A TREATISE OF CHIRURGICAL OPERATIONS After the Newest, and most exact Method
founded on the Structure of the PARTS.

CONTAINING Their Causes, Signs, Symptons, together with their Explanation, and
many curious Observations.

To which is Annexed a General Idea of WOUNDS.

Written Originally by Joseph De la Charrier; and Translated into English by R.
B.

LONDON, Printed for Dan. Brown at the Black Swan without Temple Bar, MDCXCV.

The Author's PREFACE.
I Was so well satisfied with the Authentic Approbations, that those learned
Physicians have honored me with to give my Book, that I was resolved to make
no Preface: but an accident happened, which I thought convenient to make known
to the Reader. A certain Person who passes for a Man of great Merit, and who is
actually in a Post to distinguish himself, desired, some both of his and my
Friends, that something might be said in this Tract to his advantage. I was in
no great trouble to grant him his Desire; and I began to flatter my self that
he had some esteem for my Work: nevertheless he has publicly declared himself,
against that he had so well approved in particular; and many honest Gentlemen
have been scandalized at his ill Temper, as well as my self. One may well
think, he imagined that this Book, would not have the success it deserves, and
he has reproached me to have made use of his Writings: Its no way
disadvantagious to me, that a man of his Rank should attribute to himself the
Fruit of my Labors. In the mean time the Reader will very easily see, that I
am no ill tempered Man, nor any way troublesome, since in those things which
are not my own, I have cited the Authors, among which one will not find the
name of the Sieur Du -- its likely he himself has made use of the thoughts of
the aforesaid Great men, but has not been so ingenuous in owning it as I.
Nothing's so strange as Pride! It often carries us, to some excess which serves
but the more to make our Faults and Weaknesses better known. I Will say nothing
of my Book, only I believe I have advanced little but what is founded upon
Reason and Experience, which I Will clearly demonstrate according to the
Structure of the Parts. I desire the Reader to judge of it without prejudice,
and that he would not esteem Mr. Du -- to be the Author of the good it contains.

APPROBATION.
THE Faculty of Physic in the University of Paris, having heard the
extraordinary Character that Mr. Le Meine, and Mr. Engvehard, Doctors, Regents
in the same Faculty, gave of a Book of Chyrurgical Operations composed by Mr.
Charrier, approve this Work, and think it most worthy to be Printed,

At the Physicians College at Paris, Thursday 19. October, 1690. Signed
Legier, Professor to the King, and Dean of the Faculty of Physic.

APPROBATION.
BY the Order of my Lord Chancellor, I have examined this Manuscript which
treats of Chyrugical Operations, which deserves to be printed, being inricht
with a great number of Observations, which will be exceeding useful to
Chyrurgeons: This I certify to be true, nevertheless I submit to the Gentlemen
Physicians of Paris.

May 3. 1690. Signed Beissier.

THE PREFACE TO TEH READER.
WE have an English Proverb, though somewhat obsolete, yet true, which is, That
good Wine needs no Bush; the same I think may well be said of this little
Treatise, whose every line draws a sufficient Characteristic Note after it,
without being ushered in with any Prefatory Discourse to raise its value; yet
since Prefaces (in this Age) are as much in Fashion as a pair of Gates before a
stately pile of Buildings, I hope a few lines will not be amiss, to do the
Author some justice in so admirable a Tract as this is. I shall not pretend to
write here an Encomium in the Praises of Chyrurgery, nor indeed can I give it
those due Graces it worthily deserves, it having been already (by such a Cloud
of learned Men) performed to my hand, whose most ingenious Footsteps I can
follow, (and those only at a distance) not pretend in the least to imitate. As
for the Contents of this Book, they are certainly praise worthy, the Author
being so famous a Practitioner, especial in the performing Chyrurgical
Operations, his Works show him to be a Man of sound Judgment and Learning; for
he handles the Matter with such strenuous Arguments, sound Reasonings and so
home, that I greatly admire none attempted before now to give it an English
Garb, when I first perused it, and finding it applicable to what I had seen,
especially of late by an ingenious Gentleman of that Nation, I was resolved to
make it speak our Mother Tongue, never designing it for a Press, only as a help
in my own Business; it having been Translated above fifteen Months before it
came to the Public View; and perhaps never had by me, but that the
Importunities of many Friends almost (if I may so say) forced me to it, besides
hearing one or two were on the Design of rendering it into English, I thought
it might be as well on my side, seeing it had been so long done, as theirs. It
must for certain be of great Benefit to our younger Students in the Chyrurgical
Art, (though our Seniors may not be ashamed of having so precious a Jewel about
them) who have not the opportunity of seeing many Operations performed, and
those few Authors which have treated of them, have done it so slightly and
superficially, that after all your Study and Pains, you are as far to seek as
ever, but this Tract is so exact, and Methodical, that it leads you (as it
were) by the hand through the whole Course of every particular Operation, as
well as if you saw it performed by any learned Artists: it not only
demonstrates how to perform the Operations according to Art, but also shows the
Distemper, explicates their Signs, Causes, Signs of those Causes, and
Symptoms, according to the newest System of Philosophy, founded on the Mechanic
Formation of the Parts.

Yours R. B.

A TREATISE OF THE OPERATIONS OF SURGERY.
CAP. I. Of Operations in General.
AMong all the Parts of Medicine, there is none so profitable as this which I
undertake to treat of. What it teaches.
It teaches us how we ought to perform the Operations of Surgery, it explains
the chief Pathologic Phenomenon, fortifies us in the knowledge of the Subject,
on which we practice? and I dare boldly say, that without the assistance of
these Operations, the Art of Surgery would never have arrived to so high a
point of perfection, which at this time it has atain'd; and without it, the
Knowledge which relates to the explication of the Principal Distempers, The
Excellency of Chyrurgical Operations.
would have been only dubious and uncertain, if light were not borrowed from
hence by evident Demonstrations, and by reasons which experience authorizes.
It Is a study which contains nothing but what is worthy to entertain our Wits,
and engages those who love the Profession, to show the advantages we receive
from it. It Is this which recommends the Artist, who dexterously reunites the
Parts divided, who divides those discreetly that are united, who draws together
with an extraordinary care, those bodies which in respect one to another are
strange, and who with Art and Industry supplies whatever are wanting to our
perfection, whence the end which he ought to propose to himself, is to perform
well these four Operations, to disentangle all the difficulties they contain,
and to observe all the circumstances which are precedent, concomitant, and
which follow, in order to maintain the parts in their union and natural
Situation.

Here I have a large Field to dilate my-self into the praises of Surgery; but
(besides that the shortness of time does not permit me) I must acknowledge I
dare not undertake it, least I should sink under the weight of so painful an
enterprise; for all the Authors, who have wrote of it, and boasted of their
Excellency in this Art, were never able to give it those due Encomiums which
are proportionable to the great advantages we find in it: wherefore I shall
stick close to my Subject, and I dare say that if these new Anatomists, who
have made such great and wonderful discoveries, had made a due and just
application of them to the Art of Surgery, and if those great Practitioners,
had enriched it with their Observations, we should have found such advantages,
which will never be unless they change their Principles: But the Subject being
so thorny and difficult, we find very few, who are willing to cummunicate to us
their Ideas, and particular Discoveries. Most do but treat of these matters
superficially, and without diving into the bottom, which is the reason that
oft-times we cast the difficulty of the Art, upon the evil disposition of the
subject: I acknowledge that it is very hard to hit always right, because Nature
is often various in her motions, and works in such hidden corners, and by ways
so little known, that she destroys by some unexpected stroke (which we do not
foresee) the whole Economy of her Operations.

It Is not enough to understand the practice of Chirurgical Operations by halves.
It Is not sufficient to undertake one Operation only, we must have a perfect
knowledge of the subject on which we are to exercise our Practice, that is to
say, its Temper, Disposition, and the Part afflicted.

By the temper, I mean a certain disposition of parts, that consists in the
order of these resorts or springs which compose them, What the Tempers.
and in the figure of their Pores, proportionable to the nature of those
liquors which pass through them, and of their motion, sometimes more, sometimes
less rapid.

Disposition of the Body.
The disposition of our bodies relates to the regimen of life, Inclination, Age,
Season, Habit, and Strength; for if an indisposed person observe an irregular
way of living, if he be of a spare body, void of strength, if his age obstruct
the performance of the Operation, or in fine if he has a greater tendency to
that which is contrary and hurtful to him, than to what will be profitable and
advantageous, in this case the Surgeon ought to suspend his Judgment, least he
should run the risque of doing the indisposed person more harm than good.

Part affected.
Touching the part which suffers, the Operator must perfectly understand its
natural Constitution, Connection, Action, and Use, in case he designs to draw
any advantage from his Undertakings, and prevent the emergent Symptoms usual in
these occasions. If the Operation may be delayed, it is convenient to expect a
favorable Season, as for example, the Spring and Autumn.

Nature of the Spring.
In the Spring the Blood and Spirits (which the cold had driven toward the
Center) exalt themselves to the Surface, and with a greater heat revive the
parts which before were as if benumbed, and without life, they are in a
Fermentation, soft, natural, and by consequence capable of all the good effects
which can be expected.

But on the contrary in Winter the cold obstructs the Pores, hinders
Transpiration, changes the Economy of the Circulation, and the Blood is
deprived of that vivacity which is capable to animate our bodies.

Nature of the Autumn
In the Autumn, the Action of the Salt and Sulphur which had seized the upper
Parts, and which were in a continual exaltation (during the excessive heat of
Summer) is a little represt; the Blood (which had got a sharp and bilious
disposition, by an immoderate heat) sweetens and allays the extraordinary
Effervescence, which was the occasion of a continual loss of Spirits.

These are (as I conceive) the chief Maxims which are to be observed before we
enter upon the particular of every Operation.

I could enlarge my self more upon the Operations in general, but as such long
discourses don't clear the difficulties which they contain, and according to
the Order which I have proposed my self, to publish nothing to the World, which
is not worthy the attention of the Reader, I conceived I might be excused from
producing the troublesome Definitions, Divisions, and Subdivisions, which make
up the Principal Ornament of the greatest part of Chyrurgical Authors.

CHAP. II. Of the Reunion of Wounds.
ACcording to the order of this Treatise, we begin with the Sutures, which are
only practiced to reunite the divided Parts, but first we must say something
concerning Reunion; to be informed after what manner its done, we must observe
two things.

Unition of Parts divided the work of Nature.
The first is, that the Reunion of the divided Parts is only the Work of Nature,
who on this occasion makes use of her natural Balm.

The second, That all the Surgeons Art does nothing for this Reunion, but as he
is the imitator of Nature, he must, to second her designs, and to procure the
Union of Wounds, use three means. Three Means to be used toward the Unition of
wounds.
First, To cleanse the Wounds exactly, and free them from all extraneous
bodies. Second, To bring the Lips together, and Third, To keep them in the same
situation; for to satisfy these three Intentions, a Surgeon must be informed
of the Structure of the Parts, and of the Nature of the nourishing Juyces which
entertain them.


The Body only a heap of Fibers, Vesicles and Vessels.
As for the first, its necessary to know that all the parts of our body, are
only a heap of Fibers, Vesicle;, and Vessels; but because the different ranks
they keep disposes in every one of them Spaces and Pores of different figures,
the nourishing Particles of Blood must needs accommodate themselves
differently, according to the various configurations of the Pores, and Conduits
through which they pass.

Blood the common matter of nourishment, yet not the red part, but white.
In consideration of the nourishing Juice, one must imagine that the Blood which
is the common matter of it, contains and homogeneous liquor, and though it
appears to our eyes under the form of two substances, notwithstanding it is
certain that all the parts are nourished by its white and chilous part, and not
at all by the red, if we conceive that this white part is sweet, balsamic,
glewy, and viscous, which are all the requisite and necessary conditions for
their entertaiment; from whence we may conclude that its the Balsam, and true
Cement of all the Reunions which are made in Nature.

It would be hard to understand how this nourishing Juice whose substance is
Homogeneal, can be employed to the maintaining so great a number of different
parts, if by what we have said of their Structure, we did not conceive that
this juice though indifferent, can easily become Flesh, an Artery, Membrane,
Bone, Tendon, etc. according as its modified passing through the insensible
Channels (which must be regarded as so many little threads) where it is shaped
and framed differently according to the Configuration of their Porosities; just
as the parts of the sap, which are confounded, and as it were indeterminated in
the earth, take a form and determinate figure on them, passing through the
different Pores of the Fibers which compose the Plants, as round, pointed,
square, etc. this diversity of Figures is the cause that those Particles can
produce quite contrary Effects, as well in Plants as in Animals.

This being supposed and well understood, I say that the Surgeons Science
(whether in the Reunion, in losses of substance, or finally in what occasion
soever) serves for nothing but to Rectify this Sap, by the way of general
Medicines (when it is corrupted;) and Topics, which have the virtue of
conserving the natural Purity of the nourishing Juice, which the Arteries carry
to the offended Part, and to defend it in the same time from the impressions of
the Air; therefore the Traumaticks, Sarcoticks, Carminatives, and Astringents,
which Surgeons use in the beginning, Progress, State, and declination of wounds
do produce such effects as I shall prove in explaining their virtues.

The Virtues of Traumatick Medicines.
Vulneraries are ordinarily charged with oily and salt Particles, which cause
two good effects. First, The oily Particles unite and adjust themselves easily
to the viscous, and nourishing Particles of the blood, and make together a kind
of covert which resists the powerful attacks of the Air, which is a great enemy
to Wounds. Secondly, The saline Particles divide, cut, and attenuate such parts
which are most disposed to alteration, and help them forwards in suppuration.


Sarcoticks and Carminatives.
The Sarcoticks and Carminatives (which only differ secundum majus and minus) do
always abound in fine saltish Sulphur, and fixed disicative alcalies; the
saltish and most rarefied Sulphur subtilizes and purifies the nourishing
Particles, and maintains them in their natural Motion, and consequently in
their state of goodness; whilst the fixed Alcalies, and other desicative
Particles repel by a sort of caustic virtue, the most sharp and malign
Particles capable of producing a bad pus, and begetting fungous flesh: the most
exalted sharp Particles being absorbed, the flesh keeps united firm and red.

Of Astringents.
Concerning Astringent Remedies, it is proper to give a reason why Scars
oftentimes are so deformed; this depends almost commonly on the Surgeon, either
because he has not-skill enough to make the Fibers answer one another; or else
he compresses the Wound too rudely in searching for the strange Bodies, or
because he sinks the Fibers of the Parts, (of which some tend upwards, other
downwards) in their intercussading one another, Too Astringents make Scars
deformed.
so that the two lips of the wound, can never be exactly even; or finally
because he makes use of too Astringent Remedies; all these contribute to make
the Cicatrix defective, but particularly Styptick Medicines, because being
filled with fixed Alcaline, or Vitriolick Particles, the fixed ones stop the
Pores, and the Vitriolick burn and cauterize them, and take away even some of
the substance: This in general is the Idea one must have of the effect of these
Medicines.

I pass now to the Reunion of the Tendons, which the Ancients and most part of
our Moderns had abandoned, and which in imitation of them would have been
neglected, if late Mr. BIENAISE (to who we are obliged for it) had not renewed
it. Sutures of the Tendons to be practiced.
In effect there is no more danger in practicing the Suture of a Tendon than in
that of a flesh wound; if we consider that the Liquor which runs into its
Channels, is no way differing from that which passes into the Belly of the
Muscle, why should it not be allowed that the cut Tendon unites as well
together as a Muscle? and since the same juice runs into the Bones, to serve
them for their nourishment, and is the true bond, and cement which reunites
them when broke, why will not they allow that it should produce the same
effects in respect of the Tendons which are continuous to them? Don't we even
observe in Plants when we put the Graff on a wild Stock, A parale^ Comparison.
that the Sap passes from the Porosities of the Longitudinal Fibers of the
Stock to those of the Graff, that its salfish and glewy Particles stop and fix
themselves at every circuit about the union as well by the motion and action of
the subtle, and ethereous matter, as by encountering the external Air, and frame
a Callous like that which is made in broken bones? Likewise put in fix Graffs
of different kinds in the same Stock, An Experiment.
you will have the pleasure to see them bear Fruits of as different kinds,
which cannot be explained without saying that the Juyces, which pass through
the Roots, and Trunk of the Stock, have not yet any determinate Figure, but
that they receive one passing through the Pores of each Graff; this is an
experiment which I relate by the by, because it fortifies the System which I
have established concerning the Reunion.

Cause of the inequality of the Callous.
As for the inequality which remains at the Unition, after the Formation of the
Callous, it is not difficult to conceive that it proceeds from the too great
abundance of salts which rise up to the Surface, where they are stopped and fixed
by the action of the external Air, as we have remarked heretofore.

Having explained the principal difficulties that regard the reunion, I
conceive it is made after this manner. After the Surgeon has cleans'd the Wound
from all the grumous Blood, How the Reunion of VVounds is made.
and other strange Bodies; after he has exactly brought together the Lips, and
endeavored to take all necessary care for maintaining them in the same
Situation; I say, that the Molicule of the Blood (how indifferent, or
indeterminate soever they be) passing and repassing from one of the Lips of the
Wound to the other by Pipes, which I look upon as so many little Threads, they
Frame and Figure themselves differently according to the Configuration of their
Pores; it happens that by the different turns and returns of the most Glewing
Particles, the most Nourishing and Balsamic (which heat has thickened and
hardened) disengaging themselves from the other, rank and apply themselves to
the Mouths of the little Fibrils, frame as it were a Million of little chains,
Horizontally drawn from one Lip of the Wound to the other, for to tie and join
them exactly together. After this manner I shall always explain the Reunion,
Vegetation of the Particles, and Progress of Wounds, the losses of which are
sometimes considerable. I pass now to the Examination of the Sutures, and the
Circumstances which depend on them.

CHAP. III. Of the Sutures.
Three kinds of Sutures used by the Ancients.
THE Ancients have Established two sorts of Sutures, the one of separate Points,
which they called Incarnative; and the other of continuous Points, called
Restrictive; they have also spoken of a kind of Conservative Suture, which they
used in great Wounds to avoid deformity.

Five kinds of Incarnative Sutures.
There be five kinds of Incarnative Sutures. 1. The interfected or interrupted.
2. The Quill'd or Spiral. 3. The twisted. 4. Hookt. And, 5. The dry Suture.


Five kinds of Restrictive Sutures.
The Tanners, Shoomakers, Taylor's Stitch, and from without inwards, and that of
Celsus which is made a cross, are the five kinds of Sutures, which Antiquity
has described to us under the name of Restrictive; but without insisting on the
description of these last, because absolutely useless, I pass to those which
are in use, Three sorts of Sutures most in use.
viz. The Interrupted, Quill'd, and Twisted, the last being used in the Hare
Lip, the quill'd in deep Wounds, and the Interrupted in all others.

It Is not enough to entertain you with the Sutures, I am also obliged to make
you remark all the circumstances which accompany them, after I have given you
the most perfect Idea that I possibly can of Wounds, to which they are
convenient, and to which not.

Where Sutures are to be used.
The Wounds where ordinarily Sutures are Practiced, are Angular, Transverse,
Oblique, in a word, every where the Bandage cannot make the Reunion.

Where not first in altered wounds.
The Wounds in which Sutures are rejected, are those altered by the Air. I will
propose my conjectures about its Malign Action in such Wounds.

The malign Quality of Air in wounds.
I say, that the Air is a fluid and transparent Matter, full of Saline Nitre,
whose Particles are Branched and Irregular; this being supposed it is easy to
draw some consequences concerning the manner how it Communicates its evil
Qualities to wounds, and how its capable to alter the Nature of the Blood;
which is not hard to conceive, if we consider that it Rusts, not only Iron and
Copper, etc. but also corrupts even the most solid Bodies.

I consider the Humidity of the Air, and the Nitre with which it is loaded, as
two great Agents, which have the power to consume and destroy the most Oily
Portion of the Nutritive Juice of the Parts, How the Air destroys the Tone of
wounded Parts.
so that the Oil of the Blood, which is the true Balm that Nature makes use of
to Reunite Wounds, and keep the Vessels supple, being dissipated by the
Humidity of the Air, and action of the nitrous Salts which are dispersed in it,
the Fibers dry up, and the Pores contract, which occasions very frequent and
dangerous Obstructions; the Salts thus having got the upper Hand, and united
themselves with those Salts, which result from the consummation of the
Oleaginous Particles, that serve them as a Vehicle, change into a Vitriolic and
Arsenical Matter, that gnaws, cuts, and corrodes the Vessels; of this mixture
arises a kind of Verdigrease (almost like that we see on Copper) after the
Action of this powerful Enemy of Bodies; so that if one does not defend the
Wounds from its Ravage, it happens that the Obstruction and Inflammation
increase more and more, which occasions Fevers, and gives way for a Gangreen to
seize the Part.

2. Sutures not convenient in contused wounds.
The Sutures are not convenient in Contus'd Wounds, because there is
extravasated Blood between the Fibers and Vesicles; which must needs turn to
Pus; we want no other indication to show us that we must give it vent by way of
Suppuration, and so consequently the Suture would be very dangerous.

3. Where there is loss of Substance.
I say also, that Sutures are not used in Wounds, where there is great loss of
Substance, as in Gun shot, or in those whose Lips the Surgeon cannot bring
together.

4. Nor in Bites of Venomous Animals.
Nor are Sutures made in Bites of of Venomous Animals: For without doubt their
Poison presently Irritates the Spirits which ascend to the Brain, and infects
the whole Mass of Blood, which must presently be Remedied by the help of
Cardiacs, and Corroboratives, after having applied to the Wound strong
Resolutives, as Theriaca dissolved in Spirit Vini, and other Medicines of the
same Nature.

5. Nor in great Inflammations.
They are also rejected in great Inflammations, the understanding of which
suffers no difficulty, since the Obstruction precedes always the Inflammation;
it is necessary that the Matter which is stopped, and out of its Vessels, be
Evacuated.

6. Nor where large Vessels are wounded.
They are of no use, where considerable Vessels are opened, because the Blood
which flows from them, the Bandage which one is obliged to make, and the
Astringents, which are strange Bodies, oppose the reunion.

7. Nor in wounds of the Thorax.
They must also be avoided in Wounds of the Thorax, as well superficial as deep,
because of the frequent Motions contrary to unition, for the Breast being
forced to dilate and contract, the Muscles and Cutis making an effort in
assisting the Elevation and Dilatation of it, would burst and be torn, because
of the resistance which the Sutures make, which would excite Inflammation,
Pain, 8. In discovered Bones according to the Ancients.
and difficulty of respiration.

Finally, the Ancients have added, that we must not use them in Places where
the Bones are discovered, because of Exfoliation, but as there is nothing that
alters more the texture of the Bones, and Facilitates more quickly Exfoliation
then the Appulle of the Air, we must not question to shelter them by the help
of the Sutures, having a due regard to the Contusions and Fractures which often
happen to the Bones. However, be it as it will, we hazard nothing, because, if
the Accidents should be urgent, we have nothing to do but to cut the Threads;
so that one may without danger use Sutures in Wounds of the Head which
penetrate even to the Bone; unless they be in the furthermost part of the
Coronal Bone, or behind the Head, or in a direct Line, then we may use an
uniting Bandage: This being known and explained, we must speak now of the
circumstances which accompany the Sutures that we Practice: They consist in
choosing Needles proportionable to the Nature of the Wounds, Choice of Needles.
E. Gr. if they be great and deep, you must use a crooked, flat, and very sharp
Needle, the Thread must be single or double according to the force it is to
resist. In all sorts of Wounds, the Fingers are more convenient than the
Canula. Having taken all these precautions, and freed the Wounds from all
Extraneous Bodies, a Servant must bring the Lips together, The manner of
perform^ng the Su^ures.
and the Surgeon with a Needle armed with waxed Thread, pierce them in a strait
Line from without, inwards, and from within, outward, making as many Stitches
as convenient. You must pierce deep enough into the Flesh, because for want of
penetrating, you may leave some space in the Bottom of the Wound, where some
Blood may be spilt, which would hinder unition.

An Objection Answered.
I am not of their Opinion, who recommend in the Practice of Sutures to take
more of the upper then the under Lip, because (say they) the strength of a
Muscle is much more considerable toward its Origin than insertion; but they
don't consider in the sensible Action of a Muscle, that when the tendon of the
Origin obeys, and is relaxt, that of the Insertion is much braced and bended,
so much more subject to be broken, if it suffers any Convulsions in some part,
from whence I conclude, that if you were to take more of one Lip of the Wound
(which we suppose to be in the Belly of the Muscle) than the other, it would be
much better to do so on that which regards the Insertion. But without insisting
on a thing of so little consequence, I suppose it no way necessary to engage
one side more than another.

Finally, all the Threads being past, you must begin to tie that in the middle,
making presently a single knot, on the firmest side, and where the matter is
least apt to run; over that, apply a little compress of Linen, on which make
another knot, which I believe more useful than the Surgeon's knot (which only
consists in twice passing the Thread through the same knot) because if any
Accident should happen, it could be more easily united, then make a slip knot,
and so of the rest.

If the Wounds are superficial, a strait Needle will serve; single Thread, and
your Fingers, observing always the forementioned circumstances. Thread is to be
preferred before Silk, Thread better than Silk.
because this cuts the Flesh.

If the Wound has but one Angle, you must begin at it, if two, begin in the
more solid part; if three or four, begin always by the Angles with little
Compresses, or Bolsters. The Balms, and Bandages are at the Surgeons
discretion. If you apply an Emplaster, you must lay little Compresses on the
knots, lest you move them in taking off the dressing.

If there happen any troublesome Accidents, loose the knots without any
violence, so that you may tie them again when the Accidents cease; How to cut
and draw out the Thread.
but if there should happen any considerable Inflammation, so that we should be
forced to cut them, you must introduce your Probe under them on which you must
cut the Thread: (We do so, when We find the Reunion is made, and that we are
about to undo the Stitch with Dexterity) then lay your Finger next the knot,
and draw the Thread softly out, for fear you renew the Wound.

These are the principle circumstances which must be observed in performing the
interrupted Stitch: In what part the Quill'd Stitch is most used.
I pass to the Spiral or Quill'd, which differs from the other, only in the
manner of disposing the Threads. We use it for the most part in deep Wounds,
which happen to the great Muscles of the Buttocks, and Thighs, though perhaps if
well examined inferior to the interrupted: but seeing it may be useful, and has
in all times been esteemed so; I shall now describe how it is performed.

How to make the Quill'd Stitch.
The Surgeon must take a crooked Needle, Armed with a waxed Thread, the two ends
of which must pass together through the Eye of the Needle, that there remain a
sort of Loop, having passed it through the Flesh, you must so dispose two or
three of them, according to the length of the Wound, in which you must put some
pegs of Wood, armed with Lint, some strong Tents of Lint, or a Quill, which
must be Rankt all along the extremity of the Lips, which have been brought
together by a Servant, who holds them while the Surgeon makes the knots upon
the Tents; etc. as has been said, except that we put no Compress on them.

There Is one kind of Quill'd Suture, where you can cut the Threads and make the
knots on both sides.

The Twisted Stitch is only made in a Hair-Lip, it consists in disposing the
Thread, cross about the Needle, as shall be described in the Operation.

The dry Stitch, not very useful.
Some put the dry Stitch among those that are in use: But, besides that, this
Suture is only fit for Cutaneous Wounds, and is often subject to come off, I
find it useless, not only because of the Humidity which loosens it, but also
because it is not capable of making an exact Union.

How the ^ry Stitch (...) made.
But they that would make use of it, have nothing to do, but to take two pieces
of new Linen with their Selvage, cut in several Angles, or Indented more or
less, according to the length of the Wound; at the Extremities of which, tie
some little Fillets, then dip the Clothes in some Agglutinative Medicine,
applying them in such a manner, that the Angles may be a little distant from
the edges of the Wound, about half a Fingers breadth, to facilitate the Unition
more commodiously.

CHAP. IV. Of the Suture of the Tendons.
TO make an end of the Sutures, I come to show how that of the Tendons is
performed: But before I begin, it is necessary to explain the Symptoms which
ordinarily accompany its Wounds. In these kind of Accidents, the Tendon is
wholly cut, or in part only, if the former, it is evident that the Symptoms are
not so bad, and that it suffers neither Tension, Tumor, nor Fluxion, but
withdraws somewhat into the Flesh, and increases a little in thickness: But if
the latter, the Symptoms are very dangerous, because the Fibers that remain
destitute of their wonted assistants, must of necessity be broken and torn in
the sensible Contraction of the Muscles, or at least suffer such violent
tensions, that cruel Accidents speedily arise; besides that, the Blood spilt,
Accidents attending wounded Tendons.
in the Intervals of the Fibers, does Ferment the Saline Particles, and working
upon the Tendinous Fibers divide them, on which follows sharp Pain, Convulsion,
Syncope, Vomiting, Diarrhaea, Fever, Coma, and often Gangreen, if the rest of
the Tendon be not speedily cut.

Case of Pain.
The Pain is not excited, but by the continual Divulsion of the little
insensible Fibrils, like that which one feels sometime after the cut of a
Sword, this does not proceed from the first division, but by those which are
made through the action of the sharp and extravasated Humors, No Pain without
Solution of continuity.
so that as often as the Animal feels pain; there are some divisions made, by
which means the Soul (which watches and interests it self in the conservation
of the parts of our Bodies) is afflicted.

The cause of Convulsions.
These sharp Humors, coming to shake vigorously the little Filaments of the
Nerves, cause the Spirits to run irregularly into the Muscles, which excites
the Convulsion.

The Spirits being put to flight, instead of running into the Fibers of the
Heart, And of Syncopes.
and ruling their motion, are carried in disorder, sometimes to one part,
sometimes to another; the Heart being deprived of the influx of the Spirits,
which are the true Instruments of its ordinary motion, and being no more
capable of contraction, the course of the Blood must be suspended for some
moments, from whence comes Syncopes.

And of Vomiting.
But as soon as they retake their course, they double their Action, and are
Lanch'd with so great Precipitation into the Fleshy Fibers of the Stomach,
through the familiar commerce and mutual consent between the Cardiac Nerves and
those of the Stomach, that they oblige it to discharge it self of all that is in
it, which is called Vomiting.

And Diarrhaea.
The Ventricle with its powerful and repeated Contraction, passes so hard the
Bladder of Gall, and the Neighboring Bilous and Pancreatic Ducts, that it
squeezes out their Juyces into the Cavity of the Guts, which presently causes a
Diarrhaea.

The cause of a Fever.
These two Liquors being thus pressed out of their Vessels, without having
received all the preparations and alterations which are necessary for them;
fail not to make the Chyle Acid, with mixing themselves in the Intestines, they
serve for Leven, and Ferment to corrupt and produce a Fever.

Of heaviness of the Head, and failure of the Senses.
The Blood being in Fermentation, mounts with such an impetuosity to the Brain,
that the Sinews thereof which receive all the rest of the Blood of the Interior
Head, cannot discharge proportionably so much Blood into the Jugulars as the
Arteries furnish, by reason of the slowness of Circulation in these Sinews; so
that the Nerves which come from the base of the Skull, to be distributed to the
Organs of the Senses, are a little comprest by the weight of the Blood, which
causes heaviness of the Head, and that the Senses don't receive the impressions
of their Objects with the same facility as before, through the Obstacle that
the Spirits find in their passage.

How to prevent those ill Accidents.
To prevent all these Accidents, you have nothing to do but to cut the rest of
the Tendon, if the major part be divided, but if the loss of the Fibers be not
so considerable, and the Symptoms not so pressing, you must do nothing rashly.
If you perform the Operation, you must Stitch the Tendon, rather than cut it,
so that the Surgeons intention is to Reunite the two Extremities by Suture.

If it happen that the Extremity of one part be so far shrunk into the Flesh,
that it cannot be brought to the other by the Forceps, it would be convenient
to molifie the Fibers a little with some Oils extracted without Fire, as Ol.
Amygd. Dull. Ovor. Cerae, etc. which are proper to relax the Fibers, and
facilitate their Union; for if the Oil be Extracted without Fire, the heat does
not so soon dissipate their Viscosity, which is the true Cement; besides, they
are more capable of tempering the Acid of the Blood, and of appeasing pain.

The Tendons being molified, you must Stitch if you can, and seeing they are
Composed of little Fibers, How to perform the Operation.
you must take half the breadth of a Finger upon the Body of the Tendon, that
the Stich may better resist the motions of the part, and the flowing of the
Matter. If the Tendon be not discovered enough, you must try to make the
Suture, without unfleshing it, because the Flesh secures it from all
alterations.

After the Surgeon has put the part in a convenient Situation, a Servant must
uphold one Extremity with the Forceps, whilst the Surgeon with his left Hand
holds the other, and with a strait Needle, armed with double waxed Thread
knotted at the end, pierces them from without, inwards, and from within,
outward, bringing them exactly together; then lay away your Needle, and take a
little compress of Cloth with two holes in it, to pass the two ends of the
Thread through, and make a single knot, over, which apply another little
Compress, which you fasten with the Surgeons knot, and slip knot; you must
observe to wet the Compresses in some Spiritous Liquor, and put some wax Candle
on the knot instead of Lint.

The Suture being made, you must humect the first Day with some Oil and Spirit
of Wine, the following days we use a Balsam made of Tereh. Tinct. Aloes,
Unctuous Medicices not proper.
or that of the Tinct. Flor. Hyperici, the use of Oils, or Fats, are here to be
rejected, because they Putrify the Tendons: In the beginning Cataplasms made
of the four Meals, Wine, the Yolk of an Egg, and Honey, are very proper: It must
be observed, that as soon as Suppuration is made, it is evident, that the Tendon
begins to be united; most good Practitioners Commend in long Suppurations to
make use of Spirits, on bared Tendons, and Emplas. Andreae e cruce.

CHAP. V. Of the Hair-Lip.
Why so called.
IF Sutures have any use in performing Operations, it is doubtless in the Unition
of the Hair Lip, so called, because this Animal has naturally the Upper-Lip
slit. This Malady comes sometimes from an imperfect Conformation, and sometimes
by Accident, viz. it may be caused by some Blow, Fall, or other like mischance,
if the Reunion be then neglected, it is to be feared, least the edges grow
Callous, and at length a true Hair Lip is formed.

It Is very often an Hereditary Deformity, which we keep as long as we live,
unless we are willing to suffer the Operation; however, its cure cannot be
accomplished but by Suture: If there be great loss of substance you must not
hazard the Operation, because the Cutis would be so much extended, that it
would be very hard to Pronounce well certain Words, and to make with care all
the other motions which this part is capable of, those which happens to the
Under-Lip are of difficult cure, because the Defluxions are more-frequent, and
the Lip always humected with many serosities.

Where cutting Hair-Lips would be useless.
There are several other occasions where the Operation would be useless, as in
Children, by reason of their continual Crying, in the old Scorbutic and Pox'd,
in irregular Women, and in several other vitiated and indisposed Subjects, in
which the Blood is only a serous Mass, sharp and Corrosive, having lost all its
consistence and unctuosity, and consequently incapable of Reunion: You must
have regard to some of these circumstances in all other Sutures; therefore the
Union of the Hair-Lip is not to be undertaken, but in adult Persons, who have
no other incommodity, and are willing to endure pain.

How it is to be performed.
To perform this Methodically, you must cut a little Filament which fastens the
Upper-Lip to the Gums, to give liberty to embrace with your Instrument the
whole breadth of the Hair-Lip. It Is a particular pair of Pincers with which you
must engage the Lip, toward the corner of the Mouth, and let it slip to the
Extremity of the slit, you must secure and fasten it with a Ring, to have the
liberty of refreshing and cutting Dexterously the Superfices; afterward, you
must unbridle the Upper part for fear there may remain a little swelling, which
would be as disagreeable as the Deformity it self; so that after the two Lips
of the Wound have been exactly brought together, and that they are in a just
level, you must pass from one Lip to another, one or two Needles armed with
waxed Thread, according to the length of the Hair Lip, and cross the Thread
about the Needles as is convenient; you must break off the points, and lay some
little Compresses underneath, that they may not prick the Patient, then apply a
little Pledgit wet in some Balm, or Styptick Liquor, and Embrocate with Ol.
Rosar. with a Compress dipped in Oxyerate. and a little Band, or the fourfold
Bandage.

You must not imitate certain Operators, who Scarifie to no purpose, the sides
of the Wound, to disengage the part which always suffers some Tension, since we
can remedy this inconvenience, by laying on the Cheeks some Compresses
sustained by the Bandage; you must order the Sick a very exact Diet, which
consists in using the first three or four Days nothing but Liquids, and
avoiding all sorts of motion.

CHAP. VI. Of the Gastroraphia.
OF all parts of the Body, there is none more subject to Maladies than the
Belly, and that consequently has more need of the Surgeons assistance.

The Operations which are Practiced there, depend from the Wounds that happen
to it, from the Tumou^s called Hernias, from Laborious Childbirth, from
Dropsies, Fistula's, and Apostems.

The Wounds of the Belly, are either big or little, Superficial or Penetrating,
are made with or without the hurt of the contained Parts, which very often come
out of the Cavity, according to their indisposition; greatness of the Wound,
more or less motion as we are going to explain.

We conjecture there is some part damaged according to the Figure of the
Instrument wounding; you may judge what Parts are hurt by the Situation of the
Wound, and by that in which the Patient was when received.

Signs of the wounded Viscera.
But the true Signs which indicate the division of some Internal Parts, are
acute Pains, Inflammation, Fever, or some Matter coming forth; nevertheless,
all these Signs are equivocal, except the least, which is known by the Color,
Smell, and consistence of the Matter, which is discharged out of the Wound, or
flows in the Cavity of the Belly.

After what manner the Viscera get out of the Belly.
But as the most of these parts are floating and always Relaxed, they get out of
their Cavity at the least impression, or disorder, particularly at the time of
expiration, when the Thorax contracts: Though it seems that they should rather
escape in the inspiration when the Diaphragm is levelled, pushing back, as the
Antagonist of the Muscles of the lower Belly, all the parts that are under it,
yet its certain that the Muscles of the lower Belly oblige them against their
natural motion and inclination, to come out of the Wound in time of expiration,
when they press all the containing parts of the Belly: This being so, it is
evident that it is necessary for the part, that is under the Muscle and out of
Action, to regurgitate and show it self out of the Wound, as a piece of Paste
does between the Fingers, when squeezed with the Hand, whereof depend those
frequent Strangulations, and dangerous Inflammations.

You must also remark, that these parts are extreme spungy and greezy, whose
Texture is very loose, humected with a quantity of Humors, bedewed with an
infinite number of Vessels, and consequently very subject to Putrefaction, for
the Air coming to strike and penetrate their Substances, they fail not to
Tumefie and Condense the Blood which animates them, if they be too long exposed
to it: These Parts being therefore deprived of the motion of the Blood, in
which consists their Heat and Life, there must needs happen a mortification.

Besides the action of the Air, we know that Inflammation is capable of causing
the strangulation and mortification: It Is easy to conceive that the parts
being inflamed and swelled must take up more room than before, and press the
Intestine and Omentum, which is commonly found in the passage, Cause of the
Inflation of the Intestia.
from which must follow interruption of the course of the Blood and Spirits in
those parts, and consequently Gangreens. It often happens that the Intestine is
inflated, the cause of which proceeds from the Inflammation, which the Wound
communicates to the Gut, and the Air Obstructs the Pores; besides, the return
of the Venal Blood, is in a manner stopped by the Strangulation, and the little
motion which is to be seen there.

The Inflammation which attacks the Gut, is capable of Rarifying a part of the
Serosity, (and the other Juyces which are contained there, whose motion is made
more slow) not being able to escape, by reason of the Air which stops all the
passages, and shuts the Pores of the Intestine, so that it is impossible for the
Surgeon to reduce them without dilating the Wound.

How to Dilate when too narrow.
To perform which, the Surgeon must pass a hollow Probe between the lip of the
Wound and Intestine, and slip a Bistory all along the hollow of the Probe; but
before he makes the Incision, it will be convenient to examine whether the Gut
be not engaged, lest he wound it: This being known, he may boldly dilate the
Wound, and cut as much off the Peritonaeum as of the Muscles, etc. because the
Strangulation is every where equal, against their Opinion who pretend it is more
considerable without, than within. I shall not here speak of the precautions which
the Ancients took, in applying Fomentations, and several other Medicines: But
suppose it necessary to Foment, and warm the parts with hot Clothes, or with
Wine.

If the Omentum be altered, cut off the mortified part.
Before you reduce them, you must examine whether they ben't hurt, and if the
Omentum be not mortified, which is known by its Lividity, then without delay,
cut off the Gangreen'd part, after having made the Ligature of that which is
sound.

If there be a little Wound in the Intestine, it requires no Suture; if it is
big, use the interrupted, for the Skinner's Stitch is not approved of.

In my Opinion, there is nothing that sooner cures the wounds of the Guts, and
procures quicker unition, than a true and exact Diet; and I find nothing
contributes more to it, than in ordering the Patient to lie on his Belly,
taking care to have a kind of Bolster under the Wound, to facilitate the
running out of the Matter: Every one knows, In wound of the Belly, a spare Diet
to be used.
there is nothing more contrary to union, than motion: By the Diet we lessen the
Action of the Intestines, and by the Situation, that of the Muscles of the
Abdomen: the reason is, that in this Situation, all the parts within, lie heavy
on the Peritonaeum and Muscles, and so diminish part of their motion. You must
Observe, that Wounds of the Guts are never Reunited, except to the Neighboring
Guts, and other nigh parts, as Peritonaeum, etc. for which reason, it is
convenient to past a Needle armed with waxed Thread under the Body of the Gut
through the Mesenterium, choosing a place most free from Vessels, to pull it
gently toward the Peritonaeum, to which it will easily adhere.

Having observed these circumstances, search for that part of the Gut which is
nearest the Mouth of the Wound, How to reduce the Gut.
and reduce it with your Forefinger into the Cavity of the Belly, and before
you pull that back, introduce the other; and after this manner push it
successively till in its natural place. The Ancients used to shake to the
Patient, that the parts might return to their former Situation. We always leave
out of the Wound a part of the Ligature of the Omentum, which we place on that
side where the Matter runs least, and we make the interrupted Suture; hence
come the name of Gastroraphia.

How to make the Suture of the Belly.
You must have two crooked Needles armed with the same Thread, then with your
left Hand hold the Peritonaeum, and the other integuments, and taking a Needle
with your right, pass it from within, outward, on one lip, and without lifting
your Finger, pass the other on the opposite side as the first. You must make as
many Stitches as are necessary, leaving some space to put a Tent in, on that
side where the Matter takes its course, if there be any appearance of
Suppuration, which commonly happens, if the Omentum or Intestine be any way
altered: Having examined all these circumstances, you begin with the middle
Stitch, and so of the rest.

The Sutures being made, you must apply a Pledgit dipped in some Balm, or
spirituous Liquor, making a light embrocation with Ol. Ros. and Spirit Vin. on
the region of the Belly, then a convenient defensative sustained with the
Napkin and Scapuler. The next day instead of using Astringents, it is good to
use Emollient, and resolving Fomentations to hinder Tension, Tension a dreadful
Symptom.
which is a dreadful Symptom; for the edges of the Wound endeavoring to
retire, cause extreme pain, and often break the Thread; therefore you must
dispose it so, as to be able to straiten it after the Inflammation's over.

Emollient Clysters are of great use, not only because they relax the Fibers,
and evacuate the Matter, but also because they refresh, and serve as a Balneum
Marie, to calm the motion of the Blood and Spirits, and hinder the progress of
Accidents. It Is sufficiently known, that Bleeding and general Remedies are not
to be neglected.

If the edges become Callous, digestives are wonderful, because they relax the
Fibers, take away Obstructions, and facilitate the generation of the fleshy
Vesicles, and consequently the cure of the Wound.

Concerning this Operation, 'twill not be amiss to tell you further, that a
wounded Person that has a Portion of the Intestine carried away, would Die
infallibly, if the Surgeon by his industry does not so dispose the Gut, to let
the contained Matter run out; that is, he must show the Gut to the Peritonaeum,
and Teguments which make a kind of Anus, that gives the Excrements liberty to
come forth through the Wound, unless Nature should work by its self, as it
happened to a Soldier in the Invalids at Paris, which serves us for an Example.

CHAP. VII. Of the Dropsy, which occasions the Paracentesis.
THE Dropsy, as all the World knows, is a Disease, Definition.
whose parts where it is made, are (as it were) overflowed with a great
quantity of Serosities.

Division into general and particular.
We make ordinarily two sorts of them, the general, and particular: The
particular (which we will examine after we have Explained the Universal)
receive different names according to the parts which they attack, as the
Hydrocephalus of the Head, Hydrocele of the Strotum, etc.

General twofold.
The Universal are commonly divided into Ascites, Timpanites, and Anasarca vel
Leucophlegmatia we will not speak here of the Tympanites, since scarce ever
such was seen, and it differs from Ascites, but secundum majus and minus, being
always accompanied with many Serosities. I shall stick only to the Arscites and
Anasarca, though if well examined, this last might be reduced to a kind of
Universal Ascites, In strictn^^ but one so^ of Dropsy.
or might very rationally be comprehended under the general notion of it.

Ascites true or false.
Ascites is true or false, the true is caused by a great quantity of Water, that
fills the whole Cavity of the Belly, which swells and tumefies it to the last
degree of Tension: True.
These Waters fall often into the Scrotum, and make an Hydrocele, and when they
grow sharp, and pungent, cause several troublesome Accidents, as we shall show
in the following discourse.

False. Difference between false Ascites and Anasarca.
The false differs from the Anasarca in this, that the last affect ordinarily
the whole habit of the Body, and the other is only confined to the Cavity of
the Belly. The Anasarca consists in the swelling of the whole Body, and the
other only in one part: You must observe, that in Anasarca and false Ascites,
the teguments only are altered, whereas the true Ascites possesses the whole
capacity of the Belly: When I say the teguments are only altered, it is that you
may observe, that the Body of the Muscles is not penetrated: Though it is true,
the water swims on the Surface, and it is observed in the opening, those who Die
of a Dropsy, that their Fibers are whitish, as well as the Neighboring parts,
because they have been too long humected with the water, but the rest are as
firm and solid as those which have not been touched at all. It must also be
observed, that in Anasarca, and false Ascites, the water is sweet, unsavory,
and without Acrimony, for which reason, it is not so penetrating, and the
Patient is without Thirst and Fever, his Urin is sweet, crude and thin; but
contrariwise in true Ascites, the Urin is red, muddy and lixivious, the Patient
having excessive Thirst, slow Fever and difficulty of Urin.

I shall not trouble my self to tell you the Ancients Opinion concerning the
cause of the Dropsy, Four chief causes of the Dropsy.
but suppose these four things contribute to its Formation; viz. 1. Indigestion
of the Chyle. 2. Loose texture of the Parts. 3. Slowness of the Bloods
Circulation. 4. A general dissolution of its whole Mass.


1. Indigestion of the Chyle.
I begin, first with Indigestion of the Chyle, which almost always proceeds from
the alteration of the dissolvents that serve for the preparation, and the
consummation of their Oil and Viscosity; when the Chyle is well tempered,
prepared and freed from the course Particles, it is nothing but a Buttery Mass
which passes into the venae Lacteae, and from thence into the right Ventricle
of the Heart, to be united with the Blood which comes from all parts deprived
of its Oil and most active Principles, and serves for a Vehicle and Balm for
new nourishment. It is this Lactaceous Liquor well depurated and extremely
fluid, which entertains the parts, and which by its mixture unites and ties in
the Heart the two substances of Blood, viz. the white part to the red; which
substances well joined make a whole, neither too fluid, nor solid, but such as
Nature judges most proper to circulate without Obstacle in the Vessels. But if
by chance, the Oil of the Blood, and other Humors (with which it is furnished)
should happen to be dissipated, either by violent Exercise, too serious
Meditations, extreme Grief, or by the abundance and exaltation of the Salts;
the Chyle must of necessity grow sour, become Indigested, serous, and incapable
of any Union; then it is so far from preserving the consistence of the Blood,
that it rather Dissolves, Liquefies, and disposes it to make Obstructions,
Rheumatisms, Dropsy, etc. Because the Arterial Blood, not being able to
receive, through this Indigestion, and the preparations and triturations
necessary for the Life of the parts, it is course must be in a manner
intercepted, passing into the Vesicles, or rather spaces between the Porosities
of the Arteries and Veins, where the little Oil frees and disengages its self
from the other Principles, which it had taken hold of before, to change into
our proper Substance; so that the serosity of the Blood being at full liberty,
and having lost a part of its motion, pours it self into the spaces which it
meets with, 2. Loose texture of the parts.
and so causes the Dropsy; according to the texture of the parts, which we
have supposed more or less lax.

3. Slow Circulation.
We must now explain that cause which proceeds from the slow Circulation of the
Venal Blood. That we may have an Idea of it, we must examine by what Mechanism
this Blood is carried back to the Ventricle of the Heart, which is the focus of
its ^^^ion.

How the Venal Blood is carried to the Arteries.
I set first, omitting the Organs of respiration and the assistance of the
Valves, three principal movers, which oblige the Venal Blood to pass through
the Heart. 1. The Pulsation of the Arteries. 2. The Motion of the Muscles. 3.
The Mixture of the Lympha.
If the Pulsation of the Arteries be weakened, 1. Pulsation of the Arteries,
help the motion of the Blood.
the motion of the Venal Blood must be lessened, because the Arteries beat, and
actually Flagellate those Vessels, and so oblige the Blood which they contain,
to repair to the Heart with a wonderful facility.

2. Motion of the Muscles.
The Motion of the Muscles, is much more important to hasten the Circulation of
this Liquor, they being as so many Hands which press the Vessels that penetrate
or pass through them, and determine the Liquor which they contain to a quicker
discharge into their Recepticles: So that if they have lost a part of their
motion, for want of Spirits, the Circulation of this course Blood, would be as
it were supended in the Veins.

3. The Lympha.
In the third place, I said that the Lympha disposes it self in the Veins to
make the Blood more fluid and fit to circulate: No it is certain, if its course
be impeded, either in the Glands or Lymphatic Vessels, the Blood would
circulate much slower, for want of a dissolvent. This being supposed, that
Indigestion of the Blood, slow and dull Pulsation of the Arteries, weak motion
of the Muscles, and interruption of the course of the Lympha, are causes which
concur somewhat to Impede the Circulation of the Venal Blood, The Venal Blood
very poor.
which is a Blood deprived of its Spirituous Particles, having no consistence
or strait Union between them: Then the serosity which serves the rest of the
Blood as a Matrix, separates it self from it, as the serosities of Milk from
the Curd; it transpires between the intervals of the Fibers, or pours it self
out as a gentle Rain in some capacity, for to frame both kinds of Dropsies.

Two Experiments confirm me in this Opinion. The first is, That if we make the
Ligature of the Veins in some part, and that one hinders the passage of the
Blood, it does not fail to be overflown in a short time.

Big Bellied Women subject to Hydropical Legs.
The second is, we observe, That most big Bellied Women have Hydropick Legs, or
at least Varices: This is a Matter of Fact, not to be disputed, and which is
easily explained, only by the disposition of the parts; we observe, that as the
Foetus grows bigger, it enlarges the Matrix, and compresses so much the Iliac
and crurel Veins which are near, that the Blood which comes from the inferior
parts, not having the liberty to move as it used to do, by reason of this
compression, there must a Dropsy follow, as we have shown.

Dissolution of the Blood.
What belongs to the cause of the Dropsy, which proceeds from the dissolution
of the Blood, we have already remarked, when he spoke of Indigestion of the
Chyle, that nothing is so capable of destroying and consuming the Oil of the
Blood, as the abundance and exaltations of the sharp and tartarous Salts. It Is
by the means of their action, that we explain how Scorbutic, Hypocondriac,
Lienteric Persons, and those who lie long in Prisons, become Hydropical: Which
we could not easily demonstrate, if we did not admit the motion, and agitation
of the cutting, and Corrosive Particles, which puts the principles of the Blood
to the rout, and disunites them, so that the Sarum escapes on all sides, and
gives way for the Dropsy to seize on some part; whether it transpires in form
of a Dew through the Tunicles and Membranes, or Filters between their Fibers,
or the Glands let it escape, or it is spilt by the interruption of its most
insensible Vessels, in the void spaces which present themselves at their
passage: It will always be truly said, that the parts which Nature has a mind
to attack, are in a very little time Drowned. We observe that the Muscles of
all Hypocondriacs are deprived of a part of the Spirits which are necessary to
them for their natural motion; for if we consider, that the Sulphur which we
have supposed to be destroyed, What the Animal Spirits are.
contributes only to the generation of the Anima^ Spirits; that the little
cutting Particles which this Sulphur wraps up, are the Matter of them, and the
residue, the Vehicle and true Oil, with which the Brain is imbued; we shall
agree that the Glands of the Brain furnish very few Spirits in these Diseased
Persons, whose Bodies are deprived of Fat, and that consequently their Muscles
must lose of their force, vigor, and motion; from whence comes the great
heaviness which they feel. You must also observe, that they are no more
provided with this Fat, which before made their Fibers supple, flexible, and
capable of activity: This being so, it is evident that their motion must be
weakened, that they can no more communicate any to the Vessels; the course of
the Liquors must be slackned, and the Animal Spirits which bring some formality
to every part, are no more in a condition to keep the Pores open, or at least
so wide as ordinarily, so the Vessels being as it were sunk, and the Arterial
Blood not having any more the power or strength to make it is way, the parts are
almost defrauded of Life.

I allege all these reasons, because they fortify our System of the formation
of the Dropsy, Old Men very subject to the Dropsy.
which is founded on the slowness of the Circulation of the Blood; which is
remarkable in old Men, who are most subject to Dropsies: The reason is, because
their Blood is only a fluid Indigested and corrupt Mass, having lost all its
consistence and unctuosity; one may say, it has lost its Oil, and consequently
is made incapable of sustaining its Fermentation. I add, that those who Inhabit
Boggy places, being of a cold Temperament and used to moist Food, will be more
liable to it, than others.

The Dropsy, which often effects Fat and full People, who, nevertheless, are
in a certain moderate repose, has for its cause only the slowness of
Circulation, through the frequent Obstructions which ordinarily happen in the
Glands, and Vessels, which occasions the Lympha to disengage it self, and
overflow some part.

When the Dropsy is incurable.
The waters sometimes gather together in a Cystis, which makes the Dropsy
incurable: This Cystis is a strange Covert, at first insensible, but by degrees
separates it self from some other covering, either of the Peritonaeum, or
elsewhere, by the saline and lixivious nutriture which it has contracted, or by
the too great humidity received, after the same manner as the Particles of an
Egg, or Seed disengage, or unfold themselves. This Cystis is sprinkled with a
multitude of Glands, and Vessels which it receives from the part from whence it
derives its Origin, and from other Neighboring Parts which are as so many
sources that produce new Dropsies.

Signs of the Dropsy.
The signs of this Disease are swelling of the Belly, transparency of the
Waters, and Fluctuation.

Difference between corpulant persons and hydropical.
Before I speak of the Accidents, it is necessary to give an Idea of the
difference between the swelling of the Dropsy, and a good habit of body. In
the Dropsy the Belly is extremely extended and even, the Navels rises and
terminates in a point, whereas in the latter its soft, and less extended, being
more elevated on the sides than elsewhere, where the fleshy Portion of the
Muscles lie, and the Navel is quite hidden.

Symptoms of the Dropsy.
The Symptoms which accompany this Disease are slow Fever, weak, Pulse,
heaviness of the whole Body, difficulty of Respiration, considerable Swelling,
excessive Thirst, and difficulty of Urine.

1. Slow Fever.
The slow Fever is nothing else but an effect of the impurity of the Chyle, and
other levens which intimately mix with it: this mixture designed to make the
life of the part happy, being impressed with this brine, or rather charged with
this impure and strange Matter passes to the Heart how corrupt soever it be,
where it ferments and disorders its motions, the Heart communicating its unruly
Pulsations to the Arteries, excites this kind of Fever which is only felt very
slightly.

2. Weakness of the Pulse.
The Pulse's weakness depends on the slow influence of the Animal Spirits into
the Fibers of the Heart, which being incapable to augment their Action (in
respect of the Spirits as well as Blood, by reason of their scarcity) maintain
the blood in that little degree of precipitate motion which distinguishes this
slow Fever from the other, and consequently causes this weakness of the Pulse.

3. Heaviness of the Body.
The pale color, and heaviness of the body, proceeds from the slow motion of
the Blood, and from the dissipation and concentration of the Spirits, which are
stifled and choked (as it were) in the Waters: now as the heat and vigor
depend on the presence, and natural ferment of the Blood and Spirit, which
should animate these parts, and be carried to the Surface, you must not wonder
if they be so pale, and if the Muscles cannot sustain the weight of the Body.

4. Difficulty of Respiration
The difficulty of Respiration is caused by the swelling and great tension of
the belly which presses the Diaphragm against the Lungs, and diminishes the
Diameter of the Breast, so that the Lungs having not the liberty to extend
themselves, the Respiration grows frequent and forced.

The excessive thirst is raised from the humors that are separated from the
Glands of the Stomach, 5 Thirst.
Oesophagus, and other parts of the Gula to moisten their coasts, and to
maintain them in the Humidity which is requisite for them, it is not enough
either through the frequent setlings which are made in other parts, or that the
invincible and intemperate fire, which the Fever kindles in all parts,
dissipates, consumes or ratifies it, which cause these parts to heat and dry,
and that saltish Spirits, whose actions are not corrected by any dissolvent,
rush into the little Fibers, and produce a motion in the Nerves which excites
thirst.

As to difficulty of Urine, I suppose that part of the Water which used to take
its course through the Kidneys, 6. Difficulty of Urine.
tends another way, and that the Urinous, Volatile, and other fixed Salts of the
Urine, being deprived of a part of their dissolvent stop at the entry of the
Pores of the Glands, and hinder the Urine from running with that liberty into
its Conduit, the Salts thus having the upper hand, and finding nothing in the
Blood capable to blunt their points, irritate all the parts through which they
pass, particularly the Areteries, and oblige the Sphincter of the Bladder to a
more than usual contraction, which causes the Urine to flow very difficultly,
and by turns.

I pass to the cure of this Disease which is performed by the help of
Medicines, Cure.
or Operation. The most Specific Remedies are diuretics, and those which
cause insensible transpiration, others being of no great use.

The strongest Diuretics are Rad. Tinctura Diuretica.
Ebul. Irid. Erysimi. Cucum. agr. fol. Solda nel. Cerefol. infused in Spirit
Vin. Mercurisati. It Is an extraordinary remedy.

Infusus Anthydropiens.
Rad. brusc. Polypond. Gladiol. Medul. sambuc. Croc. and Christ. miner. infused
cold in White Wine, make a wonderful remedy. Sal. Rut. Crem. Mercurii Spirit.
Salis: taken in Broth (without common Slat) are admirable. There are several
other Medicines of which Authors are full; I mention here only those which I
have experimented.

If all these will not do, you must proceed to the Operation which confists in
punction made on some part, its name differing according to the place where it
practiced, being called when made in the belly, Paracentesis; in the Scrotum,
Punction; and in the Legs, Scarification.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Paracentesis.
OMitting the Description of the method of the Ancients, I proceed ours, Where
the Puncture is made.
wherein we use the Trocher, or Lancet, the puncture being ordinarily made on
the side four Fingers from the Navel. If with the Trocher, we make no
apparatus, but pierce the belly as often as we will draw water from it:
Description
This Instrument is of a triangular Figure, and scatters only the Fibers, they
upon its being withdrawn exactly reuniting again; it must always be accompanied
with its Canula, when the punction is made, which we leave in the Belly as long
as the water is to be drawn. If you use the Lancet, you must arm it with a
little band of cloth before hand, Method of using the Lancet.
and thrust it in till the water comes forth; and before you withdraw it,
introduce a Probe on the flat of it, to facilitate the passage of the Canula
into the Belly, then having drawn a sufficient quantity according to the
strength of the Patient, stop the Canula with a small Tent, and apply good
compress sustained with napkin and scapuler: but seeing that by this method we
cannot always hinder the rapid stream of the water we must prefer the Trocher.

In what parts your Operation is useless.
You must observe that the Dropsy of the Head, Breast, and Stomach are never
cured by Operation, but by general Medicines.

CHAP. IX. Of Hernias.
THE Belly is subject to certain tumors called in Greek, Definition.
Cele, in Latin, Hernia v. Ramex. it is defined a preternatural Tumor caused by
the falling of some part, or gathering together of some superfluous Humor.

What Hernia signifies.
The word Hernia, signifies something that is troublesome to bear: I Will use the
Etymology in opposition to their opinion, who pretend it suits not with the
Humeral Hernia, and I believe every one will agree with me, that they are
insupportable as well from Humors as Parts: Hence I conclude the word Hernia
may fit all kind of Tumors which happen to the Belly or Scrotum. I confess the
word Rupture is only applicable to those in the Groin and Scrotum, from the
Omentum, Interstines, or some other part. But omitting a useless multiplication
of imaginary names, I pass to its species and differences.

And these are drawn from the parts which they attack, and the different causes
which they produce; Names.
by reason of the Parts they are called Exomphales, viz. of the Navel:
Bubonocele, of the Groins: Oscheocele of the Scrotum: and Ventralis Hernta, of
which hereafter.

By reason of the causes which produce them, the one are made by parts,
Diferences.
the other by the humors: The first are called Enterocele, when the Intestines
come forth, Epiplocele when the Omentum, and Enteropiplocele when both.

The latter are called Hydrocele, Pneumatocele, Sarcocele, Varicocele, and
Circocele, from Water, Wind, Flesh, and other Liquors, which are capable to
dilate the Vessels.

Those made by the parts are called true, the Humoral false; complete, true, or
Lips of the Womb; not complete, when they don't pass the Groin.

Causes, External.
Causes are external or internal; the external are violent blows, great
shakings, long courses or running, dancing, leaping, continual crying, vehement
coughing, excess of venery, too frequent and forced breathings, and generally
all the exercises, and strong efforts to which we are subject.

The Internal come first from the influx and deposition of a great many
Serosities, Internal. 1.
which sometimes come from the Glands of the Intestines, or the Groin, but
principally from those Glands which garnish the interior Surface of the
Peritonaeam, all these sources make that abundance of Lympha which actually
Humects, Relaxes, and Lubrifies these Parts: and consequently puts them into a
condition to yield the more to the frequent and reiterated Impulsions of the
Intestines.

The second, I suppose, depends on the great Dissipations of the oily
Particles, for if we consider that the Peritoneum is near the Omentum and
Mesentery, the two chief Repositories of the Fat, by which it is actually
separated from the Parts, by the heat, it is easy to understand that these
Parts continually greasing the Fibers of the Peritonaeum, so soften and extend
them, that at the least action or motion they give way very easily to the
blows, and to all motions which may contribute to their formation. The People
of Provence mighty Subject to Hermat.
Hence the People of Provence, the Religious especially, who eat nothing but
Oil in their Food are more subject to Hernias than others.

To the third, room than usual they impel the Surface of the Peritonaeum, and
nesting themselves in these productions form the Tumor.

For the fourth,

I pass to the Consequences which we must draw from the Causes of Hernias,
relating to the Structure of the Parts where they are formed, which depend as
well on the disposition of the Peritonaeum as the. Mechanic motion of the
Diaphragm, Muscles of the Abdomen, and Intestines.

Hook on the Peritonaeum as a Membrane of a considerable thinckness disposed in
the shape of a sack, containing all the Parts of the lower Belly; it is so long
as to reach to the Navel and groins, What Is to be considered in the Peritonaeum.
to accompany the Umbilical and Spermatick Vessels which run between its
Duplicature; this is in short the Idea you must have of it.

What about the Muscles.
Let Us now examine the Muscles of the Abdomen, whose carnous Portions garnish
the Lateral Parts, and their Aponeuroses occupy the forepart of the three
Regions; three of which Muscles are perforated toward the Groin for the
passage of the Spermatic Vessels: The first hole is of an Oval Figure belonging
to that Aponeurose of the external oblique, and being dilated well enough,
represents the handle of a Hamper, whose two extremities are fastened to the Os
Pubis reaching a little toward the Crest of the Os Ilium.

This hole is lined externally with a little thin and delicate Membrane, which
accompanies the Cremaster Muscles to the Testicles, and is nothing else but an
expansion of the Tendinous Fibers. The other two are of the Separations of the
fleshy Fibers of the Internal Oblique, and Transverse: These three Rings don't
directly answer one another, being separate about three or four Lines. The
first that presents it self to us in performing the Operation, is that of the
external Oblique, which is the lowest, and in which is made almost all the
Strangulation of the Gut, because the Tendinous Fibers don't obey so well as
the Carnous, and are more subject to inflammation; for which reason it is that
most don't scarifie this ring in the Operation; that of the Internal Oblique is
a little higher, and that of the Transvers highest of all; it is easily
observable, that if nature had placed them one against another, there would at
the least effort happen a Hernia. The right Muscle reaches from the Cartilago
Ensiformis to the Os Pubis, lying all along the sides of the Linea Alba, and
seems to be divided into four Muscles which are distinguished by four Tendons
called by the Ancients Enervations; this Muscle partly obscures the Motion of
all the others, which otherwise would so strongly compress the Guts, that if
it, like a movable Bar, did not oppose their powerful contraction, they would
oblige the Parts every where to regurgitate out of the Belly.

What the Linea Alba is.
I Will add a word or two concerning the Linea alba, which is formed by the union
of the Tendinous Fibers of the Aponeurosis of the oblique and transvers Muscles
which Aponeurosis make a kind of separation, and mark the interval between the
right Muscles; so that to show these two Muscles, we are forced to cut those
Aponeuroses under which they are hid: I pass now to the action of every Muscle
in particular. The external oblique pass obliquely from above downward,
according to the disposition of their Fibers, just as the internal pass from
below upwards. The transvers press equally the Flanks, and the action of the
right is felt all along the sides of the Linea alba: These Muscles so disposed,
press equally all parts of the Belly, when they are contracted, in time of
expiration, and maintain it in a level always united.

After all these reflections, if we make a just application of the causes of
Hernias, according to the Mechanism of the parts where they are felt, we shall
find something to satisfy our curiosity, confidering that violent blows, rude
shakings, long courses, excess of venery, dancing, leaping, and generally all
efforts are capable, not only of moving the Guts, but also of relaxing their
connexions, hence Posts, Postilians, Dancers, Leapers, etc are troubled often
with them; To these we have added Crying, vehement Coughs, and all too frequent
expirations and inspirations, hence, Musicians, Singers, and Children (whose
parts are soft and spongy,) are so much subject to them.

In all these efforts, the Guts are so pressed, and repelled on all sides by
the Diaphragm and Muscles of the Abdomen, which as so many Hands and movable
Napkins, oblige the Omentum and Intestines to strike and apply themselves so
strongly against the surface of the Peritonaeum, that they are constrained to
regurgitate through the weakest places, as a piece of Wax between the Fingers
when it is squeezed with the Hands, they push, I say, and dilate the interior
Membrane of the Peritonaeum, where it is least affisted by the exterior, and
sink into the rings of the Muscles forming a Sack, which is greater or less in
proportion to the strength of the Impulse. This Sack nests its self all along,
and at the sides of the productions of the Peritonaeum, An Ancient Error
confuted.
which are formed by its exterior Membrane, and not in the productions which
invelop the spermatic. Vessels. as most imagine: This Idea we must have of the
formation of the Purse, which includes the Intestine, and which makes the
Hernias, if there be any little indisposition in the Oil, Water, Wind, and
Tumors, which we have established for internal causes.

The Ventral Hernia remains now to be examined, Cause of a Ventral Mernia.
which happens sometimes between the right Muscles, sometimes between the Navel
and Flanks, exactly at the Aponeurosis of the Muscles, to be convinced of which
we are only to represent to our selves, how strong the moving force of every
Muscle is, which occupies the Flanks, different from the Aponeuroses which have
no other motion than that, which their carnous part communicates to them; for
though it be true, that all the Muscles Reunite themselves to one sole point of
the Navel, where the concourse of their action is, yet it is probable that their
carnous part is much stronger, and more vigorous, and by that means more
capable of resisting diverse shakes of the Intestines, as experience teaches us,
unless it be bruised, or cut by some blow: We observe also, that that the
Ventral Hernia never happens in the carnous part of the Muscles, but always in
the Aponeuroses, or in the space between the right Muscles, particularly, in
the course of some fatness. For in these kind of tumors, the Belly rises, so
that it obliges these two Musculous bands to part, and the Intestines finding
weak places, fail not by their impulsions, to dilate these parts, and so cause
the Hernia Ventralis.

Hernia ventralis and Exomphalos, not so common as Bubonotele.
If this, and Exomphales, are not so common as Bubonocele, it is because the
parts, and Humors are more inclining to be carried downwards toward the Groins
than elsewhere; and the disposition of the rings of the Muscles, which
contribute the more to it, as their overtures are widened and relaxed, so that
if the parts are put in motion, they insinuate themselves, and slip insensibly
through the opened passages, and where least resistance is made.

Fabritius Hildanus relates, Hernia caused by the descent of the Spleen.
that he has seen a Hernia made by the descent of the Spleen, this curious
remark should move the Surgeons, called to this kind of Disease, to pronounce
not always in favor of the the Epiploon and Intestines, before good
examination, particularly, when the tumor is of an extraordinary bulk, since
the ligaments of the Liver, Pancreas, and Kidneys, being relaxed, Also the
other Viscera
they may as well as the Spleen, contribute to its formation. According to the
order, I design in speaking of so nice an Operation, I think it more proper,
successively to describe the Signs of all kinds of Hernias, that I may not
confound them.

Signs of Hydrocele.
I begin with those of the first kind of Hydrocele, in which the waters are
spilt between the Membranes of the Scrotum, which are light tension,
considerable largeness, heaviness, we feel an undulation when we handle the
tumor, and perceive the transparency of the waters when we hold a light behind,
and the skin becomes tender, soft, without pain, and looks extremely shining.

In those of the second kind, where the waters possess the Membrane of the
Testicles, are great tension, pain, greater heaviness than in the other, the
skin of the Scrotum is not so much extended, and keeps its rugosities, though
it be very much swelled, through it be very much swelled, it possesses
ordinarily but one side, the Fluctuation's deep, the transparency more obscure.
It Is to be observed, that these two sorts may conjunctly meet together.

Signs of Sarcocele.
The signs of Sarcocele are, great hardness, insupportable weight, and
insensible augmentation of the tumor, if there appears no elevation in the
Groin, it is a sign that the preductions of the Peritonaeum are not accompanied
with any carcinomatous substance: It Is distinguished from the Hernia
Intestinalis, that the one's soft, the other is hard; this tumor may be divided
into Scirrhous and Malign, in the Scirrhous we feel neither heat nor pain, but
in the Malign, an excessive heat, and sharp burning pain. Varico^^.


Signs of Varicocele are great inequality; heaviness, pain, and Inflammation,
particularly, when it is irritated with some Medicine; it is also known because
it makes a Man somewhat impotent, especially, when it possesses both Testicles.
Circoce.


Signs of Circocele, which is caused by the dilatation of the external Vessels,
different from the Varicocele which comes from the Internal, are the same as
the former, except there is less pain, weight and Inflammation; add that the
Membranes of the Scrotum are more extended, and the tumor more apparent. Of
Pneumatocele.


Signs of Pneumatocele are, when the tumor disappears from time to time, it
sounds like a Drum, when it is struck without pain, weight, and inflammation,
very transparent, the color of the Cutis changes not, and the Wind is felt,
sometimes above sometimes below. Sings of Hernias made from the parts.


Let Us now examine the signs of those Hernias, which are caused by the parts,
and enquire exactly into them, because it is of the greatest importance. In the
beginning of these Hernias, they are ordinarily soft, without inflammation,
change of color, disappearing at the least pressure, except they be caused by
some Blow, Fall, or suchlike inconvenience, and are not accompanied with some
Strangulation, caused by Matter, stopped and hardened in the Intestines, either
by the course of the Blood and Spirits in these parts, which presently excites
inflammation, and often mortification; therefore you must do no violence to the
tumor by rude handling, lest it occasion a Gangreen; but that we may have a
clearer notion of all these signs, let us examine them in particular, and see
what are those which make us distinguish all these kinds of tumors.

(...) that ^ut is
If the Gut be engaged, without Inflammation, Strangulation, or adhereing to any
part, the tumor's soft, plain, and the color of the skin not changed; it
disappears from time to time, particularly, when the Party lies on his back:
When the Intestine is reduced, a kind of whistling noise is heard. Signs of the
Omentum.
But if it is in Omentum, the tumour's soft, and does not return so easily. It Is
unequal, by reason of the Bands and Fat with which it is charged; when pressed
with the Fingers, there remains a mark, and we feel the same resistance as in
pressing a Steatomatous tumor: This is more subject to mortification, because
the texture of the parts of which it is formed, is loose, spongy, and more
subject to corruption, so that at the least impression, the Blood stops more
easily there, than any where else; wherefore, you must not delay the Operation
in certain occasions, as we shall hereafter mention.

Note, That if Inflammation happen, it is always at the Intestines side; if it is
the Omentum, it grows livid at the least alteration

Inflammation, a ve^^ severe ^^mptome.
As for the Accidents, I find none more dangerous than Inflammation, which is
always accompanied with pain, Fever, Strangulation, and sometimes with the
Illiac passion, where the excrements are often forced against their own weight
to mount, and come out of the Mouth, the cause of which cruel Symptom proceeds
from the Guts, being inflamed by the excrements which are lodged there: It
communicates this Inflammation to the rings of the Muscles, particularly to
those of the external oblique, which by reason of its tendinous Nature, fails
not to shut up the Gut, and augment the Inflammation by a reciprocal action,
which causes interruption of the course of the Blood and Spirits in that part;
from thence comes the reflux of the excrements, lividity and mortification.
It Is easy to conceive that, having lost their motion, there can follow nothing
but divulsion, pain and loss of Life.

There Is yet another kind of lividity which comes from having handled and
pressed the tumor too much: These unprofitable Touchings are as so many
Bruises, which are imprinted on the part, the Gut and Omentum being pressed,
the Blood stops in the Vessels, which causes immediate mortification, and
change of color. When the Surgeon ought to avoid the Operation.
It Is also known by the pain which is greater, as we have said; The Surgeon
seeing all these bad Symptoms ought to retire.

The rest of the Accidents I reserve till I describe the manner of performing
the Operation.

An Idea of the Vmbilicus.
I begin with the Exomphalos, but before I enter on the Operation, I design to
give an Idea of the disposition of the Navel. It Is formed by the Reunion of the
Umbilical Vessels, which slip obliquely into the thickness of the Peritonaeum,
which accompanies them, and piercing conjuctly the Linea alba, fasten
themselves to the surface of the Cutis, where they leave a little tumor, which
is called the Navel after the Birth. In the Foetus, the way through which these
Vessels pass, are as manifest as the rings, of the Muscles of the lower Belly,
are in Adults, but after the Birth they shrivel up, and turn into Ligaments;
and as the parts where these Vessels meet grow bigger. They oblige the Navel by
their own weight insensibly: From which I conclude, that all the difference
between the passages of the Umbilical and Spermatic Vessels is, that the latter
are easily distinguished and separated one from another, whereas those of the
Navel are not at all distinguishable, because they shrivel up, and the
tendinous Fibers of every Aponeurosis twist themselves so one into another,
that all their parts seem to be continuous. It must also be observed, that the
Navel is without Flesh about half the breadth of a Finger round about, all this
contributes to the formation of the Exomphalos.

CHAP. X. Of the Operation of Exomphalos.
AFter having used Bandages, and all Medicines, as well general as particular,
without success, you must prepare the Sick to the Operation: How to perform the
Operation.
Being disposed, the Surgeon must lay him on his Back, without violating the
tumor, and endeavor to reduce the Intestine into the Belly, pinching up the
skin on one side, whilst a Servant does the same on the other, and with a
Bistory incise all along the side of the tumor, Danger of the Suspensorium
Hepatis.
that he may avoid the Umbilical Vessels, particularly the Suspensorum of the
Liver, for this Visera being no more suspended, the vena cava would be
comprest, and the Circulation hindt'd, which would cause Death.

If you are sure of the reduction of the Intestine, you must softly incise
still into the Cavity of the Belly, and scarifie the Lips of the Wound in all
its extension, to procure a strong Cicatrix; make the intersected stirch; some
pretend the Quill'd Suture is more covenient, because it more strongly refists
the motions of the Muscles and Intestines. You must introduce the Tampion of
Lint tied to a Thread, to hinder the regurgitation of the parts, and to give
way to the Matter; as it Incarns, you must diminish your Tent proportionably,
till the Cicartrix be formed. Here good Diet, and repeated Clysters are to be
preferred before other Remedies, as in Gastroraphia.

This Operation includes other particulars, which will more properly fall under
the Discourse of the Bubonocele.

CHAP. XI. Of the Operation of Bubonocele, and Hernia Complete.
THat I may not confound all the circumstances which accompany Bubonocele and
Hernia complete, nor mistake in the order which I have proposed in describing
them. I am forced to comprehend them both in one sole Operation.

These tumors are either wandering or permanent, they disappear sometimes, or
remain always in the same condition. If they are wandering, it is a sign of no
adherance, and that the Intestines suffer no compression, than the Bandage
alone, and general Remedies well ordered, may finish the cure. If they be
permanent, it comes from the inflammation adherence, or from some excrements
hardened in the Intestines: We know when the Epiploon is fastened there, by the
signs spoken of heretofore; which induces us to make the Operation without
irritating the tumor, for it alters at the least impression, and it is very
hard to reduce into the Hypogastrium.

I have made you observe, that the Inflammation and Strangulation succeeded the
induration of the excrements contained in the Gut, according as it swells and
grows thicker by the flowing of them; the ring of the external oblique, which
does not obey as the others, for the reasons already mentioned, restrain sit
proportionably as it dilates, which causes the Blood and Spirits not to
circulate with the same liberty, and the Inflammation of the Intestine to
increase equally with the Strangulation. You must also observe, that the Gut
never contracts any adherency, but with the bag that makes the Hernia, unless
some sharp and strange Matter has corroded it.

This bag is sometimes adherent to the cover of the Spermatic Vessels,
sometimes to the Omentum, or to the rings of the Muscles in all their
circumference, or in some part only, to the Dartos, or finally to the Membranes
of the Testicles; The most difficult part of the Operation.
so that the Intestine cannot return into the Belly, unless separated by
Incision, which necessitates the Surgeon to use his utmost Prudence and
Dexterity, if he means to succeed in so nice an Operation; the chief
circumstance of it indeed, being carefully to examine where the Gut is fastened,
not only because the economy of the Operation must be changed, but also
because this Knowledge rules our Judgments, and causes us to make a favorable
or dangerous Prognostic.

A danger. our Symptom.
The Hernia where the Intestine is adherent to the Testicle, is very dangerous,
and for the most part mortal. If it be an old one, the happiest cannot be rid of
it, without loss of the Testicle. The true way to know whether there be any
coherence, is to question the Diseased, how long 'twas since the tumor did not
disappear, whether he feels vehement and pulsific pains, and great weight on
the Testicles.

Signs that the Gut adheres to the Testicles.
If the Intestine be one fallen down into the Purse, and that it keep there some
time without returning, and there appear no Inflammation in the Groin, it is a
sign that the Sack which contains it is joined to the Testicle, by the action
of the viscous Humors which run from the Peritonaeum, or even from the
Membranes of the Testicle, these Humors growing thick by heat, are like a kind
of a Glue which ties them close together, and if the Matter come to dry up by
the reaction of the Blood and Spirits, it is impossible to sever them without
offending the Body of the Testicles. You must observe, that if the Gut does not
return into the Belly, it is not always a sign of adherence: It may be inflamed,
or contain some excrements, which is the better distinguished, because we know
that it had the liberty to enter before the Inflammation. We commonly undertake
the Operation when the Inflammation hinders the Matter from entering the
Intestines.

Having examined the different conditions of the Diseased, if there be any of
them which induces up to perform the Operation, we must use this method.

How to perform the Operation.
Lay the Patient on his Back (I suppose here, that the intestine is stopped in the
Purse, fastened to the Testicle, and Inflamed) then Incise with the Bistory the
skin of the Scrotum, near the Thigh, all along the tumor, then separate the two
Lips of the Wound, for to break gently with a Fleam, or your Fingers, all the
tegaments of the Intestine and Testicles.

How to distinguish the Gut from the Sack.
As for the precautions which we must observe to distinguish well the Intestine
from the Sack, which forms the Hernia, its brown color, I suppose, is the most
convincing Sign, by reason of the many Blood Vessels which irrigate them: It
forms a kind of Arch which is sensibly perceived when discovered; besides if
it is the Gut, the tumor lessens: It Is always thicker than the Peritonaeum,
being composed of four Tunicles. I agree, that this Sign is equivocal, so much
the more, because the Sack of the Peritonaeum grows often to a very
considerable thickness. There runs always frem the Intestine a thick and
stinking Matter; whereas from the Sack of the Peritonaeum, comes only a clear
and lump water. The Intestine obeys when you pull it, provided it adhere not to
the Neighboring parts, different from the Peritonaeum, which obeys very
little, and the Patient feels always a dull pain: These are the chief Signs
which ought to make a Surgeon circumspect. I pass to the particulars of the
Operation. The Intestine being discovered, you slip your hollow Probe between
the Membranes of the Scrotum, and the Body of the Intestine for to widen the
Aperture, and to discover it naked, to be able to separate it the easier from
the Testicle: A Servant lifts the Intestine, and pulls it gently with his Hands
toward the Pubis, whilst the Surgeon pulls lightly the Testicle with his Hand,
to have the liberty to break with the Fleam, or point of the Bistory, the
Membranous ties, observing always to cut them nearer to the Testicle, than
Intestine: If their adherance be very strong, it would be better to indammage
the Testicle, because it is not so necessary for Life, and the Accidents not so
dangerous; you must always avoid the Spermatic Vessels, for fear the Blood
trouble the Operation: Having freed the Intestine from the Testicle, you
introduce your hollow Probe between the Cutis and Intestine, and cut without
fear to the ring of the Muscle, where consequently you are obliged to give way
by a new Incision, to disengage the Intestine from the Strangulation, in case
there be any. You pass the third time the hollow Probe between the Ring and
Intestine, stirring it a little to be certain that the Gut be no way engaged,
and slip a crooked Bistory into the hollowness, and you cut from the ring about
two Lines, and a Portion of the skin, avoiding a little branch of an Arte^y,
which runs by the Aponeurosis of this Muscle.

When you free the Intestine by the dilation, you pull it out a little for to
disengage it from the internal rings, and give liberty to the excrements which
it contains to spread themselves; by this means it grows less tumid, and
extended so, that the reduction of it is much more easy; you do it with your
two Fore fingers, and press not the Intestine too much, lest you bruise it:
Being reduced, a Servant must press with his Hands the Neighboring parts, to
hinder its falling out again: Some make several little Incisions on the Circle
of the Ring, all along the Purse, which makes it incarn, and cicatrize
stronger; others content themselves to introduce into the Rings a thick Tent of
Lint tied with a waxed Thread, and a length proportionable to the depth of the
Wound, to bruise them as it were, and excite a speedy suppuration; some apply
them dry, and others dip in some digestive, according to the pain which is
felt, or humidity which relaxes these parts. But the true method to hinder this
Disease from relapsing is, to introduce into the Wound, a long Tent of Lint,
which refists the impulsion of the Intestine, which always endeavors to dilate
the rings, and so often makes the Operation unsuccessful. A Servant holds it on
whilst the Surgeon applies the rest of the Apparatus, especially, good
defensitives which oppose Fluxions that may happen.

There are several Practitioners, who would, that at the same time the Testicle
be cut off; but this method is not approved of, because it contributes not to
the cure of the Hernia, but rather, as Experience demonstrate, prolongs the
Operation, makes the Patient suffer without necessity, and deprives him of the
proper means of Propagation; but if even the Testicles should be altered, so
that they could not be secured, 'twould be always more advantageous to defer
the Operation till the Fluxion be a little moderated. If the Omentum be in the
part, and altered, you make the Ligature in the sound part, and take off the
corrupted: It may be avoided, if the tumor be recent, and preserved in its
natural State; if it be strongly fastened to the Gut, you must if possible
reduce them together, provided there appear no sign of mortification. Whether
it has contracted any tie with the Intestine Testicle, rings of the Muscle, or
with the productions which include the Spermatic Vessels: It Is always better to
take away some of its Substance, than of the Substance of any of these parts,
if necessity compel you to it. Yet I own, if it should at all adhere to the
Sack that contains the Intestine, provided it be sound, 'twou'd be better to
hurt the Purse than Epiploon. But as it cannot remain long in that condition
without being altered, we are always forced to cut a great Portion of it: You
must take care in making the Ligature, that you don't straiten the part too
much, because it is of a loose texture, spongy, and easy to be cut. You pass
the Thread several times all about slightly, straitning it after having passed
the Needle through its Substance.

In the Operation of the Bubonocele, you make not so great an Aperture, but
make it according to the extension, and bigness of the tumor. Concerning the
rest, you follow the same Rules, and observe the same circumstances formerly
mentioned.

When you have discovered the Purse which makes the Hernia, you tear it to
pieces dexterously with your Nails, or the Fleam, and if instead of the
Intestine you find water, be not surpised with the supposal that you have hurt
the Intestine, but take Courage, and remember only the signs of which we have
spoken, which will fortify you, and put you into a condition successfully to
perform the Operation; for it is only the Purse which is full of waters, in
which the intestine floats: These waters are furnished by the Glands of the
internal surface of the Peritonaeum; and by those of the Intestines, or by the
eruption of some. Lymphatic Vessels: These are, if I mistake not, most of the
particulars which this Operation contains; after having Embrocated with Oil of
Roses, you must apply good defensitives over the part and Hypogastrick region,
with good compress moistened in Oxycrate, and sustain the applications with the
simple Spica; in all these affects, you must always ease the Purses by a
Suspensorium, and prefer Clysters before other general Medicines.

CHAP. XII. Of Castration, occasioned by Sarcocele, and Varicocele.
THis Operation is not always to be Practiced, unless other methods prove
ineffectual: In the four following cases, I suppose it necessary. When the
Operation must be performed.
1. When it is so closely fastened to the Intestine, that one is forced to take
much of its Substance off. The 2. is in contusion, when the Vessels and
Vesicles are crushed together, and the course of the Blood interrupted, which
is known by the blackness of the Testicle, and mortification which follows soon
after, if the progress of this commotion be not hindered. The 3. is, when the
Testicle is varicous, and the virulent Humors which cause the tension and
dilatation of the Vessels cannot by Medicines be resolved; this case is not so
pressing as the others, unless the Patient be resolved to endure the Operation.
The 4. is in all old Excrescencies.


To have an Idea of their generation, you must consider that the one attacks
the Substance it self, and the other its Tunicles, after this you must look
upon the Spermatic Arteries, as the true source and channels which convey the
Matter, of which the Carnosities are formed, and that the Arterial Blood,
furnishing the Testicles with the Matter of Seed, to be prepared there, lets
slip in this Elaboration, its most greasy and viscous part, which the moderate
heat that we find there condenses in the little channels which compose them, or
in their Tunicles, almost as the white of an Egg hardens over a moderate Fire:
This Matter coming to swell and extend these little tender Pipes, produces that
which we call a spongy and carcinomatous Excrescence. It Is only a swelling of
these little Filaments, which a strange Humor forces to rise in a tumor. You
may also observe, that by the over-growing of a new Matter, it becomes very
often so remarkable, that one cannot long carry this burden, without
discharging it: If it happen that by what cause soever this Liquor should be
determinated, rather into the Membranes of the Testicle, than any where else,
and that there is formed a Carcinomatous Substance all along the productions of
the Peritonaeum, which encroaches sometimes upon the Interior parts of the
Belly; I suppose, that the Operation will then be needless, because this
carnosity occupying not only the vaginal Tunicle, which is a dilatation of the
productions of the Peritonaeum, but also the productions themselves; you would
ruin the. Vessels, Rings, and several parts included in the Hypogastrium.

I will not repeat here the signs of this Disease, as for its Prognostics,
Prognostic.
they are always very bad, because it costs the Testicles, if any carnosity
possess its Substance, for it cannot be consumed without destroying it, and the
sarest way is the Operation.

CHAP. XIII. Of Castration.
THE Patient being laid on his Back, the Surgeon Incises with a very sharp
Instrument, the Membranes of the Scrotum upon the Body of the Testicle, to
discover the carnosity, which must be separated from the Dartos, without
offending the cover of the seminal Vessels; being freed from the Neighboring
parts, you make the ligature of the Vessels between the Rings and the tumor;
you must cut them half the length of a Finger from the ligature, and take away
the Testicle with the Sarcoma; you leave an end of the Thread out of the Wound
(avoiding to pull the Spermatick Vessels to you, The Spermatick Vessels not to
be tied too hard.
or compress them too hard, lest the Patient should fall into a Convulsion)
that they may not slip into the Belly where they would shed Blood, and so cause
Death in a little time: If the tumor be considerable, scirrhous, inflamed,
painful, and posfess both the Testicles; and of continuance, the Operation is
very dangerous.

If the productions of the Peritonaeum be carcinomatous, and you have a design
to make the Operation, you must first consume the Flesh by the help of
potential cauteries, or molifie them by a powerful suppuration, yet it must be
avoided if the tumor extend it self into the cavity of the Belly, for the
reasons before mentioned. When the superfluous Flesh is consumed, and the
Eschar fallen, if the Vessel be preserved, you make the ligature by the Rings
of the Muscles, and take away the Testicle, as I have said; for should you make
it before the fall of the Eschar, the Patient would suffer dangerous
Convulsions. You fill the Wound afterward with Dossils dipped in some
digestive, and emborate, and apply defensitives, compresses, with a
suspensorium, ordering Bleeding, Clysters, and other general Remedies.

CHAP. XIV. Of Hydrocele.
A Hydrocele from Ascites incurable. Unless you cure the Ascites.
IF the Hydrocele be the consequence of the Dropsy Ascites the Operation is
useless, because there runs always new Matter, which presently produces another
Hydrocele, so that unless you dry up the source, there is no hopes of cure: In
this the waters occupy always the tunica vaginalis, and run from the capacity of
the Abdomen through the prolongations of the Peritonaeum. All other sorts of
Hydrocele proceed from the slow motion of the Blood, Other cures.
or its dissolution: Falls and Blows may also contribute to their Formation:
The reason is, that the Blood Stagnates more easily in these parts, which
causes the serosity to separate from it on the same principle, I say, that the
circumvolutions and serpentine turns, which the Spermatick Veins form in their
Root, are for the most part the cause of it, if the Blood be the least disposed
to it, for seeing it does not circulate here, but with much ado, the serosities
have time enough to separate and distill into the Purses.

Having examined the signs of the two sorts of Hydrocele, when we spoke of
those of the Hernia Intestinalis, we'll say nothing more of them than the
Prognostic, which is only of ill consequence when the waters are included in a
Cystis.

We must now examine all the circumstances of both kinds, which require two
different ways of Operating: We have observed, when we Treated of the signs,
that the first kind of Hydrocele, is distinguished and known, when the waters
extraordinarily swell and extend the Membranes of the Scrotum.

CHAP. XV. Of the Operation of Hydrocele.
THis Operation consists in making a puncture into the Scrotum with the
Trocher, accompanied with its Canula, through which the water runs freely, and
when it is emptied, you withdraw your Instrument, and the Cutis of the Cods
becomes rugous as before, and the aperture stops exactly. This is performed
without trouble or danger, but omit not drying up the source by the use of
general Remedies, otherwise the tumor will not fail to return.

The second kind of Hydrocele, which generally possesses only one side,
ordinarily attacks the Tunicles of the Testicle. It Is also much more painful
through the great tension of its Membranes.

The method of the Operation.
The method required in this, consists in making the aperture deep and large
enough, as well to give vent to the water, as to carry Medicines thither, which
have the Virtue of dissipating the Membranes that are imbued with them; we use
to make the aperture at the side of the Scrotum with a Lancet, The Caustic
better then a Lancet.
or a Potential cautery, to avoid the Spermatick Vessels, and seeing the
cautery makes a great Eschar, it is to be preferred before the Lancet, because
you are in less danger of offending the Testicle, and you dissipate insensibly
the Membranes by Suppuration.

You must Note, That seeing the Waters hinder the action of this Remedy, in
blunting its corrosive Particles, if the first that is applied makes not an
Eschar deep enough, it is necessary to apply another, when the Eschar is off,
you fill the Wound with Dossils, and leave those which cover the bottom four or
five days, before you take them out; to the end, that by their stay, the Matter
which is stopped become more sharp, and that they may dissolve more easily the
Tunicles which contain the Waters; you suppurate it and dress it as an ordinary
Wound.

Before you go further, you must also observe, that if the waters grow sharp
and corrosive, or rather lixivious, they change often into Pus, which makes the
Testicle alter and corrupt, so that you are forced to take it out.

Cure of Pneumatocele.
As for Pneumatocele you must use the bandage, and all the carminative Remedies,
as well internal as external; and as it is a part of the Surgeon's prudence, to
order them according to his Knowledge; I should be ridiculous, if I should
boast here of Remedies which Authors are full of.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Phymosis.
What Phymosis is.
THE Phymosis is nothing else but a shrivelling, and contraction of the
extremity of the Prepuce, which compresses so hard the Glans, that if you don't
give it Air by way of Incision, it becomes inflamed, and often mortifies.

This incommodity is either natural or accidental, the natural comes from the
parts being yet concentred, and as it were, retired into its Tunicle, and that
one has not yet betaken himself to any exercise or touching: The Prepuce forms
in this affect wrinkles which are like so many little Bolsters, As Venery.
between which gathers and stagnates a tenacious Matter, separated by the Glans
with which the inner surface of the Prepuce is sprinkled, which thickens by the
heat, and growing impure by its stay, there is as it were a kind of Glue which
fastens the Prepuce to the Glands, and so straightly presses it, that it will not
let the Urin flow.

The Surgeon therefore first endeavors to free the parts, pulling to him the
extremity of the Prepuce, then introduces at the side of the Virga an Incision
knife between the Glands and Cutis, piercing the Prepuce without danger, and
cuting all between the Instrument and Extremity of the Glans: If one Incision
be not enough to discover it, you may boldly make another on the opposite side,
the sole motion of the parts being capable to extend the Fibers of the Prepuce,
and render them obedient, and make them that they restrain and dilate
themselves according to thenecessity of Nature.

You must not use this Operation till you have tried Fomentations, Caution.
Emollent injections, and all other Remedies in vain; which method is to be
observed in all Operations.

The second kind of Phymosis is caused by some Inflammation, Shanker, Ulcer,
Induration, Callosity, and often by irritative Remedies misapplied; in all
these cases, whether the sharp Humor which comes from the Ulcers, irritate the
parts, or corrosive Medicines, it happens that the passage of the Blood and
Spirits is hindered, and the Inflammation becomes so considerable, that the
Fibers are no more in a condition to obey: This is also the reason why this
virulent Sanies which comes from the Shanker, excoriates these parts, excites
sharp pains, felt only at the extremity of the Yard, and Inflammation, which is
soon followed by a Gangreen, if you hinder not its progress.

Cause of Pulsation in the part.
The pulsisick pain which is felt in this part cannot proceed but from the Glans
which is covered with a thin and delicate Membrane, humected by a great number
of Vessels, particularly of Nerves, and that its Substance is of a very fine
and sensible texture; so the motion which these virulent Matters imprint on the
Spirits, not being able to communicate themselves to the rest of the Yard,
because of the force and thickness of the coverings of the cavernous Bodies,
the pain must needs augment and become much more sensible and acute in this
part.

But before you resolve on the Operation, use Bleeding, Fomentations,
Suppurations mixed with some prepations of Mercury, which you must introduce
with the end of your Probe, the cerot of GALEN Emollient injections, a Ball of
Lint put between the Glans and skin, compresses wet in Oxycrate; in a word, all
these Remedies must be applied, but especially the Situation of the Virga,
which must be laid on the Belly, and sustained with a little Bandage.

CHAP. XVII. Of Paraphymosis.
What Paraphymosis is.
PAraphymosis is a Disease quite contrary to a Phymosis, in one, the Glans
being hidden, in the other, Strangled, and so stripped of its Prepuce, that you
cannot cover it again.

The cause of this Strangulation comes sometimes from the overthrow of the
Cutis, Cause.
which forms a sort of Bolster, and sometimes from Inflammation, which a Shanker
or some other tumor preceded; if the Strangulation be considerable, there must
needs follow interruption of the course of Blood and Spirits in these parts,
and consequently a mortification: In this affect the Yard-swells so hard, that
it forms three or four Bags, as it were alternately disposed half a Finger's
breadth one from another: These pursings come partly from the obstructions, and
partly from the reflux of Blood and Spirits in the Body of the Virga, they are
commonly followed by a tumor which occupies the neck of the prepuce, and which
is full of a reddish water, which by the great heat of the part so rarifies
ordinarily, that from an Aqueous it becomes Windy.

This tumor augments so considerably the Inflammation, that if you don't
scarifie deep the tumified places to give a discharge, the Penis would not fail
to mortify.

How to bring over the Prepuce.
You must endeavor to reduce the Prepuce without compressing the Glans, or
putting your Thumb on its extremities, as most do that treat of this Disease.

The Reason is, that when the extremity of the Glans is pressed, it enlarges it
self, and swells more, which instead of making the prepuce slip, rather folds
up, and hinders its reduction.

You use almost the same Remedies as in Phymosis. There be some that pour cold
water on the Belly, but I think it of no great use, or at least see no great
effects of it; for want of these Remedies, you may use in Inflammation some
Styptick water, in which, dip your compresses, and apply them about the part,
you must also keep the same Situation and Bandage as in Phymosis.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Stone and Lithotomy.
THe STONE with which Mankind of all other Animals is most troubled, is called
in Latin, Calculus, Name.
and those affected with it, Calculosi: Its origin would have been always
unknown to us, if the Chemists Art had not discovered to us the secret of its
formation, in showing the principles which Compose it by the just Analysis that
Science makes of it.

The Opinion of the Ancients concerning its formation.
All the Ancients and their Abettors have always maintained with great heat, that
the Stone is formed by the most Crass, Course, and viscous particles of Blood,
which being carried into the Bladder with the Urine, came to be the Matter of
the Stone.

Of Hypocrates.
Hypocrates imagined, that the Stone was formed by the Urines retention in the
Bladder, and that the most gross and terrestrious Particles stopped there, and
stuck to the bottom almost in the same manner as the Gravel gathers in the
bottom of a pot, where the Urin has been long retained, and that certain slimy
Particles gather there, which serve for a tie to the little Gravels there
assembled, and that after this manner, by the overgrowing of a new Matter, the
Stone becomes insensibly bigger.

This Opinion is more probable than solid; for it is evident, if the Stones were
formed after Hipocrates's way, supposing the principles which he admits,
'twould doubtless not have consistence strong enough to resist the Hammer as
this does, it is much more reasonable to believe, that what we see in the Urinal
of those thus Diseased, is nothing else but the Volatile Spirit of Urin, which
taking its flight, sticks rather to the sides of the Urinal than bottom, as
experience demonstrates.

The Opinion of Fernelius.
Fernelius pretends, that all the Stones which are found in the Bladden fall
from the Reins by Nephritical pains, and says, That if the Gravel which passes
from the Reins into the Bladder, be of any considerable bigness, and that it
lies there for some time, the Stone is formed there, which grows bigger and
bigger by the access of new Matter which comes to it without intermission: And
that which fully persuaded him to believe, that Nephritick pains excited the
Gravel to fall from the Kidneys into the Bladder, was, That he never found any
one troubled with the Stone, but some Nephritick pain went before.

He says also, That when you break the Stones which are wholly formed, you find
in the middle a little Kernel, which has a covering different in Color, and
Substance from the rest of the Stone, and whose Figure perfectly imitates the
Pelvis of the Kidneys, from whence he concludes the Stone is formed in it,
before it falls into the Bladder.

Fernelius wanted nothing more than the knowledge of the principles of the
Stone, to have had a perfect Idea of it: And what made him fall into this
Error, after Hipocrates was, That he founded himself on that old Maxim of the
Ancients, that Stones are formed by the terrestrial and gross particles of the
Blood, which disengaging themselves from the others, and uniting together, form
Calcules.

The only reason which they give for it, is, that these Gravels are very firm
and massy, and that such Bodies cannot be framed, but by the assembling of that
which is most irregular, and heavy in the Blood. They pretend also, that we
must conceive this generation to be like the gross and massy Bodies which are
made on the Earth, to which the formation of the Stone in Man's Body has a
great deal of Analogy: All Minerals having no other principles than the most
inflexible and weighty Particles of the Earth: But this is a prejudice grounded
only on the impression and confused Ideas of the Senses.

Reason and Experience are their opposites, for this latter shows, that the
Volatile Spirits, and most subtle Bodies frame by their mixture a heavy and
solid Body; which the sixth Salts, and other grosser Bodies, more incapable of
motion cannot do, as Chemistry Demonstrates: Nay, Reason convinces us of it,
for it is easily conceived, that the grosser and more irregular Particles cannot
adjust, or restrain so well, or press themselves with so much strength, as the
more fine and regular, in order to the framing a solid and complete Body.

Two essential principles toward the generation of the Stone.
Chemistry discovers to us two essential principles in the Urin, by the
Analysis which it has made of it.

The one is a Urinous and Volatile Salt, which much resembles the Spirit of
Nitre: And the other a very Ethereal Sulphur, which is like Spirit of Wine.

Experience Demonstrates, Experiment.
that if we mix Spirit of Wine with Spirit of Nitre, a coagulum is presently
formed, but these two principles being engaged in the Urine, and it is course
not permitting them to Unite together to form the Stone.

Van Helmont's Opinion.
The Urine, as Van Helmont says, must fall into some disorder before the Stone
be formed, and although the essential principles of the Gravel, in which
consists the Seed of the Stone, be in the Urine, it needs an intermedium or
ferment to excite and cause the Seed to germinate like as in other generations,
therefore it is a corruptive ferment, says Van Holmont, which is sometimes
ingendered in the Urine, and which awakes and vivifies the principles of
putrefaction, which uniting themselves intimately form the Stone in the midst
of the Kidneys.

This is the manner this Author proves it, and we may say to his Credit, that
of all who have written on this Subject, none has done better than he.

He says, there is no Transmutative Principle in Nature without Ferment: The
Urine does not corrupt in us, because of its motion; but there must needs be
found in it a corruptive Ferment, by occasion of which, it is apt for
Putrefaction; so that the Putrefaction is not made by the Urin's being
vitiated, but the Reins Suscitate the vicious Ferment to the generation of this
strange Body: And he supposes, that it is the smell alone of the principle of
Putrefaction which stirs up, and separates in Heterogeneal parts, that which
before seemed to be Homogeneal; like as the smell of a Vessel, wherein there
has been some acidity coagulates and sowers Milk, The Ferment of the Stone
consists in a smell only.
or as the smell of Leven Ferments, and infects the Dough, and the smell of a
musty Fat, corrupts and Ferments the Wine, even so in the Urine does the
Ferment, which disposes to the Gravel, consist in a pure smell only.

It Is also observed, that the Urin putrifies sooner in a stinking Vessel, in
which Urin has been kept a long time, than in one which is clean and new.

He supposes, that the coagulation of the Stone is made in an instant, though
its growth is made by degrees, and sometimes all at once.

In the Distillation which he has made of the Urin, he has always found therein
a Spirit of Nitre, which he calls a coagulating Spirit, associated with the
Spirit of Wine, and though they be both very volatile, they coagulate, as Spirit
of Vitriol mixed with Sal Ammoniac, which evaporates also very easily.

Besides this coagulating Spirit, and the Spirit of Wine which meet together in
the Urin, he says, there is also found in it a terrestrial Styptick Spirit,
which by the means of putrefaction becomes volatile, so that this Spirit of
Urine, drinking up the terrestrial Spirit, excited by a putrid Ferment,
suscitates the Spirit of Wine which is in repose, and concentred in the Urine,
which mingling intimately together, and acting one with another, by a
reciprocal action, condenses in the middle of the Urine, and forms a stony
Matter.

The good or bad use of Food, contributes much to its formation; we observe,
that those who use too spiritous Drinks, and dirty Food are more subject to it
than others. We see also, that those who live on Milk Meats, Fruit, Pulse, Rye
bread, and several other Impurities, are often tormented with it: The latter
contribute to it, because of their Impurity, and the other by reason of their
spiritous Particles, the latter furnish the principles of the Stone, and the
other the Ferment, which disposes (...) the Excrements, because working on the
Colon, which is near, it gnaws and corrodes the Tunicles, and after this manner
opens a passage to come out this way. Vomiting, and Palsy of the Thigh and Leg,
are also concomitant; the Diseased cannot stand strait, and the Testicle of the
same side retires into the Groin. Cause of Vomiting in Inflammation of the Reins.
The Vomiting proceeds from the mutual communication that is between the Nerves
of the Kidneys and Stomach, by the Irritation of the Spirits in the carnous
fibers of the Stomach, occasioned by the Inflammation of the Reins.

Cause of the Palsy of the Thigh, etc. in Inflammation of the Reins.
To give a reason for the Palsy, you must observe that the Kidney is laid upon
the head of the Muscle Psoas, which it presses and inflames; this Muscle being
inflamed, also presses a thick string of Nerves which passes through its body,
and distributes it self into the interior part of the Thigh and Leg, from
whence follows the stupor, by the suppression or obstruction of the Spirits.
After this manner the Muscle Psoas reciprocally inflames the Iliac to which
it is joined; and seeing these two Muscles serve to bend the Thigh, it can no
more obey not follow the action of these Extensors, which is the cause that we
cannot stand upright without cruel pain.

Cause of the contraction or shriveling up of the Testicle into the Groin.
The Testicle retires into the Groin, by reason the Iliac Muscle is joined to
the Cremaster's, which embraces the body of the Testicle, so that its fibers
being shortened by the Inflammation, (which the Iliac communicates to it) the
Testicle must necessarily mount into the Groin; nevertheless all these Signs
are equivocal, seeing they may happen in the ordinary Inflammation of the Reins,
that is to say, in the Nephretic Colic.

Signs of the Stone in the Bladder.
The Signs of the Stone in the Bladder, are palsific burning pains in the time
of making Water, the Urine comes out by drops and reiterated turns, as in
Stranguria; and as the Bladder is emptied and diminished in bigness, its sides
apply themselves so hard against the surface of the Stone, which if it be
rough, it fails not to cause sufficient convulsions, and break some vessels, in
which consists the burning pain one feels after pissing, and the last drops are
often bloody.

The Water is made by turns, because the Stone which lies heavy on the neck of
the Bladder, Causes of these Signs of the Stone in the Bladder.
stops partly the passage of the Urine; but the worst is, that in the time of
pissing, and when the sides (which before were extended) come to touch rudely
against this rough body, its nervous fibers break, and gives way to the Urine,
by its acrimony to prick them, so causes convulsions, cruel and pungent pains,
and imprints on the spirits an irregular motion, by occasion of which the
carnous fibers contract and embrace the Stone faster, the diseased thinking in
that moment to ease himself, and desiring to suspend the course of the spirits,
augments on the contrary the violence of the pain, and retards the course of
the Urine, and so causes some of it to remain always in the Bladder, which
grows acid, and at length becomes stinking by its stay there, so renews much
sharper and insupportable pains.

Cause of Itching.
One feels an Itching in the region of the Perineum, which irritating the
sphincter of the Anus, excites a Tenesmus; the Itching continues even to the
extremity of the Gland, which obliges the Patient to rub it often.

Cause of Heaviness about the Perineum.
The Heaviness about the Perineum cannot proceed but from the weight of the
Stone, and the itching from the acrimony of the Urinc. Sometimes there happens
a Priapism, or an involuntary erection of the Penis, caused by the irritation
of the fibers, and inflammation of the bladder and urethra, which communicates
it self to the cavernous bodies; It Is easy to see that the irritation of the
part (joined with some slight indisposition) can awake and hasten the course of
the blood and spirits designed for the functions of the Yard, and adjacent
muscles, which being swelled by the spirits, compress the veins which are
distributed in it, to hinder the return of the blood; the blood and spirits
filling all the vacuum, or empty spaces of the hollow bodies; the Yard must
needs grow stiff, and extend it self.

We observe that the Urine is sometimes white, sometimes bloody, troubled and
muddy, and is charged with a mucous and sandy sediment.

HIPPOCRATES in his Aphorisms reports, That when the Urine is extreme clear,
and you find Sand in the bottom of the Urinal, it is an infallible mark of the
Stone's existence in the bladder. A certain Sign of two or more Stones in the
Bladder.
When the Stone is smooth, it is a sign that it is accompanied with some other
Stones, which by their continual atrition become polished and smooth. If the
Stone be big, and lies heavy on the neck of the bladder, it dilates in such a
manner, that in time it grows as big as its bottom. If it adhere to any part,
or is contained in a cistis, the Patient may carry it all his life without any
detriment, or manifesting any of the signs which we have spoken of, especially
when it is suspended at the bottom of the bladder.

An Observation.
VAN HELMONT assures us, that he knew a Priest, who going to reach a Book in
his Library, at the same moment felt a great weight in the Hypogastric Region,
which was presently followed with all the Symptoms we have described, 'twas the
Stone which was then separated from the bottom of the bladder, (by this simple
effort) so that he was obliged to come to the operation; but the most sure and
certain sign of the Stone is the Probe, which convinces us of it, by the
resistance it makes, and noise which we hear when we strike upon it; this is
also the sign which causes the necessity of the operation, if the age, season
and strength of the Patient permit.

No Medicine so powerful as to dissolve the Stone.
Here it is where Mountebanks triumph, who, by their Impostures, endeavor to
persuade People that they have infallible Secrets to dissolve the Stone in the
Reins and Bladder; these sweet hopes flatter the minds of those who are
troubled with it; but when we show them by evident demonstration, that the most
violent and caustie Acids, as Aq. Fortis, Spirit. Nitri, etc. cannot dissolve
it, we make them know also, that if ever these Impostors had any Medicines
capable to produce such Effects, without altering any part before they were
past the Stomach, Intestines, Receptacle of the Chile, Heart, Lungs, and in the
most insensible ways where they mingle with the Blood and Humors, they would
doubtless lose their quality and dissolving virtue; therefore there is nothing
can free us from such a cruel Disease but the operation, Nothing can free us of
the Stone but the operation.
after having used general Remedies, as Bleeding, gentle Purging, and Clysters,
unless the Stone be of an extraordinary bigness, and there be a complication of
Diseases.

If the Stone be of a moderate bigness, Prognostics.
the operation is less dangerous; if it is big, and stick in the bladder, it is
more to be feared, because of the ruption of the vessels, and of the great
laceration it causes to the parts, which is always accompanied with
Inflammation, Convulsion, Fever, Gangrene, and often Death; especially in young,
who are not over Nine years of age, and whose parts are soft and tender; or in
old, whose parts are dried up, and inflexible as it were, through the little
heat and humidity which we find in them.

If the Bladder be ulcerated, and there be any great Hemorrhage, or some
Carnosity, you must avoid the operation, all these Particularities belong to
the Prognostics of the Disease; you must observe that these sorts of Subjects
often relapse, and if the operation were not reiterated, you would find a
Quarry in their Bladder.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Extraction of the Stone.
HAving thus considered the precedent Circumstances, you may hazard the
Operation; but before, it is necessary to stir the Stone by some motion, and to
empty the Bladder of its Urine.

The situation of the Patient in the operation.
Place the Patient on the brink of a Bed, his back on an even sloaping board,
his thighs open, knees near his belly, his heels drawn up to his brich, and his
hands hanging down on the sides of his ankles.

To keep the Patient in this posture, you have a band with which you support
the thigh, lower end of the leg and hand, and after some turns of the band, you
pass it upwards about the shoulder, and slipping it behind the back, you repass
it about the other should, to bind the hand; leg and thigh of the opposite
side: this posture is very proper to execute this design; for it upholds the
bladder, and gives liberty to the muscles of the Abdomen to relax and bend, as
they formerly did.

The manner of cutting for the Stone by the Aparatus minor, or Gripe.
The Patient being in this posture, the Surgeon disposes himself to the
operation; if it is by the little Aparatus, (which is not so much in use) he
wetts his Index and middle finger in some oil, or other unctious matter, and
introduces them a little obliquely into the Anus, not stretching them, till he
has pressed gently the Hypogastrium with the other hand, then the Operator
endeavors to push the bottom of the bladder toward its neck, to place it
faster between his fingers, and the Os Pubis; having fixed it, the Surgeon
with a Bistory cutting on both sides, makes an Incision on the Stone according
to its bigness, The Place where the Incision must be made.
on the side of the Raphe, and between the os pubis, about two fingers breadth
from the Anus. The Incision being made, you extract it with fitting
Instruments, of which we'll speak in the Great Aparatus; sometimes it will slip
out of the Orifice, by only pressing the fingers a little forwards toward the
Orifice: so much for the lesser Aparatus; for seeing we cannot use it without
making the Intestine and Bladder very livid, nor often without endamaging them,
we ought to reject this method, and prefer the Great Aparatus, of which we will
give the description.

The manner of cutting for the Stone by the Great Aparatus.
After we have regulated all that precedes this so important an Operation, and
having placed the Patient in a convenient posture, the first thing we must
propose to our selves is to search him well.

Several ways of using the Catheter.
As for Probes, you ought to have some great, small, and middle-sized ones, for
all sorts of Ages; strait and crooked for both Sexes, with canulas garnished
with a stillett, to empty the bladder of the urine, and others hollow, as a
Directory to perform the Operation with; you may use the Prob^or Catheter
diverse ways.

In the first, the Surgeon takes with his left hand the top of the Yard,
(dilating its passage a little) and pulls it upwards, that the chanel of the
urethra make a strait line, to facilitate by that means the entry of the
Catheter into the bladder; all the difficulty consists in introducing it
methodically, which is, that the extremity which is held in the hand be
outward, and the convexity inward; and as its point approaches toward the neck
of the bladder, you give it half a turn, by which means you make it slip under
the Os Pubis, and cause it to enter into the hollow of the bladder, so that its
point is within, and its convexity without.

Second way of Probing.
The second method is much more easy, and less troublesome, because you introduce
the Probe quite contrary to the former; and without giving it a turn, you make
it slip into the bladder.

Good Probing is not only necessary for extracting the Stone, but also in all
carnosities and inflammations of the bladder; it is of great use as often as the
Urine is suppressed in this passages, and very often one perishes in all those
occasions, for not knowing how to probe well.

How to perform the operation methodically.
To make the Operation, you use a hollow Probe, which being in the bladder, the
Surgeon must bring it to the side of the belly, that its convexity may press
the interior surface of the Perineum, and make it rise in a hillock, and whilst
the Servant holds up the Yard, and top of the Probe with his left hand, and the
Testicles with his right, the Operator, with his thumb and forefinger, fastens
the most eminent part of the Probe to the right side of the Perineum, and with
a Knife cutting on both sides, he makes an Incision all along the hollow, more
or less great, according as he judges the bulk of the Stone to be. To make the
Incision regularly, he holds the Instrument like a Lancet, beginning to pierce
the most elevated part of the Perineum still to the hollow of the Probe, which
serves to the Knife as a Directory, and without any stop pass and repass it
several times over the surface of the Probe, till it be quite discovered, lest
you make diverse Incisions on the bladder. Before you withdraw the Catheter,
feel with your finger, to know whether there remain any adherence which might
hinder the entry of the Conductor, introduce its extremity into the hollow of
the Probe as low as possible, the Conductor being as it were engaged in the
Probe, as you withdraw it softly out of the bladder, you push your Conductor,
and make it follow the motion of the Probe, otherwise it might escape sideways,
and the Operation would not succeed with the success one would desire; when
you are sure that the Conductor is in the capacity of the bladder, you slip over
its surface strait or crooked pincers, then withdraw your Conductor, and search
dexterously for the Stone on all sides without violence; then take hold of it;
if it is fastened or sticks, you turn softly your hand on both sides to break the
ties which hold it, without causing Contusion or Haemorrhagy.

What Is to be done when it sticks to the bladder.
If the Stone strongly adhere, you must not offend the bladder, but move it
moderately; if your ties be too strong, you must use the toothed crow's-bill or
incisive pincers, always taking care lest you offend the bladder.

When the Stone happens to be too big, enlarge the Wound with the Bistory, and
reject the use of the Dilatorium, by reason of the great Contusions it commonly
leaves in the parts.

What Is to be done when any urgent Symptoms happen in time of the Operation.
If any Accident should happen in the time of the Operation, as Haemorrhagy,
Syncope, or any other troublesome Symptom, the Chyrurgion ought rather to
correct them, than finish the Operation, and so leave the Patient in repose,
till he has got new strength, and the Accidents are ceased; for having ^eferr'd
the Operation after this manner, the Stone very often presents it self at the
orifice, and the Cure is much more easy and successful.

When the Stone is extremely smooth, it is a sign that it is not alone; then
search, and being convinced, you extract them with the Pincers. If the Patient
has violent pain, use Injections of milk, or other Anodines; when the Stone is
rough and unequal, and signs of Excoriation appear, use Dete^^^ves made of
Whey, Decoct. Hord. Plantag. cum Syrup. de Rosar. Sicc. and similia.

If the Scrotum be livid, and there be sign of mortification, make use of the
most violent Resolutives and Defensitives; when the Stone is extracted, put in
the Spoon, to cleanse it from the gravel and grumous blood which might be
there, lest by any stay it might cause some disorder: Having discharged the
Bladder of these strange bodies, if the orifice be over-large, you may make
some stitches, and leave a space to put a little tent of lint in, (tied with a
thread) in case you suspect that there might yet (...) any clods of blood, or
some relics of the Stone; Tents of Lead or Silver not to be used.
never use those tents chanel'd with Lead or Silver; for their contexture being
too close, cannot soak in, or imbibe any particles of the sharp juice, which
ordinarily runs from the lips of the wound; and since we know that the calosity
of any Ulcer depends only on the action of a saline and pungent liquor, as we
shall prove, when we speak of Fistula's, we must not be astonished that the
wounds where these kind of tents are introduced, degenerate always into a
fistulous Ulcer; whereas the Lint, whose contexture is very spongy and loose,
soak up, and charges it self with the points of the Salts and Acids, so by this
means hinders a wound from growing callous: But if you are sure that there is no
strange body, the use of tents is absolutely needless; you only apply some
boulsters, plaster, compresses, and the bandage, after that you dress the
wound as a simple one, and to hasten the reunion, you make the Patient lie
cross-leg'd, and tie his two knees together; some lay under the Patient's
britch a little bag full of bran, to hinder the Urine which runs out from
heating or fretting the skin of the parts.

If the Urine by its weight should carry along with it some little Stone into
the Vrethra which stops its passage, the Urine endeavoring to escape
sometimes, draggeth the Stone along with it; but if its largeness does not
permit it, the stream of the Urine forces it to dilate, and extend the sides
of the Vrethra, which causes a ruption of the vessels, upon which follows
pain and inflammation.

How to cut the Stone from the Urethra.
If in this Accident you cannot get it out, place it between your fingers, and
make and Incision (according to the length of the Yard) upon the body of the
Stone, which you must extract with a fitting Instrument, then you close the
wound, by the help of an uniting bandage, and other remedies.

Women not so subject to the Stone as Men.
It Is true Women are sometimes troubled with the Stone, but not so often as Men,
because they have those passages more open, not so crooked, and less long, so
by this means the Urine by its stream precipitates easily the little gravels
which gather together in the bladder, not giving the ferment time enough to
produce its effect, which is the cause that they are much less subject to it;
however if the Probe, and the other signs convince us of its existence, you
must undertake the Operation.

How to extract the Stone in Women.
The Probes which we use for Women are strait, only a little crooked toward the
end. If the Stone be little, you may extract it with the finger or spoon. If it
be big, make a little Incision at the upper part of the Vreter, to introduce
the little duck's bill, to facilitate therewith the extraction. As for the
suppression of Urine, and all other circumstances that regard the Operation,
you have nothing to do but to imitate the method which we have formerly given.
Signs of good success in the Operation.
I will only say, that we know the Operation to have good success, when the
Patient rests well, has free respiration, tongue moist, thirst moderate; little
or no pain; Fever, but moderate; no swelling in the Hypogastric region, and the
Inflammation abates on the fifth or sixth day.

CHAP. XX. Of the Fistula in Ano.
What a Fistula is.
BY a Fistula, we understand a calous, deep and cavernous Ulcer, which from a
narrow entrance, ends in a large and spacious bottom, yielding (for the most
part) a sharp and virulent matter.

What parts are most subject to Fistula's.
Fistula's possess indifferently all parts of the body, especially the Anus,
breast, Os Lachrima, Joints, all spongy parts laden with fat, and humected
with many humors; all nervous parts, or at least such as are quite destitute
of flesh and fat, from whence it comes that wounds, which penetrate to the
bones, almost always degenerate into Fistula's.

If Wounds happen in spongy parts, it is easy to conceive that nothing hinders
the humors from finding out passages, and altering various parts, which is
distinguished by the color, consistence and acrimony of the matter that flows
from them, which makes all the difference of Fistula's.

Cause of Fistula's in general.
The cause of Fistula's in general, almost always proceeds from a winding Ulcer,
which is sorm'd and nourished by the most sharp and salt particles of the blood.

Causes of Fistula in Ano.
The cause of those which happen to the Anus, (whose nature we are here to
explain) are Internal, or External.

External Causes.
The External come from some Wound, as from Leeches ill applied; or from some
bruise, whether by riding, or by some other vilanous exercise, as Buggery; or
finally by some fall, or any other violent motion. It Is evident that all these
Causes must hinder the Circulation of the Juices, and give way to
Impostumation, which in a short time degenerates into a Fistula.

Internal Causes.
The Internal, are ordinarily Consequences of Obstructions, Inflammations,
Ulcers, Haemorrhoids, and Impostumations.

Why the Blood is more easily obstructed here than in other parts.
Now our business is, to give Reasons why the Blood stops more at this part than
at any other, to produce these kind of Accidents, of which Fistula's are
troublesome Consequences.

To have an Idea of it, it is necessary to examine some Circumstances which
depend on the structure of the part.

The first consists in the disposition of the Intestinum Rectum, First.
and in the temperament of its neighboring parts.

The second regards the nature and multitude of vessels which water it, Second.
and the abundance of humors which they carry along with them.

Structure, etc. of the Intestinum Rectum.
The Intestinum Rectum is every where encompassed with fat two or three fingers
thick, especially in full and fat persons, which makes the extravasated Juices
more easily penetrate these parts to attack the Gut; which is a part very
subject to alteration, by reason of its great humidity, and number of vessels
that enter into its substance.

The Vessels of the Intestinum Rectum.
We know that the Arteries, and Hypogastric Veins furnish it with two branches
each; the Aorta gives it one branch of an Artery which comes from that part
where it is divided into the Iliac; and the inferior mesenteric Artery another,
besides the Hemorrhoidal Veins, one of which come from the splenic, and the
other from the mesenteric. It has also many limphatic vessels, and several
glands that separate a white and viscous humor, which lines its interior
surface, and defends it against the acrimony of the Excrements, and other
Levens; these are the different vessels which water the Intestinum Rectum.

Now it is easy to understand from all I have said, that the Circulation of the
Humors must be very slow in that part, because they remount against their own
weight, and are deprived of the motion of the muscles, which is of great use to
hasten the Circulation of all the Juices; so for any little propension they
have to stop, and be corrupted there, (if by chance any of the External Causes,
which we have spoke of, contribute toward it) they never fail; if so be it
comes from the Veins, to cause the Haemorrhoids; Inflammations, and
Impostumations, if from the Arteries; and Excoriations, and Ulcers, if from the
Lymphatic Vessels and Glands. And as these parts are extreme penetrable, if the
blood acquires any malignity or ill quality by its fermentation, nothing
hinders but it opens it self a way, and finds passages to attack sometimes the
gut, sometimes the flesh, sanguiferous vessels, nervous parts and bones; and
finally, to produce the diversity of Fistula's, which we call strait, oblique,
or winding. When the Fistula is in the flesh, Signs of Fistula's in diverse
parts.
the Pus that comes out of it is thick, muddy, course and viscous.

If it attack the nervous parts, you have pungent and violent pains, and the
humor which flows from it is sharp and serous; if the matter of the Fistula
move toward the sanguiferous vessels, and break any of them by its acrimony,
its color is like the washings of flesh; if the Fistula penetrate to the bone,
and it be altered or rotten, the matter which comes from it is clear, thin, and
in its highest degree of acidity.

A salt and sharp juice the cause of calosity.
We likewise observe, that in these kind of Fistula's, the calosity is much more
considerable than in others; for as all the world knows that the calosity of a
Fistula depends only on the presence and action of a sharp and salt juice-like
Brine, you must not be astonished if those that reach the bones (which are
nourished with a humor that is extremely salt and pungent of its own nature) be
so calous; for from the moment that the sides of an Ulcer care watered, and
humected with an humor like it, if its intemperies be not corrected, its
points creep insensibly into the bottom of the Ulcer, and after several
punctions, these little needles (which we must consider as so many wedges)
enter, and fix themselves so into the porosities of the flesh and membranes,
that they render the Ulcer so hard and calous, that it turns into a Fistula.

As for the Prognostics of Fistula's, Prognostics.
I say in general, that those which are new, which happen in a good temparament
of body, are well conditioned, and that possess such parts where Medicines may
be easily applied, are curable.

But on the contrary, if they be old, the Party Cachectical, when they possess
such parts as are necessary for life, as the Bladder and Intestines, uncurable.
Lastly, all Fistula's which attack the Bones, Tendons, Arteries, Vertebra's of
the Back, Breast, Belly, Paps, Axilla, Groins and Joints, are doubtless
difficult to overcome.

Where Pallatives are convenient.
Some Fistula's are cured by caustic Medicines, others by Iron; some, where
Medicines are not able to vanquish, need only Palliatives, or such as are
proper to stifle and check the violence of the effect, and prevent more
troublesome Accidents. Finally, there are some which reduce the parts to such a
languishing and deplorable condition, that they being unable to perform their
ordinary functions, we are obliged to amputate the parts, as those in the
Joints, unless it be in the Axilla, or other parts where the Operation cannot
be performed. In such dangerous Affects, we are to have no other aim, than to
mollify by all means the Humors which foment and nourish them; being they
threaten death in all Subjects.

The Anus subject to several sorts of Fistula's.
The Anus is liable to several sorts of Fistula's, whose knowledge mightily
favors their Cure.

The first is, when it pierces the Body of the Intestine, and has no outward
Aperture.

The second opens outwardly, and has no communication with the Intestine, or
has only slightly touched its superficies.

The third, which is called complete, manifests it self both outwardly and
inwardly.

The fourth is of several Buroughs, or Sinusses, which discharge themselves
into a Sac, which is as the concourse of all.

Signs of the first kind of Fistula.
The Signs of the first kind, are a little outward swelling, accompanied with a
slight Inflammation; the matter runs with the excrements, or after them, with
pain and excoriation of the Intestine and Sphircter, Itching, Tenesmus, and
Inequality of the Aperture.

Causes of these Signs.
The swelling is caused by the obstruction, compression, expression of the Pus,
and the efforts which the excrements make at the passage; and if by its stay
there is be grown acid, and has contracted any malignity, it causes
divulsions passing over the surface of the Intestine, which excites pain and
inflammation.

But on the contrary, if it stay there, has not as yet corrupted it, and that
it has (in a manner speaking) only entered into its first state of alteration,
it excites but slight divulsions, in which consists the itching.

This same matter acting upon the fibers of the Intestine, rout the spirits,
which being irregularly carried into its carnous tunicle, sphincter, and
musculi levatnes, the Gut is obliged to empty it self of the little excrements
it contains.

But in the time that the carnous tunicles by its action precipitates and
expels the excrements, the sphincter and levatores shut and stop so exactly the
passage, by means of the irritated spirits, that they oppose their coming
forth, and force them often to remount, in spite of the action of the muscles,
of the Abdomen, and carnous tunicle of the Intestines, which causes the
Tenesmus.

Signs of the second.
The Signs of the second sort of Fistula, are known by the Probe, and matter
which comes out of the Fistula.

Signs of the third.
Those of the complete, are the same which we have related in both the foregoing
Fistula's.

Signs of the fourth.
The Signs of that which are with Sinusses, are pain, abundance and different
changes of the matter which flows; but the surest Sign is the Probe.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Operation of the Fistula in Ano.
IN the Operation of the Fistula in Ano, of what kind or nature soever it be,
you always observe the same Rules and Maxims.

How to perform the Operation.
First, You place the Patient on the brink of a Bed, laying him on his belly,
his legs stradled; you dispose a bandage about his body in shape of a T. if it
be a Fistula that opens inwardly, you introduce, if possible, the Stylet, or
Probe, through the passage of the Intestine, and slip all along the Fistula to
the bottom; when you find with your finger the end of the Probe outwardly, make
a little carved Incision over it, that the end of the Probe may come out; bend
it a little, and cut, not only all that the Probe embraces, but also a little
under the bottom of the Fistula, that the reunion be more easy performed. If
so you cannot pass your Probe through the Intestine into the Fistula, you make
the Incision outwardly on the Tumor, as we have prescribed, that the Probe may
be easier introduced and passed into the Intestine.

When a Caustic is to be used.
If the Tumor be somewhat distant from the brink of the Anus, you must prefer a
potential Cautery before the Bistory, for to lessen the pain.

When the Operation is to be omttted.
If the Fistula anticipate the breadth of four Fingers upon the body of the Gut,
and that it opens above the Levadores Any, you must not hazard the Operation,
for Reasons which we will allege hereafter.

In the Fistula which opens outwardly, you pass a Stilet through your Aperture,
and pierce the Intestine, and make it come out of the Anus to bend it, or make
a Handle, as has been said.

Some in a Fistula make use of Scissers, and others of a narrow Instrument like
a crooked Bistory, whose edge is armed with a sheath of Tin, you introduce it
through the orifice of the Fistula, and passing it through the orifice of the
Gut, you cut at one flash the whole bottom of the Fistula; if the Calosity be
considerable, you scarify the sides and bottom: the most to be feared are the
Arteries; but if by misfortune you should have cut any of them, Vitreobe's to
be rejected.
you must use some stiptic water, or the ligature if you can, and reject the
vitriolate Button, because of the Intestine.

The Operation being made, you introduce your fingers into the Fistula, to find
if there be any adherence or sinusses, which must be loosened, and opened with
the Scissers, (as well to facilitate the entrance of Medicines, as to give
passage to the Matter which lurks there, and which would in time serve for a
new Ferment to produce new Fistula's) avoiding always the Arteries, which are
felt by their continual pulsation.

Now the Question is, Sphincter be wholly cut away?

For to be convinced of it, musculi levatores, which by their union form a kind
of ring, that embraces fast the body of the Intestine, performing the same
office as the Sphincter. Moreover, I say that the Fibers of the Sphincter being
cut, every Fiber coming from each point of the Cicatrice, as those of the
Sphincter from the Bladder, and from all the other, may, in contracting
themselves, perform still the same office as before, provided much of its
substance be not destroyed by too great suppuration; for seeing these parts are
extremely spongy, there might be such a considerable passage made, which would
cause the Excrements to come out against our Will; this being explained, you
fill the Wound with a thick Dossel, tied with a thread, dress the rest with
Pleagets, sustained with a Plaster, Compress and Bandage, of which we have
spoken.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Empiema.
What an Empiema is.
WE understand by the word EMPIEMA, a collection of matter and blood in the
capacity of the Breast. It Is taken sometimes for the Operation, and sometimes
for the Disease; and tho HIPPOCRATES has given it a larger extent, when he
said that it might be taken for every heap of Pus in what part soever,
notwithstanding it is certain, that it is only proper to this part alone.

Difference of Empiema's.
The differences of Empiema's are drawn from the place where the matter lies,
and from the different Accidents which accompany them. Concerning the place of
the matter, it lies between the Plera and the Lungs, or in the substance of
the Lungs it self, both these proceed from an internal or external cause; from
an internal cause, as an Impostumation formed in the Duplicature of the Pleura,
or in the substance of the Lungs, which breaks and runs upon the Diaphragme.
From an external cause, as a wound, or from a vessel broke, by some fall, blow,
etc.

The Matter does not always fall on the Diaphragma.
You must observe that the Pus and Blood do not always fall upon the Diaphragma,
by reason of the adherence which the Lungs contracts with the Pleura, so that
they can communicate their inflammation and alteration to one another; and that
the matter may pass from the Lungs, through the aperture of the wound, without
one drop of it being spilled in the cavity of the breast, which is to be well
examined before you separate the Lungs from the Pleura with your finger or
Probe, (as most Practitioners are wont to do) that is to say, if the matter run
with ease through the Aperture, and without the Diaphragma being oppressed with
it, you must no ways break the adherence of them.

A Quinsy can never cause an Empiema.
I do not speak here of diseases of the Throat; we know well enough that never
an Empiema succeeded a Quinsy; the reason is, that the Pus cannot fall upon the
substance of the Lungs, without causing a sudden suffocation, because the Pus,
by its weight, would hinder the play of the vessels that compose them;
wherefore there is only Plurisies and Impostumes of the Lungs, which precede
the Empiema that comes from an internal cause.

Causes of a Plurisy.
As for the eause of a Plurisy, some say it is formed by a boiling and impetuous
blood, which is extravasated in the Plura; others pretend it is caused by a
bilous blood, which gathers and putrefies between the ribs and Plura.

Some others maintain that it proceeds from an extravasation of blood that
comes from the intercostal veins, and the Aziges; which is discharged between
the duplicature of this membrane, where it changes into pus by its stay there:
though this last opinion be not over-well grounded, yet it is the most common,
and most received.

It were to be wished that all these opinions were as true as they are
authorized by their Partisans; for besides, that the blood being ordinarily
spilt out of the vessels only after some blow or wound, it is evident that the
bilous particles are rather capable to dissolve a matter than coagulate it, and
that it is only the salt volatile alkalies of the Bile which tend to the
exaltation; but there must needs be here a coagulating Agent, which disposes
it to be obstructed in this membrane. There is nothing more common, A common
Cause of Plurisies.
than to see in the Summer-season Plurisies affect those, who having
overheated themselves by running, or some other as violent exercise, go
imprudently to drink Iced. Liquors, or in a Cellar to cool themselves, having
most commonly their Breast open. You must consider, that in the same moment the
Pores being much dilated, the blood is in an extraordinary agitation, and
furnishes abundance of Swetts; this being so, it happens that at the same time
as this cold drink chills, (as it were) the blood in the vessels, the
impression of the external cold Air suppresseth the Swetts, in shutting up the
pores, and they being quite disingaged from the rest of the mass, stop in the
duplicature of this membrane where they coagulate the blood, by the means of
their urinous volatile Salt.

Urine and Swett analogous.
Experience teaches us, that there is no liquor in the body has more analogy
with the Urine than Swett; we observe also that it has the same taste, smell,
and consistence; we know that the Urine abounds in a urinous volatile Salt, and
in a very aetherious Sulphur.

Now I say that these two spirits, (which are found in the Swett as well as
Urine, whose nature and property we have explained elsewhere) happening to be
united together in the PLVRA, in the time of the suppression of abundance of
Swett, are very capable to condense the blood, and cause the Plurisy, which
HIPPOCRATES has well observed, Sect. 5. Aph. 24.
when he says that cold things, as Snow and Ice, are Enemies to the Breast, and
that they excite Coughs, Dysenteries and Fluxions; Frigida vcluti nix and
Glacies pectori Inimica, tusses moverit, and sanguines fluxiones, and
distillationes movent.

He says likewise, that the Scythians do not live long because they drink Ice
waters; and that the frequent use of these waters offend the Breast; for the
same reason says HIPPOCRATES, Sect. 3. Aph. 23.
Plurisies happen most commonly in the wintertime; as also Peripneumonia's,
Coughs, pains of the breast and sides; Hyeme plureides, Peripneumoniae, tusses
and pectoris Laterum Dolores.

It Is commonly observed, that those who expose their breast to the Air in the
beginning of hot weather, are almost always troubled with a Plurisy; the reason
of it is evident, if we make reflection, that no part of the body is so
deprived of flesh as the breast, which is the enclosure of the treasure of
life, and which consequently is sooner penetrated by the Air; wherefore those
who take care to cover at all times their Breast well, are much less subject to
Plurisies, and many other diseases.

A Plurisy often from a nitrous Air.
The cause of a Plurisy does not always come from having put your self into a
heat, or exposed your self to too great a cold; but it comes often from an Air
too much loaded with nitrous and sulphurous Particles, which we attract in
inspiration, and which produce the same effect as the principles which we have
said are found in the Swett.

Those kind of Plurisies which we call Popular, or Epidemical, happen oftener in
Countries where the Earth abounds with Nitre and Sulphur; and where the heat is
excessive, as in Meridional Regions.

Who most subject to on Plurisy.
The constitution of persons contribute much to its formation; those who are of
a quick wit, whose blood is subtle, and are of a tender Complexion, are more
subject to it than others.

An Observation on the blood of a pluretic person.
It Is observable, that after having bled a pleuretic person, there is a little
skin formed on his blood like glue, and almost of the same consistence, which
has a kind of spring, or elastic virtue; for when ever you handle it with your
fingers, it resists a little, and returns into its first posture; it swims upon
the blood, even as certain little flanks swim upon the urine of those troubled
with the inflammation of the Reins.

As for the Prognostic of this Disease, Prognostics.
it is always very dangerous, when Bleeding and general Remedies do not
dissipate the Tumor. HIPPOCRATES says, that if one spit from the beginning, the
disease will be short; but if one spit not till some time after, it will be
long: Velut in Pluretide laborantibus, si sputum statim appareat inter initia
ipsam abbreviat, si vero postea appareat producit.

Yet this Rule is not always true, because there are some that do not spit, and
yet recover in a very short time; whether that the Humor, which causes the
obstruction, be dissipated by insensible Perspriration, or by the way of
Circulation, according to the virtue and operation of the Medicines which are
used in this Disease.

The best way of curing a Plurisy.
The most specific Remedies to hinder the progress of this Disease are Bleeding,
which keeps the first rank; and I say, that if it be of any use at all in
Surgery, it is without doubt in this occasion, Bleeding no where of so great use
as here.
because in emptying the vessels, it hinders the Blood from being carried so
abundantly to that part, and must consequently lessen the bigness of the Tumor,
in diminishing the quantity of the Blood.

Approved Remedies in a Plurisy.
The other Remedies are those which rarify, subtilize, and attenuate the Blood,
as Horse or Mule's dung infused in White Wind, old He-goat's Blood in Powder;
all Volatile Salts, and several other Remedies of that nature. The decoction of
Nettles in strong Wine, which you sweeten with Sugar, is also excellent; you
may at the same time you take the Decoction, lay on the sides the bruised
Nettles in form of a Cataplasm.

Of a Peripneumonia.
Having thus in general explained the Cause of a Plurisy, I am obliged to say
something of a Peripneumonia, that sometimes proceeds from an Impostume of the
Brain, or from the Inflammation of some Membrane which changes into an Abscess,
as experience demonstrates in those that die of great Wounds of the Head; but
for the most part it is caused by the corruption of the Blood, that is to say,
by the exaltation of its sharpest Particles. All the difficulty is, to know why
the Pus, or Blood, stops rather in the Lungs, than in any part else, for to
make an Impostumation; I say, that three Causes contribute to its formation,
the alteration of the Blood, Causes of Peripneumonia.
long and slow Respiration, and the structure of the part.

First Cause. Alteration of the Blood.
Concerning the first, you must only make reflection on the nature and mixture
of the Chile, and thickest Blood, which the right Ventricle of the Heart sends
in every Sistole to the Lungs, through the Pulmonic Artery. We know that these
two Liquors pass through the Heart and Lungs, for to receive some necessary
preparations for the function of the parts; therefore we may say that they are
the two receptacles of all that is most thick and indigested in the mass of
Blood; but if the Heart has the strength and power, by its constriction, to
subtilize, and cast off all that is most heavy and material in the mass, the
Lungs have not the same advantage, as we will prove; so that the grosser
substances being accompanied with some impurity, and having only felt the first
effects of the Heart for its perfection, it must needs stop there, and putrefy.

Second Cause. Long and slow I espiration.
The second Cause which I establish, is a long and slow Respiration. It Is
certain, the more free the Air enters into the Breast, and the more the Vessels
are extended, they are in a more fit condition by their elastic virtue or
spring, to express the Air through the Pipes of the Trachea Arteria; and the
more the Blood is agitated by the inspiration of the Air, it is driven with
greater quickness into the Veins: But on the contrary, if the Blood is moved
slowly by a long Respiration, it follows that the Vessicles being not so
extended as they should be, and not expelling the Blood out of them with such a
violence, it stops and corrupts there gradually, by the arrival and mixture of
some ill Leaven, or by the exaltation of its salt Particles; from whence it
comes, that those who have a long Neck, are more subject to it than others,
because the Air is obliged to make a long traverse before it comes to the
Lungs, which makes them dry up, and alter insensibly.

Third Cause on the Structure of the Part. What the Lungs really are.
The third Cause is grounded upon the Structure of the Part; the Lungs are a
complication of little Vessicles, in which the Arteries pour the Blood, and
where it is mingled with the Air, to receive some alteration there. Now it is
showed in the Hydravlic's, that a Liquor which passes from a little Pipe into
a greater, loses much of its motion; and being the Arteries are very little,
in proportion to the Cells, it is no wonder if the Blood grow slow there, and
changes its nature by the exaltation of some sharp and tartarous Salt, and by
the Fermentation which they cause there; wherefore the alteration of the Blood,
the irregularity of Respiration, and the largeness of the Vessicles of the
Lungs, in proportion to those of the Arteries, are the three Causes that concur
to the formation of the Peripneumonia.

Since the Signs of all these kinds of Diseases are of the greatest importance
to succeed well in the Operation, and to make a favorable or dangerous
Prognostic, I will endeavor to describe them with all the Order that is
possible.

Signs of Pus, or Blood in the Pleura.
The Signs which show us that there is some Pus, or Blood stopped in the Pleura,
are Inflammation, penetrating Pain, Heaviness, a languishing and continual
Fever; a hard, thick, and deep Pulse, accompanied with shivering; difficulty of
breathing, a dry Cough and Thirst; one cannot lie on the sound side, by reason
the matter lies heavy on the Pleura; and one grows lean and thin in a few days.

Signs of the Matter on the Diaphragma.
But if the Impostume break, and the matter falls on the Diaphragma, all these
Symptoms cease, and the Patient finds some ease for a time; but immediately
there comes others not less dangerous and insupportable; besides, the
difficulty of breathing, which is common to every Empiema, one feels a
heaviness upon the Diaphragma, fluctuation, a great uneasiness; the Fever
increases, and becomes burning; the Pulse rises, the Pain indeed is not so
sharp, it being felt toward the false Ribs, one cannot lie but on the side
where the matter is; for if you lie on the opposite side, one feels a
twitching upon the Mediastinum, more cruel Pain, and a much greater heaviness;
their spittle is sometimes stinking, and there follows very often Impostumes of
the Liver, after these kind of indispositions, even as it is observed after
great wounds of the Head.

If the Pus be diffused on both sides, one cannot lie on either, by reason of
the sharp Pains one suffers; to be eased, you must lie upon the back or belly.

Signs of Pus in the substance of the Lungs.
The Signs when there is Pus in the substance of the Lungs, may be divided into
equivocal and convincing; the equivocal belong to other Diseases of the Lungs;
it is very dangerous to be mistaking, therefore let us endeavor to examine them
well, that we may draw some advantages, and that we may not undertake an
Operation whose effect would prove not only useless, but fatal.

If there be any Pus in the substance of the Lungs, the diseased cannot breathe
without pain; he finds an insupportable and troublesome heaviness upon the
Diaphragma, because the weight of the matter deprives it of the liberty of
moving. He suffers a fixed and dull pain, which is a common sign of a PLURISY,
with this difference, that the Pluretic Pain is pungent, comes all of a sudden,
whereas the Pneumonic Pain, (that is to say, that which proceeds from an
Impostume of the Lungs) comes only by little and little, and successively. The
continued Fever does not leave, accompanied sometimes with an immoderate
thirst; his spittle is purulent, his mouth and throat dry; he has red cherry
cheeks, sunk and hollow eyes, having lost their lively and glittering color;
his nails bend backward, and the whole body grows at lest dry and emaciated;
and if the Fever increase, the Patient falls into Delirium, and his Spittle be
black, livid, or ash-colored, Death is not far off, because they are mortal
Symptoms, which oftentimes accompany it: So much for the Impostumation of the
Lungs, which comes from an internal Cause.

Let Us now examine those that follow the Impostume of the Lungs caused by
Wounds; the difficulty of Breathing is not so considerable; the Fever is
continual, accompanied with shivering, and cold Sweats, which appear from time
to time; these two last accidents are depending from the Pleura. The Patient
spits pretty often Blood in the beginning, and toward the end it is frothy and
purulent. When the Spittle is of a yellow color, it is mortal; he cannot lie
but on his back, because being on his sound side, the wounded Loab lies heavy
upon the Mediastinum, and causes a twitching and cruel pain; and when he turns
himself on the wounded side, the Lungs coming to lie heavy upon the Pleura
which is hurt, does not fail to excite the same pain, wherefore he dares not
stir. Signs of the Lungs being wounded.
In the beginning his eyes are brisk, but at last they grow dull, and the face
puffs up; but the most certain Signs that the Wounds reach to the capacity of
the breast, and of the Lungs being hurt are the Probe, the noise which the Air
makes in coming forth, and the Emphysema.

When you probe, you must observe to make the Patient put himself in the same
posture he was in when wounded, that the extravasated blood may run easier out.

If the Wound penetrate to the substance of the Lungs, the Blood which flows is
forthy, and the Air makes less noise, and comes not out with such impetuosity,
as when the Wound penetrates only the Breast, without touching the Lungs.

If one asks,

You may answer, whistling, (passing out of the breast) which can put out a
Candle held to the mouth of the Wound.

Cause of the Emphisema.
The Emphisema is likewise only caused by the particles of the Air, which
penetrate the Porosities of the neighboring parts, which swells and blows them
up; so that often one cannot find the mouth of the Wound, nor introduce a Probe.

It Is easy to see from what we have said, that the Emphisema and the Air's
coming out of the breast, are not always convincing signs of the Lungs being
hurt, because they happen when the Wound penetrates into the breast, without
having touched the lungs; wherefore there are only the signs (which we have
spoken of) that can give us afterward certain marks of it; but the Probe, and
the exit of the Air, are two true signs that the Wound penetrateth into the
breast.

You must observe, Caution.
that if the breast be pierced through and through, you must never let both the
orifices be open at once, for fear you choke the Patient; the reason of it is
evident, because the Air cannot enter by two opposite sides without compressing
the Lungs, and hinder the motion of the Breast.

I have said, that the true situation, when the Lungs are altered, is to lay
one down on the back for to ease the Patient, because the Bronchia are
compressed by the weight of the extravasated blood, which presently takes away
the liberty of breathing.

I intend to speak here of the superficial Wounds of the Lungs; for if they be
deep, and that any great Vessel be divided, one feels almost as much pain lying
on the back, as on the sides.

A certain Sign of extravasated Blood in the body of the Lungs.
But one of the most certain Signs that there is some Blood extravasated into
the body of the Lungs, and of which we have not yet spoken, is, that if we put
our Finger far enough into the Wound, (provided the bigness or Diameter of the
breast permit it) we find that the Lungs are fastened to the Pleura round about
the Wound, and reunite themselves there, even as the Intestine is united to the
Peritoneum.

A Sign that the Wound has not passed the Pleura.
The Signs which demonstrate that the Wound does not pass the Pleura, are the
Probe, and the Air, which never passes through the Wound: There are some
others, as the Pain, Inflammation, Fever, Heaviness, and Difficulty of
Breathing; besides the thickness of the exterior parts, which may in some
manner guide us for to be sure of it.

All these Signs nevertheless do not always show that the Wounds are deep,
since a simple Inflammation of the Intercostical Muscles hinder free
Respiration. If we consider that the use of these Muscles is to raise the Ribs,
to enlarge and widen the Cavity of the Breast, and that Inflammation and Tention
are utterly contrary to their Action; we shall agree, that the Lungs cannot
dilate themselves but with difficulty; and seeing the Contraction of an
inflamed Muscle increases the Tention, and great Tention many Divulsions, and
many Divulsions vehement Pain, you must not wonder if the Diseased (for to ease
himself a little from the Pain) retard the course of the spirits, and have very
great difficulty of Breathing.

Cause of the Heaviness.
The Heaviness proceeds from the Impotency of the Muscles; for as soon as a part
is out of action, it seems heavy to us, for it is a burden which the
neighboring parts must support; and being they have neither strength nor
motion to raise what offends, they must succumb under the weight of a new and
superfluous matter, from whence depends the Heaviness.

We have explained in several places of this Treatise the cause of Pain,
Inflammation, and Fever; we have said that the Pain is excited by some actual
Divulsions, by whose occasion the Soul perceiving the destruction of a part, is
afflicted, the Inflammation happens when the course of blood is hindered in any
part, and that it is sufficient to produce the Fever, (which is a Consequence of
the Pain and Inflammation) if a drop of extravasated and corrupted blood be
carried to the heart.

Cause of Red Cheeks.
One has Red Cheeks in an Impostume of the Lungs; this comes from the irregular
motion which the purulent Particles communicate to the Principles of the Blood,
and from the great number of Blood Vessels which irrigate the Cheeks.

Cause of the Dullness of the Eyes.
The Eyes lose their vivacity, and sink into the head, because the blood loses
its consistence and color; in losing its oil and unctuosity, which makes the
Eyes sink, and become insensibly wan and dull, proportionable as the sharp and
tartarous Salts dissipate the oily and sulphurous Particles. In all Diseases
of the Lungs, the Caul and Mesenterium always corrupted.
This, I say, is so true, that in all Diseases of the Lungs, we always find the
Epiploon and Mesenterium (which are the two Reservatoriums of the Fat)
corrupted; it is for the same reason that all parts of the body dry up and grow
lean.

What gives the Red Color to the Blood.
You must also observe, that the Red Color of the Blood does not only depend on
the mixture of the Sulphurs, but also on the action of the Air which whirl
about its Particles; and being the Air that gets into the impostumated Lungs
changes its nature, it is no more capable of setting them in motion, neither to
excite so lively a Sensation as before.

Cause of the Nails bending back.
The Nails bend backward, because their Extremity being irrigated with a serous
Liquor deprived of Spirits, the Cutis must of necessity fall away and dry up;
now as the Nails are only a production of it, it pulls them along, and
constrains them to bend like as a slice of Bread held to the Fire.

You must look upon all these signs as certain tokens that the Wound penetrates
into the breast; you may stay some days to examine its progress; for if they
proceed from a not penetrating Wound, in a few days they cease by bleeding and
suppuration; and they continue and increase when the Lungs are altered, or when
the Diaphragma is oppressed by the weight of some extravasated matter.

An Emphisema may happen to any parts of the Body.
The Emphisema is not always a sign that the Wound penetrates, because it may
happen not only to Wounds of the breast, but also to all other parts: We see it
even to come on Wounds of the Head, where we cannot suppose the Lungs to send
any Air; so that unless the oppression be very great, you must not try the
Operation.

These signs do not only lead us to the knowledge of the nature of the Empiema,
but they tell us also whether it is necessary to practice the Operation: For
example; Where the Operation would be useless.
it would be useless in the Empiema of the Lungs, by reason the opening of the
breast contributes nothing at all to the evacuation of the matter, unless the
Impostume be on the superficies of the Lungs, then it would be of more use,
because we know that the Lungs are fastened to the Pleura, and the Impostume is
precisely where one feels a fixed pain; but if so be the Impostume should be
deep, and manifest it self in that place by a fixed pain, it would be
fruitless. If the effusion of the blood should happen from a Wound, and that by
good luck the Wound were in a place where the extravasated blood could easily
get out, (provided the Lungs were not adherent) by enlarging the mouth of the
Wound to make way for it, or by laying the Patient in a posture convenient for
the running out of the matter, the Operation would be useless. Finally, let the
Wound be of what manner soever, if we can facilitate the evacuation of the Pus,
by making the Aperture bigger, we ought to avoid the Operation; but if the
Matter cannot have its free course, you must make use of it, for to deliver the
Patient from suffocation, and the chiefest circumstance of the Operation is, to
choose a proper place to facilitate the exit of the matter.

The most proper places to perform the Operation. Of Necessity.
There are two places in the breast proper to make the Operation, one of
Necessity, the other of Election; of Necessity, where the matter appears, as in
the Impostumation of the Pleura, or in that of the superficies of the Lungs
adhering to the Pleura, because we are forced to make the Operation where the
Impostume is: that of Election, Of Election.
when there is nothing that obliges us to make it rather in one place than
another, in this case you must choose the most convenient place, which is
between the second and third of the true Ribs, reckoning from below upwards
four fingers from the inferior Angle of the scapula, and as much from the spine.

You must observe, that in those who have been troubled with any long Disease
of the Breast, as with a long Pleurisy, etc. the Diaphragme is insensibly
fastened to the Ribs, and reaches sometimes even to the third, fourth, or fifth
Rib, A Caution to be observed.
particularly when the breathing is frequent and forced; therefore you must
inform your self which is the place where the diseased feels the pain; if it be
about the second of the true Ribs, where ordinarily the Diaphragma is fastened;
or if it be higher; which must be well examined before you make the Operation.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Operation of the Empiema.
HAving preparel all that must precede such a necessary OPERATION, you place
the diseased on a Chair or Bed; he must keep his Body very strait, and be held
up by Servants, that the Surgeon may the easier take notice of the place
where he is to make the Incision. In fat People you make it somewhat large, that
you may not be mistaken.

How to perform the Operation.
You pinch up the Teguments for to cut them at length, (with a Bistory) and the
fibers of the great Musculus Dorsalis cross; for if they were cut otherwise,
they would stop the Aperture of the Pleura, and so hinder the running out of
the Matter; you continue to incise dexterously the Intercostal Muscles: some
incise them at the uppermost part of the Rib, to avoid the Vessels that lie all
along its internal lower Sinus; but seeing the Wounds, which are near the
Bones, degeneration often into Fistula's, Caution.
it is more proper to make it in the middle of the Intercostal Muscles.

When you are come to the Pleura, you put your finger there, all along which
you slip a Bistory for to Incise the Pleura, minding to guide well the point of
the Instrument with the finger, and penetrate not too deep, lest you offend the
Lungs or Diaphragma, which are often fastened to the Pleura; the Aperture being
made, you put your finger into the Cavity of the Breast, as well to make the
Incision bigger, as to push back the Lungs and Diaphragma, and to loose them,
if they are fastened to the Pleura, particularly where the Operation is made in
a place of election, different to that which is practiced in a place of
necessity, without breaking the Adherences, as we have observed in the
foregoing Chapter.

If the Lungs strive to come out at the orifice of the Wound, you must push
them back with a blunt hollow Probe, (for to help the running out of the
Matter) or with a Pipe of a thickness and length proportionable to the deepness
of the Wound. These long Pipes are very useful in the Emphisema, because the
Aperture of the Wound being little and deep, it is very difficult, without their
help, to give Issue to the Matter.

You must not make use of a Probe, Caution.
to try whether the Pleura be pierced; for in passing, it often separates from
the Ribs, and there is a Vacuum made where some Blood is apt to gather, which
produces a new Impostume.

More Blood to be drawn at a time than Matter.
If it be Blood that comes out of the Aperture, you may draw a sufficient
quantity of it; but if it be Pus, less, by reason it contains more spirits, and
the Patient is apt to fall into a Syncope. After this, you stop the Wound with
a blunt Tent of Lint, having a large head, and being a little crooked at the
end, lest it offend the Lungs. Most commonly we tie a Thread to it, fill the
rest of the Wound with little Dossels of dry Lint, to keep the Tent in, and
absorb the Blood, and lay a Plaster on it, with Compress and Napkin about the
Body, with the Scapular, which is cut in two at one end, and put cross, to
fasten the Napkin the easier. When the Patient is dressed, you make him keep
his Bed with his Head high, as if it were half sitting; and you let him rest,
till he finds himself oppressed with the weight of a new Matter; then take the
Dressings off, and having made the Matter run out, you push the Lungs back with
a long Pipe, by whose means you facilitate the flowing of the Matter that
remains in the Breast; you continue to dress it so every day.

We observe often, that the first three or four days Blood comes out, the next
days Water, and afterward Pus, that grows thick by little and little.

We have observed already, that in case the Empiema should afford much Matter,
or Water mixed with Pus, you must not evacuate it all at once, lest the Patient
should fall in some weakness.

The Air to be corrected when you dress the Patients,
You must always correct the Intemperies of the Air with fire when you dress the
Patient, and hinder it from entering too abundantly into the Breast, because it
thickens and coagulates the matter which is extravasated there, hinders it from
flowing, and causes it to come forth in Clods. If it be Blood, the Serocity
separates from it, as after letting Blood; nevertheless, whether the Pus or
Blood be thick, or mixed with some Water, you always use (with Prudence)
Injections of Barley Water, and Mel Rosar. with which you cleanse the Lungs and
Breast; you must always cause the injected Liquor to come out by the help of
the finger, or hollow Probe; and if the Lungs should stick, you must loose them.

If in time the Blood should grow too watery, and the Patient be oppressed by
the quantity of the Pus, you would do well to dress him three or four times a
day.

The Matter runs sometimes for the space of three or four months, and as soon
as there comes nothing out but what comes from the Wound, you procure the
generation of flesh, and cicatrize.

You must observe, that when the Air works upon the Blood that is in the
Breast, it coagulates it sometimes, without changing it into Pus, and so it
comes out in Lumps.

Bitter things not to be used in Injections.
You must not use Injections in the beginning, neither make them with Aloes, or
other bitter things, because when the Lungs are open, the Patient casts them
out through the mouth; but after the Vessels are consolidated, you may use the
tincture of Aloes, or Wine mixed with a traumatic Decoction, and Mel Rosarum;
this is used when the Pus comes out in a small quantity.

Often after a wound of a Sword, there comes out of it an abundance of blood,
and after three or four days no more appears; in this occasion you must quickly
close the Wound, and you have all the reason to believe, that there were only
some little Vessels broke, which gave some blood, and which afterward were
stopped by the most glutinous particles of the blood; of the rest (however the
thing happens) there remains no danger.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the CANCER.
I Look upon a CANCER as the most inflamed and rebellious of all the schirrous
Tumors; the red part of the Blood as well as the white contributing to its
formation.

Principal Causes.
When CANCERS happen in glandulous parts, there is great appearance that the
Lympha is the principal cause there; if they attack any other part, it is to be
presumed that the Tartarous Particles of the Blood have the greatest share
therein. However it be, I say that the concourse of these two Humors is always
necessary for the production of a Cancer; all the difficulty is, well to
distinguish which of those two predominate. What a Cancer is.
I say a Cancer is a round, hard, unequal, livid, and painful Tumor, caused by
the meeting of abundance of Acids, and of the Tartarous Particles of the Blood,
from which proceeds the pain and tention of the Vessels, which very well
represent the Claws of a Crab.

Cancers of the Glandulous Parts most painful.
Those CANCERS which possess the Glandulous Parts, are much more painful than
the others, through the abundance of Nerves which enter into their Composition;
and if the alteration of the Lympha contribute any thing to their generation,
it is because the Glands are its principal Reservatories.

Cause of the Roundness.
The Roundness of the Tumor, comes from the Round Figure of the Glands,
because the Humors which cause the Obstruction, and extend the Vessels, can
easily tumify these Glandulous Bodies, without changing their Conformation.

Cause of the Tentions, etc.
As for the Tention, and fullness of the Vessels, it is known that the Matter
which they contain, is nothing else than the Matter which forms the Tumor.
This Humor is Tartarous, fixed, and gross, and consequently not very capable of
Fermentation; the slow progress the Tumor makes in the beginning, is a
convincing Proof of it.

The Lympha being acid, it may well excite some little Fermentation with a
porous and terrestrial Salt, which the red part of the Blood furnishes; but it
serves rather to fix and concenter the Humors yet more than they were before.

If this Fermentation were capable of causing the fullness and tention of these
little Vessels, it would be doubtless too slow and weak to break them so soon;
the Matter lies long there quiet, till having been exalted by the Application
of some Medicines, How the Cancer ulcerates.
it gnaws the Vessels and Vesicles which contain it, then, I say, the Cancer
ulcerates.

The Vessels which are puffed up in a Cancer, are so little and tender, that one
cannot distinguish them in their natural state, nor take them for what they
are, if one did not see them filled and extended; the Humor that is within
these Channels and Vessicles, not being presently able to ferment enough to
break them, as I have already proved, it is at least sufficient to extend and
make them appear.

You must not think that the extremities of the Vessels are open for the most
attenuated and subtilest Particles of the Matter to escape; I do not believe
that in the Cancer there is found any Matter in the Interstices of the Vessels,
till the Vessicles beginning to break, that the most active and exalted part of
this Humor may run out: I say, that as soon as some Particles are diffused,
being they are very corrosive, it is then that the Exulceration of the Cancer
happens; and as it is sometimes long without Ulceration, I maintain, that
during all that time of the Tumor, the Humors are always pent up in the
Vessels, different to other Tumors, whose course of Humors are very rapid,
and their Fermentation very quick and violent, which causes the Vessels to
break, before one has perceived the swelling of them.

We observe that the Vessels of the Eyes, which in their natural state are
imperceptible, grow manifest enough in Opthalmia. From what I have said, you
may easily draw the Differences and Prognostics of Cancers; Differences of
Cancers.
there are external, and internal; great, little; ulcerated, and not ulcerated,
as in all other Tumors. As for their production, they must always have an acid
Juice from the Lymphatic Vessels, whose Obstruction causes the Retention of
the Lympha, and makes acid an adust and terrestrial Matter from the Arteries
and Veins.

The Cancers that happen to the Paps, Prognostics.
and other glandulous parts, are the most dangerous, because it is always more
difficult to remedy the disorders of the Lympha, than those of the Blood.
Besides, these parts are very sensible, and more susceptible of ill impressions
than others, which you may more successfully secure from the Symptoms which the
Cancers may cause.

The Cure of Cancers (which one may well call Opprobrium Medicinae) is very
difficult. Cure.
If some Quacks boast of having some infallible Remedies for them, Experience
soon makes us see their Imposture. Cancers are very selfdom cured by the use of
Medicines, Chyrurgery sometimes succeeds better, but is always very dangerous:
Quibus sunt occulti Canceri (says HIPPOCRATES) eos prestat non curare, curati
namque: Citius intereunt, Sect. 6. Ap. 38.
quam non curati; therefore it is a great piece of Imprudence to undertake the
Cure of an Internal Cancer, unless it be small, and the extirpation of it very
easy.

Cancers exasperated, rather than cured by mild Medicines.
Concerning the external ones, they are always difficult to conquer; the reason
is, that unless we use a very great circumspection in choosing Remedies that are
proper, we do not fail to irritate them; whereas the other Humors are appeased
by the action of Remedies, and grow at least supportable, this seems not to
receive any impression, but rather to become more furious, and to make more
destruction.

The general method of curing a Cancer.
The general Remedies are absolutely necessary for the Cure of a Cancer, as a
Sobre Regiment of Life, frequent and gentle Purges, Phlebotomy; the Flux of the
Hemorrhoids in both Sexes, and the regular Flux of Women, give the Patient
great ease.

All sorts of Cancers to be handled alike.
Let the Cancer be in what part soever, it is not treated with much diversity,
unless it be ulcerated; and though it seems that we are more timorous to
apply Remedies to those which possess the glandulous parts, than to others; yet
when we undertake their Cure, we make use indifferently of the same Remedies,
as we for the one as the other.

What sort of Medicines not to be used.
Those that use sharp and corrosive Remedies, or else too active and penetrating
ones, never fail to make the Disease incurable; the softer Repercussives and
Supuratives one can ^appily employ in other Humors, are here the most
dangerous. The reason of it is most evident, to any that knows the Principles
of Chemistry: The Matter of the Cancer is course, The Matter which causes a
Cancer, ferments not so soon as in other Tumors.
fixed, and tartarous, therefore it cannot easily ferment. If you let it alone,
it requires a considerable time for the exaltation of any of its sulphurous
Salts which it contains; but if you stir it by some fermentative and
penetrating Remedies, from being fixed and immovable as it was, it becomes very
active and penetrating, because the Salt and Sulphur (which it contains) exalt
themselves, and take the upper hand; then does this dead Mass, which seemed
before incapable of making any disorder, change into a Vitreolic and Arsenical
Matter, which gnaweth and wastes the parts which contain it, and are nigh, till
at last it arrives to the most internal parts, and causes Death soon or late,
according to the diverse nature of this Matter, and the progress it makes in
the parts.

I say then, that the Cure of a Cancer (that is not ulcerated) must be
attemp^ed with the softest Remedies; that which cools, tempers, dissolves,
repels the Humors by little and little, without exciting them to ferment;
Remedies most proper.
that which is capable to stop the flowing Humors, as Ap. Solani Plantag.
Fragrariae, Spermat. Ranar. Lumbricor. Sal. Saturni Cream, New Cheese, Flesh of
Veal, which we change when it is corrupted. Finally, all that mollifies and
softens this Rebellious Tumor, and repels it in softning it; all this, I say,
may cure Cancers, or at least not irritate them: And though the Reflux of the
Humors could seem dangerous, yet it is the ordinary practice to go about it
after this manner.

What to be used in an ulcerated Cancer.
When the Cancer is once ulcerated, the Remedies which we must use, are those
which can hinder its progress, and ravage; nothing stops it more surely, than
Alkalisaporous Salts, mixed with some Astringents: these fortify the part with
their styptic virtue, and the other blunt, and absorb the points of the
Vitreolic and Corrosive Salts, that causes all that disorder. All Authors
recommend this practice, and if it has not altogether an advantageous success,
you must have recourse to the Extirpation of it, seeing neither Resolution nor
Supuration is to be hoped for.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Extirpation of the CANCER.
Three ways of extirpating a Cancer.
THE Cure of a Cancer may be attempted by Incision, by Ligature, or by Actual
Cautery. If you undertake it by Incision, (1) By Incision.
you must cut its most deepest Roots; that is to say, you must anticipate upon
the neighboring parts, and having taken it off, you must squeeze the adjacent
Vessels to make the Blood and Humors come out, which may have contracted
malignancy.

In respect of the Ligature, (2) By Ligature.
it is not much in use; but if you would put it in practice, it must be when the
Bases of the Tumor is but small, when the Roots extend themselves not far in
compass, and when it terminates in a kind of strangulation; but being it is
rare (not to say impossible) to meet with such a disposition, the Ligature has
no other use than that of suspending the Tumor, that you may make the Incision
more commodious.

You must observe, that if you apply slightly the Actual Cautery after the
Operation, it is to stop the blood, (3) Actual Cautery.
and absorb and destroy some portion of the unclean matter, which could serve
as a Ferment for the Generation of a new Cancer, and might even infect the
whole mass of blood.

How to perform the Operation.
The method used in performing the Operation is this; you introduce into the top
of the Tumor a Needle armed with double Thread to make a sort of Loop, with
which you uphold the Tumor, and the Surgeon cuts it round about the Base 'till
to the Ribs, with a very sharp Knife; having taken off the Tumor, you squeeze
the blood out, and pass slightly over it an Actual Cautery, you dress the Wound
with Pledgets armed with astringent Powders and lay a Plaster on it with
Compress; Napkin and Scapuler.

The best way of oxtirpating a Cancer.
But the best method is to make an Incision cross over the Tumor, even to the
Ribs, and separate dexterously the flesh from the skin; by this means you avoid
the great deformity and pain, and secure better the Wound from the Air.

If the Diseased be not in a disposition proper to endure to Operation, either
through fear of pain, or being weak, and the Surgeon not make a favorable
Prognostic, it would be a rashness to undertake it; besides, that the great
loss of substance, and dangerous accidents which happen, are worthy of
reflection, which break often the measures that the most daring Practitioners
can take: for as soon as the Tumor is taken off, the Ulcer grows often malign,
painful, and of a round figure, which is a mark of slow cicatrisation; the
sides become calous, livid, high, black, and inverted, according to the
disposition of the Juices with which they are watered.

An extraordinary way to cure a Cancer.
There are some (that without performing the Operation) do assure us, that they
have cured ulcerated Cancers with great Red Snails freed from their shells,
which are laid upon the Ulcer; they say that they creep sometimes about the
Ulcer, fasten to it, and leave their foam there; that we find the bottom of
their belly gnawed as it were, and they grow so monstrous, that in a short time
they burst.

The reason is, that these Animals contain an abundance of Volatile Alkalys,
which charge themselves with the Acids that entertain the Cancer, and which
grow and ulcerate the belly of these Animals; so that being conveyed through
the little branches of their veins, into their mass of blood, according to the
order of Circulation, they excite such an extraordinary Fermentation, that
these Animals must needs perish.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Bronchotomia.
Bronchotomia, a nice Operation.
THere is no Operation in Chyrurgery of a more nice undertaking than the
Bronchotomia; neither is there any more pressing or useful, when ever one has
the happiness to succeed in it.

The Causes of this troublesome Affect, Causes.
proceeds ordinarily from some Wound, great Crying, long Discourses, violent
Passions, or the alteration of the Humors.

If a simple Inflammation be capable of hindering Respiration, what will not
happen if any of these Causes concur to increase it? Now whether the
Inflammation attack the Muscles of the Larynx, or some other parts, it
communicates it self not only to the Aspera Arteria, but also to the Muscles of
the Pharinx, and neighboring Glands, which obliges the blood and spirits to
stop in all these parts, and to cause great obstructions, then does the blood
(which without intermission pressing on) not finding its passage free, stay
there, and augment both Inflammation and Tention; the Vessels being after this
manner distended, and swollen up, take up more space than before, and must
needs press the Aspera Arteria, and hinder the passage of the Air in that part,
whence follows Suffocation.

Bleeding, Clysters, Resolutive Cataplasms, Gargariems made with strong Wine,
in which you boil (in B. Mariae) Sanicle, Golden Rod, Perivincle, and Angelico,
with many other Remedies, are to precede the Operation, unless danger of
Suffocation oblige us to make it.

If the Obstruction and Inflammation attack only the Amigdals, or Glandulae
Tyroides, you must endeavor to open them by the mouth with the point of a
Lancet armed with a band of Lint. If all parts of the Throat be inflamed, and
all Remedies proved without success, you must betake your self to the Operation.

How to perform the Operation.
To do it methodically, the Patient must sit upon a Bed or Chair, with his head
back, leaning on a Servant's breast, who upholds it with his hands.

Being in this posture, the Surgeon chooses the most convenient and less
dangerous place, where he may make the Operation, which is a Thumb's breadth
from the Larynx, between the third and fourth Ring of the Aspera Arteria, he
pinches the Cutis, etc. cross: makes an Incision at length, and separates very
gently and artificially the Brochales, and Musculii Sternobyoidei.

Having discovered the Aspera Arteria, Caution.
you incise cross-ways (with a Lancet armed) the Carnous Membranes which ties
the cartilaginous Rings together, avoiding the recurrent Nerves, which carry
the spirits necessary for the function of the organ of the voice, which (if
they should chance to be cut) would be lost.

The Incision being made, before you withdraw the Lancet, introduce a Probe,
which facilitates the entry of a short Pipe, which must be crooked, and
proportionable to the Wound; there must be a hole on each side to pass a little
Ribon through, which is to be ried behind the Neck to keep it fast; we put a
little Cotton, or piece of Sponge at its entry, for to modify the Air a little,
then apply a Plaster on it with holes in it, Compress, and a pierced Bandage.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Fistula Lachrimalis.
THe Fistula Lachrimalis is always caused by a sharp and salt Humor. If the
Matter of the Tears, which run through the lachrimal passages, have received
any alteration, it may cause some obstructions in those passages, which
terminate at the Aperture of the os lachrimale, without communicating its
alteration to the neighboring parts. I will not call this indisposition a
Fistula, When the Operation is not necessary.
but Obstruction, which nevertheless permits the serosity to escape
involuntary; which must be well distinguished, because the operation is not
necessary if the lachrimal Bone be no way altered; for the Operation consists
in nothing else but to pierce the Bone, and consume the Cariosity. We use in
this occasion general Remedies, and all Coliriums proper to deobstruct and
disinflame these parts.

If the Matter which causes the obstruction excoriate, and slightly ulcerate
the nigh parts, one may call it a false Fistula, which yields to attenuating
Medicines, and those which are proper to consume the Calosity that comes upon
it.

But if the serosity by its acidity excoriate the little Tubercle of Flesh,
which the Ancients took for the lachrimal Gland, and the other nigh parts;
there comes upon it an Ulcer, which soon degenerates into a Fistula, by the
action of the most pungent and acid Particles; as I have proved at length in
the examination of the Fistula in Anc. So that this impure serosity, being
capable of Corruption, rots the Bone by its lying there, What a true Fistula
Lachrimalis is.
and stop the passage of the Tears. I will call this the true Fistula, where
the operation is of great importance.

It happens often that the same Humor which waters the Eye, runs to the
lachrimal Sac without producing its effect: The reason is, because it begins
only to enter into its first degree of Corruption. But this Sac being a
production of the interior Membrain of the Nose, which is extremely spongy and
penitrable; the Humor has strength enough to penitrate it, and so cause an
inflammation which stops the passage of the Tears, which by lying there wax
sour, and afterward grow so sharp, that they cause a Fistulous Ulcer, or a
kind of Fistula which one might call complete, to distinguish it from the
others.

The Matter of the Tears is not always the cause of this Fistula, as it is the
effect of it: It Is very often the consequence of some Imposthume, or even of
the inflammation of the lachrimal Sac, without this pretended serosity
contributing any way toward it: It may truly by lying still there, thicken and
harden by heat, or it may degenerate, mixing with some other strange Humor, and
so contribute to its Formation.

You must observe, That in this last kind of Fistula, there is always some Pus
in the lachrimal Sac; the most of them that are troubled with it, press every
day the fide of their Nostrils, to squeeze out the Matter, so they may avoid
the pain of the operation, being rather content to have it as long as they live.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Operation of the Fistula Lachrimalis.
How to perform the Operation.
WE have already said, that the operation of the Fistula Lachrimalis consists in
piercing the Bone, and making the Matter which entertains it flow more easy,
and in deobstructing the passages.

For this you introduce the Probe to know whether the Bone be discovered or
carnous; but particularly whether its hole be stopped.

If the exterior Orifice of the Fistula permit not the entry of the Probe,
Caution.
you must dilate it with a little prepared Sponge, or make an incision with the
Bistory, taking care not to cut the little Bridle, which makes the reunion of
the two Eyelids; which is nothing else but the Tendon of the Orbiculer Muscle,
that performs the office of a Ligament: for if by chance it should be cut, the
lower Eyelid would be reversed, which is an indisposition much more
troublesome and deformed than the first.

When you have made the Incision, you fill the wound with dry Lint to obsorb
the Blood, and dilate the lips to see more easily the bottom of it. The Bone
being laid bare, you introduce a little Canula into the hole of the Os
Lachrimale, and with actual Cauteries of different Figures you pierce the Bone,
which is very thin; lightly passing the Cauteries over its surface to hasten
Exfoliation, and destroy the Cariosity, if any. After that you procure the
suppuration of the would, and lay in the bottom of the Fistula Medicines proper
to procure Exfoliation of the Bone.

What to be done to prevent Inflammation.
You must observe, That before you make the Operation, it is necessary to apply
on the Eyes some defensative made with Aque Plantag. Rosar. Album. ovi, Ol.
Rosar. and tutiae, you continue to use it until there is no more fear of
Inflammation.

When the Operation is finished, you order the Patient to lie on his Back, that
the Matter of the Tears may take its course through the Aperture that has been
made; you must have regard to two Circumstances. The first, to stay till the
rottenness be destroyed before you procure the generation of Flesh. The second,
to hinder the cicatrize from rising too high, which would be a very
disagreeable deformity. Finally, you apply a Plaster, Compress, and a
Handkerchief across, or the lachrimal Band.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Polypus.
FOR to have a Idea of the generation of the Polypus, you are only to call to
mind what we have advanced, when we spoke of a Sarcoma; and to make, at the
same time, some reflection upon the structure of the part; viz. upon the nature
of the inferor Membrain of the Nose, which is very thick, spongy, penitrable,
actually watered, and imbued with a viscous glewy Humor; which are all the
requisite and necessary Circumstances for to make us think, that it contributes
much to the formation of the Polypus, by reason its Porosities are so disposed,
that they let pass nothing but the most crass and fungous Particle of the
Blood, which are very fit to produce some Excrescence.

True cause of its generation.
To explain rightly this generation, we must only admit a little more heat and
intemperies in the Blood. The intemperies increases the motion, and exaltation
of those viscous Particles, and the heat fixes and condenses them, by
dissipating their humidity. Wherefore its not to be wondered at, if there
abundance and profusion toward a spongy part, furnishes the Matter of a
Polypus.

This Humor (I say) tho agitated, stops in the contexture of this Membrain, it
the contexture of this Membrain, it extends the Vessels, blows up the Glands,
dilates the excressory Channels, and obliges all these parts to rise in a
Tumor, as well by its thick consistency, as too great intemperies; which makes
it be no more in a condition to pass through the Porosities of the Vessels that
contain it, and so it congeals; and by a strange heat changes into a fungous
and carcinomatous Substance: So that by the addition and presence of a new
matter, the Polypus grows insensible until it be entirely informed.

Of Polypus's, some are schirrous, Difference of Polypus's.
some are schirrous, and some painful.

There are some which change into a cancerous Ulcer, and are most ordinarily
the consequences of some neglected venereal Distemper, whose leaven retires,
and nestles in diverse corners of the body, where it lies a considerable time,
without manifesting it self, or producing its effect.

Some of them are white, soft, and some red; the latter are the less adherent,
and easiest cured. The operation is never practiced in the painful, nor
schirrous. The painful are of difficult cure; the schirrous endure best the
action of caustic Medicines. Those that ulcerate, and become concerous, are
sometimes conquered with such Remedies as are employed in the Pox. The cure of
the soft, white, and red, particularly when they have a body, and are
considerably grown, is easily brought to perfection by the Operation, or by
Catheretic Medicines.

How to perform the Operation.
The Operation consists in pinching the Polypus by the Roots, with a particular
pair of Forceps, which we turn from one fide to another; and pulling by little
and little, we tear off the Polypus with its roots. When you have extracted it,
the Patient snuffs up some Wine into his Nose; if a flux of Blood follow, you
blow up some astringent Powders to absorb the Blood, and dry up the Ulcer. They
are sometimes so considerable, that they occupy partly the narrow of the
Throat, and so hinder the respiration and deglutition. In this occasion we
endeavor to extract it through the Mouth with crooked Forceps.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Cataract.
Several opinions concerning the cause of a Cataract.
THose that have treated of the Cataract, are divided in their Opinions
concerning the cause that produces it. The one have maintained, That its only
an obstruction of the apple of the Eye, formed by the most viscous part of the
watery Humor, which is shut up between the Cronea and Wea. Others thinking to
hit better, have advanced, That it is a Web which is formed before the
christaline Humor. However, I conceive, the Cataract to be formed after this
manner.

The Author's opnion concerning the causes of a Cataract.
All the World agree, That all the parts are formed from the first moment of
Conformation; and we can demonstrate by these incontestable Principles, that
there is never a Cist or Membrane generated absolutely-against Nature; and that
these Cists and Cataracts which come so frequently, or to say better, which
appear and become sensible to our eyes, are nothing else than the unfolding of
the Membranes, and the little Pellicles which compose the parts; from which I
conclude, that the Cataract begins only to be formed by a little Pellicle which
separates its self from the Christaline, and swims in the Aqueous Humor, which
carries it from one place to another, according to the various motions we give
to the eye.

The composition of the chrystalline Humor.
Which we may without pain conceive, if we consider that this Humor is nothing
but a composition of several little Pellicles one laid upon another, and which
may easily be taken asunder after it is boiled; so that if we couch the Cataract
when it is quite framed, you change, in a manner, the figure of the
Chrystalline, that is to say, of unequal it is made flat.

Now this Humor being no more so unequal as it should be, there must a weak
refraction follow from it, and consequently some confusion; I say, An
inconvenience which always follow upon the couching a Cataract.
that the beams which come from every visible point of an object, and which
enter into the eye at a certain distance, are never soon enough broken, by
reason of the flatness of the Christalline, to be united when they come to the
Retina, which causes us to see the object confusedly. We help this
inconvenience by the means of a unequal Glass, which regulates the distances
that is necessary to make the refraction more favorable; and that the Retina
may stand just at the reunion of the beams, which paint in Minature (upon this
Coat) the Image of the object: From whence it follows, That those whose
Cataracts have been couched, never perceive objects so distinctly as others.

When first they begin to be formed, and keep as yet their transparency, one
sees the object, as if it were through a Cloud; and then we call them
Suffusions. This little Pellicle changes color and consistence, and comes to
be more or less thick, according to the nature of the Juice with which it is
watered, and the mixture of the Humors which renders it opake and impenetrable
to the light; Different colors of Cataracts.
this makes all the differences of Cataracts; there are some white, some of a
lead color, some green, yellow, pearl-colour'd; others of the color of
Seawater, or of burnished Iron.

Other differences of Cataracts.
Some are Lactaceous, as the white ones; some are more hardened, thinner, drier,
and consequently more capable to bear the Needle, as those like Pearl, or
burnished Iron; on the contrary the black, green, and yellow, are thick,
extremely adherent, and very difficult to couch.

There are others which are hard like Parchment, and which have a sort of
elastic virtue, which is the cause why after they are couched, they rise
presently again; the lactaceous or milky cannot resist the Needle, by reason of
their little consistence and fluidity.

To know when a Cataract's ripe.
You may know, when the Cataracts are in a condition to be couched, when in
dilating the Pupilla, by rubbing the Eye, they remain fixed without any motion.

If the beams of a Candle that pass through a Bottle full of Water, or a
Crystal, make the Patient perceive some Colors, it is a sign the Cataract is
not quite formed.

I do not speak here of the cause of the alteration in the Christalline, and of
the different changes of the Cataracts; I should have been obliged to speak of
the Nature of Colors, but time has not given me leave; therefore I pass to
the Operation.

How to perform the Operation.
You place the Patient in a very light place, a Servant holds his Head behind,
taking care to cover the sound Eye, that he may not turn aside; then bid the
Patient turn his Eye toward his Nose. The OPERATOR with a round or flat
Needle, having a handle, pierces the conjunctiva near the Cornea at the little
angle, and he passes through it the point of the Needle. From the Aqueous
Humor, you place it on the Cataract, and endeavor to couch it gently, keeping
it a little while under. If the Patient distinguishes the objects, it is a sign
the Cataract is couched; but if it rise again, we are obliged to reiterate the
Operation, and to hold it longer down with the Needle. After which you apply on
the Eye a Medecin made with Aque Plantag. Rosar. and alb. ovi, with a Compress
and Handkerchief across.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Wounds of the Head.
A simple Wound of the Head may be cured by Suture, etc.
WE have made you observe in the beginning of this Treatise, that a simple Wound
of the Head may be cured by the Suture, or by the uniting Bandage, unless the
loss of substance be considerable.

But if the Wound be compound, that is, if besides the exterior parts, the
Skull, Dura Matter, or the substance of the Brain it self be offended; the
Physician and Chyrurgeon ought to suspend their Judgments, and recollect, at
the same time, their Ideas and Knowledge, to prevent the ill Consequences of
any Accident, whose causes and symptoms are so dangerous, and very often Mortal.

The Skull may be fractured, the Dura Matter pricked, cut, broken, torn,
depressed; and the Brain cut, taken away, shaked, or filed with some
extravasated matter.

The Skull may be hurt 2 ways. 5 Kinds of Hippocrates.
The Skull may be hurt two ways, by Incision or Contusion. Hippocrates has
established five kinds of Fractures; which he has called Fissure, Contusion,
Incision, Depression, and Counter-Fissure.

Whether the Fissure be Oblique or Perpendicular; 1. Fissure.
it contains one only difference, which is to distinguish well whether there be
but one, or both Tables fractured.

The Contusion is of two sorts; 2. Contusion.
the one does not destroy the Continuity. Hippocrates called it Thlasis, vel
Phlasis; it is nothing else but the forcing down of the Bone, without being
broke.

Most incident to Children.
According to Hippocrates, it happens on the Skulls of Children, that have as
yet the Bone very soft and tender. This Depression is after the same manner, as
a bruise in a Pewter Pot.

The other kind of Contusion destroys the Continuity. In this the Bones are
equal and contiguous. It Is a single Fissure which always reaches beyond the
place where the blow was given. If it be apparent, it is called Khegma: If it be
insensible, it is called Trikismos, or Capillary Fissure.

The Incision is of three sorts, 3. Incision.
Eccope, Diacope, and Apokeparnismos; Eccope is a perpendicular Incision of the
bone, without carrying off the piece, leaving nothing but a mark. HIPPOCRATES
calls it Hedra, the Latins Vestigium, or Seeds. Diacope is, when the blow
lights obliquely, and goes deep into the substance of the bone, without
carrying it off: And Apokeparnismos is, when the piece is entirely carried off.

The Depression destroys both the equality and contiguity of the bone; 4.
Depression.
HIPPOCRATES calls it Esphlasis, or Enthlasis, depression or fracture with a
splint; he has established three kinds of it, Ecpiesma, Angisoma, and
Camarosis.

Ecpiesma in Greek, is a depression of the Skull, where the Splints press the
Dura Matter. Angisoma is a depression where the Splint separates it self, and
passes under the sound bone. Camarosis, or the Vault, is the third kind; this
is divided in five sorts.

In the first, a part of the Bone bends down in breaking, and the other turns
up. In the second, the Bone boweth downward without any slit; this happens only
to Children, as I have explained heretofore.

The third is a Depression, where the sides are forced down, the middle remains
bent upwards, as a kind of Vault, leaving some hollowness under it.

The fourth rises of it self; this is also when the Bones are only membranous,
because they have a kind of spring or elastic virtue, till they begin to ossify.

Lastly, the fifth kind of Camarosis is, when the second Table is depressed,
and the outward returned to its first state; this last only happens to Infants,
for Reasons which we have alleged.

The Contra Fissura which HIPPOCRATES has established without ground, 5.
Counter-Fissure.
happens in the same Bone, in diverse Bones, and in different Tables; in the
same Bone, when the uppermost part is struck, and the lower broke in diverse
Bones, as when the blow is given on the occipital, and the coronal is broke; in
different Tables when the first is struck, and the second broke.

These are three Chymeric Examples quite contrary to the structure of the part;
if we see wounds of the head of this nature happen after Concussions of the
brain, it proceeds not from a Counterfissure, (as HIPPOCRATES pretends) but by
true Relapses.

No such thing as a Counter-Fissure.
It may easily be seen, that when a man has lost his senses, and has recovered
them partly again, he is yet all giddy, and may after this manner relapse twice
or thrice, and get new Wounds; for it is impossible that a Machin composed of
several pieces as the Skull is, can break in a place opposite to that where it
received the impression, it being certain that the blow dies in all the
circumference of the assemblage, and that the diploe hinders the shake from
being communicated to the interior Table.

But without confounding and mistaking our selves, we may say, that the Skull
may be slit, depressed, fractured, cut, or carried off.

If it be slit, the Fissure is visible, or almost insensible; but whether it be
apparent or not, nothing is capable of giving us convincing marks that it
penetrates, and that there is blood spilt on the dura matter, than these which
succeed.

The use of Ink, the Rugine, and the Handkerchief in the mouth keeping one's
breath, is absolutely useless, because the Diploe confounds and hinders one
from seeing whether it reaches to the dura matter, or not; besides the practice
of the Rugine will never be approved on by good Practitioners, not only because
they do not give us any knowledge, but also because there remains a loss of
substance, and deformity of the part.

If it be Depression, it presses with it the dura matter, and causes several
Accidents, which we will examine.

If it be fractured, either the Splinters are separated from the Cranium, or
not; so by either way the dura matter may be compressed, pricked or torn, and
the Brain hurt, or at least some Blood may be spilled upon these parts.

In all these occasions, (I say) if the Fracture do not permit an unition of
the shattered Bones, and vent given to the strange bodies, which might alter
the dura matter, you must, without more ado, perform the Operation, (provided
some ill Symptoms preceded) otherwise the Patient would die.

If it be cut or carried off either with, or without shattering the Bone; as
for example, If the Incision penetrate not, and there be only a part of the
Bone separated, the consequences are not dangerous; but if it go deep, and
there be some Splints separated that offend the dura matter, if we do not soon
remedy it, the Patient is in danger of life.

Signs of inflamed dura matter.
If the dura matter be inflamed, either by diffused blood, or by some pricking,
compression, tention, cut, or rupture, one presently feels pain and heaviness
in that part, the Eyes grow puffed up and inflamed, the Face red and swelled, the
diseased is drowsy with Fever, the Pulse hard with shiverings, and blood comes
often from the nose, ears and mouth, just as in great concussions of the brain.

We know that the dura matter is pricked or torn, when there are some sharp
pointed Splints, or rugged pieces of the bone which press it.

We are persuaded that it is compressed, etc. when the bones are depressed and
applied, as it were, against its surface, or that the broken pieces of bones
are separated; or finally, that there is some extravasated blood which offends
it.

We are convinced that it is cut, when it is caused by a sharp and cutting
Instrument, and that the Fracture be of a great length; but if the bone be only
cracked, and some blood be extravasated upon the dura matter, only those signs
which I have described, (and which I am going to explain) can give us certain
evidences of it; I need not here repeat the explication of the pain.

Cause of the Heaviness.
The Heaviness proceeds from the diffused blood upon the dura matter; for since
she is to rise and follow the motions of the Brain, if the weight give her not
liberty to obey, and the Brain find any resistance, her motion must be somewhat
interrupted. Now seeing the motions of the Brain depends on that of the
Arteries, the Impulsion of the Blood not being sufficient to elevate the
substance of the Brian, and the weight upon it, its course must be slower in
this part, and a heaviness must follow thereon.

Cause of puft-up and inflamed Eyes.
The Eyes become puffed up an inflamed; to explain this Phoenomena, you must
only remember, that the Sinus's of the Basis of the Skull are only productions
of the dura matter, and that they receive all the residuous blood that comes
from the veins, which are distributed about the globe of the Eye. This being
so, it is evident, that if the dura matter be inflamed, she communicates it to
the Sinusses, and so opposes the return of the blood, which the veins are to
pour into these little reservatories; and since the arterial blood still
presses forwards, the globe of the Eye, which is pressed by these two liquors,
(by the reflux of one, and arrival of the other) must needs tumify and inflame.

Not to confound the Inflammation of the Eye with that of the Eyelids, you must
consider, that that which happens to the globe of the Eye, proceeds from the
Inflammation of the dura matter; and that of the Eyelids, from the Inflammation
of the pericranium; for the interior membrane of the Eyelids is a production
of it.

We observe, that Inflammation of the Eyes does sometimes not appear till the
third, fourth or fifth day; this can come from nothing else, but from the long
passage which there is between the Inflammation of the Sinuffes, and the more or
less progress it makes during that time.

Reasons of redness of the Face, etc.
The Face grows red, and puffed up, by reason the Inflammation of the dura
matter obliges one part of the blood that mounteth to the head through the
internal Carotides, to spread on the place where they pierce the dura matter
even to the neighboring parts, and external Carotides; which is so much the
more true, since we know that all parts of the Face swell and grow red in a
very little time after any Inflammation, being watered with a great many
sanguiferous vessels; for the same reason the blood runs out of the nose, mouth
and ears; and besides the blow that troubles the whole economy of the brain,
it is to be presumed, that the blood which flows in abundance, some little
cappillary vessels may be broken, by the great distentions they endure.

Reason of Drowsiness.
The Patient is drowsy: To explain this kind of Lethargy, we must still have
recourse to the Inflammation of the dura matter, and to the blood which is stopped
in its Sinusses; or at least to the slowness of its motion, be it that the
arterial blood is no more mingled with the grosser blood which they contain, or
that the Inflammation increases. It happens that the weight of the blood which
is pent up in these Sinusses, press the corpus callosum, and the nerves which
are distributed about the organs of the senses, so by this means makes the head
dull and heavy. You must observe, that this kind of Lethargy is not so deep as
that which comes when the matter is diffused upon the brain, as we shall speak
of in its place.

Cause of the Fever.
The Fever is caused by the inflammation and pain; for it is sufficient it but one
drop of corrupted blood be conveyed into the whole mass to produce it.

Cause of hard Pulse.
The Pulse is hard: To explain this Phoenomena, you must consider, that the dura
matter, accompanies the thick cords of the nerves is their passage, and the
inflammation and great tention which she suffers, are capable to straiten all
the little membranous sheaths which invelop them, and consequently to hinder
the spirits from flowing with that liberty into the fibers of the heart; so
that its spring being weakened for want of this distribution, you must not
wonder if it does not force the blood into the Arteries with the same force and
vigor as before, and if the Pulse be deep in this occasion.

Cause of the Shiverings.
The Shiverings which accompany the Fever, can proceed from nothing else than
the purulent matter, which causes the Impostumation; and from the disposition
it has to be stopped, and prick the membranes, at the time when the veins are
charged with it, to carry it to the heart, and from thence to all the parts;
and seeing the most part of membranes are carnous, and each muscle has its
particular membranes, which is separated into a million of membranous fillets,
which spread themselves into the body of the muscle, and inchain all the little
carnous fibers to one another, we have reason to believe that the spirits
running tumultuously into the fibers, occasioned by the motion which was
imprinted in them, exciteth shiverings, which are so many little convulsive
motions.

The Brain may be offended diverse ways:
The Brain may be hurt by a great commotion of the Head, by some blood diffused
into its substance, or by some particular wound.

Signs of a Concussion of the Brain.
If the Commotion be great, yet without any vessel broken, one falls to the
ground with loss of the senses, feeling and motion, blood comes out of the
nose, mouth and ears, the Excrements and Urine come out involuntary, with often
swooning and vomiting, sometimes soon, sometimes late.

Cause of falling down.
If one falls down, it is an evident sign that not only the spirits are in
disorder, but also that the commotion has violated the nervous fillets of the
corpus callosum, and that it has so rudely shaked the brain it self, that the
course of the animal spirits has been suppressed. Now since the spring and
tonic motion of the muscles, that hold perpendicularly our bones together, and
sustain the whole machin, depend only from the influence of the spirits which
pass through the nerves into our muscles, if by any misfortune these cords come
to slacken, and to lose some spirits by any mishap, the machin must needs fall.

Cause of loss of the Senses.
The Senses are lost, by reason the course of the spirits is interrupted in the
brain, and cannot repair to the organs of the Senses; now since the functions
of the Senses depend on the course of the spirits in the nerves, it is no wonder
if the exterior objects make no more impression upon our Senses, and we be no
more in a condition to distinguish them. The Phenomenon is a consequent of the
precedent.

Cause of bleeding of the Nose, Mouth and Ears.
The Blood flows out of the Nose, Mouth and Ears: To explain which Symptom, you
must consider that these parts are rudely shaked in the time of the assault,
that the blood and spirits are stopped in the brain, and that the great cords of
the nerves, which at their passage out of the skull pass between the branches o
the carotidal and vertebral Arteries, imprint there such a violent motion at
the time of the concussion, that they oblige the arterial blood to turn short,
and flow into the external Carotides; so that these receiving almost all the
blood which mount to the head, as well from the Inflammation, as from the
shakings of the nerves, must needs break some capillary vessels.

The cause of involuntary shedding of Urine and Excrements.
The Excrements and Urine come forth against one's will, because the spirits
repair no more in such cases to the sphincters of the Anus and Bladder, than to
other parts, which causes them to lose their spring, and permits the issue of
those Excrements; the motions of the heart are weak and languishing, only for
want of these same spirits.

Cause of Vomiting.
One vomits at the very instant, or some time after: If one vomits presently,
it is a sign that the Commotion has not been one of the greatest, and the course
of the spirits not long interrupted, since the impulse of the blood has broke
the sluice of them, and forced them to retake their course, and launch with so
much quickness into the ventricle, that they excite this first vomiting, in
which one renders nothing but Aliments.

But if the spirits be long retarded, it is a sign that the shake has been very
rude, and that the figure of the Brain is vitiated, since we see that when they
are at full liberty, they run with precipitation into the tunicles of the
ventricles and intestines, which by their irregular and vermicular motions
oblige the Bile, which runs into their cavity, to force the Pylorus, and pass
into the stomach, from whence it is driven by the powerful contraction of its
carnous fibers.

You must observe, that in this last Vomiting, where one renders Bile, it is
much more violent than the first, and that the diseased lose their strength,
vigor, and ordinary motion; these are the Accidents which immediately follow
Concussion of the Brian.

Now it is very important to examine well those that happen when the Brain is
hurt, and when any Blood or Pus is extravasated in its substance; sometimes it
is an effect of the Concussion that has broken some vessel, and sometimes an
effect of the blow, which has pricked or cut the dura matter, or which has
penetrated, or carried off some portion of the Brain; or finally, it is some Pus
between the dura and pia matter, which is shed upon the Brian. In all these
Causes the Fever comes with double Fits and Shiverings, accompanied with
Vomiting, Convulsion, Delirium, Lethargy, and Apoplexy. And besides this crowd
of Symptoms, the Liver and Lungs often impostumate; which is known by a fixed
pain on the Breast, or in the region of the Liver, and by reiterated Shiverings.

Cause of the redoubling of the Fever.
As for the Fever, with its Intermittings which come upon it, it is not hard to
give Reasons for this extraordinary Fermentation, as soon as we be a little
attentive upon the changes of corruption, which happen to the matter that is
diffused upon the substance of the Brain.

It Is not to be doubted but that it grows impure, and more or less sour,
according to the time it lies there, that the veins are from time to time
charged with it, and that a part passes into the Heart, Lungs, and all the
other Organs, which by their continual motions form and grind them, as it were,
into a thousand little parts, which lively hasten the impetuous course of the
blood, and which cause the trouble and perturbation of the spirits, which march
in disorder, which precipitate the motions of the heart, and increase the
Fever; and when ever that strange matter which is offensive to the Brian, has
got some degree of corruption, and made it self fit to circulate with the venal
blood; this matter, I say, receiving the same alterations and triturations
which we have supposed sets the blood more sensibly in motion, and puts it in a
much greater effervescency, on which depends the strength of the returns of the
Fever. After this manner, as often as the Blood is charged with it, the returns
(which are a sit were periodical) are renewed.

From all the Reasons which I have alleged, it is easy to understand, that
there are few parts or corners of the body where this purulent matter is not
thrown; it pricks the Nerves, irritates the Membranes, transmits its action on
the ventricle, nests its self sometimes in one muscle, sometimes in another,
and causes shiverings, vomitings, and the vicissitude of irregular and
convulsive motions, which show that the mass of blood is mightily suppressed,
the course of the spirits much agitated, so that Delirium and Lethargy must
follow.

Cause of Delirium.
The Delirium is an effect of the great inequality of the course of the blood in
the redoublings of the Fever, and of the diffused matter, which begins to
penetrate and corrupt the substance of the Brain; the inequality of the course
of the blood in the time of the redoublings, rules the irregularity of the
course of the spirits in the parts, and the extravasated matter gnaws by its
acrimony the vessels and nervous fibers of the white part, so puts to the rout
the spirits into the muscles, organs of the senses, and in the passages of the
brain, where the Idea's are weakened with irregularity and confusion.

Cause of the Lethargy.
The Lethargy follows, when ever there is much blood spilt upon the brain, being
in its last degree of motion and exaltation, the weight of the extravasated
blood presses the brain, and the quick motion of the blood causes the courser
particles to separate from the fine ones, that they stick to the pores of the
glands, and stop the passage of the spirits; so that the brain finding it self
oppressed with the weight of the matter, the Patient falls into a profound
drowsiness; but in the time that this extravasated matter dissipates its self,
the courser particles, which are so many sluices, be put out of order, by the
impulsion of new blood, the spirits fly out into the parts with so much
vivacity and confusion, that they renew the Phrensy, which succeeds the
Lethargy, just as the Lethargy succeeds the Delirium; you must observe that in
this kind of Lethargy, the Eyes are sometimes open and troubled.

Lastly, It happens that the blood hastens with so great impetuosity to the
brain, and that the extravasated matter gathers there so abundantly, that it
interrupts, by its weight, the course of the spirits, and constrain the
Sinusses of the dura matter every where to overflow, Cause of Apoplexy.
so that the Arteries being unable to empty themselves either into the Veins or
Sinusses, the brain finds it self so pressed on all sides, that the wounded
falls into an Apoplexy, which makes us know that Death is not far off, and that
there is no more help.

How the Liver or Lungs impostumate in Wounds of the Head.
The Liver of Lungs impostumate in great Wounds of the Head, by the arrival of
Pus, which comes from the Brain, of which the mass of blood has got some
impressions; we have in the Chapter of the Empiema given an account of the
Formation of an Impostume of the Lungs.

For to have an Idea of that of the Liver, one cannot ground upon more solid
Reasons, than to examine its structure in relation to that of other Viscera,
which are contained in the ABDOMEN.

What the Liver is.
The LIVER is the biggest, and most considerable of all the Viscera; it is a
conglomerate Gland, deprived of all carnous fibers, watered by a prodigious
number of sanguiferous Vessels, among which the vena porta does the office of
an Artery, and the Circulation consequently must be very slow there; besides,
we are sure that the little Glands which compose it, separate a liquor, which
is extremely glewy and viscous of its own nature, which are all the requisite
and necessary conditions to retain a matter, which already has a great
tendency to stop and cause some disorder; so that after the heart, and the
other organs have prepared and put it in a condition to produce its effect, it
diffuseth it self into the whole mass of blood; and being the Liver receives a
great number of vessels, it follows that the Hepatic Artery, and Vena Porta,
(which are distributed through its whole capacity) having crammed every
glandulous grain with it, according to its disposition and different
alterations which it receives it this Parenchima, it putrefies it, or makes it
schirrous: You must observe, that the Hydrocephalus is almost always followed
with the same accident, and that in these kinds of Impostumations the
shiverings cease most commonly some days before death.

We suspect that the Brain is altered when the Fracture is big, and some of the
Animal Functions are depraved; for since our Actions depend on the Functions of
the Brain, when ever those are hindered, they show that the Brian is offended:
You must observe, that in all I have proposed concerning Wounds of the Brain, I
have not comprehended the hind-part of the Brian; I am thoroughly persuaded that
an Animal dies presently, Wounds of the hinder part of the Brain inevitably
mortal.
as soon as the cineritious substance of the hind part of the Brian be pricked,
carried off, or compressed, because the nerves that furnish us with spirits for
the functions of the vital and natural parts, take immediately their origin
from thence: This is doubtless the reason that has obliged Nature to take so
much care and precaution, to preserve this part so precious to life; she has
placed it under two posterior advances of the Brain, for fear it might be
interessed in the great havocks which happen in diverse places of the Head; she
has separated it from the Brain, by a membranous Enclosure very strong and
thick to hinder it, lest in any concussion it might be compressed by its two
posterior Lobes. Lastly, Nature has covered it behind with a piece of very
hard, thick, and irregular Bone, for a defense against outward injuries, and to
secure it from all that may be hurtful.

Prognostics of Wounds of the Brain.
You must observe, that the more Wounds approach to the medulla oblongata, the
more mortal they be, because all the nervous fillaments of the white substance
join there together, and a considerable quantity of them is divided.

All this has regard to the Prognostics of Wounds of the Head; but to speak of
them more largely, we have only to consider the nature of the Wound, and to
examine their Accidents.

If the Fracture be made with a cutting Instrument, it is not so dangerous as
one made by a pricking, or that which is caused by a Fall, or contusing
Instrument, which cannot break the Skull without great violence, upon which
follows always a great Commotion; but if it be made with Gunshot, it is always
mortal, unless the Bullet carry off only some portion of the Cranium, without
offending the brain.

We know that contused Wounds of the Head are simple or compound; the latter
are more dangerous, because accompanied with Fracture. If a simple Wound with
Contusion be only superficial, it is cured with Resolutive Medicines, as an
Ecchimosis. If it penetrate, it requires Superation. If the Pericranium be
rumpled, and that it suffers some divulsions, the eyelids inflame, and there
comes some Accidents upon it, as upon Wounds of the Tendons; to remedy this
Inconvenience, we have nothing more to do, but to cut the Pericranium to the
bone, and to dress the Wound after the ordinary manner. Sometimes it happens
that the Skull is fractured, the Teguments being undivided; the reason is, that
being made of a hard and brittle matter, it cannot resist the fury of the blow,
as bodies which are pliable do, and it can break even as a Sword, which in its
Scabbard may be broken, without endangering the Scabbard; in this case we make
an Incision over the Fracture, more or less, as is convenient, with this
circumstance, that we lean not too hard with the Knife upon the fractur'd part,
especially if it be a considerable one, lest you offend the brain.

The Prognostics also of wounds of the Head depend on the good or ill
disposition of the Patient, the violence of the blow, and the strength of him
that gave it with more or less force.

A Fracture that keeps its equality, is not so dangerous as one of several
pieces, which press or prick the parts that are under them, particularly when
they are engaged or lie one upon another, because the compression is much
stronger, and the Dura matter suffers more: Besides, when the Skull is so
broken, it is always a sign that the Blow has been violent enough to shake the
Brain. Wounds of the Dura matter very dangerous.
If the Dura matter be broken by the Splints, the wounds are very pernicious,
because of the Blood spilt upon the Brain, and of the Tention and Inflammation
it suffers. The Inflammation of this Membrane tends often to Mortification,
because of its hardness and sensibility.

Great Concussions hardly cured.
Concussions of the Brain are seldom cured if great, because it is impossible to
make the Extravasated Matter to come out.

Vomiting upon Dilirium and Lethargy mortal.
Observe, That if Vomiting come upon it in time of the Dilirium and Lethargy,
it is a mortal sign; and if Irregular horrors or shiverings come, it is a sign
that the Extravasated Blood putrifies and corrupts the white substance of the
Brain.

Wounds of the Cortical part of the Brain are not always mortal, especially
when the bigness of the Aperture facilitates the entry of Medicines, unless the
Brain has been too rudely shaked; whereas if they penetrate to the white
subtance, they are always mortal, not only because the principle of the Nerves
are hurt, but also because we cannot penetrate unto that substance without
cutting thick Branches of Arteries which are concealed in the Anfractuosities
of the Brain, from thence comes the Extravasation of Blood which admits of no
cure.

If the wounds of the Skull, considered in themselves, had any Indication like
other Fractures, it would be Reunion; but seeing the Skull cannot be broke
without the inferior parts receiving some troublesome impression, we must trepan
there to introduce Medicines, and as soon as we know that the Skull is broke,
we ought not to defer the operation. Therefore, whether it be split or broken,
it is always true to say, that the Dura matter is concerned.

The Fissure causes a tention, because the Dura matter, is ordinarily adherent
to the Skull, by all the Vessels of Communication, and those which carry the
nourishment to the Inferior Table, besides the little Fibers which pass through
the Sutures, which is particularly observed in young People. This Tention is
soon followed by an Inflammation, for as much as the Vessels cannot long remain
stretched without breaking, and spilling of Blood, which by its abode inflames
the Membrane, and if the Inflammation increase, it often Gangreens.

When the Trepans to be used
If in Fracture of the Skull the Splints offend the Dura matter, either by
pressing, pricking, or rending it, we must needs trepan to prevent accidents,
or to diminish them, to take away the Extravasated Blood, separate the Pieces
which hurt it, and to have liberty to apply there convenient Medicines.

It Is therefore a Rule which we must follow, that if the two Tables be broke,
we must always come to the Operation, though there appear no accident, for
besides that the Operation is not dangerous, The Operation not dangerous.
we have the advantage to hinder symptoms; whereas if the Skull be not
altered, and some troublesome symptoms happen, we must Trepan, because the
Skull being found, it is easy to see, that the symptoms which follow are the
consequences of some ill Concussion of the Brain; besides, we know neither the
place, nor existance of the Matter, nor where the Brain suffers. However some
say, that provided the Patient can fix with his Hand the place where he feels
pain and heaviness, we ought to apply the Trepan there; Caution.
which nevertheless the most famous Practitioners dare not undertake, lest they
should find nothing there, and so pass for Rash and Inconsiderate. How to Cure
Wounds of the Dura matter.
To Cure Wounds of the Dura matter, we must Examine their Nature and Cause, we
must Bleed to diminish the Inflammation, and apply upon the tumified and
inflamed part Ol. Amigdal. Dulc. Quor. Violar. Lillior. Aquatic. which we must
mix with some Spirit. Vini: This attenuates the Blood that is congealed, and the
other softens and relaxes the Fibers of the Dura matter. You must also endeavor
to make the Suppuration of the Exterior Wound very copious, that the Vessels of
the Dura matter which have communication with the Exterior parts may easily
disengage themselves.

A great Concussion mortal.
As to what regards the affections of the Brain, we know that a great Concussion
is mortal, and a little one cured with Bleeding and other Universal Remedies.
Extravasation of the Blood is somewhat more dangerous, and it seldom happens
that the Vessels are broke without the Brain receiving a great commotion: In
that case we have no other help than Bleeding, and general Medicines, observing
a very exact Diet. For sometimes in taking these precautions, Nature resolves
the Extravasated Blood, and the Fever grows less.

It Is not the same thing in Wounds of the Brain, where the Skull is carried
off, and where there is Extravasated Blood, I have said its necessary to
Trepan, if the Aperture permits us not to elevate the Pieces above the
Extravasated Blood, and conveniently apply Medicines. We know by Experience,
that several Patients have been cured, and yet a part of the substance of the
Brain carried off; It Is true, that Wounds which enter only the Cineritious or
Cortical part of the Brain, may be cured, provided the Patient be otherwise
well disposed, whereas those of the white substance of the Brain are mortal,
for Reasons which we have given.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Operation of the Trepan.
BEfore we give a Description of the Operation, it is important to examine all
the Circumstances necessary to render the Operation successful. It consists in
Piercing the Skull, and to make an Aperture near the Fractured part. To execute
these two Intentions, it is necessary to know whether all the parts of the Head
can endure the Trepan; I speak not here of the Bones which are most easy to
break, those that know the Asteology are instructed therein.

If the Fissure be simple, apply your Trepan just near the Cleft, if it be very
little, one might Trepan upon the Fissure it self, to give an easier vent to
the Matter, nevertheless with this Circumstance, A Caution to be observed in
Trepaning.
which is to Anticipate a little upon the side that has the most strength;
which must be observed in all other places of the Skull.

If you should meet with any strange body, that were forced down into the body
of the Bone, so that it could not be pulled out, you must apply the Crown of
the Trepan upon the strange Body to carry off the Piece.

If it be a considerable Fracture, where a part is forced down, you Trepan upon
that part where you think most convenient to elevate the Bone, nevertheless you
must apply the Trepan upon a part that is firm enough to sustain it without
breaking it down. If the first Aperture be not sufficient to lift up all
Pieces, you must make a second and a third if it be necessary.

We must not Trepan the Sutures.
We never Trepan upon the Sutures, especially upon that place called Fontanella,
lest we break the Vessels which pass a cross, and tear the Dura matter which
adheres to the Skull, especially in its windings, so that the Blood which is
extravasated on one side, has no communication with the other: Wherefore if
the Fracture should cross a Suture, and anticipate upon two Bones, you must
Trepan upon both sides.

Trepaning is also forbidden directly in the midst of the Coronal and
Occipital Bone, especially toward their Inferior part, by reason of their
Spina's where the productions of the Dura matter are fastened, which are let in.

We Trepan not upon the Longitudinal Sinues lest the suppuration should open
them, which would cause a dangerous Hemorrhagy.

Neither must we Trepan upon the Eyebrows, because of the Sinus Frontalis, and
of their Cavities, which are lined with a considerable thick Membrane, decked
with an infinite number of Glands, which separate a Viscous Humor that
actually fills these Cavities, which makes that the Wounds of these parts do
long suppurate. Behold these are all the cases or places of the Skull where the
Trepan is to be rejected, you may boldly use it in all other parts. The
Ancients made a difficulty to Trepan at its inferior part, because of the
weight of the Brain, and the propension it has to get out, but it is a
Chymerical Error, being the situation may remedy this disorder. When ever you
put the Operation in Practice, this must be observed, viz. That the place where
the Trepan has been applied, must always be elevated or the highest.

What manner of Incisions convenient.
We must now speak of the Instruments of the Trepan, and of the Means to use
them, but before, it is proper to know after what manner the Incisions of the
Teguments and Flesh are made.

If upon the Temples.
If it be upon the Temporal Muscle, some make the Incision in the shape of the
Cipher 7, or of the Letter V, which they mark with the Nail or Ink, but I do
not believe it can be done after this manner without destroying the Fibers.
It Is therefore fitter to imitate their Rectitude, and to make if somewhat large
to have the liberty of placing the Trepan, in dilating the lips of the Wound;
Others recommend to make it every where else in form of a Cross, but if the
Longitudinal Incision, or in form of the Letter T, suffice to discover the
Fracture, and place the Trepan, you must absolutely reject that of the Cross;
If the Wound be on the Forehead, you must follow the Wrinkles of it.

The Pericranium covers not the Temporal Muscle as has been thought.
As to what concerns the Temporal Muscle, it has hitherto been believed, that
its Wounds are dangerous, being covered with the Pericranium, but it is known
that this Membrane exactly covers the Temporal Bone, even as in all other
places of the Skull; and that the part which has been taken for the
Pericranium, is a lengthening of the Aponevrosis of the Frontal and Occipital
Muscles, which frame by their reunion a kind of Tendonous Cover which
anticipates upon the greatest part of that Muscle, and which being pricked or
rumpled with some blow, causes the same accidents which accompany Wounds of
the other Tendons; Of the rest the Wounds of this Muscle are no more to be
feared than those of another. I pass to the Circumstances of the Operation.

Let Us now suppose a Wound at the Superior part of the Parietal Bone. You must
first probe it; If you find the Skull discovered, and the Aperture not big
enough, you dilate it even to the Bone to examine the Fracture, and you fill
the Wound with dry Lint, to absorb the Blood, which might hinder the fight
whether it be of danger. If any Artery should bleed much, you would be forced
to make a Ligature, and leave the Wound till next day.

If the Fracture be considerable, and some splints of the Bone forced down, so
that you were obliged to elevate them, it is the part of a prudent Surgeon to
leave the Dressings for 5 or 6 hours till the Hemorrhagy be a little stopped,
and then he may choose a fit place to apply the Trepan.

How to use the Trepan.
When you have fixed on a place, you stop the Patients Ears with Cotton, lay his
Head on some firm place, scrape the Pericranium off, lest you tear it with the
Teeth of the Saw, you cover the lips of the Wound, then you choose a Crown of a
Trepan proportionable to the hole you intend to make, but first you make a
little hole with the Perforative Trepan, to fasten the Pyramid which you put
into the Crown; afterward you turn the Trepan, and saw the Skull, and when the
Trepan has taken sufficient hold, you take the Pyramid off, lest you hurt the
Dura matter, then you go on sawing the Skull, taking care from time to time to
cleanse the Teeth, and the hole you have made, and observe whether you saw
equally, so you finish to pierce the Scull by several turns; if you perceive
that the Crown penetrates more in one place than another, you lean more on that
side which is not so much penetrated to equalize the Aperture.

You know that you are come to the Diploe when the Teeth of the Trepan are
Bloody, and seeing the Interior Table of the Scull is much thinner than the
Exterior, and often adherent to the Dura matter, espepecially in young People,
if you should not take care to turn the Trepan softly, and to shake the Piece
at every turn of the Saw, you would be in danger to hurt the Dura matter; When
the Piece is disengaged, you take it off with the Piercer or Myrtle Leaf, and
you scrape the circumference of the Aperture with the Lennicular Instrument,
with which you press a little the Dura matter, to facilitate the Issue of the
Extravasated Blood, and to introduce more commodiously the necessary
Instruments, as the Levatory to elevate the Pieces that were depressed.

If the Piece be extremely adherent to the Dura matter, you separate it with the
Myrtle Leaf: Several Practitioners recommend to let it alone till its fall be
procured by Suppuration; But since these ties are only in young People, who
have these parts always moist and relaxt, they may be easily separated with the
Spatula without any violence.

When the Piece is taking off, we ordinarily give vent to the Extravasated
Blood upon the Dura matter in bidding the Patient shut his Mouth and Nose, and
keep his Breath.

This ingenious manner of pressing out the Blood, is an effect of the Expansion
of the Lungs, and levelling of the Diaphragm, which presses the Descending
Aorta that passes between its Tendons, and forces the Blood to flow into the
Ascending Aorta, and so mount to the Head by the Vertebral and Carotid Arteries
with such rapidity, that the Brain rises with so much strength as to oblige
the Extravasated Blood to flow through the Aperture of the Skull, or to appear
at the Passage so that it may be absorbed with ease.

How to dress the Dura matter.
Having disengaged the Dura matter of the Burden which oppressed it, you you wet
a little piece of fine Linen in Mel Rosar with Spirit. Vini, which you
introduce between the Skull and Dura matter, as well for to Humect and dry as to
resolve the Matter: You pass through the midst of it a Thread which keeps it
from going too far under. This is called Sindon, it must be somewhat bigger
than the Aperture, that the Medicines may have room to extend themselves on the
neighboring parts, and the Dura matter not to be hurt in the Motions of the
Brain against the edges of the Skull: Upon this Sindon you put another of Lint
dipped in the same Medicine, you fill the rest of the hole with dry Lint, and
cover the Bone with it, and the rest of the wound for the first days is dressed
with Digestives able to procure a strong Suppuration.

Great Suppuration very convenient.
We have already made you observe, that great Suppuration of the Exterior Wound
very much contributes toward the easing of the Dura matter, through the
frequent commerce that is between the Exterior and Inferior Vessels.

You shave the Head for to Embiocate with Ol. Rosat. and Spirit. Vini, you make
use of Emplast. De Betonica. or Andreas e Cruce, of a Compress tempered in
strong Wine, and useful Bandage; you dress the Wound the following days with
the same care.

If the Splints be separated you take them away, if they stick to the Skull and
cannot be replaced, you cut them off with the Incisive Pincers.

The Dura matter is sometimes so inflamed, that it rises beyond the Aperture of
the Skull in spite of all the precautions that one can take, and seeing it is
dangerous to Trepan too much, nothing but Bleeding, Clysters, and an exact Diet
can stop the progress of the Inflammation.

If Blood or Matter be got between the Membranes, there is no other remedy than
to give vent to the Matter. To execute which design with prudence you arm a
Lancet, How to penetrate the Dura matter.
and dexterously open the Dura matter without the knowledge of the bystanders.

When the Dura matter and the Brain are hurt, there arises very often (in the
last days) upon it a Fungus, like a Mushroom, which increases more or less
according as the Matter which contributes to its generation is more or less
unctuous.

Malpigius 's Opinion.
The Famous MALPIGIUS pretends, that the displacing the Glands of the Brain, and
the little Nervous Pipes, frame this Excrescence. But without running to the
disordering of the Glands, is it not more reasonable to believe, that it is bred
from the abundance of the Fat, Cause of a Fungus.
and Oleaginous Matters, with which the Brain is actually watered, as we have
sufficiently proved in several places of this Treatise; which Experience also
every day shows us in those upon whose Dura matter Oils are outwardly applied.

In this Inconvenience you must dry it with Spirit of Wine, or Tinct. Aloes,
which dissipates its Humidity, and forsake the use of Ointments.

How to Consume a Fungus.
If these Remedies be not sufficient to extirpate the Fungus, use the softest
Catheretic's, as Turpentine in Powder, Pull. Irid. Florent. Alurn. Ustum. some
time you may apply Precept. Rub. In using these Powders the Flesh must be also
a little compressed, or it will not be consumed.

After these Medicines have performed their virtue, a Decoct. of Traumatic
Herbs in White Wine is very advantageous, to which add Mel. Rosat. more or less
according as it is necessary to Humect or Dry up.

You must correct the Air of the Patient's Chamber by the use of Fire,
especially when you dress him, and apply the Medicines as warm as you can.

When the Flesh is quick and firm, you must maintain it in that condition, but
when it is too soft you must compress it, or use more drying Remedies.

Whilst you are curing the Interior after this manner, you must Externally use
the best Traumatics, and apply upon the Bone such Remedies as hasten the
Exfoliation, as Spirit. Vini, in which Euphorb. is infused, which is admirable
to hasten Exfoliation: It must be always used before the Flesh which grows upon
the Brain surmount the Aperture, and according to the nature of the Accidents
which happen, general Medicines ought to accompany the Topics.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Anevrisma.
Two sorts of Anevrisma's.
AN Anevrisma is a Preternatural Tumor formed by the dilatation of the Artery,
or by the Rupture of its Tumicles, which makes two kind of Anevrisma's, the
true and false. The true one is that which does not abandon the Pipe of the
Artery, True and false.
and which has correspondence with the Blood, which the Heart sends
continually there: On the contrary the false possesses the nigh parts, and has
no communication at all with the Arterial Blood.

Internal cause of a true Anevrisma.
Concerning the Internal cause of the true Anevrisma, we can attribute it to
nothing but to the action of a sharp and corrosive Humor which is separated
from the Glands that are spread about the Vessels, and which insensibly gnaw
the outward Coat of the Artery, so that the Blood by reiterated shakings
disposes the Inferior Tunicle to extend and dilate it self, and after several
Impulsions not being in a condition of resisting its motion, it gives way, and
obeys till at last a Tumor is formed, which is called an Anevrism. Thus I
conceive all sorts of Anevrism's to be formed, which naturally happen on the
Neck, Arms, and several other parts.

We also observe, that these kinds of Tumors possess rather Lean and
Atrophiated Persons, whose Blood is laden with salt, than those that are fat
and pampered.

External causes of a true Anevrisma.
The External causes of a true Anevrisma comes from a Punction, made on the
Exterior Coat of the Artery with a Lancet, Sword, or other like Instrument, or
from some Blow, etc. or finally from the strong Impression which sharp and
Corrosive Medicines, or Humors, which lurk about the Vessels, make upon the
same Exterior Coat; it is easy to comprehend that all these causes are capable
of weakening the Pipe of the Artery, and the Blood beating without
intermission, extends, and forces outwardly the Pipe, and so produces a
Tumor.

Cause of the false Anevrisma.
The false Anevrisma is caused by the total ruption of the Tunicles of the
Artery, which gives vent to the Blood to Extravasate it self between the
Porosities of the Flesh and Skin, and so forms a Tumor, which is followed by
troublesome accidents, because the Extravasated Blood being no more in motion,
ferments and suffers alteration, which is almost always followed by the Marks
of Mortification: These two kinds of Anevrisma's increase more or less,
according as the action of the sharp Juices, Contusion, Aperture of the Vessel,
and Impulsion of the Blood are more or less considerable.

Signs of a true Anevrisma.
The Signs of the true Anevrisma are sensible pulsation of the Tumor, and its
softness, when it is pressed with the Fingers it disappears at the same time,
but as soon as you give over pressing, it comes again into its first state. The
color of the Skin is not changed; because the Blood which maintains the Tumor
keeps its liquidness, by the meeting and mixture of new Blood whose motion is
continual. In its least increase or bigness, it is commonly as big as a Nut, or
Egg at most; some Authors assure us, that these Tumors augment sometimes so
much that they break, nevertheless we know that some have kept them all their
lives; and that in most Persons who are troubled with them, the part of the
weakened Artery becomes so hard and callous, that it resists all the efforts
one can make.

Cause of Induration of the Artery.
Though this Ossification of the Artery seem very difficult to explain, one may
nevertheless believe, that the saline, pungent, and most exalted particles of
the Blood, penetrate the lesser porosites of the Fibers of its Tunicle, and
they post and mingle themselves with the nourishing Juice of the Artery, and so
contribute toward its Ossification.

But the reason which to me seems most evident, and best grounded, is, that
the Blood which maintains the Anovrism, and which is in a continual
fermentation, must by its motion increase the heat of the part which insensibly
dries and hardens the Fibers of the dilated part in dissipating and rarefying
the humidity which waters and makes them dull: That which fortifies more this
thought, is, that the Aorta grows bony (sometimes in old People) at its exit
from the left Ventricle of the Heart, either through the little heat that is
left there, dries it, or because their Blood has lost its Viscosity which is
necessary to preserve its spring: Notwithstanding Experience shows us, that
it is Ossified in some Persons.

Signs of the False Anevrism.
The Signs of the False Anevrism are opposite to those of the True; In the False
the Pulsation of the Artery is very deep; the Skin almost livid, the Tumor is
not so high, nor round as in the true one, but it takes up more room, it gives
not way so easily in touching as the true one. The most convincing signs of the
Arteries being opened, is, when the Blood comes out impetuously and by jumps,
which convinces us, that its motion is continual and unequal.

This inequality of the course of the Blood proceeds from two contrary motions;
the first depends on the strong constriction of the Ventricles of the Heart,
and the second from the spring of the Arteries. But being the Impulsion of the
one is much stronger than that of the other, it happens, that as the Heart
drives the Blood vigorously forward in the time of the Systole, the Arteries
by their Elastic Virtue beat and drive it back weekly in the Diastole, which
proves the irregularity and continuation of its motion.

Signs of a Wounded Artery.
If you perceive that you have unluckily opened one of the Tunicles of the
Artery, which is known by the resistance of the blow, by the elevation and the
violence of its pulsation, which is presently communicated to the Vein, and
which obliges the Venal Blood to come out by jumps as the Arterial Blood, but
is not so brisk, lively, or shining, and is less swift; you must have recourse
to Phlebotomy which impedes its motion, and by this means hinders the progress
of the Tumor, you apply thereon a little Compress, in which you put half a
Bean, which presses only the Aperture, over that you lay another a little
bigger, after this manner you apply several Compresses gradually bigger, which
you keep on with a fitting Bandage, and on the neighboring parts lay good
defensatives.

A certain piece of Money.
There are some which make use of a Double to compress the Aperture of the
Artery, but this practice is not approved, by reason that being obliged to tie
the Bandage strait, the Double taking more room than half a Bean, which only
compresses the Aperture, it is to be feared lest the circumference of the
wounded part Gangreen; but to supply the want of this strong compression, you
place at the Internal part of the Arm, all along the thick Vessels, a
Longitudinal Compress which you secure with the Creaping Bandage.

This Compress produces very good effects; for besides that it moderates the
rapid stream of the Blood, and by this means you may avoid tying the band too
tite, it helps also the reunion of the Artery, because the Impulsion of the
Blood being only weak, the Aperture separates very little. When the Patient
begins to have strength, you must reiterate Bleeding, for reasons we have
alleged, you take off the Dressing as late as you can, because in a very
little time it increases considerably.

But the Accidents which follow upon a false Anevrism are ordinarily violent
and cruel, being Gangreen and Mortification are its mournful Consequences, you
must not differ the Operation unless the use of the Compresses which are
applied there, and other precautions which must be taken, stop its progress, or
the Resolutive Medicines which we use, make the Extravasated Blood re-enter
again in commerce with the Liquor, or be discust by insensible perspiration, in
attenuating and rarefying its Molicule lying between the porosites of the
flesh; on the contrary a true Anevrism may be kept all ones life time, or at
least some considerable time; for which reason one may prolong the Operation in
laying on the Tumor some Compresses fortified with a Bandage, without the
Patients being in any danger, unless he resolve to endure the Operation. This,
as has been said, grows to a certain bigness, whereas the progress of the
false is not limited: Lastly, if in spite of all precaution, and all the care
that can be taken in both kinds, you succeed not, you are obliged to perform
the Operation.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Operation of the Anevrism.
Three ways of the Operation of an Anevrism. 1. By the Vitriolic Button.
THis Operation is practiced three different ways. The first is by the Vitriol
Button, but the worst is, that as the Vitriolic particles melt, they spread
themselves upon the Ligaments, and adjacent Tendons, which they carry off,
rend, and cauterise, till at last the Patient is lamed, being the part grows
incapable of its ordinary motions.

The second is to disgorge the Tumor before you make the Ligature of the
Vessel, but behold, as I think,

The Patient being placed. through which you pass the Tourniket, making several
turns, by which means you benum the Arm, stopping the passage of the Blood and
Spirits.

The Surgeon Inciseth with a Lancet the Tumor following the length of the
Artery, which must be separated from the Nerve, to have the liberty of tying
the Artery half a Fingers breadth above the Aperture with a little strong wax't
Thread.

You must observe, that in a true Anevrism the Tumor regulates the place where
you must make the Ligature, whereas in the false we are obliged to loose the
Turniket to know positively whence the Blood comes, which is the most important
circumstance of the Operation, for to stay the Blood, and to avoid making the
Ligature upon the Aperture of the Vessel, instead of making it a little higher,
because the Blood by its impulsion would not fail to dilate the weakened part,
and to bleed afresh. For this purpose you pass a Needle over the pipe of the
Artery, make first a single knot, on which you place a little Compress which
you fasten with two other knots.

Most make another knot in the lower part of the Artery, because of the
Branches of communication, and since it being a precaution not to be despised,
one may use it.

The Ligature being made, you loose the Tourniket: If the Blood be well stopped,
you open the Tumor to empty the Blood, and fill it with Dorsels armed with
Astringent Powders, as Vitriol. alb. to consume the Bag more easily you cover
the rest of the wound with Boulsters, accompanied with a Plaster, Embrocation
of Ol. Rosar. Defensatives all along the Arm, with Compresses tempered in
strong warm Wine, with the Bandage.

Some time afterward you must Bleed the Patient, if his strength permit, you
stay two or three days without taking off the Dressings, and you leave the
Dossels at the bottom of the Sac 3 or 4 days longer, lest in taking them out
you bleed afresh, and procure a fresh suppuration.

The situation of the Arm, which seems a thing of little consequence, must
nevertheless be regarded as very advantageous for furthering the cure. The Arm
must be a little bended, and the Hand elevated on the Pillow, that the
circulation be more free: But you must particularly recommend the Diseased to
bow and stretch it from time to time. We daily see that several become lame for
not having moved the Arm or Leg during such Indispositions. The cause of this
accident comes from the little motion of the slimy matter which bedaubs the
Joints: This Slime is of the consistence of the White of an Egg, and which
transpires from the Ligaments and Glands of the Joints, serving to entertain
the supple Ligaments, and to smooth the shining Cartilages, as well to
facilitate the motion, as to hinder the parts from being wasted by their
continual attrition, but from the moment that this Matter is at rest, and no
more fluid or liquid by the diversities of motion, it grows thick and hard by
the heat of the part; so that the Ligaments and Cartilages being no more
humected by that Liquor, they dry up, loose their Elastic Virtue and Humidity,
till at last they grow incapable of motion.

Sometimes it happens in old Rottenness and Fistula's of the Joints, that the
Purulent and Malign Matters gnaw the Ligaments and Cartilages, and gives
occasion to the Saline Juice, which exuds from the body Fibers, to unite the
extremity of the two Bones, and frame a kind of Anchilose, which is much more
defectuous than the precedent.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Gangrene and Sphacel, which occasions the Amputation.
SEveral Authors have treated of the Gangrene, particularly Willis, Etmuller,
and Silvius; and I believe no body doubts, but that all whatever our new
Discoverers have advanced upon this Subject in their Exercises, is nothing but
a perpetual pillage of what these great Men had spoken. To speak of it
methodically, we must first give an Idea of the Vivification of the parts, and
of the Mortification, which is its opposite, we must relate all particulars
which cause a Gangrene, and seek all the means to illuminate them with Reasons
grounded on the Economy of the Blood, and upon some Observations which
Experience Authorizes.

Cause of Vivification.
To know how the parts are Vivified, you must consider that the heat and life of
Animals consists only in the motion and fermentation of the principles of the
Blood, that this Fermentation and Motion, as well Circular as Intestine, are
entertained by the pulsation of the Heart and Arteries, by the motion of the
Muscles, and action of the subtle and penetrating particles of the Air which we
breath.

It is in effect the spiral and nitrious particles of the Air which attenuate
and subtilize the particles of the Blood in mingling themselves intimately
together in the substance of the Lungs, which make them wave upon their center,
and which give them all their vivacity and influence which is necessary to the
maintaining of their intestine motion, and consequently of their heat and Life.

It Is certain then, that it is the Blood agitated by these means, which vivify
and animate the parts, repairs the continual losses which they suffer,
furnishes the matter of the Spirits, and of all the different Liquors that are
subtilized in passing through a 1000 different Strainers: In one word, it is the
Master spring that makes the whole Machine go.

This being so, it is not hard to conceive that it is from the actual
distribution, presence, and action of the spirituous, and nourishing particles
of the Blood, in a part, on which entirely depend its motion and life; Cause of
Mortification.
so that this dispensation coming to cease, or be interrupted for some moments,
one feels no more there, either heat, motion, or life. To convince our selves
of it, we must only examine that which happens every day in Syncop's, where we
see that the pulsation of the Heart being hindered, and the circulation of the
Blood stopped, all the Extremities grow cold, the Face pale, and sometimes lived,
and the whole Body deprived of feeling and motion; but according as the Heart
recovers its motion, and the Blood conveyed into all the parts, they recover
their heat, motion, and life. It Is therefore evident, that the life of a part
depends on the presence and motion of the Blood; and on the contrary I say,
that the cause of a Gangrene and Mortification of a part is doubtless the
absence and want of these spirituous and nutritive particles in the same part.
This is the Explication which the Illustrious Etmuller gives of it in Tome 1.
operum, page 587. where he says, Causae Gangren, and sphaceli in genere sunt
and quae quacumque ratione sanguinis, and spirituum vitalium distributionem
inhibere valent.

It is a question whether the Animal Spirits which run from the Brain through
the Nerves, are not likewise interessed in a Gangrene. I say, that the most
causes which work upon the Blood for the production of a Gangrene, may in the
same manner work upon the Animal Spirits; but in the mean time the Gangrene
only depends on the alteration which happens unto the Blood. This is proved
because a Gangrene is a privation of Life, or at least a disposition next to a
Mortification; now the Functions of Life depend chiefly from the Blood, whereas
the Animal Functions depend on the Animal Spirits. The Nerves may be
obstructed, and the Animal Functions cease in a part without Mortification, as
is seen in Paralytics. It Is true then to conclude that a Gangrene depends only
on the default of the vital and spiritual particles of the Blood.

Those that will have the Animal Spirits to have much share in the Gangrene, as
well because a mortified part is deprived of motion and feeling, as because a
great pain causes an Inflammation, and sometimes Mortification, do not
consider that the weight of the courser particles of the Blood, which lies in a
part, presses the Nerves, and so interrupts the course of the Spirits, and the
pulsation of the Artery is no more felt; for as Nature delights to glue the
Arteries to the Nerves, Arteries for the most part joined with Nerves.
and that she makes use of the pulsation to oblige all the little Nervous
Fibers to discharge the Spirits which they contain, so it will be always true
to say, that the Gangrene succeeds great pains and inflammations, and that the
privation of motion and feeling come chiefly from the Blood; since it is that
which hinders by it is stay the distribution of the Spirits. I deny not that the
want of Animal Spirits in Paralytics may give occasion to a Gangrene to seize
the sooner on a part, as we shall see in the following Discourse.

After all I have said, it is easy to comprehend that the heat and life are
precisely contained in the Blood, since the dissipation and absence of it is
spirituous and nourishing particles cause the Gangrene, and that their presence
and exaltation entertain the natural heat.

True and only cause of a Gangrene.
I say then in general, that the cause of a Gangrene and Mortification, is the
dissipation and absence or concentration of the spirituous particles of the
Blood, which must vivify the part, or at least the interruption of the course
of the same, and it is coagulation. These causes act for the most part
separately, it may also happen that they act together to cause a Gangrene, as I
shall make you observe.

Let us examine all these Causes, and first see what is this alteration of the
Blood, that is deprived of its spirituous particles, from which follows
Gangrene and Mortification.

To give a just Idea of it, let us consider the changes that happen to Wine. All
the World agrees, A Comparison.
that the good condition of Wine consists in the exaltation of its most subtle
and spirituous principles, as long as these principles have the upper hand, the
Wine remains in a state of gentle and natural fermentation, and consequently of
goodness.

But if it happen by what cause soever, that they be weakened and dissipated,
and the acid salts, or salt sulphurs take the upper-hand; then it is that the
Wine grows sower, and at least sharp and very disagreeable. It happens also
very often, that after the loss and dissipation of the spirits, there remains
nothing in the Wine but Earth and Phlegm; it is without taste, and is nothing
but a dead Mass and barren Liquor, which in Latin is called Vappa, Vinum
pendulum, which is as it were the Cadaver of the Wine. Finally, it happens,
that in cold Weather the spirits of the Wine concentre in the midst of the
Vessel which contains it, so that all the parts in the circumference being
deprived of the spirits congeal. I say, that when the spirituous particles of
the Blood are dissipated, or concentred, it receives almost the same
alteration. If the acid salt, or salt sulphurs take the upper hand, it becomes
acid or rank. Willis uses the same Example when he explains the alterations
that happen to the Blood, In tract. de ferm. p. 68.
in comparison to those that happen to Wine. Cum a longa fermentatione spiritus
absumi, actandum deficere incipiunt, inducitur defectionis status, quo vina
aliique Liquores, ant in vappam transeunt, ant demum sale vel sulphur nimium
exaltatis, acetosi ant rancidi fiunt, pariter and sanguis dum in vasis
circulatur, juxta triplicem hujusmodi Diathesin considerari potest, etc.

Finally, when all the spirits are dissipated, that the Blood degenerateth into
a dead inspired mass, incapable of any fermentation; and whenever the Spirits
are concentred in great cold, they abandon or forsake the exterior parts, which
are then only irrigated with Blood deprived of vital and spirituous particles.
This last state of the Blood answers to turned Wine, whence depends the
mortification of a part in certain cases which I am going to propose.

Cause of Gangrene in old People.
First, we observe, that old People dye very often of Gangrenes, and that that
it begins by the Extremities, and follows through the whole Body in spite of
all Remedies that may be used. The same thing happens through long abstinence,
and after all sorts of too great evacuations.

To give an account of this Phenomena, you must observe, that the Blood can, no
more than other Liquors that ferment, always remain in the same condition. It Is
active principles are yet entangled in infancy, they get loose in our youth,
remain in a state of exaltation during a certain age; but at last they are
dissipated, and begin to abandon their subject in old age; therefore old People
become by little and little incapable of their ordinary motions, they loose
insensibly their vigor, till at last their life, in loosing their heat and
spirits.

This being so, it is not hard to explain why old People who dye after this
manner are always troubled with Gangrenes in their last days, the reason is
because their Blood becomes a Languid Mass, which no more contains any
character of life, and which in effect is no more than a Cadaver of Blood; This
kind of death one may call natural, because it happens not but when the heat is
extinguished of it self, and by degrees. Ideoque mori simul dicuntur, and
extingui. In this manner it is that a Mortification of the Blood and Spirits
happen after an Hectic Fever, long Fluxes, great Abstinences, too great
Labor, and generally after all sorts of great Evacuations because in these
occasions the Matter designed for the entertaining of natural heat, is
dissipated, or is not enough furnished to supply the loss of it which it
actually suffers.

Of the rest, though in this state of the Blood the Gangrene be almost
universal, and need no other cause to manifest it self, yet sometimes it
happens, that the slowness of the circulation gives it occasion to attack
certain parts, there is a very particular case of it in the 46th Chapter of the
Second Book of TULPIUS his Observations. Observation.
Where he relates, that an old Man was reduced to such a languishing condition,
and so great a weakness, that the least impression caused him to have a
Gangrene, he dared not so much as sit down, nor lean on an Elbow, nor even set
a Foot on the Ground, or press any of his Members, but there appeared some
marks of Mortification which followed the Gangrene. This Observation is rare
and singular: We must confess that his Blood was mightily exhausted of spirits,
since a slight compression only was capable to produce a Gangrene in a part.

We need not search any where else for the cause of a Gangrene which happens to
the Legs and other parts of Hydropics, what I have said explains it
sufficiently, besides we well enough conceive that the serous Blood is deprived
of spirits, that it moves more slowly in the Extremities than any where else,
and consequently the heat must rather be lessened in these parts than in
others, as I have made you observe when I spoke of the Dropsy, besides the
ferosity filters in so great a quantity between the Fibers and the parts, that
it may by its weight press the Vessels, and so cause a Gangrene.

Secondly, great Cold causes often Gangrene and Mortification in the
Extremities, especially the Feet, Hands, Ears, and Nose, particularly in
Persons obliged to march in the Snow during excessive rigours of Winters, as
those which Travel in the Northern Regions.

How Cold causes a Gangrene.
To explain this Phenomena, you must only remember what I have said in the
comparison of Wine, where we have seen that the spirits of Wine are concentred
by the cold, and that the exterior parts finding themselves deprived of
spirits, freeze. This happens to a Bottle of Wine exposed to a very cold Air:
You may observe in breaking the Bottle, that the spirits have retired to the
center, and preserved their fluidity while all the rest is congealed.

I say that the same thing happens in the Blood by the rigor of cold, and
while the spirits retire to the center of the Animal, the exterior parts remain
gangrenated, being only irrigated with a dead and insipid Phlegm, which
congeals in the very substance of the parts.

It Is easy to comprehend, that at the same time the parts feel the pinches of
the cold, they retire, being compressed by the action of the Air, which first
causes those quick and penetrating pains, and hinders the Blood from continuing
its motion in those parts, therefore lying there still, it insensibly stops
every passage, and causes an entire mortification. Hinc Interdum (says
ETTMULLER) ex frigore extrinsecus Irruente parts Gangrenosae fiunt.

So much for what regards all kinds of Gangrenes that depend on the dissipation
and concentration of the spirits, Tumors, Fractures, Luxations, etc. may cause
a Gangrene.
now I come to those that depend on the interruption of the course of the
Blood, and its motion.

First, Tumors, Fractures, and Luxations, may cause a Gangrene in a part, by
compressing too hard the Vessels that convey the Blood there; I confess that
this kind of Gangrene is rare, because the Vessels communicate themselves in so
many places, and there coming so great quantity of different branches from
them, that it is difficult that all the supply of Blood should be hindered in a
member.

Nevertheless Fabritius Hildanus assures us, Observation.
that he has seen a Man who was attacked with a Gangrene in both Legs, and his
Feet were always cold and benumbed; so he died without a Fever, and without any
other symptoms: His Body being opened, there was found a schirrous Tumor in
the Region of his Reins, over the division of his Iliac Branches. This Tumor
pressed first slightly the Vessels, and caused the cold and benumming of the
Legs, but as it grew, it pressed the Artery and Vein so hard, that the Blood
could no more descend into the inferior parts to vivifie them. Concerning
Fractures of Dislocations, it may happen that the head of a Bone or some pieces
may compress the Vessels so hard, as to hinder the passage of the Blood; for
the same reason Bandages, Too tite Bandages.
etc. used in Fractures, and Luxations, strong and close Ligatures of the
Vessels may cause a Gangrene, especially if one makes it on the great Trunks,
unless the Branches which communicate together in several places, furnish the
Blood that is necessary for the vivification of the parts. Ettmuller says,
Nimis firmae Ligaturae externae interdum hoc malum inducunt, in quod fit
interdum si in ossium Fracturis Locus Fractus orcte nimis Ligetur.

In all these cases it is very easy to see, that the mortification depends
simply on the interruption of the course of the Blood, without the concurrence
of any other cause; but you will see in what follows, how the ill disposition
of the Humors may augment, and even produce this kind of Gangrene.

A Gangrene may happen by long lying on the Buttocks, etc.
Secondly, a Gangrene happens often upon the Buttocks of those who have had long
Sicknesses, and that are obliged to lie long on their Backs, first the Cutis
begins to rise, afterward there happens Inflammation in the Flesh, which ends
in Rotteness and Gangrene. The first is caused by the sole compression of the
Vessels in the part; but if at the same time the Patient involuntary sheds his
Water and Excrements the Gangrene comes sooner, because they gall and heat the
parts by their acrimony, and so increase the Inflammation, and consequently the
Inflammation and Gangrene.

Great Inflammations, Contusions, etc. may cause a Gangrene.
In the third place, nothing's more common in the practice of Chyrurgery, than
to see Gangreens follow great Inflammations, Contusions, and even Anevrisms,
when ever the Tunicle of the Artery is broke, and the Blood extravasated
between the Muscles; I say, that in all these occasions, if the Blood be
extravasated in great abundance, it must needs lie heavy on the part, and press
at the same time the Blood Vessels, so that it entirely stops the passage to
the new Blood, which comes to irrigate and vivifie the part. Behold this is the
period of Inflammations proper to produce a Gangrene; and as there must be
great abundance of Blood to compress hard the Vessels, so it happens only upon
great Inflammations. If I say that in great Inflammations the Extravasated
Blood compress the Vessels, it is not a simple Imagination only, but a constant
Truth; since the Pulse ceases to verberate, at the same time the part begins to
gangrenate, and it is red color grows pale, livid, and black; which clearly
demonstrate that the sanguiferous Vessels are compressed, and the access of new
Blood hindered.

Repercussive Astringent Medicines improperly applied may cause a Gangrene.
In the 4th place, a Gangrene may happen upon the least Inflammation, even on
Erispielas, when ever too strong Repercussive, Astringent or Emplastic
Medicines are inconsiderately applied.

To conceive this well, you must observe, that the Extravasated Liquors
transpire very much, and that this Transpiration does extremely discharge the
diseased part, of the quantity of Humors which it contains; so while the Pores
are open in Phlegmons and Erisipelases, and the most active and agitated
particles of the Bile and Blood evaporate, the part always discharges it self
of some of its Burden, so not much fear of Gangrene. This is the reason why in
the Southern part of America there never was seen a Gangrene come upon Wounds
or Inflammations, because the great heat of the Country opens the Pores of the
Body; but when the Pores are closed by Astringent, Repercussive, or Emplastic
Medicines, and the transpiration utterly impeded in the part, the Tumor
increases, the part retains all those particles which would have escaped
through the Pores; the Extravasated Humors being in a greater quantity,
proportionable to the part which contains it, compresses the Flesh and Vessels,
and of necessity causes a Mortification.

Behold the true cause of Gangrene which comes upon Inflammations, Contusions,
Anevrisms, and Erisipelas; all these causes have been very well observed by
Ettmuller, when he says, Hinc est quod vix saepius oriuntur Gangrene, and
sphaceli, quam ex Inflammationibus male curatis, imprimis si partis Inflamatae;
per Emplastica imprudenter admota, impediatur insensilis transpiratio, tunc
sanguis extravasatus stagnat, corrumpitur, ex toto putrescit, and partis
Inflammate Gangrenam post se trahit. In primis Erisipelata per ungt. oleosa, ac
muilaginosa insulsae, tractata subito serpentem inducunt Gangrenam. But these
causes having produced their effect, there are that augment it, and which give
even occasion that it be communicated to the nigh parts, it is the corruption
of the Blood and Extravasated Humors in a simple Inflammation. When the Blood
is extravasated, and cannot be discust, it changes into Pus; This change is not
only caused by the action of the principles of the Extravasated Blood, but also
by the soft influence of the Blood and Spirits which are contained in the
neighboring parts; This makes that the Pus is not altogether a strange
substance, and enemy to Nature. But as I have showed that the access of the
Blood is entirely pressed toward the Gangrened parts, and the circulation very
often intercepted, it so happens that the Extravasated Blood is so far from
being converted into Pus, that it degenerates into a virulent Sanies, which
first causes Blisters upon the part, and then by its acrimony gnaws the
Gangrened parts, and insensibly corrupts those that are sound; which makes the
Gangrene become so angry, that it attacks even the parts that suffer no
Inflammation. Of the rest, the Gangrenes which follow upon Inflammations attack
rather the soft and fungous parts, than other, Why the soft parts Gangrenate
sooner than other.
as the Gums, Lips, Vulva, and Membrum Virile, Intestine and Brain. The reason
is, these parts being very soft and spongy, imbibe a a greater quantity of
Humors; besides, the most of them have no Muscles that might squeeze the
Blood, which makes it easily lie caking there.

Ulcers, Wounds, Scorbutic spots, and sharp Medicines, may cause a Gangrene.
Fifthly, Gangrene comes upon Ulcers, Wounds, Scorbutic Spots, and upon the
Application of sharp and corrosive Medicines, which happens two ways; 1. When
pain, which accompanies all these symptoms, causes often great Inflammation,
on which follows Gangrene. 2. From the Actual Cauteries, from Pus and Sanies
coming from gnawing Ulcers, from Scorbutic Spots, and from sharp and Corrosive
Medicines, which cauterise the Cutis and Vessels, so the Blood being no more
sent into the parts, they lose their motion and life.


Malignity may cause Gangrene.
Finally, all Authors do admit a malign and occult cause of a Gangrene, from
thence (they say) comes the Gangrene in the Plague, as Carbuncle, which
sometimes in 24 hours time causes an entire mortification of a part; To the
same cause they attribute the Gangrene which happens on Malignant Fevers, and
sometimes after the Small Pox, by a depositum (or Crisis) of the Matter which
the Disease makes in some part. Lastly, it is this way which they pretend to
explicate the Action of Poisons and Bites of Venomous Animals, which they say
will cause a Gangrene.

But (without having recourse to the Malign and Occult qualities of the Plague)
are we to wonder at Carbuncles causing a Mortification in any part, Why a
Carbuncle mortifies.
since the Humors which produce them are in the highest degree of Sharpness
and Corrosion; It gnaws the Flesh, and cauterises the Vessels; so it is evident
the part must mortify. The same thing may be said of the Matter of Malign
Fevers, and of the Small Pox, where the Blood is loaded with sharp and malign
particles, if so be that this acrimony cannot be overcome by Nature, or by
Medicines, there is a depositum made of it in some part, where the sharp and
corrosive Humors do not fail to gnaw the Flesh, cauterise the Vessels, and
even to rot the very Bones, as we have seen in many Examples.

I say the same thing of Poisons that do not work but by their acrimony, of
which some are acid, and others abound with lixivial salt, but always they
produce the same effect, as we daily see it happen by the application of Acids
and Potential Cauteries.

After the Explication of the Causes, we must pass to the signs and differences
of a Gangrene; as for the differences it is easy to draw them from their
Causes, I pass to the signs which are of more importance.

Signs of a Gangrene from want of Spirits, etc.
The signs of a Gangrene which attack old People, and which comes from the want
of Spirits, are known by that they feel neither pain, nor have Inflammation;
the parts fade away, and are (as it were) deprived of sense and motion, which
makes them die insensibly.

Signs for the Dropsy.
In a Gangrene which succeeds the Dropsy, there is but a slight pain in the
beginning, but afterward the Legs inflame, and the pain augments.

Signs from Cold.
If it be caused from External Cold the pain is presently sharp, the part grows
red, livid, and then black; at last the spirits forsake it, and mortification
seizes, accompanied with a shivering like that in an Ague.

Signs from Compression, Tumors, Luxation, etc.
If the Gangrene be the consequence of some compression, as of too narrow
Ligatures, Tumors, Luxation, Fractures, or of too long lying on the Back, it is
known by the benumming, or by a total privation of feeling and motion,
according as the compression is more or less strong.

Signs from Inflammation, etc.
If it be caused by Inflammation, the pain and pulsation cease, the part which
was red grows pale and livid, there are some little Blisters formed upon the
surface of the Skin, filled with salt Water like muddy Wine, the heat is
extinguished, the part grows soft and withers, so that being pressed with the
Fingers the dent remains; Finally, if the Mortification be perfect, the Patient
falls into great weaknesses, accompanied with a burning malignant Fever, with
Vomiting, and several other symptoms, which show, that the Mass of Blood is
very much oppressed, and Death must needs follow upon it.

Signs from Repercussives, etc.
The Gangrene which is produced by the use of Repercussives and Emplastic
Remedies, is accompanied with the same accidents.

Signs from Caustic Medicines.
The Signs of that which comes from the use of actual Cauteries and Caustic
Remedies, are almost always the same as in that which proceeds from too strong
Compressions.

Signs from Malignity.
As for the Gangrene which comes from any Malignity, as from the Bite of a
Venomous Animal, besides the signs of mortification which appear upon the part,
several others manifest themselves, as Carbuncle, Fever, Vomiting, Syncope, and
Frenzy.

Signs of a Sphacel.
The Signs of the Sphacel do not differ from those of the Gangrene, but Secundum
Majus and Minus; A Sphacelated part is heavy, black, stinking, and withered;
feeling is quite lost, and the Skin is easily separated from the subjacent
Flesh, finally, from being soft as it was before, when it was Gangrenated, it
dries up when it is entirely mortified. You must observe, that if the motion
sometime remain in a sphacelated part, as in the Foot, etc. it proceeds from
that the Bellies of the Muscles which are not interessed, making their
contraction, the Tendons in the mortified part are obliged to follow their
motions. I pass to the Explication of the chiefest Accidents.

Cause of the Blisters.
The Blisters that come upon the Skin, proceed from the Blood lying caking and
curdling in its parts, there separating from it a sharp and corrosive serosity,
which insinuates it self under the Skin, separates the Cuticle, and raises it
almost like as in Scalds.

Cause of the Blackness.
The pulsation cease in the part, and its color grows pale and livid. I have
showed that the pulsation ceased by the compression of the Vessels; It Is
probable that the red color disappears for want of new Blood, and that which
lies caking rots in the part, giving a violent or black color according to
the degree of Corruption and Mortification.

Cause of the Pains.
The pains proceed from the irritation and great impression which the sharp and
malign serosity makes upon the Membranes, and on the Nervous Fibers which are
dispersed in the parts.

The Pains cease, because the Extravasated Matter lies heavy upon the Nerves,
as well as upon the Sanguiferous Vessels, and stop entirely the passage of the
Spirits; we also observe, that the pain gives soon over after the pulsation.
Some modern Authors pretend it to be enough, that the motion of the Blood being
hindered in a part, to abolish the sensation, and motion, without the Nerves
being compressed; to prove it, they tie the descending Aorta, and they observe
the inferior parts deprived of sense and motion; but they do not consider, that
these parts being no more irrigated nor stretched by the Arterial Blood, they
must needs sink and dry up, and the Nerves, whose substance is very soft, must
be pressed; from whence I conclude, that in all kinds of Gangrene where the
feeling is entirely lost, the Nerves do always suffer some compression.

Cause of the softness.
The softness of the part proceeds from the abundance of serosities that water
the Fibers, but also being no more vivified by the Blood and Spirits, the
relax, and loose entirely their spring or Elaftic Virtue.

Cause of the Progress of a Gangrene
The progress of the Gangrene comes sometimes from the Blood, which cease to
vivifie the parts, as in old People; but for the most part it comes from the
Action of the acid Juices, which gnaw and successively destroy the neighboring
parts: It Is doubtless this malignant Matter which causes the Fever, Syncope,
and the other Accidents which are ordinarily before Death. Thus having spoken
of the Causes, Signs, and Accidents of the Gangrene, I come to its Prognostics
and Cure.

A Gangrene which attacks old People, and Hydropic's, Prognostic's.
for want of Natural heat, is always mortal: In this kind of Gangrene, where
the Spirits have forsaken their subject, we must not undertake the Operation,
because the Patient would infallibly succumb under the violence of the pain.

That which possesses the soft and tender parts, especially the internal, is
ve^^ dangerous, and degenerates very often into a Sphacel. It Is also sooner
cured in young than old, in strong Bodies than in Cachochymic.

Cure of a Gangrene from Gold.
The Gangrene which is caused by Cold, and which ordinarily possesses the
Extremities, may be cured, provided the part be not entirely mortified, you
bring the Patient near a moderate Fire, chafe the part, or steep it in
lukewarm Water, and when the great Cold diminishes, and the Spirits begin to
spread themselves upon the surface, you apply Fomentations and Similia. That
which follows great Inflammations, Tumors, Fractures, Luxations, Contusions,
Anevrisms, Erisipelas, Ulcers, Scalds, Scorbutic Spots, Venomous Bites, after
application of too Emplastic Medicines, Caustics and Actual Cauteries, and
generally upon all strong Compression, may be cured in the beginning; which
makes us consider these kinds of Gangrene in two different states, as that of
their Birth, and that of their Perfection. In the first, good Remedies capable
of smothering and stopping this Disease, as deep Scarifications, which
disengage not only the part, but also give occasion for the Medicines to
penetrate and produce a more sensible effect. If in spite of all this care the
Gangrene should increase, and incroach on the neighboring parts, lay aside the
use of Medicines, and proceed to Amputation of the Member, that the
Mortification may not be communicated to the whole Body.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Amputation.
YOU must observe first of all, that though a part be Mortified, and Amputation
the only help to save a Man's Life, yet you must not always declare for the
Operation; for Example, When the Operation is not to be attempted.
when the Mortification possesses the superior part of the Arm, or Thigh; it
would be a profaning it to undertake it, (being too near parts so necessary for
Life) without causing the ruin of the whole Subject. If it only possess the
Extremities, and an acute Fever, Syncope and Vomiting which are Mortal
Symptoms) (...) accompany it, and the natural disposition of the Humors be
entirely perverted and depraved, the Operation would prove very dangerous and
hazardous

Every one knows that this Operation is practiced in great shatterings of the
Bones, in old Ulcers and Fistula's of the Joints; but it is first necessary to
examine the Nature of the Wound; For Example, if the Bone be quite broke to
pieces, if the Splints be engaged, and (as it were) forced down into the Flesh,
or among the Tendons; if they prick some Nerves or Sanguiferous Vessels, so
that they cannot be restored to their natural position, it would be necessary
to try the Operation; but if the accident be not too great, and the pieces can
be brought level again with the Bone, be no way altered, nor have caused any
Inflammation, or pain; one might hope for its cure by Medicines, unless some
Joint be concerned. In a word, I say that all compound Wounds are of difficult
cure, how inconsiderable soever the complication be, especially there being any
indisposition in the subject. In this occasion the Pain and Inflammation, the
two Accidents most to be feared, particularly when they continue, and produce
some more troublesome, and when the Accidents are pressing, it is dangerous to
delay, and very often the Operation it self is not able to overcome them.

As for old Rottenness and Fistula's you must observe the same Circumstances,
and have regard unto three things, to the Nature and Cause of the Disease, to
the Part affected, and to the Supervening Symptoms.

To judge whether the Fistula's, etc. are curable, and may be overcome by
Medicines, it is necessary to examine whether they have been of long
continuance, the cause that produced them, and that which foments them.

If the Cause of the Rottenness and Fistula's proceed from some Wound or
Contusion, and the Patient have not been long troubled with it, if the Joint be
no way altered, and the Humors which foment them be not malign, Medicines may
terminate the Cure. But if the Cause proceed from Scrophulous Humors, Critical
Imposthumations, or from the general perversion of the Humors, if they be old,
settled in the Joints; and finally, if the Rottenness, Callosity, Pain, and
Inflammation be considerable; In a word, if the part be no longer able to
perform it is functions, you must have recourse to the Operation, provided the
strength of the Patient give leave; but before you put it in practice, you must
purify the Mass of Blood and Humors by general Remedies, as Diaphoretic's,
and Cardiac's.

I will not give you here an account of the Medicines which are employed as
well Internally as Externally, to hinder the disorder of the Gangrene, being
obliged to speak of them in a Treatise of Wounds, and as every kind of Gangrene
requires particular and different Medicines, so it is the part of a prudent
Chyrurgeon and Physician to order and use them according to their Idea's and
Understandings.

Several Circumstances to be observed.
Before you go about the OPERATION, you must observe several Circumstances. If
it be the Arm you cut off, you must cut off as little of it as possible,
because the little that remains serves in a manner to the functions of Life: If
it be the Leg, though only the Foot should be concerned, you must Amputate 3
Fingers below the Knee, just under the Aponevroses which cover the Rotula,
because of the long suppurations which rot the Tendons, and other accidents
that may happen; and to put on an Artificial one more easily.

Never Amputate in the Joint.
You must never amputate in the Joints, unless it be in the Fingers or Toes,
which we are obliged to take off. If it be the Thigh, amputate as little as you
can, because the more you cut the greater is the Wound, suppuration longer, and
the cure more difficult, and consequently the Patient's strength diminishes,
and grows more weak.

How to Amputate.
Having chosen a proper place, we perform the Operation thus. If it be the Leg,
you place the Patient on the edge of a Bed, lying half backwards, one sustains
him behind, a Servant clasps his two Hands about the inferior part of the
Thigh, and draws the Skin upwards, another holds the Leg, whilst the Surgeon
puts on the Ham a Compress of several folds, of a fitting bigness, with another
pretty large Compress, which encompasses the whole part, upon which you place a
Ligature, which must be straightened with the Torniket; but being it must be
tied very hard, sufficient to compress the great Vessels, you may place a
Past-board under the Ligature, that the Patient may feel less pain, and for
hindering the Skin from wrinkling; Then you make two other Ligatures, one over,
and the other below; the first keeps the Skin which you raise upward, and the
other fastens the Flesh; Then the Surgeon places himself between the Patients
Legs, and with a crooked Knife which he holds in his Right Hand, How to cut the
Flesh.
he makes an Incision about the Member even to the Bone, and with the Back of
the Knife separates the Periostium, and cuts at the same time the Flesh and
Membranes between the Bones, lest you rend them with the Saw, and so cause new
accidents; but before you saw the Bones, you take a Fillet of Linen which you
split in two parts, and you make use of it to raise the Flesh, and to give
liberty to saw the Bone as near to the Flesh as possible; for seeing it wastes
and consumes in suppuration, if this precaution were not taken, there would
stick out an end of the Bone deprived of Skin and Flesh, which would serve for
nothing but to incommode the Patient.

How to saw the Bone.
This being done, you take the Saw, which you carry obliquely over the Tibia,
which also serves for a support to saw the Fibula, which is the weaket; which
obliges us to saw it before the Tibia, to avoid its cracking or shivering.

You must observe, that in the time of sawing, the Servant must bend the Leg a
little inward, that the Saw may pass more easily. The two Bones being sawed
off, you take off the Ligature above, which held the Skin fast, you loose the
Torniket; to find out the Artery, you take hold of it with the Crow's Bill, How
to tie the Artery.
or Pincers with a Ring, then you take a crooked Needle armed with Waxed
Thread, which you pass twice into the Flesh under the Artery, that it may be
engaged in the Loop of the Ligature, which you tie very hard; you make a knot
over the Artery, upon the knot you apply a little compress, which you fasten
with two other knots, you again loose the Torniket; If the Blood should run out
with any violence from any other Artery, you make another Ligature as the first.

Some to stop the Blood use an Actual Cautery, others a Button of Vitriol,
which they wrap up in some Cotton; some tie the Artery without passing the
Ligature through the Flesh: But I think the true and surest Method to be as I
have described. The Ligature being made, you take away the Turnstick from off
the Stump, Where to use the Suitches, how to dress Stump.
and endeavor to cover it again with the Cutis; If it be Thigh or Arm, it is
not enough to cover the Stump again with the Cutis, but you must keep if so by
the help of four Stitches, which must not be practiced at the Leg, or below the
Elbow; because the Knee or Elbow hinder it from rising too high, you apply
little compresses upon the Vessels, and a dry one on the Bone, or soaked in
Spirit of Wine to correct its alteration, then several other Boulsters armed
with Astringent Powders, over that a little Two spread with the same Powders, a
Defensative and Compress like a Maltha Cross, two Longitudinal Compresses, and
a Circular one, sustained by the Circular Bandage and Capling; some days after
you use only the Circular one, you need not load the part with too many
Compresses, A Hogs Bladder of no great use.
nor apply the Hogs Bladder, neither tie the Bandage too hard; for besides that
all these things excite only Obstructions and Inflammations, and if by chance
the Ligatures should fail, the Patient would infallibly perish unawares,
because the Bladder could retain all the Blood that should run out. You must
take care in pulling off the Dressings, not to handle them with too much
violence, lest you pull also off the Ligature. You must take care after
suppuration to press the Stump a little by means of the Compress, to hinder the
generation of fungeous and superfluous Flesh, which ordinarily happens after
long Suppurations.

Caution to be used in applying the Vitreol Button.
Those that use the Vitriol Button must precisely apply it to the mouths of the
Vessels, and take care it does not fall in applying the Bolsters. Nevertheless
though we have disapproved its use for several Reasons; yet those that will
make use of it ought to lift the Stump up a little, and hold the Hand upon it
for 3 or 4 hours, until the Vitriol has begun to produce its effect.

In happens sometimes, that after the Operation the part suffers some
Convulsive Motions, Cause of after Convulsions.
occasioned by the Spirits being irritated by sharp, corrosive, or Vitriolic
Matters, or by the trouble of the Spirits themselves in the part. For if we
consider that the Brain actually prepares a certain quantity of Spirits, which
run through the Nerves, to serve the Functions of the whole Body, we shall
agree, that those which are designed for the motions and sensation of that part
which is no more existent, but separated from the others, must needs run back;
It Is perhaps this unlucky reflux which excites these irregular Convulsions, and
the involuntary Contractions pull along with them the Arteries, and so gives
occasion to the Ligature to break, and the part to bleed, which often causes
Death. Therefore in these Occasions a Chyrurgeon must not stand searching for
the Artery, he must only lay upon it the Vitriolic Button, with Bolst^ ^oaked
in some Styptic Liquor. These are the measures which you must take in such
Occasions.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Paronychia.
PARONYCHIA is a very painful Tumor which possesses the Fingers ends, caused
by the alteration and effervescency of the Bilious and Sulphurous Particles of
the Blood.

Two kinds of Paronychia.
They ordinarily make two kinds of it; in the one the Matter lies between the
Periostium and the Bone, accompanied with a burning heat, acute pain, and deep
pulsation, great Tention, and burning Fever; The other is only in the Flesh,
with less heat, and pain, lighter pulsation, less Tention, and hardly any Fever
at all.

Cause of the Heat and Pain.
The heat and pain come from the strong ebullition of the Blood, and many
irritations whi^^ ^he sulphurous particles (that ^elt, and are ^^rn'd into
Sanies) excite at the Fibers of the Periostium.

Cause of the Tention.
The Tention proceeds only from the fermentation of the Humors, it is easy to
comprehend that when a Liquor boils, it extends it self more in length and
breadth than when it is at rest, and must consequently dilate the Vessels (in a
great manner) that contain it.

Cause of the Pulsation.
The Pulsation is nothing else but a more exquisite and lively feeling that we
have of the Arteries beating in the inflamed part, caused by a great Tention
and Effervescency of the Blood.

Cause of the Fever.
The Fever comes from the mutual agitation of the different particles of the
Blood, that fight against one another with great strength, and tear one another
in a thousand little particles of a different bigness and figure, which being
moved in the mass of Blood excites the Fever, but after a long struggle the Pus
is made, the Vessels burst, the Matter Extravasates, the Tumor grows softer,
the Fever and all other symptoms diminish, then we give the Pus Issue, by
Incision, Where to make the Incision.
which we make at the side of the Finger to avoid the Tendon, we then use those
Medicines ordinarily used for other Ulcers.

I will no longer insist upon the Paronychia, though it would furnish us with
Matter for a long Discourse, and seeing most Authors have given their Opinion
of it, any one may be Instructed by them.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Use of Cupping-Glasses.
MOST Practitioners of Physic are wont rather to approve the use of
Cupping-Glasses and Leeches, than condemn it, be it, that they either found
themselves upon that pretended Attraction of the Ancients, Cupping-Glasses of
very little use.
or that they think to discharge sooner a part laden with the weight of some
strange Matter: It Is true, they use them but with little success; besides this
Attraction is just a Chimera, and is the most cruel and temerarious practice
that can be imagined; What appearance is there to scarrifie the Back, to
dissipate Inflammation of the Eyes? To slash the Loins to hinder the progress
of malign Fevers; No such thing as Attraction.
to cut the Skin and Flesh in 20 different places, to draw one or two Ounces of
Blood? I do not believe that those who have an Idea of the Circulation of the
Blood, can show me by Experience, or any other way, that the division of some
Cupillary Vessels are capable of curing the least Cutaneous affect.
Nevertheless there are some that do authorize this practice, maintain, that the
Scarifications do determine the Blood and Spirits to repair in abundance to the
scarified parts, and that in moving the Humors after this manner, the
afflicted part is disengaged, and the Inflammation lessened.

It Is to be wished for the Partisans of this practice, that the Inflammation
would favor their Opinion. For we cannot believe that the Blood and Spirits
running into a part in a greater quantity than the used to do, without causing
some Inflammation, which is not observed here; besides, Inflammation caused
only by the interruption of the Blood.
that the Inflammation comes not, but because the motion of the Blood is
intercepted by the divulsions of the Vessels, as it happens in all new Wounds,
and not at all by a determination occasioned by the Pains.

Lastly, all the Virtues which are attributed to Cupping-Glasses, shall not
hinder me from disapproving their use; for I say, that they are not only
useless in many Diseases where they are employed, but also in Venereal Sores,
and Bites of Venomous Animals, since it is certain, that the Poison of these
Animals, which consists in a strange acid, manifests it self in a moment to the
Brain, in spite of the influence of the Spirits, and that the Mass of Blood is
presently oppressed with it, by the Laws of Circulation; from whence I
conclude, that once Bleeding, or the least Sudorific in what Disease soever,
will always do more good than all the Cupping-Glasses you can apply.

Leeches very often the cause of Fistula's.
You must observe, that in the Hemmorhoides, Emollient and Discussing Remedies
are to be preferred before Leeches, which are very often the cause of
Imposthumes, and Fistula's in the Anus, as I have showed you in the Treatise of
Fistula's.

Where and how to make an Issue by Caustic.
I also say by the bye, that Caustic's are not applied upon Nervous parts, nor
upon the great Vessels, but always between the Muscles. You first rub the part
with a warm Cloth, to open the Pores, and to make the part in a manner
insensible; you put a Plaster on it with a hole in the middle, to put the
Caustic in, which you cover with a Compress, and with a little Fillet.

A GENERAL IDEA OF WOUNDS.
CHAP. I. Of Incised or Contused Wounds of the Flesh.
TO finish this Treatise I thought fit to relate the most Important
Observations which regard the Cure of Wounds, and to clear the stiffest
difficulties which puzle most Chyrurgeons, in the Method of discussing them
well, without which we cannot obtain our wished for end.

Those that hitherto have treated of them, have been satisfied to hold long
Discourses about their several Kinds, Differences, and Prognostics, but seeing
these sorts of useless Discourses serve only to tire the memory of those which
seek to be Instructed, I will not repeat them; I begin first with the most
simple and known Symptoms.

To stop the Hemorrhage in Wounds.
Being the Hemorrhage is the first and most dangerous Symptom of Wounds, it is
that which the Surgeon must quickly correct, in closing the vessels from whence
the Blood flows. For if you stop them the Blood runs no more, that is to say,
you must put into their Apertures some Medicines which hinders the effusion of
the Liquors they contain, or in tying or compressing them. These two last
Methods are the surest, because one may order them as one please, so that the
Intention for which we make the Ligature, or introduce Lint into a new Wound,
is to hinder the flux of Blood, in pressing the Lint a little to oblige the
sides of the Vessels to approach, and resist the Impulsion of the Blood, yet so
that the Compression excite not Inflammation. A Wound having been so dressed,
it is of importance to prevent the Inflammation and Pain, which are the two
accidents which always accompany it.

Cause of Inflammation.
The Inflammation or Tumor proceeds from the Circulation in the part being
impeded, by the division of the Vessels, the Grumous cloded Blood, and the
Dressings. These strange Bodies are as so many Sluices which oppose the course
of the Blood, obliging it to stop and excite Inflammation.

Cause of Pulsative pain.
I conceive two sorts of Pain. The first is a Pulsative pain, which depends on
the Arteries, that creep about the Nerves, which at that time are so extended,
that they strike the Nerves more rudely than they used to do, and make them
suffer so great distentions, that they break, and it is this plurality of
divisions which cause the Pain.

Cause of the quick and burning pain.
The second is a quick and burning Pain, caused by the suppression of the course
of the Blood, which by the motion and frequent shocks of its most active
principles, bursts the Vessels, and extravasateth between the porosites of the
Flesh, where it is rarefied by the great quantity of concentred Spirits, which
penetrate the most insensible Porosities. Then does the Blood by its irregular
action shake, and violently prick the little Nervous Fillaments, from whence
proceeds this second kind of burning pain.

2. To prevent pain.
We commonly prevent these two Accidents, by repressing the motions of the
Blood, which comes to the part with too great precipitation, by Repercussives
and gentle Astringents. Bandages are of the first rank, which we use very
successfully in binding the Wound up gently, as also the neighboring parts;
whereas too tite a compression would augment the Inflammation. It Is for this
end we readily employ Defensatives, as we call them, because they are
compounded of a Desiccative Matter, which insensibly shuts up the porosities of
the Vessels, as Terra Sigillata and Bole mixed with the White of an Egg, or
common Water.

You must observe never to leave them longer on then 24 hours, Caution.
for Reasons which we shall allege hereafter. You must at the same time
sweeten the acrimony of the Blood, and empty the Vessels by Phlebotomy,
Clysters, and a good Diet.

A thin Diet exceeding good in Wounds.
If the patient would be prudent in his way of living, and use only a thin spare
Diet, he would suffer much less pain, and his cure would be quicker, because
Salt Meat is capable of thickning the Blood, and making it fit for
fermentation, whereas sweet Liquids, by their insipidness dissolve and charge
themselves with the salt, and precipitate it by Urine; after this manner the
intemperies of the Blood is corrected, and the affected part relieved.

Benefit of Clysters.
Clysters are also of great use, because they hinder the Excrements from
heating, and boiling back again in the Intestines, they dilate the Matter,
moderate the heat of all the Viscera, and contribute much to the cure of Wounds.

Repercussives used only in the first Dressing.
You must observe, that at the same time Repercussives retain the most subtle
and agitated salt particles of the Blood, they grow sour, gnaw the Vessels, and
excite a fermentation, upon which a Fever soon follows; They are therefore only
used in the first Dressing, and prefer Discutients which open the Pores, and
causes the volatile salts to perspire, and so empty the part. It Is easy to
see, if one continues the use of Repercussives, the salts endeavoring to
escape, fail not to excite Inflammation, and to corrupt the nourishing Juice of
the parts, in disuniting the principles of the Blood, which depend one on
another, and which by the frequent encounter, and shock of their particles,
change figure; from which depends the generation of a new Matter, and all the
changes which happen. Discutients and Suppurations must work together.
If in such an occasion Discutients which causes perspiration, and Digestives,
which excites a quick suppuration, should not work together to disengage the
part, it would tumifie so much as to fall into Gangrene. Cataplasms, which have
Oils and Fats in their composition, have almost the same effect as
Repercussatives, for which Reason good Practitioners disapprove their use.

We observe, that in great Wounds Discutients excite often a fermentation which
increases the Inflammation: In that Case, a Cataplasm made with Crumbs of Bread,
Milk, the Yolk of an Egg, Mallow Roots, etc. is very proper. We ordinarily
blame those who let the Pus lie too long in the Wound; because it always gets
some malignity, and corrodes the neighboring Vessels, which presently produces
Inflammation and Putrefaction; or else the Veins absorb it, and carry it to the
Heart, from whence it diffuseth it self into the whole Mass of Blood, and
causes the Fever; and according to the different alterations which it receives
in passing through the parts, it obstructs the Liver, Lungs, or some other
part, so causes an Imposthume there, as we have observed in Wounds of the Head.
This demonstrates to us, that we ought to dry up all the Matter that is in the
Wounds, and press the Dossels into the least corner, that the Matter may not
lurk there. It Is so true, that the Mass of Blood takes up the purulent Matter
in the time of its flay there, Matter often seen mixed with the Blood.
that whenever you Bleed the Patient, you often find some Pus mixed with his
Blood.

How to consume the Callosity of Wounds.
If the Lips of the Wound grow callous, you must betake your self to general
Remedies, which sweetens the acrimony of the Blood, or Topics which digest and
ripen the Matter, as Emplas. Andreas e cruce, which makes the edges of the
Wound tender, also Digestives of Turpentine, Spirit. Vini, Ol. ovor. and Pull.
Aristolochia. If all this be not enough to waste the Callosity, you slightly
scarrifie the Lips of the Wound, to give way to the Remedies to penetrate and
excite suppuration.

If the part disengages it self by a copious suppuration, you prefer Compresses
soaked in warm Wine before Cataplasms, because it fortifies the part.

Always after long Suppurations fungous Flesh grows.
It Is observed, that after long suppurations, there always grows proud Flesh,
which is sometimes taken away by compressing the Wound a little; if this
pressure be not enough, we use Pull. Sabinae mixed with Honey, or pass over it the
Coustic Stone, or use Pull. Alum. Vet. after it is consumed, we stop its
generation with the Aq. Phagodonica, which dries and shuts up the Extremities
of the Vessels, which had been before relaxed by the Suppuratives, which had
given room to the nourishing Juice by its overabundance to beget this fungous
Flesh.

The Method is often changed according to the disposition of the Wounded
Subjects; for Example, elderly People, or those that are lean and spare, have
ordinarily their parts soft and loose, because a part of their heat is
extinguished; in this case the Phagedenic Water would be hurtful, because in
shutting the Pores too much, and not permitting their little heat to open them,
the Wound would entirely dry up, Detersive and Traumatic Medicines ordinarily
supply its default, because there contain alkaline particles; which destroy the
acid of the Blood by insensibly opening the little mouths of the Vessels, and
charge themselves with the Suppurative particles, which being united with them
stick at their Extremities, to regenerate new Flesh; such is the Spirit or
Decoct. of these Vulnerary Plants, Some choice Traumatic Plants.
as Rad. Aristoloc. O. and Long. Fol. Vincae Pervinc. Scord. Absinth. Fol. and
Rad. Angelic. Consolid Pyrolae, Scrophulariae, Sanicula, Persicaria, and may
others. These Symples are charged with alkaline particles, which absorb the
predominant acid, hinders the rise of the Ever, and makes the Wound of a
Vermilion hue.

We observe according to the degree of Corruption, that when the Suppurative
particles cannot accommodate themselves to the Extremities of the Vessels
without the help of some medium, we mix with the Traumatic Decoctions some
things that have a kind of unctiosity in them, as Mel Rosat. which is
admirable, especially when the Pus is thin and fluid, whereas if it be thick we
lessen its quantity. If it be black and serous, it is a sign that it is in the
last degree of corruption. As in this alteration of the Blood where Traumatics
cannot master the Acids, we use successfully a Spirit drawn from brown Sugar,
An Extraordinary Spirit for Wounds.
Vitriol Mart. and Hep. Antim. which resists all sorts of Corruptions.

This Spirit is charged with Balsamic, Styptic, and Alkaline sulphurous salt
particles: The Balsamie particles supple the Vessels by their unctiosity, the
Styptic fortify them by their Astringency, and the Alkalist salts blunt and
master the sharpest Acids by their porosity. I think this method of dressing is
to be preferred before that where they use greasy Unguents, Plasters, and
Balms without intermission.

Signs of good Pus.
That the Pus be right, it must be of a moderate consistence, white and without
any ill smell. It often happens, that when we intend to destroy its acidity,
there rises a soft fungous Flesh, which depends on the great fermentation of
the Acids and Alkalies, and when that fermentation ceases, that faint Flesh is
dissipated only by compression. Most Practitioners, without any reflection,
presently use burnt Alom, and if it work not fast enough, they use red
precipitate, and if that performs no more than the other, they make a mixture
of them, which may well be called the Diabolical Corrosive; it increases the
Pain, and renews the Inflammation; But to avoid the Impression of such a strong
Corrosive, you take the Traumatic Decoction, in which you dissolve a Dram or
two of Calcined Vitriol, so you consume insensibly the Flesh.

It Is observed, that the Flesh often grows hard, especially when the part is
too much loaded, or the Bandage too strait, the motion of the Juices being
intercepted, which must be avoided in all sorts of Wounds; If the Flesh be red,
and granulate well, you must not press it, you introduce only into the Wound a
pledgit of Lint wet in warm Wine or Brandy.

You must never wash Wounds, it is enough to dry them with Lint; If you are
obliged to siringe them, How to Siringe Wounds.
you must do it discreetly, because the Injection melts and dissolves the
Flesh, so that instead of breeding good, it produces Fungous; in this case Lint
only soaked in warm Wine suffices, because it cleanses the Wound in drinking
up the Impurities it finds there, unless there be some Sinuses, which cannot be
opened by reason of the Vessels, Tendons, or thickness of the substance which
we must be obliged to offend in making the Incision; then we use Injections
when we cannot introduce Lint in the bottom of the Sinuses.

We always observe in Wounds certain white and hard places, which are nothing
else but some broken Lymphatic Vessels, and which most Practitioners take for
the beginning of a Cicatrix; in that case Limewater is useful to dry up the
Extremity of the Vessels, and dissipate the Glutinous particles of the Lympha,
which produces some Fungus's to grow over the Vessels.

It Is very important to distinguish this white mark from the extremity of the
cut Nerve, for if one should put on a Nerve any corrosive Medicine, it would
excite an insupportable pain, which it does not here; besides Experience
Authorizes it, as often as we carry off a Gland, and Lymphatic Vessel of a
Veneral Bubo; there appears next morning a round and hard point, which cannot
be consumed without Pull. Vitreol. Rub. all other as Precep. and Allom burnt,
etc. work in vain. But that which is most surprising, is, that this Corrosive
Powder which in 1000 occasions is insupportable, is not felt at all in this.

You must observe, that if some Limphatic Vessel open in the bottom of a Wound,
and spils the Lympha there, it fails not to turn Fistulous; this for the most
part happens unforeseen; in which case to cure the Fistula, you must open even
to the Gland if possible, to destroy it, and drain the source of it. If you
fear you should not succeed this way, you must hinder the Vessel from shedding
the Lympha into the bottom of the Wound by drying up its extremity, and procure
the generation of Flesh as fast as you can.

If a Wound be accompanied with contusion, you must use the strongest
Discutients, as Spirit. Vini alone, or Aromatised, or a Lixivium, which shall
be described in the Chapter of Wounds made with Firearms.

If the Matter discuss not, and that it increases, you must disingage the parts
by Scarification, and use Medicines which awaken the particles of the Blood
that are at rest; and force them out by perspiration, or to reenter again in
commerce with the Liquors. This is the method which you must follow in great
Inflammations where the Gangrene is apt to succeed.

The Medicines are the Decoction of the chiefest Vulneraries which we have
recommended before; The Tinctures of Aloes, Olibanum Myrrh made with the Spirit
of Wine, all Medicines where the preparations of Mercury enter, Urine, Sea
Water, Cataplasms made with Meal of Lupins, Beans and Lentiles, Tops of
Wormwood, and Scordium boiled in Oximel Simp. These are the chiefest Remedies
which are to be employed in deep Scarifications; some destroy and blunt the
Acids, some sweeten and correct the Acrimony of the Lixivial salts, others
strengthen the part, and all together contribute to retain the spirituous
particles which are ready to escape, or to disengage them when concentred, and
produce a fermentation which separates the Morbid Leavens, and restores the
heat and spirits again into the part.

If a great flux of Blood follow upon the Wound, or if any considerable Vessel
be opened, you must make the Ligature if the place permit, or use the Vitriolic
Button, or some Styptic Water, as that in Mr. Lemery's Chemistry, and some
drops of Spirit of Turpentine.

When to dilate the Wound.
If the Orifice of the Wound permit not the entry of your Dossels, you must
dilate it, avoiding the great Vessels and Tendons. This is the surest and most
important practice to succeed in all Wounds, where one cannot apply Boulsters,
because in discovering the bottom of the Wound you have the advantage to use
Boulsters, and reject the use of Tents, which are only Beneficial in deep
Wounds of the Thorax and Belly; you may also better wipe the lesser corners of
the Wound, fill it with Dossels, and hinder the Matter from cakeing or lodging
it self in any corner, and to hinder the formation of any Sinus. I have made
you observe, that many Compresses, and too narrow Bandages, are kinds of
Ligature which stop the course of the Blood, and which increase the fluxion,
and all other accidents.

A Wound ought to be dressed as soon as possible, to secure it from the Appulse
of the Air, and free the It Is of great Benefit to Cleanse the Circumference of
Wounds.
Patient from some Pain. You must also take care to cleanse well its
Circumference, which is a very important Circumstance, because the Cataplasms
and Emplasters which are applied upon it, stick to the Skin, and form a kind of
Scab which hinders the effect of the Remedies, and retain those particles of
the Blood which would transpire, whereas if you free the Skin from this
Scabbard, the Remedies presently enter through the Pores, as soon as they feel
the heat, they favor the transpiration, the part empties it self, the
accidents diminish, and the Wound unites more easily. You must observe, that
Emplasters compounded of Fats, Gums, and Powders, serve only to retain the
Dressings, and to oppose the Exaltation of the Juices. For which reason good
Practitioners condemn them.

In the time when the Wound begins to cicatrise, and the Flesh grows
unequally, we let it increase till all Inequalities are filled; then we dry
them with Limewater, How to Cicatrise Wounds.
or some other Dissicative Medicine, to cause an even Cicatrice. If the Flesh
arise too high, you pass gently the Infernal Stone over it.

To this Method of dressing a Wound, I will yet add, that the situation must
favor the Circulation of the Humors, and the running out of the Matter. These
are the chiefest Circumstances which must be observed in dressing Wounds in the
Fleshy parts, where the Inflammation, Aperture of any great Vessel, great loss
of substance, and the Contusion does not permit us to practice the Sutures.

CHAP. II. Of Punctured Wounds, or those made with a small and sharppointed
Instrument.
WOunds that pass through are not so dangerous as those which have but one
Aperture; they are sometimes cured by the help of Bandage applied outwardly
with some Boulsters soaked in Spirit of Wine.

Signs when to dilate the Wound.
If one be pained, and the part inflamed, it is an evident sign that there are
some Obstructions, Extraneous Bodies, which hinder the unition. These two
Accidents do also signify the necessity that there is to dilate it, for to
carry Remedies to the part, and give a greater vent to the Matter, we most
commonly introduce two Tents of Lint of a length and thickness proportionable
to the Orifices, we fasten Threads to them, and dip them in some Digestive made
of Ol. Ovor. Spirit Vini, and Turpentine, which we alter according to the
different degrees of Inflammation; if the Suppuration be plentiful, the Spirit
of Wine must predominate; if suppressed by the Inflammation, we must correct
the Spirit of Wine, by putting to it more Turpentine.

If the Pus be good, and the most intimate parts reunite themselves, you must
continue this Method; but if it be black, and Inflammation succeed, Phlebotomy,
reiterated Clysters, and cooling and opening Fisans must not be neglected, we
correct the Digestives with Ol. Rosar. Traumatic Injections with Brandy in this
occasion are admirable.

If notwithstanding these precautions the Inflammation incroaches upon the
neighboring parts, with putrefaction, you must dilate it sufficiently to
discover the place where the Matter lodges; by this means you discharge the
part, and dress all the corners where the Matter formerly was nestling, and so
prevent Gangrene and Mortification.

Where prepared Sponge is better to dilate with than Incision.
Concerning the Dilatation of Wounds, there be some who pretend that the
prepared Sponge may supply the want of Incision; I own, that, in places where
much dilating is not wanting, and where the Cicatrices would deform, as in the
Face; and am so far from condemning the use of it, that I say it is very
necessary; but in all other Occasions the Incision is to be preferred.

Though a Wound goes not through and through, yet if the Probe enters almost
through the part, you must without delay make an Incision on the opposite side.

The Symptoms which commonly attend Punctur'd Wounds.
The most frequent Symptoms that happen in these kinds of Wounds, are Fever and
Looseness, upon which sometimes follows Dysentery.

The Fever excites Inflammation, and retards Suppuration, that the part becomes
so tumified, that a Gangrene often follows it. It Is known that the different
dgrees of the Fever rule those of the Inflammation, as these do them of the
Gangrene. Bleeding, Clysters, Sweet and Liquid Food, Emollient and Discutient
Cataplasms made of the four Meals, Honey, and the Emollient Herbs boiled in
Wine, as Fol. Malve, Altheae, Senessionis, Violar. Rarietariae, Candilariae,
Chamomillae, Meliot. etc. All these Medicines are very Efficacious here.

You must observe to let the Cataplasms be very moist lest they dry up; and so
instead of Humecting and Mollifying the Fibers, they obstruct the Pores as
Astringents, and hinder Transpiration.

If in spite of all this care the Inflammation goes not off, you relieve the
part by some slight Scarifications; if they be not enough, you make others
deeper, that the Medicines may have room to work.

If the Wound be superficial, you must dilate it; but if it penetrate even to
the most intimate parts, I mean near the great Vessels or Bones, you must keep
to Scarifications, and Injections made of Traumatic Plants, Mel. Rosar. and
Spirit of Wine, because you would be apt to ruin the whole part by the
Incision, which must afterward be cut off.

It often happens, that the Gangrene comes on the sides of these kinds of
Wounds, where the Obstruction is always most considerable, in which case your
Pleagets must be well charged with Digestives:

If the Inflammation goes not off either by Suppuration or Transpiration, and
the red color of the Skin changes not, you must use strong Maturative
Cataplasms of White Lilly Roots, Sorrel, Leaven, and the common Digestive,
provided the Inflammation communicates it self not to the adjacent parts.

Scarifications are not to be used but when the part is extremely stretched,
and the red color changed into a livid, and when little Blisters arise which
signifies a beginning Mortification, and shows that the ferment of the Gangrene
is very acid and malignant; you must not stay till these little Blisters
increase, but as soon as you see that the Wound does not suppurate, and the
Skin changes color, you ought to Scarifie, and lay Compresses upon the
neighboring parts, soaked in warm Wine and Brandy.

The Fever is sometimes extinguished by Scarification, because the Agitated
Matter of the Acid ferment has room to escape; so the Inflammation is
diminished, Suppuration procured, and the progress of Putrefaction stopped.

If the Lips of the Wound be of a Vermilion color, it is a token that the salt
particles prick the Membranes, and increase the Fluxion; it excites the Fever
anew for some time, and the edges of the Wound grow white and dry. This change
proceeds from the salt Juices, which by their too great motion separate
themselves from the sulphurous ones, so that they irrigate the Fibers, and
cause a new Obstruction, which afterward makes the Flesh foggy and white.

We often observe, that though the Wound be often ready to Cicatrise, yet if
the Fever arises anew, it grows bigger and more dangerous than it was before,
because the Inflammation makes a greater progress, in this case you touch the
new formed Skin with Aq. Calcis, in which some Mercurius Sublimat. has been
dissolved; but without using any remedy you may cut it off, for the ferment of
that Membrane infects the neighboring parts. Balsam of Sulphur is very good in
this occasion, especially in small Putrefactions.

Flux a dangerous Symptom.
If a Flux come upon a Flesh Wound, it is a very dangerous symptom, because it
only happens when the salt particles have left the part, and enter into the
Mass of Liquors. Now as the Volatile salts maintain the motion of the Blood and
other Humors, and have a virtue of dissolving and making them fluid, we are to
search no where else the cause of this Symptom. This Flux hinders Suppuration,
and weakens the Sick more than all other accidents together, because of the
great dissipation of Spirits that is made by the Stools. We also observe, that
the Wound dries, shrivels, and becomes as it were mortified, according as the
Spirits abandon it; and the stronger the Flux is, the more the Inflammation
lessens, the Flesh dries up, and the part becomes more faint, adust and putrid.
You must foment it with Aromatic Wines, and hinder the disunion of the salts by
the help of Balsam of Sulphur; but from the moment that the Spirits exalt
themselves toward the surface, the motion of the Blood slackens, the Flux
cease, and the Wound which before was inanimate as it were, revives again.

This Flux must be stopped with great Circumspection, for it is a sign that the
salts are become very acid, since they offend every part where they lie; you
must always stop it by degrees, for fear a sudden suppression might again
revive the Fever, and render it more malignant and pernicious, which would
presently unite Putrefaction with Inflammation. The Flux being stopped, the
Patient must be fed with sweet and thick Food.

The proper Medicines for stopping a Flux are Clysters made of White Broth,
Mallows, Bran, Lettice, Knot-grass, and the Yolk of Eggs. Tisans made of Bugle,
Sanicle, Lemons, and Liquorish, are also of great help.

We observe, that this Flux happens oftener in great Hospitals, than any where
else, especially in great Wounds, because the Wounded receive there an Air
laden with Malign and Pestilential Vapors, which not only causes the
Looseness, but all the other troublesome Accidents which follow upon it.

We observe, that the Wounds which happen to the Legs are most dangerous, or of
difficult cure, but since the Circulation being more flow in them, their
Tendons and Membranes stretched, and their Vesicles more narrow, this
disposition of parts causes the Humors to settle and employ themselves more
easily, and that only the serosity is able to disengage it self in time of
their settlings, by its abode changes into a Virulent Sanies, which entertain
the Wounds of these hard and callous parts. They also require some Medicines
capable of carrying off, and melting the Callosity, and destroying the Sanies
which is the chief cause of it.

When Wounds are of difficult cure, and as it were unconquerable with
Medicines, it is the evil disposition of the Subject for the most part which
contributes to it. Some are naturally of an Ill Habit, others affected with
some Venerial Disease, or some other as bad; Finally, others do not govern
themselves, and have a greater inclination for that which is hurtful to them,
and which is capable of heating and altering their Blood; If in these kinds of
Inconveniences the Medicines which we have used produce not any effect,
Cardiac's and Medicines of a Purifying Quality favors their cure; What to be
used in Venomous Wounds.
as all Aromatic's, Cordial Potions, all Preparations of Mercury and Antimony,
Theriac, Confections, Powder of Vipers, with their Volatile Salt, Volatile salt
of Hearts-horn, and several Medicines of the same Nature, which differently,
according to the different degrees of Corruption.

This is the Practice which must be followed in Venomous Wounds, having applied
upon the part all things that resist Mortification. These are more or less
mortal according as the malignity, activity, and penetration of the Acid Humor
(wherein consists the Nature of Poison) are more or less great and fatal.

CHAP. III. Of Wounds of the Tendons.
I Have made you observe, speaking of the Suture of the Tendons, that when it is
quite cut, there happens no troublesome accident but that it retires toward
its Origin, and that one is obliged to soften their Fibers with Oils drawn
without Fire, that their reunion may be the easier.

I have also made you observe, that the Stitch being made, it was necessary to
Humect the Tendon with Oil and Spirit of Wine, the Oil resists the Impressions
of the Air, and the Spirit of Wine penetrating the least Porosities,
deobstructs their Channels in driving out the Humors, and by this means the
concourse of Symptoms, particularly that of Pain is stopped. Suppuratives must
follow next immediately, forasmuch as they hinder that the Inflammation may not
cause long suppuration, which would infallibly rot the Tendons in spite of all
the care that might be taken, as it happens in all great Fluxions, where the
Tendons are discovered. This is the reason which obliges us to stay till the
Suppuration be accomplished, and the Tendon covered, before we use
Dissicatives, as Tinct. Aloes, Spirit. Vini, with several others, because in
drying the part too soon you hinder the dissolution of the Juice, stops
Suppuration, and retains the Inflammation, which is the true cause why the
Tendon rots.

The Inflammation which comes upon Wounds of the Tendons that lie but shallow
under the Skin, is not dangerous, but since the Juice which exudes out of it is
corrosive, it awakes the Pain and all other Accidents which most commonly
attend Wounds of the Tendons. But if it happen that a deep Tendon be hurt, the
Inflammation and Obstructions are greater, and more troublesome, by reason of
the many Sanguin Vessels which lie over it.

If the Accidents continue, and the Tendon suppurates not, it is most convenient
to dilate the Wound, that the Remedies may be able to penetrate, and ease the
part by causing a speedy suppuration.

If the Flesh which is generated in these kinds of Wounds become callous, it is
a sign that the salt abounds every where, and that the fluxions will be great,
since the salt particles condense themselves in the very substance of the part.
We use only here Digestives and Balsams which are convenient till the Wounds be
ready to cicatrise, being capable of melting and dissolving the Juices, by
which we know that Dissicatives are noxious because they procure too soon a
Cicatrix.

There Is sometimes generated a soft spongy Flesh, which threatens the part with
great Obstruction; then it is also necessary to continue the Digestives; for
Dissicatives glue and harden too much the nourishing particles, and augment the
abundance of the salts which cause faulty Flesh. In this case SCHRODER's Green
Balm is excellent.

You must observe, that a Tendon may be hurt by a prick without any accident
happening. This is when the Instrument slips between the Interval of the Fibers
without endamaging them. But if by chance it divides some of the Fibers,
Obstructions follow, which occasions the nourishing Juice to become corrosive,
gnawing the Fibers and Membranes, which causes a greater Obstruction, and more
violent Pain; Besides the Spirits which are irritated by these sharp Matters
augment the Inflammation, which at first is not (...) ^^nsiderable, but
afterward very dangerous.

To help this inconvenience, you ought without scruple to open the Teguments
and Flesh to find the place of the pricked Tendon, and to sweeten the Acrimony
of the salts with Ol. Ovor. Cere, and Spirit. Vini, not neglecting at the same
time the use of Digestives and Balms. If the Accidents cease not, it is a sign
the Puncture is deep, and that the Medicaments cannot penetrate; then you must
separate dexterously the Fibers of the Tendon according to their length, to
give way to the Balsamic Particles to soften the Fibers, and the Spirit of Wine
to discuss the Humors, and cause a more easy Suppuration.

The Inflammation which follows upon the Puncture of a Tendon incroaches often
upon the near parts; as for Example, if the Tendon of the Finger be pricked, the
Wrist and Arm swell so much, that one is often obliged to Amputate it. For
seeing the Tendon and Belly of the Muscle contain nothing but a heap of Fibers
of the same continuity, the Convulsions (...) consequently the Inflammation
communicates it self not only to the Belly of the Muscle, but also to all the
neighboring parts. You must not be astonished if these parts have such a
correspondence together, and if they communicate so mutually one to another
their alterations. If there be any difference between the Tendon and the Belly
of the Muscle, it consists only in their Texture, and in the more or less
Inflammation, Tention, or Pain.

The most Specific Remedies to stop the Accidents of a Punctured Tendon, is to
give issue to the Wound. If the Tendon lie high, we use Balsamic's and
Digestives; but if deep, you must add Spirit of Wine; if the fluxion be great,
you apply upon the Tendon a little Boulster soaked in Brandy, to secure it from
the impression of the Purulent Matter. As concerning Cataplasms it is known,
that we apply Emollients, Discutients, and Defensatives, during the first 2 or
3 days, according to the degrees of the Inflammation, afterward we prefer
Discutients, which are continued all the time of the Fluxion; and during the
rest of the Cure you must use Plasters and Compresses soaked in Spirit of Wine
warmed.

If the Tendon of the Hand be hurt, we lay not only Defensatives upon the part,
but also over the whole Arm. If the Puncture be made with a square or
triangular Instrument, it is doubtless more to be feared than that which is made
by a flat or round one, because of the great number of the divisions; it
therefore requires more Circumspection. Lastly, if the Inflammation be great,
and there be appearance of a Gangrene, you must Scarifie, and use all that is
capable to awake the motion of the Spirits.

CHAP. IV. Of Wounds of the Ligaments and Bones.
WOunds of the Ligaments differ not much from those of the Tendons, but in the
more or less sensibility, and though they are not so painful nor dangerous,
nevertheless it happens very often, that Putrefaction seizes it, by the abode
of the Purulent Matters upon these parts.

If the Ligaments of the Joints be hurt, I say that thickning Remedies are most
contrary; because we must by all means oppose the coagulation of the viscous
and salt Juices which entertain these parts, as also the formation of Ganglions
and Anchilose, which cannot be mollified nor dissolved by the most powerful
Medicines. If the Ligaments of a Joint cannot be hurt without some Tendon
receiving damage also; it may be easily comprehended, that the Inflammation
hinders them from obeying the motion of the Muscles, and that the Humors which
supple the Ligaments and Glands, are not entertained in their ordinary
fluidity; and as I have showed in the Anevrism, that it condenses at the least
heat, by the repose of its Particles, and it forms an Anchilose; so I say its
formation must be much quicker here, the heat being more excessive. Now it is
evident, that a concatenation of accidents of this nature may utterly destroy
the part; for if the Anchilose which grow about the Joints and Ganglions, which
are formed upon the Ligaments by the thickning and coagulation of the Nutritive
Juice, cause the loss of motion; the alteration and mixture of several Liquors
of different nature, are very fit to putrify it, by their purulancy and
acidity.

The Purulent Hmour corrupts and infects it, the Acid pricks and gnaws it, and
the Viscous obstructs, and makes it immovable; It Is doubtless by reason of the
contrariety of their principles which destroy one another in the actions of the
Medicaments, which causes them to be of so difficult a cure, and so hard to
prevent the Ligaments from rotting.

We have made you observe in the Examination of the Fistula in Ano, that Wounds
of the Joints often degenerate into Fistula's, because the salt Juice abounds
there from every part, and the Pus changes into a sharp and malignant Sanies,
which filters into the Porosities of the Nervous Fibers of the part, making the
Ulcer callous and fistulous; This Humor becomes sometimes so biting, that it
destroys not only the Tendons and Ligaments, but gnaws also the Cartilages, and
causes a Cariosity of the Bones.

To prevent all this, you must follow the same Method which we have prescribed
in Wounds of the Tendons, that is to say, you must use every thing that
tempers, sweetens, and is capable to correct the acrimony of the salts.

When the Wound has run well for some days, and the swelling of the part a
little gone down, you use a Balm made of Ox-gall, An Extraordinary Medicine in
Wounds of the Joints, etc.
Spirit of Wine, and Mel. Rosat. which has the faculty of discussing and
resolving the Coagulate Matters. After this manner you prevent the callosity of
the Wound, and all other accidents; We commonly Cicatrise with Humecting
Medicaments, because Dissicatives make it deformed.

The Bones differ from the Tendons and Ligaments, in that their Contexture is
more thick, close, and compact, and are nourished with a more salt and subtle
Juice.

If the Wounds which happen to them be simple, the sole reduction of the Pieces
maintained by Bandages is sufficient to cure them.

If the Fractured Bones press some Vessel or Tendon, and the Contusion be
considerable, if you differ the reduction, the part falls into a Gangrene and
Mortifies.

If some pieces of the Bone be separated, so that you cannot reduce them, you
must make an Incision to pull them out. I know that this happens very seldom,
and the Splinters must the very much entangled in the Flesh, if they cannot be
reduced without Incision.

If the Bones be quite broke to pieces, and some great Vessels lacerated, you
must cut off the Limb.

I speak not here of the Dressings which are used in all sorts of Fractures; I
only recommend to you that the Bones be tied harder where broke, then any where
else, to keep them reduced, and to hinder the Callus from growing too
abundantly.

We know that Compound Wounds comprehend both those of the Flesh and Bones, and
that besides the 18 tail Bandage, they require the application of several
different Remedies. We use in the beginning Discutient Cataplasms, to evacuate
part of the Matter by Transpiration.

You must by all means Suppurate, because we are obliged to wait for the
generation of the Callus, and exfoliation of the Bone, besides a great
Suppuration alters the Bones in a very little time.

It Is therefore necessary that Discutients be used in stead of Suppuratives,
and if in the first days we use Digestives, Spirit of Wine and Honey must
exceed, you apply dry Lint upon the Bone till the Callus be formed, and after
it is generation you apply Boulsters on it, soaked in Spirit of Wine, in which
Sal. Ammoniac. and Camphire has been dissolved, which is a most excellent
Medicine to cure Ulcers of the Bone, and to hasten Exfoliation.

You must observe, that there never grows good Flesh upon a rotten Bone, or
that which is ready to exfoliate; It Is always spongy, and one may say, that
whenever they are of such a nature, it is a certain sign that the Bone must
needs Exfoliate, which most ordinarily happens in long Suppurations.

The formation of the Callus grows according to the Patients way of Living;
It Is observed, that it grows too much, and renders the part unequal, when the
Patient eats too plentifully, and when they use too spare a Diet, it grows not
sufficient to reunite the part.

The Prognostic's of Compound Wounds are always very dangerous to Cachectical
Persons, Old, and Pox't, whose Bones rot oftentimes without any Wound coming
upon them.

CHAP. V. Of Gunshot Wounds.
GUnshot Wounds are always very dangerous, as well by reason of the great
Contusion which accompanies them for the most part, as because the passages of
the Blood are utterly stopped.

We know that the Bullet's passing through a part scatters the substance, and
breaks the Vessels without any Hemorrhagy, or Suppuration before three, four,
five, or sometimes six days; the age, temperament, and nature of the part
regulate these accidents; the reason of it is grounded upon the great agitation
of the Bullet, and upon its round and blunt figure, that enters with so much
force and swiftness into the Flesh, bruiseth and crushes the Vessels, so that
it forces their Tunicles to glue themselves to one another, and so opposes the
flux of Blood, unless some great Vessel be broke, and the Blood force a passage
by its Impulsion. Obstruction great in Gunshot Wounds.
Of all Wounds there is none where the Obstruction is greater than in these, and
which consequently are more capable of Inflammation and Gangrene.

The contain several Particularities to which the Chyrurgeon ought to give his
attention; The first is, to consider whether they be in any of the Venters, or
the Limbs; if superficial or penetrating; if the Bullet has passed through and
through; if it has touched some important part tending to the functions of Life
in its passage, which may be known by the succeeding symptoms.

But whether it has passed through, or found some obstacle in its passage, it is
well known, that these kinds of Wounds are almost always accompanied with
troublesome accidents, Accidents accompanying Gunshot Wounds.
as rupture of some Vessel, fracture of a Bone, or Contusion, which is of least
consequence.

If the Orifice of the Wound be of a round figure, and grown less by the
fluxion; the first Intention which you must satisfy is to dilate it; you
excite by that means Suppuration, and procure a more equal. Cicatrice; you
discharge the part in letting the Wound bleed as much as is convenient, and
prevent accidents. But first it is important to extract the Bullet, if you can,
since it is its progress which marks the place which is to be dilated. If you
cannot follow the track which it has taken without making an Incision, How to
extract the Bullet.
you put the Patient into the same posture he was in when wounded, that you may
easier trace the Bullet, and observe the place where it stops; you afterward
dilate the Wound, minding two Circumstances; 1. You must avoid the great
Vessels; 2. You must not discover the Tendons of the Joints without necessity.


If the Bullet be engaged near some great Vessels, When to leave the Bullet in.
or in the middle of the Muscles, so that it cannot be extracted without
causing some ill effect, you may leave it in the part, provided the Patient be
not much incommoded with it. If it be in any of the Venters, you must leave it
to Nature. If it stick in the Bones, you must gently move it, to draw it out
more easily; because the Bone would of necessity putrify. If it be in the
Nervous parts, as in the Joints, you must hasten its extraction, particularly
when it is sharp, or of any corruptible Matter, for then you must not only
extract it from the Nervous parts, but every part whatever.

You extract the strong Bodies by Attraction, or by Impulsion, with the Hand,
Instruments or Medicines according to the part they lie in. If, for Example, a
Bullet be passed the great Vessels, you will be obliged to extract it from the
opposite part; but if it be on this side, you extract it through its entrance.

Nevertheless that general Rule has its exception, for if some strange Body be
upon the Carpus or Tarsus forced from without inward, and should have passed
the Bones; It would be a great temerity to Incise the bending Tendons of the
Fingers, to force a passage through the opposite. In that case you must extract
it by the same way it went it.

If the Bullet has ruined a Joint, you must cut off the part, because the
Ligaments and Bones being quite split to pieces, and their Splinters irritating
the Tendons; it causes a Gangrene to seize presently on the part.

If the Bone of the Thigh be broken, you must dilate the Wound as much as is
convenient, and advance the Suppuration, that you may have the liberty of
extracting some pieces of the separate Bones, if there be any; Of the rest you
follow the same method as in other Compound Wounds.

If there be any Vessels opened, as the Subclavian Vessels, you make the
Ligature; and if some Blood be diffused upon the Diaphragm, you must come to
the Operation of Empiema.

If the Bullet has carried off a great part of the Bone, as we cannot cut
proportionably so much Flesh as the substance of the Bone lost; for to convey
Remedies thither, it happens that the Flesh that grows over it becomes callous,
and sometimes ossified, forasmuch as the salt Juice which runs this way hardens
it by little and little.

If the Trunk of a great Vessel be opened, we are often obliged to Amputate the
part, because the part which receives no more Blood for its nourishment
Gangrenates. If the Wound be only in the Flesh, you may bath it presently after
the first dressing with Brandy, you soak Boulsters in it, and bind up the part
with Compresses soaked in warm Wine, strengthened with Spirit of Wine.

Accidents which attend.
The chiefest accidents that accompany Gunshot Wounds, are Tumors,
Putrefaction, and Hemorrhagy, to dissipate the swelling we successfully use
Traumatic Fomentations mixed with Spirit of Wine, or Cataplasms made of Urine,
Rye Meal, Honey, and Infusion of Roses, or a Lie made of Vine-Ashes, in which
you dissolve Sal Ammoniac, and Brandy; If the Tumor be not big, Suppuration is
enough to carry it off; If it be accompanied with hardness, you make some
slight Scarifications.

To excite Suppuration in these kinds of Wounds, you use a Digestive made of
Vngt. Basilicon, Linament. Arcei, Ol. ovor. and Spirit. Vini; If Corruption be
joined, you add Theriac. Myrrh, Aloes, Sal Ammoniac. Ol. Absinth. and Anthi; as
you fear the Corruption, you animate them the more.

If the Putrefaction happen to a fleshy and spongy part, you dissolve Egyptiac.
in Spirit of Wine, and mix it with the Digestive. Egyptiac not to be used in
Nervous parts.
For Egyptiac. being entirely a Dissicative, if it were used in Nervous parts,
that are wont to dry up, it would dissipate the little humidity that remains
there. If you use Injections, it is best to use the two Aristolochias boiled in
White Wine, in which you dissolve Sugar Candy, Camphire, Myrrh, and Theriac.

Bitter things not to be used in Injections of the Breast.
You must observe, that Injections as well as other Remedies must be managed
with prudence according to the parts where they are used. Ex. Gr. If you Inject
into the Breast of one troubled with an Empiema a bitter and sharp Liquor, it
would irritate the part, so that they would augment the accidents; in the like
occasion we use with good success a Decoction of Barley, Agrimony, a very
little Wormwood, and Centaury, Plantain, Birthwort, in which you dissolve Mel.
Rosar. If this needs to be fortified, you boil them in Whitewine or Brandy.

The Tincture of Persicaria Maculata made with White wine, is also good to
resist Putrefaction; if you intend to make it stronger, you dissolve Myrrh,
Aloes, and Sal Ammoniac in Brandy; and mix with it the Solution of Sal Ammoniac
in Spirit of Wine, which produces the same effect; and to hinder the generation
of new Corruption, you compass the Dressing with Spirit of Wine Camphorated;
The Solution of a Dram of Mercurius sublimate, or Arsnic in half a Pint of
Spirit of Wine is excellent in great Putrefactions; or one Ounce of Mercury in
two Ounces of Aquafortis, which we mix with Lime Water or Brandy.

We also use with very good success in these occasions, the Solution of the
Canstic Stone in Brandy, which we mix with the same quantity of Spirit of Wine
Camphorated. All these Solutions are capable to waste and separate putrified
and rotten Flesh, and also to consume the Cariosity of Bones.

After the effect of all these Remedies, you use Detorsive Decoctions made of
red Roses, Consolid. Maj. Quinquesolium, Plantain, Agrimony, Nettles,
Pimpernell, Periwinckle, St. John's Wort, Purslain, Plantain, and Poppy Seed;
with which you slightly siringe the Wound, so separate the rest of the
Impurities that are there.

When you use Detersives, you ordinarily join Suppuratives with them, as
Turpentine, Unguent. ex apto, Balsam. Arcei, and Ol. Hyperici.

If the Wound has long suppurated, and the Flesh grows Luxuriant, you consume
it with the Spirit of Sulphur put in the Mundificative; If it be the Humidity
of the part, which causes this proud Flesh to grow, instead of the
Mundificative, you use Allom Water, or the Aq. Phagedenica, or the Decoction of
the Traumatic Plants made with Lime Water; or, Lastly, Linamentum Arcei, mixed
with Myrrh and Fine Bole in Powder.

THE END.
BOOKS Printed for, and sold by Daniel Brown, at the Black-Swan and Bible
without Temple Bar.
THE Secrets of the Famous Lazarus Riverius, Councellor and Physician to the
French King, and Professor of Physic in the University of Montpelier. Newly
Transsated from the Latin, by E. P. M. D.

A Physico-Medical Essay concerning the late frequency of Apoplexies. Together
with a general Method of their Prevention and Cure. In a Letter to a Physician.
By William Cole, M. D.

Nova Hypotheseos, ad Explicanda Febrium Intermittentium Symptomata and Typos
Excogitatae Hypotyposis. Una cum Aetiologia Remediorum; Speciatim vero de
Curatione per Gorticem Peruvianum. Accessit Dissertatiuncula de Intestinorum
Motu Peristaltico. Authore Gulielmo Cole, M. D.

Novum Lumen Chirurgicum: Or, A New Light of Surgery. Wherein is Discovered,
a much more Safe and Speedy way of Curing Wounds, than has heretofore been
usually Practiced. Illustrated with several Experiments made this Year in
Flanders. Authore Johan. Colbatch, Med.

Novum Lumen Chirurgicum Vindicatum: Or, The New Light of Chyrurgery Vindicated
from the many unjust Aspersions of some unknown Calumniators. With the Addition
of some few Experiments made this Winter in England. By Jo. Coloatch, Physician.

Christian Practice Described, by way of Essay upon the Life of our Savior. By
Stephen Skynner, Rector of Buckland in Hertfordshire, and late Fellow of
Trinity-College in Cambridge.

Rules for Explaining and Decyphering all manner of Secret Writing, Plain and
Demonstrative. With Exact Methods for understanding Intimations by Signs,
Gestures, or Speech. Also an Account of the Secret ways of Conveying Written
Messages. Discovered by Trithemius Schottus, Lord Fran. Bacon, Bishop Wilkins,
etc. With exact Tables and Examples. By J. F.

The Traveller's Guide, and, The Country's Safety. Being a Declaration of the
Laws of England against Highwaymen, or Robbers upon the Road; What is necessary
and requisite to be done by such Persons as are robbed in order to the
recovering their Damages; Against whom they are to bring their Action, and the
manner how it ought to be brought. Illustrated with variety of Law-Cases,
Historical Remarks, Customs, Usages, Antiquities and Authentic Authorities. By
J. M.

The Clerks Grammar, wherein are laid down Plain and Easy Rules for the Making
any Bond or Bill Obligatory or single, with the several Conditions in most
Cases; also Instructions how to place the Names, Sums and Dates of the same in
true proper Latin. Likewise, An Exact Method of Drawing all manner of Deeds of
Common use, with Instructions how to Raise any Consideration, Habendum,
Redendum, Preservation or Covenant used therein, made more Plain and
Intelligible to the meanest Capacity than

(...) Scarron's Novels; Vix. The Fruitless Precaution. The Hypocrites. The
Innocent Adultery. The Judge in his own Cause. The Rival Brothers. The
Invisible Mistress. The Chastisement of Avarice. The Unexpected Choice. Done
into English with Additions, by J. D. Esquire

All sorts of Physic Books, Latin and English.


