A LETTER FROM THE PROTESTERS, WITH AN ANSWER Thereunto, from an ASSERTER Of
the AUTHORITY of the two late GENERAL ASSEMBLIES, AT DVNDEE and EDINBVRGH.

Printed in the Year, 1653.

The PROTESTERS Letter.
Right Reverend.
THe gracious dispensations of the Lord our God toward his People in this Land
have been many and great, who can utter the Mighty Acts of the Lord, or who can
show forth all his praise? mavelous things did he in the sight of our
Fathers, and this generation has also seen his wonderful Works to the
Children of Men. How beautiful was the Spouse of Christ (in this Land) as
Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, and terrible as an Army with Banners? How great
was the harmony of the sons of Zion? they took sweet counsel together and
walked unto the House of God in company: How good and how pleasant was it to
see Brethren dwell together in Unity? It was as the dew of Hermon, and as the
dew that descended upon the Mountains of Zion, for there the Lord commanded the
blessing, even life for evermore; but now he has cast off and greatly abhored
Israel, he has commanded concerning Jacob, that his adversaries should be
round about him, he hides himself, and his wrath burns like fire, the Lord
has covered the Daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger, and cast down the
beauty of Israel from Heaven unto Earth; Zion spreads forth her hands, and
there is none to comfort her. How shall we be silent when the Lord has so
great a Controversy with his People, and pleads with Israel, because he
says he is innocent and has not sinned? Nothwithstanding he has gadded about
to change his way, and has followed the way of Egypt and of Assyria; And
though the Lord has rejected his confidences that he does not prosper in them,
yet will they not return again unto the Lord their God.

We desire sadly to Regrate these things, and that so many stumbling blocks are
laid in the way of the Lords People. It does also much afflict us that
groundless prejudices and needless jealousies are so readily received and
entertained, and so hardly removed, and that many are so far from the meekness
and gentleness of Jesus Christ, as alienation of mind and affections has in a
great measure gotten place; whereby it comes to pass that clear and evident
Truths concerning the Lords controversy with the Land are not received in
simplicity of heart, but are by many laid aside as unworthy to be taken into
consideration: It is our hearts desire that we may obtain mercy of the Lord, so
to speak unto, and walk with our Brethren as may be unto edification, and that
we may do nothing which may either heighten or continue Differences in this
Church, but every lawful way study to remove them. We have in that measure of
sincerity which the Lord has bestowed on us endeavored to approve our selves
before him, in speaking our Judgment to others with whom we have to do. And in
the fear of God we are constrained in the bowels of love and compassion to
speak our thoughts also unto you, that so far as in us lies, we may in the
Lords strength yet further endeavor to prevent his departure from the Land,
and that sin and transgression may be acknowledged and mourned for, that so the
Lord may yet delight to dwell amongst us.

For this end we conceive it a good and ready way, to look back where we were
when these differences began, and whence these matters which have overflowed
the Land have broken in upon us, and to repent and do our first works; the time
was not long since, when all that feared the Lord in the Land were of one heart
and one way, against adversaries on either hand, and, O that it were his good
will and pleasure to unite us again upon the same Principles, and for the same
ends, in carrying on the Lords Work as heretofore! How graciously did the Lord
countenance the purging forth of corrupt men in the Ministry in some places of
the Land, and plentifully blessed the Labors of these that were planted in their
rowm? He poured water upon him that was thirsty and floods on the dry ground,
they sprang up as among the Grass, as Willows by the water courses, and it
might have been said, who are these that flee as a cloud, and as the Doves to
their Windows? But now alas! How has loosnesse and prophanity got up the head
in the Land? How is Piety mocked and shamed, yea even trampled upon, and
endeavored to be crushed so soon as it begins to break forth, even in the the
tender bud? How does the Work of Reformation ly behind, and the mourners in
Zion look on the dust and rubbish of the Lords House with weeping eyes, and
bleeding hearts? How are the mountains of Zion laid wast? how do the Foxes
spoil the tender Grapes? and How is the Lords Vineyard become like unto the
Vineyard of the sluggard, through the negligence of unworthy Laborers,
scandalous and insufficient Ministers and Elders who ought to have been long
since cast forth? How are the Sheep scattered and exposed to Wolves by Idol
Shepherds, which feed themselves and not their flocks, and have seen vain and
foolish things, and have not discovered their iniquity to turn away their
captivity? neither have we it only to lament, that the work of purging the
Lords House is obstructed, but that too many Ministers in the Land repent of
what has been formerly done therein, and condemn it as a sin, which before was
avowed and highly commended as a most necessary duty, how great reason have
we to tremble at the words of the Prophet Ezekiel, She has wearied her self
with lies, and her great scum went not forth out of her; her scum shall be in
the fire, in thy filthiness is lewdness, because I have purged thee and thou
wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I
have caused my fury to rest upon thee: I the Lord have spoken it, it shall come
to pass, and I will do it, I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither
will I repent, according to thy ways, and according to thy doings shall they
judge thee, says the Lord God.

In October 1651. after seeking the Lords Face and humbling our selves before
him, we did agree upon some courses of the Lords dreadful wrath which has
gone forth against the Land, and because of the gross corruption and iniquity
abounding among Ministers (In reference to which we fear that sad charge of the
Prophet Malachi may be applied, But ye are departed out of the way, ye have
caused many to stumble at the Law, ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi says
the Lord of Hosts, therefore have I also made you base and contemptible before
all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways but have been partial in
the Law) we did therefore at the same time condescend upon some of the sins of
the Ministry, in both which, we are so far from pleading our own innocence,
that we do unfainedly desire to acknowledge our accession to be very great, and
to be deeply humbled for the same before God. And we do earnestly entreat in
the Lord Jesus Christ who came into the World to save sinners, that you would
seriously ponder the things that are therein represented, without taking
prejudice against them, because they come from us, If the Lord shall be
graciously pleased to put it into your hearts, with fervent Prayer and deep
Humiliation, to consider the Covenants and Engagement (which you and all of us
have sworn to the most High with uplifted hands) and to peruse and ponder the
many faithful Warnings and Declarations of this Kirk in former times, anent
the present Differences, and to call to mind the tentations which you met
with, the snares which were laid in your way, the straits which you were driven
into, and all the motives and inducements which engaged you in that way you are
now upon, and to look upon the sad Judgments which have come upon the Land
since the first declining from the former way, we are hopeful that the Lord
shall discover unto you the sinfulness of that Treaty in Holland, and of the
Public Resolutions following thereupon; in particular, how greatly his Holy
Name was abused in prostituting the Ordinance of public Repentance to the
lusts and designs of corrupt men, by receiving the Malignant Party to the
fellowship of all Church Ordinances, to make way for entrusting them as
Captains and Rulers over the Lords People and his Interests, while they were
notoriously walking in their accustomed profaneness and enimity to the Work
of the Lord and to his People, and had not given evidences of Repentance; and
who, as was then often foretold, have now again by their wicked deeds
proclaimed to the World their Hypocrisy and dissimulation; we would much
rather desire to hear that your selves did search, then that we should need to
put you in mind what sinful courses were taken to promote and establish these
Resolutions, and what Censures have been imposed upon Ministers, and Acts made
against Professors for giving Testimony against the same; How gracious and well
qualified Elders are removed and kept out from Church Judicatories, and
ignorant and profane persons brought in and more endeavored to be brought in
to their rowm; How gifted and gracious young Men are debarred from entering into
the Ministry, and a door is opened to others, whereof some are loose
and-profane, and many are ignorant and strangers to the Work of the Lord upon
their own hearts. And here we cannot forget to desire you seriously to
consider, how unwarrantably you did proceed in that Meeting at Forfar in August
1651. in the midst of so many warnings and sad dispensations from the Lord,
even to that height and animosity of spirit as to pronounce the heavy Curse of
God against all these that did withdraw their counsels from your Judicatories,
and to ordain the same to be Read in every Congregation publicly on the Lords
Day, and to spread Declarations at home, and send Printed Informations abroad
into England, grievously traduceing your Brethren as Separatists, as Enemies to
the Work of Reformation, and promoters of their designs who Invaded this Land,
with many other reproaches of the like kind: Notwithstanding you have had long
experience of their faithfulness in the Lords Work. Oh that you would lay
these things to heart, and remember how greatly the Lord was thereby provoked,
and his wrath increased, how ye have made the heart of the righteous sad whom
the Lord has not made sad, and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he
should not return from his wicked way, and how the Work of Reformation has not
only been interrupted thereby, but dangerously shaken, and a foundation laid
for conjunction with all Parties whatsoever both at home and abroad, which has
been the cause and fountain of these sad rents and divisions that are among the
Lords precious People: But of all things it is most grievous to us, that after
all the evils and miseries which the Lord has brought upon this poor Land,
you should yet continue to justify and maintain these things, and so
tenaciously adhere unto them, which you would well examine from what principle
the same does flow. We know that it is commonly said, that a satisfactory
answer was returned to the Propositions delivered in by us to the late meeting
at Edinburgh, in July last, but it is only a seeming satisfaction in some
things by reason of the hidden way of expression that is used in that answer,
for the matter is so conveyed in words, as the two late Assemblies and their
Acts (which comprehended all the things in question betwixt us) are included in
your specious concession; and so in effect, what seems to be granted there,
is wholly overturned; to other things, no answer is returned; and, for these
things which are laid down in that answer as uncontraverted betwixt us, we do
not hear nor can we learn that they are begun to be practiced by any of your
number, though it be in the power of their hands, but the great bensill of the
zeal of most part is turned against us: We may further say, that ways of Peace
and healing were so little studied by the most part at that meeting in July
last, as we fear the contrary was too much endeavored; for not only Synods and
Presbyteries were warranted and encouraged to proceed against Ministers,
Elders, and Expectants, according to the Acts made at Dundee, (which for the
substance were renewed) but also Letters were written and Published in Print
directed to the Noblemen and Gentlemen of the Land whereby the Malignant Party
was stirred up to exercise all the Power they had against us, which in some
places they have not been slack to put in execution. We are much unsatisfied
that advantages are sought and taken against us in a very ungaining way (to say
no worse) not only to slight, misconstrue, and reject all our endeavors for
healing the breach that is amongst us; but likewise, in your Letters to
Presbyteries, and other Papers you do misrepresent our proceedings. Beside
diverse other strange expressions in your late Letter, of the date the 25.
Febr. last (wherein we hope you will not upon serious examination allow your
selves) we do not a little wonder why it should be said that the conference for
reconciliation and Union was altogether slighted and deserted by us, when some
of our number had carefully attended about three weeks for promotting the same,
and were not at all advised with, nor so much as daigned with any Answer at
all, until after you had dissolved your meeting, and when the Answer was
given, it was in effect a refusal of all our previous desires, without
satisfaction to which, you very well knew there could be no profit in
conference: We are also greatly stumbled at the Fasts and Humiliations which
you do appoint from time to time, the Causes are general, and ambiguous
expressions are used, which no doubt is a sin before the Lord; if in any case
surely in the confession of sin and transgression, and humiliation for the
same, we ought to study to be clear, plain, and distinct, and to avoid
ambiguitie, neither fearing the power of men upon the one hand, nor desiring to
please the multitude upon the other, especially after so much wrath from the
LORD upon the Land: We know, and desire to acknowledge that there was always
so much sin and iniquity abounding in this Land as might have justly provoked
the LORD to anger and indignation, but in the LORDS ordinary way of dealing
with his People, we do find that there have usually been some publict sins
and breaches of Covenant preceding such sad judgments which brought their
other sins to remembrance; you would not look upon it with a light eye, that so
many of the Godly in the Land cannot away with, nor join in your Fastings and
Humiliations, and that all the wicked and grossly profain in the Land (who have
always hated and do still hate the ordinances of GOD in their power and
purity) do, with such a furious carnal zeal, defend and maintain your
Humiliations, and carefully attend such diets and opportunities with delight
and approbation, and yet do slight other occasions (even with your selves) for
worshipping the Lord. We take no pleasure to mention those things, they are
matter of lamentation unto us before the Lord: neither is it our purpose to
render you odious, and, if our duty to God and unto you did not constrain us,
we would much rather choose to be altogether silent in such an evil time. It
is from the love we bear in our hearts toward you, and the earnest desire we
have to recover you from the snares into which you have fallen, and that ye
may, through the Lords blessing upon you, become isntrumental for the good of
Zion, in the day of her calamity and distress: We do therefore exhort you, by
the Lord Jesus, to weigh these things in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and to
take with your sin and guilt therein before the Lord, and to forsake that way
of the Public Resolutions, as that which is greatly displeasing to him, and to
join cordially with your Brethren in the former way we have been upon, for
carrying on the Work of Reformation which was acceptable in the Lords sight,
and signally blessed in our hands from heaven: let it be far from you to put a
hard construction upon our intentions herein, or upon any of our words or
expressions which may seem harsh; if we could have made choice of smoother
words in such a purpose, we would willingly have made use of them. We hope
likewise that you will not offend at the freedom and plainness which we have
used with you, as being our Brethren, it is a great sin in the Lords sight to
make a man an offender for a word, and to lay a snare for him that reproves in
the gate; But how excellent are the words of the sweet Psalmist of Israel! Let
the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness: and let him reprove me, it
shall be an excellent oil which shall not break my head. If we would rent our
hearts and turn unto the Lord our God, he is gracious and merciful, slow to
anger and of great kindness, and repents of the evil, who knows but he
will repent and leave a blessing behind him, and shall yet again choose
Jerusalem, and dwell in the midst of us? Surely he would rent the heavens and
come down, that the mountains might flow down at his presence, and make his
Name known to his adversaries, and should say unto us, Fear not, O Land, be
glad and rejoice, for the Lord will do great things. Now he whom God has
exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give
repentance unto Israel and forgiveness of sins, fill you with the knowledge of
his will in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding: and the God of peace,
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the
Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every
good work to do his will, working in you (and in us and in all his people) that
which is well pleasing in his sight, through JESUS CHRIST: to whom be glory for
ever, Amen.

We desire you to communicate this to the Brethren that are of your judgment
in these Differences.
Subscribed in the name, and at the desire of many Ministers, Elders and
Professors of the Gospel, met at Edinburgh the 17. of March, 1653. By Mr.
ANDREW CANT.

The ASSERTERS Answer.
Right Reverend,
WE received a Letter subscrived by You in the Name and at the desire of many
Ministers, Elders, and Professors met at Edinburgh, which all along charges us,
and those of our Judgment, with the guilt of many Land-destroying sins, and
with obstinacy in them. This does necessitate us, in order to our clearing unto
those among whom that your Letter is spread, as also, least you take our
silence for an evidence of our conviction, to give you this ensuing answer. We
are very confident that ye who plead for so much charity at our hands, while ye
are loading us with such a weight of unjust and odious imputations, will take
it well from us, while we go about to clear our selves, and by force of Reasons
to wipe off our Persons and Ministry that contempt and disgrace, which the
matter of your Letter and your other Papers has wrongously cast upon us. We
could gladly have chosen to be as deaf men who hear not, and as dumb men who
open not their mouth, if we alone and what concerns us only did herein
suffer; But for Zions sake we dar not hold our peace. The respect we owe to our
Mother Church, and to the hitherto untainted reputation of many faithful men,
Ministers, Elders and others, all embarked with us in the defense of one common
Truth, forces us to speak. Far be it from you to put an hard construction upon
us, or upon any of our words and expressions, while we are giving a reason of
our Faith and practice with meekness and fear, especially, being constrained
to it by your selves.

We acknowledge with you the former mercies of God unto this Church, together
with the astonishing terror of his present judgments: How good and how
pleasant was it when Brethren dwelt together in Unity? it was like precious
ointment, the dew of Hermon, then the Lord commanded the blessing; Our Church
then looked forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and
terrible as an Army with Banners; How excellent were the fruits of Church
government when inferior Judicatories and persons of all ranks, Ministers and
others did move each in their own place, in their due subordination prescribed
unto them by the Lord Christ? When publict warnings concerning dangers and
duties did come from the Watchtower of Supreme Judicatories, and from thence
as from Aarons head, did run down by his-beard to the uttermost skirts of his
garments, were we not then for a name of praise amongst the Churches abroad,
and the rod of Discipline in our hand, a terror to every thing which exalted it
self against truth and piety at home? Then did the work of Reformation come on
apace, until the head-stone was ready to be put upon it, with shoutings crying
Grace, Grace unto it; The Vine brought out of Egypt planted amongst us did fill
the land, the hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof
were like the goodly Cedars, She sent forth her boughs unto the sea, and her
branches unto the river. But now alas! the case is altered, we are as members
disjointed, as an Army routed, the Authority of CHRIST'S Courts weakened, and
all this is the more terrible, that our own hand has been in the
transgression, our hedges are broken down, so that all they that pass by do
robe and spoil; the Boar out of the wood does waste and the wild beast out of
the Forest does devour, the Foxes and little Foxes do spoil the Vines with
tender grapes, and there is none to take hold of them.

We do also regrate with you that groundless prejudices, and needless
jealousies are so readily received and entertained, and so hardly removed, and
that alienation of mind and affection does so much increase. Those seems to be
the latter times indeed, concerning which it is foretold, that because iniquity
shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. Only it appears from what
follows in yours, that what guilt is herein ye intend to fasten it all upon
us, and to purge your selves wholly of it. Thus we take up your meaning, and
doubtless others will do so also, while ye add that, Hereby it comes to
pass, that clear and evident Truths concerning the Lords controversy with the
Land are not received in simplicity of heart, but are by many laid aside as
unworthy to be taken notice of, a thing which those of your judgment do
usually charge us with. But for your selves, ye profess it is your hearts
desire so to walk with your Brethren as may be unto edification, and that ye
may do nothing which may heighten the difference. Thus all those forenamed
evils must be fastened upon us: To all which we return this Answer. 1. As we
conceive, ye neither will, nor yet can positively clear your selves from having
your own share in those things as well as others. Surely ye do not really think
that there is no groundless prejudices nor needless jealousies received and
entertained by those of your Judgment, nor no place given to alienation of
mind and affection; and if so, we wonder much why then do ye so regrate these
evils, as it is evident ye would fasten them wholly upon us: How is it, that
ye who press so much taking with guilt upon others, do not freely own your own
share in this common and uncontroverted guiltiness? 2. We do not purge those
of our Judgment, but as usually falls out in Church divisions, so it is
possible, way is given by many to prejudices and jealousies; but we are sorry
we have reason to say, your way does free them from the imputation of being
altogether groundless. We can hardly conceive, but if ye seriously consider,
ye your selves will judge, that there is great ground of jealousy given to
these of our Judgment from several things in your carriage: As namely, for
your crying out so much against that which we conceive to have been our duty,
as the main Cause of Gods Judgment, and Kingdome-ruining sin; from your
asserting in Print to the World that we are, for the same very thing, men
scandalous, and unworthy to sit in a General Assembly: If ye speak this much,
when for number ye are comparatively so few and destitute of all power, what
can be expected your Principles will lead you unto, if once ye had that
fullness of power which ye aim at? 3. How groundless so ever our jealousies
be, we must crave leave to clear our selves of that unchristian effect which ye
have expressly affirmed to have followed upon them. The searcher of hearts
knows, no groundless prejudices, nor alienation of mind and affections, has
so prevailed with us as to reject clear and evident Truths concerning the Lords
Controversy with the Land, as unworthy to be taken notice of. We desire to
believe that the fear and dread of the Almighty shall never so far forsake us,
But 4. what ye mean by these clear and evident truths concerning the Lords
controversy, and rejected by us, we cannot well conjecture; We can hardly
think that ye mean the points of controversy under debate betwixt you and us;
ye know what ye hold in those are not clear and evident truths unto us, and we
believe unto none of the Foreign Churches: We desire to know if ever such
Tenets were vented for Truths in any part of the Christian World, as that it is
not lawful, for the lawful Magistrate to employ the Body of his Subjects for
the Lands defense against an unjust Invasion; or that we may not be concurring,
according to our Place, unto the investing of any, with the power of
Magistracy, what ever otherwise be his right unto it, until he give
convincing signs of a real change; or that it is unlawful to join in Camp
fellowship with these whom we may have even the nearest Church fellowship with:
Such and many such like are no clear and evident Truths unto us. But if ye mean
other Truths concerning the common and uncontroverted guiltiness of all ranks
of Persons within the Land, such as Contempt of the Gospel, Pride, Oppression,
Uncleanness, Despising of Ordinances, Self-seeking under public pretenses, ye
know we do receive such Truths, and stir up the Land to mourn for them,
though we know many who looks on those, as sins not to be taken notice of in a
Public Fast, except those other things under debate, and of lesser moment,
what ever truth be in them, be acknowledged also.

Ye Profess your scope in Writing unto us, is that sin and transgression may
be acknowledged by us; ye needed not have excused your attempting of this
toward us, by your doing the like unto others. We are glad indeed how freely
ye do acquit your selves according to your Vocation unto all men, and are
confident when what ye have done unto others of this kind, shall be made as
public as this to us has been a long time since, it will speak for it self:
But what ever ye have done or not done unto others, your Writing unto us had
been most acceptable, if so it had taught us what we know not; your smiting of
us should have been a kindness.

For attaining the end by you Proposed, ye conceive it a good and ready way to
look back where we were when these differences began, particularly ye mention
our by past work of purging corrupt men from the Ministry, and the profitable
fruits thereof, together with the sad effects has followed upon the
interuption of it, by the abounding of scandalous Ministers and Elders, which
ye lament so much the more, as that what has been already done of this kind is
condemned by many. In answer to which we wish indeed we may all look back where
we were when these differences began. Our General Assemblies were then
terrible as ane Army with Banners, inferior Judicatories and Persons of all
ranks walking in their due subordination unto those, whereby the weeds and
stones of all sorts were gathered out of the Lords Vineyard, which now almost
every where abound. 2. We grant, that the House of God ought to be purged, and
that not only from men of scandalous lives, but also of dangerous and erroneous
principles; but we are sorry that ye labor so much to fasten upon us the
hindering of this so good a Work, ye know the weakening of our Authority makes
purging Work for the time but very little useful; Men are now taught, and ye
know by whose example, to submit no further to Church Censures nor what seems
good unto themselves. Our purging work must have Union going before it, or else
it is to little purpose, so that these who have begun and continued our woeful
Rent most, are greatest retarders of this necessary work, and so deepest in
that guilt, which you so much at all occasions do charge upon us. 3. We know
not who those are who repents of the by past work of purging, possibely some
conceive an inconvenience and danger to continue it in the same way wherein it
was formerly used, but for what we know, there is none of our judgment against
the thing it self. It may prove hazardous indeed to give unto a Quorum of some
few men (most of them being very young inexperienced and unacquainted with our
Discipline) a constant power renewed from time to time to sit down upon whole
Synods and Presbyteries, and cast out and hold in whom they please, especially
at this time when through our woeful Rent there is so much mutual irritation
of spirit, and as your selves grant so many groundless prejudices, and
needless jealousies, together with so much alienation of affections. We are
very confident it shall not be made appear, that Ezekiel threatens the
neglecting of purging only by such a mean as this, so, with all respect to
your Wisdom and parts, ye might, as we conceive, have omitted the citation of
that place as to this purpose.

As for your two Papers mentioned in yours, as containing the causes of GODS
dreadful wrath, and the sins of the Ministry, which ye recommend unto us, we
have not, as yet, so acurately perused them, but from the general view we have
taken, we find what is the great work of these books, to wit, to convince us
of the sinfulness of the Treaty, publict Resolutions etc. And in order to our
conviction herein ye recommend to us the perusal of the Covenant, Engagement,
Remonstrances, Declarations of this Kirk; For Answer, We have perused many of
them all, and most of all, the Word of Truth (the perusal whereof, why it is
not recommended by you, at least among the rest, we wonder much) But we cannot
find from all or any of these that sinfulness in these things which ye charge
them with. We find the Treaty with the King approven by Covenant,
Remonstrances, Declarations, so that if ye had cited but one passage of any of
these seemingly against it, we should have cited ten really for it. We find
the publict Resolutions also approven by these: to wit, The Commissions Answer
to the Quaeries proponed to them by the Committee of Estates; some of which
Answers in these, is. 1. It is lawful for a Magistrate to employ the body of
his Subjects for the Lands defense, especially providing none of them be put to
such Trust as may be prejudicial to the work of GOD, which ye know was
expressly provided for in the Commissions Answer. 2. That a Parliament may take
off civil mulcts, alter or shorten dyets for admitting unto, or debarring from
Trust, providing they actually employ none but these who are of known good
affection to the Cause of GOD. These are the public Resolutions so much cried
out against, and these we darre not condemn, except we would depart from
the Word of Truth. We find also what the Commission did in receiving of
Malignants to give Ecclesiastic signs of Repentance, to be justified by the
Acts of preceding Assemblies, especially the Assembly 1649. where many of
your judgment did sit as Members. We find that Assembly did injoin the
Commission to process these who were upon the unlawful Engagement, even to
Excommunication, if they did not offer signs of Repentance: We find the
Commission 1650. walking by the same steps, in their receiving of them to the
Communion of the Church, which the same Assembly in the same place does
prescribe, and if they failed in one circumstance, why do ye not make it known.
So that while ye say that they were notoriously walking in their accustomed
profaneness and enimity unto the Work of God, even when the Commission did
receive them, is more then can be made good; we mean, that they were so walking
notoriously unto the Judicatory who received them, and ye know Church
Judicatories are to judge only according unto what is made notour unto them. If
ye say their walking so was notour unto others, then we ask why did not those
others follow Christ's rule with them? Was there any of the whole bulk, whom any
of you did admonish, and for their pertinacy delated them unto the Church, as
the Word of God and the General Assembly did excite all to do. This ye know
ought to have been first done, before ye had thus charged CHRIST'S Court with
prostituting the Ordinances of Repentance unto the lusts of corrupt men.

That several of these, whom the Commission did then receive, have since
proclaimed their dissimulation, reflecteth nothing upon us, no more then the
carriage of diverse of your Judgment, who have tread in the same steps with
them of late, does reflect upon you. Besides this, we may say that the greater
part of those, at whose receiving ye professed your selves most stumbled, have
given as great a proof of their sincerity, by their after actings and
sufferings for the Covenant and Cause, as any others have done since that time.

Ye proceed and wish our selves may search what sinful courses have been taken
to promove these Public Resolutions: but least we should not search, or
happily, after searching, not find, ye put us in mind of several particulars,
to which we give this return:

1. If any Censures have been imposed upon Ministers, without a preceding Act
and practice of our Kirk in such like cases, then let the Imposers bear the
blame.

2. For any particular Acts made by the Assembly at Dundee against Professors,
for their opposition to the Acts thereof, they not being particularly
instanced, we cannot speak particularly to them; But, compare who will, we are
very confident the most rigorous Acts of that Assembly will be justified by the
many practices of former Assemblies in the like cases.

3. That ignorant, profane Elders are brought in upon Church Judicatories, is
beyond our knowledge, neither do we justify any who so does, if any such be;
But sure we are, do it who will, they have no warrant for, nor encouragement to
it from any of the late Assemblies: the latter whereof expressly Ordains that
none shall be admitted to that Office, but such as shall be well reported of,
trial also being first taken of their abilities.

4. Ye mention that gracious and well qualified Elders are removed and kept out
from Church Judicatories, and gifted and gracious men debarred from entering the
Ministry, and a door opened to others, loose and profane, etc. We know the
ground of your challenge is the Act of the late Assembly, about Ruling Elders
and Expectants: concerning which we answer, 1. That those who are for the
Assembly have been so far from the rigide executing of that Act, that in any
Synods and Presbyteries, chiefly where these of our judgment have power, where
there has been one Elder adhering to the Protestation removed from Church
Judicatories, there has been twenty of these who are for the Assembly, and
that for no reason we have heard of (few or none being legally processed)
except for their judgment in the present controversy; And the ground why we
thus speak is this, the same Elders have sitten in our Sessions their many years
by past without any endeavor to have them changed during their woeful
differences; And for Expectants, where one of our judgment has entered the
Ministry, we mean in any place where we have power, a door has been opened to
three of yours. We shall not insist here to complain, though there be more nor
reason, that by the unwearied activity of some, the credit and reputation of
diverse gracious young men is much blasted, and their names traduced, so that
many other ways, willing, gracious and able, are greatly discouraged from
aiming at the Ministry, seeing nothing as the times now are, but certain ruin
and disgrace, if over the belly of their light they do not profess an
alteration of their judgment. 2. As to the Act it self, we have this to say
for it, it is not the first which has been made of that kind, ye know what
Acts were made against Ministers, Expectants and Elders, who did not
acknowledge the Assembly at Glasgow; And how ever, the not acknowledging of
that Assembly was a thing sinful, yet none will call it such a sin, but
gracious men through error, tentations, or preingagements might have fallen in
it; Will ye therefore call these Acts a debarring of gracious Elders and
Expectants from the Ministry, we conceive ye will not.

5. As to the business of Forfar; When the Invaders had overrun and possessed
both sides of Forth, the best part of this Land, and were now ready to pass
Tay, lie down before Dundee, and overrun the Shires be North Tay, the People
then being exceedingly discouraged with fear, and divided in factions; The
Commission not out of hight and animosity of Spirit (whereof they are
uncharitably challenged) but out of the sense of danger and conscience of the
Trust committed to them, conceived it their necessary duty at such a time, to
incite the People there to unanimous concurrence and conjunction in Counsel
and Forces for the defense of the remnant of the poor Kingdom, and to lay out
the fearfulness of the sin of with drawing from these duties, and the
judgments threatened in Gods Word against the same. This was not to pronounce a
curse against any, but to rouse up all unto the acting of duty for preventing
the curse, which God himself has denunced against such as come not forth to
help the Lord against the Mighty, and has been practiced by former General
Assemblies and Commissions in exigencies that were not so extreme. Sol. Warn.
February 1645. page 15. and 18. When you have considered this and informed your
self better in the matter, we hope you will find their Warning was seasonable
and necessary even under these sad dispensations; and none in our opinion can
justly think other ways, except such as think that after these dispensations,
men should have willingly yielded up themselves, the Cause, the Kingdom, and
all their Interests to the Invaders.

6. For that you allege of our grievous traducing and reproaching you by our
spreading Declarations in this Land, and Printing Informations for England, we
doubt these Declarations and Informations you mean were spread or Printed; Sure
we are, there were no calumnies nor reproaches in them against any Persons, but
a faithful relation of Truth in matters of fact, and a clearing of the
integrity and lawfulness of our proceedings against your calumnies and
aspersions; But if ye could have instanced and instructed any particular in
these Papers, wherein ye were so traduced, it would have had the more weight,
and until then, indifferent men will think you guilty for your so charging us
of the same fault which ye charge us with. Especially seeing, 2. Its known
whose Papers had most ready access to the Press then, and yet have. And 3.
Considering what ye avowedly charge us with, to be carriers on of a course of
backsliding, and by doing our duty to have drawn down the wrath of God upon the
Land, and by our obstinacy therein to continue the same; Which in our
estimation, is as unjust a reproach, as if ye had been charged with all that
which ye do affirm. 4. If we intended to recriminate, we might speak much more
of propagating opinions by informations if not mis-informations upon your side,
than for any thing we know ye can make good upon ours.

7. That the Work of Reformation has been shaken, a foundation laid for
conjunction with all parties, and that the present Divisions have proceeded
from our forementioned actings otherwise then as from an harmless occasion,
is as easily denied by us, as affirmed by you.

But in the next place ye do profess it to be very grievous that we do yet
adhere to our former Judgment, and wish us to examine from what Principle it
does flow; We have obeyed your desire, and shall here give you an account what
after examination we have found to be the Principle from whence our adhering to
these Truths in controversy betwixt you and us do flow. God is our witness,
that according to the measure of Grace received, we have labored to lay aside
preingagements, respect to credit with men, and to judge so far as our
infirmity would suffer of the things considered abstractly and in themselves,
and after pondering of what might be said on both hands, we are more and more
confirmed, that these things we adhere unto, are Scripture Truths, consonant to
the Doctrine of our Church, and never so much for ought we know, as once
questioned in any part of the Christian World: And we do not doubt, but there
are many able men in this Church, who will maintain the beauty, necessity, and
usefulness of these Truths, against all the reproaches they are aspersed with.
Believe us, it is from this Principle that we adhere unto those so much
contradicted and reproached Truths.

Ye complain of several things in our late Assembly at Edinburgh; 1. That
they did not give you a satisfactory answer, and that because in their specious
concessions was included the approbation of the two late Assemblies and of
their Acts; To which we Answer, we believe ye will not affirm that the
Assembly did require an Approbation from you, either unto Assembly or Acts:
And will not this think ye, be thought reasonable satisfaction by indifferent
Judges, that nothing was required of you, which did necessarily infer the
alteration of your Judgment. But it seems no thing will satisfy some, so
long as we do approve of these Assemblies, and do not alter our Judgment in
relation to the maine things in controversy; And if so, we apprehend such
shall not receive a satisfactory answer in haste. 2. Ye complain that things
laid down by the Assembly as uncontroverted amongst us, are not yet practiced
by any of our number, what these things are should have been instanced, and if
we could, we should have given an answer. 3. Ye profess your fear that the
most part of that Assembly did endeavor to mar Peace and ways of healing,
Because 1. Synods and Presbyteries were encouraged to go on against Ministers
and others according to the Acts of Dundee. 2. Because of the Act sent to
Noblemen, Gentlemen, and all pious Persons within the Land, whereby the
Malignant Party was stirred up to exercise their whole power against you, and
this ye hold forth as the native scope of that Letter, not as the naked event
only; for that is after mentioned while ye add that in some places the
Malignant Party has not been slack to Act accordingly. To which we Answer,
what was the intentions of any or most part of that Assembly in relation to
Peace we cannot infallibly determine; but if we may judge of intentions by
actions, we conceive they have endeavored Peace more than ye would make the
World believe: For the thing required by them from you in the Overture of
Peace, is not that ye should alter your Judgment either in the matter of
Public Resolutions, or yet concerning the Authority of the Assembly. Only
because the holding up of Debates did tend to increase the fire of strife: It
was required that those unnecessar and unbrotherly Contests, should be laid
aside; And because a standing Protestation would prove afterward inevitably
the seed of new contention and strife, it was required in like manner, that ye
should pass from your Protestations also; Both which as we conceive, ye might
have done, reserving your Judgment concerning the sinfulness of the
resolutions, and Nullity of the Assembly, except ye affirm, that the public
venting of any thing which we conceive to be Truth may not be forborne, no not
for the Churches Peace, or that none can esteem an Assembly Null, except they
appear in a public Protestation against it, none of which as we conceive ye
will assert for Truth. Now this being all which was required, let any judge if
this was not a coming up a good length toward Peace upon the Assemblies part,
especially if it be compared with what ye have since made public in your
Printed Papers, tending as we conceive to make Peace and Union desperate. viz.
The justifying of the second reason of the Protestation, given in at St.
Andrews, wherein is asserted that these who have been Active for carrying on
the Public Resolutions are Men Scandalous, and so not to be admitted to voice
in a General Assembly; together with what ye hold out in your fyft Reason
against choosing Commissioners to the late Assembly at Edinburgh: That it is
unlawful to join in an Assembly, made up for the most part of those who acted
in, and approved of the late Assembly at Dundee; Of which sort, are without all
controversy the Body of Ministers and Elders within this Church: from which
grounds, we cannot see any probable way for Peace, except the Body of the
Ministers and Elders do willingly lie by at your mere desire; suffering you to
erect your selves in an Assembly, and then to attend with patience the
Authoritative result from your already known principles, whereby all of us are
judged men highly scandalous, guilty of foul defection, and Church-ruining
sins, together with an high degree of pertinacie in them against, so many
testimonies, such clear and evident light, and in the midst of so many fearful
judgments. Now let indifferent men judge who requires most of others, and
whose principles are most obstructive to peace. 2. That the most part of the
General Assembly did encowrage Synods and Presbyteries, to go on with Censures
against Ministers and Elders, it is hardly probable; considering that not one
Minister has been hitherto so much as processed for any thing relating to
differences; and if the bensall of their zeal was so much toward censure then;
ye would show what has interveened to blunt the edge of their zeal so much
since. 3. That such an outcry should be made against the Assemblies Letter to
Noblemen, etc. as bewraying unpeaceable spirits, we cannot imagine the Reason:
sure we are, they are known to be men very peaceable, in whose breasts the
motion of sending such a Letter did first bread: And for the matter of it, we
are confident, indifferent Judges will approve of it as savouring much of
Peace; The sum whereof was to show what length the Assembly had come toward
Peace, in the Overture of Peace therewith sent, and to entreat them to deal
with you to embrace the famine. And, 4. We wonder most by what Art ye can make
it appear, that the native scope of that Letter was to stir up the Malignant
Party to exercise all their power against you. Was the Letter direct unto any,
but unto Noblemen, Gentlemen, and all pious Persons within the Land? We cannot
conceive those to be the Malignant Party ye do so much speak of: Or is there
the least hint in that Letter exciting to exercise any power against you
further then exhortations, persuasions, desires, and entreaties? What then, is
there in that Letter which ye can load justly with such an invidious sense? If
we were going about, as the manner of some is, to charge you with being guilty
of the Kingdoms ruin, and were turning over all your opinions and practices,
whereby ye differ from us into causes of Gods wrath, stirring up the People of
the Land to mourn for the same, denouncing you guilty of high pertinacie for
your maintaining of them, and prophesying the continuance and increase of
wrath, until those were acknowledged and taken with: If our way were such, ye
might justly challenge us indeed, for stirring up not only the Malignant Party
to exercise their power against you, but also for making your own people
abhor you, and truly though we were aiming at your shame and disgrace, we
could hardly imagine a more compendious way, for bringing of it about, but the
uprightness of the upright will preserve him.

Lastly, ye profess your dissatisfaction with the present Commission, and that
for several things. 1. For their slighting and misconstruing all your
endeavors for Peace. 2. For misrepresenting your proceedings to Presbyteries,
particularly in their Letter of the Date Febr. 25. To which we Answer, 1. The
Commission did appoint a Conference at St. Andrews, in order to Union and
Peace, which was the grant of your desire for the maine, and if some words
expressing their appointment, did make you slight the offer, it would appear ye
have not had mind to the thing it self. 2. That the Commission did misrepresent
your proceedings is more then can be proved, as to the passage of their Letter
pitched upon, we answer, 1. If, the Conference appointed by the Commission was
not slighted by you, then whose default was it that it was not kept? 2. That
those of your number was not advised with, in drawing up of the Commissions
Answer, will not be thought strange unto those who know ye advised with none of
our Judgment when ye did draw up your demand, though there was severalls
present, mediating with you for Peace. 3. That some at least of your previous
desires were refused by the Commission, will be thought as little strange unto
those who knew what ye did desire, viz. that the Commission should
uncommissionat themselves by a Public Declaration, that they should Act
nothing as a Commission, during the Conference, though the necessity of the
Church should never so much require it. And how could we as ye allege imagine,
that the refusing of this desire would mar the good of the Conference, except
we had first imagined that your proponing of such a previous desire, did argue
that ye intended no good at all in order to the Churches Peace, should be
reaped by the Conference. Lastly, ye profess your selves greatly stumbled at
the Fasts and Humiliations appointed by the Commission from time to time, and
that because the Causes thereof are General and ambiguous For Answer, 1. If we
were to show unto you all wherewith we are dissatisfied in your way, we
conceive we have greater reason to be dissatisfied with your selves, but our
intent being mainly herein to clear our selves, we shall only Propone this
Question, If ever ye read in any Church Story, in any age of the Church, that
when difference of Judgment did fall out among Prime and Eminent
Church Members, that ever the one Party being the fewer, and no Church
Judicatorie, did take upon them to turn over the one side of the Controversy
into Causes of Gods Wrath upon the Church, and by the Sole Authority of Church
Sessions, hold them forth to Congregations to be mourned for at Solemn Fasts,
and this all before the Rent did turn remediless, yea and while the same Party
is pretending unto Peace, and charging the other with slighting all Overtures
for Union and healing so often Propounded, and so much pursued by themselves.
2. If ye had instanced any of these Causes of our late Fasts, which are either
ambiguous or general, we should have answered; But sure we are, it is an
unjust charge: no Causes can be more clear, nor needs to be more particular
nor the Causes of the very last Fast are, as is obvious unto any who without
prejudice will peruse them. But we gather from that which follows in yours,
what it is ye miss most in these Causes, viz. That we do not acknowledge a
Land-destroying guiltiness in the Public Resolutions. It seems unto us, ye
hint at this, while ye say, ye do find in Gods ordinary way of dealing with
his People, that there has usually been some public sins and breaches of
Covenant preceding such sad judgments. For Answer: 1. We are deceived if we
have not found the contrary, Psalm. 44. The People of God are put unto shame,
given as sheep appointed for meat, scattered among the heathen, they were
broken in the places of Dragons, their bellies made to cleave unto the dust,
and yet verse. 17. for all this, they had not forgotten God, nor yet dealt
falsely in his Covenant. Ye know also, what sad judgments were brought upon
the whole Catholic Church visible in the time of the first Persecutions by the
heathen Emperors, and afterward by the Arrians, and yet there is nothing
extant of any public break of Covenant, going before those terrible strokes
and sad sufferings. But 2. Granting that some breaches of Covenant had gone
before our sad stroke, must it therefore follow that those were the Public
Resolutions: May there not be found other breaches in relation to those who are
our Rod, or some other things. But 3. Though ye were persuaded that the breach
is in these, yet do ye think it indeed a sin before the Lord for us, who are
not so persuaded, to mourn for other Land-destroying sins which are upon all
hands uncontroverted? May not Joshua and the Elders mourn for their stroke and
their known sins procuring it, though yet they knew nothing of Achan, who had
procured Gods Wrath against them most. Or did Job sin while he acknowledged his
known iniquity? Job 7. 21. Although he himself apprehended there was some
further prime cause of this stroke nor any thing he had yet seen, as appears
from Job 10. 2. Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. But lastly as to
this purpose ye add, that we would not look upon it with a light eye, that so
many Godly in the Land cannot join in our fasts, and that all the wicked and
profane in the Land do carefully attend such dyets. For Answer, 1. We know
there are both Godly and profane within the Church, but for our selves, we
never liked the making use of that distinction for strengthening of interest and
faction, by ranking all the profane and wicked upon the one side, and so none
but the Godly, yea, and the generality of the Godly, upon the other. We know
such a method has been followed by some, but the vanity of it has still at
last been discovered, how long it will hold up with you, we do not know. 2.
Though we are not able from our own exact knowledge to order Professors through
the whole Land in their several ranks, yet our information fails us, if the
generality of noted professors of any old standing do not join with us in our
Fasts and Humiliations. 3. That any does not join with us is not looked on with
a light eye by us, we profess we look sadly upon it, as a piece of that spirit
stirring in the times: The intent whereof is to make professors first lightly
to scruple, and then to separate without any reason, upon mere gainstanding of
mind, first from some Ordinances in the hands only of some, and next in the
hands of others, that so in progress of time they may cast at all Ordinances.
We do verily believe so much is not intended by them, but so far as we can
judge, the Spirit stirring in the times drives at no less, and this is a
thing which neither we nor ye ought to think lightly of, far less do any
thing by Word or Writ which may strengthen peoples hands, or encourage them in
such a way. 4. Ye mistake while ye affirm all the profane in the Land do join
with us; We know in some places that severalls of the most profane have
separated from us, and gone to hear some of your Judgment at those dyets, and
that only because they conceived such a way would be acceptable to some whom
they have dependence upon: If ye knew the men, we conceive ye would not think
us uncharitable, though we said it was nothing of conscience which moved them.
5. Though many profane men should join in our Fasts (as they usually did in
years bypast countenance all such Fasts as were appointed by Public
Judicatories) yet there is no reproach to us, nor the way of God which we
maintain (the contrary to which ye seem to insinuate) ye know by whom the same
has been objected as a matter of reproach against the Presbyterian way, and
how ye your selves have often answered it.

That the rise of your Writing is from love to us, and not from a purpose to
render us odious, we shall not Question, only we stumble much that doubles of
yours were spread unto others before it came to our hands: what has been the
purpose of those who did so we cannot well imagine. As for the matter of your
exhortation, that we should quite the Public Resolutions, ye have our Answer
to it in what is already Written: Only your method stumbleth us not a little,
that the quyting of our Judgment in those is required as previous to our
joining with you, if ye hold this as necessarily previous to our Union we
desire to know; surely if so, ye are not so cordial for Union as some of you
pretend.

And now since we have spoken our heart freely unto you in answer to yours,
wherein we presume ye will find that we have obeyed at least your last desire,
having Written nothing which may evidence our putting of a hard construction
upon your intentions, or upon any of your words or expressions, which may seem
harsh, we have only answered to the matter held forth by them; we shall not take
upon us to speak our sense of that way wherein ye have walked this time bypast,
the General Assembly having spoken so much to that purpose, whom if ye do not
hear, we conceive neither will ye hear us. Only Sir, let us with all due
respect take the boldness to propound unto you some few Questions concerning
some things in your way, and the way of those other Reverend Brethren who join
with you: To which we earnestly crave, and, as we conceive, in equity may
expect an Answer. The things we question being such as your clear and distinct
answer will satisfy the minds of many, much concerning the sincerity of your
endeavor for healing, and your willingness to remove these things, which in
the apprehensions of many are real impediments and stumbling blocks, cast in
the way of Union and Peace. The Questions are those following.

QUEST. 1. Do ye indeed conceive that ye can have no Union with us until we
obey the contents of your Letter, and profess an alteration of our Judgment
in these things wherein we differ from you? Besides other things, the
exhortation proponed in your Letter unto us gives us ground thus to Question,
where our forsaking of the way of Public Resolutions is required as previous
unto our joining together for carrying on the Work of Reformation: If ye so
conceive we are at a point, we must either come over the belly of our Light,
and call good evil, else ye will not hear of Peace.

QUEST. 2. If ye look on us as men scandalous and unworthy to sit in Church
Judicatories? the second Reason of your Protestation against the Assembly at S.
Andrews gives us ground to imagine thus: for there do ye decline that Assembly,
because the most eminent men of our Church was not casten by as scandalous,
though nothing either was or could be alleged against them, but their
accession to the Public Resolutions; If ye so judge still, we cannot
understand how ye mind peace.

QUEST. 3. Do ye really think it unlawful to join in an Assembly made up for
the most part of these who acted in, and approved of the late Assembly at
Dundee, as your fifth Reason against choosing Commissioners to the late Assembly
at Edinburgh does express? If thus ye judge, then you must decline not only
the General Assemblies, but all Synods and Presbyteries: yea, and shake off
your Ministers also, if they be not of your judgment, as continuing in a
course which you think defection and the main cause of GODS wrath.

QUEST. 4. How is it many of your judgment refuse to join with us in the
public Acknowledgment of uncontroverted guiltiness, and that only because we
cannot go over our light, to acknowledge that for a sin which we do esteem to
have been a duty? We desire to know any passage of Scripture, warranding a
separation from such a necessary duty for that only cause.

QUEST. 5. Seeing ye do so much cry out against us, for retarding the work of
Purging, how is it ye do not cordially join and excite to the censuring of
erroneous Ministers, who have avowedly spit upon their Mothers face, and are
daily stirring up others to do the like?

QUEST. 6. How is it some Ministers of your judgment take upon them to
intimate Fasts, read forth Causes of Wrath unto the people to be humbled for,
appoint particular diets for going about this work; and this all without the
Authority of any Church Judicatorie, no not so much as of their own Sessions?
if this were done by others, it would seem somewhat Prelaticall like.

QUEST. 7. How is it some of your judgment take upon them to debar from the
Lords Table, the third part or half the number of their Church Members come to
age? This seems unto us a great step toward separation.

QUEST. 8. We desire to know what are these positive signs of real
repentance, which ye require in those who are to be received, after scandal,
unto the fellowship of the Church? and why the same may not be required in the
admission of Church Members?

QUEST. 9. How is it the practice of many of your number to cast out of
Sessions, under one pretense or other, all those almost who are of our
judgment? and yet cry out so much against the Act of the late Assembly,
ordaining not those who differ from us in the matter of Public Resolutions:
but only such as adhere to the Protestation against the Assemblies to be laid
aside only, from voicing in Presbyteries and Synods, but not at all to be cast
out of Church-Sessions.

QUEST. 10. What warrant or approven precedent in this or any Reformed Kirk can
you show for your admitting Ruling Elders and private Persons in your public
meetings to pray publicly among so many Ministers?

QUEST. 11. How upon no other ground, but your own declinature, (...) assume
the power of the Commission 1650. which was surrend^^^^ to the General
Assembly 1651. by a Quorum, and the greatest number of the Commissioners,
whereof some of your selves were a part? And what Assembly will you find your
selves countable to, which another Quorum of your Commission may not also
decline upon your own or the like reasons?

QUEST. 12. How can you pretend to Act be virtue of the Commission 1650. which
you neither have, nor ever had at any of your Meetings? Have you made up to
your selves the whole power, members, Quorum, and date of that Commission by
your own memories and assertions.

QUEST. 13. Or do you assume to your selves the power of the Commission of the
Assembly 1649. which you have in Print, because you have not the Commission
1650. and will have it believed from your own testimonies, that the power of
both is one and the same in Terminis? which yet will not be found true, and you
cannot but know, that the Members and Quorum are not the same in both.

QUEST. 14 But if you have an authentic extract of the Commission 1650. Since
pretending to that Authority you Act so great things, why is not your
Commission Printed with the Acts issueing from you, by virtue thereof that the
Authority of it may be known, seeing it is so much questioned in the Power,
Members, Quorum, and the very being of it?

Sir, We have proponed those that by your answers to them we may know what
hopes there is of making up of our woeful Rent; and (if we might take the
boldness to speak a little to such an Eminent servant of Jesus Christ as ye,
whom our conscience bears witness we respect and honor much in the Lord) We
would humbly obtest you, If there be any consolations in Christ, if any comfort
of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, ye would
employ the great power, which we know ye deservedly have amongst these of your
Judgment, to make them incline to ways of Peace and healing. Do we not yet
see that our Church is destroyed? The Authority of Christ's Courts almost
mortally wounded? Has not Unity in times bypast been this Churches praise,
and that which made our Government lovelie unto Foreign Churches? And shall
this breach turn irrepareable under our hands? Consider, we entreat you,
seriously how improbable it is that our Union shall begin at our uniting in
Judgment concerning those Public Re^^^^ (...) much opposed as defection by
you, so much defended as (...) of necessary duty by us. If this be the Method
ye resolve to follow, what hope is there of attaining Peace and Union? To what
end serves all our debates concerning those? May we ask how (...) have ye
gained unto your mind, by all your pains taken that way? Or how many gain we
to ours? Or when do ye expect that all precious and able Men in this Church
shall be one in those? To what purpose then is our mutual challenges, our
answers, replies, our public debates, but to irritate one another, and to make
our selves ridiculous? When shall we cease thus to strive? Are we not Brethren?
How many are our mutual bands? we are knit together by the ties of one
profession; one holy Calling; one Church; one Country; one Covenant; and by
the tie of common sufferings; Are we not one in all those? and shall we thus
rent asunder for things of small concernment? Surely then, if lesser then any
of those forementioned ties, Oh we might once see that Scripture verified in
us. The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall
be cut off; Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. How
good were it if as Brethren we were dwelling together in Unity, it should be as
the precious Ointment upon the head, that ran down upon Aarons beard to the
skirts of his garments, as the dew of Hermon, there the Lord should command the
blessing, even life for ever more.

FINIS.

