SAUNY the SCOT. OR, THE Taming of the Shrew.

Sauny the Scott: OR, THE Taming of the Shrew: A COMEDY.

As it is now ACTED at the THEATER ROYAL.

Written by J. LACEY, Servant to His MAJESTY.

And Never before Printed.

Then I Will cry out, Swelled with Poetic Rage,
It Is I, John Lacy, have Reformed your Stage.
Prol. to Rehers.
London, Printed and Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall. School.

ACTORS NAMES.
LOrd Beaufoy. Woodall Petruchio, the Tamer. Geraldo Tranio Sir Lyonell Winlove
Winlove, his Son. Snatchpenny Iamy, Sauny, the Scott. Curtis, And other
Servingmen. Philip, And other Servingmen. Margaret the Shrew. Biancha, her
Sister. Mr. Johnson. Mr. Powell. Mr. Thomas. Mr. Harland. Mr. Mills. Mr.
Penkethman. Mr. Hains. Mr. Bullock. Mrs. Verbrugen. Mrs. Cibber.
SAUNEY the SCOT: OR, The Taming of the SHREW.
Enter Winlove, and his Man Tranio. Win. I Am quite weary of the Country Life;
there is that Little thing the World calls Quiet, but there is nothing else;
Clowns live and die in it, whose Souls lie hid here, and after Death their
Names: My Kinder Stars, (I thank 'em) have Winged my Spirit with an Active
Fire, which makes me wish to know what Men are Born for, to Diet a Running
Horse, to give a Hawk casting, to know Dogs Names; These make not Men; no, it is
Philosophy, it is Learning, and Exercise of Reason to know what is Good and
Virtuous, and to break our Stubborn and Untemper'd Wills, to Choose it; This
makes us Imitate that Great Divinity that Framed us.


Tran. I thought you had Learned Philosophy enough at Oxford, what betwixt
Aristotle on one side, and Bottle-Ale on the other, I am confident you have
arrived at a Pitch of Learning and Virtue sufficient for any Gentleman to set
up with in the Country, that is, to be the Prop of the Family.


Winl. My Father's Fondness has kept me so long in the Country, I Have forgot all
I Would Learned at the University: Besides, take that at Best, it but Rough-casts
us; No, London is the Choicest Academy, it is that must Polish us, and put a
Gloss upon our Country-Studies; Hither I Am come at last, and do resolve to
Glean many Vices. Thou, Tranio, have been my Companion, still one Bed has held
us, one Table fed us; and though our Bloods give me Precedence (that I count
Chance) My Love has made us Equal, and I have found a frank return in thee.


Tran. Such a Discourse commands a Serious Answer; Know then, your Kindness
tells me, I must Love you: The Good you have Taught me Commands me to Honor
you; I have Learnt, with you, to hate Ingratitude; But setting those aside, for
thus I may seem to do it: for my own sake, be assured, I must Love you, though
you hate me; I neither look at Vice nor Virtue in you, but as you are the
Person I dote on.


Win. No more; I do believe and know thou love me: I wonder Iamy stays so
long behind: You must look out to get me handsome Lodgings, sit to receive such
Friends the Town shall bring me; you must take care of all, for I Am resolved to
make my Study my sole Business; I Will live handsomely, not over high, nor yet
beneath my Quality.


Enter Beaufoy, Margaret, Biancha, Woodall, and Geraldo. But stay a little,
What Company's this? Beau. Gentlemen, Importune no farther, you know my firm
Resolve, not to bestow my Youngest Daughter, before I have a Husband for the
Elder; if either of you both Love Pegg, because I know you well, and love you
well: You shall have freedom to Court her at your Pleasure.


Wood. That is to say, we shall have leave to have our Heads broken, a prime
Kindness, by'ur Lady, she is too rough for me; There, Geraldo, take her for me,
if you have any Mind to a Wife; to her, you are Young, and may clap Trammel's
on her, and strike her to a Pace in time; I dare not deal with her, I shall
never get her out of her high Trot.


Marg. It Is strange, Sir, you should make a Stale of me among these Mates thus.


Geral. Mates, Madam, 'Faith, no Mates for you, unless you were a little Tamer;
woe worth him that has the Breaking of you?


Marg. Take heed I don't bestow the Breaking of your Calves Head for you; You
Mate, Marry come up; go, get you a Sempstress, and run in Score with her for
Muckinders to dry your Nose with, and Marry her at last to pay the Debt: And
you there, Goodman Turnep-eater, with your Neats-Leather Phisnomy, I Will send
your Kitchen-wench to Liquor it this Wet-weather; Whose old Boots was it cut
out of?


Ger. From all such Potticoate Devils deliver us I pray.


Tran. Did you ever see the like, Sir? that Wench is either stark Mad, or
wonderful Froward.


Wood. I cannot tell, but I had as live take her Dowry with this condition, to
be whipped at Chairing-cross every morning.


Ger. Faith as you say, there is small choice in rotten Apples, but since it is
as it is, let us be Friendly Rivals, and endeavor for a Husband for Margaret,
that Biancha may be free to have one, and then he that can win her, wear her.


Wood. I would give the best Horse in Smith-field to him that would thoroughly
Woe her, Wed her, and Bed her, and rid the House of her, to carry her far
enough of, well come agreed.


Exit. Tran. But pray Sir, is it possible that Love should of a sudden take such
hold of you.


Win. O Tranio, till I found it to be true, I never found it possible, but she
has such attractive Charms, he were a stone that did not Love her, I am all
fire, burn, pine, perish Tranio, unless I win her; Counsel me, and Assist me,
Dear Tranio.


Tran. Are all your Resolutions for Study come to this? you have got a book
will hold you tack, you are like to be a fine Virtuoso, now must we to a
Chemist to set his Still a going for Philters -- Love Powders and Extracts of
Sigh's and Highoe's.


Win. Nay Tranio, do not make Sport with my Passion, it is a thing so deeply
rooted here, it cannot dye, but it must take me with it; help me, or hope not
long to see thy Master?


Tran. Nay Sir, if you are so far gone there is no remedy, we must contrive some
way, but 'twill be difficult; for you know her Father has mewed her up, and
till he has rid his hands of her Sister there is no coming near her.


Win. Ah, Tranio, what a cruel Father's he, but don't you remember what care he
took to provide Masters for her.


Tran. I Sir, and what of all that?


Win. You Are a Fool, cannot I be perfer'd to her, to teach her French, I have a
good command of the Language, and it may be easily done.


Tran. I don't apprehend the easiness of it; for who shall be Sir Lyonels Son
here in Town? To ply his Studyes, and welcome his Friends, visit his Kindred,
and entertain 'em.


Win. Be content, I have a Salve for that too; we have not yet been seen in any
House, nor can be distinguished by our Faces, for Man or Master. Then it
follows thus, you Tranio must be young Winlove in my stead, and bear your self
according to my rank; I Will be an ordinary French Master about the Town, the
time I stayed in France, in that will help me, it must be so. Come, come,
unease, and take my Clothes and when we are at our Lodgings, we'll make a full
change; when Iamy comes he waits on thee, but first I Will charm his Tongue.


Tran. 'Twill be needful, since this is your Pleasure I Am tied to be Obedient,
for so your Father charged me at your Parting, although I think 'twas in another
sense; In short I Am ready to serve you, and assist you in your Enterprise.


Enter Jamy. Win. Here comes the Rogue. Sirrah, Where have you been?


Iam. Where have I been? Pray how now Master, where are you Master, has Tranio
Stolen your Clothes, or you his, or both?


Winl. Sirrah come hither, this is not time to Jest. Some weighty Reason makes
me take this Habit; enquire not; you shall know them time enough; mean while
wait you on Tranio in my stead I charge you as becomes you, you understand me.


Iam. I, Sir, never a whit.


Win. And not of Tranio; one word in your Mouth, he is turned to Winlove.


Iam. The better for him, would I were so too.


Tran. When I am alone with you, why then I am Tranio still, in all places
else, your Master VVinlove.


VVinl. Tranio, let us go, one thing yet remains, which you must by no means
neglect, that is, to make one amongst these Wars; Ask me not why, but be
satisfied, my Reasons are both good and weighty.


Tran. I obey, Sir.


[Exeunt. ACT II.
Enter Petruchio, and his Man Sauny. Pet. SIrrah, leave off your Scotch, and
speak me English, or something like it.


Saun. Good will I Sir.


Pet. I think we have Ridden Twenty Miles in Three hours, Sawny are the Horses
well Rubbed down and Litter'd.


Saun. Deel O my Saul, Sir, I never Scrub'd my sell better than I Scrub'd your
Naggs.


Pet. And thou need'st Scrubbing, I Will say that for thee, thou Beastly Knave;
Why do ye not get your self Cured of the Mange.


Saun. S'breed, Sir, I w'ud ne'a be cured for a Thousand Pund; there is nea a
Lad in aw Scotland but Loves it; Good Sawny might hang himsel an it were not
for Scratting and Scubbing.


Pet. Why so Prithee?


Saun. When ye gea 'tull a Ladies House ye are Blithe and Bonny Sir, and gat good
Meat, but the Dee'l a bit gat's Sawndy, mere than Hunger and Cawd, Sir; Ba
then, Sir, when aw the Footmen stan still Sir, and ha nothing to dea, then gees
Saundy tul his Pastime, Scratten and Scrubben.


Pet. Do call it Pastime?


Saun. A my Saul de I Sir; I take as Muckle Pleasure, Sir, in Scratten and
Scrubben, as ye de in Tiplin and Mowing.


Pet. Nay, if it be so, keep it, and much good may it do you. This is my old
Friend Geraldo's Lodgings, for whose sake now I am come to Town, I hope he is at
home; there Sauny, Knock.


Saun. Wuns, Sir, I see nean to Knock boe' yer ean sell, Sir.


Pet. Sirrah, I say Knock me soundly at this Gate.


Saun. Out, Out, in the Muccle Dee'ls Name to ye; you will gar me strike ye, and
then ye'l put me a-wau, Sir, with ye'r favor Ise never do it Sir: Good an ye ne
ken when ye an a gued Man, S'breed I wo't when I Have a gued Master, ye's bang
yer Sell for Saundy.


Pet. Rogue, I Will make you understand me.


[Beats him. Saun. Good an yeed give Sawndy ea bang ar two mere e that place,
for I can never come at it to Scrat it my sell Sir.


Pet. Yes thus, Sir.


Saun. The Dee'l faw yer Fingers, I may not beat yea of yee'r e'ne Dunghill,
Sir, bot gin I had yea in Scotland, Is'e ne give yea a Bawbee for your Luggs.


Enter Geraldo. Ger. How now Sauny, What Crying out? Dear Petruchio, most
welcome; When came you to Town? What Quarrel is this 'twixt you and Sauny? I
pray let me Compose the Difference, and tell me now what happy Gale droye you
to Town, and why in this Habbit? Why in Mourning?


Pet. A common Calamity to us young Men, my Father has been Dead this four
Mouths.


Ger. Trust me I am sorry, a good old Gentleman.


Saun. Gee yer gate Sir, ge yer gate, on ye be fow a grief ye'r nea Friend,
Sir, we are blyth and bonny, Sir, we nere woe for it.


Pet. Sirrah, you long to be basted.


Saun. Gad do I not, Sir.


Pet. Hither I come to try my Fortunes, to see if good luck and my Friends will
help me to a Wife; Will you wish me to one?


Ger. What Quallifications do you look for?


Pet. Why Money, a good Portion.


Ger. Is that all?


Pet. All Man? all other things are in my making.


Ger. I shall come roundly to you, and wish you to a Rich Wife, but her Face --


Pet. That shall break no Squares, a Mask will mend it, wealth is the burden
of my Wooing Song. If she be Rich, I care not if she want a Nose or an Eye, any
thing with Money.


Saun. De ye nea gi him Creedit Sir, I wud a halp't him tul a Highland Lady
with Twanty thousand pund; Good he wud nea have her, Sir.


Pet. Sirrah, your Twenty thousand Pounds Scotch will make but a Pitiful
English portion.


Saun. Good Sir, Bo a Muckle deal of Scotch Punds is as gued as a Little deal
of English Punds.


Ger. She has nothing like this, but a thing worse, she has a Tongue that
keep's more Noise then all that ever Moved at Billingsgate.


Pet. Pish, a triffle; Where lives she? I long to be Wooing her, let me alone
with her Tongue, I Am in Love with the new's of it, who is it? who is it? I Am
resolved for her or Nobody.


Ger. But look before you Leap, Sir, and say you were warned.


Saun. Out, out, he can nea break his Cragg upon her, Good an ye'd venture your
bonny Lass, Ise venture my bonna Lad at her, Sir.


Ger. Her Father is the brave Noble Beaufoy, her Name Margaret, famed about
Town for a Vixen.


Pet. The Town's an Ass, come prithee show me the House, I will not sleep 'till
I see her, I know her Father. Nay, I am resolved man, come prithee come.


Saun. Wun's man an she be a Scawd, awaw with her, awaw with her, and Iohnee
Iohnstons Curse go with Her.


Ger. Prithee what is that?


Saun. That is, the Deel creep into her weem t'ith very bottom on it that is to
the Croone gued faith of her head.


Ger. Well Sir, if you are resolved, I Will wait on you; to say the truth, 'twill
be my great advantage, for if you win her, I shall have liberty to see her
younger Sister sweet Biancha, to whose fair Eyes I am a Votary, and you in
order to my Love Petruchio must help me, I Will tell you why, and how you must
prefer me as a Musick-Master to old Beaufoy.


Pet. I understand you not.


Saun. He Would ha ye make him her Piper, Sir, gued at ye'd make Sanndy her Piper,
wun's I Would sea blea her Pipe.


Pet. Sirrah be quiet, what I can I Will serve you in; But who comes here Geraldo?


Enter Woodall and Winlove Disguised. Ger. It Is Mr. Woodall, a rich old
Citizen, and my Rival: Hark.


Saun. Out, out, What sud an awd Carle do with a young bonny Lass, are ye not
an And theif, Sir.


Wood. How!


Saun. Are ye not an And Man, Sir?


Wood. Yes marry am I, Sir.


Saun. And are not ye to Marry a young Maiden?


Wood. Yes, What then?


Saun. And are not ye troubled with a sear grief, Sir?


Wood. A sear grief, what sear grief?


Saun. Your troubled with a great weakness in the bottom of your Bally, what
sid yea dea with a young Maiden? Out, out, out.


Wood. You understand me, your French Books treat most of Love; those use her
too, and now and then you may urge something of my Love and Merit? besides her
Fathers bounty, you shall find me Liberal.


Win. Mounsier, me will tell her the very fine ting of you, me vill make her
Love you whether she can or not?


VVood. Enough, Peace, here is Geraldo, your servant Sir, I am just going to Sir
Nicholas Beaufoy to carry him this Gentleman, a Frenchman, most Eminent for
teaching his Country Language.


Ger. I have a Master for Biancha too, but waving that, I have some news to
tell you, I have found out a Friend that will Woo Margaret, What will you
contribute, for he must be hired to it?


VVood. Why I will give him forty Pieces in hand, and when he has don't, I Will
double the Sum.


Ger. Done, Sir, I Will undertake it.


Saun. S'breed Sir, I'se gat it done muckle Cheaper, for twanty Punds I'se dea
it my Sell.


Ger. Come, down with your Money, and the Bargain's made.


VVood. But if He should not do it, I don't care for throwing away so much Money.


Ger. If he don't I Will undertake he shall refund.


VVood. Why then here is ten Pieces, and that Ring I Will pawn to you for 'tother
Forty, it is worth a Hundred; But does the Gentleman know her Qualities?


Pet. I Sir, and they are such as I am fond on; I woul'd not be hired for any
thing, to Woo a person of another Humor.


Enter Tranio brave, and Jamy. Tran. Save you Gentlemen; Pray which is the way
to Sir Nicholas Beaufoy's House?


VVood. Why Sir, what is your Business there? you pretend not to be a Servant to
either of his Daughters, d' ye?


Tran. You are something blunt in your Questions, perhaps I do.


Pet. Not her that Chides, on any hand I pray.


Tran. I Love no Chiders; come Iamy.


Ger. Pray stay Sir, Is it the other?


Tran. May be it is, Is it any offense?


VVood. Yes it is Sir, she is my Mistress.


Ger. I must tell you Sir, she is my Mistress too.


Tran. And I must tell you both she is my Mistress; Will that content you? nay
never frown for the Matter.


Saun. And I mun tell ye all, there is little hopes for Saundy then.


VVin. The Rogue does it rarely.


Pet. Nay, nay, Gentleman, no Quarrelling, unless it were to the purpose: Have
you seen this young Lady Sir?


Tran. No Sir: but I Am in Love with her Character. They say she has a Sister
moves like a Whirlwind.


Pet. Pray spare your Description Sir; that Furious Lady is my Mistress; and
till I have Married her, Biancha is Invisible; her Father has Sworn it, and,
till then, you must all move Forty foot off.


Tran. I thank you for your Admonition; I should have lost my Labor else; and
since you are to do all of us the Favor, I shall be glad to be numbered among
your Servants Sir.


Pet. You will honor me to accept of me for yours. But pray Sir let me know
who obliges me with this Civility?


Tran. My Name is VVinlove, Sir, a VVorstershire Gentleman; where I have
something, an Old Man's Death will Entitle me to, not inconsiderable. Come,
Gentlemen, let us not fall out, at least till the Fair Biancha's at Liberty;
Shall we go sit out half an hour at the Tavern, and Drink her Health?


Saun. Do my Bearns; and I'se Drink with ye to Countenance ye.


Pet. I, I, agreed; Come, and then I Will to my Mistress.


Saun. Good these Lades are of Saundyes Mind, they will lather take a Drink, nor
Flight.


[Exeunt. Enter Margaret and Biancha. Marg. Marry come up Proud Slut, Must you
be making your self Fine before your Elder Sister? You are the Favorite you
are, but I shall make you know your Distance; Give me that Necklace, and those
Pendants, I Will have that Whisk too, there is an old Handkerchief good enough for
you.


Bianc. Here, take 'em, Sister, I resign 'em freely, I would give you all I
have to Purchase your Kindness.


Marg. You Flattering Gypsy, I could find in my Heart to Slit your Dissembling
Tongue; Come, tell me and without Lying, which of your Suitors you Love best?
Tell me, or I Will beat you to Clouts, and Pinch thee like a Fary.


Bian. Believe me Sister, of all Men alive, I never saw that Particular Face
which I could Fancy more than another.


Marg. Huswife you Lie; and I could find in my Heart to Dash thy Teeth down thy
Throat; I know thou Love Goraldo.


Bian. If you Affect him Sister, I Vow to plead for you my self, but you shall
have him.


Marg. O then belike you fancy Riches more, you Love Old VVoodall.


Bian. That Old Fool: Nay now I see you but Jested with me all this while; I
know you are not Angry with me.


Marg. If this be Jest, then all the rest is so: I Will make ye tell me e're I
have done with you Gossip.


Enter Beaufoy. Beau. Why now now Dame, Whence grows this Insolence? Biancha
get thee in my Poor Girl; She Weeps; Fie, Peg, put off this Devilish Humor;
Why do thou Cross thy Tender Innocent Sister? When did she Cross thee with a
Bitter Word?


Marg. Her Silence Flouts me, and I Will be Revenged.


[Flyes at Biancha. Beau. What in my sight too? You scurvy Ill-natured Thing:
Go, poor Biancha, get thee out of her way.


[Exit. Marg. What will you not suffer me; nay, now I see she is your Treasure;
She must have a Husband; and I Dance Barefoot on her Wedding Day: And for your
Love to her, lead Apes in Hell. I see your care of me, I Will go and cry till I
can find a way to be quit with her.


Exit. Beau. Was ever poor Man thus plagued?


Enter Woodal with Winlove Disguised, with Jamy carrying a Lute and Books, and
Tranio. How now who'se here?

VVood. Sir your Servant, I am bold to wait on you to present you this
Gentleman, an Acute teacher of the French Tongue, his Name's Mounsieur Mawgier,
pray accept his service.


Beau. I am your debtor Sir, Mounsieur you are welcome.


VVin. Me give you humble thanks Sir.


Beau. But what Gentleman is that?


VVood. I don't love him so well to tell you his Errant, but he would come
along with me, you had best ask him.


Tran. I beg you Pardon for my Intrusion, we heard your Fair and Virtuos
Daughter Biancha, praised to such a height of Wonder, Fame has already made me
her Servant; I Have heard your Resolution not to Match her till her Eldest Sister
be bestowed, mean while I beg Admittance like the rest to keep my hopes alive;
this Lute Sir, and these few French Romances I would Dedicate to her Service.


Beau. Sir you oblige me, Pray your Name?


Tran. It Is VVinlove, Son and Heir to Sir Lyonell VVinlove.


Beau. My noble Friend, he has been my School-fellow; for his sake you are most
kindly welcome, you shall have all the freedom I can give you.


Enter Sauny and Geraldo Disguised. Saun. Hand in hand, Sir, I'se go tell him
my sell. Whare is this Lord?


Beau. Here, Sir, What would you have, what are you?


Saun. Marry I'se can a bonny Scot, Sir.


Beau. A Scotchman is that all?


Saun. Wun's wud ye have me a Cherub? I ha brought ye a small teaken Sir.


Beau. But do you hear you Scot, don't you use to put off your Cap to your
betters?


Saun. Marry we say in Scotland Gead Mourn til ye for aw the day, and sea put
on our bonnets again, Sir; Bud Sir, I ha brought ye a Teaken.


Beau. To me, where is it; from whence is your Teaken?


Saun. Marry from my good Master Petruchio, Sir; he has sen ye a Piper to teach
your Bonny Lasses to Pipe, but gin yet let Sauny teach 'em? I'se pipe 'em sea
Whim -- Whum, their Arses shall nere leave giging and joging while their's a
Tooth in their head.


Beau. Petruchio! I remember him now, How does thy Master?


Saun. Marry Sir, he means to make one of your Lasses his Wanch, that is his
Love and his Ligby.


Beau. You are a Saucy Rogue.


Saun. Good wull a Sir, he will tak you Lass with a Long Tang that the Deel and
Saundy wun a venture on, but he is here his aun sell, Sir.


Enter Petruchio. Pet. Your most humble Servant.


Beau. Noble Petruchio welcome, I thank you for your kindness to my Daughters.
Within there.


Enter Servant. Conduct these Gentlemen to my Daughters, tell 'em these are
both to be their Masters, bid 'em use 'em Civily; take in that Lute, and those
Books there, Petruchio I hear you have lost your Father lately.

Pet. It Is true, but I hope to find another in you; in short I hear you have a
fair Daughter called Margaret, the World says she is a Shrew; But I think
otherwise, you know my Fortune, if you like my Person, with your Consent, I Will
be your Son-in-Law.


Beau. I have such a Daughter, but I so much Love you, I would not put her into
your hands, she will make you mad.


Saun. Good he is as mad as heart can wish, Sir, he need nea halp, Sir.


Pet. I Will venture it Father, so I Will presume to call ye; I Am as Peremptory, as
she is Proud-minded: and where two Rageing fires meet together they do consume
the thing that feed's their fury; my Fathers Estate I have bettered, not
Imbezell'd, then tell me, if I can get your Daughters Love, What Portion you
will give?


Beau. After my Death the Moiety of my Estate, and on the Wedding day Three
Thousand Pounds.


Pet. And I Will assure her Jointure answerable; get Writings drawn, I Will warrant
you I Will carry the Wench.


Beau. Fair Luck betide you.


Enter Geraldo Bleeding. How now Man, What Is the matter? Will my Daughter be a
good Lutanist?

Ger. She Will prove a better Cudgel Player, Lutes will not hold her.


Beau. Why then thou can not break her to thy Lute.


Ger. No, but she has broke the Lute to me; I did but tell her she mistook her
fretts, and bowed her head to teach her Fingrings, Fretts call you these,
(quoth she) and I Will frett with you, so fairly took me over the Pate with the
Lute, and set me in the Pillory; and followed it with loud Volly's of Rogue,
Rascal, Fiddler, Jack, Puppy, and such like.


Pet. Now by the World I Love her ten times more than er'e I did.


Saun. Good, bo the De'll a bit ye's wad her Sir, Wun's I'se nea gi two Pence
for my Luggs gin you make her yer Bride.


Pet. I Will warrant you Sauny, we'll deal with her well enough.


Beau. Well Sir, I Will make you Reperation, proceed still with my youngest
Daughter, she is apt to Learn; Petruchio will you go with us, or shall I send my
Daughter to you?


Pet. Pray do Sir, and I Will attend her here.


Exeunt Manut. Pet. Saun. Saun. Good at ge gi Saundy a little Siller to gea to
Scotland again.


Pet. Why Sauny, I have not used thee so unkindly.


Saun. Good I'se nea tarry with a Scauding Queen Sir, yet the Dee'l faw my
Luggs, if Ise ken which is worse, to tarry and venture my Cragg, or gea heam to
Scotland.


Enter Margaret. Pet. Peace Sirrah, here she comes; now for a Rubbers at Cuffs.
O Honey Pretty Peg, how do thou do Wench?


Marg. Marry come up Ragmanners, Plain Peg? Where were you bred? I am called
Mrs. Margaret.


Pet. No, no, thou lie Peg, you are called plain Peg, and Bonny Peg, and
sometimes Peg the Cursed, take this from me; Hearing thy Wildness praised in
every Town, thy Virtues Sounded and thy Beauty spoke off: my self am moved to
take thee for my Wife.


Marg. I knew at first you were a Moveable.


Pet. Why what is a Moveable.


Marg. A Joint Stool.


Pet. Thou have hit it Peg, come sit upon me.


Marg. Asses were made to bear, and so were you.


Pet. Why now I see the World has much abused thee, 'twas told me thou were
rough and Coy, and Sullen, but I do find thee pleasant, Mild and Courteous; Thou
can not frown, nor Pout, nor bite the Lip as angry wenches do. Thou art all
sweetness.


Marg. Do not Provoke me, I will not stand still and here my self abused.


Pet. What a Rogue was that told me thou were Lame, thou art as straight as an
Osier! and as Pliable, O what a rare walk's there! why there is a gate puts down
the King of Frances best great Horse.


Saun. And the King of Scotland's tea.


Pet. Where did thou Learn the grand Paw Peg? It becomes thee rarely.


Marg. Does it so sawcebox? how will a halter become you with a running knot
under one Ear?


Pet. Nay, no knot Peg, but the knot of Matrimony 'twixt thee and me, we shall
be an Excellent Mad Couple well matched


Marg. I matched to thee? what to such a fellow with such a Gridiron face; with
a Nose set on like a Candels end stuck against a Mud wall; and a Mouth to eat
Milk Porridge with Ladles? Foh, it almost turns my Stomach to look on it.


Saun. Good an your Stomach wamble to see his Face, What will ye dea when ye see
his Arse Madam.


Marg. Marry come up Abberdeen, take that [hits him a box on the Ear.] and
speak next when it comes to your turn.


Saun. S'breed the Deel tak a gripe O yer faw fingers and Driss your Doublat
for ye.


Pet. Take heed Peg, Sauny's a Desperate Fellow.


Marg. You Are a couple of Logger heads Master and Man, that I can tell you.


Pet. Nay, nay, Stay Peg, for all this I do like thee, and I mean to have thee,
in truth I am thy Servant.


Marg. Aye you, why then I Will give you a favor, and thus I Will tie it on,
there is for you.


[beats him.] Saun. Out, out, I'se gea for Scotland, Good an she beat ye
Saundy's a Dead Man.


Pet. I Will swear I Will cuff you, if you Strike again.


Marg. That Is the way to loose your Arms, if you strike a Woman, you are no
Gentleman.


Pet. A Herald Peg? Prithee Blazon my Coat.


Marg. I know not your Coat, but your Crest is a Coxcombe.


[offers to go away. Pet. Stop her Sirrah, stop her.


Saun. Let her gea her gate Sir, an e'n two Deels and a Scotch wutch, blaw her
weeme full of Wind.


Pet. Stay her Sirrah, stay her, I say.


Saun. S'breed Sir, stay her yer sen, but hear ye Sir, an her tale gea as fast
as her tang, Good ye ha meet with a Whupster, Sir.


Pet. Prithee Peg stay, and I Will talk to thee in Earnest.


Marg. You may pump long enough er'e you get out a wise word, get a Night Cap
to keep your brains warm.


Pet. I mean thou shall keep me warm in thy Bed Peg, What think thou of that
Peg? in plain terms without more ado I have your Fathers Consent, your Portions
agreed upon, your Jointure settled, and for your own part, be willing or
unwilling all is one, you I will marry, I am resolved on it.


Marg. Marry come up Jack a Lent, without my Leave?


Pet. A Rush for your Leave, here is a Clutter with a troublesome Woman, rest you
contented, I Will have it so.


Marg. You shall be baked first, you shall; within there, ha!


Pet. Hold, get me a Stick there Sauny; by this hand, deny to Promise before
your Father, I Will not Leave you a whole rib, I Will make you do it and be glad
on it.


Marg. Why you will not Murder me Sirrah? you are a couple of Rascals, I don't
think, but you have picked my Pockets.


Saun. I'se sooner pick your tang out OF your head, nor pick your Pocket.


Pet. Come leave your idle prating, have you I will or no man ever shall,
whoever else attempts it his throat will I Cut, before he lies one night with
thee, it may be thine too for company; I am the Man am born to tame thee Peg.


Enter Beaufoy, Woodal and Tranio. Here comes your Father, never make denial,
if you do, you know what follows.

Marg. The Devil's in this fellow, he has beat me at my own Weapon, I have a
good mind to marry him to try if he can Tame me.


Beau. Now Petruchio, how speed you with my Daughter.


Pet. How but well, it were Impossible I should speed amiss, it is the best
Naturd'st Lady --


Beau. Why how now Daughter, in your Dumps?


Marg. You show a Fathers care indeed to Match me with this mad Hectoring
Fellow.


Pet. She has been abused Father, most unworthily, she is not Cursed unless for
Policy; for Patience, a second Grizel; betwixt us we have so agreed, the
Wedding is to be on Thursday next.


Saun. Good Saundy's gea for Scotland a Tuesday then.


Wood. Hark Petruchio, she says she will see you hanged first, is this your
speeding? I shall make you refund.


Pet. Pish, that is but a way she has gotten, I have Wood her, Won her, and
she is my own; we have made a bargin that before Company she shall maintain a
little of her Extravagant Humor, for she must not seem to fall off from't too
soon; when we are alone, we are the kindest, Lovingst, tenderst Chickins to one
another! Pray Father provide the Feast, and bid the Guests, I must home to
settle some things, and fetch some Writings in order to her Jointure. --
Farewell Gallants, give me thy hand Peg.


Beau. I knot not what to say, but give me your hands, send you Joy; Petruchio,
it is a Match.


Wood. Tran. Amen say we, we all are Witnesses.


Marg. Why Sir de'ye mean to Match me in spite of my Teeth?


Pet. Nay, peace Peg, Peace, thou needst not be pevish before these, it is only
before strangers according to our bargain; Come Peg, thou shall go see me take
horse, farewell Father.


Marg As I live I will not.


Pet. By this Light but you shall; nay, no testy tricks, away.


Exeunt. Saun. Good I'se be your Lieutenant and bring up your rear Madam.


Exit. Wood. Was ever match clapped up so suddingly?


Beau. Faith Gentlemen, I have ventured madly on a Desperate Mart.


VVood. But now Sir, as to your younger Daughter, you may remember my long Love
and Service.


Tran. I hope I may (without Arrogance Sir,) beg you to look on me as a Person
of more Merit.


Beau. Content ye Gentlemen, I Will compound this strife, it is Deeds not Words
must win the Prize: I love you both, but he that can assure my Daughter the
Noblest Jointure has her, What say you Sir?


VVood. I Will make it out my Estate is worth De clara, full Twenty Thousand
Pounds, besides some ventures at Sea, and all I have, at my Discease I give her.


Tran. Is that all Sir? Alas it is too Light Sir, I am my Fathers Heir, and only
Son, and his Estate is worth Three thousand pound per Annum; that will aford a
Jointure answerable to her Portion; no Debts, nor Encumbrances, No Portions to
be paid -- have I nip't you, Sir.


Beau. I must confess your offer is the best, and let your Father make her this
assureance, she is your own, else you must pardon me, if you should dye before
him, where is her Power?


Tran. That Is but a Cavel, he is old, I young.


Wood. And may not young men dye as well as old, have I nip't you there again?


Beau. Well, Gentlemen, I am thus resolved, on Thursday my Daughter Peg is to
be Married; the Thursday following Biancha's yours, if you make this Assurance;
if not, Mr. Woodall has her; and so I take my Leave, and thank you both.


[Exit. Wood. Sir, your Servant; Now I fear you not: Alas, Young Man, your
Father is not such a Fool, to give you all, and in his waining Age, set footing
under your Table; You may go Whistle for your Mistress* ha, ha, ha.


[Exit. Tranio. A Vengance on your Crafty Withered Hide. Yet it is in my head to
do my Master good: I see no reason why this supposed young VVinlove should not
get a supposed Father, called, Sir Lyonell VVinlove, and that is a wonder,
Fathers commonly get their Children, but here the Case must be altered.

Love Brings such Prodigies as these to Town,
For that, at Best, turns all things upside Down.

[Exit. ACT. III.
Enter Winlove, Geraldo, Biancha. Table covered with Velvet, Two Chaires and
Guitar. A Paper Pricked with SONGS. Geral. PRay Madam, will you take out this
Lesson on the Gittar.


VVin. Here be de ver sine Story in de Varle of Mounsieur Appollo, And
Madomoselle Daphne; Me vill Read you dat Madam.


Geral. Good Madam, mind not that Monsieur Shorthose; But Learn this Lesson
first.


VVin. Begar Monsieur Fideler, you be de vera fine troublesome Fellow, me vil
make de great Hole in your Head wid de Gittar, as Margaret did.


Ger. This is no Place to Quarrel in: But Remember --


Bian. Why Gentlemen, you do me double wrong, to strive for that which Rests
in my Bare Choice: To end the Quarrel, sit down and Tune your Instrument, and
by that time his Lecture will be done.


Gera. You Will leave his Lecture, when I am in Tune.


Bian. Yes, yes; Pray be satisfied: Come, Monsieur, let us see your Ode.


VVin. I do suspect that Fellow, Sure he is no Lute-Master.


Bian. Here Is the Place, Come Read.


[Reads. Do not Believe I am a Frenchman, my Name is VVinlove; He that bears my
Name about the Town, is my Man Tranio. I am your passionate Servant, and must
live by your Smiles. Therefore be so good, to give Life to my hopes.

Gera. Madam, your Gittar is in Tune.


Bian. Let Us hear; fie, there is a String split.


VVin. Make de spit in the Whole Man, and Tune it again.


Bian. Now let me see. I know not how to believe you. But if it be true, Noble
Mr. VVinlove deserves to be beloved; and, in the mean time, keep your own
Council; and it is not impossible but your Hopes may be Converted into
Certainties.


Gera. Madam, now it is Perfectly in Tune.


VVin. Fie, fie, Begar no Tune at all.


Bian. Now, Sir, I am for you.


Gera. Mounsieur, Pray walk now, and give me leave a while, my Lesson will make
no Music in Three Parts.


VVin. Me vil no trouble you Mounsieur Fiddeller. I am confident it is so, this
must be some Person that has taken a Disguise, like me, to Court Biancha; I Will
watch him.


(Aside. Gera. First, Madam, be pleased to Sing the Last Song that I Taught
you, and then we'll proceed.


Bian. I Will try, but I Am afraid I shall be out.


SONG. Gera. Madam, before you proceed any farther, there be some few Rules set
down in this Paper, in order to your Fingering, will be worth your Perusal.


Bian. Let Us see.


(Reads. Though I appear a Lute-Master, yet know my fair Biancha, I have but
taken this disguise to get Access to you, and tell you I am your humble
Servant, and Passionate Admirer, Geraldo. Pish, take your Rules again, I like
'em not the old way pleases me best, I do not care for changing old Rules, for
these Foolish new Inventions.

Enter Servant. Serve. Madam my Lord calls for you to help dress the Bride.


Bian. Farewell then Master, I must be gone.


Exeunt Ger. I know not what to think of her, this fellow looks, as if he were
in Love, and she carresses him. These damned French men, have got all the trade
in Town, if they get up all the handsome Women, the English must even march
into Wales for Mistersses; well, if thy thoughts Biancha are grown so low, to
cast thy wandering Eyes on such a kikshaw, I Am resolved to ply my Widow.


Exit. Win. I am glad I Am rid of him, that I may speak my Mother Tongue again,
Biancha has given me hopes, I dare half believe she Loves me.


Enter Beaufoy, Woodal, Tranio, Margaret, Biancha, and Attendants But here is
her Father.

Beau. Believe me Gentlemen, it is very strange! This day Petruchio appointed,
yet he comes not; methinks he should be more a Gentleman, then to put such a
slur upon my Family.


Marg. Nay, you have used me sinely, and like a Father; I must be forced to
give my hand against my will, to a rude mad brained Fellow here; who Wooed in
have, and means to Wed at Leisure. this comes of obeying you, if I do it again,
were you ten thousand Fathers hang me.


Tran. Be Patient Madam, on my life he will come; though he be blunt and merry,
I Am sure he is Noble; good Madam, go put on your Wedding Clothes, I know he will
be with you e're you be Dressed.


Marg. Wedding Clothes, I Will see him hanged before I Will have him, unless it be
to scratch his Eyes out.


Exit weeping. Beau. Poor Girl! I cannot blame thee now to weep, for such an
Injury would vex a Saint; Tho I am old, I shall find some body will call him to
a strict Account for this.


Enter Jamy. Iam. O Master, News! News! and such News as you never heard off.


Beau. Why what News have you, Sir?


Iam. Is It not News to hear of Petruchio's Coming?


Beau. Why, is he come?


Iam. Why, no my Lord.


Beau. What then Sirrah?


Iam. He Is coming Sir.


Beau. When will he be here?


Iam. When he stands where I am and sees you there.


Beau. Well sarrah, is this all the News?


Iam. Why Petruchio is coming in a new Hat, and an old Jerkin, a pair of
Britches thrice turned, a pair of Boots that have been Candle-cases; an old
rusty Sword with a broken hilt, and never a Chape, upon an old Lean, Lame,
Spavin'd, Glander'd, Broken-winded Jade, with a Woman's Crupper of Velvit, here
and there peec'd with packthreed.


Tran. Who comes with him?


Iam. O Sir, his Man Sauny, and in an Equippage very suitable to his Master, he
looks no more like a Christian Footman, then I look like a Windmill.


Wood. This is a most strange Extravagant Humor.


Beau. I Am glad he comes however he be!


Enter Petruchio and Sauny strangely Habbited. Pet. Come, Where be these
Gallants, who is at home?


Beau. You're Welcome Sir, I Am glad you're come at last.


Tran. I think I have seen you in better Clothes.


Pet. Never, never, Sir, this is my Wedding Suite; Why how now, how now
Gentlemen, What do you stare at, do you take me for a Monster?


Wood. Faith in that Habit you might pass for one in the Fair.


Pet. O you talk merrily, my Tailor tells me it is the newest Fashion: But
where is my Peg? I stay too long from her, the Morning wear's, it is time we were
at Church.


Tran. Why you will not Visit her thus.


Pet. Marry but I will.


Saun. And sea will Saundy tea Sir.


Beau. But you will not Marry her so will you?


Saun. A my Saul sal he Sir.


Pet. To me she is Married, not to my Clothes; Will ye along Father and
Gentlemen? I Will to Church imediately, not tarry a minute.


Saun. Here ye Sir, ye sal Marry her after the Scotch Directory, then gin ye
like her not, ye maw put her awaw, How say ye now?


Exit. Pet. and Saun. Tran. He has some meaning in this mad Attire, but you
must persuade him to put on a better, e're he goes to Church


Beau. Let Us after and see what will become of it.


Exit. Tran. Well Sir, you find there is no other way, it is too short warning to
get your Father up; should you Steal the Match, who knows but both the old
Fools would so deeply resent it to your Prejudice.


VVin. Why Prithee this way it will be Stolen for it is but a Cheat, which will
be in a little time Discovered.


Tran. That Is all one, it Carries a better face, and we shall have the more
sport; besides e're it comes out, your Father may be wrought to like it, and
Confirm my Promises; She is suitable to you every way, and she is rich enough
to do it, and Loves you well enough besides.


VVin. Well if it must be so, let us contrive it handsomely.


Tran* Let me alone, Iamy shall do the business, he shall find out some Knight
of the Post, that shall be old Sir Lyonel VVinlove here, and make Assurance of
a greater Jointure then I proposed; never fear it Sir, I Will so Instruct him, it
shall be carried without the least Suspicion.


VVin. Ay but you know old Beaufoy knows my Father.


Tran. That Is nothing, it is so many years since he saw him, he will never
distinguish him by his face.


VVin. This may be done, but notwithstanding all did not my fellow Teacher,
that damned Lute-master so nearly watch us, 'twou'd not be amiss to steal a
Marriage, and that once performed, let all the World say no, I Will keep my own.


Tran. That we may think on too; this same Lute-Master I more then half suspect.


VVin. And so do I.


Tran. I have mist a Gentleman out of the gang a good while, but let that pass,
I have already sent Iamy to find a Man.


Enter Woodall. To our postures, here is Mr. VVoodall, he must be Choused too
among the rest, save you Sir, Came you from the Church?

VVood. As willingly as e're I came from School.


Tran. And is the Bride and Bridegroom coming home.


VVood. A Bridegroom, why he is a Bridegroom for the Devil, a Devil, a very
Fiend.


Tran. Why she is a Devil, an errant Devil; nay, the Devils Dam.


VVood. But she is a Lamb, a Dove, a Child to him: When the Priest asked if he
would take Margaret for his Wife, I by Gogs wound's quoth he, and Swore so
loud! that all amazed, the Priest lets fall the Book, and as the Sexton stooped
to take it up, this mad brained Bridegroom took him such a cuff, that down
fell Sexton Book and all again; now take it up quoth he if any list.


Tran. What said the poor Bride to this?


Wood. Trembled and shook like an Aspen Leaf; after this just as the Parson
joined their hands, he called to his Roguy Scotchman, for a Glass of Muscadine,
drank his Wives Health, and threw the Toast in the Clarks face, because his
Beard grew thin and hungry, then took the Bride about the Neck and gave her
such a Smack the Church echoed again; the sight of this made me run away for
shame, I know they are following by this time; but hark, I hear the Minstrels.
Music.


Enter Beaufoy, Petruchio, Margaret, Biancha, Geraldo, Sauny, etc. Pet.
Gentlemen and Friends I thank you for your Pains, I know you think to Dine with
me to day, and have prepared great store of Wedding Cheer, but so it is, grand
business calls me hence, and I take my leave.


Beau. Is It Possible you will away to night?


Pet. I must immediately, if you knew my business you would not wonder; well
honest Gentlemen I thank you all, that have beheld me give away my self to this
most Patient, Sweet and virtuous Wife; Dine with my Father here, and drink my
health for I must hence, so farewell to you all.


Saun. Wun's will ye nea eat your Wadden Dunner, Sir?


Tran. Let us Entreat you to stay till after Dinner.


Pet. It must not be.


Marg. Let me Entreat you.


Pet. That will do much, I am Content.


Marg. Are you content to stay?


Pet. I am content you should Entreat me, but yet I will not stay entreat me
how you can.


Marg. Now if you Love me stay.


Pet. I cannot, Sauny the Horses.


Saun. They have nea ea't their Wadden Dunner yet.


Pet. Sirrah get the Horses.


Marg. Nay then do what thou can, I wont go to day, nor to morrow, nor till I
please my self. The door is open Sir, there lies your way, you may be jogging
while your boots be green.


Pet. O Peg content thee, Prithee be not angry.


Marg. I will be angry, What have thou to do? Father he quiet, he shall stay my
Leisure.


Wood. I marry Sir, now it begins to Work.


Marg. Gentlemen forward to the Bridal Dinner; I see a Woman may be made a fool
off, if she want Spirit to resist.


Pet. They shall go forward Peg at thy Command; Obey the Bride you that attend
on her. Go to the Feast, Revel, Carouse, and Dance* be Mad or Merry, or go hang
your selves, but for my Bonny Peg she must with me; Nay look not big uppn't,
nor stamp, nor stair, nor fret; Come, come, gently, so so, so, that is my good
Peg, I will be master of my own; She is my proper goods and Chattells; my
House, my Ox, my Ass, my any thing: Look here she stands, touch her who dare,
I Will make him smoke that offers to stop me in my way. Sauny unsheath thy
Dudgeon Dagger, we are beset with Thieves, rescue thy Mistress if thou be a
Man; fear not sweet Wench I Will Buckler thee against a Million; nay, come.


Marg. Will none of you help me?


Saun. The Deel a bit of Dunner ye gat, Good at ye would speak to your Cuke to gi
Saundy a little Mutton and Porridge to put in his Wallet.


Exeunt. Pet. Marg. Saun. Beau. Nay let 'em go, a couple of quiet ones.


Tran. Never was so mad a Match.


Beau. Well Gentlemen let us in, we have a Dinner, although we want a Bride and
Bridegroom to it; Biancha you shall take your Sisters Room, and Mr. Winlove
you may Practice for a Bridegroom.


Execunt. Wood. Mounsieur how do ye find my Mistress inclined?


Win. Me can no tell dat yet, but in time Mounsieur sal inform you.


Wood. Pray Ply her close, here is something for you.


Exit Woodall. Win, Me tank you, Sir; Ha, ha, ha, I must go tell this to my
Biancha.


Exit Winlove. Tran. Hark ye Sir, you may inform me, Pray what think you, does
Madam Biancha fancy any other but my self, she bears me fair in hand, pray
discover Sir, I shall not be ungrateful?


Ger. Troth Sir, I think she is as all other Women are.


Tran. How is that pray?


Ger. Why Fickle and Foolish.


Tran. Why d' ye think so of her, she was always held Discreet?


Ger. No sober Man will think so, I tell you Sir, she cares neither for you,
nor any Man, that is worth careing for; she is fallen in Love with a Mounsier
Jack-daw, a fellow that teaches bad French, in worse English.


Tran. That fellow, why it is impossible.


Ger. It Is true though.


Tran. Why I am confident he was employed by old Woodall as his Instrument to
Court her for him.


Ger. If he were, he has spoken one word for him and two for himself.


Enter Winlove leading Biancha. See here they come hand in hand, stand close,
perhaps your Eyes may convince you.

Win. Madam, you need not doubt my Passion; by those fair Eyes I swear (an Oath
inviolable) you have made a Conquest over me so absolute, that I must dye your
Captive.


Tran. What does he say, what does he say?


Ger. I cannot hear, Listen.


Bian. I must believe you Sir, there is some strange power attends your Words,
your Attractive Actions, and your Person, which is too strong for my weak
resistance; you have won, but do not boast your Victory.


Tran. Nay then I see it is so, I cannot hold! Madam you must forgive my
Interruption, you have used me kindly, fooled me with fine hopes, your
Mounsieur there has read Excellent Lessons to you.


Bian. Sir, I understand you not.


Ger. That is, you will not.


Win. What be de matter Mounsieur Fiddeler?


Ger. No Fiddler, nor no Lutanist Mounsieur, No point, but one that scorns to
live in a Disguise; for such a one as leaves a Gentleman, to dote upon a Pardon
a moy Jack-pudding; know, I am a Gentleman, my name Geraldo.


Bian. Alas, Sir, And have you been my Master all this while, and I never knew
it?


Geral. Yes, Sweet Lady, you did know it; I see you have a Little Spice of Peg
in you: But I have done with you, Mr. Winlove; Pray tell me, Don't you hate
this Gentlewoman now?


Tran. I cannot say I Hate her; but I Am sure I don't Love her for this days
Work, Would she Court me, I Swear I would not have her.


Gera. Nor I, by Heavens: I have Sworn, and will keep my Oath.


Bian. Why Gentlemen, I hope you will not both give the Willow Garland.


Gera. Go, go, you are a Scurvy Woman; I have a Widow that has Loved me as
Long as I have Loved you. Sweet Lady, I am not Bankrupt for a Mistress: It Is
true, she is something of your Sisters Humor, a Little Way-ward: but one Three
Days time at the Taming-Schoole, will make her Vye with any Wife in England.
And then I can pass by you unconcerned.


Bian. The Taming-School, for Heavens-sake where is that Sir?


Gera. Why your Brother Petruchio's House: I doubt you must there too, e're
you will be good for any thing; I Will to him immediately? Farewell thou Vile Woman.


[Exit. Bian. Ha, ha, ha, this is Excellent.


Tra. Madam, I beg your Pardon; but I hope my boldness with you, has done my
Master some Service.


Win. Believe me has it Tranio, and I must thank thee.


Enter Jamy. Now, Sirrah, Whither away in such have?

Iam. O Master, I have found him.


Winl. What? Who have thou found?


Iam. A rare old Sinner in the Temple Cloisters will do the Feat to a hair.


Bian. What feat? What Is to be done?


Winl. That which I told you of my Fairest:
Where is he?

Iam. Here, here, he Walks in the Court.


Bian. Well, I must in, or I shall be mist;
Carry the Matter handsomely, and let me not suffer.

(Exit. Winl. Fear not Madam; Call him in, Tranio
(Exit. You must Instruct him, I Will not be seen in it.

(Exit. Enter Jamy and Snatchpenny. Tran. Now Friend, What are you?


Snat. Any thing that you please Sir.


Tran. Any thing; Why what can you do.


Snat. Any thing, for so much as Concerns Swearing and Lying to your Worships
Service, and to get an Honest Livelihood, So please you to Employ me.


Tran. Why thou may serve turn I think;
But I Will put thee to no Swearing, Bare Lying and Impudence will serve for my
Occasion;
You must bate of the Price for that.

Snatch. Faith, Sir, they are both of a Price, take them or leave them.


Tran. But can thou Manage and Carry off a good Well-contriv'd Lie, to the
best advantage?


Snatch. I should be very sorry else; it has been my Trade these Seven and
thirty Years, never fear it Sir.


Iam. Nay, I picked him out amongst half a Score;
I fancied he had the best Lying Face amongst them.

Tran. Well, come along with me, and I Will Instruct you; But if you fail, look
to your Ears, if you have any.


Snatch. I Will venture Neck and all to do it Sir.


(Exit. Enter Sauny and Curtis severally. Petruchio's House. Curt. Honest
Sauny, Welcome, welcome.


Saun. Saundy's Hungry; Cannot you get a little Meat, Sir?


Curt. Yes, yes, Sawny.


Saun. Ye mun gat a good Fire, Sir; Mrs. Bride has gat a faw intull a Dike,
She Is aw wet Sir; Good she has not a dry thread to her Arse.


Curt. Is Master and Mistress coming Sauny?


Saun. Good are they, gin they be nea frozen to the grund, bo whare's your Fire
man?


Curt. It Is making, it is making, all things are ready; Prithee what News good
Sauny, what kind of Woman is our Mistress?


Saun. Ken ye two twanty Deel's Sir.


Curt. Marry Heaven defend us.


Saun. Good she has ean two twanty Deel's I'se nea bate ye can of 'em.


Curt. They say she is a Cruel Shrew.


Saun. O my saul Sir, I'se hau'd a thousand pund, she is set up her Tang, and
Scaud fro Edingbrough to London, and nere draw bit for it.


Curt. What shall we do then, there will be no living for us.


Saun. Good will there not, Wun's I think the Deel has flead off her Skin, and
put his Dam intul't; Bo where is Phillip and George and Gregory.


Curt. They Are all ready, what ho, come forth here, Phillip, George, Joseph,
Nick, where are you?


Enter 4 or 5 Serving Men. Phillp. Honest Sawny, Welcome home.


Saun. Gat me some Meat, and I Will believe ye Sir.


Geor. I am glad to see thee Sawny.


Saun. Gat me a Drink, and Is'e believe ye tea.


Iosep. What, Sawny come to Town again, Welcome?


Saun. Wun's, Walcome, walcome, gat me good Meat and Drink, that is Walcome,
Sir.


Nick. Old Lusty Fellow Sawny, Welcome.


Saun. How do you Wully?


Nick. Do You hear the News, Sawny? Wally Watts is Dead.


Saun. S'breed, nea Man that geas on two Legs could slay Wully Watts, Sir.


Nick. True; for he was fairly Hanged.


Saun. I was sure nea Man that went on two Legs could slay him.


Nick. You are in the right Sawny, for 'twas one with Three Legs, 'twas Mr.
Tyburne, for he was fairly Hanged.


Saun. S'breed ye Lie, Sir, the Gallows might kill him, and break his stout
heart, but it could nea hang him: It Is hang an English Man.


Nick. Well, But what kind of Woman is our Mistress, Sawny.


Saun. You Will ken soon enough 'tea your Sorrow, and wea Sir; Ye've awe two Luggs
apeece o'your Head: A my Saul I'se nea gea ye two Pennys for them by the Morn:
How say ye now?


Enter Petruchio and Margaret. Pet. Where be these Idle Rogues? What no more at
Door to hold my Stirrip, or take my Horses? Where Is Curtis, Phillip, Nick and
Gregory?


All. Here, Here, Here, Sir.


Pet. Here, here, here, you Loggerhead Currs; What, no Attendance, no Regard,
no Duty? Where Is that Foolish Knave I sent before.


Saun. Wuns, Sir, Ise be sea hungry, snd sea empty, ye may travel quite
through me, and nere faw your fingers Sir.


Pet. You Mangy Rogue, Did not I bid you meet me in the Park, and bring these
Rascals with you?


Saun. Good did ye Sir; bo Ise sea hungry, Ise ha nea Memory, Deliver your
Message your sell Sir.


Pet. Be gone you Slaves, and fetch my Supper in; Rogues do I speak, and don't
you fly to make have. [Exit 2 or 3 Servants. Sit down Peg and Welcome. Why
when I Pray, nay good sweet Peg be Merry, These are Country Clownish Fellows;
Prithee be Merry: Off with my Boots, Sirrah, you Rogues, ye Villaius. When

SINGS. It was the Orders of the Friar Gray,
As forth he walked on his Way.

Marg. Sure he will run himself out of Breath, and then it will be my turn.


Petru. Out you Rogue; You pluck my Boot awry; take that, and mend it in
pulling off the other. Be Merry Peg. Some Water here, ho; Where Is my Spanniel,
Sarrah? Make have and desire my Cousin Ferdinand to come hither, one Peg you
must Kiss, and be Acquainted with: Where are my Slippers? Shall I have some
Water. Come, Peg, wash and VVellcome Heartily.


Sau. VVuns bo whare is the Meat to mack her Vvelcome.


Marg. We shall fall out if we wash together.


Petru. You VVhorson Villain will you let it fall?


Marg. Pray Sir be Patient, 'twas an unwilling Fault.


Table Covered. Enter Servants with Meat. Pet. An Idle, Careless,
Beetle-headed-Slave.
Come, Peg, sit down. I know you have a Stomach.
Will you give Thanks, Sweet Peg, or shall I?
Or each for our selves? Come, fall too,
What Is this, Mutton?

Saun. Good it is, Sir.


Pet. Who bought it?


Cur. I did Sir.


Pet. You Rascal you it is not Mutton, it is the Breast of a Dog; What Currs are
these? it is dried and burned to a Coal too, Where is this Rascal Cook? How dare
you bring such rotten Meat to my Table? Why d' ye mean to Poison me, ye
heedless Joltheads? ye ill manner'd Whelps, what d' ye grumble? I Will be with
you straight.


Marg. Pray Husband be content, the Meat is good Meat; and I am very hungry, I
must and will eat some of it.


Pet. Not for the World Peg, I Love thee better then so; It Is burnt and will
Engender Chollar, a Disease we are both to Subject too; I Love thee too well to
give thee any thing to hurt thee, we'll fast to night, to morrow we'll make it
up.


Marg. Say what you will Sir, I Will eat some of it; Did you bring me hither to
Starve me?


Pet. Why ye Rascals will ye stand Still and see your Mistress Poison her self?
take it away out of her sight, quickly.


[Throws the Meat at 'em, Sauny gets it. Saun. Good Saundy will venture, Poison
and 'twill.


Pet. Well Peg, this night we'll fast for Company; Come I Will bring thee to the
Bridal Chamber.


Marg. I must Eat something, I shall be Sick else; But an Egg.


Pet. No, no, Prithee don't talk on it; to Bed upon a full stomach.


Marg. But a Crust of Bread.


Pet. To morrow, to morrow; Come prithee away.


Exeunt. Geor. Did ever see the like?


Curt. He kills her in her own Humor.


Phil. Have you said Grace Sauny?


Saun. Good I was sea hungry, I forgot Grace. O thou that have filled our Boys,
and our blathers, keep us aw from Whoredom, and Secrisie.


Nick. Secrecy, why Sauny?


Saun. Wuns Man, it is wutchcraft, peace, you put me out with the Deel's name
to ye: Keep us aw from Whoredom and Secrecy, fro the Dinger of the swatch to
the gallow Tree, keep us aw we Beseech thee; Tak a Drink man.


Phil. Are ye full now Sauny?


Saun. As for as a Piper, ye may put can finger in at my Mouth, and another in
mine Arse, and feel beath ends of my Dinner.


Exeunt. Enter as in a Bedchamber, Petruchio, Peg, and Servants, Sauny. Pet.
Where are you, you Rogues? Some lights there, come Peg undress to bed, to bed.


Marg. Pray send your Men away, and call for some of your Maids.


Pet. Maids, hang Maids, I have no such vermin about my house, any of these
will do as well; Here Sauny come hither Sirrah, and undress your Mistress.


Saun. O my Saul Sir, I'se put on my head-peice; now, an ye'll bind her hands
behind her, I'se undress her.


[Goes to take up her Coats. Pet. What do thou do?


Saun. In Scotland we aw ways begin at the nether end of a bonny Lass.


Pet. Who made this Bed? What Rascals are these? Foh these Sheets are Musty as
the Devil, and what Rags are here upon my Bed? Is this a Counterpain? it is a
Dishclout.


Marg. Why the Counterpain is well enough, and Rich enough, and the Sheet's are
as Clean, and as Sweet as may be.


Pet. Fie, fie Peg, thou have got a Cold, and lost thy Smelling, I tell thee
they are all Damp and Musty, I would not have thee to venture to Lie in 'em for
the world, it would be thy Death; here take 'em away, we must ce'n sit up,
there is no remedy.


Marg. Pray Sir talk not of sitting up, I am so sleepy I cant hold my Eyes
open, I must to Bed.


Pet. I Will keep thee waking, I warrant thee; Ho Curtis bring us a Flaggon of
March Beer, and some Tobacco, and clean Pipes, we'll be merry.


Exit. Curtus. Marg. Why what d' ye mean are you Mad?


Pet. Mad? I, what should we do? I mean thou and I hand to fist, will drink a
Health to my Father, and my Sister, and all our good Friends at London.


Enter Servant with Beer and Tobacco. Marg. Why you don't take me to be one of
your fellow Tospots?


Pet. I mean to Teach thee to Drink; thou must Learn that, or you are no Wife
for me: Here, Peg, to thee with all my Heart, a whole one, and thou art
Welcome; My Father's good Health, Peg, you shall Pledge it.


Marg. I cannot Drink without Eating; 'twill make me sick.


Pet. Pish, Pish, that is but a Fancy; Come, off with it, or thou shall neither
eat nor drink this Month.


Marg. Shall I go to Bed when I have drank it?


Saun. Good at ye gi Sawndy a little Drink Madam.


Pet. Talk of that anon.
(She Drinks. So, here Peg, here is a Pipe I have filled for thee my self,
Sit down, and Light it.

Marg. Do You mean to make a mere Hackny Horse of me? What d'offer me your nasty
Tobacco for?


Pet. Nay, never make so shy, I know' thou Love it: Come, young Ladies are
often troubled with the Toothache, and take it in their Chambers, though they
will not appear Good Fellows amongst us: Take it, or no Sleep nor Meat, Peg, Do You
hear.


Marg. Yes, to my Grief; I will not be abused thus.


(Weeps.) Pet. Nay, nay, Go where thou will, I Will make thee Smoke before I
Sleep.


(Exeunt. ACT. IV.
Enter Petruchio and Sauny. Pet. SIrrah, wait on your Mistress; Say what you
will to her, and Vex her, but do not touch her; and let her have no Meat I
Charge ye.


Saun. S'breed Sir, send her into the Highlands in Scotland, there is Hunger and
Caud enough, there she may starve her Bally foo.


Pet. Well Sirrah, Do as I direct you.


(Exit. Saun. OF my Saul wull I Sir, Yee'l let me take my Headpiece to defend
me Sir.


Enter Margaret. Marg. What Gregory, Phillip! No Body near me? Sawny, Where are
you?


Saun. Is'e even hard at your Arse Madam.


Marg. Where Is your Master?


Saun. He Is gone to the Market himself, and he will bring ye heam a Braw Bull's
Puzzle to Swaddle your Weam with.


Marg. And in the mean time I am Famisht; Was ever Woman used so Damnably? I am
Starved for Meat, Giddy for want of Sleep; and that which Spites me more then
all the rest, is, he pretends it is out of Care and Love to me: Prithee good
Sawny give me some Meat.


Saun. OF my Saul, Sawndy would be Hanged gin I sud bestow an awed Liquor'd
Bute, Sawny will cut it into Tripes to Stuff your Weam with.


Marg. Good Sawny, here is Money for thee, but one little bit of any thing to
stay my fainting Spirits.


Saun. What will ye eat a Bit of Beef?


Marg, I, good Sawny.


Saun. Will ye eat some Mustard to it?


Saun. I, good Sawny, quickly.


Saun. Mustard is nea gu'd for your Tang, 'twill make it tea keen, and ye can
Scau'd fast enough without.


Marg. Why then the Beef without Mustard.


Saun. Good Beef is nee gued without Mustard: Sawny will fetch ye some Meal and
Water, ye'st make ye a Scotch Pudding, ye'st Eat of that tull your Weam crack.


Marg. You Abusive Rogue take that,
(Beat him.) Must I be Braved thus by my own Servant.

Saun. The Dee'l wash your Face with a Fou Clout.


Enter Geraldo. Geral. Why how now, Sirrah, Will you strike your Mistress? You
Cowardly Rogue strike a Woman.


Saun. S'breed Sir, Do You Caw a Scotchman a Coward? Gin Is'e had ye in Scotland,
Is'e put my Whinyard in your Weam, gin ye were as stout as Gilderoy.


Geral. Why Gilderoy was as arrant a Coward as thou art.


Saun. VVuns yeed be lath to keep the Grund that Gilderoy quits; yet I must
confess he was a little Shame-fac'd before the Enemy.


Marg. O Mr. Geraldo, never was Poor Woman so used. For Charity sake Convey me
home to my Father.


Enter Petruchio with a Dish of Meat. Petru. Here Peg, here is Meat for thee, I
have Dressed it my self, my Dear; Geraldo VVellcome, this was kindly done to
Visit Peg and Me; Come Peg, fall too, here is an Excellent piece of Veal.


Marg. Why it is a Pullet.


Pet. Why it is Veal, Art thou Mad?


Marg. You will not Persuade me out of my Senses,
It Is a Pullet.

Saun. A Good is it Sir.


Petr. What an unhappy Man am I, my poor Dear Peg's Distracted. I always
feared 'twould come to this. Take the Meat away Curtis; Is the Room Ready as I
Ordered? Are the Lights Damned up?


Curtis. Yes Sir.


Marg. Why what do you mean to do with me?


Pet. Poor Peg, I Pity thee; but thou shall want no Help for thy Cure, you
must be kept from the Light, it troubles the Brain.


Cer. I see I shall Learn, he is an Excellent Teacher.


Marg. Why Sir, Pray tell me, Have you a mind to make me Mad? this is the way
indeed: How have I injured you, that you use me thus inhumanely? Did you Marry
me to starve me?


Saun. He means to bring down your VVeam for a Race; For we awways Cry a Nag
with a VVeam, but a Mare with Nean.


Pet. No, no; Good Peg thou know I have a Care of thee; Here Is a Gown just
brought home for thee Peg. Now thou art empty, it will sit Handsomely; Where
is this Tailor? Call him in Sawny, if it fits you, you shall put it on, and
we will Gallop over to London, and see your Father; Your Sisters Wedding is at
hand, you must help her.


Enter Tailor with a Gown. Marg. If she be Matched as I am, Heaven help her!
But there is some Comfort in going Home; there is Meat and Sleeping-room.


Pet. Come Tailor, lets see the Gown, How now what is here? Bless me, what
Masquing Suite is this! What Is this a Sleve? why it is like a Demmy Cannon, Why
what a Devil Tailor do thou mean? Is this a Gown?


Tay. A gown Sir? yes Sir, and a handsome Gown as any Man in London can make,
it is the newest Fashon lately come out of France.


Pet. What a lying knave art thou! my great Grand-mothers Picture in the Matted
Gallery is just such another.


Saun. It is like the Picture of Queen Margaret in Edenbrough Castle, Sir.


Marg. I never saw a better Fashon'd Gown in my life; more quaint nor better
shaped, I like the Gown, and I Will have this Gown or I Will have none; say what
you will I like it, it is a handsome Gown.


Pet. Why thou say true Peg, it is an ugly paltrey Gown, I am glad to hear
thee of my mind; it is a beastly Gown.


Marg. Why I say it is a good Gown, a handsome fashionable Gown; What do you mean
to make a Puppet of me?


Pet. Ay, this fellow would make a Puppet of thee?


Tay. She says your Worship means to make a Puppet of her.


Pet. Thou Impudent, lying, Thread, Bodkin and Thimble, Flea, thou nit, brave
me in my own house? Go take it, I Will ha none on it.


Tay. Sir I made it according to your Directions, and I cannot take it again.


Saun. Tak it awaw, or the Deel O my Luggs, but yest tak my Whineyard.


Marg. He shall not take it again, what need you trouble your self about it, as
long as it pleases me; lay it down there.


Pet. Sirrah take it away I say, we shall find more Tailors; I wont have my
Wife so Antickly dressed, that the Boys shoud hoot at her.


Marg. Come, come, all this is but fooling, you don't understand what belongs to
a Gown, say what you will I Am resolved to have it, if it were an ugly one I
would wear it, and it were but to Cross you.


Saun. Now the Deel's a cruppen untell her Mouth Sir, you may see a little of
his Tail hang out, it looks for aw the world an it were a Sting Sir.


Pet. Why that is my good Peg, I know thou do not care for it; say no more
prithee, thou shall have another.


Marg. I know not what you mean to do with me, but methinks I might have leave
to speak, and speak I will, I am no Child, no Baby; your Betters have endured
me to speak my mind, and if you cannot you had best stop your Ears; It Is better
set my Tongue at Liberty, then lee my Heart break.


Pet. Speak Peg, by all means, say what thou will; Sirrah carry that tawdry
thing away, Ceraldo tell him you will see him paid, [Aside.] and bid him leave
it. Come what say thou Peg?


Ger. Leave the Gown in the next Room Tailor, and take no notice of what he
says, I Will see you paid for it.


[Aside. Exit. Marg. Why I say I will have that Gown, and every thing I have a
mind (...) not bring you such a Portion to be made a Fool of.


Pet. Very true, you are in the right Peg; come lets to Horse, these Clothes
will serve turn at present till we can get better. Go Sirrah lead the Horses to
the Lands end, thither we'll walk a foot; lets see, I think it is about seven a
Clock, we shall reach to my Father in Laws by Dinner time with Ease.


Marg. It Is almost Two, you cannot get thither by Supper time.


Pet. It shall be seven e're I go, why what a Mischief's this, what I say or
do, you are still crossing it; Let the Horses alone, I will not go to day, and
e're I do it shall be what a Clock I please.


Marg. Nay Sir, that shant stop our Journey, it is seven, or two or nine, or
what a Clock you please, pray lets go.


Saun. Ye's have it what hour you wull Sir.


Pet. Very well it is so, get ready quickly; Come Geraldo let us all go, we
shall help mend the Mirth at my Sisters Wedding.


Ger. I Will wait on you.


Pet. Come Peg, get on your things.


Marg. Let me but once see Lincolns-Inn-Fields again, and Yet thou shall not
Tame me.


Enter Tranio and Snatchpenny. Tran. Now Sirrah, be but Impudent enough and
keep state like the old Knight, and thou art made for ever.


Snatch. I warrant ye Sir, I know it to a hair, my Lord Beaufoy and I were
School fellows together at Worster; my Estate lies in the Vale of Evesham,
Three thousand Pound a year, and Fifteen hundred a year I settle upon you upon
the Marriage, let me alone I am Sir Lyonell himself.


Tran. Right, right; Excellent brave, How now.


Enter Jamy. Iam. To your Postures old Sinner, be an exquesite Rascal, and then
thou shall be a Rogue Paramount; thou shall lay the Dragon asleep while my
Master steals the Pippins.


Tran. Well Iamy, What have thou done?


Iam. I have been with my Lord Beaufoy, presented your Fathers, and your
Service to him, and told him the old Knight was happily come to Town, and
hearing of your Love to Biancha, was so overjoyed, he would Settle all upon you.


Tran. Well, and what said he?


Iam. He gave me a Piece for my News, I told him Sir Lyonell desired his
Company just now to treat upon the Match; he is coming in all have, he longs to
be Couzend, and Snatchpenny if thou do not do it.


Snatch. Then hang me.


Iam. Mum look to it, he is here.


Enter Beaufoy and VVinlove. Beau. Mr. Winlove your Man tells me your Father is
just happily come to Town* Where is he?


Tran. Here Sir, this is my Father; Time has been too Bold to wear ye out of
each others Memory.


Snatch. Is this my Lord Beaufoy, Sir?


Tran. Yes Sir.


Snatch. My Lord your humble Servant; I Am happy at last to meet a Person I have
formerly so much Loved.


Beau. Noble Sir Lyonell I joy to see you.


Snatch. O the merry Days that you and I have seen my Lord; Well fare the good
old times I say.


Beau. I Sir Lyonell, when you and I were acquainted first.


Snatch. I marry, there were Golden Days, indeed, no Couzening, no Cheating,
the World is altered.


Beau. But we will remember these times, and be honest still.


Snatch. That Is even the best way, there is hopes we may have honest Grand
Children too, if all be true as I hear, my Son tells me, your Daughter has made
a Captive of him.


Beau. I would she were better for his sake, she is a good Girl, and a handsome
one, though I say it; if she were not, I would give her somewhat should make
her so.


Tran. It takes Rarely.


Snatch. I Am even overjoyed that you think my Son worthy your Alliance, I Will
give something they shall make a shift to Live on; in Plain and in brief, if
you will approve of it, I Will settle Fifteen hundred Pound a year upon him at
Present, which shall be her Jointure; after my Death, all I have with a good
will, What say you my Lord?


Beau. Sir Lyonell, Your Freedom pleas's me; I see you are an honest meaning
Gentleman: The Young Folks (if I am not mistaken) like one another. Well, I
say no more, it is a Match.


Tran. You bind me to you Ever: Now I may boldly say, I am truly happy: Where
will you please to have the business made up?


Beau. Not in my House, Son; I would have it Private; Pitchers have Ears, and
I have many Servants; Besides, Old VVoodall will be hindering of us; He Is
hearkening still, and will be interrupting.


Tran. Then at my Lodging; there my Father Lies, and there the Business may be
all Dispatched: Send for your Daughter by this Gentleman; my Boy shall fetch a
Scrivener presently. The worst on it is, it is too small a Warning. You are like
to have but slender Entertainment.


Beau. No matter, no matter; I shall like it.


Snat. I would feign see your Daughter, my Lord; I have heard great
Commendations of her.


Beau. That you shall presently; Mounsier, pray go to Biancha, and tell her
from me, She must come hither with you immediately; you may tell her too, if
you will, what has happened, and that she must prepare to be A^r. VVinlove's
Bride.


VVin. My Lord, me vil fetch her presant.


Tran. My Lord, Will your Lordship please to walk in with my Father, this is
my Lodging.


Bea. I Sir; Come Sir Lyonell, I Will follow you.


Snat. Good my Lord, I will wait upon you.


( Exit. Beaufoy, Snat. Tra. VVin. Thus far it is well Carried on Iamy; But how
shall we prosecute it?


Iam. Why there is but one way in the World, Sir.


VVin. And what is that?


Iam. Why thus, I have got a Parson ready for the Purpose; when you have got
Biancha abroad, whip her into Covent Garden Church, and there Marry her, and
your VVork's done.


Win. Troth thou say true; But is the Parson Orthodox and Canonical? I would
not have an Obadiah to make us enter into Covenant of Matrimony.


Iam. Trust me Sir, he is as true as Steel; he says all Matrimony without Book;
he can Christen, Wed, and Bury Blindfold.


VVin. Well, I Will take thy Counsel, if I can persuade her to it, as I hope I
shall, for I know she Loves me; fair Luck betides me; But who comes here.


Enter Woodall. Iam. It Is the Olp Grub VVoodall; What shall we do with him?


VVin. We must contrive some way to get him off.


VVood. I don't like those shuffling matters; I doubt there is some false Play
toward me in hand: Here Is my Monsieur he may Inform me -- Mounsieur.


VVin. Che Dict a vouz Mounsieur. Mounsieur, Your Servant.


VVood. Mounsieur, Prithee tell me, if thou can, how Affairs go, things are
carried very closely; How stands my Mistress affected?


VVin. Moy foy Mounsieur; Me tell you de bad News in the Varle, Madamoselle
Biancha no stand Affected to you at all. My Lord has sent me to fetch her just
now to be Marry to Mounsieur Vat you call? Mounsieur Le --


VVood. What not to VVinlove


VVin. Yes to Mounsieur VVinlove; Begar me be very sorry, but me canno help dat.


VVood. Is Old Beaufoy mad to Match her to him without his Father's Privity.


VVin. Here be de ver Fine Old Man new come to Town, me Lord be wid him now.


Wood. Upon my Life old Sir Lyonell, nay then she is lost quite; Hark you
Mounsier, yet it is in your Power to make me a happy Man.


Win. O Mounsier me be your humble Servant.


Wood. Why look you, you are to fetch her; here is forty Pound in Gold to buy
you a pair of Gloves, let me take her from you, as you are carrying her
thither; I will have two or three with me, and you may saftly say she was
forced from you.


Win. Mounsier begarr, me do you all de Service in the Varle, but me sal be the
grand, Sheat Knave then.


Wood. That Is nothing, here is more Money, I Will save you harmless; Come, you
shall do it.


VVin. Mounsier me have no mind to be van Knave, but to do you Service, if you
will meet me upon de Street.


VVood. Fear not I Will secure you, honest Mounsieur farewell; I will be your
Friend for Ever.


Exit. Win. Ha, ha, ha, this is rare; What an Ass this Fellow will make
himself, do what we can? Here Iamy, thou shall share with me.


Iam. Thank you Sir; Would we had such a Windfall every day: But come, Sir, you
must make haste, this is the Critical Minute; if you miss it, you lose Biancha.


Win. Thy Counsel's good, away; I Will buy a Ring, and Pay the Priest with some
of Woodall's Money, Ha, ha, hah.


[Exeunt. Enter Petruchio, Margaret, Geraldo and Sawny. Pet. Walk your Horses
down the Hill before, we shall reach London time enough, it is a fair Night; How
bright and goodly the Moon shines.


Marg. The Moon! the Sun, it is not the Moonlight now.


Pet. I say it is the Moon that Shines so Bright.


Marg. I say it is the Sun that shines so Bright.


Pet. Now by my Mothers Son, and that is my Self, it shall be the Moonlight, or
what I please, before you set Sight of your Father's House; Sirrah, go fetch
the Horses back; Evermore Crossed, and Crossed, and nothing but Crossed?


Ger. Say, as he says, or we shall never go.


Marg. Forward, I Pray Sir, since we are come so far; And be it Sun or Moon, or
what you please; Nay, if you call it a Rush-Candle, henceforth it shall be so
for me.


Pet. I say it is the Moon.


Saun. S'breed, but I say nay, Sir, Out, out, a Lies.


Marg. I know it is the Moon.


Pet. Nay then you Lie, it is the Blessed Sun.


Marg. Why Heaven be Blessed for it, it is even what you have a mind to; Pray let
us forward.


Gera. Petruchio, go thy ways, the Field is Won.


Pet. Well, forward, forward; Now the Bowl runs with a Right Byas, but soft,
here is Company.


Enter Sir Lyonell Winlove. Sir Lyo. Boy, Bid the Coachman drive gently down
the Hill; I wonder I meet nor overtake no Passengers to day; stay, I think here
be some.


Pet. I will have one bout more with thee Peg; Good Morrow Gentle Lady; Which
way Travel you? Come hither Peg; Did thou ever behold so Exquisite a Beauty
as this Fair Virgin bears about. Go to her Peg, and Salute her.


Marg. Are you Mad, it is an Old Man.


Pet. Beat back again then, still Cross? Will you do it?


Saun. Why in the Deel's Name, What mean ye? it is nea bonny Lass Sir; S'breed,
it is an aw faw Thief.


Gera. He Will make this Old Man Mad.


Marg. You Budding Virgin, so fair, so sweet, so fresh, which way Travel you?
How happy should we be in the Enjoyment of so fair a Fellow Traveller.


Saun. The Dee'l has built a Bird's Nest in your Head; Good ye'r as mad as he;
and he as Mad as gin he were the Son of a March Hare, Sir.


Sir Lion. Why what do ye mean Gentlewoman?


Pet. Why now now Peg, I hope thou art not Mad: A Virgin Quotha! it is an Old
Wrinckled Withered Man.


Marg. Reverend Sir, Pardon my mistaking eyes, that have been so dazzled with
the Moon (Sun I mean.) I could not distinguish you; I now perceive you are a
Grave Old Man, pray excuse me.


Sir Lyo. Indeed you are a Merry Lady; your encounter has amazed me. But I like
such Cheerful Company; I am for London to see a Son of mine, that went lately
from me thither.


Pet. We shall be glad of your Company; you must pardon my Wifes Error, she
has not slept well to Night; and I could not persuade her, but she would come
out Fasting, which makes her Fancy a little extravagant.


Saun. The Dee'l OF my Saul but you are a false Trundle Tail Tike, the Dee'l a
bit he would lat her eat these three days Sir.


Marg. Curse upon your Excuse, and the Cause of it; I could have eaten my
Shooe-Soules, if I might have had 'em Fried.


Pet. Your Name I beseech you Sir.


Sir Lio. I am Called, Sir Lyonell Winlove in the Country.


Pet. Father to young Mr. Winlove?


Sir Lyo. The same Sir.


Pet. Then I am happy indeed to have met you; I can tell you some News, perhaps
may not be Unwelcome to you. Your Son is in a fair probability of Calling me
Brother within these Two days.


Sir Lyo. How so, I pray Sir.


Pet. Why he is upon Marrying my Wifes Sister, my Lord Beaufoyes youngest
Daughter. A brave Match, I can assure you, and a Sweet Bedfellow.


Saun. Good she is tea gued for any man but Saundy; Good Gin poor Saundy had her
in Scotland, Wun's I Would sea Swing her about.


Sir Lyo. You Amaze me! Is this true? or have you a mind, like a pleasant
Traveller, to break a Jest on the Company you overtake?


Gera. Upon my Word, Sir, it is very true; 'twas so designed; but I don't think
he will Marry her, he is Forsworn if he do.


Sir Lyo. You make me Wonder more and more.


Pet. Mind him not, he is a Party Concerned, it is true.


Sir Lion. Pray Gentlemen let us make haste, I must look after this Business, it
soundes strangely, he would not do it without my Consent; he is my only Son, my
Heir, the Prop of my Family, I must be careful.


Pet. I see you are Jealous Sir; but you need not; he cannot have a better
Match.


Sir Lyo. I doubt it not, if all be fair; I should be glad of my Lord Beaufoyes
Alliance, he was my School-fellow; but Time, I doubt, has worn out our Old
Acquaintance; Gentlemen, I must hasten to prevent the worst.


Saun. What mean ye Sir? Yea will nea bawk the Bonna Lad, and tak fro his
mattle Sir.


Gera. Well, Petruchio, thou have put me in a Heat, have at my Widow now.


(Exeunt. Enter Winlove, Biancha, Jamy. VVin. How good you are my Fair one:
Iamy, Ar't sure the Priest is ready for us?


Iam. I warrant you Sir; Pray make have, some Devil or other may come else and
Cross it. Don't stay Thrumming of Caps; Here, Body of me away, here is VVoodall,
shift for your selves, all will be spoiled else.


(Exit. Win. and Bian. Enter Woodall with 3 or 4 Fellows. VVood. Be sure you
seize on her, and Clap her into a Chair, and one stop her mouth; fear not, I Will
save you harmless.


1st. Fellow. I warrant you Sir.


Wood. What a Devil makes this Rogue Poaching here?


Iam. Tum, te Dum, te Dum; Sing Old Coal of London.


[Sings. Wood. Now Iamy, What Walk you here for.


Iam. Why to look about me; Te Dum, te Dum, etc,


Wood. They say your Master is to be Married to Madam Biancha to day.


Iam. Why then we'll be merry at Night; Te Dum, te Dum, etc.


VVood. The Rogue will not be gone; What, Have no Business? Thou look as if
thou had not Drank to day, there is something for thee, go get thy Mornings
Draught.


Iam. I thank your Worship: Will you take part of a Pot of Ale and a Toast.


Wood. No Sirrah, I Drank Coffee this morning.
[Exit Jamy. So, he is gone; I wonder Mounsieur appears not with Biancha.

Enter Petruchio, Margaret, Sir Lyonell, Geraldo, and Sauny, with Attendants.
Wood. Ha, Who comes there?


Geral. Now you are there Ill take my Leave; Your Servant.


(Exit. Petr. Sir Lyonell, you are Welcome to Town; There Is your Sons
Lodgings; my Father Lives on the other side; thither we must, and therefore
here I take my Leave.


Sir Lyo. Pray stay a little, may be he is not within; if so, I Will wait upon you
to the Lord Beaufoy.


Saun. OF my Saul, nea can could have Begged (Knocks.) Dunner better then this
awd Theife has done.


Wood. They are all busy within Sir, you must Knock Louder if you mean to be
heard.


[Snatchpenny Above. Snat. Who is that Knocks, as if he would Beat down the
Gate.


Sir Lion. Is Mr. Winlove within?


Snatch. He is within, but not to be spoken with.


Sir Lion. What if a Man bring him a Hundred Pounds or Two, to make Merry
withal.


Snat. Keep your Hundred Pounds for your self, he shall need none as long as I
Live.


Pet. Nay, I told you, Sir, Your Son was well Beloved in London. Do You hear Sir,
leaving your Frivelous Circumstances, pray tell him, His Father's just now come
out of the Country to see him, and is here at the Door to speak with him.


Snat. That is a Lie Sir; his Father came to Town yesterday, and is now here
Looking out at Window.


Sir Lyo. The Devil he is; Are you his Father?


Snat. I Sir; so his Mother says, if I may believe her.


Saun. Can they Hang him for having two Fathers Sir? Good and 'twas sea, poor
Sawndy would be Hanged sure enough.


Pet. Why, Have thou Two Fathers?


Saun. Good have I, and Two, and Two to that Sir.


Pet. Why how now Gentlemen, this is flat Knavery, to take another Man's Name
upon you.


Snat. Lay hands upon this Villain, I believe he means to Cheat some body here,
under my Counter-Name,


Enter Jamy. Iam. I have seen the Church on their Back, send them Good
Speeding: Ha, how now, my Old Master Sir Lyonell? S'foot, we are all lost,
undone; I must Brazen it out.


Sir Lion. Come hither Crack Hemp.


Iam. You may save me that Labor, and come to me, if you have any thing to say
to me.


Sir Lion. Gome hither you Rogue, What have you forgot me?


Iam. Forgot you Sir? I could not forget you; for I never saw you in all my
Life before.


Sir Lion. You notorious Villain, Did thou never see thy Master's Father, Sir
Lyonell Winlove?


Iam. What my Worshipful Old Master? Yes marry Sir: See where his Worship
Looks out of the Window.


Sir Lion. Does he so Sir? I Will make you find him below stayres.


(Beats him. Iam. Help, help, here is a Madman will Murder me.


Saun. Dea Caw your sell Iamy? And wull ye be Beten by an aw faw Thief? An yea
Caw your sell Iamy cance meare, l'se bang ye tea Clootes, breed a Good will I Sir.


Snat. Help Son, help Brother Beaufoy, Iamy will be killed.


Pet. Prithee Peg stand by to see this Controversy.


Enter Snatchpenny with Servants, Beaufoy and Tranio. Tran. 'Sheart it is Sir
Lyonell; but we must bear it a little time: Sir, What are you that offer to
Beat my Servant?


Sir Lion. What am I, Sir; Nay, What are you, Sir? O Heaven what do I see! O
fine Villains, I Am undone, while I play the Good Husband at home in the
Country, my Son, and my Servants spend my Estate Lavishly at London.


Saun. Your Son sal allow you Siller to keep an Awd Wutch to rub your Shins;
And what to anger would ye ha mere Sir.


Tran. How now, What Is the Matter?


Beau. Is the Man Frantic?


Tran. Sir, You seem a sober Ancient Gentleman by your Habit; but your Words
show you a Madman: Why Sir, What Concerns it you what Rich Clothes I wear? I
thank my good Father, I am able to maintain it.


Sir Lion. Thy Father! O Villain! he is a Hemp-dresser in Partha.


Saun. Mara the Deel stuff his Wem fow a Hemp, and his Dam Spin it out at his
Arse.


Beau. You mistake, you mistake; What do you think his Name is?


Sir Lion. His Name; as if I knew not his Name; I have Bred him up e're since
he was Three Years old, and his Name is Tranio.


Snatch. Away, away, mad Ass, his Name is Winlove; my only Son, and Heir to all
my Estate in the Vale of Evesham.


Sir Lion. Heavens! he has murdered his Master; lay hold on him, I charge you
in the King's Name, O my Son, tell me thou Villain, Where is my Son VVinlove?


Tran. Run for an Officer to carry this mad Knave to the Jayle; Lay hold on him
I charge ye, and see him forthcoming.


Saun. Awa, awa with the Hampdresser Sir.


Sir Lion. Carry me to the Jayle ye Villains!


Pet. Hold Gentlemen; Your Blessing Father.


Beau. Son Petruchio VVellcome. You have it, and you Peg, how do you? Know ye any
thing of this matter?


Pet. My Lord, take heed what you do; so much I know, I dare Swear this is Sir
Lyonell VVinlove, and that a Counterfeit.


Saun. VVuns, I think sea tea, good an ye please I'se take the Covenant on it.


VVood. So durst I Swear too almost.


Snat. Swear if thou durst.


VVood. Sir I dare not Swear Point Blank.


Tran. You had best Swear, I am not VVinlove neither.


VVood. Yes, I know you to be Mr. VVinlove.


Beau. Away with the Doater'd, to the Jayle with him.


Sir Lion. Are you all settled to do mischief to me? Why my Lord Beausoy
methinks you might know me.


Tran. Away with him to my Lodgings for the present, 'till we can get a
Constable to charge him upon, we shall have a hubbub in the Streets, drag him I
say.


Sir. Lion. Rogues, Villains, Murderers! I shall have Justice.


[Exit with Sir Lyonell. Wood. These are strange Passages, I know not what to
think, of 'em; but I am glad Biancha came not when they were here, sure my
Mounsier will not fail me.


Enter Winlove and Biancha. Win. Now my Biancha I am truly Happy, our Loves
shall like the Spring be ever growing.


Bian. But how shall we Escape my Fathers Anger.


Win. Fear not, I Will warrant thee.


Wood. O here is Biancha, how now Mounsier brave, What fancy's this?


Win. O Mounsieur te Vous la Menes, How do you do good Mr. Woodall, how do you like
my new Bride?


Wood. How, how, how, Sir, your Bride? Seize on her quickly.


Win. Hands off, she is my Wife, touch her who dares; Will you have your Teeth
picked? What do you think of giving 20 Pieces to teach your Mistress French.


Wood. O Rogue, I Will have thee hanged.


VVin. Or 40 Pieces to buy a Pair of Gloves, to let you Steal Madam Biancha:
this Ring was bought with some of it, ha, ha, ha.


Wood. Down with him, down with him, a damned Rascal.


Win. I, do, Which of you has a mind to breath a Vein?


2 Fell. Nay if she be his Wife we dare not touch her.


Wood. I Will fetch some body that shall, O Devil.


Exit. VVin. Ay do, I am your poor Mounsieur, ha, ha, ha; Fear not Biancha,
he will fetch 'em all I know, I warrant thee we shall appease thy Father Easily.


Bian. Trust me Sir, I fear the Storm.


Enter Beaufoy, Tranio, Petruchio, Margaret, Sauny, Snatchpenny, Jamy, Sir
Lyonell, Woodall, and Attendants. VVood. That Rogue, that Damned Counterfit
Frenchman has stolen your Daughter and Married her, here they are.


VVin. Bless me, What do I see yonder my Father, in earnest? Dear Sir your
Blessing, and your Pardon.


Sir Lion. My Dear Son, Art thou alive? then take it.


Bian. I must beg your Pardon too Sir.


VVin. And I most Honored Father.


Beau. Why what is the Matter? What have thou done? VVoodall tells me thou have
Married the Frenchman.


VVin. Me she has Married, but no Frenchman. The right VVinlove, Son to the
right VVinlove is her Husband, and your Son in-Law.


Saun. S'breed Sir, ye act two parts, ye were but a Hamp-dresser in the last
Act, Sir.


Snatch. It Is time for us to be going, I feel one Ear going off already.


Exit. Beau. You amaze me* Are not you the Frenchman, Mr. VVoodall preferred to
teach my Daughter?


Bian. No my Lord, he put on that Disguise to Court me, he is the true VVinlove.


Sir Lion. Marry is he my Son, Sir.


VVin. Those were but (...) of my making.


Wood. Here Is Patching with a Mistress, I Am sure I am Gulled.


Beau. But do you hear Sir? Have you Married my Daughter without my Consent.


Sir Lion. Come my Lord, now you must know me; I will beg both their Pardons,
and Secure her a Jointure worthy her Birth and Fortune.


VVin. You are a Father now Indeed.


Beau. Sir Lyonell excuse my rashness I accept your noble Proffer, you are
forgiven.


Saun. S'breed Sir, we sal nere go to Dunner Sir, the Deel forgot and forgive
you aw, Sir.


Sir Lion. But where is that Rogue that would have sent me to Jayle? I Will slit
his Nose for him.


VVin. I must beg his Pardon, for he did all for my Sake.


Sir Lion. Well Sir, for your Sake I Pardon him.


Beau. Come Gentlemen all to my house, we shall there end all our Doubts, and
drowned our fears.


VVood. Sir, I shall expect my Money back again, it is enough to loose my
Mistress.


VVin. No Faith it is in better hands already, you will but fool it away, you will
be hireing Frenchmen again.


Wood. Well mock on, I Will in and eat out part of it.


Beau. Come Gentlemen.


Marg. Husband will you not go with my Father?


Pet. First kiss me Peg, and I will.


Marg. What in the middle of the Street.


Pet. What art thou Ashamed of me?


Marg. Not so Sir, but ashamed to kiss so openly.


Pet. Why then let us home again, Sauny lead the way.


Saun. Good the Deel a bit will Saundy Budge before Dunner, Sir.


Marg. Nay I will give thee a kiss, nay pray now stay.


Pet. So is not this well? come my sweet Peg.


Bian. Sister I hope we shall be friends now.


Ma^g. I was never Foes with you.


Win. Come fairest, all the Storms are overblown; Love has both Wit and
Fortune of her own.


Exeunt. ACT V.
Enter Margaret and Biancha. Bian. BUt is it Possible Sister, he should have used
you thus?


Marg. Had I served him as bad as Eve did Adam, he coud not have used me worse;
but I am resolved now I Am got home again I Will be revenged, I Will muster up the
Spite of all the Cursed Women since Noah's Flood to do him Mischief, and add
new Vigor to my Tongue; I have not pared my Nails this fortnight, they are
long enough to do him some Execution, that is my Comfort.


Bian. Bless me Sister, how you talk.


Marg. Thou art a Fool Biancha, come Learn of me; thou art Married to a Man
too, thou do not know but thou may need my Council, and make good use on it;
Thy Husband bares thee fair yet, but take heed of going home with him, for when
once he has thee within his verge, it is odds he will have his freaks too; there is
no trusting these Men: Thy temper is soft and easy, thou must Learn to break
him, or he will break thy Heart.


Bian. I must Confess I should be Loath to be so used, but sure Mr. VVinlove is
of a better Disposition.


Marg. Trust him and hang him, they are all alike; Come thou shall be my
Scholar, learn to Frown, and cry out for unkindness, but brave Anger, thou
have a Tongue, make use on it; Scould, Fight, Scratch, Bite, any thing, still
take Exceptions at all he does, if there be Cause or not, if there be reason
for it he will Laugh at thee. I Will make Petruchio glad to wipe my Shoes, or walk
my Horse, ere I have done with him.


Enter Petruchio, Winlove, Sauny. Bian. Peace Sister, our Husbands are both
here.


Marg. Thou Child I am glad on it, I Will speak louder,


Pet. Well Brother VVinlove now we are truly happy, never were Men so blessed
with two such Wives.


VVin. I am glad to hear you say so Sir, my own I Am sure Im blessed in.


Pet. Yours, why Biancha's a Lion, and Margaret a mere Lamb to her: I tell thee
Winlove, there is no Man living tho I say it, (but it is no matter since she does
not hear me) that has a Wife so gentle, and so active and affable, poor thing I
durst be sworn she would walk barefoot a hundred Miles to do me good.


Marg. No but she would not, nor one Mile neither.


Saun. Now have at your Luggs, Sir.


Pet. O Peg, art thou there? How do thou do my Dear?


Marg. You may go look, What Is that to you?


Saun. Stand of yer guard Sir, Good Saundy will put on his head Piece.


Pet. I am glad to hear thee say you are well in troth.


Marg. Never the better for you, which you shall sind.


Pet. Nay I know thou love me, Prithee take up my Glove Peg.


Marg. I take up your Glove; Marry come up, command your Servants, look you
there it lies.


Pet. I am glad to see thee merry, poor wanton Rogue.


Marg. It Is very well, you think you are in the Country but you are mistaken,
the case is altered, I am at home now, and my own disposer; Go swagger at your
greazy Lubber there, your Patient Wife will make you no more Sport, she has a
Father will allow her Meat and Lodging, and another gaits Chambermaid then a
Highlander.


Saun. Good an ye were a top of Grantham Steple that aw the Toon may hear what a
Scanden Queen ye are, out, out.


Pet. Why what is the matter Peg? I never saw thee in so jolly a Humor, sure
thou have been Drinking.


Saun. Good has she, haud ye tang, ye faw dranken Swine, out, out, out, was ye
tak a Drink and nere tak Saundy to ye, out, out, out.


Marg. It Is like I have, I am the sitter to talk to you, for no sober Woman is
a Companion for you.


Pet. Troth thou say right, we are excellently Matched.


Marg. Well mark the end on it, Petruchio prithee come hither, I have something
to say to you.


Saun. De ye nea budge a foot Sir, Deel a my saul bo she will Scratch your eyn
out.


Pet. Well, your Pleasure Madam.


Marg. First thou art a Pitiful fellow, a thing beneath me, which I scorn and
Laugh at, ha, ha, ha.


Win. She holds her own yet I see.


Marg. I know not what to call thee, thou art no Man, thou coudst not have a
Woman to thy Mother, thou paltry, Scurvy, ill conditioned fellow, do thou not
tremble to think how thou have used me; What are you silent Sir? Biancha see,
Looks he not like a Disbanded Officer, with that hanging dog look there? I must
eat nothing because your Cook has Roasted the Mutton dry, as you used to have
it (...) your Worship was a Batchellor, I must not go to Bed neither, because
(...) are Damp.


Pet. Mark you Peg; What a strange Woman are you to Discourse openly the Fault
of your Servants in your own Family.


Marg. No, no, Sir, this wont serve your turn; your Old Stock of Impudence
will not carry you off so: I Will speak your Fame, and tell what a fine Gentleman
you are* how Valliantly you, and half a Douzen of your Men, got the better of
a Single Woman, and made her lose her Supper,


Saun. Good she Lies Sir; I would a gin her an awd Boot tul^ a made Tripes on,
and it wod a hin bra Meat with Mustard, and she would nea have it.


Marg. My Faults? No, good Squire of the Country, you thought to have Tamed me,
I warrant, in good time; why you see I am even with you; Your Quiet Patient
Wife, that will go no more in the Country with you, but will stay in Town, to
Laugh at your Wi^e Worship, and wish you more Wit.


Pet. I should Laugh at that; why we are just now a going* Sauny go get the
Horses ready quickly.


Saun. Good will I Sir; I'se Saddle a Highland-Wutch to Carry your Bride; Good
she will mount your Arse for you Madam.


Marg. Sirrah, touch a Horse, and I Will Curry your Coxcomb for you: No Sir, I
will not say, Pray let me not go; but boldly, I will not go; you force me if you can
or dare: You see I am not Tongue-ty'd, as silent as you thought you made me.


Pet. Prithee Peg, Peace a little, I know thou can Speak, leave now, or
thou wilt have nothing to say to morrow.


Marg. Yes, I Will say this over again, and something more if I can think on it,
to a poor despised man of Clouts: Sister, how he smoakes now he is off his own
Dunghill.


Pet. Prithee Peg leave making a Noise; In Faith thou wilt make my Head ach.


Marg. Noise? Why this is Silence to what I intend; I Will talk Louder than this,
every Night in my Sleep.


Saun. The Dee'l shall be your Bed fellow for Sawndy then.


Marg. I will learn to Rail at thee in all Languages; Thunder shall be
soft-musick to my Tongue.


Saun. The Dee'l a bit Scot's ye gat to brangle in, marry the Dee'l gi ye a
Clap wi a French Thunderbolt.


Pet. Very pretty; Prithee go on.


Marg. I Will have a Collection of all the Ill Names that ever was Invented, and
call you over by 'em twice a day.


Pet. And have the Catalogue published for the Education of young Scolds:
Proceed Peg.


Marg. I Will have you Chained to a Stake at Billingsgate, and Baited by the
fish-wives, while I stand to Hiss 'em on.


Pet. Ha, ha, ha; Witty Peg, forward.


Marg. You shall not dare to Blow your Nose, but when I bid you; you shall know me
to be the Master.


Saun. Wuns gat her to the Stool of Repantance, Sir.


Pet. Nay, I believe, thou will go in Breeches shortly; On, on; What have you
no more on it? Ha, ha, ha.


Marg. Do You Laugh and be Hanged? I Will spoil your Sport.


(Flys at him. Pet. Nay, Peg, Hands off; I thought you would not have Disgraced
your Good Parts, to come to Blows so soon; Prithee Chide on, thou can not
believe what Delight I take to hear thee; It does become thee so well: What
Pumpt dry already? Prithee talk more and longer, and faster, and sharper, this
is nothing.


Marg. I Will see you in the Indies before I Will do any thing to please you; Do You
like it?


Pet. Extremely! On Peg, you will cooll too fast.


Marg. Why then Mark me, if it were to save thee from Drowning, or Breaking thy
Neck, I will not speak one word more to thee these Two Months.


(Sits Sullenly Saun. Ah Good an ye do nea Ly, Madam.


Pet. Nay, Good Peg, be not so hard-harted. What Melancholy all ^'th' sudden?
Come, get up, we'll send for the Fiddlers, and have a Dance; Tho'lt break thy
Elbow with Leaning on that hard Table: Sawny, go get your Mistress a Cushion;
Alas! I doubt she is not well; Look to her Sister.


Bian. Are you not well, Sister? What ail you? Pray speak Sister: Indeed,
Brother, you have so Vexed her, she will be Sick.


Pet. Alas, alas! I know what is the matter with her, she has the Toothache. See
how she holds her Cheek; the Wind has gotten into her Teeth, by keeping her
Mouth open this Cold Weather.


Bian. Indeed it may be so Brother, she uses to be troubled with that Pain
sometimes.


Pet. Without all Question; Poor Peg, I pity thee; Which Tooth is it? Will thou have it Drawn, Peg? The Toothache makes Fools of all the Physicians;
there is no Cure, but Drawing: What say thou? Will thou have it pulled out?
Well, thou shall. Sauny, Run, Sirrah, hard by, you know where my Barber Lives
that Drew me a Tooth last Week, fetch him quickly; What do you stand staring at?
Run and fetch him immediately, or I Will cut your Legs off.


Saun Good I'se fetch can to pull her head off an ye wull.


[Exit. Win. This will make her find her Tongue again, or else for certain she
has lost it.


Pet. Her Tongue, Brother? Alas! You see her Face is so Swelled, she cannot
speak.


Bian. You Jest Brother; her Face is not swelled. Pray let me see, Sister, I
cannot perceive it.


Pet. Not Swelled? Why you are blind then; Prithee let her alone, you trouble
her.


Enter Sauny and Barber. Here, Honest Barber, have you brought your Instruments?

Barber. Yes Sir; What must I do?


Pet. You must Draw that Gentlewoman a Tooth there; Prithee do it neatly, and
as gently as thou can; And, de hear me, take care you don't tear her Gums.


Barber. I warrant you Sir.


Saun. Hear ye Sir, Could not ye Mistake? and pull her Tang out instead of her
Teeth.


Bian. I Will be gone, I cannot endure to see her put to so much Pain.


[Exit. Barb. Pray, Madam, open your Mouth, that I may see which Tooth it is.
[She Strikes him. Why Sir, Did you send for me to Abuse me.

Saun. Good be nea Angry, Ye ha ne aw yer Pay yet Sir. Cud ye not Mistake, and
Draw her Tang in stead of her Teeth Sir.


Pet. No, no: But it seems now she wo' not have it Drawn: Go, there is something
for your Pains however.


[ Exit Barber. Sau. Ye sid ha taken my Counsel Sir.


Win. This will not do, Sir. You cannot raise the Spirit you have laid, with
all your Arts.


Pet. I Will try; Have at her once more. VVinlove, you must assist me; I Will make
her Stir, if I cannot make her Speak. Look, look! alas! How Pale she is! She Is
gone of the sudden; Body OF me, she is stiff too; undone, undone, What an
unfortunate Man am I? she is gone! she is gone! never had man so great a Loss as
I; O Winlove, pity me, my poor Peg is Dead, dear Winlove call in my Father and
the Company that they may share in this sad Spectacle, and help my Sorrows with
their joining Griefs. Exit. Winlove. Speak, or by this hand I Will bury thee
alive; Sauny thou feast in how sad a condition thy poor Master is in* thy good
Mistress is Dead, have to the next Church and get the Bier and the Bearers
hither, I Will have her buried out of hand; Run Sauny.


Saun. An you will mack her Dead, we'll bury her deep enough, we'll put her done
intill a Scotch Coalepit, and she shall rise at the Deel's arse of Peake.


Exit. Pet. I will see that last Pious act Performed, and then betake my self
to a willing Exile; my own Country's Hell, now my dear Peg has left it. Not
yet, upon my Life I think thou have a mind to be buried quick; I hope thou have.


Enter Winlove, Beaufoy, Sir Lyonell, Woodall, Biancha, Tranio, Jamy, etc.
Beau. Bless me Son Petruchio, Is my dear Daughter Dead?


Pet. Alas, alas, it is but too true, would I had taken her room.


Beau. Why methinks she looks brisk, fresh and lively.


Pet. So much Beauty as she had must needs leave some wanding remains to hover
still about her face.


Beau. What could her Disease be?


Pet. Indeed I grieve to tell it, but truth must out, she Dyed for spite, she
was strangely Infected.


Bian. Fie Sister, for shame speak, Will you let him abuse you thus?


Pet. Gentlemen you are my loving Friends and knew the Virtues of my matchless
Wife, I hope you will accompany her Body to its long home.


All. We'll all wait on you.


Beau. Thou will break her heart indeed.


Pet. I warrant you Sir, it is tougher then so.


Enter Sauny and Bearers with a Beir. Saun. I bring you here vera gued Men, an
she be nea Dead Sir, for a Croon more they will bury her quick.


Pet. O honest friends, you are Welcome, you must take up that Corpse, how!
hard-hearted, Why de ye not weep? the loss of so much Beauty and goodness, take
her up, and lay her upon the Beir.


1 Bear. Why what do you mean Sir? She is not Dead.


Pet. Rogues, tell me such a Lie to my face? Take her up or I Will swinge ye.


Saun. Tak her up, tak her up, we'll make her Dead Billy, ye'st a two Croo^
mear, tak her up Man.


1 Bear. Dead or alive all is one to us, let us but have our fees.


Pet. There, nay she is stiff, however on with her, Will you not speak yet? So
here take these Strings and bind her on the Beir, she had an active stirring
body when she Lived, she may chance fall off the Hearse now she is Dead: So, now
take her up and away, come Gentlemen you will follow, I mean to carry her through
the Strand as far as St. Iame's, People shall see what respect I bore her --
She shall have so much Ceremony to attend her now she is Dead. There my Coach
shall meet her and carry her into the Country, I Will have her laid in the Vault
belonging to my Family, she shall have a Monument; some of you inquire me out a
good Poet to write her Epitaph suitable to her Birth, Quallity and Conditions,
Pity the remembrance of so many Virtues should be lost; March on, I would say
more, but grief Checks my Tongue.


Marg. Father, Sister, Husband, Are you all Mad? Will you expose me to open
shame? Rogues set me down you had best.


Pet. A Miracle! a Miracle! she Lives! Heaven make me thankful for it, set her
down, Liv'st thou my Poor Peg?


Marg. Yes that I do, and will to be your Tormentor.


Saun. Out, out, gea her nea Credit, good she is as Dead as mine Grannam, tak
her, away with her, Sir.


Pet. Bless me my hopes are all vanished again, it is a Demon speaks within her
Body; Take her up again, we'll bury 'em together.


Marg. Hold, hold, my dear Petruchio, you have overcome me, and I beg your
Pardon, henceforth I will not dare to think a thought shall Cross your
Pleasure, set me at Liberty, and on my knees I Will make my Recantation.


All. Victoria, victoria, the field is won.


Pet. Art thou in earnest Peg? May I believe thee?


Saun. You ken very well she was awway's a lying Queen when she was Living, and
wull ye believe her now she is Dead?


Marg. By all that is good not truth it self truer.


Pet. Then thus I free thee, and make thee Mistress both of my self and all I
have.


Saun. S'breed bo ye`l nea gi Saundy tull her Sir?


Wood. Take heed of giving away your Power, Sir.


Pet. I Will venture it, nor do I fear I shall repent my bargain.


Marg. I Am sure I will not give you Cause, y've taught me now what it is to be a
Wife, and I Will still show my self your humble Handmaid.


Pet. My best Peg, we will change kindness and be each others Servant;
Gentlemen why do you not Rejoice with me?


Beau. I am so full of joy I cannot Speak, may you be happy, this is your
Wedding day.


Saun. Shall Saundy get her a Bride-Cake, and Brake o'r her Head Sir? and wee's
gatt us a good Wadding Dunner.


Enter Geraldo. Geral. Save ye all Gentlemen; Have ye any Room for more Guess?
I am come to make up the Chorus.


Pet. My Noble Friend, VVellcome; Where have you been so long?


Geral. I have been about a little trivial Business; I am just now come from a
Wedding.


Pet. What Wedding I pray Sir?


Geral. Troth even my own; I have ventured upon it at last: Madam, I hope you will
pardon me.


Bian. Yes Sir; and so will this Gentleman.


Saun. Are not you a Gentleman-Hampdresser?


Pet. It Is even so, this proves to be VVinlove in earnest.


Ger. Good Gentlemen undo this Riddle; I Am all in the Dark.


Pet. You shall know anon, in the mean time Believe it Gentlemen. We want
another Woman, or we might have a Dance.


Geral. My Widow is within, she will supply you.


Beau. Good Peg go and wait on her, and you Biancha too.


(Exit Peg, Biancha. Pet. I tell thee Geraldo, never had Man so Obedient and
Loving a Wife as I have now, I defy the World to equal her.


VVin. Nay, Brother, you must except her Sister.


Geral. You must except mine too, or I shall have a hard Bargain of it; my
Widow is all Obedience.


Pet. I Will tell you what I Will do with you, I Will hold you Ten Pieces to be spent
in a Collation on them, That mine has more Obedience than both them; to try
which, each send for his Wife, and if mine come not first I Will lose my Bett.


Saun. Good yeel lose your Siller sure enough Sir.


Both. A Match.


VVood. I Will be your halves Geraldo, and yours Mr. VVinlove too.


VVin. Iamy, Go tell your Mistress, I desire her to come hither to me presently.


(Exit Jamy. Pet. A Piece more she does not come.


Beau. You Will lose Son, you will lose; I know she`ll come.


Pet. I know she won`t; I find by Instinct I shall VVin my Wager.


Enter Jamy. Jam. Sir, she says she is busy, and she can`t leave Mr. Geraldo's
Lady.


Pet. Look ye there now, come your Money.


Ger. Prithee go again and tell my Wife I must needs speak with her immediately.


Exit Jamy. Pet. I shall win yours too as sure as in my Pocket.


Ger. I warrant you no such matter, What will you give to be off your Bett?


Pet. I will not take forty Shillings.


Enter Jamy. How now?

Jam. Sir, she says you have no Business with her, if you have you may come to
her.


Pet. Come produce, I knew 'twould be so; Sauny go and tell Peg from me, I
command her to come to me instantly.


Saun. I'se gar her gea wuth me Sir, or I'se put my Durke to the hilt in her
Weam.


Wood. Yet you wont win, I Will hang for it if she will come.


Pet. Yes but she will, as sure as you gave forty pieces to Court Biancha, I Will
venture them to twenty more upon it with you.


Wood. Nay I have lost enough already.


Enter Peg and Sauny. Pet. Look ye here Gentlemen.


Saun. O my Saul, she is can a daft gued Lass, she is at your Beck, steake her
and kiss her Man.


Marg. I come to receive your Commands, Sir.


Pet. All I have to say to thee Peg, is to bid thee demand ten pound of these
two Gentlemen, thou have Won it.


Marg. I, Sir, for what?


Pet. Only for being so good natured to come when I send for you.


Marg. It was my duty Sir.


Pet. Come pay, pay, give it her, I Will not bate ye two pence.


Ger. There Is mine.


Win. And mine Sister, much good may it do ye.


Beau. Well Peg I Will find thee one Thousand Pound the more for this.


Saun. Bo what wull ye gi Saundy that halpt to make her gued and tame? VVuns she
was as VVild as a Galloway Coalt.


Enter Biancha and Widow. VVin. Look here they come at last.


Bian. What did you send for me for?


Win. Why to win me five Pound if you had been as obedient as you should a
been.


Bian. You have not known me long enough to venture so much upon my Duty, I
have been my Sisters Scholar a little.


Saun. Bo put her to Saundy to teach, Good I'se make her sea gentle ye may
streake her and handle her all over Sir,


Ger. You might have got me five Pound if you had done as you should do.


Wid. Were it to do again you should be sure to loose.


Marg. Fie Ladys, for shame, How dare you infringe that Duty which you justly
owe your Husbands, they are our Lords and we must pay 'em Service.


Beau. Well said Peg, you must be their Tutor, come Son if youll have a Dance
dispatch it quickly, the Musick's ready, and the Meat will be spoiled.


Pet. Come then, play, play.

DANCE. Now let us in, and Eat, the Work is done,
Which neither Time nor Age can wear from Memory;
I Have Tamed the Shrew, but will not be ashamed,
If next you see the very Tamer Tamed.

FINIS.

