THE Dumb Lady: Or, The FARRIAR MADE PHYSICIAN. As it was acted at the
THEATER ROYAL. By John Lacy, Gent.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Dring, at the White-Lyon, next Chancery Lane end in
Fleetstreet. 1672.

To the Highborn and most hopeful Prince, CHARLES, Lord Limrick, and Earl of
Southampton.
GREAT SIR,
WHen I began to write this Dedication, my hand shook, a fear possessed me, and I
trembled; my Pen fell from me, and my whole frame grew disordered, as if
blasted with some sudden upstart Comet. Such Awe and Reverence waits on
Dignity, that I now find it fit for me to wish, I had been refused the honor
of my Dedication, rather than undertake a task so much too great for me. How
shall I excuse this bold and saucie fault? How shall my mean unworthy pen,
render you your Attributes? Now I find presumption is a sin indeed. I have
given my self a wound beyond the cure of common men: Heal me then, Great Sir,
for where Princes touch, the Cure is infallible. And now since you so
graciously have received my Farriar, who dares say he is no Physician? When you
vouch safe to call him Doctor, he has Commenced, and from your Mouth he has
taken his Degree; for what you say, is, and ought to be: such a power is due to
you from the Greatness of your Blood: I, and my abject Muse had perished but for
you; and in such distress, whither should we flee for shelter, but to him that
has power to spread his wings and cover us? and you have done it generously:
Yet am I not to wonder at this Virtue in you, since your high Birth can do no
less for you than to make you good, and you are so: and may that Goodness and
Humility, which so early appears in you, increase to a full perfection: may
your Virtues prove as beautiful as your person; may they still endeavor to
outvie each other, yet neither obtain, but still walk hand in hand, till your
Virtues in you be reverenced by all Mankind, and your lovely Person honored by
all Women, and so may you continue to a long and happy life. But I need not
wish this, nor the world doubt it; for already you're possessed of all those
Virtues, that men hereafter may reasonally expect from you: for being supported
with Majesty of one side, and with so admired and beautiful a Mother on the
other, besides her great and honorable Birth, on such sure foundations, you
cannot fail our hopes, and that you never may, shall be for ever the prayers of

Your most faithful, and most obedient servant, John Laey.

The Epistle to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, (for so most Epistles begin) being conscious of my own weakness
(for so they go on) I let thee know my own modesty had kept me from the Press,
but for the importunity of friends, (and so they make an end.)

By this you see, Poetry consists more of Fancy than truth; so do the Poets
too, or else, why should they seem ashamed to come into the Press? when I know
their Bowels languish within them till they are there: Vainglory being the
chief ingredient, that makes up the spirit of Poetry, and the grand Inducement
that puts us all in print. There is a kind of Charm in Poetry, it is like
Tobacco and Chemistry; for if you once take the one, and undertake the other,
you are fixed to the freehold never to be parted. So fares it with the Dablers
in the Dew of Pernassus: no revilings, no shameful reproaches can discourage
us; still we write on, still we are fixed to the freehold. I have observed, how
much more precious to a Poet the Issue of his Brain is than that of his Loins:
for I have known them bury Children without grief or trouble; but the Issue of
their Brain is so dear and tender to them, that if you go about to persuade
them but to cut a Play or Poem shorter, they are so concerned, that every Line
you cut is valued at a Joint, and every Speech a Limb lopt off Without doubt
there is a kind of madness in Poetry, or else how can a man be so vainly
possessed as to think his own works exceed all other men's? That there are such
men is but too true; for, I my self have thought so of my own Poetry: and when
I that am so mean an under-shurb do prove so vainly mad, the tall Cedars sure
must needs be shaken with out-ragious fits; and in those fits they write
raptures, and fly to the Skies, and get among the Gods, and makes such work,
that you would swear they are all breaking up School, and coming down amongst us.
For my part, I wonder they have not come all this while, I Am sure they have
been sufficiently provoked. I thank my incapacity I am not so far gone in
Poetry as to arrive at those fits; yet I have this to say, that I have had my
ends upon Poetry, and not Poetry upon me: for if Poetry had gained its ends on
me, it had made me mad; but that I having my ends on it, appears in my getting
money by it, which was shown plentifully on my Poets days; but that I thank my
friends for, and not the desert of my Plays: and I wish, Reader, that you may
prove as kind to the Printer, as you were to me, when you were a hearer; and
that my Farriar may prove as good a servant to him, as formerly to me, who am,
Reader,

Your humble servant, John Lacy.

PROLOGUE.
HEre I am, and not ashamed who know it,
I humbly come your Forma paup'ris Poet:
Not Hector-like, that one half-year has writ,
And fights the other half to defend that wit:
Nor have I brought you here a second Play,
Like him that pretends preaching twice a day;
And when you gravely come in the afternoon,
He puts you off with repetition:
Saying, you may remember in the morn
I told you thus, and so, and where, and when;
So spins out his hour with the same again.
Though such things pass on those that Sermons hear,
It will not do with Play-judgers, I fear;
I would you had their grace, and they your wit,
Sermons would then be hard as Plays to hit;
And easy Scenes would pass upon you, when
Grace above Wit abounds in Gentlemen.
How would the Poets all rejoice to see
This age appear in the old simplicity;
To have your wives and you come ten times over,
To see the pudding eaten in Jane shore;
To cry up the bold Beauchamps of the Stage?
There was a blessed understanding age.
I would you were such but for one three days,
Till the poor Poet gather up his Bays;
Or else my less than fifth-rate wit I find
Will force me beg you will not be just, but kind:
Yet use me as you please, my comfort is,
If by your vengeance I must needs be worried,
I Am not the first small Poet has miscarried*
The Actors Names.
GErnette An old rich Gentleman. Olinda His Daughter, pretending dumbness, and
after that madness. Suqre Softhead Her Suitor. Leander Her Lover, but not
permitted. Drench A Farrier beaten to a Doctor. Isabel His Wife. Jarvis Servant
to Gernette. Nurse His Wife, and Housekeeper to Gernette. Mrs. Nibby Cousin to
Gernette. Mr. Othentick A Parson, and Brother to Leander. Three Doctors Of
Physic. Women servants Attending on Olinda. Two Foot-boys. Patients. Two
Whippers Of Bedlam. Neighbors.
THE Dumb Lady.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Jarvis and Servant. Ser. THe like was never heard of, to have a sweet
young Lady as she was going to be married, to fall dumb.


Jar. If my wife had done so too, I think it had been never the worse for the
Commonwealth: but it would make any woman dumb to be designed for such a Fopp
as Squire Softhead.


Ser. He is a fopp of a new stamp, I would not marry a milkmaid to him.


Jar. I would he had my wife, or any that would make him a cuckold: he has
turned away twenty servants because they do not call him Squire often enough: I
shall be sick every time I hear the word Squire, he has made it so ridiculously
loathsome.


Ser. He has been called so from his Cradle in the Country, where the title of
Squire had always great worship, till the fool crept in amongst them, of which
he is chief.


Jar. Yes Faith, for if there were an Army of Fopps (as truly I think they
might be raised here) Squire Softhead must be General; he has one faculty, he
will maintain a quarrel within three words of striking, and then he will eat
cold Custard.


Ser. Hang him; but do thou think my young Mrs. is dumb indeed?


Jar. You saw the Doctors could not cure her, but if she do counterfeit do not
blame her, for 'twere pity upon pity that the Sqr. (a Pox Sqr. him,) should
have her; here they all come.


Enter old Gernette, his daughter lead by servants as dumb, Sqr. Softhead her
suitor, Nibby and Jarvis. Ger. To have my Child struck dumb, upon her intended
Wedding day, and to have the Doctors give her over too; O my unhappy stars!


Soft. Are the stars such unhappy things, are they the cause of her dumbness?
by the heart of a horse if I thought so I Would complain of 'em.


Nib. Complain of the Stars! who would you complain too Good Sqr. Softhead?


Soft. I Would complain to the Sun and Moon, I warrant you they would not uphold them
in their Raskally twinkling Tricks.


Nib. Alas poor Sqr. the Sun is always in haste, he never stays to hear
complaints.


Soft. Why then I Will watch them when they fall, and if the proudest star of them
all light within my ground, by the heart of a horse I Will have an Action of
Trespass against them, and if the Law once take hold of 'em, I Will warrant 'em
for twinkling again in haste.


Nib. You were best get a star-trap to catch 'em in.


Soft. I warrant you a Law-trap will do as well.


Nib. Do you think your daughter had not better be dumb and dead, than marry
such a ridiculous bruit as this?


Ger. O but his estate lies so sweetly round mine, that when she understands
the blessing, she will dote of him as I do.


Nib. Marry the Devil dote on him; why sir, he never comes into her Chamber,
but he is all of a foaming sweat, throws off his Periwigg, and no one knows
whether he or that smells rankest; then he runs to the Looking-glass, rubs his
head with the dressing cloth, puts on his Periwigg, then combs out the Powder
upon his Mrs. so makes a scurvy leg, and leaves her -- there is a lover with a
Pox to him. But Sqr. why do you profane the stars so?


Soft. Profane? there is a company of vagabond wandering stars that do nothing
but run up and down the sky to tell fortunes, just like our Gypsies in the
highway, I know 'em well enough. Heart of a horse, to lose a wife for want of
three words, if she had said but to have and to hold, we had had no farther use
of her tongue as I know of.


Hib. Why so, Sqr.


Soft. Do not call me Sqr. Mrs. bare Sqr. without Softhead sounds scurvily, and
it is scurvily done to call me so, and as scurvily I take it, and by the heart
of a horse if you were not a woman, I Would wound you scurvily.


Jar. Truly methinks there is such a sympathy betwixt Sqr: and Softhead, that
it is a thousand pitties to part them.


Nib. I beseech you Sqr. which is the Ancientest family, the Softheads or the
Haufheads?


Soft. The Softheads are the Ancientest family in Europe, for Adam's youngest
Son got a knock in his Cradle, and the Softheads ever since derive themselves
in a direct line from him.


Ger. How does my child? thou have thy health I hope.


Olin. A a a a a a.


Soft. Heart of a horse, I believe she counterfeits dumbness: but I have a
trick to make her speak again if you will give me leave.


Ger. With all my heart, Sir, what is it?


Soft. Why I Will go call her Jade and Whore, and that will provoke her to call me
Rogue and Raskal, you know.


Ger. Though it be upon such rude terms, I would be glad to hear her speak, Sir.


Soft. Come on: Why do not you speak the words of Matrimony, you Jade, that you
might be my Wife, you little Whore? Look you Sir, she has given me an answer.


She takes him a cuff of the ear. Ger. I, but it is but with her hand, Sir.


Soft. However it is an answer Sir, and she may marry me with her hand as well
as with her tongue, for it seems to me to be the stronger confirmation.


Ger. Squire, if you love my child, endeavor to find all possible helps:
where is my Servants? Run and ride all ways imaginable, leave no ground
unsearcht, nor means unthought of to recover her.


Nib. And good Sqr. Softhead, find out a wise man to cure her: do you know one
when you see him?


Soft. By my troth to my knowledge I never saw a wise man in my life.


Jar. Do you send a fool to find out a wise man?


Nib. If he cannot find a wise man, a wise man will find out him quickly.


Ger. Come lead my Child to her Chamber, and ride all ways and all Countries to
find out wise and able men.


Soft. Jarvis, how shall we do to know a wise man when we see him; what marks
and signs have they?


Exeunt all but Jarvis and Softhead. Jar. Why, their dress and their speech
they have from the stool of formality, and they have likely a bald head with a
satin cap on it, a narrow band, with a broad hat, a kain growing in their
hands, with the silver head always bobbing at their lips, and they that are
thus habited are taken for wise men.


Soft. Why then I may be a wise man, if a Silver Kain will make me so; but
prithee what do these wise men do?


Jar. Bi'rlady that will pusse a wise man to tell you; for I never heard of any
thing that was wisely done in my life, therefore I think wise men do nothing.


Soft. Then I will be wise, whatsoever it cost me, for I love to do nothing
above all things in the world: but come let us go the right way to find a wise
man now.


Jar. I Will warrant you go right, for we will go directly East.


Soft. Why you fool, the wise men came out of the East, and do thou think to
find them there, when they left the place.


Jar. I, but Sir, they returned back into their own Country again.


Soft. Did they? why then the wise men of the East are not so wise as the wise
men of France, for if they get into another Country, the Devil cannot drive
them home again.


[Exeunt. Enter Drench a farrier, and Isabel his wife. Dr. I say Dame Isabel
I Will have it my way.


Isa. Have it my way? why, who are you, Sir? art thou any more than my husband,
fellow? how came thou thus audacious then to say, I Will have it my way? say
that again, and by the faith I have in my Confidant, my Gallant shall make thee
an example.


Dr. A ha, have you your Confidant and your Gallant, Wife?


Isa. Yes that I have. You know when the great ones have done with a fashion,
it comes amongst we mean Madams into th'Country at last, and I have as much
privilege due to me as any free born people in the world has, and we women will
maintain the liberties of the she subject with our lives and fortunes.


Dr. Bi'rlady Wife you rant like a free born subject indeed: but pray you, what
do you with the word free born subject.


Isa. I have it to show that I am one of the free born, and may have my Gallant
with all the perquisites belonging thereunto.


Dr. Why thou straglest as far out of the bonds of Matrimony as if thou would a
good Jointure to justify thee in it: there is a thing called duty Wife; the
Parson you may remember said so when he married us.


Isa. I no more remember what the Parson said when he married us, than what he
has said ever since when he preached.


Dr. The Jade's mad beyond recovery, a Pox of the liberty of the she subject:
Wife there are five Children by the fire side, pray you how many of 'em's mine,
Wife? I think it is high time to ask that question.


Isa. I must not be so much concerned with thee as to call thee husband,
therefore Mr. Drench, the first child was yours.


Dr. And whose are the rest?


Isa. The rest are mine fellow, let that suffice thee.


Dr. And but one of them mine, Wife?


Isa. No but one yours, and for this following reason, after my first child you
neglected your family duty, Mr. Drench, and when you grew negligent of me, I
grew careful of my self, and from that care came the rest of my children, Mr.
Drench.


Dr. And those four children it seems, are free born subjects* I find a Wife a
little modish, is worse than a Wife a little oldish: Wife I Will downright poison
your free born children.


Isa. O thou ungallantified Beast; would thou destroy thy own flesh and blood?


Dr. Not mine, but I will yours, Wife.


Isa. Why, are not man and wife one flesh, and then are not your children mine,
and mine yours, Mr. Drench?


Dr. Faith, I doubt this argument is the general security that mankind has to
warrant their offsprings Legitimate.


Isa. Sirrah, talk of poisoning my children and I Will have thee so gallantified.


Dr. Gallantified? prithee what is that Wife?


Isa. To be gallantified, is to be soundly cudgel'd, sirrah: there is another
point of she doctrine for you.


Dr. Pray you, let me ask you a question, Madam; nay be not ashamed to be
called Madam, for as mean people as your self has the impudence to own it,
therefore Madam are you true to your Gallant?


Isa. I, by my life am I, I else deserve to lose my privileges and be a
bondwoman, I, and condemned to my own husband.


Dr. That part of me that is Gentleman forgives thee freely for that; but the
rough part, which is Farrier, must be revenged; and though your gallant carry
your cudgel of love, I carry your cudgel of chastisement: I plead my privileges
Wife, and must beat you: take this and that, and that and this.


[beats her. Isa. Help, murder, murder, will you kill me you villain?


Dr. Kill you? alas this is but complement, Wife, and it is a new fashion come
into the Country Wife, so I have it to show you that I Am one of the free born
Wife.


[beats her again. Isa. Murder, murder, help, murder.


N. What Is here, fie, fie, neighbor Drench, hold for shame: what, beating your
Wife?


[Enter a Neighbor. Isa. I marry is he Sir, what is that to you? suppose I long
for a beating, I have been getting him in a good humor this two months to do
it, and now you must disturb us.


N. Nay if you long for a beating I Am sorry I disturbed you, I have done.


Isa. You wicked fellow do you know what ye've done? you have taken him off of
the sweetest humor: I see by his looks I shall not get another blow of him to
save my life.


Dr. The jade is mad beyond all cure.


N. I, for none but a mad woman would long for a beating, but farewell
neighbors, I have done.


Dr. You're an impertinent fellow to begin: Men that part rancounters are often
killed or hurt, and therefore you ought Neighbor to be soundly cudgel'd.


[Beats him. N. Nay good neighbor hold, hold.


Isa. You see he has taken off his anger from me, and now you must have all the
sweet blows you raskal.


Dr. So he shall, for if I had known thou had longed for a beating, thou
should not have had a blow to have saved thy life, but you shall have it.


[Beats him again. N. Hold, hold, hold; if ere I part man and Wife, if ere I
put my hand betwixt the bark and the tree again, may my fingers bear fruit, and
the boys rob my Orchard: A woman to long for a beating? what a blessing 'twere
if all our Wives would long sol.

[Exit Neigh.
Dr. Now I know you long for a beating Wife, lest you should miscarry I Will beat
you wonderfully.


Isa. Hold, hold, my longing is over indeed.


Dr. Is it? why then I Will to the Wood and drench a sick horse, and by that time
I return I hope you may come to your longing again, and then I shall plead the
liberty of the subject, and claw your free born sides again.


[ Exit Drench. Isa. To be beaten thus! if I be not revenged, say I Am a woman
without Gaul or invention; let me think a little, they say when a woman means
mischief, if she but look upon her Apronstrings the Devil will help her
presently; I Will try him: who is here?


Enter Jarvis and Softhead to her. Soft. We may search long enough, the Devil a
wise man that I can find or hear of.


Jar. I but Sir, you must know there be several sorts of wise men, and our
business is to find out a wise Physician.


Isa. Either the Proverb's false, or the Devil's very dull, for he has helped me
to no invention yet.


[Aside. Soft. But all the professed Doctors which we take to be wise
Physicians have given her over you see.


Jar. I, but there may be skilful and wise men in Physic that do not profess
it.


Soft. You say very true, for I was cured once of the belly ach by an old woman
and a warm Trencher, when all the Doctors in the Town had given me over.


Isa. God a mercy Devil, I have it in Faith, these Gentlemen have given me a
hint for a revenge upon my barbarous husband: Gentlemen I overheard your
discourse, and I find you are in great distress for a wise Physician.


Soft. What then, does such a Country creature as thou know any thing that is
wise?


Isa. I know not what your worship means by wise.


Soft. I dare swear thou do not, for I that am a Squire scarce know my self.


Isa. But Sir I can help you to the most excellent Phisician upon earth, but
then he is a man of the most strangest humors.


Soft. 'Slid no matter for his humors, so he be wise; where is he?


Isa. Why in that very Copse, blooding and drenching of a sick horse.


Soft. Why, that is a wise Farrier, not a wise Physician woman.


Isa. But he is a famous Physician of Padua, and has retired himself on purpose
to avoid Patients.


Soft. Then he is a fool and no Physician; for the wise Doctors never leave a
Patient whilst he has either breath in's body or money in's purse.


Isa. I but Sir, this is not a man that values money.


Soft. Then I say he is not a wise man. Come away Jarvis, this cannot be he we
look for.


Isa. Why you must know Sir, he exceeds the World for Physic, but then his
humor is to deny his profession and acknowledge nothing but Ignorance; then
Sir, he looks so like a Farrier, that you would swear he were one indeed; then
he is such a Clown.


Jar. The greater the Scholar, still the more Clown; and the further he is gone
in Learning, the more ignorant still in other things.


Soft. I, but is he far gone in Physic? can he make a dumb woman speak?


Isa. A dumb woman speak? I Will undertake he shall provoke a dumb devil to speak.


Soft. That Is the wise man I want: pray you where is he?


Isa. Why, Sir, he is easily spoke with, but you will find it wonderful difficult
to get him to a Patient; neither gold, complement, nor other fair usage could
ever yet work upon him, and yet there is a way to gain him.


Soft. Heart of a horse, pox to him, what way can that be?


Isa. A way that you will think strange, but very true: he could never yet be
brought to a Patient without being rudely used and soundly cudgil'd to it.


Soft. Nay, by the heart of a horse, he shall want for no beating.


Isa. I marry, Sir, that will do it, and nothing else in the world; yet he will
carry his seeming simplicity so cunningly, that I hold a wager you come away
persuaded that he is no Physician.


Jar. I hold a wager he shall own it, I Will make him commence Doctor else with a
good cudgel, I warrant you: but is he such a rare Physician?


Isa. Truly, Sir, but two days since he brought a mad woman to her wits again,
that was suspected never to have any; nay, he has taken men's legs and arms off,
and set 'em on sound again.


Jar. That Is beyond Surgeons-hall: sure he can conjure.


Soft. I Will be hanged if this fellow be not a spy of the Vertuosos, and is
come hither disguised to betray secrets in Nature.


Jar. But does he take no other fees but beating Mrs?


Isa. Of a certain nothing else, Sir.


Jar. I would some Doctors, I know, could be brought to that, I would want no
Physic, nor he should want no fees in faith.


Isa. Gentlemen, you will find him in the wood with a leather Apron, and a Hammer
by his side, as if he were a real Smith; and he studies as much to be a Farrier
now, as formerly a Physician; and as his drink was altogether Wine before, now
Farrier-like he studies all sorts of Ale, and drinks them soundly too: So,
farewell Gentlemen, you will find all things true as I have said, and my Raskal, I
hope, will be cudgel'd from a Farrier to a Doctor.


[ Exit Isa. Jar. Why, this is such an humorous Physician, as yet I have not
heard of.


Soft. Slid, we should have asked the woman one thing, it may be he delights to
be beaten with one sort of cudgel more than another.


Jar. We'll be so civil as to ask him that, if he puts us to it: But come, let
us into the wood and find him out.


Soft. Hark, I hear the trees burl in the wood: Slid, here is a man coming
toward us, I hope 'twill prove the Doctor.


Jar. By mass he has a leather Apron on, and a Hammer by his side.


Soft. It Is he, what if we cudgel him before we speak to him?


Jar. Not for the world, Sir; that would be rude indeed. Save you, Sir.


[Enter Drench. Dr. Save me, Sir? spare your Complement till I Am dying, and
then I Will thank you for it.


Soft. By the heart of a Horse I like him for that, for what should a man be
saved for till he is dead, you know.


Jar. Sir, in short, we come (having business with you) to pay you all the
respect and reverence that is due to your worship.


Dr. Respect, reverence and worship! you're very merry, Gentlemen: pray you,
Sir, what part of me is it that you find worshipful?


Jar. O Sir, it is your virtues that we admire.


Dr. Virtue! I never heard the word in my life, no nor the use on it.


Soft. Thou speak like an honest man, for by my troth I see no sign of
virtue about thet.


Jar. Slid, you will spoil all to be so blunt with him: Sir, we understand you
are a great Doctor.


Dr. I understand my self to be a great horse Doctor, Sir.


Soft. But pray you, Sir, be a man Doctor for my sake; by this cudgel it will
be the better for you, if you knew all.


Jar. Sir, in short, we know you to be a famous Doctor of Padua, and we wish
you would leave these abject thoughts of being a Farrier, and follow your own
worthy profession of Physic.


Dr. Now you provoke me, Sir: do you think a Farrier inferior to a Physician?
he is the son of a Mare that thinks a horse has not as many diseases as a man.


Soft. And he is the son of a whore that thinks a Squire has not as many
diseases as a Horse: and Friend, take heed how you make comparisons, for you will
have all the Squires in the Country about your ears upon this score.


Dr. Country Squires I shall deal well enough with, and I shall justify a
Horse has more diseases than a Squire, and take the honor of Knighthood to
help you.


Soft. You lie, and for the honor of Squire-hood I Will dye a virgin-Martyr.


[offers to draw. Jar. Hold, hold, Sir, the latter end of a Squires argument is
still quarrelling.


Soft. Without quarrelling then I Will prove, that Squire and Squiress have more
diseases than a Horse.


Dr. I, with the diseases of their own, that Nature never meant them, I grant
you.


Soft. And first, I prove a Squiress, that is, a woman, may be dumb.


Dr. And I answer, a horse cannot speak, set that against that: and yet I Will
undertake to make a horse speak before you shall make a woman dumb, Sir.


Jar. Good Squire let us mind our business: In short, Sir, will you own your
Profession? are you a Doctor or no?


Dr. A pox of a Doctor, I am a downright Farrier, I can give you a drench, or
out you for the staggers when you are drunk; I have no more learning than a
horse: pray open my head, and see if you can find a Physician there.


Jar. Since no means but the extremity will make you own your profession, we
will cudgel you with as much complement as we can, Sir.


Soft. A cudgel is but a course complement, I confess.


Dr. Hey, good boys in faith, what a Devil mean you, Gentlemen?


Jar. Squire, do you strike the first blow.


Soft. No, do you Jarvis, for the first blow will bear an Action, you know, and
you are a poor fellow, he can recover nothing of thee.


Dr. What a Devil's the matter?


[Beats him. Jar. Fall on, fall on, will you confess you are a Doctor?


Dr. Hold, hold, hold, I will be a Physician.


Jar. Will ye own, you are one, Sir.


[Beats him again. Dr. I am one, I am one, hold, I am a very good Physician, I
feel I am.


Enter Isa. Isa. Yes, Gentlemen; he is a rare Physician, and would confess it
too, but that he would not lose the pleasure of a cudgel, for once a week he
longs for a beating: now you and I are even, Sir.


[ Exit Isa. Dr. A pox upon you, is this your design? I Will be revenged, you
Jade, to the purpose: If I should say she is my wife, and that I Am a very
Blacksmith, they would not believe me, 'twere but the way to be cudgel'd again.


Jar. Nay, come, Sir, what are you falling into a relapse again?


Dr. No, no, hold, as the woman says, I am a Doctor.


Jar. I, and so famous, that you can take off broken limbs and set them on
sound again.


Dr. Well, I will own all this, rather than have my bones broken; and now I
remember you fetched me once before out of this great wood, in Plato's great
year, as my Master called it.


Soft. Pray you, Sir, how long is that since?


Dr. Why, next Strawberry-time, it will be complete six and thirty thousand
years.


Jar. Ho Boy!


Dr. I, and I remember I poisoned somebody at your request.


Jar. No, Sir, I do not remember that.


Dr. But I do, Sir, by the same token you gave me a hundred pieces for a bribe
tied up in a laced Handkerchief.


Jar. I remember now as well as can be.


Soft. But I do not remember I hired him to poison any body, nor do I remember
I Am six and thirty thousand years old: A pox of your Plato's great year, and
his little year too.


Jar. Pray, Sir, remember, your Mistress will never be cured else.


Soft. Nay, rather than so, I will remember any thing.


Jar. Look you there, Sir, you see we both remember, therefore I pray you go
with us to cure a distressed Lady.


Dr. My business in Physic is killing, not curing, I assure you; for as there
is your Man-taylor and your Woman-taylor, so there is your killing Doctor, and
your curing Doctor, distinct Professions, I assure you.


Jar. But, Sir, you must own curing, as well as killing, or else we shall court
you with a cudgel again.


Soft. As we did in Plato's great year, you know Jarvis.


Dr. I do not rememher that ye beat me then.


Soft. But I remember it, by the same token you gave me my laced Handkerchief
back, when you had put the Gold in your pocket.


Dr. Now I do remember, hold, hold, [Offers to beat him. I do own curing; and
since there is no remedy, I confess I am a Doctor: but if all menshould take
their degrees, as I have done, we should have but small commencements. I once
served a Mountebank, and have some of his canting terms, and for ought I know
may prove as good a Physician, as if I Would served an Apprenticeship at Padua.
Well, Gentlemen, what disease is it I must cure?


Soft. You must help a Lady that is dumb, and has lost her speech.


Dr. How, dumb, and lost her speech too! that is a great work; if she had only
lost her speech, I could have cured her, or if she had been but dumb; but to be
dumb and speechless too, her case is very desperate, would I Would my wife and all
the neighborhood at that lock.


Jar. But we must entreat your utmost skill, for it is a sad thing for a woman
to be speechless.


Dr. I, and dumb: but it is a sadder thing for a man to be a fool, for certainly
he is a changeling that has a dumb wife, and would have her speak again: Are
you in love with a woman's sting?


Jar. Why do you call it a sting, Sir?


Dr. Because, Sir, a woman has no tongue, they are tongues in men's mouths, but
they are called stings in women.


Jar. But, Sir, this Lady never spoke an angry word, not so much as to a
servant.


Dr. But she will do, if I cure her, for I Have an unluckie hand that way; yet
for her sweet dispositions sake I Will preserve her; and now I Will answer to the
name of Doctor, with as much confidence, as a Quack dressed up in all his
ignorance.


Soft. Will ignorance make men confident? Slid, would I Would a little ignorance
too.


[Act ready. Jar. I, if you had but a little 'twere very well, Sir.


Dr. Let me see how to behave my self like a Doctor now; I will first take your
Mistress by the pulse, and look up gravely at the sieling all the while; then
ask what she took last, and when she would a stool, and there is half a Doctors
work; then I Will prescribe something that will neither do hurt nor good, so
leave her to luck, and there is the other half of the Doctor; then (to amuze the
people) I Will give her the powder of a dried Dock-leaf, with Apothecaries hard
name to it; and if that will not mend her, I Will give her a drench, for women
have sturdie stomachs, and why not as strong of constitution as Horses?


Soft. Heart of a horse, you are a delicate mad Doctor; Sirrah, will thou give
her a drench?


Dr. Why, a drench is a potion, and a potion is a drench; only the distinction
is, when you put it into a horn, then it is a drench for a horse; and when you
put it into a vial-glass, it is a potion for a man; nay, I Will discover all their
cheats.

Come my Squire Softhead, never fear thy wench,
She shall be cured by Learned Doctor Drench.

[Ring. Finis Act. I.
ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Gernette, Softhead, Jarvis and Nurse. Ger. ANd is he so famous a
Physician, say you?


Jar. Why, Sir, Aesculapius, as you call him, is a mere Mountebank to him.


Soft. I, and that fellow Galen Hippocrates, as you call him, not worthy to be
his Apothecary: he can conjure, for he will cure a wooden leg, make it flesh and
blood, and set you up sound again.


Jar. Nay, if he like your pulse, he will give you a lease of your life for term
of years.


Nur. I would he would give me three lives in mine, and begin them all at
fifteen again.


Jar. Is not one life sufficient to make a man a Cuckold? but you would have three
to do it in.


Nur. Yes, because I Would make thee a Monster, that my child and I may live upon
showing thee.


Ger. You talk of wonders, I long to see him.


Jar. He is in the next room, Sir, but it is the maddest Doctor, and of the
strangest humors.


Soft. So he is, for by the heart of a horse we were fain to bribe him with a
cudgel, before he would own being a Doctor.


Nur. A down right Sirreverence of a Doctor, I say get her a worthy husband,
and say I told you so.


Ger. You Are a foolish woman, and talk of that you understand not.


Nur. Understand not? sure I should know what a woman wants as well as you: I
say again, a pox of your Doctor, get her a good husband, a plaster of true
love clapped to her will do her more good than Sena or Rhubarb.


Ger. Did I not provide her a good husband? was she not to marry the Squire
here?


Nur. A precious morsel of him: how came you to be a Squire with a pox, with
your softhead, and your little head, and your no head at all?


Soft. Bear witness, she says I have no head at all.


Nur. Thou may take it, and throw it to the dogs for any brains there is in it.


Soft. I will not call you whore, Gentlewoman; but by the heart of a horse your
husband's a cuckold; and he is not only an English cuckold, but also an Italian
cuckold; that is to say, he is a cuckold both before and behind.


Nur. Sirrah, cudgel him, or lie in the truckle-bed all thy life.


Jar. I Will rather cudgel thee, for I believe every word he says.


Nur. For shame proffer her a husband of her own choosing, let her have Leander.


Ger. She shall never be his Hero.


Nur. If she perish in the Hellespont, at your peril.


Ger. Hellespont? how came you by that fine word?


Nur. Honestly enough.


Jar. As honestly as you came by your child, I think.


Nur. I have seen Mr. Hellespont in a Puppet-show, and Hero, and Leander too.


Ger. Talk no more of Leander, I know him not; but who ever he be, he is not to
be compared with the Squire here for wealth.


Nur. Is your Squire boobe, loobe, poope, to stand with Leander for parts and
person?


Ger. Do you know his parts?


Nur. No, but I have heard of him and his parts.


Soft. Grant me patience, for I have much ado to forbear calling you whore,
forsooth.


Nur. Do if thou dare; is wealth to be named the same day with love? I scorn
that comparison, though I Am of the wrong side of the teens in faith.


Ger. Have thou any sense of the fopperies of love left?


Nur. Do thou call sweet love foppery? though you are my Master, you are a
beast; go, go to bed and die, what do thou in this world? let the Doctors
give him Physic, no body else has need on it.


Jar. You Are very bold with your Master, wife.


Nur. He has been as bold with me, let that suffice you husband: I have so
fresh in my memory the sweet effects of love, that I wonder mankind should be
such beasts as to forget it.


Ger. Go give your child suck, for that is your talent, and meddle no more.


Jar. That Is another sign it is none of my child, for why should he be so
careful to have the child suck, if it were not his own?


Soft. Look you friend, your wife has abused me, and it is not civil to call her
whore to her own face: but I tell thee to thy face, she is a Whore Rampant, and
in Heraldry you are a Cuckold Passant.


Jar. I, Sir, and my wants make me a Cuckold Couchant, or I Would never endure it.


Soft. Oh, here comes our delicate humoursome Doctor in faith.


[Enter Doctor. Ger. Squire, go bid them make my Daughter ready to receive the
Doctor.


Soft. I do not care to go, for she has her wild Irish Chambermaid that always
calls me Squire pogemihone, and then laughs at me.


Ger. Pray you go, Sir. You Are very welcome, Sir, I have very much desired to
see you.


[ Exit Softhead. Doct. Hippocrates says, I pray you be covered.


Ger. Pray you, in what Chapter of Hippocrates does he bid you be covered?


Doct. In the first chapter of keeping your head warm.


Ger. A pleasant Gentleman, and I love his humor. But, Sir, concerning my
Daughter who is very sick, Sir.


Doct. I am very glad on it, Sir, and I would you and your whole Family were
sick, lame or blind, that I might have the honor to cure you.


Ger. Why, this is the strangest Doctor: he had need of good parts to bear out
his humors.


Doct. And now, Sir, I pray you what is your Daughters name?


Ger. Olinda, Sir, at your service.


Doct. Olinda? a pretty name to be cured.


Ger. Sir, I Will see if my Daughter be ready to come forth to you.


[Exit Ger. Doct. Your servant, Sir: and what woman is that, I pray you?


Jar. The Nurse of the house, Sir.


Doct. Bi'rlady, a pretty piece of household stuff, and a fine ornament for a
Couch: I do salute you Nurse, and I would I were that happy sucklin, that shall
draw down the milk of your favor and affection, Nurse.


Jar. Her pulse beats not thereabouts, Sir: hands off, for she is my wife, Sir.


Doct. I cry you mercy, Sir, I congratulate you for having so handsome a wife,
and your wife for having so worthy a husband: Your breasts, sweet Nurse.


Jar. Pray you hold, Sir, half this courtesy would serve.


Doct. Worthy Sir, I cannot declare enough how much I Am your servant. Delicate
breasts, Nurse.


His hands upon her breasts still* Nur. At your service.


Jar. O Devil take you, Sir, let my wives breasts alone.


Doct. Sweet Sir, I must see her breasts, it is the Doctors duty to look to the
Nurses milk.


Jar. You shall not look to her milk, I Will look to your water for that, Sir.


Doct. You will not hinder me from following my Profession; alas, I must not
only feel her breasts, but I must know whether she be with child or no.


Jar. Sir, my wife is not with child.


Doct. But she must be with child: what say thou Nurse?


Nur. If your worship think it be for my health, Sir.


Doct. Thou will dye in a week else.


Nur. Do you hear that?


Jar. A pox of your Mountebanking, Sir, my wife is sound and well, and shall
have no Doctor.


Doct. Sir, I know you are a man of sense, and I beseech you hear reason. A sweet
Nurse!


Nur. O dear Doctor.


Jar. A pox of your sense and reason, give me my wife, Sir.


Doct. But, Sir, I Am from home, and want a woman; I hope you will be civil to a
stranger; if you come my way, I Will be as kind to you, Sir.


Jar. The Devil take your kindness, give me my wife.


Doct. Give me a reason for it; for look you, Sir, your wife is either with
child, or else she has a tympany. Nurse, show me your legs, they may be swelled
and dropsical, a sweet woman may be cast away here for want of a little looking
to.


Jar. Let my wives legs alone, or I Will downright thrust you out of the Room.


Doct. Sir, I find you are choleric, but I Will give you a purge shall make you so
patient, that if you saw me lie with your wife, you should not have so much
gaul left, as would make an angry line in your face.


Nur. Now good husband take Physic.


Doct. God a mercy Nurse.


Nur. In troth, Sir, he is always so fretful, and so cholerickly jealous.


Jar. I Will make you an example.


Doct. Such another word, and I Will put thee into a Fever, and keep thee in it a
year; I tell thee fellow, thy wife is not well, and I will give her a gentle
gentile Glister; prithee be sick Nurse.


Nur. Yes, Sir, I am sick, and, if you please, you shall give me a gentle
gentile, as you call it.


Jar. You are no more sick than I am huswife.


Nur. Sure the Doctor knows better than you or I whether I be sick or no; and I
find I am sick, and I do so long for a gentle gentile, what do you call it.


Jar. My Master is coming, or I Would give you such a gentle gentile.


Enter old Gernette, his Daughter lead in by Servants, and Sqr. Softhead. Ger.
Sir, I have brought my Daughter, and I beseech your best care of her, for the
world's gone with me if she die.


Doct. Hold, Sir, people do not die so easily without the help of a Physician.


Ger. A notable Droll, and puts me in great comfort.


Doct. Is this she? a very pretty Patient, and one a man may venture on in
sickness, or in health: come on, Sir, let me feel your pulse.


Ger. I am not sick, Sir.


Doct. But your Daughter is, therefore give me your pulse; why, by your pulse,
I find your Daughter is dumb.


Nur. O dear, how he hits on it!


Jar. Hits on it? you would be hit on it too, would you; he may thank his knowing
on it before.


Ger. But, Sir, it is strange that you should know my Daughters disease by my
pulse.


Doct. Sympathy does it: I find you have no faith here in the Sympathetical
Powder, therefore cannot know our Sympathetical way of practice; when any man
or woman is sick in Greenland, they always send the next of kin to the Doctor,
and by that pulse the disease is known, and the Patient cured.


Soft. Pray Doctor feel whether I be dumb or no.


Nur. Let me feel your pulse husband; O I am sick, and the Doctor must physic
me, or I die.


Jar. The Devil has found a new way to make a Cuckold.


Ger. But what may be the cause think you of her dumbness?


Doct. Why, Sir, according to the sense of Aristotle.


Ger. Aristotle was a Philosopher, Sir.


Doct. I, and a Physician too, I know what I say. Heart! I had like to have
been gravel'd; I say again, according to the sense of Hippocrates.


Ger. I marry, Sir, he was a Physician indeed.


Doct. I, and a Philosopher too, therefore no matter which of their opinions I
take.


Jar. By my troth I think so too.


Doct. And therefore as I said at first, according to the sense of Aristotle,
women are dumb because they cannot speak.


Nur. A sweet Doctor, I always thought so indeed.


Jar. Have you tasted of his sweetness you queen?


Nur. Not yet, but I hope I shall do, you rogue.


Ger. But, Sir, are there many reasons for dumbness in a woman?


Doct. Several, Sir: a woman may be dumb, when she has no mind to speak, and
she may speak when no body has a mind to hear her; this is Natural Philosophy
now.


Ger. Why, you speak, as if it were sullenness in their Sex, and not a defect
in Nature, nor other accident.


Doct. I do so: in some Romance perhaps you may have read of a woman's being
dumb; but sure no man seriously ever heard of a woman that could not speak.


Nur. He is in the right in faith; this is the Doctor of Doctors in faith.


Jar. Again the Doctor? I would he were hung about thy neck.


Nur. By my troth, so would I to determine thy jealousy.


Ger. But pray you, Sir, why should you think a woman cannot be dumb?


Doct. Why, Sir, your men that has endeavored to find out the perpetual
motion, has come near it, I confess, with their Clocks and Pendulas: but
Aristotle says, Fix a Dya^^ plate to a woman's mouth, and if the perpetual
motion be not there, let them never hope to find it; and if it be there, it is
infallible a woman cannot be dumb.


Boy. Squire, forsooth, here is a Letter.


[Enter a Footboy. Soft. A good Boy; Squire, and forsooth does well together,
they are very suitable; but hold, this Letter is not big enough to have business
in it, nor little enough to be a challenge. Heart of a horse, a downright
challenge; [Reads the Letter. and if he be as stout as Hercules, I Will fright
him out on's fighting, or he shall fright me.


Ger. But touching the cause of my child's disease, Sir.


[Exit Softhead. Doct. Why, you must know, her dumbness may proceed from the
string-holt.


Ger. The string-holt? why that is a disease one of my Horses has now in the
stable.


Doct. I grant you, Sir; but we of Padua call a lameness in the tongue the
string-holt, from that very string which you call the greedy worm: (A pox on
me, I shall betray my self a Farrier:) and this dumbness proceeds from a
contraction, [Aside. or shrinking of that Nerve or String; which shrinking
proceeds from Stomachous fumigations which proceed from certain Exhalations, or
Influence of the Stars, called in Arabic; do you understand Arabic?


Ger. Not a word, not I, Sir.


Doct. A Gentleman and not speak Arabic? why, where have you been bred?


Ger. I neither speak Arabic, Latin, nor any language, but my mother tongue.


Doct. What blessed luck is this for me? how shall I do to explain it to you
then? for Optimun purgamentum, cantaridem, venetreclum, do ye conceive me, Sir;
Vinum cum drammum, scirramoucha scrupulum; and this is just your Daughters
case, Sir.


Nur. Ho boy, Doctor, he claws it away with Latin in faith.


Jar. Still commending the Doctor? you would have him claw you away with Latin too,
would you not, you Jade?


Nur. I faith, or with Greek either, you knave.


Ger. Sure he is a Learned man, if one could understand him; pray you, if you
please, state her case in English.


Doct. Why, this is worse than all the rest; why, you must know, Sir, that the
vapors passing from the right side where lies the heart, unto the left where
lies the liver, the lungs, which in Latin we call Armion, having communication
with the brain, which in Greek we call Nazmathon, by Intermedium of the
Venacava, which in Hebrew we call Rabshack, and in Arabic Helgoshob.


Nur. Thou beast, when will thou know Rabshack and Helgoshob? O most divine
Doctor!


Jar. Divine? is it come to Divinity now? why then you hope to be saved by him.


Nur. I Will venture with him into Rabshack and Helgoshob, what ever befalls me.


Ger. Ragshag? Sir, I understand these tongues less than Latin.


Doct. I Am sorry for it, Sir; did you but know the sweet sound of Hebrew and
Arabic, you would never speak your mother tongue again.


Ger. Sir, I like your discourse well, only where you say, the heart lies on
the right-side, and the liver on the left; which is contrary to all Anatomists
I ever heard of.


Doct. How shall I answer this? pox on him, he makes me sweat. Why, Sir, it is
true, that in time of health the heart lies on the left-side, and in most
diseases too: but in dumbness, the heart by some strong passion being turned,
and whirled to the right-side, till by art it be returned and whirled back to
the left, neither man nor woman can possibly speak; and that is the positive
cause of all dumbness.


Nur. O dear Doctor, I cry still.


Jar. Is it come to dear Doctor now? is he your dear, you whore?


Nur. He is not yet, but he shall be you cuckold.


Jar. Cuckold? remember this.


Nur. I do remember thou art one, and I will remember to continue thee so.


Ger. Sir, I am well satisfied; now, if you please, let us proceed to the cure
of my Daughter.


Doct. O, there is the point; why, there be several ways to cure, and twice as
many ways to kill; for we Learned Physicians with too much study, have likely
a worm in our heads, and when that worms wrigles, the mind alters; so that we
change our fashions as much in Physic, as the Court and Gentry do their
clothes: But come, get my Patient to her bed, and when she is warm, give her a
lusty dose of Sops and Wine.


Ger. How, Sops and Wine! sure that will make her drunk, Sir.


Doct. The better, Sir; for when people are drunk, they are apt to speak their
minds: I work by Natural Causes: you see by the virtue of Cakes and Wine how
women tattle at a Gossoping; no man ever knew a dumb woman at a Christening or
a Gossoping, but she talked before she went away.


Nur. The Doctors in the right, I Will be sworn, I know it by experience: O brave
Doctor.


Jar. Brave Doctor, in faith proclaim your love with him.


Nur. By my troth so I will, with the first opportunity.


Doct. So lead her to bed, and let Nurse drink with her to countenance her.


Nur. I will indeed, Mr. Doctor, I will be sure to obey your commands.


Doct. And when you have drunk smartly, bring me word how it works Nurse.


Jar. You shall be hanged first, Doctor.


Doct. And be sure Nurse come alone still, for you know she may have something
to say to me, that is not fit for her husband to hear.


Jar. A pox on you, must my Master pimp for you too.


Ger. Pray you take your fee, Sir.


Doct. By no means; no cure, no money with me, Sir: but pray you be careful of
my Patient, and be sure to send Nurse still to me.


Jar. I must be a Cuckold, and cannot avoid it.


Ger. Sir, I shall send to you, but perhaps not Nurse.


Jar. So, my Master is jealous of her, as well as I; now it is plain he got my
child; how many points of the Compass am I a Cuckold?


Doct. I hope I shall make that Rogue mad for beating me.


Nur. Your servant Mr. Doctor.


Doct. Your servant Nurse.


[Exeunt. Enter Leander, and his Footboy. Lea. Boy, did Squire Softhead
receive my note so cheerfully?


1 Boy. Yes, Sir, and withal he told me, he wondered that he heard not sooner
from you, being you know he was to marry your Mistress.


Lea. Is he so brave? I shall the better digest my ruin, if I find honor in
him, yet he with all his merits can never deserve her; it is strange if he
should fight, for they say he is a very ass. O here he comes.


[Enter Softhead and his boy. Soft. Sirrah, yonder he is, will you be sure to
do as I bid you?


2 Boy. Yes, I warrant your worship.


Soft. Just when you see my vest off, that is your time.


2 Boy. I Will be sure to do it, Sir.


Lea. Save you, Sir.


Soft. Dam you, Sir; why? why the pox save me, Sir?


Lea. Because your poor servant has an occasion to kill you, and send you to
heaven. But why Dam me, Sir?


Soft. Because your poor servant has an occasion to kill you, and send you to
hell, Sir.


Lea. This is uncharitable language, from a dying man, as you are, Sir.


Soft. I scorn dying, I Have an estate will keep me alive in spite of a Duel,
Sir: I scorn but to be very charitable. Where will thou be buried fellow?


Lea. Let me be killed first, I pray you.


Soft. Nay, by the heart of a horse, doubt not that, Sir; and if you will have a
Tombstone over you, write your Inscription, and my Stone-cutter shall do it:
Nay, I scorn but to be charitable, Sir.


Lea. Good rich Squire make your will, for dye you must.


Soft. What a pox should I kill thee for, that has nothing to leave me for my
pains?


Lea. Now you are not civil, Sir.


Soft. I scorn but to be as civil as any man.


Lea. You shall find me so too, for I Will see you buried in the flaxon your
Grandam spun her self, and left your worship for a winding sheet.


Soft. And I Will be as civil to you, Sir; for I Will see you buried in Flannil: and,
Sir, to show my self civil, if you have a mind not to fight at this weapon, I Will
stay till you choose another; nay, if you have a mind not to fight at all, for
civilities sake, I Will have no mind to fight at all neither; I scorn to be behind
hand in civility.


Lea. Now no more words, Sir, but strip and take your fortune.


Soft. Pull off Boy: and, Sir, I must have you know, that I long as much to go
out of this world honorably, as you to stay in it honorably.


2 Boy. This is my Q. I take it.


[ Softheads Boy runs away with his Masters sword. Soft. And to show you, I
kill you, Sir, merely upon honor, and not upon malice; I lovingly embrace you,
Sir.


Lea. Embrace an Ass: leave your Fencers tricks, and take you to your sword,
Sir.


Soft. Then a pox on you, Sir; and give me my trusty sword boy: how! the rogue
is run away, and with my sword too: why sirrah, raskal, come back you
treacherous rogue; come this must be your plot, Sir, to hire my boy to run away
with my sword, Sir: Why rogue, traitor to my honor, come back.


Lea. This shall not serve your turn Squire, my boy shall run and overtake him,
I Will warrant you.


Soft. I scorn to be beholding to you, or your boy, Sir; I Will run and overtake
him my self, Sir; and I charge you upon honor to stay till I come back, Sir.


[He runs off as fast as he can. Lea. This is the newest coward I have known,
he has cozened me; for as I live, I thought he would have fought, for he bore
it up to the very point of danger: Sirrah, there is a Vest (...) you, and run
after him, and cudgel him, till he be all over black and blew.


1 Boy. You could not have put me upon a better employment, Sir.


[Exit Boy. Enter Doctor. Doct. By your favor, Sir, I was looking out at my
window, and as I thought saw a Duel toward, so I came.


Lea. To prevent it?


Doct. No by my troth, Sir, my business is not to prevent wounds, but to cure
'em; where is the other that fought you? Nounze you have made quick dispatch;
have you killed him and buried him already?


Lea. No, he is gone very safe, and no wound about him, but that of his honor.


Doct. Was it not Squire Softhead, Sir?


Lea. It was so, Sir; and how he has behaved himself, you shall know anon. But,
Sir, I guess you are the Doctor that undertakes the Dumb Lady.


Doct. I am so, Sir.


Lea. You Are happily come, Sir; for I have earnest business with you.


Doct. Why I? the dullness of your eye shows you have, let see, let see, a very
dangerous and high flying pulse.


Lea. I am not sick, Sir.


Doct. You are loath to confess; come I see you have a clap, Sir.


Lea. By my honor, not I, Sir.


Doct. Do not let it go too far, modesty has spoiled one half of the
Town-Gallants, and too much confidence the other half; so that there is no hopes
of any of you.


Lea. If you please, Sir, I shall acquaint you with my business; my name, Sir,
is Leander, perhaps you may have heard of me.


Doct. I have heard of a Naval Knight, called Sir Hero Leander; are you the man
I pray you?


Lea. You are merry, Sir, but my affair is serious; you have a dumb Lady your
Patient, to whom I am a servant and she, Sir, has an equal love for me: now
being by her father barred of all means of coming together.


Doct. You would have me do it, and so pimp for you.


Lea. Not pimp, Sir; but I would fain oblige you to befrend us.


Doct. Befriend us? a modest phrase for pimping; I begin to find that physic
is but one part of a Doctors trade, and I shall gain the Character of Chaucers
Semstriss; for says he,

She keeps a shop for countenance;
But baudeth for her sustenance.
So I shall physic give for countenance;
But pimping's my chief maintenance.

Lea. Sir, I know you may bring me to the speech of her: I mean no pimping, Sir.


Doct. Whatever you mean, the thing is the same, Sir; for how can I help you to
the speech of her, but I must bring you together? and if I brng you together,
what is that but pimping, Sir?


Lea. But I mean in the way of honesty, Sir.


Doct. Honesty? indeed I have heard 'twill make men rich and brave; but I never
heard of honesty in the case before: Sir, the profession will not bear it: and
would you make a pimp of a Physician? O most horrible indignity!


Lea. Pray you, Sir, be pacified, and let this show you that I can be grateful.


Doct. Is there a fee belonging to that [Gives him a purse. part of a Doctor
too? I begin now to think that pimping is no such scandalous thing as malicious
men report it. Sir, you have given me such strong reasons to think so well
on it, that I believe none rail at it, but such as would be glad of the
employment themselves: And, Sir, as you call it, I will help you to the speech
of her, or befriend you, or pimp for you.


Lea. Your servant, Sir; I must now reveal a secret to you; you must know, Sir,
the Lady fains this dumbness for love of me, and to avoid marriage with this
Squire Softhead.


Doct. I knew there was some trick in it, 'twere impossible else, either by
Nature, Art, or misfortune, a woman should be dumb* for take a woman's tongue,
and pluck it up by the roots, I Am sure in an hour another would grow in the room
on it, But come, Sir, you shall shift you, and pass for my Apothecary.


Lea. That I think an excellent way, and nothing better.


Doct. We cannot miss to cure her now, I shall get credit as I am her
Physician, and money as I your bringer together, or your pimping friend.

Thus shall I be your Advocate and Protector,
And venerably called both Baud and Doctor.

[Ring. Finis Act. II.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Doctor, Leander like an Apothecary. Lea. THis habit will pass me for an
Apothecary, I only want some of their canting phrases.


Doct. Why, faith you are as well qualified for an Apothecary, as I am for a
Physician; you have trusted me with your heart, and now I Will trust you with my
simplicity: I am no Doctor, but was forced to own being one; why, and how, I Will
tell you hereafter; but having served a Mountebank, that and my great share in
impudence, has made me famous.


Lea. Is it possible impudence should have such virtuous effects?


Doct. Yes, yet some men rail at impudence, and speak it vicious, when the Jest
is, they that rail most at it, make most use on it: it is doubtless the greatest
blessing in the world, and most men do their business by it.


Lea. But if you be so ignorant, sure impudence should not bear you out,
especially in this learned Profession.


Doct. O, Sir, it is the securest cloak for ignorance of all Arts: other
Professions are liable to miscarriages and questionable: but the Physician may
kill from the Fool to the Senator, from the Beggar to the Bloud-Royal, and
never be called in question; the dead was never so uncivil yet, as to come out
of the other world to complain of the Physician.


Lea. It Is a sign they are civily used where they are: But do you not study at
all?


Doct. It needs not, for the great study of Physic is come to nothing now but
letting Blood; and it falls out well for me that am a downright Farrier.


Lea. How, is your real Profession a Farrier?


Doct. Yes faith, and with the same Fleams I let Horses blood* I use my
Patients to; and the horses drench is the potion I give to men, and I cure more
than I kill; so that I am the only Doctor that has found out horse and man to
be of one constitution.


Lea. But how comes letting of blood so much in fashion?


Doct. O, Sir, it is Alamode Paris; if your corn does but ache against rain, what
says the Doctor? Let him blood: Nay, if you be troubled in Conscience, they will
let you blood for that too


Lea. They let not blood for the Smallpox, I hope.


Doct. But they do; and it is the opinion of Padua, that it is as sure a way to
kill, as an old woman and Saffron is to cure.


Lea. How came you by that Velvet Coat?


Enter a Seamans wife, a Countryman with an Vrinal, and an Apprentice with an
Vrinal, with other Patients. Doct. O here come Patients; mark [They press to
the Doct. my confidence: good people one at once, let the woman be served
first: Now woman what want you?


Wife. That that no body can help me to, the worse luck, Sir; I am a Seamans
wife, Sir, that has been married this dozen years, and I have never a child,
and please you, and I would fain have a child, Sir.


Doct. And would thou have me get it?


Wife. I would fain have your worship give me something that will, Sir.


Doct. By my troth I have nothing about me at this time can do it: Why, look
thou send thy husband to Sea, that often make the wife fruitful.


Wife. A lack, Sir, I have tried all ways both by Sea and Land, and nothing
will help me.


Doct. I do prescribe thee a lusty Wine-porter, and he shall be thy gallant.


Wife. And it please your worship, I have tried your gallant, and your
top-gallant, and your top and top-gallant, and all will do no good, Sir.


Doct. By my troth, go try the main-yard too; and if that fail thee, you are a
barren woman of a certain: but come in the evening to me, after a glass of Wine
I may have something to help thee.


[Exit woman. Count. And it please your worship, I am a poor man.


Doct. I have never a Medicine for that disease: Prithee be gone fellow.


Count. My wife, and it please you, lies dangerously sick.


Doct. If thou be'st poor, trouble thy self no further, she will dye of a
certain: but art thou so poor thou can not come to the point?


Count. I would entreat your worship to visit her; and here is an old angel for
you.


Doct. This is but one of the points, there is two and thirty in the Compass,
fellow; however I Will come see her: she rules the roast when she has her health,
does she not?


Count. I, but too much to my sorrow, Sir.


Doct. Thou have a stable, have thou not?


Count. Yes, and it please you.


Doct. Then take the your wife, and tie her up to the Rackstaves; and be sure
you give her no hay, for I mean to blood her and drench her.


Count. Why, Sir? that is as I serve my horse when he is sick.


Doct. But I know you are a hen-peckt fellow, and such women as do command in
chief, I physic them as I do horses, and all little enough too: but first take
her and ride her off on her legs.


Count. That Is more than I and your worship to help me can do, Sir: But I hope
your worship will come.


[Exit poor man. Doct. Yes, yes. What are you, Sir?


Prent. A Prentice, Sir, that has brought my Mrs. water, Sir.


Doct. Has your Mrs. never a Maid, but she must send her water by her Prentice?
a foolish custom, I cannot break 'em on it; let me see, but are you sure this is
your Mrs. water?


Prent. Yes, and it please your worship.


Doct. How sure are you? did you see her make it?


Prent. I did not see her make it, but, and it please you, I heard her make it.


Doct. Why, I find by thy Mrs. water friend, that thou art almost out of thy
time.


Prent. Yes truly, within three months, and it please you.


Doct. I knew it; why here is twenty visible things in this water; your Master
is out of Town about a purchase, is he not?


Prent. Yes, and it please your worship.


Doct. And you are removed out of the Garret to lie in the next room to your
Mrs. to keep spirits from her, are you not?


Prent. By my troth, and so I am, and it please your worship.


Doct. The water shows it plainly; hold, ha, I find your Mrs. is apt to dream
much, and is frighted, and walks in her sleep, and comes to your chamber to be
awakened, does she not?


Prent. By my truly, she has been so troubled with these frights since my
Masters absence, that I have never had a good nights rest since he went; for
she will come in her sleep, and throw her self upon my bed; and then I lie as
still as can be, and then she rises like a mad woman, and throws all the
clothes off, and makes such work with me, that I Am ashamed your worship should
know it, then tell her on it the next day, and she runs away and laughs at me.


Doct. I know her disease, commend me to thy Mrs; and tell her, because I Will
make a perfect cure on it, I Will come and lie in the next room to her my self, and
thou shall go into the Garet again.


Prent. And it please your worship, my Mrs. perhaps may not like that so well,
Sir.


Doct. She will like it I know; it is variety must recover her, go tell her I Will
not fail her.


[Exit Prentice. Lea. Here comes Squire Softhead, that ran away with a trick to
save his honor.


Doct. I see your boy has cudgel'd him to some purpose.


Soft. Save you Doctor, a word in private, can you keep a secret?


Doct. It Is the first point of my Profession, secrecy.


Soft. Dispatch that fellow out of the way quickly then.


Doct. He is my Apothecary, and as much to be trusted as I am: But how came
your face so?


Soft. Honorably of my side, you must know I have fought a Duel with a damned
coward, a raskal called Leander.


Lea. Now must I be abused, and dare not take notice on it: But, Sir, is it
possible Leander should be such a coward?


Soft. Do you know him, Sir?


Lea. Very well, Sir.


Soft. Is he your friend, Sir? if he be, I am sorry I said so of him, Sir; but
if he be not your friend, he is a coward, and I Will justify it, and a raskal,
and I Will maintain it; yet, Sir, if you have the least relation to him, I shall
be very ready to eat my words, rather than disoblige you.


Lea. Sir, he is neither relation nor friend of mine, neither care I a farthing
for him, Sir.


Soft. Then he is the son of a whore, and I Will tell you how he served me: just
when we were stripped, and ready to go to it, the base raskal hired my boy it
seems to run away with my sword.


Doct. That was base indeed.


Lea. I cannot believe so unworthy a thing of him.


Soft. Rather than offend any man; I Will say I hired my boy my self to run away
with my sword, I can be no civiler, Sir.


Lea. Rather than so, I will believe Leander did it, Sir.


Soft. Sir, I thank you heartily, and I will justify all that Mandevil or
Coriat writ for your sake, so you believe it your self, Sir.


Doct. But how was the Duel, if the boy ran away with your sword?


Soft. Why, I ran after him, got my sword, and came honorably to him again,
and I drive him honorably round the field; and all that while his boy got
behind me dishonourably, and cudgel'd me damnably, that I am ashamed it should
be known.


Lea. Nay, Sir, it shall never be known for us, but if the boy cudgel'd you
behind, how came you thus black and blew before?


Soft. Why, he beat my head and shoulders so divelishly, that it came quite
through to the other side, that my face is all over Coventrey blew: therefore
good Doctor, report I am your patient and desperately wounded, and there is
twenty pound, and I Will have a Red Scarf with a great fringe about my arm,
methinks that looks valiantly; and here is a sword has been up to the hilts in
blood; and if you hear Leander be killed, not a word who did it on your lives.


Lea. Sir, to tell you true, we came just now from dressing of Leanders wounds;
and to be plain with you, if you did it, your life is in danger; for he cannot
live above two dressings more.


Doct. Therefore, if you would escape hanging, flee your Country.


Soft. Heart of a Horse, I did neither wound him, nor kill him.


Lea. No, did you not confess just now you did? besides your sword is all
bloody up to the hilts, which will hang you, if there were no other witness in
the world,


Soft. Heart of a horse, I shall be hanged with a trick of my own.


Doct. I Will get money out of him; Sir, we can do less than send for a Constable
and apprehend you.


Soft. O dear Doctor, thou will not be such a raskal, I hope.


Doct. I Will be revenged of you for beating of me into a Doctor, when I had a
mind to conceal my parts: therefore get me a Constable.


Soft. I am disgraced, and dishonored, if you do, and that is all you can do to
take away the reputation of a poor Squire; for I did not kill Leander.


Lea. Why, how came your sword so bloody?


Soft. If you must needs know, 'twas with killing of a sheep, Sir.


Doct. A sheep? why, are you not ashamed, as you are a Squire to own that?


Soft. There Is no shame in it, Sir; for 'twas a Ram-sheep, Sir, and he
assaulted me; and in my own defense, I killed him honorably and fairly.


Doct. This excuse will not serve, for Leander is dying, and we must apprehend
you.


Soft. Since you are such a raskal, I Will give you a hundred pound to conceal all
that I have said.


Doct. Tell us the whole truth of your Duel, and give me two hundred pound, as
you did for the last man you killed in Ploto's great year.


Soft. A pox of your Plato, and your two hundred pound: but since there is no
remedy, you shall have it, Sir.


Lea. And withal tell us the truth of your Duel, and we will swear to be true to
you.


Soft. Why then by the heart of a horse we fought not one stroke, but my boy
ran away with my sword, as I contrived it, and I seemed to run after him to
fetch it again, and so ran quite out of the field. And this is the truth by the
heart of a horse; then Leanders boy ran after me, and cudgel'd me, as you see,
Coventrey wise.


Doct. Well, Sir, go into my chamber, and send for your money, and I Will release
you, and keep your counsel faithfully.


Soft. To give a Physician two hundred pounds, and not so much as one clap
cured for it; O dishonor to true Squirehood for ever more.


[ Exit Soft. Doct. Slid Pothecary, here is my wife, I Am [ Enter Isabel.
resolved I will not own the queen; for first she will obstruct our design, next I
owe her a revenge: Hark you, we must have some device to be rid of her.


[Whispers, Lea. I understand you very well.


Isa. Save your worship.


Lea. Would you speak with any body here woman?


Isa. Pray tell his Doctorships worship, that here is his wife.


Lea. Alas poor woman, his worship has never a wife.


Isa. Who told you so? were you by when his worship was unmarried again? I must
and will make bold to speak to him. Good Doctor dog-bolt, how long have you
been worshipful?


Doct. Feel her pulse, feel her pulse Pothecary.


Isa. I Will take you over the face, if you feel any thing about me, you beastly
fellow.


Lea. Prithee be gone, woman; for I assure thee Doctor Drench has never a wife.


Isa. But there is a horse Doctor Drench a Farrier that has a wife.


Doct. I, the Farrier Drench may have a wife; but I assure thee Doctor Drench
has none, therefore be gone woman.


Isa. Are you too proud to own your wife, you ungrateful raskal? who made you a
Doctor, but my invention and a good cudgel? I Will spoil your trade of physic,
sirrah.


Doct. Now is your time Pothecary to be rid of her.


Lea. It Is enough: But Doctor do you hear the strange news that is abroad?


Isa. O lack, what news is it, I beseech you, good Sir?


Lea. I do not speak to thee woman.


Doct. Well, what is it?


Lea. It seems there is an Edict made, and it goes very hard with poor women, I
confess,


Isa. Now good Sir, as ever you came of a woman, tell me quickly what it is.


Lea. I will not tell my tale to the woman.


Doct. Then tell me, I pray you.


Lea. Why, Sir, there is a new Edict made, that no woman upon pain of death,
under such a degree or quality, in all presume to have a gallant, or any man
but her own husband.


Isa. And all this upon pain of death? Slife, who would not be a rebel at this
rate?


Lea. You say very true; and upon this hard usage, there are twenty thousand
women in arms, and have made a formal Remonstrance, wherein they declare for
the privilege of the She-subject, and will live and die for the freeborn
women of England.


Isa. Ten thousand blessings upon them; where are they, I beseech you, Sir.


Lea. They Are drawn up upon Hounslow-heath, and are now marching to besiege
Winsor Castle.


Isa. Though I sell all I have, and undo my children, I Will have a Regiment
whatsoever it cost me.


[ Exit Isabel, Doct. I saw the Cadge stand open by the Stocks, throw this
purse into it, and say I sent it; and when she is in, lock the door, and bid the
boys whoot at her, and call her baud, and then I am revenged for her beating
she procured me.


[Exeunt. Enter Nurse. Nur. I find the Doctor has a mind to gallant me, he has
such a winning way with him, he swears it is a thousand pities such a raskal as
my husband should ever enjoy me, and such like fine terms, that it is hard I
swear to withstand him: But yet ones honesty; why, I confess honesty's a fine
thing to read of in a Romance: But I do not find the practice of it so
followed, as to make it a fashion; therefore if Doctor's love hold, I shall, I
shall, I cannot help it husband, I shall.


Enter Doctor. Doct. Nurse, how happy am I to meet with thee alone? a rogue,
methinks I could even run through thee now.


Nur. I, so ye all say; but I am sure I could never see it yet.


Doct. Now good Nurse grant me my suit.


Nur. Truly Doctor so I would, if it were not for my honesty.


Doct. Thou fool, there is no such thing as honesty: the word honesty is a mere
bugbear that jealous husbands invented to keep women in awe with, as raw-head
and bloody bones frights children, that is all in faith.


Nur. But is it possible that should be true, Doctor?


Doct. Nurse, it is so true, that I Will show thee a reverend book, called St.
Aratines, where you shall be convinced, there is no such thing as honesty.


Nur. Say you so; nay then, dear Doctor, give me physic. Here comes my
husband, what woman's that with him?


Enter Jarvis and Isab. Doct. It Is a Patient of mine that has twenty diseases
besides a Neapoliton pox.


Nur. What disease is that Doctor?


Doct. It Is a new fashioned disease came fresh with the last Packet.


Nur. Have we not old fashioned diseases enough of our own, but we must send
for new ones over?


Jar. What a villain is this Doctor? first not to own his wife, next with a
trick to trapan you into the Cadge; then make the boys throw dirt at you, and
call you baud: But why do you weep?


Isa. To think that ever I should live to be called baud; if he had called me
whore, 'twould never have vexed me; but to be called baud, is to be thought an
old woman unworthy of copulation.


Jar. Troth malicious people may call you baud, but I protest I think you far
worthy to be called whore; therefore pray you wipe your eyes.


Isa. I thank you for your good opinion howsoever.


Jar. If it please you, Madam, I Will make my opinion good.


Nur. Here is a rogue to be jealous of his wife, and yet play the whore-master
himself.


Isa. Look you, there is Doctor Devil for you that will not own his wife.


Jar. And my wife with him, take no notice of them, I believe he has made me a
Cuckold of all colors, of the red, and the green, the yellow, and the blew
bed: A pox on him, faith be revenged, and make his caps too little for him.


Isa. By my gallant so I would, if it were not for my honor.


Jar. Honor? I Will not come near your honor, that is an ayrie thing, that lies
in the crown of your head, my request lies lower quite another way.


Isa. Look, look, how familiar Doctor dog is yonder; O for revenge.


Jar. A pox on him, I Am not able to endure this, go you in there: Are you in
your closet, Sir? if you be, [ Exit Isa. come out and see a fine sight quickly,
Sir: O look, look this cursed Doctor.


Nur. We had need be careful of our credits, Doctor; for the world is grown so
base, that if they should but see a man and a woman in bed together, they would
swear they were naught straight.


Doct. Fear nothing Nurse.


[Kisses her. Jar. Look, look, look, I am no Cuckold to speak on.


Enter Ger. Ger. Is it so; what a false queen is this to use me thus?


Jar. Use you thus, Sir? it is use me thus, with your favor; Slid, why are you
concerned? it is I am the Cuckold, Sir.


Nur. Slid Doctor, my Master sees us kissing, I am utterly undone.


Doct. Feign your self in a sound, and I Will seem to rub you to fetch you to life
again: Alak, help, help, who is within there, help. O, are you there, Sir? good
Sir, run for a glass of cold water, I have much ado to keep life in her.


Ger. I, with all my heart, and glad it is no worse.


[ Exit Ger. Jar. Why the Devil must he fetch water? why could he not have sent
me, I find I shall be the staple Cuckold for all the Kingdom.


Nur. What a raskal art thou to fetch my Master?


Jar. O you counterfeit queen, you are not in a sound then.


Nur. No, you jealous rogue, but I Will counterfeit again as soon as my Master
comes, and he shall believe it too.


Doct. Here he comes, fall into your sound again quick.


Enter Ger. Ger. Here, here, alack poor Nurse, she does use to have fits.


Jar. I, a pox on her, more than ever her mother had; Sir, give her no water,
she counterfeits, she spoke as sensibly since you went as ever she did; deny it
Doctor if you can.


Doct. What an uncharitable villain art thou to forge such a wicked lie? this
rogue is made sure.


[Gives her water. Ger. Come you wicked knave, and help to lead her to her bed,
you will never leave your jealousy.


[Servants and Jarvis lead her off. Jar. Oh, oh, oh, she will pull my ear off, Sir.


Doct. That Is a sign of a strong fit, Sir, but lay her upon her bed, and she will
recover. Slid, Sir, I was never so surprised in my life; I was consulting with
Nurse about your daughters health, and all of the sudden she fell into my arms
in a sound: But now for your daughter, Sir.


Ger. Dispatch and bring my Daughter hither with all care.


Doct. And good Sirs, bid my Apothecary come in.


Ger. What Apothecary is it, Sir? cannot you cure her without an Apothecary?


Doct. No, Sir; you speak as if you were jealous.


Ger. Not jealous, Sir, but I love to know who comes in my house.


Doct. Neither Apothecary nor Doctor shall trouble you; so fare you well, and
cure your daughter your self, Sir.


Ger. Nay sweet Doctor, leave me not in this distress.


Doct. Be not jealous then.


Ger. Be not angry then. Hey ho, Doctor, my heart misgives me that my child
will be stolen.


Enter Apothecary. Doct. I Will warrant you, whilst I am in your house. He smoaks
us I doubt.


Ger. I thank you, Sir; is this your Apothecary?


Doct. Yes, Sir.


Ger. What the reason may be, I know not, but my heart rises at him, though I
never saw him before.


Doct. You make your life miserable with foolish phantasms: Pray, Sir, bid him
welcome.


Ger. Why you are welcome, Sir; but to tell you truly, I like you not.


Apot. If you please, I Will be gone, Sir. Do you think he has no hint of our
design?


Doct. No, no: Nay, Sir, if he go, I Will go with him.


Ger. Nay, I beseech you both stay, for I doubt my child is dying. O here she
comes, good Sir, look upon her.


[ Olinda in a Couch, two women. Doct. Apothecary, feel her pulse.


Ger. Is not that your office, Sir?


Doct. Yet again? why, he is the most learned man in Europe, and to my shame I
find, I cannot cure her without him; go, go, feel her pulse.


Apot. I fear my over joy will discover me.


Doct. Mean time I Will tell you, Sir; it is a great question amongst we learned of
Padua, whether men or women be hardest to cure; some are of one opinion, some
another; mean time there be potent Arguments on either side.


Ger. He is very long feeling her pulse methinks.


Doct. Pray you mind you me, Sir; first we hold, that women being naturally
more cold than men, and cold being an enemy to life, it follows their cure must
needs be more difficult and dangerous.


Ger. How many pulses has she to feel that he is thus long about it?


Doct. You do not mark me, Sir; I do not love to be slighted when I Am in
argument.


Ger. I do mark you, Sir.


Doct. Then I say it is generally held at Padua, that women, when they take
physic, ought to have their potions much more stronger than men, because
physic cannot work so well upon cold and phlegmatic bodies, as upon hot and
dry: You do not hear me, Sir.


Ger. They Are very close together methinks.


Doct. A sign he minds his business: and this was the opinion of the great Cham
of Tartar's chief Physician, that was fellow-student with me at Padua.


Ger. A pox of your great Cham, I must know why he dwells thus long upon her
pulse; have you conveyed no Letters to her, Sir?


Doct. What an uncivil question's that? Come Pothecary, let your Daughter die,
and you perish; the world shall never make me visit her again.


Ger. Dear Doctor, do not leave me in this extremity. Mr. Pothecary, will you
be my overthrow too?


Apot. I Will do no man service that affronts me thus.


Ger. Good Gentlemen bear with an old man's passion: good Mr. Apothecary go to
my child again.


Apot. No, not I, Sir, I shall but convey Letters.


Ger. Nay then you are cruel, I beseech your pardons Gentlemen.


Doct. Well Sir, we see it is your weakness, and we pass it over; go to your
Daughter whilst we consult a little: we must press to have her to your house to
cure her.


Apot. Good, and if he refuses that, I Will persuade her to counterfeit madness; I
have a design in it.


Doct. And that she may appear the more mad, let her tear all her clothes off;
for a mad woman naked has such antic temptations.


Apot. I should be loath any man should see her naked but my self, Doctor.


Ger. Well, Gentlemen, what have you concluded of?


Doct. Sir, he must feel if he can discover of what side her heart lies: I Will
keep him in discourse the mean while.


Ger. Must he feel her heart, Doctor? still it runs in my mind, this Apothecary
will do me a mischief: nay, be not angry.


Doct. Nay, I forgive you, I see an old man's twice a child, pray you walk into
the next room, I must talk in private with you.


Ger. I should sound, if I should leave my child with the Apothecary.


Doct. Let Us talk here then, for look you, Sir.


[They walk and seem to talk earnestly. Olin. I Will observe all your directions;
for if he will not let me go to your house, he shall find me mad enough, doubt
not.


Apot. You see how jealous he is, therefore we have no other hopes of enjoyment
left but by this means.


Olin. I Will do my part, fear not.


Ger. Sure he feels something more than her heart all this while.


Doct. If there be occasion, we must stick at nothing.


Apot. Why, Sir, according to your opinion, I have found her heart on her
right-side.


Ger. Most wonderful! pray you what may be the reason, Gentlemen?


Apot. Love is certainly the cause on it, and for her cure, this is no place of
convenience, therefore she must be removed to my house.


Ger. To thy house thou wicked fellow? I told thee at my first sight of thee, I
did not like thee.


Apot. But there is all things ready that cannot be removed hither, Sir; my
Tubs, my Baths, and my Sweating-house.


Ger. I like it not, it is a plot to steal my child, I doubt so: Nay, be not
angry, Gentlemen, I do but doubt so.


Doct. You would make a man forswear doing you any service.


Ger. I crave your pardons once more; is there no art left to make her speak?


Doct. Yes, I could make her speak presently, but I doubt it will be but
wildly, Sir, for love has shak'd her brain exceedingly.


Ger. Let me have the comfort to hear her speak of any fashion, good Mr. Doctor.


Apot. You shall, Sir; pray you Madam chaw that in your mouth: Sir, you shall
see the effects of it straight: before you speak, put out your tongue, and wag
it two or three times.


[He embraces her. Olin. Let me alone, I Will do any thing to purchase thee my
dear Leander.


Ger. Why does he embrace her so? I do not like it, Sir.


Doct. It Is something in order to her cure: I think you are mad, Sir; you will spoil
all, he is but shaking her heart right.


Ger. I Am sure he shakes mine every time he touches her.


Olin. A, a, a, a, a.


[She rises up and stares, and wags her tongue. Ger. O bless my child.


Doct. Be comforted, Sir, for now it works.


Olin. A, a, a, a, a.


Ger. Is this your working? the Devil work, my child is undone.


Doct. Nay, now her tongue wags, she will not be long ere she speak, fear not.


Olin. Who are all you, Sirs?


Ger. She speaks, she speaks, make me thankful to you for it, worthy Mr. Doctor
and Apothecary.


Olin. What art thou? whence came thou? and whither would thou?


Ger. O me, I fear my child's distracted.


Doct. I told you, Sir, he sense was a little shaken.


Olin. Pray you, is not that the Devil in black, Sir?


Doct. No, I Am but a Doctor yet Madam, I shall not take my degree of Devil this
seven years.


Apot. Yet if you please Madam, he shall commence Devil presently.


Olin. Then good Doctor Devil, for you shall lose none of your titles here,
Sir, help me to tear that beard of that old wrinkled weather-beaten tan'd old
face.


Ger. I am thy father, child.


Olin. I hope thou art not, I Would rather be a bastard than have thy ill nature in
me.


Ger. I am thy old father, child.


Olin. I hate any thing that is old.


Ger. Will thou break thy old fathers heart?


Olin. Nay, that that is more precious to me than my father, which is my dear
looking-glass, I would break that, if it were old; for sure the Devil invented
old people on purpose to cross young lovers; they could never have been so
cruel else to poor Leander.


Ger. My child is undone, she weeps for Leander.


Olin. Yes, and will weep again and again for Leander: Leander, Leander,
Leander, why you do not love Leander; for which sin, good Doctor Devil take him
into your Territories, and let him fall desperately in love with a young
She-devil, and let that She-devil have a cross father, that will not let them
come together, and then he will feel the torment his poor child indures.


Ger. Doctor, this has too much sense and satyr in it to be madness.


Doct. O, Sir, it is madness to a high degree, and dangerous madness too.


Olin. You look like Leander, Sir, you are so young and handsome, sure you are
Leander.


Apot. Yes, Madam, I am so.


Ger. No, no, no Pothecary, do not say so I charge you what does he mean by
holding up his finger so impudently?


[He beckons. Doct. He makes signs to let you know he must say as she says to
please her; for in Padua we deal with mad folks like those that catch Dottrils;
when they stretch out a wing, we must stretch out an arm; if they stretch out a
leg, you must do so too: else if we should cross her, she may fall into a
raging fit, and tear us all to pieces.


Ger. O most accursed madness!


Olin. Why would you absent your self so long Leander? why lay you not your
rosy cheek to mine, and throw your arms with sweet embraces about your lover:
I doubt you are false Leander.


Apot. Madam, may the earth open as I kneel, and make me an example of
falsehood, if any unconstant thought be in me.


Ger. Why villain, Pothecary, talk no more so to her: why the Devil does he
kneel? he speaks as feelingly, as if he were concerned.


Doct. Sir, there is no other way on earth to cure her but this.


Ger. The remedy is worse than the disease; come from her Pothecary, I told
thee at first I did not like thee, I have a natural aversion against thee;
confess, for I know thou art to do me a mischief: why were you so concerned to
kneel and make such protestations.


Apot. By my life, Sir, I did it to please and to satisfy her, for she doubted
I was false, and I swore I was not: alas, Sir, we must take these courses to
recover her by saying as she says; for physic has the least hand in curing
madness, I have cured twenty mad people this way.


Ger. Well, Sir, you have a little satisfied me, and with reason too; but yet
there is something within me that hates thee heartily.


Apot. Well, Sir, when I have cured your daughter, I hope you will have a better
opinion of me.


[Act ready. Ger. I may of your Art, but never of you, I doubt; for thy
conscience knows thou art to cozen me; nay, do not tell the Doctor so.


[He offers to go to the Doctor. Doct. Troth Lady, you are so fine a mad woman,
that it is a thousand pities you should ever come to your self again; faith for
a frolic take me by the ears, and lead me round the room.


Olin. If you will have it so Doctor, but I shall make you repent it: I have
him, I have him; and now I Will tear him all to pieces.


Ger. O save the Doctor, save the Doctor.


Apot. Sweet Lady spare the Doctor, I Am your friend Leander, Madam.


Olin. I will do any thing for Leander; but you must stay and live with me then.


Apot. You see, Sir, how very calm the very name Leander has made her: troth,
Sir, I doubt you must be forced to send for Leander.


Doct. I doubt we cannot cure her without him.


Ger. She shall die mad first, and I Will die with her; this is a plot, carry my
child to her chamber; get out of my house you Villains.


Enter servants, Nurse. Doct. You shall lay your hands under our feet before we
come under your unworthy roof again.


[Exeunt Doctor and Apothecary. Olin. Let me go with Leander, Leander, Leander.


[Exit Lady, she tears them. Nur. You have made a fine hand to make my Mistress
thus mad; I Will weary you out of your life for this.


Ger. You are very bold with your Master, Nurse.


Nur. There Is an English Proverb says, If you lie with your Maid, she will take a
stool and sit down by her Master.


Ger. Well, well, I say again, she shall never marry but the Squire.


Nur. She shall never marry your fool Softhead,
She shall first merchandise her Maidenhead.

Finis Act. III.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Olinda and Mrs. Nibby. Olin. NO dear cousin, I was not dumb, nor am I
mad, I have trusted you with my love, and in that my life.


Nib. Dear Cousin, doubt me not; when I am false to you, may I miscarry in my
own Amors: but pray you Couz, how came you by this lover Leander? for none
of the house knows him.


Olin. Truly Couz I never saw him but at Church.


Nib. A very good place to make love in.


Olin. Indeed, I have found it so, the first time I saw him was six Pews from
me, the next time he sat within two, and there he warmed my heart: the next
after he sat in the same Pew with me; and 'twas so ordered betwixt him and the
Pew-keeper, that none sat with us, and there we loved, and there we plighted
troth.


Nib. I find a Pew-keeper is a worthy friend to love, and for sixpence you may
sit with whom you please, and court whom you please in the Church: It was
handsomely contrived of your Lover though, to come with the Doctor as his
Apothecary; but what made him persuade you to counterfeit madness?


Olin. He has a design in it but had not time to tell me; my father has turned
the Doctor off you see, therefore Couz you must go to him.


Nib. He Will find some stratagem to see you again, fear not; if not, I Will go to
him: but come Couz, now lets laugh at the Duel, that the Squires footboy told
us of his Master.


Olin. I, he found if safer killing of a sheep than Leander.


Nib. No doubt on it: your father's bringing of him in to woo you again; fall to
your madness, and let me alone to dispose of the Squire; I Will have him drawn up
with an Engine, and there he shall hang in the Air in a Cardle till you are
married, or run away: Here they come, let us withdraw a little.


[ Exeunt Olinda, Nib. Enter Ger. and Softhead. Ger. But how came your face
thus black and blew, and thus black patched? I never saw a Ladies face thus
furnished.


Soft. They may be thus furnished when they please; but they shall never come
so honorably by their black patches as I have done.


Ger. Pray you how came you by them?


Soft. Do you take these for patches? O dull old age! these are badges, badges
of honor: look you my sword is glazed with honor too; but you shall never
know how, it has sost me two hundred pounds already confessing.


Ger. I know it already, Sir; but Squire, I fear you did not court my Daughter
handsomely; what said you when you wooed her?


Soft. I wooed her with all the fashionable questions of the Town; I asked her
if she could come a seven, and she laughed at me; then I asked her if she would
come the caster, and I Would cover her: no man could say fairer to his Mistress I
think; then I asked her if she could drink Burgundy, and seal Bonds, pay the
price of a Chine of Beef, for a dish of French Trotters; and that is all I said
to her.


Ger. I would thou had more wit, or I thy precious Acr^s. Who Is there?


Ser. Sir?


Ger. Bid them bring in my Daughter, if she be awake: I hope she may take you
for Leander; for she is now out of her dumbness, and is fallen stark mad.


Soft. How, can she speak? and is she mad? Heart of a horse, I Will be mad with
her for a hundred pound: O I do so love to be mad; and will she be drunk too?


Ger. Drunk you bruit you? no.


Soft. Why, how can she be mad then? I cannot be mad till I Am drunk, for my
life; but I Will try what I can do.


Ger. But be sure you humor her, and say every thing as she says.


Soft. Let me alone, here she comes: Slid how delicately she stares.


Enter Olinda, Nib. Nurse and Servants. Olin. What Is that with the pye-bauld
face? how came thou so distracted, thou errand Knight?


Soft. For thy sweet sake, thou divelish damsel.


Olin. Thou art as mad as I am.


Soft. I am stark mad, for my mother was born in March: therefore let us be
married.


Olin. I would not be so mad for all the world.


Soft. And when we are married, we will outdo the Great Mogul for new fashions;
instead of six Flaunders Mares, our Coach shall be drawn with six Centaures.


Olin. Centaures! in the name of madness what are them?


Soft. A Centaure is a horse born with a Postilian on's back.


Olin. And shall all the Footmen ride behind the Coach?


Soft. Yes, of the backs of one another, like March Frogs in a Ditch; and there
they shall spawn young Foot-boys.


Olin. And at the Boot of your Coach must be running an Orang-wench, presenting
your Lady a sweet Lemmon with a love-Letter in it.


Soft. Right, and instead of Points and gilded Nails, our Coach shall be
trimmed round with Cartridges.


Olin. And they shall be filled with Powder and Shot to defend us.


Soft. No, each Cartridge shall have a little tine Page in it, with his head
peeping out like Hictius doctius.


Nib. Bi'rlady, I think they are both mad.


Soft. What wonders would I do for my true love.


Nur. There is a verse of a Song to that purpose, I Will sing it: What would
thou do for thy true love, if she for help should call?


Soft. Why, I would fight with a great Giant, though he were never so tall.


Olin. Thou fight with a Giant? he must be in sheep-skin then.


Soft. Heart of a horse, how came she by that?


Enter Conjurer. Olin. Go bid my Conjurer come.


Con. Here, Madam.


Olin. Let me see Elisium quickly, and tell me truly what they do there.


Con. Madam, it is so little, and so like what is done in this world, that it is
not worth your knowing; but since you command I must obey; let idle Poets speak
their fancies of Elisium, but I that have been there must speak the truth; in
short, Madam, all the women do nothing but sing, John come kiss me now; and
then the men give 'em a green Gown upon the flowery banks, and there they commit
love together.


Olin. Do they not dance in Elisium?


Con. Yes Madam, as you shall see; every one keep their stand. Squire, stand
you here.


Soft. Must I see the Devil?


Con. Yes.


Soft. Would I were devilish drunk then.


Con. Why would you be drunk, Squire?


Soft. Because they say when I Am drunk the Devil would not keep me company.


Con. You must know my Devil scorns to be commanded with canting mountebank
words, he is a Seafaring kind of Devil, that comes when his boson whistles;
stand fast.


Soft. Save the Squire, Save the Squire.


He whistles, Elisium opens, many women's voices sing, John come kiss me now,
after that a dance; they draw up Squire Softhead with a Devil, and he cries
out. Enter Jarvis, and Isabel, Nurse unseen. Jar. Tell my Master all the lies
you can invent of him; for I know women are good at sudden invention.


Isa. Yes, I Could lie sufficiently to do his work; that is, I can lie my part,
if you can swear yours.


Jar. If you do not second your lying with swearing, we shall do no good on it.


Isa. Nay, by my troth if I lie, I expect you should swear to it; it is your
revenge as well as mine, and you shall bear your part.


Jar. Troth, I am not very good at swearing.


Isa. Then do you lie, and I Will swear; take your choice, for it is all one to me.


Jar. Nay, we must second one another both with swearing and lying, as occasion
serves.


Nur. That I had but some witness of this Villainy.


Isa. I Will warrant you, we will spoil his being a Doctor, in faith.


Nur. You shall not, if I can help it.


Isa. I Will tell your Master first, he is a drunken Farrier, and no Doctor, a
villain not to own his wife.


Nur. How, is this his wife? I dare say it is for my sweet sake he does not own
her: poor dear Doctor!


Isa. I Will be revenged to the full.


Nur. So will I till I am full.


Jar. I Will give you my wives new Gown, and take your revenge my way.


Nur. O rogue, a Cuckold to the ninth degree.


Isa. Sure a new Gown, and a new Gallant are two sweet things, but revenge is
sweeter and dearer to me than my Children; therefore let us first go to your
Master.


Jar. But first, let us consider, and lay our story ready.


[ Exeunt Jar. and Isa. Nur. I Will to the Doctor and tell him all this: what a
slave is this husband of mine? O rogue that cannot be content to be a Cuckold,
but he must be a whore-master too; thou shall have more than an ordinary head,
for that at Amboes shall appear but a Pricket to thee, for thou shall be a
monstrous. Cuckold, if man or beast can make thee one.


[Exit Nurse. Enter Doctor and Apothecary. Apot. I doubt Doctor we shall never
win the old man's favor again.


Doct. Troth, I think you were never in it, for his blood rose at the very first
sight of you.


Apot. He finds by instinct the mischief I Am to do him.


Doct. Well, it is now come in my head to gain his opinion again.


Apot. O my dear Doctor, how!


Doct. Why thus; you shall write a Love-Letter to your Mistress, as you are
Leander, and then deliver it to the old man, as you are my Apothecary, I Will go
with you too.


Apot. What advantage will that be?


Doct. We Will tell him, that Leander hearing that we gave his Mistress physic,
offered us a lusty sum to convey a Letter to her; and finding how heartily he
resolves against Leander, we thought fit to show our selves honest by
delivering him the Letter.


Apot. In troth this may clear the jealousy he had of us, and bring us in
again.


Doct. If this will not, we must find some other trick; what if I continued
love to Nurse? she would be very instrumental, if we had so little wit as to
trust her.


Apot. It would argue very little wit indeed; but come let us about the Letter.
Slid, here comes Nurse.


Enter Nurse. Nur. O, Mr. Doctor, I must tell you, you are a man of little
conscience to make such true love to me, as you have done, and have a wife as
you have.


Doct. Truly Nurse I had thought you had had more honesty than to suffer me to
make such love to you, and have a husband as you have.


Nur. But Doctor I came to tell you, that the woman that my Cuckold makes love
to, swears she is your wife, and says you are no Doctor, but a Farrier, and a
drunkard, and a beggar, and they are just now going to my Master to tell him so;
nay, they are resolved to lie and swear all things they can invent against you.


Doct. There is no great invention in so much truth: a pox on 'em, what shall
we do? all our designs are quite spoiled.


Apot. I am undone to all eternity.


Doct. Nay, nay, it is I am undone, for I must turn Farrier again; Nurse I Will
come to you presently.


Apot. I Am utterly destroyed, if I get not off of this.


Doct. I have it already, run you to Bedlam, and give two of the whippers a
piece, and bring them hither, and tell them they own my wife for a mad woman,
and carry her to Bedlam, and force her with all violence, and keep her there
till further orders.


Apot. I Will instruct them farther, as they come along.


[Exit Apothecary. Doct. Do so, make haste, and fly like Gunshot. Now Nurse,
this was kindly done indeed to tell me this Nurse; but be not troubled, for she
is not my wife, but a mad woman broke out of Bedlam; and now I am resolved to
marry thee Nurse, for I see thou love me truly.


Nur. I, but Doctor, you know I Have a Husband.


Doct. Hang him, I were a pitiful Doctor to suffer any body to live that I have
occasion to have dead.


Nur. If it could be done with a safe conscience.


Doct. Why, if it be safely done, it is done with a safe conscience; I see
you are a fool and knows nothing.


Nur. You Learned men know best, I leave all to you.


Doct. Thou shall lead the sweetest live Nurse; first I will get my son and
heir my self Nurse, and then thou shall have a brave gallant with a fine white
Periwig that cost twenty pound Nurse.


Nur. O dear Doctor, how sweetly you express your love to me.


Doct. And then your gallant shall carry you abroad, and bring you home of
nights: so well pleased, Nurse!


Nur. O my most obliging Doctor!


Doct. And then thou shall throw that gallant off, Nurse, and have one with a
brave brown Periwig, Nurse.


Nur. Did ever man show such true love to a woman? let all husbands take
example by this dear Doctor.


Doct. And then thou shall have one with a brave black Periwig, Nurse, so that
thou shall have Children of all colors in the Rainbow: but why do thou weep,
Nurse?


Nur. I weep for joy to think what a comfortable life I shall lead with you.


Doct. And dare you be true to your young Mistress and Leander, and help to
bring them together, Nurse?


Nur. I deserve to starve for a true lover else.


Doct. But then you must be true to your Master, and tell him when they are
together; and then you oblige both parties, you know.


Nur. By my troth, and so I shall; and I Will be sure to follow your directions.


Doct. I dare swear thou would: but Nurse, I do but jest, I would not wrong
the old Gentleman for the whole earth.


Nur. Nor I for all the world.


Doct. But Nurse, go tell your Master that the woman is a mad woman of Bedlam;
you may swear you have seen her there, for it is very true, Nurse.


Nur. I will do it truly Doctor; but when shall our happy day of marriage be,
Doctor?


Doct. As soon as you can persuade your husband to take physic.


Nur. Let me alone for that. O dear Doctor, this fine white Periwig does so run
in my head.


Doct. And does not the brown one do so too?


Nur. Yes, by my troth, and the black one eke also.


[Exit Nur. Doct. I dare not trust this Jade for all this; yet for little
things, which may be helps to the main, I shall venture to try her in.


Enter Apothecary, and two Officers of Bedlam. Apot. Mr. Doctor, I have brought
you a couple of Officers for your turn, they both understand, and are ready to
serve you for your money.


Doct. But have you given them instructions?


1 Offi. O, Sir, we have it throghly.


Doct. You must be confident, for you will find a damned scould of her.


2 Offi. O, Sir, we that can tame mad folks, can tame a scould, I warrant you.


1 Offi. And though the woman be not mad, we can make her mad, if you please.


Doct. Prithee how?


2 Offi. With these Engines: why people are not so mad when they come to
Bedlam, as they are when they are in it, I assure you.


Doct. How comes that I prithee?


1 Offi. Do you think that the food of bread and water, to lie naked in foul
straw, and to be whipped twice a day, will (...) make any body mad? I Will warrant
you faith.


Doct. But do you give them no physic?


1 Offi. Something they have, but a whip is the main ingredient; for we whip'
em out of a phrenzy into stark madness, and then whip'em on till they come
round to their wits again.


Doct. That plainly shows the circulation of the blood; and this may be cited a
consultation.


Apot. Well, Sir, you see they know their work, therefore about it, and there
is more money to encourage you.


1 Offi. You shall hear of her in Bedlam, I Will warrant you.


[Exeunt Bedlam men. Apot. Now let us about our Letter with all speed.


Doct. Come on, and if all fail, we will fetch your Mistress to Bedlam; for she is
pretty well entered into madness already.


Apot. No, then people will say, If she had not been mad, she would never been in
love with me; yet any where out of her fathers house does it.


Doct. Well, if our other designs fail, faith have at that.


[Exeunt. Enter Gernette, Nibby and Nurse. Nib. Thou wretched old man, first to
make thy Daughter mad, and then to keep her in it with thy cruelty, when your
own conscience knows a husband would recover her.


Ger. But now my mind is altered; for I Am resolved, let her perish, she shall
never marry whilst I live.


Nib. At your peril be it, for I Will take my oath before a Judge that a husband
would bring her to her wits again.


Ger. I renounce and disclaim her.


Nib. A husband I tell you: Second me Nurse.


Ger. I Am resolved I Will hear of no husband.


Nur. I tell you once again a husband.


Nib. And I tell you moreover and above a husband.


Nur. And I tell you both under and over, and over and under a husband.


Both. A husband, a husband, a husband.


Ger. I Will stop my ears, I Will hear no more of her.


Nib. But in troth Uncle, consider soberly her sad condition, she is young, and
her blood gallops in her veins, and requires the satisfaction of a Gentleman, I
prescribe her nothing but what I would take my self.


Nur. Alack she might take it if she were a dying.


Ger. Cannot the comforts of a Father recover her.


Nur. Nor of a mother neither, if her heart be set the other way.


Ger. Then let her dye mad, for I Will hear of no such thing as husband.


Nib. With all my heart, I wish she would marry thy Gardener.


Nur. I, that she might taste of his Apricocks: Nay, nay, nay, you shall hear
us out, for look you Master, a husband is such a thing.


Nib. I truly Uncle, a husband is such a thing.


Ger. What a thing is a husband?


Nib. Why, a thing a young woman cannot be without.


Nur. No, nor an old woman neither.


Nib. A husband is a thing that is good for many things.


Nib. A husband is good to father his wives children.


Nib. Pray you let him be good at getting them first.


Nur. No matter, that is a thing may be done without him; I see you are a young
woman and know nothing.


Nib. Then a husband is a thing that is a good Cloak for a woman's knavery.


Nur. I, if a husband could be brought to do the civil office of an
orang-woman, to fetch and carry, he were worth his weight in gold; I have a
husband, my Master knows, is the untowardest peevish fellow at it.


Ger. Away, away, you idle woman.


Nib. You mean down right pimping, Nurse, that is a little against the hair
methinks for a husband. Ben. Johnson says, fathers and mothers make the best
bauds.


Nur. Bauds! your Johnson's an ill bred foul-mouthed fellow to call them so;
besides he is a fool, for a husband's worth a hundred fathers and mothers for
that office; for then the wife's unstained, the world cannot taint her, when
the husband gives her countenance.


Nib. But will you consider your daughters madness?


Nur. I, he has turned off a worthy Doctor, and his Apothecary that would have
cured her, and now he is jealous of 'em, and will not let 'em come near her.


Nib. 'Slife, I Will indite you for murder, I Will not see my Cousin cast away thus:
send for this Doctor, I say.


Enter Jar. Isa. Jar. Here is a woman, if it please you, has something to say
to you concerning the Doctor.


Ger. I, what is it woman?


Isa. I would be loath to have your worship abused; this Doctor, if it please
you, that comes to your house is a very raskal: swear to it now.


Jar. I by my feckars-law is he.


Isa. Swear up roundly and be hanged; is feckars-law an oath to pass before a
Judge? I say this Doctor is a raskal.


Ger. Why, he may be never the worse Doctor for that.


Isa. But he is not a Doctor, if it please you.


Ger. Why, he may be never the worse raskal for that.


Isa. But as I said, he is no Doctor, but a down right Farrier.


Ger. A Farrier, bi'rlady a good foundation to raise a Doctor upon; I like him
never the worse.


Isa. Besides he is a beggar, and I am his wife, Sir.


Ger. If thou be'st his wife, it is an even lay but he is a beggar.


Isa. Besides we have had five children, and now he will not own me, Sir.


Ger. That confirms him a good Doctor still, I say,


Nur. This woman is mad, Sir.


Ger. She talks sensibly enough, and I believe her.


Isa. I am not mad, Sir, and I tell you he is but a Farrier. Swear and be
hanged, you leave me sweetly in the lurch. I say he can give your daughter a
drench, and shoe her before and behind, and that is all he knows of a Doctor.


Enter Bedlam-men. 2 Offi. By your leave we must make bold with your worship;
we have a mad woman broak out of Bedlam, and we understand she is come into
your worships house. O are you there you mad queen, must we have all this
labor to find you with a pox? I Will scourge you to some purpose in faith.


[He mistakes. Ger. What do thou mean fellow? this is my servant.


Nur. You rogue, you villain, you raskal.


1 Offi. Sir, pray you pardon him, this fellow is a stranger, and come newly to
his office, since she stole out of Bedlam; this is the queen, Sir, she knows me
well enough; look, look, look, if it please your worship, how the mad whore
stares at me, now she sees me.


Isa. I mad? I in Bedlam, you rogue? it is that thing, that Gentlewoman thing
that looks like a mad woman.


Nib. 'Slight, I Will away and secure my Cousin.


[ Exit Nib. Ger. I hope they do not come for my daughter, Nurse.


1 Offi. Nay, nay, nay, come you queen, away with her: Why, Sir, we have had
this wretch in Bedlam this dozen years; and sometimes she is so well, that we
let her go about the house, and then she steals out, and it is sometimes a week
before we can find her again. Fare you well, Sir; Slid how I Will lash the whore.


[Exeunt Bedlam-men with Isa. Ger. This woman being mad, confirms me the Doctor
is wronged.


Jar. The woman is his wife, and not mad, Sir; and the fellow is no Doctor, but
a Farrier, Sir.


Nur. The rogue is jealous of the Doctor, and that makes him say so, as he is
of your worship, when I rise a nights to rub your shins.


Jar. I say again, he is a Farrier and no Doctor.


Ger. This must be scandal, for I believe he is a learned man. How now? what do
you here, Sir? did not I forbid you my house? Are you a Farrier, Sir?


Enter Doctor and Apothecary. Doct. Are you a changeling, Sir?


Ger. Why changeling, fellow?


Doct. Why Farrier, fool?


Ger. He is wronged sure by his angry confidence.


Doct. Who told you I was a Farrier, Sir?


Ger. A woman that said she was your wife, and truly I believed it, till two
Officers of Bedlam fetched her away, and said she was a mad woman.


Doct. Alack, alack, was it she; why that poor creature has been in Bedlam this
many years; and she has called me husband so long, that of my conscience the
poor wretch believes it to be so indeed.


Nur. I, but Mr. Doctor, my husband swears you are a Farrier.


Doct. Who, that villain? why thou scandalous rogue, how dare thou wrong me,
when thou have discovered such strange things to me of thy Master?


Ger. I, what has the rogue discovered, Sir?


Doct. First, he is damnable jealous of you; next he told me that you got his
wives child, and he desired us of all loves to give you some cantharides to
disable you for getting of children: ask my Apothecary else.


Apot. It Is very true, I assure you.


Jar. Sir, they wrong me, and they lie.


Nur. But they do not swear and lie, as thou and the mad woman did: Sir, I Will
swear upon a book I overheard them make the bargain, she was to lie, and he
was to swear to it.


Doct. Pothecary, you overheard that too, did you not?


Apot. I did so, Sir, and I Will be deposed upon it: you put me to hard duty Doctor.


Ger. You villain out of my house.


Jar. Sir, they do me wrong, I never said so.


Ger. I know you were always a jealous raskal, and therefore must believe 'em;
so get you out you villain.


Doct. Sirrah, will you be content to be a Cuckold yet?


Jar. I Will be revenged, for I Will cut thy throat.


Doct. I Will be even with thee, for I Will give thee physic.


Ger. Pay him his wages, and let him be gone.


Jar. Give me my wife then.


Doct. No, I mean to physic her, and make her fit for a Gentleman.


Jar. I Will have my wife, if there be law.


Doct. Thou shall have her before thy suit is ended; for by that time every
body will have done with her.


Nur. Come, sir, I Will pay you your wages, you see what comes of jealousy; could
not you be content to hear, and see, and say nothing?


[Exeunt Jar. and Nurse. Apot. But, Sir, our business is to present you with
this Letter, and withal to advise you to look strictly to your daughter; for
this Leander is contriving several stratagems to steal her, he offered us I
know not what to deliver her this Letter.


Doct. But we knowing it would break your heart, we thought our selves bound in
conscience to bring you the Letter, and withal to advise you to be careful of
your child, for to my knowledge she will be gone else; so having fairly discharged
our selves, we take our leaves.


[Offers to go. Ger. O do not go, you are my friends, you have proved your
selves my faithful friends; I beseech you stay and take care once more of my
child.


Apot. Not for the world, Sir, we came not to that end, Sir, we came to show
our selves honest men, and that being now cleared, our credits shall come no
more in question.


Ger. I beseech you leave me not.


Doct. Why, your passion will spoil all our practice; for should it be noys'd
abroad, that a Doctor of physic carries letters betwixt party and party,
'twere enough to undo us all.


Ger. Good Gentlemen, I have received comfort by your fidelity, take it not
from me again by your obstinacy; I once more beseech you to take the care of
my child upon you.


Apot. Alack, Sir, do not weep, we will do any thing to serve you, but our credits
are so precious to us.


Ger. Good men, I Will never distrust you more, you have showed such worth in the
discovery of this Letter, that I weep for joy to think I have found such
faithful friends.


Doct. In troth my tender Nature melts too, see, see, my poor Apothecary weeps
too.


Ger. Do thou cry too, Nurse? alack poor woman.


Nur. How can I choose but cry, to see my Master weep?


Doct. I thought you had cried to part with your husband, Nurse.


Nur. Your own conscience knows I do not love him so well: Pray you good Master
wipe your eyes.


Ger. Good Doctor and Apothecary weep no more.


Doct. We cannot hold to see your grief so great, Sir.


Omnes. Ah, ah, ah, ah, ah, ah:


[All cry together. Doct. Let us cry in four parts, and see how 'twill go.


Apot. I have heard of singing in four parts, but never of crying in four parts
before: come, Sir, take comfort, for once more we will undertake your child.


Doct. We must first repair home, to provide things fit for her, and then
without delay we come: once more we have fastened of him.


[Exeunt Doctor and Apothecary. Ger. Good Gentlemen make haste: Come hither,
Nurse, this was kindly done to weep, Nurse.


Nur. I could not choose but weep to see you weep.


Ger. In the middle of my sorrows, there is some comfort in thee yet; come kiss
me, Nurse, I hope thou have been true to me, Nurse, and not suffered that
raskal thy husband to come near thee.


Nur. Do you think I Would be so false a wretch, as to let my husband touch me? I
wish the heavy judgment of such a sin may fall on me, if ever he so much as
kissed me, or ever shall whilst your worship lives; for sure you have been a
sweet man in your youth, that is such a comfort to a woman in your old age.


Ger. But am I such a comfort to thee indeed, Nurse? do not dissemble with me.


Nur. If I do, I wish I may never enter into the -- why am I a woman? but why
do you suspect me so?


Ger. Because I thought the Doctor had kissed you, when you were in's arms.


Nur. That you should think such a wicked thing of me, when you saw I Would a fit
of the mother.


Ger. Weep not Nurse, I am satisfied, come kiss and be friends.


[He kisses Nurse. Enter Nibby. Nib. Look, look of that old sinckanter, here is
a fine moldy gallant, an old gray badger; I must play the rogue with him,
though I suffer for it.


Nur. Slid your Niece sees you kiss me.


Ger. Alack, I am ashamed for ever then: good Nurse sound as you did when the
Doctor rubbed you.


Nur. Do you think I can counterfeit sounding? besides do you think you are
able to rub me as the Doctor did?


Nib. O woe is me, and woe unto us all, O this Uncle, this wicked Uncle.


Ger. Alack, what is the matter?


Nib. O cruel destiny! O fatal fortune!


Ger. Why, Niece Nibby, what is the matter?


Nib. That ever I should live to see this day.


Nur. O my dear Mrs. Nibby, what is the misfortune?


Nib. O where should I find this cursed Uncle of mine?


Ger. Here I am Nibby, what is the danger?


Nib. You are undone and ruined.


Ger. How, undone and ruined? do not delay me.


Nib. O your daughter, your daughter you wicked wretch, I am not able to say
more for grief.


All. Ah, oh, ah, ah.


[All weep. Ger. Tell me quickly what is the matter.


Nib. Why, your daughter's grown desperate mad at your unkindness; ran to the
window that stands over the River, and there opening the great casement.


Ger. O what did she then?


Nib. Why, lifting up her hands and eyes to that good place, where you will
never come Uncle; she loudly cried, Since my father has abandoned me, it is time
for me to quit this life of mine.


Ger. And so threw her self into the River?


Nib. No, it seems she did not like that kind of death.


Ger. Why, what then?


Nib. Why then she ran like lightning to the Table, where your Pocket-Pistol
lay.


Ger. And so shot her self with that?


Nib. No, it seems there was no powder in the pan, but bitterly sighing and
weeping, at last she ran and desperately threw her self upon her bed, and then
growing paler and paler, by degrees fell into a deadly sound.


Ger. And so dyed?


Nib. Stay, stay, you are too quick for your daughter; but with much rubbing,
tumbling and tossing her, I brought her to life again; so leaving her at deaths
door, I came to tell you the news.


Ger. Where are my servants? run, bid 'em run, I Will have a consultation of
Doctors; and run for Doctor Drench, for he shall join in council with 'em.


[Exit. manet Nurse. Nur. I Will to the Doctor and tell him this. I doubt he will
not like a consultation with Physicians.

If he stand this brush, he is made for ever;
Luck if it be thy will just now or never.

Finis Act. IIII.
ACT V. SCENE 1.
Enter Doctor, Leander and Parson Othentick. Lea. LOok you Doctor, this
Gentleman is my brother; and, though he be young, a Minister in orders; I have
told him what we designed, and he is to go as my Apprentice, and carry our
feigned physic.


Doct. Very good, and can you step out of a Pulpit into an Apothecaries Shop?
poison a friend or two, and steal to your Text again without scruple of
conscience?


Othen. Sir, I shall go as near the wind as a Dutch Skiper, to serve my
brother, but I hope there is no poison in the case.


Lea. No, but there is a little cheat.


Doct. Which I hope you may dispense with.


Othen. Truly I hope I may to serve my brother.


Doct. Or your Sister.


Othen. Yes sure, to serve any of my Relations.


Doct. Or a friend.


Othen. So it be a dear friend.


Doct. Or a stranger with a good living to present.


Othen. That Is a good thing still.


Lea. The Doctor's merry, brother: but pray you let me help you off with your
Reverend Weeds, and appear like an Apothecary's Apprentice, or a Disciple of
Paracelsus.


[Helps him off. Othen. Now Doctor give me leave to be merry with you, I
studied physic, and should have professed it, and an old Doctor gave me some
rules for a young Doctor to observe.


Doct. Pray you let us hear them by all means.


Othen. First, have always a grave busy face, as if you were still in great
care for some great persons health, though your meditations truly known are
only employed in casting where to eat that day: Secondly, be sure you keep the
Church strictly on Sundays; and in the middle of the Sermon, let your man fetch
you out in great haste, as if 'twere to a Patient; then have your small Agent
to hire forty Porters a day to leave impertinent notes at your house, and let
them knock as if 'twere upon life and death; these things the world takes
notice of, and you are cried up for a man of great practice, and there is your
business done.


Doct. Believe me these are good instructions.


Othen. Nay, I have more, be sure you ingratiate your self with the Bauds,
pretending to cure the poor Whores for charity, that brings good private work
after it. Strike in with Mid-wives too, that you may be in the council for
by-blows, that secures a Patient during life; and with Apothecaries, and
Nurse-keepers go snips; but above all acquire great impudence, lest you be out
of countenance at your own miscarriages.


Doct. I am so well stockt with that, that if ever impudence come to be
worshipped as a Deity, they will set me upon a pedestal for their god.


Lea. But to our business Doctor, you know we persuaded the old man that we
must say and do all things to humor his seeming mad daughter, and by that only
way she is to be recovered.


Doct. Right, and the old man believes it too.


Lea. Therefore when we are there, you shall hold the father in discourse
whilst I whisper her; and as she and I will manage her madness, my Brother
shall marry us to the old man's face.


Doct. By my troth that would be impudently done indeed; yet the old Gentleman
has now so much confidence in us, that we may do any thing.


Lea. Therefore pack up your pretended physic, and let us cheerfully about it.


Enter Nurse. Nur. Save you Gentlemen, you are much longed for, my old Master
does so talk of the Doctor, and my young mad Mistress of the Pothecary, that
you must come with all speed; for my Mistress is so stark mad, that my Master
has sent for three or four learned Doctors; and you must make haste, and bring
all your Learning with you; for you must sit in consultation with them.


Doct. In consultation with Doctors? 'heart all is spoiled again, and worse
than ever 'twas. Tell your Master plainly, Nurse, consultation with Doctors is
not my way of practice; a company of wrangling fellows, they can never agree;
besides, he under-values me to think I am not able to cure her without help:
but Nurse, go into my chamber, and turn over St. Aratines book, till I talk
with my Pothecary.


Nur. With all my heart, dear Doctor.


[Exit Nurse. Lea. This is the unfortunatest cross that ever befell me.


Doct. The Devil has conspired against you: so farewell for an unluckie wretch,
I Will put on my Apron, and profess Farrier again; and then let the Doctors and
the Devil come, I defy them.


Lea. Nay, nay, stay Doctor and let us consider.


[Offers to go. Doct. Consider? do you think I can support an Argument with
able Physicians?


Othen. Come, be not dismayed, for we will go, if there were a whole College of
Physicians; I am a Scholar, and a proficient in physic, and those questions
that you cannot answer, put them upon me, and doubt not but we will baffle them
all; therefore we must be wary, and not talk too much of Padua, for ten to one
but some of 'em has been there, and they are strict Galenists, therefore we
must be Chemists: Now you must not call my brother your Apothecary, nor me his
Apprentice, that will not sound like an outlandish Physician, therefore call
him Hurnatio your Operator, and me Stirquilutio his man.


Doct. Well boys, you have so encouraged me, that I have just now a trick come
into my head to baffle them all my self.


Lea. O brave Doctor! what is it? what is it?


Doct. You shall know, but Nurse must be in the plot.


Lea. By no means in the earth, she will betray us all.


Doct. Fear nothing, for I Have promised to poison her husband, and marry her,
and allow her half a dozen Gallants; and if that will not make her true, I have
no art to gain a woman.


Lea. That may go a great way; but


Doct. But me no buts; Nurse, Nurse.


Enter Nurse. Nur. Here my dear Doctor.


Doct. Nurse, tell your Master that I am resolved to consuit with the Doctors;
but it is for thy sweet sake I Will swear, Nurse: therefore my dear Nurse, if thou
love mirth, and will be true to me, we will put such a trick upon these learned
Physicians, that we will laugh seven years after it.


Nur. Here Is my hand and heart, dear Doctor, I Will be true to you.


Doct. I believe thee; be sure Nurse, that you be in the room; and when I bid
you fetch your Mistresses water, be sure you go out and bring me your own; and
then mark what work I Will make with your learned Doctors.


Nur. Why, this will please me above all things, most hugely, most strangely.


Lea. I, but if Nurse should cozen you, and neither bring her Mistresses water
nor her own, she would serve you finely.


Nur. I scorn to be so base, Sir, and if you think so, Sir, you may be by when
it is made, Sir.


Doct Nay, be not angry Nurse, for my Apothecary, my Operator I should say, is
to give your husband physic when he is to die, and he knows I Am to marry you,
I Have told him all; nay, he is as true as steel.


Nur. Is he so, Sir? I crave your pardon for my hasty speech: the Doctor
reports you are as true as steel, Sir; and I assure you I honor any Gentleman
that has either truth or steel in him* I shall inform my Master of your coming;
and I assure you, Sir, you shall command my water without fraud or guile.


[Exit Nurse. Lea. Let us now consider how to answer these learned Doctors*


Othen. That cannot be, for we know not what they will fall upon.


Doct. I find I shall betray my self to be a damned Farrier; but however I Will
brazen it out.


Othen. Doctor, you must be sure you consent not to consult in private, which
they will desire, because they never agree; besides, urge that the Father,
Nurse, and we may be admitted, it will be a good excuse for your worship not to
speak Latin.


Doct. But by the way, you must furnish me with a snip or two of Latin to save
my credit.


Othen. That Is easily done, but you must be sure to imbroil the Doctors first
with some strange questions, to prevent their falling upon you.


Doct. Let me alone, I Will do it,

And spite of all their Scruples, Drams and Ounces,
I will confound these learned Doctor Dounces.

[Exeunt. Enter old Gernette with three learned Doctors. Ger. Gentlemen, I have
made bold to send for you again, and though you could not help my child when
she was dumb, I hope you may now she is mad.


1 Doct. How, is she mad? and does she speak?


Ger. Yes, Sir, a famous and a learned man, of great skill, and wonderful
knowledge, gave her something, and in a short time she spoke, and fell into
raving fits of madness, and has ever since continued so; and this he told me
would be the effect of what he then did.


2 Doct. This is strange.


3 Doct. Most wonderful! what was it he gave her, Sir?


Ger. Nay, that I know not, but I assure you, he said he could make her speak,
and told me her disease would turn to madness, and accordingly it has proved
so; nevertheless, Gentlemen, I desire you to join with this Learned man, and
consider how to perfect her cure.


1 Doct. Why, Sir, you tell us wonders of him; where did he study?


Ger. I know not, but he seems to be a great Traveller, for he talked of Tartar
Cham, and of Padua, and Greenland.


2 Doct. Tartar Cham and Green-land? this must be a Mountebank and a cheat.


Ger. Upon my credit you will not find him so, for he has seen all
Universities, he is but newly come over, and his name is Doctor Drench.


1 Doct. Drench? why that is a fitter name for a Farrier than a Physician.


Ger. Let his name be as strange as it will, he has also strange humors too,
for he will find out men's ignorance presently.


3 Doct. I think we were best be gone, lest he finds out ours.


1 Doct. Why I, for if he be a Chemist, his opinion and ours must needs differ,
and consequently not agree in consultation.


2 Doct. I am, Sir, of your opinion, for I think it infradignitatem to hold
consultation with Mountebanks.


3 Doct. We know not yet, Sir, what the man is.


1 Doct. If he be a Chemist, Sir, he is eo nomine, a declared enemy to the
Galenical way, to all truth and learning, and a denyer of principles; and
therefore not to be consulted with.


2 Doct. Right, Sir, contra principia negantem non est disputandum; he that
replys but with submission to sic dixit Galenus, is not to be looked on as a
Physician.


3 Doct. Pardon me Gentlemen, I have known some Chemical Physicians learned and
rational men; and although not strict adherers to the Galenical Method, proceed
with great reason, and good success, which, I take it, answers all we can say
or do.


2 Doct. I profess I think it as bad as murder to cure out of the methodical
way. Oh what satisfaction it is to have a patient dye according to all the Rules
of Art.


Ger. But sure it should satisfy your conscience better to have them live by
Rules.


2 Doct. Come life, come death, to follow Rules is your satisfaction, and
Conscience is no ingredient within the Rules of Physic, Sir.


Enter Servant. Ser. Sir, the Doctor is come.


Ger. It Is well, it is well: Gentlemen, to end this dispute here is a double fee
for each, and pray you consult with him his way, and be civil in it for my sake.


1 Doct. Sir, you and yours here has prevailed over us.


2 Doct. I profess to serve so worthy and magnificent a person, I would consult
with a Farrier.


3 Doct. A Farrier? nay, for a double fee, we would consult with a Gun-smith.


Ger. Here he is, pray you salute him.


3 Doct. We know how to be civil, Sir.


Enter Doctor Hurnatio and Stirquilutio, Nurse. Ger. Save you, Sir.


Doct. I thank you.


3 Doct. Save you, Sir.


Doct. One save you, Sir, is sufficient for all, we Learned men should hate
complement, Verba panca sapiens sapit: was that true Latin, Parson?


Stir. Brave! fear nothing: at them with some question.


Doct. I shall fall into the Farrier. Well, I find, Gentlemen, you are
professed Doctors of Physic, and are met to consult the health of a distracted
Lady; therefore to the point, and avoid your canting words, that would stick
in a wise man's throat and choke him.


2 Doct. But, Sir, it is necessary we deliver our selves in proper and learned
phrases, when we discourse either of Physic or Distempers, In Art
artificialiter loquendum; and withal, Sir, it is fit that we of the consultation
should withdraw.


Doct. No withdrawing, Sir, it is not my way, I love persons concerned should
hear and see what is done, that they may judge who are doers, and who are
talkers; and if you affect the vainglory of learned phrases, my Operator
Hurnatio, and his man Stirquilutio shall dispute you; for with great pains I
have enabled them to argue in all tongues, because they know I hate the trouble
on it my self.


Stir. Start a question quickly.


Doct. I shall only trouble you with one question or two my self: First, I ask
you whether you know the practice of before behind, behind before?


2 Doct. Before behind, behind before? why, that is something belongs to a
horse, a Farrier or a Blacksmith must answer that question.


Doct. I know where you would be presently, in some sort it is true that you say;
yet in Italy both woman and boys have their before behind, behind before, as
well as your horses have here.


Stir. Bravely come off Doctor.


Doct. I know not well your way of practice, but the cost you put the people to
in that common disease, called the mourning of the Chine, I do abominate you
for.


3 Doct. Mourning of the Chine? with your favor, Sir, that is the disease of a
Horse, and the phrase of a Farrier.


Doct. And, Sir, I say again, I call it the mourning of the Chine, for the word
Pox is a phrase of ill manners; and therefore I think it proper to call it the
Pox in a Horse, and civil to call it the mourning of the Chine in a man.


Stir. You Will have no need of Latin, Doctor.


Doct. Look you to that Parson: and I must tell you I shall spoil the benefit
you get by that disease; for I Will advise every man to plant a Guaicum-Tree in
his Orchard, and a Leaf of that at any time will cure infallibly, and that is
one of the secrets I will reveal to the world, to spoil the practice of
Mountebanks, clap Doctors and bill men.


2 Doct. But will that disease be cured with the Leaf of a Guaicum-tree?


Doct. I, Sir, as I can order it.


1 Doct. Pray you, Sir, how will you order it?


Doct. Why first, Sir, I will make you a mash.


3 Doct. How, Sir, that is a Farriers phrase again, what mean you by a mash, Sir?


Doct. Tell 'em, tell 'em Stirquilutio, and let not me be troubled to interpret.


Stir. Why, Sir, the Doctor is so much read in the Arabian Physicians, that he
often uses their terms: Masha in the Arabic is what quinta essentia is in the
Latin.


Doct. Well helped Parson: you wonder at my phrases, and I at your want of
Arabic. Now, Sir, when any man is troubled with the staggers, we do not cut
him and slash him in the forehead as you do your Horses.


2 Doct. Staggers in a man? with your favor, Sir, you have talked all this
while liker a Farrier than a Physician; and I begin to think you are one, Sir.


Doct. How shall I get off now?


Stir. Yes, Sir, he is a Farrier, and an able Farrier too; for if you be not
good Farriers, and good Surgeons too, you deserve not the name of Doctors.


Hur. And pray you come to the point concerning our mad patient.


Doct. I, there is the best trial of our judgments, therefore Nurse, run and
fetch your young Mistresses water presently.


Ger. I, that the Gentlemen may the better judge what to apply, and I beseech
you Gentlemen agree, that I and my child may find comfort from you.


3 Doct. Sir, you shall be sure of all the aid our Art can show.


Doct. And likewise our endeavors, Sir.


2 Doct. But, Sir, amongst all signs of sickness or health, whereby the skilful
Physician is led into the knowledge of the state of the body; two above the
rest are most certain, which are the Pulse and Urin.


3 Doct. I, whereof the Pulse shows the state of the Heart and Arteries, and
Urin the state of the Liver and Veins.


2 Doct. Therefore the question is, whether of these two severally considered,
does give the most certain signification.


Doct. Urin, Urin, Urin, which makes me send for her water; still I say,
Stirquilutio give 'em reasons, and let not me be troubled.


Stir. Then I say, Montanus de excrementis says.


Doct. I say, give them reasons in their own mother tongue.


Stir. Then I say, the Urin above the Pulse, gives the most manifest, certain,
and general signification of all diseases, because with the blood it is
conveyed into all parts of the body; and from thence returns back again in the
Veins, to the Liver and Vessels of Urin, and so brings is some note of the
state and disposition of all those parts from whence it comes.


3 Doct. It Is wonderful that an under-servant to a Doctor should have this
learning.


2 Doct. I doubt whether the Master understand so much.


Doct. Say you so, Sir, I Will be even with you: Parson, I Will tell that Doctor he
is not well, and whilst I feel his Pulse, convey you this Cow-itch down his
neck. Come hither, Sir, I pray you.


2 Doct. Your pleasure, Sir.


Doct. You are not well, Sir.


2 Doct. As ever I was in my life, Sir.


Doct. Let me feel your Pulse: you accuse me of Farriers phrases, I Have another
Farrier phrase for you; you are not well, you are foundered in your body, and
it will fall upon your shoulders: first, it will begin with a kind of itching,
then into Inflammations and Catarrhs; therefore look to it, be rowel'd be times.


2 Doct. I slight your opinion, Sir.


Doct. Well, mark the end on it, Sir.


Enter Nurse with water and Nibby. Nur. Gentlemen, my Mistress presents her
service to you, and desires you to be civil to her water, and use it with as
much modesty as you may; for I assure you her Virginwater was never exposed to
public view before.


3 Doct. Pray give it the stranger.


Doct. By no means, Gentlemen, I must have your opinions first. Nurse, art thou
true to me?


[The Doctors takes the water. Nur. By my little life it is my own water, Doctor.


Doct. By my great life I Will marry thee to morrow then: but Nurse, when I wink
at you, you must own the water to be yours.


Nur. I Will do it, dear Doctor.


2 Doct. Here is dangerous water, it does not show the three Regents, neither
is here color, substance, perspicuity, darkness, contents, or smell.


3 Doct. Therefore the Urin being obstructed, must needs fly back upon the
parts, as to the stomach in vomitings, to the belly in Dropsies.


2 Doct. Or to the head in Frensies, here we find plain madness. 'Slife I itch
most terribly, this fellow sure can conjure.


Hur. The Cow-itch works, he is at it already.


Doct. Come on, let me see the water; hum, ha, here is no madness, nor the
least sign on it: Come hither, Sir; is your daughter married?


Ger. No, Sir; why do you ask?


Doct. Then I say she is a baggage, she had a chid lately, and counterfeits
madness to keep the knowledge on it from you.


Ger. Gentlemen, I beseech you believe not this scandalous Doctor: Sir, I Will
have you punished for this defamation: my daughter had a child you wretch?


Doct. Come you are a weak old man. I say again, that she that made this water
has had a child lately, therefore let search be made to find it out.


2 Doct. You will do well to examine it, for it is possible it may not be her
water; for Doctors have had such tricks put on 'em ere now: this itching makes
me mad.


Doct. But they can put no such tricks upon me, for my judgment cannot fail
me; therefore I say look to it, for there is a child in the case.


Ger. Call all my servants; where is my daughters women? here must be treachery,
and Nurse you must need know it.


Nur. Sir, I do know it indeed, and I crave your pardon.


Ger. What has my daughter had a child then?


Nur. No, Sir, but you know I have had one.


Ger. But the Doctor says, she that made the water has had a child.


Nur. The Doctor says very true, for it is my water, Sir.


Doct. I was sure I could not be deceived.


Ger. Are you sure you speak truth, Nurse?


Nur. By my little life do I, Mrs. Nibby can witness.


Nib. Nurse speaks very true, Sir.


Ger. Why did you so bold a thing as this, Nurse?


Nur. If you will have the truth, I did it to find out which would prove the
ablest Doctor, and the stranger it seems is the Doctor of Doctors in faith.


2 Doct. I believe he is, for ever since he felt my pulse, my back has played
the Devil.


Ger. Worthy, Sir, I once more heartily crave your pardon, and must acknowledge
you an able and faithful Gentleman: and Doctors I beseech your leaves to make
use of this worthy stranger, as to the cure of my child.


2 Doct. He must cure me too, for the vengeance has got into my back parts.


3 Doct. Sir, we consent, and think you have made a worthy choice. so we take
our leaves, Sir.


Doct. Nay, Gentlemen, I hope you will stay and see our way of practice; alas we
cure madness with as much ease as, you do fevers, and merely with humoring
them.


2 Doct. I believe every word he says.


Hur. It Is well you are convinced. O brave Cow-itch! pray, Sir, let your child be
brought forth that we may dispatch.


Ger. Go Nurse prepare her quickly.


Nur. She is ready, Sir,


[Exeunt Nurse and Nibby, Doct. Stirquilutio, go get me a Parsons Cassock.


Ger. Why so, Sir? why so?


Doct. Because, Sir, you saw in her madness she phansied my Apothecary, my
Operator to be Leander, and was much in love with him.


Ger. She was so to my grief, but what then, Sir?


Doct. Why then, Sir, if she take him for Leander again, you shall see how
finely I Will fool her into her wits again.


Ger. Here she comes.


Enter Olinda, Nibby, Nurse and Servants. Olin. What is all the world got
together? then I hope I shall find Leander amongst them.


Ger. Again Leander? a pox on him, who knows him, or ever saw him?


Nib. None of your household, we have only heard well of him, and I believe she
never saw him but at Church.


Ger. Like enough, that is one of the ends people go thither for: I Will take
warning how I ever send my child to Church again.


Olin. Are you Leander, Sir?


Doct. Say I, say I, Doctor.


2 Doct. I am Leander, Madam, at your service, if my back would give me leave.


Olin. Thou Leander, Beast? why thou shruggest as if thou were lousie and
wanted a clean shirt: O Doctor Devil have I caught you, where is my Leander?
find him, or I Will tear thee into Air.


Doct. Here, here is your Leander, Madam.


[presents the Parson. Olin. O you Devil, would you put a false Leander upon
me? find me out the right, or I Will throw thee headlong to that dismal place
prepared for Doctors.


Doct. Here, here, Madam, is your right Leander.


Olin. I, this is he indeed, now I thank you Doctor: nay, Sir. I Will take a
course with you; why Leander, would you torment me with your absence thus?


Hur. It was not my fault, heaven knows, it was your cruel father keep me from
you.


Ger. Why raskal Apothecary? why say you so, you Villain?


Doct. It Is you are mad: Gentlemen Doctors, you saw how fine and calm she began
to be upon humoring her: it is you that keeps her mad, I Will justify it.


Ger. Nay, I have done, I have done; but here is something here that will not
be removed.


Olin. Nay, Sir, I Will fetter you from running; Doctor, get me a Parson; does
none of these grave men belong to the Clergy?


2 Doct. No, Madam.


Olin. Run, run and fetch me one, they are never in the way when they should do
good.


Doct. Stirquilutio, put on the Parsons Coat quickly: Madam have patience, the
Parson will be here presently.


Ger. Why so? why so Doctor? why so?


Doct. To bring your child to her self again, ask these Doctors else.


2 Doct. Nay, no doubt they are right, Sir, if you obstruct them not; I must
have his opinion for my disease too.


Doct. Look you, here is the Parson, Madam.


Olin. O welcome, Sir; nay, not a word out of your Book, but turn to your text
of Matrimony and marry us presently; and pray you let not that old man know we
are married.


Doct. No, no, by no means; you must not know old man your daughters to be
married.


Ger. Nay, nay, nay Doctor, Doctor, no jesting with marriage.


Doct. Why are you jealous of my Operator? Alas poor wretch! why, Gentlemen,
the man has a wife and four children.


Ger. Has he, and art thou sure of that, Doctor?


Doct. Why, Sir, before these Gentlemen, if I speak false, degrade me of the
dignity of a Doctor.


Ger. I believe you, and am satified, and now I am as light and airy as a boy.


Olin. Who will be my father, and give me to Leander? I have a mind to this
grave Gentlemaan; do you refuse me, Sir?


Doct. No, no, no, Madam; go and give her, Sir, go: bless us all, you see what
a raging fit she had like to have fallen into.


Ger. I, but I do not like, I do not know, I do not like, I do not know what to
say to it.


Doct. The Divel's in you, have forgot the fellow's married?


Ger. I had forgot, I had forgot, in troth I should laugh to see her thus
recovered; why Gentlemen, is not this a strange way to cure madness?


3 Doct. It is so, Sir; but it seems they have the experience, the practical
part, and truly it seems rational.


Doct. Why, Sir, if we can but get her to sleep, in the belief that she is
married to Leander, my life for yours she wakes in the morning in her right
senses.


2 Doct. And sure this back will put me into my wrong senses.


Ger. Ha, ha, ha, I laugh to think, poor Girl, how she will be cozened into her
wits again.


Nur. Master, as I live, they are married in earnest; I Will be sworn, with the very
same words that I and my husband was.


Ger. Let them alone, it is all but jest, Nurse; why the Apothecary's married,
fool, and has four children.


Hur. It Is true that he is married, but no four children, Sir; but we will have
four and four to that Girl.


Olin. What shall we have but eight Leander?


Hur. Fifty, fifty Sons to vie with Priam; besides Girls shall be reckoned
but as by-blows.


Nur. Fifty besides Girls? when shall a poor woman get such a husband?


Hur. Olin. Now, Sir, we both crave your blessing.


Ger. Well said Apothecary, thou acts it to the life, in faith: Gentlemen
Doctors does he not do it well?


Hur. I shall do it better yet; Nurse make a Sack-posset, and let us to bed
presently.


Ger. No, no, no, no, Nurse, no going to bed, there you over act it Pothecary.


Olin. Sir, he is no Apothecary, but real Leander, and my lawful husband;
therefore we must of necessity go to bed, Sir.


Ger. Why Doctor, this Girl is stark mad still.


Doct. No indeed, she speaks sensibly; what would you have a young woman do but
go to bed when she is is married?


Ger. Why Doctor, thou over acts thy part too.


Doct. In troth, Sir, this is neither Apothecary, Operator, nor Hurnatio, but
very Leander; neither is this his man Stirquilutio, but his Brother, and a
Minister in orders, who has lawfully made 'em man and wife.


Ger. How Villain! did not thou say he was married and had four children, and
bid me degrade thee of the dignity of a Doctor, if it were not so.


Doct. I did so, Sir, and therefore I Will degrade my self; there goes the
Doctors, and here is honest Robin Drench the Farrier.


All. How a Farrier!


2 Doct. Did not I tell you he must be a cheat.


Hur. You have found him so, it is much that a Doctor weded to Rules and Method
should be cozened by a Farrier; for you have no disease, 'twas only a little
Cow-itch put down your back.


2. Doct. A pex upon you, and all your cheats.


Ger. O this cursed Farrier, this cursed Villain, then you are not mad, Lady?


Olin. No, Sir, neither was I mad or dumb, but counterfeited both to cozen the
Squire and you, Sir.


Ger. And you, Sir, were Leander, when you brought me the Letter from Leander?


Lea. Yes, Sir.


Ger. And you told me that Leander would steal my daughter, and gave me good
counsel to look to her?


Lea. I did so, Sir.


Ger. 'Twas good counsel if I could have taken it: that cursed Letter feigned
from Leander cozened me, that got them credit with me, spite of my jealousy:
thou art a pretty fellow, I confess, but the most impudent and audacious
Villain, to marry my Child against my will, and before my face too, Gentlemen.


Olin. Do you think I Would have been married but in my Fathers presence? not for
all the world.


Lea. 'Twas love forced us to make this shift, Sir.


Ger. A pox of love, for that is the end on it: did not I tell thee all along
that thou would cozen me?


Lea. You did so, Sir, but love can take no warning.


Ger. For my revenge, I Will to bed, and fall desperately sick, make my will, and
dye, and leave thee never a groat, that thou and thy issue may starve and
perish.


[ Exit Ger. Olin. Fear not Leander, when this fit is over, he is to be
reconciled, fear not.


Doct. Gentlemen Doctors, I hope it is no disparagement to you, that a poor
Farrier, by a combination with Nurse, has cured a mad woman.


Nur. ^ but w^^^e is my reward for it?


Doct. (...) Nurse, if thou will accept of a Farrier instead of a Doctor, I Will
love thee still.


Nur. A pox on you for me, my heart is so set upon the white Periwig, that I
shall never be my own woman again.


Enter Jarvis, Isabel, and many Neighbors. Jar. Where is my Master, here is
witness enough now, that he is no Doctor, but a drunken Farrier; these are all
his Neighbors, Gentlemen.


Doct. I confess I am a Farrier, they all know it too; but can my Neighbors
bear witness you are no Cuckold?


Isa. No, but here is witness that I am thy Wife, and that I am not mad.


Doct. I Will own that too, thou art my wife, and not mad; nay, more than that,
I Will go home and live with thee.


Lea. Well, I Will give you a Pension of fifty pounds a year, for the good service
you did me in your reign of Doctor.


Doct. I thank you, Sir: and Jarvis, thou shall have thy wife again, that thou
may have a foundation for thy jealousy; for I find when thou art not
jealous, you are a dead man.


Ger. Save the Squire, save the Squire, save the poor Squire.


The Scene opens, and the Squire is discovered hanging in a cradle. Olin. Is
not that the Squires voice?


Nib. Yes, and it is high time to let him down now, open, open; come Squire,
will you quit your interest in your Mistress now to be set free?


Sqr. I, with all my heart, and the Devil take her to boot; I have hung so long
in the Air, that the household [Let him down. took me for Mahome's Tomb, and paid
my worship with their Piss-pots out of the Garret, I thank 'em.


Nib. I caused it to be done.


Nur. I was joined with her in commission of the member Vessels.


Nib. But Squire, since you have lost your Mistress, what think you of marrying
the wild Irish Chambermaid.


Sqr. Who, Madam Pogamihone, I Will marry my mothers Sow first.


Lea. But Squire, when shall you and I fight another Duel?


Sqr. Sir, if I were a man that were given to quarrelling, as sometimes they
say in my drink I am; I Would have you know that I am able to beat, and cudgel,
half a dozen such fellows as you are, I and make you creep under the Tables and
Joyntstools, Sir; nay, I could cudgel you under a Candle-stick, Sir; that is,
if I were a man that were given to quarrelling.


Lea. I am very happy that you are a man not give to quarrelling.


Sqr. So you are, Sir; but if I were given to quarrelling, here is a leg that is
four and twenty inches about, that is three inches more than any of the Kings
Cables, Sir; and I Would have you know, Sir; that I am able not only to kick you
down stairs, but kick you up stairs again, Sir; still that is, if my leg were
given to kicking, or I to quarrelling.


Lea. Well, Sir, we are all blessed, that your leg of four and twenty inches
about is not given to kicking. Nurse, let the Sack-posset be made: In the
interim we will dance, and have the song of Arthur of Bradley, where Christopher
carried the custard.


Doct. And bartle the Beef and the Mustard.


[Dance. Lea. Come my Olinda, let us in and prove
[ To Olinda. The sweet Rewards, due to our vertu's Love.

Othen. I, I, to bed, you now need fear no Proctor,
But thank your Farrier cudgel'd to a Doctor.

EPILOGUE.
YOu that are Learned, expect honor for it;
We that are unlearned, slight and abhor it:
The Rich does look with scorn upon the Poor,
But give no Alms; the Beggar scorns you more.
Thus does the wretch your wealth disdain; nay worse,
For each proud look, the Beggar gives a curse:
But give him Alms, as I believe it is rare,
The Beggar gratefully returns his Prayer.
So when the Vnlearn'd, by the learned improve,
They Will give them honor for their learned Love:
But stead of that, the Vnlearn'd they indite,
And proudly ask us how we dare to write?
We humbly answer our Indictment thus,
If Poetry be Fancy, the right's in us;
For you with Authors are so deeply read,
Invention has no room in learned head;
Borrowing what you read, and Authors citing,
Is your invention, and your writing.
Now the illiterate are for fancy bent,
Having no learning, they must needs invent.
Thus Poetry is ours to inherit
As much as yours with your learned merit;
For as Quakers preach, we write, by the spirit.
FINIS.

