THE OLD TROOP: OR, Monsieur Raggou.

As it was Acted at the THEATER ROYAL.

By John Lacy, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook and Thomas Dring, at the Green Dragon
without Temple Bar, and at the White-Lyon next Chancery Lane end in
Fleetstreet. 1672.

TO The young PRINCE GEORGE, Third Son to her GRACE, THE Duchess of CLEVELAND.
SIR,
I Acknowledge, that I am no less unworthy to appear before you, than I was
before your Elder Brother, having in me the same duty and reverence for your
high Blood, and the same equal regard for your Person: Yet I come with
confidence to you; for having found so affable and sweet a Reception from your
dear Brother, I ought not at all to doubt of yours: since his Great Blood runs
in your veins, you must also retain his Virtues; and in you they are justly
called so, yet they are not so in all men; for if slaves, and servants, and
meaner men, prove affable and humble, it is not Virtue in them, because it is
their duty: but in you, being adorned with all your Greatness, it shows so rich
a Goodness in you, that all men are obliged to return you honor for it, which
I do with my heart, and all my faculties. I also present you, Sir, with a poor
Frenchman, Monsieur Raggou, being party perpale Trooper, and Cook: I tender
him to you in his own Equipage just as he landed, with not so much as a shirt
to his back: But that is no new thing to the English Nation; therefore, Sir,
receive him as an object to exercise your Charity upon; being naked cloth him;
let him but wear your Livery, and he will not only be received, but be made
welcome to all men: Lay your protecting hand upon him, and he is safe from the
malice of his Enemies: And, Sir, as I am bound, so I pray, that you may want no
one Virtue that may make you up a Miracle: May your Great Blood appoint you to
cut your own fortune out, and may you do it with such success and valor, that
all men of courage may honor you, and the rest of the World fear you.

And this, Sir, shall always be the prayer of your obliged and most obedient
Servant, John Lacy.

THE EPISTLE To the READER.
EPistles ('it is true) are customary, but I think as unnecessary as Funeral
Sermons, for they must either insinuate and flatter grossly, or else say nothing
to the purpose: For my part I cannot imagine, Reader, what to say to thee,
unless like a raw Preacher I swerve from my Text; and instead of a modest
Apology for my bold printings, tell thee a Tale of Maestricht being taken, or
the Dutch banged at Sea; and to do that were to rob the Gazette, and so be
called in question for Intrenchments. What then shall I say? shall I praise my
Play to thee? No, that were to be a vain glorious Ass; and in thy power,
Reader, to prove me so: What then, shall I decry it? No, that were to break the
Stationer, that perhaps has paid too dear for it: What then, shall I discover
the Plot and Intrigue of the Play to thee? No, to speak of the Plot in the
Epistle, were to fore-stall the reading of the Play, and so dam the sail of it.
Instead then of an ingenious Epistle to divert, I beg a crafty Boon, Reader,
that some one eminent leading Voice amongst you, will be for once so kind, as
to give an excellent Character to the World of this my Play; and by that decoy
people may be drawn in to buy it off: so that, as I have cozened the Stationer,
by this means the Stationer may overreach you; and in so doing, Reader, you
will

Most highly oblige Your humble servant, John Lacy.

PROLOGUE.
TO you that Judges are in the public street,
Of Ballad without sense, or even feet;
To you that laugh aloud with wide mouthed grace,
To see Jack Puddings Custard thrown in's face,
To you I do address; for you I write,
From you I hope protection here to night.
Defend me, O friends, of the upper Region,
From the hard censure of this lower Legion.
I was in hope, that I should only see,
My worthy Crew of the upper Gallerie.
What made you Wits so spightfully to come?
To tell you true, I Would rather had your room:
Order there was, and that most strictly gi'n
To keep out all that looked like Gentlemen;
You have even bribed the Door-keepers I doubt,
Or else I Am sure they would have kept you out:
You must, nor censure Poet, nor his Play,
For that is the work of the upper house to day.
Deal you, Sirs, with your Match, your Dryden wit,
Your Poet Laureat both to Box and Pit.
It is some conquest for to censure him*
That Is filled with Wit, and Judgment to the brim*
He is for your censure, and I Am for theirs,
Pray therefore meddle with your own affairs.
Let Wits, and Poets, keep their own stations;
He writes to the Terms, and I to the long Vacations.
The Persons Names.
CAptain of the Troop. Lieutenant of the Troop. Cornet of the Troop. Tom
Tell-troth. Raggou. Flay-flint, Plunder-master General. Captain Ferret-farm.
Quartermaster Burn-dorp. Biddy, the Cornets Boy. Dol Troop. Troopers.
Constables. Painter. Carpenter. Servants. Women and Children in abundance.
Roundheads.
Governor of a Garrison. Captain Hold-forth. Captain Tub-text; and, his two
Holy Sisters.
AN OLD TROOP: OR, Monsieur Raggou.
ACTUS I. SCENA I.
Tell-troth and Dol Troop. Dol. I Have heard your story, and much pity you;
but, in truth, I am a wicked, very wicked woman: for I never did one good deed
in all my life; and I doubt you're unluckie, that your fate directs you to me.


Tell. I find you have opportunity to do good, and will to serve me; and for
reward, if that --


Dol. Nay, you are liberal enough, you understand the world; for money creates
good and evil: and I, that never thought of doing good, will now heartily
endeavor it. Go to my quarters, for I have a great deal of roguery to act for
my self, besides the good I am to do for you.


Tell. Inquire all you can into the last thing you spoke of, for I confess that
troubles me: if she proves but honest, I Will forgive her wildness.


Dol. I Will do it, with all the craft I can. Exeunt.


Enter Lieutenant, Flea-flint, Ferret, and Burndorp. Flea. Good morrow, good
morrow Lieutenant.


Lieut. Precious Rogues! what brave Honors and Titles you have arrived at in
the Wars, Rascals! Plunder-master General Flea-flint! what Prince can give thee
so great a Title? a great credit for my Colonel, Rogue. Then, here is Captain
Ferret-farm, an honorable Gentleman; for always, when we are fighting, you are
ferreting the Farms, and searching the women for Letters of intelligence, you
damned Rogue. Then, here is the Quartermaster Burndorp, a Rogue that, when we
have brave large quarters assigned, you sell half of 'em, and then truss us up
nine or ten in one house together. A pox on you, Rascal.


Burn. But why are you thus cruel, Lieutenant?


Lieut. Hang you dogs; did not I know you at first to be three tattered
Musketeers, and by plundering a Mault-mill of three blind horses, you then
turned Dragooners, and so quartering in a Farm where a good team was, you
changed your blind horses for better, and then you commenced Troopers at
Oxford, and when you had plundered your selves into good clothes, you
impudently called your selves Major, and Captain, and Quartermaster, and then
you ran away from your own Troop, and I entertained you for Reformado-Ofcers?
you know I know this, and yet, you dull ungrateful rascals, you will not know
why I am angry.


Ferret. Why are you angry?


Flea. Why? I Will tell thee why: He wants twenty pounds, and a good gelding,
Coxcomb; he must have it too, I know him well enough.


Burn. Is that it? he shall have it, and thank him too. Pray accept of this
twenty pound, Lieutenant.


Ferret. And we have a good gelding for you, Lieutenant, as ever you laid leg
over.


Lieut. Why so? Why will you put me to it to give you ill language? cannot you
understand me without scurvie usage?


Ferret. I did not understand you, by my troth, Lieutenant.


Lieut. Pray understand me hereafter. Now are you three as honest, harmless
fellows! how do thou do? who dares say that thou will flea a flint? or he
search for Letters in a wenches Placket? or the Quartermaster burn a Town?
I Will set 'em by the heels that say it. Honest Robin, Tom and Dick, when shall
we drink a tub of Ale together?


Burn. When you please, worthy Lieutenant.


Lieut. Get a Tub at one of your quarters, and I Will come to you. And pray
understand me thoroughly hereafter: I believe I shall be very angry within this
week again; therefore pray take care to prevent it. Exit.


Flea. It were a good deed never to plunder more.


Burn. Why, pr'ythee?


Flea. No thriving on it for these damned Officers. To put Excise and Custom
upon Plundering! to put Toll upon fleaing a Flint! I hold my own quarters to be
my lawful Inheritance as much as any man's Land or Office, that is held by old
Custom, and Time out of mind.


Terret. Nay, I hold my quarters to be so much my own, that the Wife, the
Daughter, and Maidservants, ought to be in my occupation.


Burn. I deny that; for the man of the house ought to have his wife himself, in
case he have a daughter to furnish you. Nay, the strictness of the Statute of
Plundering says, that in case he has but barely a Maidservant, you ought not
to meddle with his wife, or indeed his daughter.


Flea. I am of the opinion of the Gentleman that spoke last; for I am (in my
own quarter) Lord of the Manor, and all Wefts and Strays are mine.


Burn. I Will say that for thee, a Maid cannot go a milking but thou make a Weft
or a Stray of her.


Enter Cornet. Corn. Here Is the faithful fraternity, a league of Knaves that is
never to be broke. It is a joyful thing when Brethren plunder together in
unity. How do you, Plunder-master General?


Flea. We have all arrived at excellent nicknames; to say truth, according to
our several degrees and ways of Plundering: but you, Cornet, have a name that is
proper for all Cornets to be called by; for they are all Beardless boys in our
Army: for the most part of our Horse were raised thus, The honest Country
Gentleman raises the Troop at his own charge, then he gets a Low Country
Lieutenant to fight his Troop safely, then sends for his son from School to be
his Cornet, and he puts off his Child's coat to put on a Buff-coat; and this is
the constitution of our Army: So I salute you, Cornet Beardless. Thou art
called Ferret-farm, because thou art so terrible valiant amongst the
Country-Bumpkins, and Aspin because thou shakest and tremblest in a day of
Battle.


Ferret. Whoo pox, this is absolute malice.


Corn. There thou art out; for this is neither malice nor anger, but downright
truth.


Flea. You abuse him in faith. I have seen him up to the chin in blood.


Corn. 'Twas in a Saw-pit then: yet when the Armies meet (I Will say that for him)
he will draw up as confidently, as if he would take a General by the Beard; and
he will as confidently ride out of the Army before the Battle joins: and if any
man ask him whither he goes, he says he is sent for Orders, so you hear of him
no more; and the next day you find him as sure in a Saw-pit.


Ferret. Pray let the Saw-pit alone, and provoke me not: good men have done the
like; therefore be not too bold with your betters.


Flea. Provoke him not; for he is a Devil at a Sword, though he tremble at a Gun.


Ferret. A Gun, I confess, is as terrible to me as Thunder and Lightning,
they are out of my Element. Well, but leave this discourse, and so you do not
laugh at me, I Will tell you a story.


Flea. What is it?


Ferret. Why, faith our Dol's with child, and lays it to me.


Burn. Pox on her, she was with me this morning, and I compounded with her, for
five pound.


Terret. The whore had seven of me, by this light.


Corn. An excellent cunning queen! She knows the family of the Flea-flints are
ever the moneyed men of a Troop. I Will make use of my time too: give me ten pound
to keep counsel, or I Will make you the laughing stock of the Army.


Flea. Thou will not turn treacherous Rogue now sure.


Corn. It Is no treachery. Show me a Soldier that will not take advantage.


Flea. I, of the enemy.


Corn. For ten pound any man's my enemy or friend: there is another principle
for you, and very fit for the Flea-flints to make use of.


Burn. We scorn to compound; but we will lend you so much money, if you will
mortgage the next fresh Quarters.


Corn. I Will do it.


Burn. Then there is your ten pound.


Corn. Now are you men of Inheritance, now you have a good title to every man's
goods and chattels; and for ten pound more I Will help you to a Lawyer shall plead
it, and make it good to you and your Heirs for ever.


Enter Tell-troth. Tell. God give you good morn, Sirs: I pray you which of you
is the Captain Commander?


Flea. Why, friend, we have never a Captain here, he lies Leiger at Oxford, to
give the King intelligence when his Troop beats or is beaten.


Corn. There you are a scandalous rascal: some Captains, I confess, have that
trick; but our Captain always fights his Troop himself: but we have a good
Lieutenant here, if that will serve your turn.


Burn. I, he is too good for us, I would the Devil had him.


Corn. What Is thy business?


Tell. I Would be a Trooper.


Ferret. And can thou fight?


Tell. Will thou try?


Ferret. No, faith, friend, I believe thee. Wast' ever a Soldier?


Tell. I, a Parliament one.


Flea. What, and did thou run away?


Tell. No, I walked this pace: I scorn to run.


Burn. I believe this fellow's a Spy.


Tell. You lie; I am very honest. Now dare you fight?


Burn. No, by my troth, not with thee.


Tell. Then remember, if any body want the lie, you had it last.


Flea. This is such a fellow as I never met with. Yet why did thou leave the
Parliament?


Tell. For the same cause that I believe I shall leave you.


Flea. What Is that?


Tell. Because I liked 'em not.


Ferret. Who was thy Captain?


Tell. One Captain Verily Rett.


Ferret. Of what Profession was he?


Tell. Of every ones Profession, I think.


Ferret. What Is that?


Tell. An Hypocrite.


Burn. And do thou come out of love to the King?


Tell. No; I come to see fashions.


Burn. But why did thou leave thy Captain?


Tell. Because he is an Hypocrite, a yea and nay knave; he cannot endure to
plunder, but (in a godly manner) he will take all he can lay his hands on.


Corn. But will thou fight for the King out of stark love and kindness.


Tell. No; I Will fight for him as all men fight for Kings, partly for love,
partly for my own ends. I Will fight bravely for a Battle or two; then beg an old
house to make a Garrison of, grow rich, consequently a coward, and then let the
Dog bite the Bear, or the Bear the Dog, I Will make my own peace, I warrant you;
and, in short, this is my business hither.


Enter Lieutenant. Lieut. Where are you, Sirs? the Captain has brought Orders
to march, but whither I know not; and better news than that, he has brought
pay, Boys.


Flea. I hope you are not angry, Lieutenant.


Lieut. I am not yet; but I shall be very suddenly, therefore provide against
it: the next fresh quarter you will have advantage enough. I hope we understand
of all hands.


Flea. It Is sufficient, Lieutenant.


Corn. But here is the strangest fellow come to be a Trooper.


Lieut. He 's welcome. Have thou a good Horse, friend?


Tell. No, but I Have a bridle, and if you will entertain me, I shall quickly have a
horse. Are you the Captain?


Lieut. I am but Lieutenant, friend.


Tell. Ho, I thought you had all been Captains, I Am sure you are all called so.


Enter Captain. Lieut. But here comes one that is so: this is a very Captain.


Tell. I tell thee that is very much. What Is his name?


Lieut. Captain Honor.


Tell. I? have you such a thing as Honor amongst you?


Capt. Lieutenant, get your Corporals together, and give 'em Orders to make
ready for a march; and be sure you charge 'em to see every Horse in their
Squadrons shod, otherwise we shall have 'em lie behind drinking and plundring,
and then pretend they stay to shoe their Horses: let me hear no more on it.


Tell. It Is possible a very Captain may be honest.


Lieut. But, Sir, before you do any thing, talk with this fellow: he would fain
be a Trooper.


Capt. Now, friend, would thou be a Soldier?


Tell. Yes, if I could light of a good side: a right cause, and good men to
manage it.


Capt. On my word, that is shrewdly put. Well, I Will promise thee a good cause,
and some good men: in multitudes all are not virtuous, nor valiant.


Tell. That Is well said: I think I shall begin to take a liking to you. But,
Captain, I hear a man may learn to flea a flint amongst you, to drink and
plunder.


Capt. Do You hear that rascals? But where did thou hear this report of us?


Tell. In a London-pulpit: but another sort of people told me, they preached
Interest more than Gospel; so that a man knows not which side to take.


Capt. Nay, upon my word, thou art come to the right side.


Tell. I ghess as much; for you talk worse than you do, and they do worse than
they talk.


Capt. This is an odd kind of fellow, and I believe a dangerous. Friend,
withdraw, while I read my Orders to my Officers.


Tell. A word in your ear first, are you wonderful honest?


Capt. Thou art a strange blunt fellow: yes, I am honest.


Tell. But are you wise too? for else the want of wit to manage your honesty,
may make you a knave. I know it is some men's cases.


Capt. Thou do surprise me: sure thou have more business than to be a Trooper.


Tell. I have so; but I must ask you another question ere you know it. Are you
stanch enough to keep a secret? Be not angry; many of your party cannot hold:
for tell you news, and you fly, like lightning, to the next man to disgorge it,
and so it goes round till it comes to the Enemy; and thus you betray your
business, and intend it not neither.


Capt. I have not heard so dangerous a man. Pray, friend, think me worthy to
know your business.


Tell. You shall. And to show you that I have business, I know what your Orders
are.


Capt. Why, it is impossible.


Tell. Nothing impossible: you are to remove your Troop to Cilstow, there
quarter till further Orders, but not to go to bed, for you are within three
miles of a little house called Thieves-den Garrison, and you are to expect a
company of Foot to quarter with you: is this your Orders?


Capt. You amaze me! how came you by this intelligence?


Tell. It came to Thieves-den house this morning, and so to me; I am their
Confidant, and would fain be yours.


Capt. Do you not know who sent it?


Tell. No, nor they neither; there is the subtle carriage of the thing.


Capt. But pray, Sir, let me ask you who you are?


Tell. I am a plain, honest-meaning man, a neighbor to that Garrison of
Thieves-den, and one that has dived into the bottom of both your parties, and
find that you have faults, but the other great wickedness.


Flea. I do not like this fellow, he had a sling against drink.


Ferret. And plundering; but twenty to one he has paid for it.


Flea. He had a plaguey jerk at flaying of flints too.


Capt. What if you went to Oxford with me?


Tell. So I may be hanged when I come home again; for they will know it as
sure. Pray let me eat, and refresh my self, and then conclude of something.
Exeunt.


Enter Dol, and calls Lieutenant back. Dol. Lieutenant, I Would speak with you.


Lieut. Dol, I Will come to thee presently. Exit.


Dol. I cannot say I am with child, but with children; for here has been all
Nations, and all Languages to boot: if the several Tongues should work upwards
now, and I speak all Languages? why, I am not the first learned woman; but I
believe the first that ever came by her learning that way. If I should have for
every man that has been dealing here a child, and if the children should be
born with every one a Back and Breast on, as they were got? Bless me, what hard
labor should I have! But, for all this, I hope I do not go with above a
Squadron of children. But to my business. I mean to lay this great belly to
every man that has but touched my Apron-strings. I thank the Law, it is very
favorable in this point; for when I have played the whore, the Law gives me
leave to play the rogue, and lay it to whom I will.


Enter Lieutenant. Lieut. Why how now Dol? how go matters with you, good Dol?


Dol. I desire you stand my friend, Sir, you see my condition.


Lieut. Thou will not lay thy child to my charge, I hope.


Dol. No, Sir, I have more wit; my drift is to lay it to more than one man, or
one Squadron: Sir, I understand there is a months pay in your hands; and I am
resolved to lay this great belly to every man round the Troop; some I have
struck already, and they have very fairly compounded with me; some, I suppose,
may bustle and stand out, but if you will countenance me, then they must
compound at our rates.


Lieut. But Dol, what benefit is this to me? for I profess no friendship, but
follow the general principle of mankind, Dol; which is to pick the money out of
thy pocket to put it into mine. So, Dol, in plain terms what will you give me?


Dol. Why, Lieutenant, you shall go snips.


Lieut. Why, Dol, we are agreed: but after we have struck the Troop round, who
do thou pitch upon to father it?


Dol. Why, faith, I did design to marry Monsieur Raggou, the French Cook, that
rides in your Troop.


Lieut. Thou will never endure to live with him, it is such a nasty slovenly
rogue.


Dol. It Is no matter for living with him; I want a husband.


Lieut. He stinks above ground: he has not had a shirt on's back time out of
mind.


Dol. That makes it a fit match; for, by my troth, I do not deserve a man
that is worth a shirt.


Lieut. Well, Dol, upon the aforesaid terms, you're sure of me, play your game
with all confidence.


Dol. Well, I Will to work amongst 'em presently: or if I might gain you to
advance my greater desires, which is my Cornet's Boy that waits on him; I am
foolish, for I love him strangely, desperately. A hundred pounds, in plain
terms, make him mine.


Lieut. But, Dol, where is this hundred pound?


Dol. I have shark'd these four years, and made a shift to scrape four hundred
pounds together.


Lieut. Still I say you're sure of me, with ready money.

Enter Monsieur Raggou and his Landlady. Well, Dol, away; here comes Monsieur
Raggou, step aside.


Dol. O let him have his money: if our Cornets Boy fail, I Will have him, or he
shall certainly keep the child. Exit.


Rag. Landlady, come, take a my Pistol and lock in your Trunk very safe.


Land. Yes, Sir.


Rag. Take heed, for begar you will be hang if my Pistol run away.


Land. O Lord, I Will take no charge on it.


Rag. You roundhead whore, lock it up, or me will kill you, begar.


Land. I Will take all the care I can on it, Sir. Exit.


Rag. So, me will steal my Pistol from her trunk, and say she carry it to de
Enemy, and den me will so plundra de dam whore.

Enter Bumpkin. Stand; who are you for, Bumpkin?


Bum. O Lord, Sir, I am for no body.


Rag. You Dog, be you for de King, or de Parliamenta?


Bum. Why I am for -- pray, Sir, who are you for?


Rag. Tank you for dat. Begar you be very full wid cunning: you will be of my a
side, if me name my self first. Speak, you dam Dog, who be you for?


Bum. In truth it is not good manners to say who I am for: your worship ought
to speak first.


Rag. Pox take you, me be for de Parliament, you Dog.


Bum. O the Lord bless your worship, I am for the good Parliament too.


Rag. Je'rny, I am for de King, you roundhead Dog: begar me will plundra you
soul and body.


Bum. O good Sir, spare me; I am for the King.


Rag. Diable, me will plundra you for being Jack of both sides. Diantie, he
have but one filling about his soul and bodee. Get you gone, you Dog. Exit
Bumpkin. Begar, me have no luck, zoun me plundra every day dis tree years, and
begar me never get but one filling or one six pen, begar. Ha! Monsieur
Lieutenant, me hear very brave ting of you.


Lieut. What Is that?


Rag. Me hear you have some Largion for Monsieur La Soldier: pray how much will
come to Monsieur Moy?


Lieut. Faith, Monsieur, some three pounds.


Rag. How, tree pone? whar be de tree pone? how much be tree pone?


Lieut. Why, here it is, Monsieur, so much as you see.


Rag. Begar, sure you mock a de moy; begar me never see so much money togeder
in my life. Me will lie down and tumble in my money like de Dog dat tumbla in
de carrion, it is so sweet. O brave Capitain, O brave Lieutenant, Gad a bless
de King of England, and de King of France too, when he give me tree pone.
Lieutenant, be to be mad a dangerous ting?


Lieut. O, very dangerous.


Rag. Begar dear be your tree pone again, it will make a me tark a mad; me no
know vat me sall do with all dis money: begar me admire tree pone of all ting in
dis varle; it vill make de great Turk de Christian, or de Christian de Turk,
better den all de argument in de varle. Pray, Lieutenant, keep dis money for me
one two tree year, till me take counsel of all my friend in France vat me sall
do wid dat.


Lieut. Go to Oxford, and buy some necessaries with it; you are so nasty, no
body is able to come near you: buy some shirts, to keep you sweet and clean.


Rag. Buy some shart? Me love you very vell, Lieutenant, but you no understand:
for vat sall me have some shart?


Lieut. To keep your self sweet, and from being lousy.


Rag. Who can see my shart? here be my doublet come close, my coat come over
all dat, den who de devil see my shart? For vat sall me have a shart, when no
body see my shart?


Lieut. But then you want stockins, and twenty necessaries.


Rag. Me pull up my boot, who see me have a stockin? you vill have a littel
English tricka, and never understand: for vat vill you have more ting about
you, den vat vill make a show in de varle, and every body can see? Pray let me
lay out my money to please my own fancee.


Lieut. With all my heart.


Rag. Den me vill lay it out for my honor, and for de honor of de King, and my
Lieutenant: So adieu. Buy shart? who see my shart? Exit.


Enter Dol. Dol. Faith, Lieutenant, I Will at him, and some of the rest presently;
therefore leave me to work: I am ashamed, I am such a fool to dote on a Boy,
but no remedy: remember, therefore, and about it.


Lieut. Do you remember the hundred pound; I Will work him, fear not. Exeunt
severally.


ACTUS II. SCAENA I.
Enter Dol Troop. Dol. Now to my business. My Flint-flayer compounded with me
very civilly, that I did fear would have outwitted me: I am afraid of nothing
but an impudent rogue that has no shame in him, that will father the child
rather than part with his money, and so spoil my compounding with the rest of
the Troop. I Will be as wise as I can; so have among 'em.


Enter a Trooper. Troop. What a pox makes she here?


Dol. How do you, Mr. William? I Am come to tell you I am gone half my time, that
you may provide; for I am quick.


Troop. Art thou? faith, I Will be as quick as thou art, for I Will be in Nolland (if
the wind serve) to morrow. Exit.


Dol. 'Slife, if they should all boggle thus, I should make a thin Troop on it.


Enter Raggou. Rag. O, Madam Dol! O dee, O dee?


Dol. You see how I do: I am near my time, I desire you to provide. You swore a
thousand oaths to me you would keep the child.


Rag. But me did but swear in French, Madam Dol, and dat vill no stand good in
English Law, Madam Dol.


Dol. Come, Sir, come, I Will make you father my child, or I Will make you do worse:
will you compound?


Rag. Me scorn to compone, and scorn to fader your shild; you be a dam whore,
Madam Dol.


Dol. You are a Rascal, Mr. Monsieur, and I Will make you father the child in
spite of your French teeth.


Rag. Begar, Madam Dol, you be de great whore de Babylon; begar, me vill make
appear noting can get you wid child but de May Pole in de Strana: and den me
can make appear, by good vitteness, dat me have no May Pole abouta me. So
adieu, Madam Babylon: Pox take you, me fader your dam son of a whore shild!
Exit.


Dol. You fickle Frenchman, I shall be revenged on thee: I Will marry thee, but
I Will be revenged on thee.

Enter Cornet, Lieutenant and Biddy. But here comes my Cornet and his Boy, and
the Lieutenant: I see he is mindful of my business. Exit.


Lieut. Cornet, I have an earnest and (by my troth) a most pleasant suit to you.


Cor. You cannot miss the grant of it. What is it?


Lieut. But first, do you love money?


Cor. By my troth, I know not; for I never had a sum worth loving in my life
yet.


Lieut. Will fifty pound do any hurt?


Cor. But what must I do for it? betray the Troop to the enemy, or some
Garrison? for under that I cannot deserve fifty pound.


Lieut. Towns are not so cheap yet: though Treason be plentiful, it is not grown
a Drug. But to my suit: you are to know that our Dol is desperately in love,
and with whom.


Cor. Not with me? I find I must earn this fifty pound.


Lieut. No such matter: you have too great a conceit of your good face.


Bid. Indeed you lie, Lieutenant: for he can never think too well of that face.
Aside.


Cer. Who is it she is in love with?


Lieut. By my troth with thy Boy here: desperately in love with thy Boy.


Bid. The Devil take her for her pains. But why do I curse her, that am so
desperately in love my self? Aside.


Cor. Why, this story is very pleasant, if you knew all.


Bid. O Lord, you will not tell him what I am, I hope?


Cor. Lieutenant, I must deny your suit, for it must not be a match; for the
Boy is, in plain terms, a Girl.


Bid. The Devil take you for telling him.


Cor. Why so? my Lieutenant's very faithful.


Lieut. A Girl? Let me see your face.


Bid. O you unworthy man! Good Sir, forgive me, for I am even ready to scold.


Lieut. This is the pretty young daughter that belonged to your Winter
Quarters, and so came away for love?


Bid. Yes, Sir; but if your Cornet had been true, I had been past Love by this
time: I had been married.


Lieut. Why, are all married people past love?


Bid. Yes, Sir, of the men's side especially: but, Sir, I am naturally very
merry, and shall be, if you will but do me the favor to think me very honest.


Lieut. I shall do you a great favor, if I do, for I never thought any body so
yet; but if it please you, I Will try your honesty, and then I Will give you my
opinion.


Bid. Be not rude when you try me, if you be, you were better venture on a
Maiden-Cat at midnight, for I shall scratch worse, and so mark you, not for my
humble servant, but my humble Catterwauler.


Lieut. I could meet such a creature of the house top, at any hour, and scratch,
and squeak, and tumble down together, and get the prettyest Kitlings as we fall.


Bid. I am glad to see you merry, Sir; for merry people are likely honest.


Lieut. Well, we will try; but, if you love mirth, consent to marry with this Dol:
there is money for us all. Exit.


Bid. Content, in faith. 'Twill be excellent sport to marry her, for I love
roguery well enough; but, the Devil's in it, she will know me to be a Girl.


Enter Dol, aloof. Cor. No, no; she shall not come near you, nor touch you,
till she is brought to bed; then two to one but the Troop marches away, and
leaves her behind; then I Am sure the Country-Bumpkins will knock her of the head.


Dol. There Is a Cornet in grain, in faith.


Bid. Troth, you are very charitable. Well, since my hand's in at wearing
Breeches, I Will do all the Offices of a man: I would I had wherewithal to
perform; for, by my troth, I am weary of our own Sex.


Dol. She cries, in faith: I like that well.


Cor. You little fool, you do not cry, I hope?


Bid. No, faith, that was but a tear by chance. You made me leave my friends
(you know) when you talked of marriage to me; but not one word on it now you
have made me your Be-de-Boy.


Dol. I know not what to say to that.


Cor. We Will talk of those things when we are settled.


Bid. By my troth, you have put me in such a gog of marriage, that it will not
out of my head: and yet I scorn to ask you to marry me, and I scorn to crack a
commandment with you: was not that basely done of you to tempt me? but I shall
scold, which is a thing I hate. O base fellow! you would be going of the score
with me, for my Virginity? Faith, Sir, I Would have you know it is worth ready money
at any time; and faith, I Will swear, it shall never go under Matrimony.


Dol. She is honest, in faith: I love a virtuous woman, though I am none my
self; like him that loved the sound of Greek, though he understood it not. She
is right honest, in faith.


Bid. Marry me, and then halloo Dog for thy Silver collar; but till then, I Will
gnaw my under-sheet to the bed-cord, before you shall have your will of me. I
am sometimes mad when I think how I left my friends: sometimes I could scold,
and sometimes I could cry, and the Devil take that good face of yours, I can do
neither for it.


Cor. Come, come, you trust your person with me, and why not your virginity?
How long do you think you can hold out at this stanch rate.


Bid. Faith, Sir, I can hold out till it is fit for no body: till I Am past the
use of man, before thou shall have it, shameless wretch.


Dol. She is certainly honest, and that is half our work done.


Cor. Come, prithee let us think of our mock-marriage with Dol, and after we will
be serious.


Bid. Why, I Am for that too; but yet I cannot choose but cry to see how false
you are, and how they talk at home of me, she is run away with a Soldier, and
that rascal will not marry her. O the Devil take you, I shall never recover
that credit again!


Cor. Come, we will cozen 'em all at last.


Bid. Nay, I believe thou wilt cozen more than me; for what woman can forbear
running away with thee, that sees those leering eyes, thou bewitching Devil,
thou!


Cor. O remember you hate scolding, Biddy.


Bid. I had forgot that, indeed.


Cor. Nay, Pr'ythee no more of this story.


Bid. Well, I will not: but truly I grow weary of your unkindness; and I am
served well enough, for scorning a man that doated on me.


Dol. A ha! I marry, that is somewhat indeed.


Bid. But I see, a Cornet with his flying Colors, and his word, Have at all,
goes a great way with a virgin: who can resist it? Exeunt.


Enter Captain, Lieutenant and Tell-troth. Capt. Lieutenant, stay and receive
Orders. But, Sir, how many companies are there in Thieves-den Garrison?


Tell. Never a Company; for not one of 'em will be called Captain of a Company,
but Captain of a Congregation. One is called Captain Holdforth, another,
Captain Tubtext; Rogues marked at the Font for Rebellion.


Capt. Rebellion is the first point of Reformation always.


Tell. They are formed to a new stamp of villainy, the last Impression; that
which put the Devil into a cold sweat: take the wickedest and worst-reputed men
you have, and turn 'em loose to Plunder, and I defy 'em to make the Tithe
of the spoil these hypocrites have done.


Capt. You are very bitter.


Tell. Malice cannot lay 'em open: they Lecture it thrice a week, and summon
the Country to come in: they that refuse, they take their goods, and leave 'em
never a groat; and then they say, They took but their own, for the good
creature is the inheritance of the people of Gad.


Capt. It seems, every Captain is a Teacher, and his own Company is his
Congregation; so that they hang and drag Religion among themselves. No doubt
most blasphemous villains.


Tell. Well, Sir, I Will home to night; march your Troop to Lavel to morrow; stay
till I come to you: So fare you well; and I wish a blessing upon your good
meaning. Exit.


Capt. Lieutenant, be careful how you march to morrow, and take heed, I hear of
no complaint. I Will to Oxford in the morning, to give an account of this fellow.


Lieut. I hope you will allow us our old harmless Drolleries.


Cap. I, most freely. Exit.


Enter Cornet. Cor. Lieutenant, half the Troop will be gone: Dol has laid her
child to 'em all, and they are for Horse and away.


Lieut. What shall we do?


Cor. Endeavor to prevent it, that is all that is to be said.


Exeunt. Enter a Trooper with his Arms, and Monsieur Raggou meets him. Rag. Ow
dee, ow dee, Monsieur Lancashire? vat make you have your arms so late at night?
is dear Alarm? be de enemy in de quarteer?


1 Troop. Worse than the enemy, the Devil's in the Quarter: our Dol is with
child, and would lay it to me; but I Will lay down my Arms, and go home.


Rag. Begar, me vil lay down my Arms, and go home too; Have begar, now I tink,
me have no home. Exit.


1 Troop. Captain, Captain. Within. Who Is there? what is the matter?


1 Troop. Thomas, it is I; the old Mutinier: tell the Captain I must speak with
him.

Within. He is but just laid down on the bed, to sleep a little. Come in the
morning.


1 Troop. Flesh deu blood, I will speak with him.


Captain above. Capt. What Is the matter? an Alarm?


1 Troop. I marry is there, Captain; there will be a whole Squadron upon you
presently.


Capt. 'Sdeath, my horse, presently.


1 Troop. The Enemy Dol is fallen into our Lancashire quarters, and has laid her
Child to our Squadron: so here is your Back and your Breast, Captain, and I Will go
home.


Enter four Troopers and Raggou. 2 Troop. Flesh, we will father no child, not we.


Rag. Begar, me vil fader no shild too. Hey Monsieur Captain, here be your one
Pistole.


3 Troop. Captain, we have brought you some Lancashire Arms; here is ten or
eleven Sowze Kidgiors for you.


Cap. What a Devil ayls the fellows? Above.


Rag. Begar, Capitain, me vill keep no shild: your dam Madam Dol have get us
all with a shild.


Capt. Run for the queen to come to me: I shall have all my Troop forsake me.
Stay, Sirs, I Will come to you: I must as well humor 'em as be severe, or else no
Soldiers.


Exit from above. Rag. Vell, me do know very vell how it sall be my shild or no.


4 Troop. Well, Monsieur, and I have a mark to know whether it be mine or no,
as well as you.


2 Troop. And so we have all.


Enter Captain and Cornet. Capt. My Masters, you might have had so much manners
to have held your complaints till morning; but however I have sent for Dol, and
I Will do you justice before I stir now. How now, Raggou; what are thy sleeves
stuffed withal so?


Rag. Begar, dis sleeve be my Stabla, dear be good Oata for mine Arse: and dis
sleeve be my Kitchen, dear be meat for my self. Vill you eat dis morning,
Capitain?


Capt. Foh, your sleeves stink abominably.


Rag. Zoun, do you call dat a stinka? it is true, it have a little huggo: begar,
dis sleeve keep your Troop alive; dis sleeve is de Physician to all de Troop:
When any man be sick, me set on some hot vatera, dear let my sleeve boil one
hour in it, and dat make de comfortable Pottage in de varle. Have not me cure
you all?


4 Troop. Yes, indeed, Captain, he has cured us twenty times.


Rag. Begar, Capitain, me have cure that dam whore Madam Dol, and yet for all
dat she lay her shild a top upon me.


Enter Dol. Capt. O, here she is. Now (you audacious queen) what makes you
Alarm these people thus? Who got you with child? speak, and speak truth I
charge you.


Dol. Why then I will speak truth, an't please you: good Captain do not fright
me.


Capt. Well then. Is it his child? did he get it?


Dol. I cannot say absolutely it is his, Captain.


Capt. Why, is it this fellows?


Dol. I cannot say directly it is his neither.


Capt. Is it Monsieur Raggou's?


Dol. I cannot say (to speak truth) it is his in particular.


Capt. Death, (you abominable queen) say whose it is, or I Will slit your nose.


Dol. Why, truly, I cannot lay it to any one man; but Gad is my judge, it is the
Troops child, Captain.


Capt. Was ever such a slut heard of!


Dol. I desire your worship to believe me in one thing: truly Captain, and as
Gad's my comfort, I have been as true and faithful a woman to the Troop, as
ever wife was to a husband, Captain.


Rag. O, ho, are you so? me tink now, Madam Dol, you are de whore de Babylon;
for one whole Troop may make a May Pole.


Capt. Why this is some honesty yet, that she is true to the Troop.


Rag. Old, Capitain, for oughta me see dis shild be your shild.


Capt. How prove you that, Sir?


Rag. Begar, she say de shild belong to de Troop, and you say de Troop belong
to you; derefore de shild is your shild, begar.


Capt. But I Will make some of you father it. There is none of you but have some
private mark to know it (to be your own) by.


4 Troop. Faith, Captain, if it be born with a Gauntlet and a Headpiece on,
I Will own it.


2 Troop. Troth, Captain, if it be born with a Bridle in its hand, and Boots
and Spurs on, I Will own it.


1 Troop. Troth, Captain, I never touched her; I was about it once; but the
jade laid her self so like a Constable tied neck and heels together, that I
went to plunder her, and she up and beat me like a Dog.


3 Troop. And, by my troth, if it be born leading a horse into the world, it is
my child, Captain.


Rag. Old: you every one have a mark to know your shild: Madam Dol, before my
Capitain, if your shild be born wid never a shart, den it be my shild; for me
have had no shart dis forty week.


Enter Ferret-farm. Ferret. By your leave, Captain.


Capt. What want you, Aspin?


Ferret. I come to free all these men, and to own the child, Captain.


Dol. How, own my child? the Rogue never touched me in his life, Captain.


Ferret. Ha, Dol! Confess, confess. Will you have the truth, Captain?


Capt. I, pr'ythee, with all my heart.


Ferret. Why, then I must confess she goes with two children: one I got on the
great trunks end, and the other on a staircase, by my life, Captain.


Cap. I never heard of staircase children before.


Rag. But vat if de shild be born wid no shart? you sall be hang before you
fader my shild.


Dol. Captain, if I were to dye to morrow, the rogue never touched me.


Ferret. I Will cudgel the rogue to death, Captain.


Capt. Hold, hold.


Rag. Let him come, Captain: me vill kill him, begar.


Draws and throws off his coat. Capt. Hold Dol. I charge you to put up,
Monsieur.


Rag. Me vill put up den.


Capt. Not one word more, I charge you, but all to your quarters. Be gone,
Cornet, it is time to sound to Horse; and take heed I hear of no complaints.


Rag. Begar, me never see all dat before; diable, me be Monsieur Raggou indeed:
me vill put on my coat presan, for begar if Monsieur Dung-hill-raker see me,
begar he vill put me in his sack. Exeunt.


Enter twelve Troopers at sick doors* two at a door. 1 Troop. Pox of this
French fool, what does he mean to give us all Ribbons? we do but laugh at him.


3 Troop. His business is to be admired; I admire he has bought him never a
shirt.


2 Troop. He is like the Hypocrites, that will not sing Psalms, because they have
never a Room to the street, they cannot be heard.


4 Troop. And so he will have never a shirt because it cannot be seen.


Enter Lieutenant, Flea-flint, Ferret-farm, and Burndorp. Lieut. Come, to
horse, to horse.


Flea. Lieutenant, pray let Monsieur Raggou ride before, and make the Quarters
to night.


Ferret. Pray do, Sir: for every fresh quarter we know you expect, and
therefore you must wink.


Lieut. But, Sirs, I dare not own you, for my Captain is so severe, that I
protest he will hang any man that plunders; especially you Flint-flayars, that he
has forgiven so often.


Bunr. Why, Sir, we will venture that, for we have a way to come off.


Lieut. Pray how? for if the Country complain (and they discover you) the world
cannot save you.


Flea. Why, Sir, you know Monsieur Raggou has a remarkable coat, with one
sleeve always full of Meat for himself, and the other full of Oats for his
horse.


Lieut. Well, what then?


Flea. Why, I have such a coat; and I will stuff up the sleeves, and rob like
him; I can spatter French, and have every thing so like him, that your self
cannot distinguish.


Lieut. Well, and how rob the rest?


Ferret. To satisfy you, in such disguises as the Devil cannot find us out in.


Lieut. You Will do well to keep in those disguises still, for in faith he will find
you at the long run else. Well, if you will venture, do; I Will aid you in what I
can.


Burn. If the Country complain, they come directly to you, Lieutenant.


Ferret. Then you bid 'em describe the men, and without peradventure they fall
upon the Frenchman, with his remarkable sleeves.


Lieut. But suppose he stand it out, and make it out where he was in the time
of plundering?


Flea. That Is shrewd, I confess.


Lieut. Come, I Will help you. If the Countrymen come in, and describe him, I Will
go directly to him, and tell him, I have Orders to seize him, for my Captain is
resolved to hang him: so out of my kindness to him, I Will let him make his
escape; and I Will warrant he will away as if the Devil drove him.


Ferret. But, suppose he will not go at that neither, for he is impudent enough.


Lieut. Ha! if he will not (let me see) I Will write a Letter and have it ready in
my hand, and we will pretend to search him for Letters of Intelligence, and so
clap the Letter into his pocket, and pull it out again, which shall be as if it
came from the enemy, and that (according to his promise, they hope) he will
betray the Troop.


Ferret. I marry, this is something: needs must he go, that the Devil drives.


Flea. Then much more must he go that the Lieutenant drives: I warrant he goes
to some purpose.


Ferret. Good; and when he is gone and fled for it --


Lieut. The case is plain, he is guilty: none but he could do it.


Burn. Why, this is Plot and Intrigue, Lieutenant, bravely laid, in faith.


Flea. Why then Esperanza Flea-flint.


Ferret. What work we will make


Enter Raggou and his Landlady. Lieut. Here comes the poor rogue and his
Landlady: he little thinks of our Tragical design against him. I Will step aside,
and see what work he will make. Exeunt.


Rag. Come Ladlady, bring me my Pistole, me must march.


Land. I, Sir, I Will fetch it you: it is safe enough. Exit.


Rag. Begar, me have steal my Pistole, me vill make her believe she vill be
hang, and den she vill endure plundering de betra. But (pox take her) me have
search, and she have noting to plundra.


Enter Landlady. Land. O Lord, what shall I do, Monsieur? your Pistolls gone.


Rag. Ha!


Land. It is gone, it is stolen.


Rag. Ha! you have carry my Pistole to de enemy (you dam whore) Begar, you sall
hang tree pair of Stair higher den Haman.


Land. Truly I know not what is become on it: I hope you have it your self.


Rag. O, you dam whore, me vill plundra your house for slander a moy.


Land. Good, Sir, I have nothing worth plundering, but a great Cheese.


Rag. Give me your Sheese, you devil you.


Land. Here it is, Sir, and all I have in the world.


Rag. Pox take you, give me one shilling for my Sheese.


Land. With all my heart: truly it is all the money I have.


Rag. Now give me my Sheese again, you dam whore: Vat sall me do wid dis Sheese?
it vill not go into my Kitchin-sleeve. Begar, for one shilling more you sall
have the Sheese indeed.


Land. You Will plunder it again?


Rag. Begar, it go again my conscience to take your Sheese, because it vill no
go in my Kitchen sleeve.


Land. I have not a penny to save my life.


Rag. Begar, me sell it to your Neighbor.

Enter Neighbor. Vat vill you give me for my Sheese.


Land. It Is my Cheese.


Rag. Begar she lie, me plunder it very fair from her.


Neighb. Then I hope I may buy plundered goods as well as other people. What Is
your price?


Rag. Begar, Dog-sheap: one silling.


Neighb. There Is your money.


Land. Will you offer to buy my Cheese?


Neighb. It Is my Cheese.


Land. I Will try that. Fight and exeunt.


Rag. Begar, fight till de devil part you.

Enter Lieutenant, and all the Troopers. O Monsieur Lieutenant!


Lieut. What do with that Cheese?


Rag. My Landlady love me vera dear, and she give me dis Sheese as a token to
wear for her sake.


Lieut. Raggou, you must needs go make the quarters for the Troop.


Rag. Wid all min heart. But, Lieutenant, dear be a favor for you. Gives him a
knot of Ribbon.


Lieut. But what is the meaning of this?


Rag. Begar, it be for my honer: me have lay out all my tree pone in Ribbon, and
give all de Troop my favor to wear in de Hat.


Lieut. What, and is all thy three pound gone in Ribbon, and bought never a
shirt? It Is very fine.


Rag. Begar, and so it be very fine. As me tell you before, who de devil see my
shart? all de varle see Monsieur Raggou in de Hat: every man vill admire, and
ask, who gave all that favor to de Troop? den dey cry, Monsieur Raggou de
French Cook: begar, dat sall be more honer for me, den ever you sall get by
your shart.


Lieut. Thou art a right Frenchman. My horse there, Groom: Let Us march away.


Exeunt. ACTUS III. SCAENA I.
Enter Flea-flint, Ferret-farm, and Burndorp. Flea. IS not this like him as can
be?


Burn. It Is like enough to delude the people with.


Flea. I Will rant and tear the ground, Boys. I will so plundra all de dam Bumpkin
Dog.


Ferret. That will pass: that is his word: it is like him.


Flea. Be you pretty modest, Sirs, and let me play the devil among 'em. I will
so terrify 'em with French-gibberish, that you shall appear no body amongst
'em.


Burn. Good: for the more active and terrible thou art, they will the more
remember thee when they come to complain, and so we shall be sure to escape.


Flea. Come away, Sirs; we must be quick, and ride hard for it. Exeunt.


Enter Raggou like Flea-flint. Rag. Begar, me have maka my self like
Flea-flint, and me vill burn one two Town as me go to make a de Quarter, and me
vill speak English, and me vill call my self Flea-flint: let me see. Come,
where is this Constable? where are all these damned dery damned Rogues and
Whores? I Will slay your very souls, you beastly Bawds. Begar, all dat be very
good English, and it be very much like Monsieur Flea-flint, and begar, me hope
he vill be taken and hang for dat, for begar me vill plundra de devel if me
catch him. Exit.


Enter Cornet and Biddy. Cor. Come, let me see, Biddy, how finely you will court
your Mistress now.


Bid. I can court her as all men court women; you shall lend me two or three
hundred oaths, your dissembling tongue, and your false heart, and then I cannot
miss the right way of wooing her.


Cor. This comes very near scolding, Biddy.


Takes her by the chin. Bid. You make me forget my self: look you now, would
any honest man take a Maid so kindly by the chin, and yet not mean to marry her?


Cor. Thou little fool, at that rate every man in the Kingdom would have ten
thousand wives: if you will part with your Maidenhead, have at you Biddy. Come,
come, you loving worm, I know I shall have it at last.


Bid. Nay, of my conscience I believe thee; yet I have held fast hitherto.


Cor. I am glad to hear that, in faith.


Bid. But I find I must look no more on those eyes; if I do, in faith I shall
flutter so long about the Candle, that I shall singe my Virgin wings at last: I
will therefore now conclude I am a man, and must go court my Mistress.


Enter Lieutenant and Dol. Cor. Here Is the Lieutenant and Dol, now behave your
self like a man.


Bid. Could you show me how to behave my self like an honest man? that is out of
your way I doubt.


Dol. Still better and better. This confirms me.


Bid. Well, give me thy hand: I Am resolved to be very virtuous, and very merry,
and never think more of thee.


Cor. Well, Mrs. Dol, here is one has consented in part to marry you.


Dol. Pretty creature!


Bid. Ugly Toad. Aside.


Dol. Well, and will you be content to ride before me lovingly a days?


Lieut. I, and behind thee too; ride thee all the points of the Compass, wench,
fear not.


Bid. O Lord, but is there so many ways of riding, Lieutenant?


Lieut. Have thou lived to these years, and not known that yet?


Cor. Well, but when will you marry?


Bid. Nay, by my faith, let us woo first, and then marry: because I believe
there is more pleasure in wooing than in the effects of it.


Cor. Why do you not begin and court her then?


Bid. Nay, by my faith, let her begin first.


Lieut. That Is not the mode for the woman to woo the man.


Bid. That is, if the man love the woman; but that is not my case: for it is she
loves me, not I her.


Lieut. O, but in complaisance you must begin: It is not civil to put a woman
to it.


Bid. Not I* faith: pray forsooth do you begin.


Dol. Indeed it shall be yours.


Bid. I protest it shall be yours: therefore begin, or I vow I Will break off the
match.


Dol. Nay, rather than so, I Will begin. Sweet, Sir, I am much, and greatly
ashamed.


Bid. Were you ever so before, Mistress?


Dol. Yes, truly, I have been ashamed; but it is so long since --


Bid. That you have forgot it, I suppose. But I disturb you, forsooth.


Dol. No disturbance, sweet Sir. (I want sine words to express my love in.) I
am sorry that the Cart-wheel of Fortune should drive me into the Coach-box of
your affection.


Bid. Fortune will take it scurvily to call her wheel a Cart-wheel: besides,
Coach-box and Cart-wheel did never agree in this world yet.


Dol. I am not able to express my love as it deserves; but I have four hundred
pound in gold, if that will do it.


Bid. By my faith you express your self very well, and I will woo you heartily
for it. Madam, you have struck me with such a desperate Dart, from those fair
somewhat or other that you have about you. -- Are you sure you have the gold
you spoke of?


Dol. Yes, my dear heart, very sure.


Bid. Then if I do not love you above all women-kind, perish me, and sink me,
refuse me, rot me, and renounce me.


Cor. Hold, hold, hold: do you call this wooing?


Bid. Yes faith; I had a Sister cast away with the very same speech, therefore
do not interrupt me, for I know all mankind wooes thus. And, as I was swearing,
Madam, the Devil take --


Lieut. Enough, enough, enough, enough.


Bid. But, Madam, are you satisfied?


Dol. I am, to the full: and do believe you.


Bid. But, if you please, Madam, now my hand is in, to accept of a hundred or
two of oaths more.


Dol. No, no, no; by no means: I believe you without 'em, and I am yours.


Bid. I have not sworn out half my Alphabet yet.


Dol. You have done sufficiently, indeed.


Bid. Well, give me your hand then; you are the first woman certainly, that was
ever gained with so little swearing.


Cor. Thou have wooed her, and won her most bravely.


Bid. Have I? why, then I Am thine. But hark you, Lieutenant and Cornet, we will
be married privately, and in the dark, because her face shall not turn my
stomach. Madam, I have one ill humor, I cannot abide a woman with a bare face;
therefore, if I could buy you a masque that would stick to your face, and never
come off, I believe I should love you very well.


Dol. I Will have a Masque, or what you please, my dear:
Next bout, I hope, will be my turn to jeer.

Lieut. Come, let us in, and visit our new Quarters.


Exeunt. Enter Raggou making Quarters, Constables and Neighbors. 1 Neighb. I
beseech your worship do not quarter so many upon me: I Am but a poor man.


2 Neighb. Alas poor man! you have over-charg'd him. Rogue, he has more money
than half the Town.


Rag. You be a dam Dog to betray your Neighbor: who would tink to find de
devel in a Country-Bumpkin! Begar, me vill make use of your develry.


1 Neighb. I pray your worship take four horse from me.


Rag. You be a dam rich Dog: begar, you sall have a Squadron upon you, if you
no understand me.


1 Neighb. How should I understand you?


Rag. You be a dam Dog: begar, me vill put twenty horse upon your back till you
understand a moy. Vat vill you give me, if I take all de horse from you?


1 Neighb. Indeed I Will pray for your worship.


Rag. O ho! be dat all? do you understand noting but prayer? Devil you fool vat
be prayer to de Quarteer Master? but can you pray in French?


1 Neighb. Alas, not I, an't please you.


Rag. Den, begar, your English prayer vill no save a Frenchman; you sall have
ten Arse more fo dat.


2 Neighb. An't please you, Monsieur, I understand you.


Rag. You sall have no Arse upon you.


3 Neighb. And I understand you very well, Sir.


Rag. Begar, you have very mush, a great deal of understanding.


3 Neighb. Here are more of our Neighbors that understand you, Sir.


Rag. Begar, den me understand too: get all your money togedra, and put in my
pocket your self, den me can swear begar, me never take no penny of you, a ha!


3 Neighb. We will do it gladly, Sir, and pray for you too.


Rag. Begar, me no care for dat. But you dam Dog, that no understan a moy, sall
quarteer all de Troop; and den look to your wife, for begar Flea-flint vill so
get your shild for you.

Exeunt.
Enter Flea-flint, Ferret-farm, Burn-dorp, Lieutenant, Cornet, Raggou, and Dol.
Burn. Lieutenant, we have done the work.


Ferret. We have burnt seven Towns.


Flea. We have raised fourscore pound.


Lieut. You Are dextrous at your trade, you have made quick dispatch: but peace,
we will share anon. Aside. Now you're welcome. Come, where is the Boores of the
house? we will see what my quarters can afford. Where are you all? What house
here, ho?


Enter Woman and Maid. Woman. What want you, Sir?


Lieut. Art thou the woman of the house?


Woman. Yes, Sir, a poor woman.


Lieut. Art thou poor? what a pox do I in such a quarter? why, Quarter-mast.
Raggou, is this the best house in the Village?


Rag. Zoun, hang 'em, they are very rich Dog; but you sall have no meat for your
self, no Oat for your Arses, but her dam husband vill feast you all wid pray
for you.


Lieut. Diable* you Rotterdam whore, I Will make you bring out your things:
where is your Cowes, your Calves, and your sheep?


Woman. Alas, we have none, Sir.


Cor. Have thou any drink, good woman?


Woman. No, truly, we have none.


Flea. Nor have thou no wine, nor strong-water, good woman?


Woman. No, indeed, we have none.


Rag. Why den, a pax take you, good woman.


Lieut. No Hens, nor Turkies, nor Swine, nor nothing?


Rag. Hang her, begar she hide every ting, when dey hear me come to make a de
quarteer.


Ferret. Send to the Market Town, and buy provision, and be hanged, or I Will set
fire of your house, you damned dery damned whore.


Rag. Zoun, dis dam coward, how he domineer over de Bumpkin woman!


Woman. Alas, we have no money, Sir, not we.


Ferret. What do thou tremble and shake so for? what a pox ails thee?


Cor. What shall we do? threatening will not serve the turn.


Lieut. Do but second me, and I Will make 'em bring out all they have, I warrant
you: do but talk as if we used to eat children.


Ferret. It Is enough.


Lieut. Why, look you, good woman, we do believe you are poor, so we will make a
shift with our old Diet. You have children in the Town?


Woman. Why do you ask, Sir?


Lieut. Only have two or three to Supper. Flea-flint, you have the best way of
cooking children.


Flea. I can powder 'em, to make you taste your liquor: I Am never without a
dried child's tongue or ham.


Woman. O bless me!


Flea. Mine Is but the ordinary way, but Ferret-farm is the man: he makes you
the savouriest pie of a child's chaldron that ever was eat!


Lieut. A pox, all the world cannot cook a child like Monsieur Raggou.


Rag. Begar me tink so; for vat was me bred in de King of Mogul's kitchen for,
tere ve kill twenty shild of a day? Take you one shild by both his two heels,
and put his head between your two leg, den take your great a knife and slice
off all de buttack, so fashion; begar, dat make a de best Scotts Collop in de
varle.


Lieut. Ah! he makes the best Pottage of a child's head and purtenance! but you
must boil it with Bacon: woman, you must get Bacon.


Ferret. And then it must be very young.


Lieut. Yes, yes. Good woman, it must be a fine squab child, of half a year
old: a man child, do here?


Woman. O Lord! yes, Sir.


Rag. Do you hear? get me one she-shild, a littel whore-shild, and save me all
de lamb-stone and sweetbread, and all de pig petty-toe of de shild: do you
hear you roundhead whore?


Woman. I, Sir, I. O that ever I should live to see such men! Exit.


Lieut. I warrant you it works; if there be provision in the Country, we shall
have it.


Flea. How the whore trembled for fear!


Cor. We shall have all the women in the Village about our ears: hide-bound
whores! it is a question whether they will part with their meat or their children
first.


Lieut. This foolery will be noised about the Country, and then the odium will
never be taken off.


Cor. Why, what can they make on it? all understanding people will know it to be
mirth.


Lieut. I know they will; but the envious Priests will make fine talk on it, and
make a great advantage on it too: though they know it to be nothing but mirth,
they will preach their Parishioners into a real belief of it, on purpose to make
us odious. They Will preach against any thing: I heard a scandalous Sermon, of two
hours long, against Prince Rupert's Dog.


Cor. Come, it is no matter what hypocrites preach: let us see what the event
will be. Exeunt.


Enter Women in a fright, alarmed by their Neighbor. Woman. Look to your
children; if ever you mean to see your children alive, hide your children:
they will eat your children.


1 Neighb. Woe is me! what is the matter, Neighbor?


Woman. I say, hide your children.


2 Neighb. Ah! good Neighbor, what is the matter?


Woman. Why, run away with your children.


3 Neighb. Why, that ever we were born! what is the matter?


Woman. They will eat your children.


4 Neighb. O, these bloody Cavaliers! how, eat our children?


Woman. They talk of boiling your children.


All. O mercy on us!


Woman. And roasting your children.


All. O bloody villains!


Woman. And baking your children.


1 Neighb. O Hellish Cavaliering Devils?


Woman. There Is nothing to be thought of, but hiding your children.


1 Neighb. I would mine were in my belly again.


Woman. That Is not safe: they will search there in the first place, to be sure.


2 Neighb. I Will hide mine in the straw.


Woman. And so we shall have one of 'em lay you down a top of it, and smother
one child whilst he is getting another. I say, run away with your children.


3 Nighb. O bloody wretches! I have heard much of their getting children; but
never of their eating children before.


4 Neighb. Neighbor, their getting of children might be born with; but eating
'em was never heard of.


Woman. They have got a Cook from the great Mogull, on purpose to kill
children: and they talk of roasting their haunches, and baking the chaldron,
and broyling the chine.


Maid. And making Pottage of the child's head and purtenance.


All. O deliver our poor children.


Woman. Do you stand whining and crying? Fetch out your Sheep, and your Calves,
your Hens, your Pigs, and your Geese, and your Bacon; for there is no other way
to save your children.


All. I, with all our hearts.


1 Neighb. I Will bring two fat Sheep.


2 Neighb. I Will bring Turkies and Hens.


3 Neighb. I have a brave fat Calf worth eleven Nobles, by my troth I had as
lieve part with one of my children.


Woman. O you uncharitable beast! go fetch your Calf. Run every body, and bring
your things to my house, as fast as you can drive. Exeunt.


Enter Lieutenant, Cornet, Flea-flint, Ferret-farm, Burn-dorp and Raggou.
Lieut. Meat, or Children, to supper for a wager, Gentlemen?


Cor. Meat, for a wager, if they have it.


Lieut. I, without doubt; for never was women and children so alarmed in this
world.


Flea. When they were got together, and told their children would be eaten;
they set up their throats, and made a more horrid noise than a Welsh Hubbub, or
an Irish Dirge.


Enter Nurse with two Children. Ferret. How now! what think you if we be put to
eat Children indeed? By this light, here is a woman with two Children.


Lieut. We shall be cross-bit with these Country whores* what shall we do?


Rag. Begar, me vill help you off: you sall eat no shildren.


Nurse. By your leaves, your good worships: I make bold to bring you in some
provisions.


Ferret. Provisions! where, where is thy provisions?


Nurse. Here, an't please you: I have brought you a couple of fine fleshy
Children.


Cor. Was ever such a horrid whore! what shall we do?


Nurse. Truly, Gentlemen, they are as fine squab Children: shall I turn 'em up?
they have the bravest brawny buttocks!


Lieut. No, no. But, woman, art thou not troubled to part with thy children?


Nurse. Alas, they are none of mine, Sir; they are but Nurse-children?


Rag. Dear be a dam whore for you.


Lieut. What a beast is this! Whose children are they?


Nurse. A Londoners, that owes me for a years nursing. I hope they will prove
excellent meat: They Are Twins too.


Rag. A ha! but, begar, we never eat no Twin-shild; de Law forbid dat: but hark
you, have any woman with shild in de Town?


Nurse. Yes, half a dozen.


Rag. Lieutenant, it be de best meat in de varle: begar, a woman with shild is
better meat den one hen with egg at Shrove-tide.


Enter Landlady, and women with provision. Lieut. How now! what news, Landlady?


Woman. Here is a great many poor women that have brought in provisions, in
hope you will spare their children.


1 Neighb. We beseech your worships spare our poor children, and you shall want
for nothing our Country can afford.


Lieut. Good woman, we are content to spare your children, but you must get us
some strong drink.


2 Neighb. I, I; we will get you every thing you want.


Lieut. Why, then, go all home, and be contented; for we promise you, if we eat
any children, it shall be the two Nurse-children.


All. Ah, -- preserve you all, Gentlemen.


Rag. Take some comfort; for if we should eat your shildren, you sall no be a
loser by dat: for look you, good woman, how many shildren we eat in a Parish,
so many shild we are bound to get before we leave it: dat is very fair.


Exeunt women. Lieut. Why, is not this better than fasting?


Flea. Well, and what harm is there in all this?


Cor. None in the world. Come, let us in, and dress our supper.


Rag. Me will go eat at my own quarteer. It be a brave ting to be in Office:
begar de Clowns worship me, as if me were dear great God Bumpkin. Exeunt.


ACTUS IV. SCENA I.
Lieutenant, Flea-flint, Ferret-farm and Burndorp. Flea. LIeutenant, here is all
our Country crew that we plundered yesterday.


Ferret. But, our comfort is, they know us not; but cry out of a Frenchman,
with two coat-sleeves, stuffed like two Country bag-puddings.


Lieut. This cunning rogue has cross-bit you all: he has been plundering as he
went to make his Quarters, and in a Buff-coat too; for here is a dozen fellows
at my Quarter, and they all describe a rogue so like thee, that I protest thou will suffer for it. Nay, the rogue called himself* Flea-flint, too.


Flea. Ouns, what shall we do, Sir?


Lieut. Upon my word, this is no jeasting business.


Ferret. 'Sheart, over-reached thus!


Lieut. You must even think of overreaching him again. You must first think of
stopping the clamor of the Bumpkins; that is your first point of security.


Flea. But, Lieutenant, how should we do it? Faith, you must try your wits, and
stick to us.


Lieut. I knew you would venture so far, 'twould come to my turn to fetch you
off at last, Rogues.


Flea. Why, Sir, my man and his both shall swear Raggou borrowed a Buff-coat of
them.


Lieut. Let him be gone first, and then you may swear any thing. One of you go
tell the Bumpkins, I am searching for the Rogue: the rest go with me to Raggou.


Exit Ferret-farm. Burn. This is his quarter.


Lieut. This? Knock: it seems to be the best house in the Town. Knocks.


Maid. Who would you speak with? Within.


Lieut. With Monsieur Raggou.


Maid. Sir, he gave us a strict charge to let no body speak with him.


Lieut. But I must, and will speak with him.


Maid. Indeed, Sir, he charged us, upon pain of his displeasure, not to disturb
him.


Lieut. Pain of his displeasure? what an impudent rogue's this! Show us, show
us.

Raggou is discovered in a Taffata bed, with a Back, Breast and Headpiece on.
How now! what, in Taffata Curtains? the impudent rogue makes me laugh. You,
rascal, Raggou; look in his Headpiece too.


Rag. Who de devel disturb me? you dam whore, you know vat me do to you last
night?


Lieut. Why, what was that you did to her last night?


Rag. Begar me lie with her at three motion, as de Musquetier shoot of his Gun;
make ready, present, and give fire.


Lieut. O my word that is good discipline.


Rag. Begar, she sall make ready for you, if you will present and give fire.


Lieut. But how came it that I had not this good Quarter?


Rag. Because me knew me should make a de Quarter but one night, and so, begar,
me make a de best use of my time, as all de whole varle do too.


Lieut. But what a Rogue art thou: why do thou lie in such a bed in thy Arms?


Rag. For two gran reason, Sir. First, because my French louse sall go great
way about before he come to de clean sheet: next, because a de dam English flea
shall not bite a my sweet French body.


Lieut. Well, Maid, go down: I must speak with him.


Exit Maid. Rag. Vat you have wid me, Lieutenant?


Lieut. Faith, out of my love, I would save thee from hanging.


Rag. Hang! for vat? begar, hang me if me deserve, so you hang all dat deserve
a de hang; begar, dat is de whole Troop, Lieutenant and all.


Lieut. Here you plunder in one shape, and there in another: sometimes, like
Flea-flint, in Buff; sometimes like your self: that here is all the Country
come in with such horrid complaints. Nay, they say you ravish women too.


Rag. Lieutenant, begar, me never ravish but one old woman, and she give me
five shilling for my pain.


Lieut. Nay, here is worse than all that, my Captain has intelligence you're a
dangerous man, and hold correspondence with the enemy.


Rag. Me sall be hang, Lieutenant, if you tink so.


Lieut. Nay, it is so; I have orders to search you. -- Put that in his Pocket,
[aside] and pull it out again.


Rag. Ah, begar me have no long life before me be hang.


Burn. O, Sir! are you good at that? he was going to convey Letters out on's
pocket.


Rag. Begar, he lie Lieutenant, me have no Lettra; begar, hang a me, if me can
write an read: de Horn-book be de Hebrew to me, begar.


Lieut. Search him, search him.


Search, and pulls a Letter out, and an Engine. Burn. Here Is a Letter,
Lieutenant; and an Engine, I think.


Flea. What Is this?


Lieut. O, you need not write and read if you have this: I Will be hanged, if this
be not the key of his character he writes to the enemy with.


Rag. Dat make a de French Pie, and make a de Garniture for de Dish, dat be all.


Lieut. Let Us see; the case is plain; he sent his intelligence in characters of
paste. This very thing will hang him: but let us read the Letter.


Rag. Begar, me have no Lettra: de devel send it in my pocket.


Lieut. Reads. Monsieur Raggou; in hope that under this poor disguise of a
French Cook you will show a rich faith --


Rag. Vat he mean by fait? begar, me have no fait.


Lieut. Reads. And when you have delivered up your Troop to us, the Parliament
will own you as your self, and give you the respects due to your great and
honorable family.


Rag. Devel, me have no honorable, nor family neider, begar.


Flea. The case is plain, you are of some great family.


Rag. Lieutenant, me confess me come of de King of France Kitchen, of de
honorable family of de Turn-spit: Begar, me tell you true, dear be all my
family, and my honorable too.


Burn. O, Sir, it is a very cunning fellow; my Captain sends word he used to be
conversant with the Roundheads, and pray with them.


Rag. The Devel take a me, me never pray in my life, me swear altogedra in de
King of France Kitchen.


Lieut. I love you so well, that I Would be loath to hang you, Monsieur; therefore
I Am content to let you escape: but be sure you be not taken.


Rag. Begar den hang a moy, for my Arse vill no go very far.


Lieut. Well, pray be gone, and say you found a friend.


Rag. Gad a bless you, Lieutenant: ven me come in France, zoun, me vill so pray
for you.


Flea. And yet you say you never prayed in your life.


Rag. Begar, me tank Gad, me never have occasion to pray till just now. Adieu,
adieu -- a -- Who send me dat dam Lettra in my pocket? Exit.


Lieut. Well, now we must keep the Bumpkins here till he is gone, and then give
'em orders to search the Countries for him.


Burn. And that will whidle them as well as if you had given them their money
again. Exeunt.


Enter Governor, Captain Holdforth, Mr. Tell-troth, and Captain Tub-text. Hold.
In truth, drinking is a harmless recreation, so we proceed not to drunkenness.


Tub. Pray how far-forth may we proceed in drink? for I would take no more than
is fit to be taken with a safe conscience.


Tell. Why, Captain Tub-text, if thy belly were as large as thy conscience, by
that computation, the great Tun at Heidelberg would be just thy mornings
draught.


Tub. Here is old Tom Tell-troth: ha, ha, ha.


Hold. In truth, if he were not very faithful, we should never away with his
boldness.


Tub. Well said, Captain Holdforth. But to the question; how far may we proceed
in drink?


Govern. As far as the innocent recreation of knocking one another down with
Cushions come to; it is the exercise of our superior Officers.


Hold. I have observed, indeed, they do three things together: they drink, then
practice Pulpit-faces,


Tell. (To cheat the people with.


Tub. Ha, ha, ha: in truth you hit so home.)


Hold. And the third is throwing of Cushions. The practicing and dissembling of
holy looks, is of great use and design.


Tub. And drinking, and throwing Cushions, a great refreshing to the body.


Govern. As for Example. Throws a Cushion.


Hold. Ha, ha, ha. I have seen our Grandee throw a Cushion at the man with the
great Thumb, and say, Colonel, will thou be a Cobbler again? Throws a Cushion.


All. Ha, ha, ha.


Tub. Come, here is to you, Governor, you Colonel Goldsmiths, with a conscience
as dirty as a Blacksmith: will you sell Thimbles again? Throws a Cushion.


All. Ha, ha, ha.


Hold. Noble Colonel, will thou brew Ale again? Throws, etc. What an
everlasting cheat is Reformation and false Doctrine! It has raised us from
Cobblers to Commanders.


Tub. There is no other way to raise Rebellion, but by Religion.


All. Ha, ha, ha.


Govern. I never knew the use of Religion before.


Tub. The women tickle like Trouts at it: ha, ha, ha.


All laugh. Tell. I believe the Country will find it so. For I hear of twenty
wenches with child.


Govern. In truth, I wonder at the witchcraft of it; for notwithstanding the
people have been bit through the chine-bone with it, yet for all that, before
the old wound is healed, they are ready to run after the Lanthorn of new lights
again: ha, ha, ha.


Tell. Well, Sirs, since you are in such an ingenious way of confessing, tell
me one thing, do not you wish your Garrison a fire, so you were at home, with
all the wealth you have got?


Tub. Thought's free; but talk no more of that: these are both treacherous
Rogues, I dare not trust 'em*


Tell. Well, you are merry, Sirs; but faith be plain, Sirs: what says my
seeming Saint that drinks by the conscience? Do not wish thy self at home,
wallowing in thy plunder?


Hold. You might find a better name for it. Hark in your ear: we are all such
treacherous Rogues, we dare not trust one another: but we will talk in private.


Govern. But our Contribution-women will come in anon.


Hold. Ha, ha, ha: in truth, they edify as one would have 'em.


Tell. Well, now you ought to be serious, and consider the enemies approaching.


Tub. In truth a good occasion to fetch in all the Goods and Chattels of the
Country, upon pretense of securing them, and so make conditions with the enemy
to march away with them. I see we shall be rascals to the last gasp.


Hold. And so we shall have provisions for a long Siege.


Govern. I Will make your Siege short enough.


Exit Governor and one Captain. Tub. You are faithful; they are Rogues: Read
that, and tell me whether you will undertake or no.


Gives Tell-troth a Letter, and exit. Tell. How! very good. Is It possible! This
is a greater Rogue in his own nature than the Devils invention can make him: he
would not only betray his trust, but deliver up all the rest of the Garrison to
mercy; conditionally that he may have all their wealth, and safe convoy to his
own house. I need lay no Plot, it is done to my hand. I love the King well; yet
my own ends are mingled, because I have a Mistress among 'em, and cannot have
her but by serving the King: and I believe most men have their reasons for
their Loyalty as well as I; so that, good King, wheresoe'er you see me, trust
to your self. Yet I will do something. What if I betrayed this Rogue, and his
Letter, to the Governor to secure my self? but then, if they have a mind to
deliver up the Garrison, 'twill make 'em shie of me I find I have a hard task
on it.


Enter Governor. Govern. O, Tell-troth, I came to ask thee a question; and
what think thou?


Tell. Troth, I know not.


Govern. To know whether thou love me truly, or no.


Tell. If you be serious, I could be angry with you, for raising such a doubt:
to show you that I love you (I do not say your Cause, but you) read there; look
you, one of your Captain Rogues gave me that Letter, and the other gave me a
whisper to the same purpose too.


Govern. Is It possible! What Is to be done with these villains?


Tell. Something must be done, they will betray you else.


Govern. I thank thy honesty, I find it so.


Tell. Shall I speak boldly? serve 'em in their own kind.


Govern. In Troth, I had it in my head before to betray 'em, for the Rogues are
rich.


Tell. Come, let not you and I be shie of one another, do it yet.


Govern. Art thou in earnest?


Tell. By my life; and I will put you in a way too.


Govern. Let Us in, and consider how: had we best secure 'em.


Tell. No: first command their two Companies out, then draw 'em into several
parties, and then with your own Company disarm 'em, and so clap them up and
their Officers; then show 'em the reason (this Letter:) when that is done, send
the Letter to the Parliament, and write how you have secured 'em: which will so
ingratiate you with them, that you will never be suspected for betraying on it your
self.


Govern. My worthy friend, shall I fall on my knees and worship thee?


Tell. Let Us be wise, and about our business. Exeunt.


Enter Cornet and two Troopers. Cor. Where have you been, Sirs?


1 Troop. Why, we have been to take Flea-flint: my Captain is resolved to hang
him.


Cor. For what?


2 Troop. For plundring, and so forth; but the Rogue has intelligence of it,
and is gone: but he is in as bad a case as Raggou; for we must send Huy and Cry
after him.


Exeunt. Enter Raggou. Rag. Ah, Ian povera de moy: my Arse can no carry me from
de danger of de hang a de moy; and yet me have spur two such great hole in his
rib, dat you may creep quite trow him. Me must go change mine coat, and mine
hat, begar, me sall be known by dat. Vat come here now?

Enter Frenchman with a Show. What, come?


French. Come, who see my fine shite? my rare shite, who see my sine shite? my
rare shite.


Rag. Monsieur, where you go wid your shite?


French. To de Bristol Fair, Monsieur.


Rag. Dis Frenchman look as if he will be hang, begar, me vill put a de sheat
of de hang upon him. Monsieur, Begar me have de very sine shite too, and it
vill come de Bristol Fair too: it be de great vonder of de varle, it be de
great fat Dromadory; you hear of dat?


French. We, we: all de varle know de fat Dromadory.


Rag. Begar, you and me vill join partiner in de Fair: because you be my
Countryman.


French. I, Monsieur, and tank you too.


Rag. We vill give out in de Bill of de two famous Frenchman: one inventra de
show of all Trade, and de oder make a de invent of de fat Dromadory.


French. Monsieur, wid all my heart.


Rag. Vera good: you sall go take a de best House in de Town: dear be two
piece, two Iacoby for you; get some vera good dinner. You shall take a my coat
and de hat, and leave your show wid me, for my wagon will come wid my
Dromadory presan.


French. I had good luck to light of this Frenchman. Aside.


Rag. Begar, me have betra luck to light of dis Frenchman. So, help me wid your
wast-coat: vera good. So, now make all de haste in de varle. Adieu, adieu. Exit
Frenchman. So, now, begar, me be very safe: but how de devil sall me show mine
shite? Begar, me forget to ask vat language all de Puppet in de show speak.
Parla Francois Monsieur Puppey? Owieda. A ha! very good.


Enter Constables. 1 Constable. Sure we shall catch this fellow at last; for we
hear of him every where.


2 Constable. I, his two sleeves stuffed, and his French Hat edged with Ribbons
will discover him.


Rag. Diable, dear be de Constable and Mr. Huy-Cry come to catch a me. -- Who
see my shite, my rare shite, my sine shite? Begar, me sall shite my self indeed.


1 Constable. What a pox does he mean?


2 Constable. He would have you see his show.


1 Constable. Come, faith let us. You fellow, come, let us see your show.


Rag. How sall me do now? begar, me must show it as well as me can.


2 Constable. Sirrah, did not you see a Frenchman pass by?


Rag. Frenchman? Vat have he upon him?


1 Constable. Why, he has a greasy coat with the sleeves stuffed out.


Rag. A pox take him, begar he rob me just now of two piece, all me have in de
varle, dat make a me cry.


2 Constable. O Rogue, Rascal! alas to day! give him a Crown, Churchwarden, we are
at the Parish charge.


1 Constable. Come, do not cry, poor fellow: let us see thy shite; there is a crown
for thee.


Rag. A Gad bless you. Here be de brave shite of de varle: here be de King of
Spain play on de Bag-pipe to his Privy Council. Dat's a very good jest. Den
dear be de King of Solomon, he give judgment upon de vise shild. Dear is de
first Act. Now put on your hat, and look upon all de Lady.

Iam more cum povera bla cum povera, Plays and sings.
Iam, Iam, Iam, Iam Tomba net,
Iam Iang Tomb net equbla.
Now here be de Queen of Swiveland, she sit in great Majesty: her leg hang over
de chair, vera full of temptation, make your chops watra. Vera good jest. Den
dear be de whore of Babylon, she make great love to de May Pole in de Stran.
Second Act.

Iam more cum povera, etc.
Plays and sings. Dear be de King of Denmarks and Norway, learning to juggle of
de Bishop of Munsera. Dat's a vera good jest. Dear be de silent Ministra, he
make a de long preach in de Playhouse. Dear is tree Act: dat is all.


2 Constable. I thought your Plays had always had five Acts.


Rag. Dey be de great Puppet have five Act; de little Puppet have but tree. Vill
you go catch dis dam dog for me, and get a my money for me again, my two Iacoby?
Begar, me be undone, if you no catch dis dam dog for me.


1 Constable. We Will away: we will have him I warrant thee.


Exeunt. Rag. Begar, me be very sine sheat, if it vill hold out. But hold a;
vat if dey catch my Coat? Begar, den dey vill hang a my Coat: but dam dog vill
confess me have his Show den; begar, me sall be hang wid mine Coat. Begar me
vill put away mine Show.

Enter Flea-flint, with Huy and Cry after him. Who de Devil is dat?


Flea. A pox on it, I must be robbing alone, and without my Lieutenants advice!
I must be careful, or suffer for it. The Rogues follow me with Huy and Cry; I
am not able to go further, I must change my clothes. How now? what fellow's
this? 'Sheart, would I could persuade him out of his Show, and take my Cloak
for it.


Rag. Begar, would me could persuade him to take my Show, and give me de Cloak
for dat.


Flea. Come hither, honest fellow.


Rag. Devil, it is Flea-flint. Ah me be povera de moy, begar, me be half hang
already. Me vill no speak French begar, den he vill know me: me vill belch
Dutch at him. Yaw min here,


Flea. Come hither honest man: what is that, a Show?


Rag. Yaw min here. Begar me vill slit my mouth from one ear to de odra, to
speak good Dutch; and den, when me speak French, begar me vill sew it up again:
dere's a vera good trick to save a my life.


Flea. Fellow, will thou sell thy Show?


Rag. Yaw min here. Begar, dis Dutch make me vera sick. Look! begar, every time
me cry, Yaw min here, dear come up a pickle Herring with it. Yaw, look dear it
go.


Flea. Art thou a Dutchman?


Rag. Yaw verathticke.


Flea. Where hab you de neder Lands go Weston?


Rag. Diable, vat sall me say? Begar me have no more Dutch.


Flea. Hab you de neder Lands go west Lanceman?


Rag. Ick haben de Hoigh Dutch Lander go weston Lanceman.


Flea. Nay, it may be what Dutch it will, for I can speak no more.


Rag. Ick maken weel vander slapan can Helder Hought.


Flea. But will thou sell thy Show?


Rag. Yaw, Yaw, ick vill van hundred Gilder haben.


Flea. That Is ten pound; that is too much. I would I had it at any rate.


Rag. Begar, never fear, you sall have it.


Flea. Will thou take five pound?


Rag. Neave ick: ick maken de Show my self, and ick maken dat better as dis,
and dat's better as dat, and dat's better as all begott.


Flea. I hear 'em coming: here is ten pound for thee, and I Will give thee my
Cloak to boot and Hat.


Rag. Dear be my Show and my Cap: me tank you Lanceman. So, dis dam Rogue never
do no good in all his life before; and me hope, begar, he vill be hang for dat.
Exit.


Flea. Now, what shall I do with this Show; for I cannot show it? why, if any
body would see it, I must say it is locked up; the key is gone before to Bristol
Fair: that is all I have for it.


Enter Constables looking for Flea-flint. 4 Constable. Come, Sirs, we shall have
him at last.


3 Constable. Stay, Sirs: what fellow's this? who are you, Sir?


Flea. A poor man, Master, going with my Show to the Fair, to get a penny, and a
Rogue has robbed me of all I have, almost ten pound.


4 Constable. O damned Rogue! Had he not a gray Cloak and Hat.


Flea. I, (wicked villain) the same, Master.


3 Constable. It Is the same Rogue we are looking for, we shall have him in the Fair,
I warrant you. Let Us away.


Exeunt Constables. Flea. This rogue thinks himself so safe now, and he will be
hanged sure enough if they catch him.


Enter the first Constables with him that had Raggou 's Clothes. 1 Constable. Look
you, there is the notorious Rogue with the Show: take him.


Flea. What would you have with me, Gentlemen?


French. Begar, me vill have my Show from you.


Flea. Pox take you and your Show; a damned Rogue that had it, has rob me of
ten pound, and my Hat and Cloak.


1 Constable. Come, these are both Rogues: bring 'em away.


1 Watch. Hold, it will do us no good to have them hanged, what if we plunder
them as they use to do us.


Constable. It Is a very good motion, do you hear, we are to ask you a question,
will you be hanged, or be plundered?


Flea. I Will be hanged before I part with my money.


2 Watch. Then let us hang him, we can take his money when he is dead.


Con. Then do you hang him.


Enter Bumpkin passing over the Stage. 1 Watch. Not I, I know not how to hang
him.


2 Watch. Troth hang him your self, if you will have him hanged.


Constable. Do here brother Bumpkin? I Will give thee an Angel, and hang this
fellow. Constable calls to the Bumpkin.


Bumpk. It is not worth while for one, but I Will take Angels a piece to hang you
all.


Constable. Hang you raskal, come there fall on boys, and plunder him. Plunder
Flea-flint.


Flea. Pray you, Gentlemen, give me some money again to bear my charges home.


Constable. There Is a Crown for thee, and farewell.


Exeunt all but Bumpkin. Bumpk. Hey day! this will prove a very wonder,
That Bumpkin should a Soldier plunder.

ACTUS V. SCAENA I.
Enter a Ioyner, Servant, and a Painter at one door, and Raggou at another.
Serve. JOyner, make haste, and set your the other Post up; and Painter, fetch your
Colors, your Pots and Pipkins, and paint this Post in the mean time: it must
be dispatched before the people are stirring.


Paint. My things are all ready, Sir, at the next house: we can scarce see to
work yet.


Serve. And be hanged then go get some Ale to clear your eyesight: I Will warrant
you will see the bottom of the Pot well enough without daylight.


Ioyn. Make what have you can, I Will bring my Post as soon as you will be ready to
paint it. Exit.


Paint. I Would laugh at that, i says. But friend, what noise was this all night?
I think the Watch was searching for somebody.


Serve. I, I; hark, you may hear 'em searching still. Why, it seems it is a kind
of outlandish Frenchman that they look for: he has a gray Hat, and a gray
Cloak; but come, let us mind our business, and make haste. Exeunt.


Rag. Dat be me: dey slandra a moy, me be no outlandish Frenchman, begar me
be a French Frenchman: Hark, dey come: vat sall me do? Begar, me vill stand
for de odra Post till de dam Bumpkin be gone; a pox take 'em, de devel could
not Huy and Cry me so close. How sall me do to be like a dat Post? Hark, dey
come now.


Raggou gets upon the Post, and sits in the posture of the other Post. Enter
Constable and Watch. Constable. Pox of this outlandish French-fellow for me; I Am
as dry as a Dog.


1 Watch. So we are all: let us go and knock 'em up at an Alehouse, and eat and
drink a little.


2 Watch. With all our hearts.

Enter Painter. Honest Painter, can tell where we may have a little Ale?


Paint. I, sure, two or three doors off you will find 'em up, and a good fire,
where you may tossed your noses, Boys.


Constable. Thou did not see an outlandish Frenchman this way?


Paint. No, I saw no Frenchman. Exeunt Constables and Watch. Why, what a
Devil, this Joyner has been here, and set up his Post, before I came: how time
slips away at an Alehouse!


Rag. Begar, would a good rope would slip away you too.


Paint. Now to work. Whistles, and paints him.


Rag. He vill paint a me; vat sall me do?


As he stoops, Raggou throws a stone at him. Paint. A pox of these roguing
Prentices. Sirrah, I Will have you by the ears: a company of Rogues, a man cannot
work for you! If you serve me such another trick, I Will break all your Windows.


Rag. De pox break all your neck.


Throws the Pipkin at him as he stoops. Paint. Why, you damned Rogue, you have
broke my head: 'Sheart, I Will complain to your Master. Spoiled all my Colors
too! I Will not endure it; I Will be revenged, whatsoever it cost me. Exit.


Rag. A pox dis Rogue; he murder mine face wid his dam paint. Now de coast be
clear, me vill take a de Coat of Monsieur Jack Painter and go; for begar dear
be no stay in dis Town for moy.

Enter Ioyner with his Post. Hark, dear be someting: me must be de Post again. A
pox on dat. He stands up for a Post again.


Ioyn. Why, how now? what a devil, another post, and none of my work? 'Sheart,
do you employ two men at once? I Will not be used thus; I Will be paid for my work,
and then let the devil set up your Posts. Exit.


Rag. So, now begar, me vill take de Coat of de Jack Paintra, and de Post of de
Jack Joyner, den no man vill suspect a moy. Offers to lift the Post. Diable, it
is too much heavy for moy; begar me betra be hang den have all dis dam Joyner
sit upon me. Diable, and vould me vere in bed wid all de King of France Army,
begar me vou'd fain see vat dam English Bumpkin, Mr. Huy-Cry come fetch me from
them. Exit.


Enter Servant, Painter and Ioyner. Serve. Why, what a foolish fellow art thou
to be so angry? I employed no Joyner but thy self.


Ioyn. 'Sheart, there was two carved Posts up, and I Am sure I brought the third.


Serve. Thou art mad, and so is this fool too, to complain of throwing stones at
thee, when we have never a Prentice, nor none within six doors of us.


Paint. I Am sure my Pipkin's broke, and my head too: pray look here.


Serve. Why, what is here? here is a broken Pipkin indeed, but where is the three
carved Posts?


Ioyn. There was two stood up when I came to the House, and I set the third
down here. Ounes, my Post and my Tools and all is gone.


Serve. I believe you are both drunk.


Paint. Heart man, I painted the Post that stood there.


Ioyn. Well, and heart man, I brought the the other, an' you call it heart man,
and all is gone you see.


Serve. My Masters, go look after your things, and make an end of your work.


Paint. Let Us go search for this fellow that stole our goods here.


Exeunt. Enter Tell-troth and Dol. Tell. O Dol, do you hear, put her off till
your friend come as before you pretended, and say you will marry when the Garrison
is delivered up.


Dol. The Lieutenant and Cornet are very eager to have it dispatched, that they
may have the money I promised, and then they are resolved to laugh me to death.


Tell. Well, but you know it will be our turn to laugh at them, if all be right
you have told me.


Dol. Upon my life I have been faithful in all points, and I find I shall take
pride in doing good, since I have prosper'd so well in serving you.


Tell. Your reward shall answer your service. I must to the Captain, and give
him an account of all I undertook, which will meet his expectation.


Dol. Let me alone to manage my undertakings.


Enter Captain and Lieutenant. Tell. Here Is the Captain; be you gone therefore:
I would not be seen with you, till I make him acquainted with every thing. Exit
cum Doro.


Lieut. But pray, Sir, why are you thus severe now, to banish the Flint-fleyers?


Capt. The Kings Honor and Interest is so abused with these scandalous
fellows, that I Am resolved to cashier 'em.

Enter Tell-troth. Oh, friend Tell-troth! look you Lieutenant, my opinion
seldom fails me.


Tell. So, you had some dispute then concerning me. Look you, Sir, it is now in
my power to do more than ever I hoped for: you have a Foot Company?


Cap. Yes; they are now (...), see they march fair, and do no wrong. Exit
Lieutenant.


Tell. Read that: upon my life there is but three Companies, and two of 'em are
disarmed, and Prisoners, Officers and all. I laid no plot to do it, I found 'em
all ready to betray one another to get the wealth; the manner how, hereafter.
The Governor has commissioned me to make his Conditions; which must be a
Convoy, with all his wealth, to his own home. The Country bring in their plate
and goods to secure 'em from your party, and he will make conditions with you to
march away with 'em, and so cheat the people: (precious Rogues!) besides what
they preach the women out of.


Capt. That must not be; for the King has Intelligence that they have great
Treasure there.


Tell. Does he know how they came by it?


Capt. Yes, very well; with the cheat of preaching (I mean Tub-preaching, and
Lectures.) The Lectures your wives read you, never awed you so.


Tell. But faith, Sir, give him his Conditions.


Capt. I Will storm it first.


Tell. I intend not to have you keep Conditions when you have made 'em.


Capt. That Is base; I scorn that: my Honor is at stake.


Tell. What, for breaking Articles with a Rebel? Had it been a fair enemy, I
grant you. Suppose you storm it, and be beaten off? the King would give you
little thanks for the punctillio of your own private honor. Let your
Lieutenant do it: the Captain may with his Honor break the Conditions that his
Lieutenant makes.


Capt. I may approve of that; I would not have my own hand appear against me.
But I am glad to see you thus earnest for the King: sure you have some design.


Tell. By my troth I have; but so small a one, it is not worth this labor: you
shall know it, for you must assist me.


Capt. With all faithfulness.


Tell. Come then, let us sign Articles. So, march, and take possession. Exeunt.

(...)you are (...)


Paint. Heart man, I painted*


Enter Raggou like an old woman. Rag. Me vill make a me nose of wax, like de
old woman, and vill go to Madam Dol, and tell her me come from Monsieur Raggou.
Vera good. And if she vill beg his pardon of de Capitain, he vill come and
marry her, although her shild be born wid a shart and back and breast too; for
begar me find in mine conscience me had betra marry a dam whore, dan be hang.
Exit.


Enter Tell-troth, Captain, Lieutenant, Cornet, etc. with the Governor
Prisoner. Tell. Now, Sir, are you satisfied in my faith?


Capt. I am so; and I have found you a worthy person: command me to any thing.


Tell. Then I Will make you merry till I go about my design. Captain Tub-text,
that got the two Sisters with child, is now in bed with them eating a Sack
posset; and, that we may both shame and fright 'em, there are Bears in the Town,
and other Shows that are going to Bristol Fair: now I Will speak to the Bearward
to muzzle a Bear, and turn him loose into the room, and I Will bring you where you
shall see the sight.


Capt. Content, for I am a great lover of sports: let not the Shows go away,
for I mean to celebrate Dol's wedding.


Lieut. That Is kindly done. You Will need no other sport than to see Dol rant and
tear when she finds she has married a Girl.


Capt. But the sport will be, when you and the Cornet receive your fifty pound
a piece you told me of.


Lieut. Yes, faith; we shall have it sure enough.


Capt. Yes, for it is deposited in my hands.


Cor. Never was jade so deeply in love! but the jest is the Girl has made
conditions with Dol, to put on a Masque when she is marrying; for her face is
so bad she cannot away with it.


Capt. Give all the Troop favors; let 'em dispatch, and bring them in to the
bayting of the Sack-posset, and let the Country be summoned in. Exeunt.


Tub-text and his Sisters are discovered in bed, eating a Sack-posset: Enter
Captain, Lieutenant, Cornet, Ferret-farm, above. Tub. Here is this spoonful in
remembrance of our sweet Sisters precious fruit she goes with.


He puts a spoonful in each of their mouths. 1 Sister. My tender, and most
shame-fac'd thanks be returned you.


Tub. Now here is to the Maiden-fruits of this our weeping-Sister. Wipe your
tears; if they were Cavaliering burdens you went with, your case were
mournful; but as they are my offspring, repent not; for your Infants (be
assured) will be Babes of Grace.


Capt. What a damned Rogue is this!


1 Sister. Why then, it seems, we religious Lambs may play with one another,
without sinning?


Capt. Was ever such blasphemous Rogues and Whores! I tremble to hear 'em! Let
in the Bear upon 'em.


1 Sister. Here is to this our sweet comforting man.


2 Sister. I am overjoyed to hear that religious Lambs may play, and yet not
sin.


Put their Spoons in his mouth. Enter Bear. Tub. What Is here, a Bear? mercy
upon us!


All. Help, help, help, help.


Tub. Shift for your selves, sweet Sisters.


Capt. Now Bear, now Saint.


Lieut. Halloo Saint, halloo Bear: I Will hold a --


Cor. Hundred pound of the Bear: thou Boy Bear.


Lieut. A hundred pound of the Saint. So, now take off your Bear.


Ferret. By my faith, we must stave and tail him off for ought I see, Captain.
I have been at many a Bear-bayting, but never at a Saint-bear-bayting before.


Exit Bear, etc. Capt. Now, Sir; is your name Tub-text?


Tub. Yea.


Capt. And do you think your two Whores are with child with two babes of grace?


Tub. Yea, foul mouth.


Capt. What an audacious Rogue is this! And do thou really believe thy self
in such a degree of perfection, that thou can not sin, and so, need no
repentance?


Tub. Yea, sure, we are past repentance.


Capt. Thou damned villain, I believe thee. Blasphemous Rogue! how many poor
souls have thou deluded? Sirrah, it were just to make thee marry these two
women, and then hang thee for having two wives.


Enter Ferret-farm. Ferret. Sir, our wedding folks are coming, and are so
merry, and so pleased; that, if their joy continue, the Example will make us
all marry.

Enter Biddy as Bridegroom, Tell-troth in her hand dressed in Dol 's clothes,
and Dol in other clothes, and Raggou dressed like an old woman with a Mufler.
Look you, here they are, pleased as you see.


Dol. Now stand you here till I beg your pardon of my Captain.


Bid. By your leave, Captain, I have made bold to espouse your old handmaid
Dol; and give us leave to laugh; for faith my Lieutenant and Cornet has cheated
her, Captain, for they have matched her to a Girl: I am a very Girl, and yet I
have not wronged you, for I told you before I could not get your children.


Tell. And we laugh, to think how we have cheated you; for though you cannot
get my children, if I can get yours, we shall do well enough.


Bid. O Lord, what is that? that is not Dol's voice.


Dol. You Are in the right; it is not Dol's voice, nor Dol that has married you
(keep the money, Captain) but your old love Tell-troth. Pray have your money,
Lieutenant, before you laugh me to death.


Bid. What, my old Lover Tell-troth!


Tell. Now the laugh is on our side, Gentlemen. Come, be not troubled, for I am
the same honest lover Lover that ever I was.


Bid. Nay, I Will swear thou deserve me, thou art a desperate lover to venture
on a wench that has troop'd so long under such a handsome Cornet: but he is a
fool too; for if he had followed his blow close at one time, he had had all
that I could have given him.


Tell. I had spies upon you, and am well assured of your honesty. Ask Dol.


Dol. Yes, faith, I watched your water at every turn. Do you remember he would
have gone of the score for your Maidenhead? but you cried 'twas worth ready
money at any time; but marry me, and then halloo Dog for thy Silver Collar. You
remember this?


Bid. I, to my shame I do.


Tell. What, are you ashamed that you are honest?


Bid. No, but I Am ashamed that I lost so much time; for I Am sure thou would
have had me honest or not honest.


Tell. Come, be not troubled, I pass by all.


Bid. I love thee for thy confidence, give me thy hand, by my life I Am very
honest; but I have had as much a do to keep my self so, as ever poor wench
in the world had.


Cor. But I hope, Biddy, you and I shall not lose our acquaintance?


Bid. If my husband will have it so, I cannot help it. But I hope he has more
wit than ever to let me see you again: if you have not, husband, in good faith,
at your own peril.


Tell. I Will have wit enough; fear not.


Enter Ferret-farm. Ferret. Sir, here is the Country-Gentlemen come.


Capt. Pray let 'em come in.

Enter Country-Gentlemen. Gentlemen, it is not unknown how publicly you have
appeared against your Prince; and how secure you thought your selves under the
protection of these Hypocrites: but to show you what rogues they are; all the
wealth that you brought hither to be secured from us, they would have made
conditions to have marched away with, and so cheated the whole Country. Look
you, there is their Articles: there is Reformation for you.


1 Genesis We are deceived indeed in them; to have used us thus!


Capt. You must own, Gentlemen, that all the wealth, that is here, is justly
forfeited to the King.


2 Gent. We grant it, worthy Captain, and our lives to boot.


Capt. Although the wealth that is here be great, and the Kings wants require
it; yet, to show that he had rather have his subjects hearts than money, he has
Commissioned me to return every man his own again.


1 Gent. Sir, this gracious act of the King, and your readiness to perform it,
shall turn us all faithful subjects to the extent of our lives and fortunes.


Capt. Now you deserve his mercy.


Dol. Sir, will you grant me a request? Poor Raggou has sent me word, if I can
beg his pardon of you, he will marry me.


Capt. Dol, you have been instrumental to our friend Tell-troth; I must grant
you any thing.


Dol. Then pray, Sir, let us make a little sport with him: who do you think that
old woman is?


Capt. I know not.


Dol. It Is Raggou himself. Pray fright him a little before you seal his pardon.


Capt. What a Devil has he done to his face?


Dol. I know not; I believe he has clapped wax upon it.


Capt. Now, good woman, what would thou have?


Rag. Me come in de crowd, in hope to see a Soldier hang: it would be great
satisfaction to de Country, truly.


Capt. Well, good woman, where do thou dwell?


Rag. Begar me have no dwell: vat sall me say to him? I live at Bristol Towns
end, an't please your worship.


Capt. But, woman, if thou would tell me where to find a plundring
Frenchman, called Raggou, the Country should hang him with all my heart; for
that is a notorious rogue, and he shall be hanged if he live above ground.


Rag. Begar he serve a me vera well to hang me: vat a Devil make a me come
here? dis be my vit: a pox on mine French wit. aside.


Capt. Woman, find out that Rascal for me, here is ten shillings in earnest,
and when thou take him, I Will make it ten pound.


Rag. But will your worship secure me that I shall have no harm if I find him?


Capt. I upon my honor, before all this Company, thou shall have no harm.


Rag. Bear witness, gentlemen; now give me ten pound: for begar me be de man,
me be Monsieur Raggou.


All. How! Monsieur Raggou!


Rag. Wie mafoy, ha, ha; me have sheat a my Capitain of ten pound, and save a
my life too; dear be de French vit! Begar me honor my vit very much for dat.


Capt. Call the Marshal. Take him and hang him upon the next tree.


Rag. Hang a moy! did not you before vitness engage your honor dat me sall
have no harm? Begar you vill do me great deal wrong, if you hang me now.


Capt. I promised, indeed, that the old woman should have no harm; but Raggou
shall certainly be hanged.


Rag. A ha! dear be a dam English trick vill hang a Frenchman. But hold, hold:
if you hang Raggou, how can you save de old woman? Dear be Law case for you!
Let me have fair play for my life.


Capt. Take the old woman's garments and lay them up safe, and then they have no
harm; then my honor is clear, and here is Raggou fairly to be hanged.


Marsh. Come, come away; it is a plain case, you must hang for it.


Dol. Why were you such a fool as to come hither?


Rag. For love of you, you dam whore you.


Dol. Why would you betray your self for ten pound?


Rag. Dat be my cunning; de hangman sall have de ten pound because he sall no
hurt a me when he hang me. But, Capitain, begar you can no hang me in justice;
for de old woman is Raggou, and Raggou is de old woman, and de Devil can no
part us: so if you hang Raggou, you hang de old woman, and you hang your own
honor too, begar.


Capt. Well, Sir, you have pleaded so well for your self, that conditionally
you will marry Dol, I Will pardon you.


Rag. If you tink it better to marry den to be hang, Capitain, me leave all to
your judgment.


Capt. Why, then marry her.


Rag. But who sall keep de shild?


Capt. The Troop shall keep it.


Rag. Why may not de Troop as vell marry her, and me vill make one? dat's very
fair me tinks.


Capt. Nay, you may be hanged yet if you will.


He takes the woman in one hand, and the halter in the other. Rag. Let a me
see: here be whore, and here be halter; vera fine shoice begar! me can no tell
which to shuse; but me vill even stan to mine fortune, and cross and pile for
it.


Capt. By my troth it shall be so, and take your choice; cross or pile?


Lieut. Why, cross he shall be hanged, and pile he shall be married.


Rag. No, begar, it fall be cross if me be married, and pile if me be hang.


Lieut. Now it is an even lay whether this Farce be a Comedy or a Tragedy.


Cor. Come, Gentlemen, whore or halter for a wager?


Lieut. Whore for a wager.


Cor. Halter for a wager.


Rag. Hold, hold: vat if it be nedra cross nor pile?


Capt. If it be neither cross nor pile, thou shall neither be married nor be
hanged, upon my Honor. Come, here is your fortune for you: in faith, it is
cross, thou art to be married.


Rag. Den dear be your halter again, and me tank you.


Capt. Come, take your beloved wife, and strike a match.


Rag. Den let her take me, and de Devil in hell give her good of me.


Capt. Then you have my pardon, and all is well.


Enter Ferret-farm. Ferret. Sir, here are two of Queen Elizabeth's Tilters,
going to Bristol Fair, desire to dance before you.


Capt. With all my heart: call 'em in.

A Dance of two hobby Horses in Armor, and a Iigg. You have done well: where is
my man? give 'em half a piece; you have done prettily indeed. Lieutenant,
cashier the Flint-fleyers: as for these Hypocrites I Will keep them prisoners till
the King dispose of 'em, which will be but too mercifully I Am sure.


Cor. I suppose, Governor, the Parliament will reward you with some Bishops
Lands for being so honorably pulled by the ears out of your Garrison.


Capt. Come, upbraid 'em not; I hate that. To morrow, Sirs, summon in the
Country, and every man shall have his right.


All. God bless the King, and all his good Soldiers.


Capt. You see, Lieutenant, how with good usage the people return to their
Loyalty: I know you are a brave fellow; but you have been to blame in the
Country, and that disserves your Prince more than your courage can recompense.


Lieut. Sir, you shall never have occasion to say this again.


Capt. I believe you: and I wish that the great Timber, the Pieces of State,
that lie betwixt the King and Subjects,

I wish that they would take a hint from hence
To keep the peoples hearts close to their Prince.

Exeunt Omnes. EPILOGUE.
PRologues, and Epilogues, should something say
In order to the excusing of a Play;
But things toth' purpose, being laid aside,
We shoot at random at least six bows wide;
Speaking of this or that, of Sea or Land,
Of any Matter but the thing in hand*
If men with such faults, Poets do Commence,
I may put in with my impertinence.
And though my dull Muse cannot make y'a feast,
I Would fain be thought a Poet at the least:
I find I am one, I can prove it plain,
Both by my empty Purse, and shallow Brain:
I Have other symptoms to confirm it too,
I Have great, and self conceit, of all I do:
I have my little Cullies too in the Town,
Both to admire my works, and lend a Crown.
My Poets day I morgage to some Citt,
At least six months before my Play is writ;
And on that day away your Poet runs,
Knowing full well, in sholes, come all his duns.
If these things make me not a perfect Poet,
He that has better Title let him show it.
Some Plays printed for Thomas Dring.
THe Unfortunate Lovers. The Amorous Prince: Or, Curious Husband. Town-Shifts.
The Six Days Adventure. Albumazer. The Changeling. Love and Honor. School of
Complements.
Acted at the Dukes Theater.

Plays new Printed. 1672.
THe Dumb Lady: Or, Farrier made Physician. The Rehearsal. The Old Troop: Or,
Monsieur Raggou.
Acted at the Theater Royal.

FINIS.

