A Letter from Lucifer, TO HIS Roman Agents N. T. W. P. J. F. and R. L. Sir
Edmond-bury Godfrey's Back-friends.
NO less than a Legion of Devils have been mixed in Counsel with an Army of
Papists, to make Sir Edmond bury Godfrey Felo de Se. Oh, how diligent has N. T.
that over-loyal Protestant been in the service! He (no doubt) was made
Messenger to the Devil's back-stairs, and sent by his Master Pluto the Prince
of the Air, to procure two Fellows that would swear whatever that Hellish
Council would dictate to them, or else to bid Farewell to the hopes of Gold, and
the sale of his Popish Pamphlets; and now he is in pain till Mother Celier, by
the help of her Imps, brings him to Bed of two or three such Demi-Devils as
will swear that he stabbed himself at home, choakt himself at Somerset House,
and then ran two or three miles to gather Primeroses for his last Nosegay. Such
they say that never-failing Friend to the Popish Interest has got him; but
whether a Rope or a Pillory must be their Reward, time must tell us.

One would have thought Redding's miscarriage in a different Enterprise, and
the fate that attended it, might have put a period to the rest of their Shams:
If an eminent Counselor was bawk'd in his premeditated Contrivance, what will
become of the Pimping Solicitor? No doubt he has Langhorn in his Heart, and
Gold in his Eye; the remembrance of the one, and his zeal for the other, will
make him swear home.

But hark you, my hot-mouth'd Friends, have you not read Sir Edmond-bury
Godfrey's Apparition to Not. Thompson? methinks if you have, it would a little
retard your motion: Why this haste to the Devil? Go on fair and softly; my life
for yours you will come time enough to Hell. What Jesuitical Doctrine makes you
gallop so fast to your own destruction? are you weary of Earth? and do you long
to see the Fashions of the Devil's low Countries? then ride upon that Horse you
have lately mounted, and I Will warrant you he will carry you safe to your Journeys
end: Possibly you may meet with some rubs of Conscience by the way, that may
make him stumble a little; but if you have taken a resolution never to mind
them, whip on, and doubt not but you will come to your Journeys end in good time.

If you can but go through-stitch with this Work which you have taken in hand,
the Popish Plot will be hid in Embers, and the Papists may hope to sing Te
Deums in a little time in every Church in Town. This is your Masterpiece: if
you can dexterously complete this design, what can you not do? what Task can
be too hard for you? You may even remove Mountains, if they lie in your way. If
you swear effectually to this Murder, so as the stain of this Justice's Blood
is washed off from the Papists, oh, how should I curse my Stars, that I found
you no sooner! two of you would have done more for the Popish Interest, than
two thousand St. Omers Lads. Pox on your slow heels, why were ye not at
Langhorn's Trial? why is your Contrivance so late? It had been some hundreds of
pounds in your way, if you had come to deliver old Will. Stafford from the
hands of merciless Ketch: Come ye now, when all the Roman Martyrs are locked up
in their Coffins, and as fast asleep as a Rope and an Ax could make them? Come
ye now, when the Plot is laid waste to your hands? Had you come in time, the
Meal tub-Plot would never have miscarried; and with much more difficulty the
Earl of Shaftsbury and the Lord Howard of Escrick, and Mr. Whittaker, had
escaped the Snare laid for them: but better late than never; though you come
late, you are not come too late, if you can but swear home to the matter in
hand. Now the Scales are almost even, whether a Plot or no Plot, is the
Question in dispute; if you can thurn the Scale, then in faith we'll pick the
Whigs, that have made this Popish Sham-plot to hide their own: Woe be to them
that have shed the Roman Martyrs blood: Then we'll call Father Plunket's
Impudence, his Innocence; and every thing shall look with other colors, and
with another countenance, than now they do. A Whig shall not dare to say his
Soul's his own; and though it is against their Reason and Conscience, we'll make
them turn Abhorrers and Addressors. They Would (...) good take a Bear by the Tooth,
or a Lion by the Throat, as come with their Ifs in point of Succession, let him
be Pope or Devil that comes to reign over them.

Let me advise you how to harden your selves, so that you may swear without any
manner of remorse or fear:

First, Keep your Correspondence with the Priests and Jesuits more frequently
now than ever, and they will tell you, you do God good service by the worst of
your Oaths, that tend to the Ruin of the Protestant Religion. And then,

Secondly, Learn to frame new Lies every day, and swear they are as true as the
Gospel; thus custom of Sinning will take away the conscience of Sinning.

Thirdly, Meditate on your promised Reward, when you have brought your Work to
perfection; viz. the Gold you shall have here, and the Honor you shall have
hereafter, when the Pope regains his Arrears in this Kingdom.

Fourthly, Put God Omnipotent always out of your mind, and let me that am
Magnipotent be in your thoughts; it is I that must back you in this Undertaking:
for what has God to do with this business? the Work is mine, and I Will help you
to finish it.

Lastly, Never give ear to the Whisperings of Conscience; I know your
Consciences will be speaking to you thus: Oh, be careful what you swear, be
tender of his Repute that di'd for you, whose Death gave you the Watchword to
look to your selves; Conscience will tell you, the Oath you are about to swear
is a sin against God, against your King, and against all his Protestant
Subjects; but what is that to you? what have you to do with their Religion,
further than to destroy it? Mind your Conscience no more than the Moon minds
the barking of a Dog; whenever it offers you any service, bid it be gone: for
it is an Enemy to your present Interest. Read over your Promises, to put it out
of your thoughts: Imprimis, 1000 l. from the Pope, for swearing that Sir
Edmond-bury Godfrey Hanged himself. Item, 500 l. from the Earl of Pow Item, 500
l. from the Lord Pet. Item, 500 l. from the Lord Bell. Item, 500 l. from a Lord
with a single Eye and a double Heart. Item, a general Contribution from all the
Papists in England. And this Summa To talis will be so pleasing to your
covetous desires, that in a little time you will be as able to kick Conscience
out of doors, as the Yea-and-nay-man was to kick the God-damn-me-man down
stairs.

A PRESENT from an unknown Friend, TO Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey's BROTHERS.
YOur Brother's murdered over and over again;
They put his precious Memory to pain:
Now they make woeful work with his sweet Name,
To our great Grief, but to their matchless shame.
Was It not enough to choke and stab him too?
Must they his Reputation quite undo?
What will their Fury never have an end?
Will they still stab and hang our martyred Friend?
Have they no Modesty, no Sense, nor Zeal?
Do they the pangs of Conscience never feel?
Where will their Killany and Malice rest?
Why do they his most sacred Corpse molest?
What had he done? or, oh! what had he said,
That he so dearly for his Actions paid?
Oh, he dealt justly! 'twas too great a Crime,
If you will weigh both Circumstance and Time.
Could he have daubed or plastered over the Guilt
Of Papists, then his Blood had never been spilt:
Could he have sailed with the Pope's Wind and Tide,
Neither his Life, nor his Repute had died.
But now for doing Justice, this cursed Crew
Their bloody Hands within his Breast embrew.
Oh, horrid Villains! are you not afraid
To have your Actions by such Actions paid?
Lord, why so slow? why does this lingering Rod
Forbear, since they forget there is a God?
Why are thy Saints, thy martyred Saints abused?
And why's so very much of Mercy used?
Because you are slow, they think thou do forget;
Therefore these Villains dance in their own Net.
But, oh, make bare thy Arm, come forth, O Lord,
And show them that thou have a three-edg'd Sword:
One edge for Not, another edge for Pain,
And one for Farewell, such as swear for gain.
Those that divide thy People without cause,
On them (Lord) execute thy fiercest Laws.
Thy Patience makes them study to do Evil;
They Are striving who should first go to the Devil:
Not rides the winged Horse, he is in such haste,
And thinks the time he stays he does but waste.
It Is strange to see at what great pains and cost,
These Villains to the Devil do ride Post:
How eager they are to get a place in Hell,
Where perjured Raskals must for ever dwell.
They think we bid them loss, if we cry, Stay,
Oh, stop your course, and make some small delay;
Consider what you do, and where you go,
What pain and misery you're like to know.
This is lost breath, they do not thank you for it;
Nay, let me tell you, that they do abhor it:
They Would rather go to Hell, than take advice
From Whigs, though never at so small a price.
A sober Whig cries out, Proceed no further
About Sir, Edmond-bury Godfrey's Murder:
Be wise and wary, ere it is too late,
And do not gain the King and Kingdoms hate,
For fear your Necks salute a Hempen Fate.
But pish, cry they, let us on a full Car^er,
And show that neither God nor Man we fear:
Let Us swear, forswear; what if we perjured be?
The worst we know is but the Triple Tree:
Alas, a sight of Hell they do not see.
These Hawks have golden Hoods before their Eyes,
They see not where their greatest mischief lies:
The God of this World blinds them, we do find;
With golden Wedges every Pocket's lined:
Conscience is seared, a Mill-stone's not more hard;
Their Eyes are only fixed on their Reward:
Hopes of Preferment, and some present Pay,
Does steal their Wit and Senses quite away.
And if their Gold and Silver heaps may swell,
They Will dread no danger, till they drop to Hell.
But are these all the Devil named before?
I fancy I could guess there is yet one more.
May not Rogero come in for a Snack,
Who does his Fancy strain, and his Brains crack,
To shield the Papists and the Popish Cause,
Even to the utmost, with his Roman Paws?
Strange Le the Knave does write in their defense;
Joanna with her Broom sweeps him some Pence;
That is one reason: but the Rogue does hope
For far more comfort from his Lord the Pope.
Were it not for the Popish Pence, I Am sure
His scribbling pains he never would endure;
He Would rather choose to fiddle to the Dogs
That sometimes dance, and sometimes run at Hogs.
This is his Harvest time; when the Commons sits,
He must pike off, they will fright him out on's Wits:
If hanging does not stop him, he will fly
To France as fast as ever he can hie;
There like a Vagabond the Knave may range,
And this will be the fate of R. L'Estrange.
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for Charles Lee. 1682.


