A Letter from Rotterdam, touching the Scotch Affairs, since November, 1650.
SIR, Since my Arrival here, it has been my good hap to gain a clear
confirmation of the truth of that Assertion, that it never was in the
intentions of the Presbyterian Scots to have Charles the 2. for their King, and
that you may also be confirmed in the Assurance thereof, I shall presume to
offer to your more serious consideration this short view of some of their
Actions since November last.

As first, the strange rendition of the Castle of Edenborough, the strongest
hold in all the Kingdom; whether out of cowardice or covetousness, I dispute
not; sure I am out of no necessity, the stores of Provisions, Arms, and
Ammunition (if Relations be true) being almost incredible. Then the many
secret Plots and Designs they have put in practice, for the more cleanely
betraying into the Enemies hand, the Town and Castle of Sterling, and Burnt
Eland, those two principal Keys or fastnesses of Fife and Stragherne, all
which God in mercy has hitherto frustrated, to the Enemies disheartning, and
the Actors confusion. I shall not need to mention how heartily the
Presbyterian entertained Ker and Stragherns Declaration, with those in the West
of Scotland, though founded upon Independent Principles, and purporting little
less then renunciation of Monarchy: Or what cunning tricks they used for
putting off the Kings Coronation, ambitious still to keep the Reins of
Government in their own hands, and curb His Sacred Majesty in His Exercise of
his Regal Power, by enslaving Him to the unreasonable Articles he was forced
to condescend unto at Breda? Or how violently they opposed all Agreement with
the Royal Party, openly protesting against it, and secretly fomenting
Divisions amongst them, till through Gods blessing, in despite of all their
Machinations, Loyalty prevailed, and increased so fast, as in a short space to
overpower those Machivillian Kirk-lings; whose guilt of conscience, hourly
pursued with just fears, affrighted them quickly to decline His Majesty's
Mercy and Goodness, and seek for shelter and protection from the Enemies of
their King and Country. As for particulars I refer you to the weekly
Newes-Bookes; he that will but waste so much time and pains as to peruse
those Pamphlets, may soon observe all these, and many more, and more
mischievous Presbyterian Practices, then here are related.

But not to insist on such perty proofs; a more convincing Argument we have
in that right Presbyterian, and (without offense to so Sacred a Solemnity be
it spoken) sordid manner of Crowning their King on New Years Day, 1650. For
whether we look upon it in any of those Circumstances of Time, Place,
Persons, or Ceremonies, the Presbyterian baseness is most clearly to be
discerned thereby.

As for the Time, the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of that Kingdom, having
long groaned under the cruel oppressions of Kirk and State-Committees, were
ready to shake off that Iron Yoke, and recover again their Ancient Laws and
Liberties, under the Golden and Gentle Scepter of Monarchy, wherein their
Forefathers for many generations had happily enjoyd so great Peace and plenty;
this the Presbyterian perceiving, for fear lest the Royal Party should grow
strong enough to set the Crown on the Kings Head without them, they resolve to
do it themselves, making this advantage of the time, still to ensnare His
Sacred Majesty with the bonds of the Covenant, and limit His Royal Prerogative,
ere the Nobility and Gentry could have free access to Court, or the Army come
to a General Randevouz.

The Place: the most Profane and Sacrilegious place in all Christendom, a
dining Chamber, (no Consecrated Chapel) where the Belly is the only God that
is worshipped: To show the Presbyterians that are so stiff in observing of
difference of Time, the Sanctifying of the Sabbath, etc. make no difference of
places, but a Barn, a Stable, or a Dining Room, is a place good enough for
their Solemn Assemblies.

Then the most Sacrilegious Place: It Is confessed, the Abbey and Church of
Schone has been famous all the World over, as well for the Marble Chair,
wherein the Kings of Scotland Anciently had their Crowns set on their Heads;
as for the Monuments and Tombs of those Pious Princes, whose Sacred Dust was
there religiously preserved; but since Sacrilege entered the World under the
cloak of Reformation, that Abbey has been dissolved, and out of the Ruins of
that Beauteous Church, was erected this Palace of Schone, the Walls built with
the Stones of that Church and Abbey, the Chimney-pieces and Pavements framed
out of the Marble Tombs and Grave Stones of those dead Kings. This His
Majesty's Father (of Blessed Memory) perceiving when he was invited to a Feast
by the Nobleman that is owner of that house, He refused to eat and drink in
so Sacrilegious a place: Yet this was picked out by the Presbyterian for the
solemnizing Charles the Seconds Coronation, as if betimes they would season him
with that cursed thirst after things dedicated to Holy Uses, and invest the
Crown with the spoils of the Churches Patrimony, which his Blessed Father so
much abhorred, (...) ^ap. 4.
that himself professed he had rather live of the Churches Alms, as some of
his Predecessors had done, then violently take the bread out of Bishops and
Ministers mouths; and by such Sacrilegious Rapines, as the Covenanting
Presbyters gaped after, bring a brand and curse upon His Posterity by robbing
God and his Church of what the bounty of His Ancestors had enriched it withal,
for encouragement of Learning and Religion.

The Persons and solemnities likewise were suitable: No Bishop to anoint him,
and pronounce the benediction at the setting the Crown on his Head, nor
Nobleman to present the Regalia; though for these thousand years the like
president never was known in Scotland; where the Nobility ever counted it an
Ensign of Honor and loyalty to attend their Kings Coronation, and behold his
sacred Person inaugurated with all due solemnities: his Anointing and
benediction to be performed by a Bishop, as in all other parts of the Christian
world, Kings have been ever since Christianity prevaild over the Thrones of
Princes; not without a sacred pattern of Samuels Anointing Saul and David by
Gods own appointment. And in the Age bypast this Ceremony was thought so
Religiously necessary, that John Knox with his contemporary Presbyters (I am
sure no friends to needles Ceremonies) sent purposely for the Bishop of
Aberdeen (who had received his Consecration from the Pope) to Anoint King
James, even in his Cradle, that his Coronation might not be defective in such a
Ceremony, whose name and Authority they abused, not only to oppose, but to
imprison Queen Mary his mother, and force her to resign up the Crown into her
Sons hands, that so themselves (the prevailing Faction) might Rule and Reign
as Kings during his minority. Thus whilst it serves their own ends, the
Presbyter is stiff for this Ceremony in the Grandfathers days, but now as
regardlesse of it in the Grandchild: Charles the 2. is to be Crowned without
any such Royal or Religious Ceremony; upon design doubtless, as well to
divest him of that Jus Sanguinis, that hereditary right of Succession, which
does immortallize Princes here on Earth, and make their Names and Office (like
his whose Vicegerents they are, and whose Image they bear) eternal to all
generations: as also to render him the peoples Creature and servant, as if his
Crown and dignity had been the peoples gift, and not his own by Birthright;
as if his Power had been derivative from his Subjects, and not Gods Ordinance,
and as natural over them, as a Fathers over his children: in a word, that his
first Title might be Carolus Electione Populi: not Carolus Dei Gratia. For this
purpose they had prepared three Lay-Kirk-men, and three Kirk-Lay-men to
perform the Office of the Bishop; my meaning is, three Presbyters of their own
Brooding under their Classes, not of Episcopal Ordination; and three Ruling
Elders; these last acting their parts in a double capacity: for first they
stand for Representers of the People, and Commissioners of the Representative
Body, the Parliament; and next for Assisting Elders of the Kirk.

Thus Presbytery, which was ever good at deposing and usurping upon Kings, has
at last (and may it prove the last) set the Crown on their Kings Head, more in
mockery (if without an ill Omen I may borrow that fimilitude, as the Soldiers
Crowned our Savior a little before his Crucifixion;) than out of any true
intention: For the Crown they put upon his Head, though it were of gold, yet
was it debased by the Covenant, and robbed of the choicest Flowers wherewith it
was wont to be adorned, His Royal Praerogatives, those individual and
unforfeitable Ensigns of Sovereignty.

The Sword they gave him, though it had a specious outside, yet it seemed
rather of Wood than Steel, the Edge being blunted, by taking from him the
Militia, and depriving him of the power of the Sword, either for offense, by
doing justice upon malefactors, or for defense against Foreign Invasion, or
homebred Rebellion.

Lastly, the Scepter they put into his hand was but a Mock-Scepter, being
divested of the Supreme Power, which is the very Essence, or Formalis ratio of
Majesty; for by the Articles of Breda they had reserved that Power to
themselves, tying him up to act nothing without or contrary to the advice of
Parliament and Assembly; nor to deny his Assent to any thing that should be
represented by them, or resolved on in their Committees of Kirk and State.

Thus had the Presbyterians muzled their Lion, and at this first step into the
Throne, thrown down his Sovereign Majesty's, had not the great God, by whom
Kings reign, graciously upheld his servant; and in a short space restored him
to that height of Honor and Dignity, which those Varlets sought to keep him
from: For soon after his Coronation, the Nobility and Gentry, for many years
having been oppressed by several Factions in their turns, for the future to
prevent all Faction, and unite the whole Kingdom against the Common Enemy,
they resolve forthwith to restore His Majesty to all his just Praerogatives,
and no longer to suffer Committees either of Kirk or State to Lord it over
them: the jealousies of the two grand Factions of the Kingdom, the
Hamiltonian, and Argylian gave life to this Resolution; who not more ambitious
of, than envious at each others greatness, chose, rather than submit to the
commands of their equals or inferiors, to set up the King, and to yield
obedience to one King, rather than many Kings; for which very cause, The Beasts
of the Forest once made choice of the Lion for their King.

By this means in the month of January that glorious Sun began to mount higher
and higher in the Zodiac of Majesty and Soveraigntie; and quickly warmed with
its bright beams, the hearts of his languishing Subjects into the love of
Loyalty and Regal Government; for which they now praise God that had sent
them a King, under whose protection they might be freed from the tyranny and
oppression of their fellow subjects.

But about the 5. of February this glorious Sun appeared brighter and brighter,
when that free Parliament began to sit, which ashamed longer to deprive their
King of the liberty to use his Reason with a good Conscience, admitted him to
the power of his Negative Voice, and put him into the possession of his just
Rights, whilst the Kirk Assembly at the same time met at St. Andrew perplex
themselves with hot disputes touching His Majesty's Authority in
Ecclesiasticals, and other private quarrels of their own, rather than
endeavor to compose differences, and submit to the Kings supreme power over
all persons, and in all Causes spiritual and temporal; His Majesty not much
minding their Disputes, nor they careful to tender their due respects to him,
till those contentions ended, and that Assembly dissolved suddenly, through the
hot alarm given about this time by the English Forces, who sent a strong party
to cross the Forth above Sterling, whilst the maine Body faced Sterling it
self; and other parties were sent by Sea to make some attempt upon Burnt
Eland, and Fife-Nesse. I shall not need to express the losses the Enemy
sustained in those several places: Though your Mercury's, whose bribed breath
dares publish naught but Victories, conceal the particulars; yet the Dutch
Gazets talk of thousands of the English killed, and of their disorderly
Retreat, and unseasonable mutiny of the Soldiery for want of pay, and hard
duty, which begat a debate, whether Fairfax his Counsel had not been more
prudently followed, rather to stand upon defense, than invade a Country where
they were to fight with two such potent Enemies, as Hunger, and Cold.

Sir, I can assure you, the Scots, since their Kings Coronation, magnify Gods
providence, in blessing them wonderfully beyond their deserts, as well in the
discovery of some men's Treasons against his Majesty's Person, and the Treachery
of others that sought to betray Sterling, and Brunt Eland into the Enemies
hand; as also in repulsing Genesis Cromwels Forces, which have endeavored often
and by sundry Stratagems to land men in Fife* but chiefly for that great piece
of providence, by sending in unexpectedly to their relief, 3 English Ships
laden with provisions and Arms for the supply of the English Army; and for the
casting away of four English Merchants Ships and their Convoy at the Town of
Are; And further, this you may take upon the assurance of an authentic witness,
that the Scots King himself, under his own hand very lately signified to his
friends here, that he is in no inconsiderable condition, having already a very
gallant Army of 36000. horse and Foot well appointed. This news has much
encouraged the English Cavaliers in these parts, and stirred them up to furnish
themselves with all necessaries fit for his Majesty's service, insomuch that
about the end of February 12. sail of Ships, convoyed by two men of War, went
from the Brill in Holland toward the North of Scotland, stored with all sorts
of Provisions, Arms and Ammunition, many Volunteers, and good store of Horses.

I had like to forgot one observation worth your noting, that whilst the King
was under the tuition of the Scots Presbutery, they would not afford him the
freedom to speak or write to any of his friends; all Letters either sent by
his Majesty or directed to him, they intercepted and opened: and the only use
they made of his Royal Hand and Authority, tended ever to his dishonor, and
ofttimes to the destruction of himself and his party in the three Kingdoms;
for proof of this I shall call to witness his Proclamations published in
August last; his peremptory command for disbanding Middleton and his friends in
the North, his declaring that party in Ireland Traitors, who fought daily
against the State of England; his revoking the Commissions granted to the
Marquess of Ormond, Lord Inchequeen, and many others of that Nation, that were
to act by Sea and Land; and lastly, his recalling all Commissions granted to
diverse of the English Nobility and Gentry; in order to some action and
designs then plotted against the Kingdom of England: all which is sufficient
to show the Presbyterian is no Changeling; Kings must be their Subjects and
they themselves Kings, or else there is no living amongst them. And that you
may see how much the Kingdom of Scotland has groaned under the Rigidnesse of
Presbytery, I shall acquaint you with a few Grieveances, which of late have
been represented to the King and his Counsel, by the Commons, with an earnest
desire, and hope of redress.

Grievances against the Scots Presbytery.
1. Their Usurping a power over all secular and Military Affairs; for if by the
major part in Parliament a Law be enacted contrary to their minds, they
presently excommunicate the Members for sitting and Voting in that Parliament:
for this very cause Duke Hamilton, Earl of Lyndsay, Earl of Dumfernling,
Lauderdaile, and diverse others of the Nobility were forced to do penance: and
if any man else yield obedience to such statute enacted without their
approbation, he is immediately brought to the Stool of Repentance; witness
all those that levied Horse or money for the use of Duke Hamiltons Army, or did
serve under his command. 2. Their taking cognizance of things done in another
Kingdom, and beyond Seas: an honest man was forced to do penance for
drinking in a woman's house at Campheere in Zealand, who had been Excommunicated
formerly by the Presbytery of Aberdeen; likewise many others have been
Excommunicated, and constrained to do penance for bearing Arms in England
under Duke Hamilton. 3. Their defaming of Persons of Honor, and other
particular Persons in their Pulpits; as also their publishing defamatory
Declarations, to the scandal of Religion, and contempt of Monarchy. 4. Their
secret subornation of children and servants to accuse and betray their Parents
and Masters for words spoken in their Bed-chambers and private houses; there is
scarce a considerable Family in all the Kingdom, where they have not by one
means or other set a spy upon them. 5. Their wresting out of the hands of the
Nobility and Gentry the Patronages of all Ecclesiastical Livings, whereby they
have occasioned great corruption and divisions among the Clergy, insomuch that
in some places Churches have lain void without any Minister two or three years,
to the eternal prejudice of the peoples souls. 6. Their cruel interdicting of
Churches; in one County, Atholl by name, 5 Churches were interdicted 3 years
together, no Minister suffered to Preach or pray amongst the people all that
time, nor to administer Sacraments, whereby many children dyed unbaptised. 7.
Their usurping an Arbitrary power over the souls of men, every Minister taking
upon him to debar whom he please, even the best man of the Parish from the
Sacrament, and their denying Baptism to the Children of Malignants. 8. Their
covetous increasing their own stipends, in all Corporations, procuring the
State to lay an imposition of 3 d. Excise upon every Scotch pint of Wine to be
paid to the Minister of the Parish, making every house to pay the 12. penny,
according to the utmost racked Rent, which is 20 d. per pound.
Sir, All the effect these grievances produced at that conjuncture of time,
was, That the King and His Council thought it not fit to make the breach
wider, or increase Divisions amongst His Subjects, only for the present the
Clergy were commanded not to intermeddle in Civil or Military Affairs; but to
preach to the people obedience to His Majesty's Authority, and Unity and Peace
one amongst another: Yet in the opinion of wise men, if things should settle
that way, the Presbytery of SCOTLAND would be refined and made conformable to
these in HOLLAND: For as your Reformers did in the beginning call for a
Moderate Episcopacy; so the whole cry of the Scots Nation is, for a Moderate
Presbytery, which in time will end in JOHN KNOX his Government, whose design
was to place Superintendents in every County: The Nobility and Gentry of that
Kingdom, as well as yours, cannot endure to hear of the restoring of
Episcopacy, for fear their Sacrilegious Titles to the Churches Lands should
once more be called in question.

As I was closing my Letter, this certain Intelligence I received, That the
Scots King, having secured all the passes and landing places in FIFE, and
quelied the CLASSIS of STERLING, who declared against Him and His Party, is
lately gone to suppress the like Faction which the CLASSIS of ABERDEEN has
countenanced to the great prejudice and safety of that part of the Kingdom. In
His absence Duke HAMILTON commands the Southern Army, who endeavors daily to
try his friends in levying Forces in the West of SCOTLAND. Here we expect some
Scotch Nobleman, as an Ambassader from the Scotch King for that Kingdom, and
the Report is, the Lord GERARD has a Commission sent him to be His Ambassador
for the Kingdom of ENGLAND. I have no more room to write, but only to
subscribe my self,

Your most humble servant.
From Rotterdam 10/1. March. 1650.

