A LETTER FROM AMSTERDAM TO A FRIEND IN PARIS.
Steriles dominantur auenae.
SR.
I never complied more cheerfully with your commands then at present, since I
have the occasion to discharge a debt I owe to the Christian World. You desire
to be satisfied concerning this so much talked of Plott in England which you say
is the only subject of all Discourses and as it has alarmed all the King of
Great Britains Kingdoms and Dominions so it has struck with astonishment the
greatest part of Europe. Judicious People find them selves in great perplexity;
on the one side they cannot comprehend how so many Religious Persons whose
education has been in the spirit of Meekness and Humility, so many men of
Quality, who have given such unquestionable Proofs of their Loyalty, and
exposed both Fortunes and lives to maintain the life and Authority of the late
and present Kings of England, so many of all degrees and conditions hitherto
reputed honest in their Actions and sincere in their words, should upon a
sudden be engaged in a Diabolical and Damnable Conspiracy to take away the
life of the King and subvert the Government. On the other side, if there be
noe plott how comes a whole Kingdom to be so imposed upon as to believe it,
And then to use such severityes and Rigours far different from the usual
temper of the Nation? This is the Riddle which you desire to be solved: I
shall do it in brief and plainly; for Truth never appears better then in
downright and vnartificiall expressions. Sr. I can assure you there is no such
thing as a Plott of the Catholics; no design against his sacred Majestyes
Person, Government, or Laws of the Land: If any particular Person has
transgressed let him suffer for it, Anima quae peccaverit ipsa morietur. This
is the desire of all good Christians; and I am credibly informd that the
General of the Jesuits, upon the first bruit of this Conspiracy, should say of
his Religious, si se miscuerint istiusmodi Rebus, dignum luant supplicium. But
as a bare Accusation without manifest proofs is deemed a mere Calumny, so a
bare denial is a slender Apology, to take of a prejudicate opinion: I shall
therefore make it out with undeniable Reasons. You have rightly described the
parties accused; I shall decypher the Accusers and then appeal to your Judgment
whether they be Persons that deserve any Credit.

Sergeant Mainard, in Mr. Colmans Trial page 8. says Mr. Oats was the first
man that we hear of, that discovered this Treason: He was the single man,
that discovered so many* Active Agents in so great a Treason. It is worth the
pains to inform you what this Oats is. His Father in his younger days was a
devoute silck weaver, but in the late Rebellion found it more for his advantage
to turn an Anabaptisticall Preacher, After the Return of his Majesty, he
became a Minister and was beneficed in or near Hastings, at present he is an
old fornicator in Kingstreet southampton Buildings. He trained up his son Titus
to the Pulpit, and having him self procured a better living resigned that to
his son; but whether he was baptized or no is a great question; though the son
says he was christened at seventeen years of Age, yet I presume it was done
after the Anabaptisticall form. His debaucheries are notoriously known in and
about Hastings; I shall not defile my paper with them: yet I must not omit to
tell you how he accused an Innocent man of Sodomie, but was convicted of
Perjury (The Conviction stands upon Record) and was clapped in Prison, but he
brake it. Sometime After he was embarcked for Tangers, he fell to his old
Tricks of Sodomy in the ship and was taken in flagranti, to escape hanging,
according to his demerit, he adventured drowning and stole away narrowly to
shore in the Cockboat: But this, you will say, is not to the purpose; his
Majesty's Indulgence has granted him a plenarie impunitie; and his infamous
life does not de grade him from a capacity, to bear witness for the King; nay
his Patrons allow this, and like him the better; the more wicked he is, the
fitter instrument to make discoveries of wicked designs: for who more proper
to vnkennell a Fox then the Terrier, that is part of him? And as to his legal
conviction of Perjury recorded In perpetuam rei memoriam, tho it disables him
from making a Legal Testimony, yet it implies only a Presumption, semel malus
semper praesumitur malus; And not a necessity of always lying from that time
forward; and who can Tell but heemay speak truth at present! be it so; yet it
must be granted that the Infamy of the Accuser takes of from his Credit with
the Judicious, and obliges a conscientious Person to wave his Judgment, until
better proofs be produced; as all so that every one must be looked upon as
Innocent by the eye of the Law, if there be no allegation against him, besides
the testimony of a Person perjured upon Record. Justice then and Charity (That
is the law of God and man) maintain a man in possession of his Innocence,
until he is either outed by the evidence of his own Acts, or ejected by a
Legal formality. This Argument must be allowed to conclude thus far; and I
pretend no more. This you say is too general, and not to your entire
satisfaction; J will therefore descend to the particulars of the Accusation,
and make out with evidence that they are groundless and false.

On sunday 29. September 1678. still: v. his Majestye being present in Council,
Titus Oats deposed upon oath, how he had been employed by the Jesuits to
Treat with Don John of Austria. and that he did actually treat with him at
Madrid about this Conspiracy; and mentioned several other passages happened at
Madrid. He repeats also his benig at Madrid July 77. in his depositions taken
by order of the house of Commons.

How well he knew Don John, may be seen by the description he made of his
Person to his Majesty and Council, I report myself to those that were
present; That he never was at Madrid is thus made out; He was not acquainted
with the Jesuits before April 1677. This he cannot deny. His great friend and
acquaintance that first introduced him can testify as much. Toward the end of
April he was on shipboard in the downs, as apears by his letter dated there.
As to his arrival in spain his stay there and return for England I shall
give you the Depositions of several Persons upon oath before a public Notary.

Don Duarte sal, Michael Hoar, and John Grace Merchants of Bilbao deposed how
they knew very well Titus Ambrosius alias Oats an Engishman, that he landed at
Bilbao on the 16. of May 1677. stilonovo brought from London in the ship called
the Merchant of Biscay Lucas Roach Master; he stayed there 10. days or there
abouts; And thence went the nearest way to vagliadolid with Martin Lornitz
Espinosa a Guide to the College of Saint Albans; where he continued as they
understood, until he set out back for Bilbao; he arrived here the 3. of
November following; he stayed in town about 8. days and was shipd upon the
Merchant of Bilbao bound for Topsam in England. Martin de Lornitz Espinosa a
guide dwelling at Bilbao deposed upon oath before a Notary that he knew Titus
Ambrosius as having conducted him on a Mule the right way from Bilbao to the
Coledge of S. Alban in vagliadolid where they arrived on the beginning of June
1677. Moreover that he is ascertaind how the said Titus was never 5. leagues
out of vagliadolid until he returned for Bilbao for having occasion to travel
frequently that way (as being a Guide much employed because he knew the french
Language) as often as he past he found him at vagliadolid. The foresaid
depositions were taken on the second of January 1679. stilo novo at Bilbao
before John Baptista de Asturiaca a public notary: the originals are kept at
S. Omers together with an Authentical Attestation that the said John Baptista
is the Kings public Notary.

That he went not to Madrid from the time of his arrival at the College of S.
Albans in vagliadolid until his departure from the College is made out by the
depositions upon oath of F. Manuel de Calatajud Rector and F. Domingo Rames
Procurator of the said College as follows: Titus Ambrosius alias Oats
departed from the College of S. Albans in vagliadolid for Bilbao on saturday
30. October 1677. he entered upon the is it of June about 4. or 5. in the
afternoon in to the College; from the time of his entrance til the day of his
expulsion he never lay one night out of the College which also appears, by the
Books.

That he went not to Madrid from the Day of his departure from the said
College until his arrival at Bilbao upon return, is made out by the
Depositions of John de Sandoval the Guide who furnished him with a Mule and
accompanied him from vagliadolid to Bilbao: as follows.

On saturday the 30. October 1677. we departed from the College of vagliodolid
and lodged that night at Torquemada ten leagues of; the next morning I told him
I would hear Mass he said he would not hear. The next night we lodged at
Burgos, and the morning after being the Feast of all saints we both heard
Mass at the Dominicans, then we kept on our Journey, and at noone arrived at
a place called the White Inn having broke fast in the morning; he inquired of
the host whether he might say Mass in the Chapel over the way, I asked him
how he could say mass having broke his fast in the morning. He answered
that is no great matter, I have several times said 3. or 4. Masses after
breakfast. On the third of November about noone we arrived at Bilbao.

The said depositions were made before Joseph Morales at vagliadolid the Kings
public Notary on the 20. of December 1678. The Originals with all the usual
Formalities in such cases are kept at S. Omers.

How after his arrival at Bilbao he never went out of the town before he was
shipped for England is attested by Mr. Michael Hoar Merchant of Bilbao.

Titus Ambrosius alias Oats arrived here with the Castilian Guide, who
returned homewards the next day.

Titus stayed here about 8. or 10. days during which time he never went from
Bilbao but kept Company with the English in Town until he was shipped for
England, which was in the Katch called the Bilbao Merchant Thomas Richard Master,
bound for Exon, to which place I understood the vessel belongs. I hope this
fully satisfies you that Oats was not at Madrid and therefore that he is
perjured as to this point. Titus Oats being expelled out of the College of
Vagliadolid with a very bad caracter which will shortly be published in a
larger treatise, and departed out of spain came to London in November 1677.
And before the end of the same month prevailed with the Jesuits to be sent
over to S. Omers. He departed November 26. sti: v: on a monday from London in a
coach to Dover and arrived at S. Omers 10. of December st: no. Now he deposed
upon Oath at the Kings bench Bar Colemans Trial page: 18. How he brought a
packet of Letters From Mr. Coleman delivered to him by Fenwick at London, which
(says he) I opened when I came to S. Omers. And some few lines after being
asked by the Chief Justice. Did you break it open? Oats. I was at the opening
of it and saw it and read it. But this is a peccadillio not worth an
animadversion. What is material, is, that in the Packet there was a letter of
thanks to Father Lechese for the 10000. pounds given for the propagation of the
Catholic Religion and it should be employed for no other intent, but for that
for which it was sent; which was to cut of the King of England. page 19. Oats
says, I delivered this letter to Father Lechese his own hand. page 20. he
spoke Latin to P. Lechese, which Lechese sends an Answer to this Letter. I
brought it to Saint Omers and there it was enclosed in a letter from the
Society to Coleman.

It is not worth an observation that Oats spoke latin; an Jgnorant Dolt that
could not speak six words nor write 3. lines of true latin; I must tell you the
Character the spaniards gave of him: we have a mean opinion of the English
Heretics since so ignorant and ridiculous an animal could gain esteem amongst
them. This Letter mentioned in Col: Trial contained Treason of the highest
degree. Oats received it at London from Fenwick, brought it to S. Omers where
he was present at the opening and reading; he delivered it to Lechese his own
hands and brought back his Answer to S. Omers. so that Oats after his arrival
at S. Omers must have gone to Paris to deliver the Letter, and then returned
back to S. Omer. But from his arrival at S. Omers which was the tenth day of
December st: n: til the 23. of June st: no: on which day he departed for good
and all he never lay out of S. Omers but one or two nights at Watten the
Jesuits Noviship 2. leagues distant; this is deposed upon Oath by 20. Persons
before the Eschevins of the place, and an Authentical Testimony is extant of
it. Are you satisfied now that Oats is perjured in another material point
relating to this pretended conspiracy? I come now to the maine body of the
Plott. Colemans Trial page 21. Mr. Oats speaks: In the month of Aplil st: ve:
in the month of may no: sti: there was a Consult held at London, it was begun
at the white Horse Tauern, after they had consulted to send a Procurator to
Rome they adjourned themselves to several clubs and meetings. They went on to
these Resolves, that Pickering and Groves should continue in attempting to
assassinate the kings Person; Groves was to have 1500.l. Pikering 30000. Masses.

Colemans Trial page: 27. In the month of may last new style April old style.
I think within a day after our Consult I was at Mr Langhornes Chamber: He had
several Commissions which he called Patents; Amongst his Co^missions I saw one
from the General of the Society of Jesus by virtue of a brief from the Pope by
which he was enabled, for Coleman to be Secretary of state. Justice Wild*

What other Commissions were there in Mr. Langhornes Chamber? Oats Agreat many
I cannot remember all there was a Commission for my Lord Arundel of Warder The
Lord Powis and several others. Lord chief-Iustice. Ibid. p. 28. When did you
see the Commissions? Oats. In the month of April old style May new style.
Lordchief Justice: What time did you come over from S. Omers? Oats. In the
month of April. Ibid. page 29. Oats speaks, Mr Langhorne I hear you have
received the Commissions from Rome; He said, he had: shall I have the honor
to see some of them; He said I might: he thought he might trust me, and so
he might for that very day I gave him an account of the Consult.

Most of the said particulars are mentioned likewise in Oats his depositions
taken by order of the house of Commons. As the several Consults held at London
in April and May at which he was present about assassinating the Kings Person
The Commissions of Military and Civil Offices, as also for the Bishoprics,
seen by him in Mr Langhornes Chamber These are the two main branches of the
Plott: Destroying the King Person and subverting the Covernment. How absurd
and ridiculous this Fable is to a man of indifferent Capacity I leave to your
Consideration, J have not leisure to make glosses. I must tell you in one word
Oats came to S. Omers on y 10. December stilo novo 1677. and stayed there
until 23. June 78. stilo novo all that Time he never lay out of the College
but one or 2. nights at a place two leagues dista^t, there is an Authentical
instrument upon that subject made by the Eschevins of the place, having
examined 20. wittenesses upon Oath for that Purpose There are a hundred more
ready to testify it in the same manner. How was Oats then at London present
at the foresaid Consults, and saw the Co^missions in a Chamber of the Inner
Temple in April or May? Are you satisfied that he is perjured? He swore that
he delivered a Commission to Sr. Francis Ratcliff in Wild garden the summer
1678. where as it was made out that Sr. Francis had not been in London within
four years. He swore that Pierson my Lord Powis his Secretary in the month of
June 78. received a Commission for his Lord in Wild street, and brought there
in a Coach 300.l. in exchange for it, where as it can be proved by 500.
witnesses that Mr Pierson was not in London nor within 80. miles of it from
Aug: 9. 1677. until October the 5. 1678. He swore that one Preston a married
man of many years was a Priest, and how he had been several times at
Confession with him: the Contrary was proved to his Face. My Lord Chanceller
can Authenticate it. He swore before the Lords that he could accuse no other
member of their house nor any Person of Consideration out of their house; yet
within few days after he swore in the same place that the Queen was deeply
engaged in the Plot, my Lord Salisbury will Justify it, who caused the Iournal
to be inspected, and asked the opinion of the house whether the Queen was a
Person of Consideration or no? I should allege his false accusations of Mr.
Ireland for words and Actions done and spoke at London when it is deposed by
many Honorable and worthy Persons that he was far distant from the place, which
shall be made out with evidence in a treatise a part. All the other
particulars are canvassed and found false in the same degree so that Oats had
great reason to say Colemans Trial 30. page Prisoners may supplant Evidence
when they know it and bring Persons to such circumstances as time and Place. J
hope you are fully satisfied that the Plott is a Diabolical Fiction of this
Oats: that himself is a pure compound of Lies forgeries and Perjuryes. J hear
there is a statue preparing for him as preserver of the Kingdom. I shall adorn
it with an Epigraphe for his sake.

Upon this fellows Testimony is grounded the whole Machin of the Plott, others
are brought in as butteresses to support a weak foundation. Upon his single
testimony the Lords and many Gentlemen of Quality and fortune besides Priests
and diverse others are committed to Prison and some of them, most barbarously
treated. Catholics houses are searched in all parts for arms and Priests; All
Catholics in less then seven days warning are banished out of London and Ten
miles about. Others in the Country confined within five miles of their
habitation; so many forced to take Oaths against their Conscience. The train
band up in London, watch and ward thorough all the Kingdom. Many severe Bills
prepared in Parliament against poor Papists. An universal consternation in all
places. And what is beyond all admiration both houses of Parliament vote that
there is a plott.

Others I say are brought as Buttr^sses. In the first place comes in a second
to Oats, a knight of the Post ready to swear what you please, one Bedloe a
Fiddlers son. Its hard to give a Character of him in a short letter, he is well
known over most parts of England, Low countries France and Spain for
debaucheries cheats, Robberyes and Rogueries: Guzman and the english Rogue were
mere novices to him; but it is no marvel for J am credibly informed by a
Person of worth that he carries a familiar devil about, which he calls his
Patrimony, and if he were well searched it might be found. He has disgraced
many honorable names in his Travells as Lord Cornwallis in France, and Lord
Gerard (not him of Gerards Bromley) in Spain, but all these are pardonable
crimes. He cheated even his own Friend Titus Oats alias Ambrosius in
Vagliadolid, yet Oats has sworn that he never saw Bedloe before: and brings
it as a great proof of the truth that his Depositions should be confirmed by a
mere stranger. I have in my Custody to attest it Titus his own Letter dated
at Vagliadolid September. 3. 77. to Mr. Grace a Merchant. I am sorry for Mr.
Franklin's misfortune by the pretended Lord Gerard, he should first have
demanded of the said Lord three things, his Patent of honor, his license under
the great seal of England to travel, and Letters of Credit for his Reception.
If the said person were my Lord Gerard, I assure you that he is an errant Rogue
and is outlawed in England for a murder committed upon a boy whose neck he
broke Villanously and basely; Proclamations are out against him. His complice
was tried for his life but was quitted, the fault lying on the said Lord Gerard
as the sole Murderer: I have written against him to the Irish Archbishop and
Father sweetmans a Jesuit that they may not countenance him, he stole ten
pieces of 8. out of my Drawer being left alone in my Chamber, whilst J went to
provide him somewhat to eat and drink. This is Oats his own Letter, I am not
bound to correct some mistake that lies in it. Esquire Brandon Gerard is much
obliged to Bedloe, and has expressed his Gratitude at a dead lift. When his
Majesty with great indignation had refused to sign Bedloes pardon extended to
a certain day, who more concerned in the Case then the Esquire? who more
importune to press him too it, then he, and at last effected it? for your
assurance that this Bedloe was the counterfeit Gerard I send you a copy of a
letter from Mr. Hoar Merchant of Bilbao to a friend at Madrid. December 12.
1678. The Original J have in my custody.

El Diabolico Titus (Oats) may be proved a perjurer if he swore that he was
at Madrid I writ a couple of lines to a friend in London to whom I sent the
note Titus gave me for the 10. pieces of 8. J lent him; and by the way gave
him to understand that one Williams of whom his letter to Mr. Grace makes
mention, has presented himself Before the Parliament, declaring himself to
have had a hand in Sr. Edmunbury Godfreys death. I know the said Williams to
be a knave and a highway Robber, and Titus Oats told me that he had stolen
from him at Vagliadolid ten pieces of 8. This Williams was here with his
brother, the one pretended himself to be the young Lord Gerard. and the other
his Tutor, The one is a shoemaker the other a Carpenter: they have used many
cheats and other mad pranks amongst our Merchants.

This fellow is quallified to be a Witness in the case, he has obtained an
universal pardon under the great seal; but noe act of Grace nor oblivion can
cancel the memory of his misdemeanors. This man has far more wit and
confidence then Oats tho he is only second and not principal in the Intrigue.
He and Oats swore stoutly against Mr. Colema^, who took it upon his salvation
before and after sentence and at the Gallows, that he had never seen Oats
before he was brought into trouble, nor Bedloe before the day of his Trial.

A third Person brought on the stage is one Prans a silver smith, who has
sworn forward and backward several times in the Case: he is now for the Plot,
but I presume when the next fit comes he will swear against it.

Stephen Dugdale born of mean Parents in Darbyshire after some him spent in
school was applied to the plow, but being found to have skill in Arithmeticke,
and a capacity for a better employment, he was entertained by the Lord Ashto^
for bailey. After some years spent in that service honestly as is supposed, he
turned spendthrift by frequenting foot races, making matches abetting and
loosing often such considerable somms as once of three hundred pound, that to
maintain his Credit he used to imbezel his Lords money and play several other
cheats, things well known and talked of in the neighborhood before they were
discovered by his Lord in October last, which was on this occasion. He had
told his Lord that certain Tenants had not paid their Rent whereof one coming
in the way was asked the Reason, who answered that is was paid long before;
the Lord asked his Bailey: whether it were true, he stood upon the denial
very confidently, until the Tenant was brought in place. Then he fell upon
his knees begd his Lordships pardon promising future amendment if he might
keep his service, which was granted at the intercession of a Gentleman then in
the house, provided he would procure out of hand the money for which he had
sold two yoke of Oxen: this he undertook to do and assured his Lord that
within few days the buyer would bring it, but noe money Coming he was asked
who the buyer was; he said one of Newcastle, and how a certain man of Stafford
was witness to the bargain. The Lord found upon enquiry at Stafford how the
price of his Oxen had bin disposed of to pay a debt of his Baily. About the
same time he sold of certain Runts unknown to his Lord, and kept the money. For
these and many other cheating tricks notoriously known in the family and
Country about Tixall, he was turned out of service. Toward the end of
November he was committed to the Jaile of Stafford, where he took the Oaths,
but being asked by two Justices of Peace whether he knew any thing of the
Plot. he answered that he knew nothing. Yet on the 23. December, having had
notice of 200.l. and other adva^tages that were promised to any one that would
make further discovery of the Plot, being now in a desper ate condition and
never like to get out of Prison by reason of his debts, laid hold on the
proffer and feyned a false accusation. You see upon what account he is brought
in shortly we expect to have his depositions published.

I hope this short account will satisfy you that there is noe plot; I have made
use of one Topic only to defeat Oats his deposition, to wit, by making out
that he and the Parties accused were far asunder at such times as he fixes the
Treason to, which he laid to their charge.

Your self will reflect upon the Absurdityes and Improbabilityes in the whole
subject of his deposition. As that Oats was a Jesuit, a fellow unknown should
be entrusted with secrets of most dangerous consequence, and then turned away
disgracefully to betray them. To be called by a particular Patent to consults,
to be empowered to open letters. That 40000. black Bills should be provided,
and yet be in visible. That a General of a Religious Order should be
empowered to dispose of all Offices Military and Civil in the Kingdom by
comissions. That such honorable Persons of Estates and discretion should be
so simple as to believe it, and stake both life and Fortune on such a mad cast,
etc. All the whole Contrivance is a mere midsommer nights dream.

But all this increases the difficulty of the second Quere, how the whole
nation could be worked to such a temper as to belive it. This is soon answered
if the time were seasonable: the success of a plot does not so much depend
upon the Composition as upon the management; There lies all the art and wit.
Verbum sapienti satis. Adieu.

FINIS.

