A LETTER FROM A MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS TO HIS FRIEND IN THE COUNTRY.
THe coffy house and street news, Sir, is but too true. Our new King continues
entirely an Hollander still, and means our purses shall pay his gratitude to
the States General for the suceour which he squeesed out of them.

That forward zeal for Protestant Religion with which the Hollanders clothed
their manifest, and those desinteressed succors which they gave in alms to
England for the reestablissement of our liberty, have cheated many a man: but
so much generosity is not the virtue of merchants, who sacrifice all to their
interest. They have now declared that they never intended, the ships and
Soldiers lent the Prince of Orange, for his entreprise, should be at their
charge. They swell the account to 600000. l. and urge payment; we must allow
the account as they give it in on their word, and may be sure, interest and the
hazard of their money is not forgotten.

They have made the Prince of Orange their Factor, and he prowes zealously
faithful. He never served them so well when he was their subject, as now we
have made him our King. He set on his emissarys to tamper with all his well
affected members, before the motion was made to the house, and we proving a
little slow in taking a motion so unexpected and so unresonable into
consideration, he plied us with message after message and at last got Mr.
Hamden to undertake the business, and report the account to the house.

In the time of our past liberty you yourself can witness how matters past in
debates of free and lawful Parliaments, and with what freedom every one
deliverd his opinion of what he judge'd expedient or prejudicial to the
nation. But it is not now as it has been. We are no longer the same Englishmen,
who knew not what fear meant as often as our rights and privileges came in
question, and who were so unshakably unanimous against impositions contrary to
the good and advantage of the Nation. We have got traitors among us wholly
devoted to their private interests and their new master, and these so fright
the honest men with their threats, that we are grown spiritles in our own
defense: fear ty's up our toungs, and with as much indignation as most of us
heard a motion made to enrich foreigners with our money, and send so vast a sum
out of the kingdom, no body durst open his mouth. The house was struck dumb,
and forced to adjourn the debate to the next day. I was one of the first that
left the house, with the grief of a true Englishman stung to the quick with the
unhappy condition to which we are reduced *** and *** and some more who yet in
their hearts preserve a love for their lost liberty, followd me home where we
found ourselvs all of a mind, very desirous to withdraw and avoid at least the
reproach of being accomplices in what passes against our liberty and laws: but K
Williane being it seems secure that those, whom threats and promises have made
sure to him, will alwais carry it in Parliament, will needs force us tarry in
the house, and make it a punishable matter to take the air in the country. It Is
for this reason his creatures have got an order to oblige absent Members to
return by a day prefixed: so that they are not content to impose upon us the
yoke of a new tyranny, but bart us the poor comfort of not being witnesses to
what is don against us, and if we will not concur with our consent, make us in
spite of our teeth concur at least by our presence.

This is the result of our seducing hopes when we came into the house. They
told us the Prince of Orange was the defender of our liberty, and desired a
Convention only to set due bounds to Royalty, secure Protestant Religion
against the attempts of the Papists, and by excluding the groundles pretense of
dispensing power for ever, reanimate the laws with a fresh vigor They told us
that coming purely for the good of the English, he would trust wholly to them,
and send back his foreign soldiers to Holland, of whom he had no need, and
that looking upon the restoration of our liberty as his own work, he would be
the Protector and Defender of it.

We believed him upon his word, and this credulyty will be the source of all
our misfortunes. We know his false dealing, his boundles ambition, and
insatiable avarice. But what remedy? and what way left to avoid taking his will
for law, when against all law, he keeps his foreigners to authorize his
doings, and enslave us at at pleasure? so that till God put in a helping hand,
and cure us of our blindness, he will do here, what ever he has a mind to.

His 600000 l. motion to gratify the Hollander will certainly take. We know
well enough there is no justice in it, we know the Hollanders declared in their
manifest of 28. October past, that being advertised that the Kings of France
and England hand made a league to pull down and quite destroy their state, they
had consented to the enterprise of the Prince of Orange, and resolved to assist
him with men and ships. They themselves therefore own that they acted for
themselves and their own interest: and yet we shall give them what they ask
never the less for that: Nay I expect the Members, who are of the Privy
Counsel, shall be ordered to carry his Majesty the thanks of the house for his
Goodness and love to the English, in contenting himself with so small a sum
for the Hollanders. I see our Nation heretofore so jealous of its liberty
accustom's it self now to kiss the iron rod which scourges them; and those who
formerly would have laid down their lives to purchase a Common Wealth, drive
furiously on for a despotik power such as is known no where but in Asia.

The truth is he carrys it yet with us, in appareance, with some moderation.
What a noise did his releasing chimny money make? and what trumpetting was
there of his tenderness and liberality. Alas! he means we shall pay dear for
that small ease, and make up his petty loss with gain to the purpose It Is
already insinuated that the reduction of Ireland will cost considerably, and a
War at home and abroad ask a great deal of money; and these insinuations will
quickly become votes and Acts. We have no will of our own left; we are goeing
to be over whelmed with tax upon tax; Our laws already undermined, are upon the
point of falling and if God give us not courage enough to resolve to maintain
them, farewell to our estates and liberty for ever.

We might have taken warning by our Neighbors, and by what he has done in
Holland, certainly known what he would do in England He was born a subject to
the Hollanders, yet found means to become their Master; and engross a sovereign
power over them, without the title. Beso ted we! could we think it a likely
matter, that he would go less when he was King of England, and depend on
Parliaments? And then we find by experience that the same courses are taken
here, which have enslaved Holland: those chosen into all employments who are
blindly devoted to him, and all others excluded; promises to corrupt one, and
threats to frighten another, and the art of ridding those out of the ^y whose
free spirits will not bend, and sweeping away all that resist him.

Nothing can keep the vast projects of his irregular ambi^on within compass.
Religion is but an useful tool to work upon the fools which will be cheated;
and we shall quickly ^ee ours destroyed by his hands, who in his Letters, his
Declarations and even in his flags has declared him self the Proector of it.
The oath of Supremacy which acknowledgd Kings ^o be the supreme Governors of
the English Church, is al^eady gone; Ceremonys and the Music in Whitehall
Chapel, (...) thing in use in our Churches, sent packing; Prayers changed,
very ancient Rites abolisht: and all this upon pretext of uniteing Episcopacy
and Presbytery, but in reality to bring the Episcopal party over to the
Presbyterians. Not that he troubles him self much with either Religion: but
the fidelity of Bishops to powers lawfully established by God, is not for the
turn of usurpers; Calvinist or Independent Principles do much better when one
has a mind to fly at all; Principles by the which every one may believe as is
most for his purpose, break oaths made to lawful Princes without scrupule,
acknowledge no subordination whither in Church or state. This suits a great
deal better both with his own present interest, and that of Protestant Princes,
of whose assistance he thinks, he may have occasion. Let that interest
change, he will change too, and follow it wherever it go, whether to Head or
Member of the Church, and Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent or Quaking
Member, Stateholder in Holland or King in England, but Tirant by whatever (...)
or title dignified.

The frights in to which our abdicating King and his popery put us were nothing
to this Tis-true he would need employ Papists, and dispense with conscience
laws But for destroying the Religion established by law in England, he neither
had the will, nor the means; a lawful Parliament without which he could do
nothing, would alwais have been in a condition to oppose, and redress what bad
Counsel might suggest amiss. That releif is now out of do^es: The Parliament
is a pack of his creatures slavishly obedient to the pleasure of our new King
and those who in their hearts preserve the love of their Religion and laws, so
cruelly ^ken, are bridled by the fear of a Prince, who stands (...) upon
dispatching a man who opposes him, without (...) ado out of the way, and has a
foreign army at hand, ready to execute whatever order he gives them.

In a word our Laws are already overturned; our Religion totters, and will not
long stand; and to this state of ^i^lence our credulous weakness has reduced
us, it is time I think to wake out of our swound, to acknowledge the hand of God
upon us for deserting our lawful Prince, and return to him. He who sets up
the standard of liberty any where is sure of crowds of helping hands flocking
in to him from all parts; and the fidelity which we ow to the true interests
of the Nation cannot fail to be crowned with success, and immortal glory. I
remain, etc.


