A LETTER FROM A MINISTER to his FRIEND, Concerning the GAME of CHESSE.
April 16th. 1680. SIR,
I Here send you my Reasons for my difusing and declining the Game of Chess.
This I premise, that I think Recreation to be in it self Lawful, yea that like
Physic it is to some persons, and in some cases very needful: Also that this
Game of Chess is not only Lawful, but it may be the most ingenious and
delightful that ever was invented: Others seem to be calculated for Children,
this for Men; in most others there is much of Contingency, in this there is
nothing but Art. But though it be never so lawful and eligible in it self, yet
to me it is inexpedient. And there are some particular Reasons why I am fallen
out with this Exercise, and I believe shall never be reconciled to it again;
and they are such as follow.

1. It is a great Time-waster: How many precious hours (which can never be
recalled) have I profusely spent in this Game? O Chesse, I Will be avenged of
thee for the loss of my Time. It Is a true saying, That it is more necessary
thriftiness to be sparing and saving of Time than of Money. One offered on his
Deathbed a World of Wealth, for an Inch of Time; and another with great
earnestness, cried out, when she lay a dying; Call Time again! call time again!
This I heard, says a worthy Minister, and I think the sound of it will be in my
ears so long as I live. 2. It has had with me a fascinating property: I have
been bewitched by it; when I have begun, I have not had the power to give over.
Though a thing be never so lawful yet I ought not to suffer my self to be
brought under the power of it. I Will not use it, till I find I can refuse it.
Reason and Religion shall order my Recreation. 3. It has not done with me when
I have done with it. It has followed me into my Study, into my Pulpit; when I
have been Praying, or Preaching, I have (in my thoughts) been playing at Chess;
then I have had as it were a Chess-board before my eyes; then I have been
thinking how I might have obtained the stratagems of my Antagonist, or make
such and such motions to his disadvantage; nay, I have heard of one who was
playing at Chess in his thoughts (as appeared by his words) when he lay a
dying. 4. It has caused me to break many solemn Relsolutions, nay Vows and
promises. Sometimes I have obliged my self in the most solemn manner, to play
but so many Mates at a time, or with any one person, and anon I have broken
these obligations and promises, and after Vows of that kind I have made inquiry
how I might evade them; and have sinfully prevaricated in that matter; and that
not once only, but often. 5. It has wounded my Conscience, and broken my
peace. I have had sad reflections upon it when I have been most serious. I find
if I were now to dye, the remembrance of this Game would greatly trouble me,
and stare me in the face. I have read in the life of the famous John Husse, how
he was greatly troubled for his using of this Game, a little before his death.
6. My using of it has been scandalous and offensive to others. Some Godly
Friends (as I have understood) have been grieved by it; and others (as I have
reason to fear) have been hardened by it. Great inconveniences have arisen from
the places where, and the persons with whom I have used this Game. 7. My using
of it has occasioned much sin, as passion, strife, idle (if not lying) words,
in myself or my Antagonist, or both. It has caused the neglect of many duties
both to God and Man. 8. My using of it does evince, I have little self denial
in me. If I cannot deny my self in a foolish Game, how can I think I either do
or shall deny my self in greater matters? how shall I (...) all for Christ,
when I cannot (...) a Recreation for him. 9. My using it is altogether needless
and unnecessary to me. As it hinders my Souls health, so it does not further my
bodily health. Such is my constitution (being Corpulent and Phlegmatic) that
if I need any exercise, it is that which is stirring and laboring. I cannot
propound any end to my self in the use of it, but the pleasing of my flesh. 10.
My using of it has occasioned (at times) some little expense of Money. This is
the least, and therefore I mention it last. I should think much to give that to
relieve others wants, that I have wasted this way at several times upon my own
wantonness.
I Conclude with the passage of Mr. B. in his Christian Direct. p. 464. Thus he
writes. I know not One person of an Hundred, or of many Hundred, that needs
any Game at all, there are such variety of better Exercises at hand to recreate
them. And it is a sin to idle away any time which we can better improve. I
confess my own nature was as much addicted to playfulness as most, and my
judgment allows so much Recreation as is needful to my Health and Labor, and
no more; but for all that, I find no need of any Game to recreate me. When my
mind needs Recreation, I have variety of recreating Books, and Friends, and
business to do; that when my body needs it, the hardest labor that I can
bear, is my best Recreation; Walking is instead of Games and Sports, as
profitable to my body and more to my mind. If I am alone, I may improve that
time in Meditation; if with others, I may improve it in profitable cheerful
conference. I condemn not all Sports and Games in others, but I find none of
them all to be best for my self. And when I observe how far the temper and life
of Christ and his best servants, was from such recreations, I avoid them with
the more suspicion. And I see but few but distaste it in Ministers (even
Shooting, Bowling, and such more healthful Games, to say nothing of these and
such others as fit not the end of Recreation) therefore there is somewhat in it
that Nature it self has some suspicion of. That Student that needs Chess or
Cards to please his mind, I doubt has a Carnal empty mind; if God, and all his
Books, and all his Friends, etc. cannot suffice for this, there is some disease
in it that should rather be cured than pleased. And for the Body, it is another
kind of exercise that profits it.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the
lower end of Cheapside near Meners-Chappel, 1680:26 April.


