A LETTER From a Scholar in OXFORD, To his Friend in the Country: SHOWING What
progress the Visitors have made in the Reformation of that University, and
what it is that obstructs it.

ACADEMIA ^ OXONIENSIS ^
SAPIENTIA ET FELICITATE


Printed in the Year, 1647.

A Letter from a Scholar in OXFORD, to his friend in the Country.
Sir,
I Writ to you yesterday by your good friend Master P. but in such haste, and
so abruptly, that it cannot in any measure answer either your expectation or my
desires of satisfying you.

I know you must needs long to hear what Progress is made in our Visitation:
Truly so little, that I cannot well tell whether it be begun. Friday June 4.
was designed for the day; and the Visitors from London had peremptorily
resolved to be here, and were as confidently expected. But they were diverted
by the unexpected news of the Armies rebelling against the two Houses,
together with a high Mutiny of the Garrison here (two days before the Visitors
should have come down) who not only refused to disband, but detained the 3500.
l. which was sent down to pay them upon their disbanding. The Parliament,
while the money was upon the way hither, being informed that they meant not to
disband, sent Post after the money, to have it brought back: but their
menssenger was too slow; for it was got into Oxford before he overtooke it: and
the Garrison notwithstanding the Parliaments command, were resolved not to part
with it. Whereupon the Convoy of Dragoones, who had guarded it from London
hither, attempting to have it back again, the Garrison-Souldiers fell upon
them in the high street (the money standing laden betwixt them) wounded many
of them, and quickly beat them out of the Town, leaving their money and their
wagon and teeme of horses behind them.

This, with the high demands of the Army (which fell out very opportunely at
the same time) made Sir Nathaniel Brent, and those other gentlemen which should
have accompanied him hither, begin to look about them, and to be think
themselves whether it were not better to keep in London then to adventure
themselves at Oxford amongst a company of Malignant Scholars, and an
Independent Garrison that had already put such an affront upon the Parliament
especially there being a great party of Horse then lying quartered about Ox.
sent from the Army to secure the Train of Artillery here, upon an information
that there was a design to seize upon it, and remove it to London.

The result was, that (though on the Thursday following, June 3. Merton
College great gates were set wide open to receive them and great preparations
made for their entertainment there; and the poor Scholars generally quaking at
the approach of their Doomesday, the rather in regard they had declared but
three days before against the Covenant, yet) the Gentlemen came not. Only a
Packet of letters was brought from them to the Ministers here, to let them know
that they should not expect them till the long Vacation.

Hereupon we conceived (and we thought we had some reason for it) that the
Visitation would be adjourned till that time: never imagining that the
Ministers (especially considering the present Posture of Affairs) would have
had the courage to undertake it themselves. Though by the way let me tell you,
that had the rest all of them come, yet the University had beforehand resolved
not to appear or submit to their Visitation, otherwise then with a [ Salvis
nobis and Academiae omnibus juribus, privilegiis, immunitatibus, etc.] to be
delivered to them in writing by the Proctors and Heads of Houses. Nay it was
put to the question (but waved) whether we should appear at all: upon this
supposed ground that they had no lawful authority to visit us.

But the next morning, contrary to every bodies expectation, we understood that
the M. Rogers. M. Harris. M. Reynolds. M. Wilkinson. M. Cheynell.
Ministers (forsooth) assisted by one Master Dunce of Pizzy, Master Draper (a
new-made justice, and a Committee-man for this County) and another of the
Wilkinsons, which three were come to town for that purpose, supposing the rest
would have done the like (and indeed some others there were in Town; one, I am
certain* but he thought it more prudence not to be seen among them) intended
to proceed in the business. To be short (for I perceive I am already become
tedious in my Relation) the bell rung out for the Visitation-Sermon; M. Harris
preached it; the greatest part of the University were present.

Sermon ended (but it was very long first; for which we do freely forgive him)
we hasted away (the Visitors following after more gravely and leisurely) to the
Schools: where the Vicechancellour, the Doctors and Proctors, with diverse
other members of the University had attended (according to the Citation) from
nine of the clock. No sooner were we come thither but the clock struck eleven:
and I can assure you there was no foul play in it; for to prevent all cavil,
the Vicechancellour, when he perceived it to draw toward eleven sent a command
to the Sexton that he should be careful to observe the Sun, and see that his
clock kept pace with it exactly.

This fair advantage being thus unexpectedly offered us (for which we have
none to thank but the Preacher, one of themselves) we thought we had no reason
but to embrace it: and therefore, upon the striking of the clock, we entered
immediately into the Convocation-House, and there declared (by the mouth of the
Proctor; whereunto we have the attestation of a Public Notary) that whereas by
virtue of an Ordinance of the two Houses we had been cited to appear there
this day between the hours of nine and eleven in the forenoone, we had obeyed:
and because the time limited was now expired, we held our selves not obliged to
any further attendance. Whereupon the Vicechancellour gave command that we
should every man forthwith repair home to our several Colleges.

In our return (the Vicechancellour and Doctors marching in a full body, with
the Bedells before them) we met the Visitors just in the Proscholium; where the
passage (you know) being somewhat narrow, one of the Bedells called to them [
room for M. Vicechancellour] whereupon they were pleased to deny Self, and
gave the way. The Vicechancellour (very civilly) moved his cap to them, saying
[ good morrow gentlemen; it is past eleven a clock] and so passed on without
taking any further notice of them. Upon this, there followed a great Humme, and
so we parted; they ^^lding on to their Visitation-House, and we home to dinner.
They sat about an hour that day (looking one upon another) and have met
several times since (M. Principal Roger^ being Chairman:) but what they do
when they are togther, or how they put off the time* I am not able to inform
you: for, to tell you the plain truth, we never heed them.

This carriage of ours they take very ill, and look upon it as a high
contempt. We, on the other side, think we are very well able to justify what
we have done; and are of opinion that they are quite out, and must begin again,
if they mean to do any thing: conceiving that we are not bound to make any
further appearance, unless we have a new Citation; the former being rendered
null through their default.

Sir, let me crave your Opinion of the Case, and your favorable acceptance of
this impertinent Paper, that presumes thus to break in upon you, and disturb
your thoughts, which (doubtless) are now fixed upon a business of much
greater concernment, the present contestation between the two Houses and the
Army. However, I do not at all doubt but you will pardon this injury, when you
shall find that it is done you by

Your very affectionate Friend.
Oxford. June 25. 1647.
POSTSCRIPT.
YEsterday Doctor Shelden and Doctor Hammond (two of His Majesty's Chaplains)
went from hence toward Saint Albans, upon a command sent them to come and
attend their Master: a favor which he had long begged of the two Houses, and
has now (it seems) obtained it of the Army. Whereat Master Cheynell here is
very angry, and storms extremely, if any body cared for it. The poor man, God
help him, has utterly lost his patience, and (truly I am afraid) something
else.

THE END.

