A LETTER FROM THE Officers at Whitehall TO THE Officers under General MONCK
in Scotland.

With the ANSWER Of General MONCK and his Officers thereunto, Wherein with
plainness and sincerity, they endeavor to set before them the Evil of their
doings.

Printed at Edinburgh, by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close over against the
Throne Church, and reprinted in London, 1659.

A Letter from the Officers at Whitehall, to the Officers under General Monck
in Scotland, sent by Captain Deane.
Dear Brethren, and Fellow Soldiers,
WE most heartily wish Grace and Truth to be multiplied unto you, through the
knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord; And also we desire the God and Father
of all Grace, to add to your Faith. Virtue; and to Virtue Knowledge; and to
Knowledge Temperance; and to Temperance, Godliness; and to Godliness,
Brotherly-kindnesse, and to brotherly kindness Charity.

Dear Brethren, We cannot but be deeply affected and afflicted in our own
spirits, to consider of your dissatisfaction with us upon mistaken grounds. You
have known us these many years to be your faithful Brethren, that durst do
nothing that is sinful; And we may affirm with plainness, honesty and
simplicity of heart we have done nothing in the late Revolution, but that which
the Providence of the most wise God prepared to our hands and led us out unto,
without so much as one half hours time to design or resolve to take that course
we were necessitated unto; Since which most of such persons that were not clear
in the present and sudden Action, have made their acknowledgement of their full
satisfaction, and we are mutually reconciled, and they are received and
tendered by us as affectionate Brethren: And for a more full Narrative of the
providential Grounds and graduall Steps that led us to that work yet (with a
king hearts) and as an Answer to your Queeries, signed in your Name by William
Clerk Secretary, bearing date the 22. instant, We refer you to a Book,
Entitled, The Armies Plea, And also, The Armies Declaration, relation
thereunto being had we hope will give you satisfaction.

Loving Brethren. What have we done, that you are offended? We are not
conscious, that any thing is acted by us upon the public Theater, but that
which we judge is acceptable to God: And what we have done has proceeded from
uprightness of heart, and for the glory of God, the good of his Interest,
Cause and People in these Nations: Nothing less then these worthy ends could
have caused us to adventure our All that is dear to us for your and their
sakes; And after such a hazard, our Brethren to look shy upon us yea such, with
whom we have lived and conversed together, prayed, fought, and jeoparded our
lives together, And witnesses together of the glory of the most High God in the
high places of the field; Yea, we, that are of one Society, of one Family and
Household, that none hitherto (through the grace of God could disunite us) now
to be at a distance with us, is the greatest wound to us, which is
unexpressable: If it had been from our Enemies, we could have born it; Oh but,
they are the wounds of the house of our Friends. And all this arising without
dealing brotherly with us and without so much as sending to know the
providentiall grounds that led us to these Undertakings; And likewise your and
our unhappiness has been possibly by misinformations received by those who
have corresponded with the principal occasioners of this Breach; However we are
censured by you, we shall, we hope, carry Christianly and Brotherly toward
you, and exercise our selves in the Doctrine of our Savior. If any be
overtaken in a fault, restore such a one in the spirit of mecknesse, knowing
also, we are subject to like temptations,: And we ought to p^^y and pray for
one another, and forgive one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven us; We hope the fear of God will guide you, so that you may do nothing
to grieve Him and his little Flock, and rejoice the common Enemy abroad and at
home, nor give them advantages to make a prey of these poor Nations: What can
you propound to your selves? If you are for good things. So are we; If for a
Free State and Commonwealth, So are we; If against a single person, So are we;
If for Reformation, So are we; If for godliness, and the nations to be exalted
in Righteousness, So are we; Why do we differ in the form and way to it? Oh,
dear friends if you should precipitately engage into a War, and should Conquer
your Brethren, Would not the consequence be a Conquest over your selves, and
all the good People of the Land? And if they are gone, certainly (if you
retain, your old Principles) you would not desire to live long after them.

Precious Brathren We commend unto you that place of Scripture, Josh. 1.14.15.
We shall with our bended knees implore the God of Heaven, and King of Saints to
guide you, and persuade you, as holy Noah said in another case, Genesis 9.27. God
shall persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem. Finally, Brethren,
farewell, Be of good comfort, Let us be of one mind live in peace and the God
of love and peace shall be with you and us: We remain

Your most affectionate Brethren and Fellow Soldiers.
Dear Friends, We hope to hear in your Answer to this, that all our dear
Friends n^w in Bonds, are at Liberty and that the Lord has ^atisfied your
hearts to acquiesce in his pre^ent Dispensations, so as we may not expose each
other to further Inconveniency.



A Return of the General and Officers in Scotland, to the aforesaid Letter of
the Officers at Whitehall.
Dear Brethren, and Fellow Soldiers in the Lord,
IN the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, We return you our most hearty wishes and
prayers, That Grace, and Truth, and Peace also might be multiplied unto you:
And that to your Faith, and your Virtue, and your Knowledge, and your
Temperance, and your Godliness, and your brotherly Kindness, and your
Charity, might be added, Patience, and Meekness, and Humility, and
Self-denial. Great are the thoughts of our hearts, for the divisions in
Reuben, and we are (as you express it) deeply affected and afflicted in our
own spirits, when we consider what cause we have to be dissatisfied with you,
our dear Brethren; you, with whom we have lived and conversed together; with
whom we have prayed and fought, and jeoparded our lives together; with whom we
have taken sweet Counsel, and walked together in the House of God as Friends:
But we cannot conceal from you that our Affection and Affliction of spirit is
much increased by the Letter you sent us by Captain Deane, and by the Books
you referred us to in that Letter. We had before some small (indeed our only)
hopes that there might be some mistake between us, but alas! We cannot but now
think (since we find you have no more to say for your selves) that Our fears
were but too true, and the Causes of our Dissatisfaction at your present
actings but too just: We shall deal with you with that plainness and freedom,
and sincerity that becomes Brethren, for so we think it becomes us, To
fulfill all Righteousness: And so we think it Expedient both for you and us,
that We may the sooner come to a right understanding one of another.

We could not be satisfied that there was any such need of more General
Officers (the first occasion of this unhappy difference) as that the Parliament
should be pressed to it so unseasonably and so just a jealousy treated in
them, that there was a Design to set up a Single Person (of which they had but
so late, and so sad experience) and we could not but think it sufficient for
the security of the good Interest, that the Army was united under one head, the
Parliament.

We were less satisfied, that after you declared your Satisfaction and
Acquiescence in the Votes of the House, you should endeavor by a new way to
wrest the Power out of their own hands, and to prosecute the same Design; This
making the Army a Corporation in a manner Independent from the Civil Power,
and creating to it an Interest, distinct from that of the Peoples, by whom they
hitherto have, and still must live, and for whom they are by their Engagements
and duties bound to die: and that after you knew the Parliament had in effect
disapproved your Petition, you should still endeavor to get more hands to it,
which neither the Parliament, not we our selves could look upon any otherwise
then as a Design to force the Parliament to grant what they had already in
effect disapproved, if not to do that which you say was done at less then half
an hours warning.

But then that after the sad experience of so many confusions and tossings,
which these poor Nations had already felt by such actings as these, after the
unhappy (and since acknowledged unlawful) former. Interruption of that (by
your selves called) famous long Parliament, after the Confusions and
Distractions of that little one of your own, and not of the peoples choosing;
after the occasion by them given to some of setting up, and the necessity
imposed on us of accepting a Single Person, contrary to our former Engagements,
and to our Interests; after our late renewed Engagement, and our solemn and
serious expressions of Repentance, That you should so soon return to your
former sin, and for the apparent interest of nine or ten Persons (who how
precious soever, yet cannot be worth the blood that may he shed in this
quarrel) to put a new force upon the Parliament, and to destroy all Lawful
Authority in the three Nations, and to put them out of hopes of ever having
any for the future, but what shall be at your disposals; and to do these things
in the Name of the whole Army, thereby usurping a Power over your Brethren, to
which you have no right, and involving us in the same guilt with yours in the
same actings, against which we are bound to protest before God and Man: This is
that which lies the forest upon our Spirits; This is that which wounds us
deepest.

This is that which must of necessity make the three Nations slaves to the
Army, The Armies of Scotland and Ireland, Slaves to that of England, and that
of England to nine or ten Persons, and perhaps in short time those nine or ten,
to one single One: The best effect it can have, must be that which you so much
complain of in the Armies Plea, page 25.

That all the pious and good people of this Nation shall not enjoy a peaceable
and quiet life in all Godliness and Honesty, but only some part of them.

We cannot but in the Name of the Lord tell you that these Actings make us
stink in the nostrils of the good people, and cause the Name of God to be evil
spoken of, and his Enemies to rejoice.

And yet you say Behold, what we have done? and tell us in many, but very
general terms, what good things you are for: We likewise are for good things
as well as you; We are for a free State and Commonwealth as well as you; We
are against a single Person as well as you; We are for Reformation as well as
you; We are as well as you for Godliness and the Nations to be exalted in
Righteousness; if so be that you be indeed for these things which you
pretend, and that we differ not in the end as well as in the way to it!

But how can you be for good things, as long as you do that which is Evil?
How can you be for a Free State and Commonwealth, if for the Interest of
nine or ten Persons you dissolve Parliaments? To what purpose is it to be
against a single Person, if you be for nine or ten; or for Reformation, if
you return so soon to former sins? Or, how can Godliness or Righteousness
be exalted, by violent and unvvarrantable means?

Brethren, Our daily prayer to God is, That we may not be necessitated to a
War with you; but if we be, we must tell you that we do not precipitate
our selves, or run rashly or inconsiderately into it; We have had time, sadly
and seriously to consider the whole Matter, and we must deal plainly with
you, and tell you, that what you pretend, you had not half an hours time to
deliberate about, We have expected from you some vvecks; We could not but take
notice that the occasion both of calling and Interrupting this Parliament,
was, the making of General Officers.

How little desire we have of making a conquest over you, He knovvs who
knovvs how little joy we should take in it; If there were not something in
the Quarrel that is dearer to us then our lives, we should never undertake it.

And now Brethren, as yet dear and precious in our eyes, we beseech you for
the mercies of Jesus Christ to lay these things to heart, and as we have done
with Josh. 1. Verse 14.15 so to reflect seriously upon Josh. 7. Verse 19 and
once more to take the shame to your selves, and to repent with a repentance not
to be repented of. Consider whose blood is to b^ shed on both sides, what
cause it is that lies at stake, who they are that are like to reap the benefit
of our Contentions: Suffer not Self or Interest, nor desire of the things of
this world, to entangle you again in the same snare out of which you have so
lately escaped: Lay not up your treasure in this world, But seek first the
Kingdom of heaven; Do not evil, because you think good may come of it.

Finally, Brethren, stand fast in that Liberty wherein Christ has made you
free, and be not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage. The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with you, Amen.

EDINBURGH, Your most affectionate and afflicted Brethren and Fellovv-Souldiers.

POSTSCRIPT.
Dear Brethren,
WE entreat you not put so hard a name upon the necessary and short restraint
of our Brethren, as Bonds; We still own them and use them as brethren; their
Pay is still continued to them, and the Restraint put upon them, for their and
your, and our Security, and the Security of all Gods People, we hope will be
very short, shorter then either you or we can expect: And take it not ill we
acted any thing without first sending to you, We acted nothing but what was
necessary to our present safety and we immediately sent our Letters to you,
which if they came not to your hands, it is not our faults We have lately sent
Commissioners, Men faithful and approved, whom we hope you will treat as
brethren.

For the Right Honorable the Lord F^eetwood, and the rest of the Officers of
that part of the Army at London.

FINIS.

