A LETTER from JAMAICA, to a Friend in LONDON, concerning Kid-Napping.
SIR,
YOURS found me a little Indisposed; but yet I made the best Enquiry my Health
and Opportunity would give me leave to Answer your Desires. The Relation you
have sent me of the great Abuses in the Spiriting away of Children, makes a
very sad Story; and must needs be a Lamentable Grief to their Parents that have
lost them. You should have done well to have sent me the Names of those that
are missing; or if you think fit to have me look any further into this
business, pray let me receive your further Directions at your best leisure. We
are not without Apprehensions here in this Place for the Divisions in England;
I wish we may yet live to meet again in Comfort and Peace.

The Paper which I send you here enclosed, is all I was able to do in so short
a time; but upon the Truth of it you may depend. I do not know but you may find
in this List some unhappy People that you look for; and it would be well if you
made a Publication of it in one of the common News Papers: Mr. Janeway, or Mr.
Curtis, I make no doubt will do it for you, and it may be so Notified, as that
any of those good People that have lost their Children, may understand whither
to Repair for satisfaction.

If you know no better a way, you might do well to apply your self to Mr. JOHN
WILMORE in Jewen-street, who is a Planter himself, and knows all the Tricks of
those Rascals. Besides that, he is a Man of Business in the City, a large
Acquaintance, a True Protestant, and (if I am not mistaken) a
Common-Council-Man. He is very Industrious and Charitable beside; and if there
should be occasion, he is as likely to assist you as any Man I know: tho it
were to go as far as the Hope upon the Errand, to save a Poor Child from Want,
and Slavery. I need say no more to you, than that if you have his Friendship,
he can tell you all the ways of the Trapan: how they take up Children, Inviegle
them away, and the conveieances they have for the concealing of them. These
Kid-Nappers will tell you perhaps that a Child was ready to be eaten up with
Vermin, and they took him in Compassion; that they could not get quit of him,
or persuade him to come back it may be, tho he were ready to leap into the Sea:
wherefore you must get a discreet Justice to examine the matter; so the rest I
leave to your discretion.

Little Will takes to his business very well; and I hope his Friends will have
Comfort of him. Pray Commend me to all my good Friends and Acquaintance in your
Neighborhood, and pardon all Faults; for I must immediately take my leave of
you, and Subscribe my self your Affectionate Kinsman and Servant,

T. M.
If any Person Named in the following List, shall be found to have been
Spirited away: Notice may be left with Mr. Walter Davis, in Amen-Corner, who
will give Directions how to make a further Enquiry.

The Number of Whites.
1. Joseph Russel. 2. William Burn. 3. George Shallitoe. 4. Urban Rony. 5.
Andrew Reddal. 6. William Polliard. 7. John Brown. 8. Richard Sevitor. 8.
Richard Sevitor. 9. James Durham. 10. George French. 11. Thomas Woodcock. Total
of the Whites -- 11.


The Number of Whites that Dyed in my time.
Thomas Hughs. 5 Peter Peterson. John Gwartwrite. Thomas Davies. Samuel
Hodgley.

Sold in my time.
Thomas Martin. 2 Thomas Barber.

Free.
William Ward. Richard Barret.


Lost at Law
with Fountain.


Jamaica December.



