A LETTER From a Gentleman in the COUNTRY, To his Friend in LONDON.
Occasioned by a PROPHECY, That was lately found in the place of Retirement of
Father Lewis, at Comb in Hereford-Shire; he being the Party that undertook, for
the value of thirty pounds, to pray the Soul of a certain Maids Father out of
Purgatory, (the which) has lately been made mention in a Pamphlet.
SIR,
THe News which daily occurs to us in the Country, does give me frequent
Opportunities of presenting my Service to you; I am very glad, that you are so
kind to me, as to do me the Honor, to employ me to give you an Account of our
quotidian Transactions; But on the other side, I am sorry that you will find no
better entertainment, when you come into the Country, than now you are like to
have. For our French-Wines were long since, quite spent, and our better Wine,
our Redstreak-Sider is almost drank up, for Father Lewis and his Accomplices
were most insatiable Drinkers, and would never be at quiet, till they had
gotten our Liquors from us; and though that Holy-Father was so Conscientious,
as to demand but thirty (out of five and thirty) pounds of the Maid, to pray
her Fathers Soul out of Purgatory (which if well done, might in Reason, deserve
a hundred) yet he was so Devilish unkind to us, as to threaten us, that we
should drink no more Sider after his Decease; The verity of which, you soon may
find, if you please to Read the Copy of a Prophecy which he left behind him;
It is as follows.

The Prophecy.
BEfore the Glorious Luminary of the Day shall this year Enter into the ninth
of the Caelestial Houses, there shall happen strange Revolutions, to the great
Admiration of many. Deserts shall become populous, and many Populous places
shall be almost desolate. Diverse Fertile places shall grow Barren, and some
Mines shall be exhausted. There shall be Apparitions of Men in Bloudy-coloured
Robes, shaking of Chains, to the great Terror ofl the Beholders. In many
places shall be heard wonderful and unintelligable Voices, to almost the
general Consternation of all those that hear them; and by means thereof, some
shall be so enchanted, that for some considerable time, they shall not be able
to stir from the Magick-Ground. Diverse grievous Sighs and Complaints shall be
uttered, which shall even penetrate the Hearts of those who hear them, whilst
others shall rejoice to see Bloody Slaughters and great Fires, which shall then
be in many places. Many things which for several Ages have been kept in
profound Secrecy, shall be then brought to light, and made to appear as clear
as the Noonday. Vineyards shall lie waste, Pomaries shall be rifled, and
diverse Structures shall be Demolished; insomuch, that Corn shall hereafter grow
in the places where they once stood.

This Prophecy was strangely and miraculously found out, for our Gentleman of
the two legged Tree, having a Months mind to try whether a Priests Garments
would become him, going one Morning to try how Father Lewis his Doublet would
sit him, by chance espied a Gentleman, which much accompanies the Black-Guard,
creeping out from between the Lining and the Cloth, which he intends to send
to Rome, there to be kept alive, for Zealots in future Ages to go in Pilgrimage
to; and that he might be so much further meritorious, as to oblige other Romish
Churches (besides St. Peter's) with some of those Relicts, he falls to Ripping
up the Doublet, not daring to trust a Tailor with a matter of so great
importance; lest by him he should be cheated of some of those six-footed
Animals, and so his intended pious Designs should be performed by another. He
had no sooner thrust in his Knife, with an intent to Rip up the stitches, but
on a sudden out leaps the Prophecy, and away vanishes the Doublet, so that he
thinks his desires are accomplished, for he does really believe, that every
Church in the Popes Dominion is furnished with one of the beforementioned
consecrated Gentlemen. This is all the News I can at present inform you of; but
when there happens more, I will give you notice of it by the next, in the mean
time if any thing happens at London worthy your pains of writing, pray
Communicate it to your Friend and Servant,

M. P.

The PROPHECY Explained.
Prophecy. BEfore the Glorious Luminary of the Day shall this year enter into
the ninth of the Caelestial Houses, etc.

Explanation. Sagittarius is the ninth House, into which that Glorious Luminary
the Sun enters upon the tenth of November, being near the middle of Michaelmas
Term.

Pro. Deserts shall become populous, and many populous places shall be almost
desolate.

Exp. Those People who in the long Vacation went into the Country and deserted
London, will toward the Term come up again to Town, and leave the Country
almost Empty.

Pro. Diverse Fertile places shall grow barren, and some Mines shall be
exhausted.

Exp. Some Clients who came up with full Purses, will then go down with scarce
a Cross in their Pockets: and those who were troubled with more vexatious Suits
of Law, will likewise be forced to ezp^nd greater and more considerable sums of
money than others need to do.

Pro. There shall be Apparitions of Men in Bloudy-coloured Robes, shaking of
Chains to the great Terror of many of the Beholderss

Exp. Before the Term the Sessions will be held in the Old Baly, where the Lord
Mayor, the Sherifs, and some of the Aldermen will fit in their cSarlet Robes,
with Golden Chains about their Necks, and those Prisoners who are Conscious of
their Guilt, will tremble, when they are brought to be tried at the Bar.

Pro. In many places shall be heard wonderful and unintelligable Voices, to
almost the general Consternation of those who hear them.

Exp. In the several Courts of Judicature, the hard terms of the Law will be
made use of, which many persons cannot understand.

Pro. And by means thereof, some shall be so enchanted that they shall not for
some considerable time be able to stir from the Magick-ground.

Exp. Some against whom Verdicts have passed, will be Arrested and imprisoned,
till they have paid the sums of money, in which they were Cast.

Pro. Diverse grievous Sighs and Complaints shall be uttered, which shall even
penetrate the Hearts of those that hear them.

The poor Prisoners in several places are apt to Sigh, and make sad Complaints.

Pro. Whilst others shall Rejoice to see Bloody Slaughters and great Fires
which shall be in many places.

The Butcher must kill their Beasts, and the Poulterers their Foul, and the
Cooks must have good Fires or else they cannot dress them.

Pro. Many thing which for several Ages have been kept in profound Secrecy,
shall be then brought to light, etc.

Exp. Upon some Trials, Ancient Records must be produced.

Pro. Vineyards shall lie waste.

Exp. Because the Grapes will be all gathered befors that time.

Pro. Pomaries shall be Rifled.

Exp. The Orchards will have no Fruit left in them.

Pro. Diverse Structures shall be demolished, insomuch that Corn shall hereafter
grow in the places where they once stood.

Exp. Sturbridg. Fair is kept in a Corn field, and the Builders of the Booths
are obliged to pull them down before the end of September, that the Field may
be Ploughed. And now I bid the Reader farwell, hoping he will be satisfied with
this Explanation.

FINIS.

