SR. Hercules Buffoon: OR THE POETICAL SQUIRE.

A COMEDY, As it was Acted at THE DUKE's THEATER.

Written by John Lacy, Com.

LONDON: Printed for Io. Hindmarsh, Bookseller to His Royal Highness, at the
Black Bull in Cornhill. 1684.

PROLOGUE.
Written by Tho. Durfey, Gent. Spoken by J. Haynes, Com.
YE Scribbling Fops, (cry mercy if I wrong ye)
But without doubt there must be some among ye.
Know that Famed Lacy, Ornament of the Stage,
That Standard of true Comedy in our Age,
Wrote this new Play:
And if it takes not, all that we can say on it,
Is, We have his Fiddle, not his Hands to play on it:
Against our Interest, he to do you right,
Your Foes the Poets has abused to night,
And made us like rude Birds our Nest Besh -- te.
We know,
If you would write us Plays, they would lose their ends;
Kind Parties still would make your pains amends;
For there is no Fop but has a World of Friends:
Who will like City-Whigs help one another,
And every noisy Fool cry up his Brother.
No more then rack for Prologue or for Song,
Such Trifles to dull Quality belong:
Nor Lampoon Ladies, that your Virtues trust,
That bask in the hot Malls Pulvillio dust:
Whose low hung Fringes, with attractive Arts,
Sweep heaps of Straws' among crowds of Lovers Hearts.
Subjects like these will never get you Fame,
Nor can you write, if this be all your aim,
More than a Rogue can sing that sets a Psalm*
But if (like Wits) you would the Town oblige,
Write a good Comedy on some famed Siege,
But not in Rhyme; and if to please you mean,
Let Luxemberg be taken the first Scene.
Yet now I think on it, choose another Story,
Some Sparks that late went over to hunt for Glory,
Have spoiled that Jest, and taken the Town before ye.
No wonder too, for who could stand their rage,
Since they with Conningsmark broad Swords engage?
I fancy you will turn Butchers the next Age.
For these new Weapons look that guard your Lives,
Like bloody Cousin Germans to their Knives.
I Will put a Question to ye, Pray does the Writer
(As times go) get most credit, or the Fighter?
Wit is applauded when with Fancy dressed;
But to be knocked of the head's a cursed Jest:
A Fate in which your forward Fool miscarries;
No it is much better to lie sick at Paris:
Where we can write what the French King intends,
And storm a Town in Letters to our Friends.
Another Inconvenience we must own,
There Is many a Fool is by a Bullet known,
That once passed for a Wit of high renown.
The proof of Sense lies hid in Safety here,
But when the Skull is broke the Brains appear.
Ah Sirs, if you to the rough Wars should follow,
How many Pates (like mine) would be found hollow!
Faith then take my advice, Stick to Apollo.
Write, and be studious in Dramatick Rules;
For should our Poets sound your shallow Sculls,
You were undone for Wits, and we for Fools.
Actors Names.
Two Gentlemen.
Laton. Bowman.
Aimwell. Lord Arminger. Sir Marmaduke Seldin, Uncle and Guardian to the two
Heiresses. Sir Hercules Buffoon, a Lover of Wit and Lying. Alderman Buffoon,
his Uncle. Squire Buffoon, Son to Sir Hercules. Overwise. A Judge, a Clerk, a
French Tailor, and Women.
Mariana, Eldest Daughter to Sir Marmaduke. Fidelia, Youngest Daughter to Sir
Marmaduke. the Two Heiresses.
Belmaria. Innocentia.
Lydia, a Servant to Mariana. A French Waiting Woman. A Seaman, Lover of Lydia.
Servants, Constable, Waiters, and Footboy.
SR. Hercules Buffoon.
FIRST ACT.
SCENE I.
Enter Laton, Bowman, and Aimwell. La. DEAR Bowman well met, Aimwell thy
servant.


Bo. O Mr. Laton, I was told you were in a gay humor last night, good company,
and very witty.


La. An easy thing for any man to be witty, or a Wit at my rate: for we that
make the greatest bustle, the loudest noise, and are rudest to the women, are
called Wits.


Bo. Than you conclude rudeness and ill manners to be the ingredients of wit: I
see thou understand'st some wit.


La. Yes, the wit of this age I do; for to be witty now, is to be more
troublesome in a Playhouse, than a Butcher at a Beargarden: that is wit to tear
women's clothes and linen off in the house: that is wit to see Pl^ for nothing,
one Act in the Pit, another in a Box, a third in the Gallery, that is wit. And
lastly, to cheat your Hackney Coachman, Link Boy, and your Whore, and give 'em
nothing: O that is mighty wit!


Aim. Hang 'em, those are Sherks, not Wits.


La. They go for Wits I assure you, Sir. When a poor Coachman has driven me all
day, and I not knowing how to pay him, I have b^ him drive to such a place, and
there I tell him he must wait till I have supped; under that pretense I slip
out at a back door, and there your Coachman's paid.


Aim. This is a very ungentleman like wit, I assure you.


La. Take heed what you say, for I always do it when I am drunk.


Bo. Ay, and when you are sober too I doubt.


La. Faith when I want money, but now they all know me so well, that when I
call a Coach, they drive away from me as the Devil were in the wheels.


Aim. If thou call'st this wit, prithee be witty no more.
But waving all this, what news?

Bo. All the discourse of the Town is, of the two great Heiresses of the City*
three hundred thousand pound betwi^t two ^isters.


Aim. It Is almost incredible, that a Merchant in his life time should raise so
vast an estate.


Bo. It Is no wonder; several Aldermen have left greater sums,
Whose Sons to this hour wallow in wealth,
And honor too.

La. Has their Father left them Orphans to the City?


Bo. No, but he has ^etch'd his elder Brother out of prison, and made him their
Guardian.


La. If he be poor, they will as certainly be bought and sold, as Soap and Hops
are at Sturbridge Fair.


Bo. May be not, for he is of great education: and though he be a man of parts
and wisdom, yet his pride would never suffer his high spirit to stoop to his
low fortune, but still spent on till he was clapped in prison.


Aim. It Is strange his Brother should trust him
In that low condi^ion.

Bo. It Is so; but to encourage him to be just, he has left him a thousand
pounds a year for his life.


La. For all that they that bid most shall have 'em.


Bo. He has two Daughters of his own indeed, what his love to them may tempt
him to I know not; but this men say of him, he is the Devil in his anger, and
in his temper the most airy, jocose, and civil Gentleman in the world.


Aim So much for him, now for our selves:
How design ye the day?

La. My business is to visit the famous Norfolk Knight,
Sir Hercules Buffoon, they say he is come to Town.

Bo. I am glad to hear it, or
He is a man of great divertisement.

La. To most men he is a pleasant Creature; his ambition is to be a Wit, but he
wants materials, (...) all the tools he has toward it is Lying, and that he
does so well, that it is hard to know when he lies, and when he does not.


Aim. I have business with him, let us all go.


Bo. Faith let us call of my Lord Arminger,
For he loves such divertisement.

La. With all my Soul, for I value him above all Mankind.


Aim. He deserves it, Sir; for he has all points of honor in him to perfection.


Bo. I am not the least of his Admirers, and so let us go wait upon him.


Exeunt. Enter Sir Marmaduke Seldin; Mariana, Fidelia, his Daughters. Sell.
Fortune, Mariana, has bailed me out of the jaws of prison, and made me Guardian
to my Brothers Daughters: three hundred thousand pounds they have, which shall
lodge you both in the Arm^ of Honor. But you must follow my instruction, and
subtly act your parts in my design.


Ma. So your design be just, Sir.


Sell. Just! dare you question the actions of your Father? does your Conscience
scruple to be great, Madam Precision?


Ma. No, Sir, if that greatness be fairly purchased; but where have we Fortunes
to expect such blessings?


Sell Is not three hundred thousand pounds enough to
Invite the best of Subjects to your bed, Madam?

Ma. Bless me! that is your Brothers Money, left for his own dear Children; I
hope then you will not betray your trust, and strip your self of that honest fame
you have ever lived in.


Sell. Who would not be a Knave, a damned one, rather than a Beggar? who can
withstand this great temptation? The Fools, the Wise, the Learned, nor the
Religions, have power to resist such a blessed occasion, why then should I be
styled That Honest Fool? No.


Fi. Sister, c^n you forget that our wants made our Landlady attempt our
virtues, saying she would help us to a kind Gentleman that would pay our Rent
for us, if we would be kind to him again?


Sell. A Baud by my life, O damm her! But Landladies are Licensed Bauds, for
paying s^ot and lot they have Vestry Commission to corrupt the Daughters of
each Parish.

But say, Mariana, resolve you to obey?


Ma Sir, on my knees I beg I may retire from the mischiefs, I foresee: your
honor and my Cousins rum are at stake, and must be lost; I Will beg some
heaven^y Guide to direct me where Virtue dwells.


Sell. That Is where no Mankind inh^bits; Virtue is a meagre sta^v'd old Woman,
that lives in a Cellar on the Alms of a Parish; and that is the Pest preferment
Virtue ever purchased.


Fi. And will you be one of those virtuous old Women, Sister?


Ma. Yes, and from my heart I wish yo^ were so too.


Fi. Thank you, Sister; but I hope it is time enough to think of virtue when
ones ^eeth are out: to be a virtuous young Woman, and a virtuous old Woman too,
is too much; I think it is fair, Father, for a young Woman to resolve to be
virtuous when she is old.


Ma. Would you not be virtuous whilst you're young, Sister?


Fi. Yes, dear Sister; but one would not make it their business: if it come,
it is welcome; if not, by my troth I Will never break my heart about it.


Sell. Thou art my own Child by Heaven; for thee, Mariana, though thou art the
treasure of my heart, I Will tear thee from it, for it must be torn, thou art so
firmly rooted: but henceforth I Will hate thee for thy disobedience, therefore be
gone.


Ma. It Is the only thing my Soul desires; for I had rather be the Offspring of
a Monster, than the Child of him who means such horrid wrongs to those that
trust them.


Sell. 's Death her saucy zele has made her impudent.

You Fanatic Devil, dare you talk to me thus, and not shake and tremble? Has
Virtue bereft thee of modesty and manners? A curse upon the Errors of the Age,
when Children grow precisely obstinate; the damned Ignorant call that Virtue.


Fi. Prithee consider, Sister, Virtue cannot maintain thee; and when once it is
known a handsome Woman is in want, then as the Poet worthily says, the powerful
Guinney cannot be withstood. Pray you, Sir, let me but have her one hour, I Will
make her sensible what destruction Virtue brings to Womankind: but pray you
tell her how great she shall be; I fancy an Honorable Title may prevail with a
Tender Conscience.


Sell. She shall be sure of the highest, or if Subjects can arrive at greater
Dignities, we will still fly higher.


Fi. But hark you, Father, what shall I be all this while? This tempting
Honor has kindled such a fire in me, that I Am ready to break out into
Dignities, and cannot be quenched till I am refined and purified fit for
Empire. There Is noble pride for you, Father.


Sell. My own Spirit dictates to thine, and makes our Hearts strike time and
thought together.


Fi. Sister look here, farewell Conscience, for Greatness sake I Would make no
scruple to poison my very Father.


Sell. How! how!


Fi. If you stood betwixt me and Honor, Father.


Sell. O my Genius, my own dear Genius!


Ma. Was ever thing so very young so very wicked! Thou shou'ds a taken thy
leave of Heaven fairly, and not suffered the Society of Devils to have entered
thee so soon.


Fi Alack Father, she will preach anon. I dare swear a great Pew in a Fanatic
Church is her Non ultra: she has no honorable pride in her, she is not of our
Family.


Ma. From my Soul I wish I were not.


Sell. That shall be granted never doubt; the thing I dote on more than Heaven
proves my greatest Hell; thy virtue makes thee thy own Angel and my Devil.


Ma. Well I Will go where nothing of Religion is professed, and there perhaps may
be no wickedness; for Heathens sure have no sins of your monstrous growth.


Fi. I had rather be a rich and honorable Monster, than a virtuous Beggar,
Sister.


Sell. Is Greatness then a monstrous sin? that is like those malicious Bruits,
who call Coaches Hell-Carts because they go afoot; so you think wealth
monstrous because you are a Beggar. That ever we should bring our Children up
to be religious! it only teaches them to rebel against their Prince and
Parents. Then Dame Nature, that cunning Gilt, commands and orders us to dote on
them, when they retu^n nothing but ingratitude. Would Nature had let that
subtle knack alone, for it is the chiefest curse that Mankind has, loving and
providing for our Brats: come, Minion, I Will provide for you, for by the Life
that is lent me, if within this hour you comply not, I Will ease your troubled
mind with this --


Fi. Let me, Father, but have her to my Chamber, if I do not charm her to
obedience, and like a Twig bend and supple her fit for all your projects, then
disown me too.


Sell. Thy words come from thee with an Angels voice.


Ma. A Devils or a Peacocks rather.


Fi. You bray like an Ass, Lady, and may come into the consort: what harmonious
music would a Peacock, a Devil, and an Ass make! the Peacock should chant the
Treble, the Ass should bray the Tenor, and the Devil should roar the Base. And
to these add but a Sowgelder, and say they are come out of France, and they
would pass for the best Music in Christendom. Come foolish Sister, come angry
Father, I Will confute your She Lay-Elder never fear me. Exeunt.


Enter Sir Hercules Buffoon and Alderman Buffoon at several doors. Ald. My
worthy Nephew Sir Hercules Buffoon, I rejoice heartily to see you at London;
and pray you, Sir, what news does the Country afford?


Her. Why all the news in the Country is, that there is no news at London.


Ald. What and the Gazette bauling in the streets twice a week.


Her. Burn the Gazette, we know what h^ws there is in it before it come; out;
there is my Ladies little Dog, with Liver-colour'd Spots; then a Horse stolen or
strayed fourteen hands high, they that can bring tidings of him shall be well
rewarded: then there is the old stop-gap Ditto: and these are for ever and ever
the news of the Gazette. I Will be better informed in the Country at a Thatched
Alehouse, where the Gentry meet twice a week to communicate news.


Ald. But prithee Nephew, tell me what news in the Country?


Her. They say for certain, that London and Westminster are grown so Godly,
that in a whole week there is scarce a Cuckold made.


Ald. You found not that in the Gazette I hope.


Her. A Pox on the Gazette, they have got a trick now to expound it, and they
make as many false Interpretations, as thou make Uncle when thou expound'st a
Chapter to thy Family.


Ald. You are always jerking at the Scriptures, and profaning the silent
Ministers; those are your Common-places. They say now you take delight to be
thought an Atheist, and a Wit forsooth.


Her. I confess I Would rather be thought an Atheist, than not a Wit


Ald. They go together indeed* imp^ssiole to pa^^ those two sins.


Her. They are as inseparable I confess as Matrimony; an Atheist and a Wit are
incorporated, and like man and wife become one flesh.


Ald. Or rather graf^ed or inoculated into Beelzebub,
And so become one Devil.

Her. The truth is, they are linked together like Sausages.


Ald. I, and they will fry together like Sausages one day.


Her. In Hell thou meanest; they never value that Man, for they that believe
nothing fear nothing.


Ald. Then you are counted the most notorious Liar of all Norfolk, which is a
shame and dishonor to the Family of the Buffoons.


Her. Thou Fool, 'ti^ the only useful virtue belonging to a great Family, and
I am prouder of it Uncle, than thou art of thy great Bible with huge Silver
Clasps.


And. A worthy virtue indeed, when a Lyer's counted worse than a Thief.


Ald. You Are a Rascal Uncle, Lying is one of the Liberal Sciences, and is the
eminent'st profession in the world but Poetry.


Ald. A Poet indeed is an excellent yoke fellow for a Liar; The D^vil could not
a matched them better.


Her. A City Presbyter and a silenced Minister are better matched by half.


Ald You Are a wicked Fellow, sure there is some secret delight in being a Wit,
or else men would never ventu^e to be damned for it as they do.


Her. A man would venture any thing to be a Wit Uncle, to have ^en honor and
admi^e them, and cry There goes a Wit, that Gentlem^n's a Wit* O there is more
glory in that than in being a Monarch.


Ald. I believe I my (...) Wit than tho best of them,
I can repeat all Hopkins and S^^rnal^ (...) by notes*
And that is more than any Wit (...)

Her. Ha, ha; what a thing has this F^ol found out for Wit? why what the Devil
has Wit to do with Religion?


Ald. Nay Sir, I have got a hundred thousand pounds by my wit, that is the
substantial part. Your little (...) Wits, their Pockets are always* as empty as
their Heads. Money is wit, Purchasing is wit, Planting is wit; when they come
to that (...) be^o^e I assure you. But where is your Son? I m^an to make a
Prent^ce of him.


Her. I mean to make a Wit of him.


Ald. First make a Prentice of him* and then he is qualified for wit, or any
Honorable Title in the world. I would bind him Prentice because I would have
him saved


Her. Saved! I was a Prentice my self, and I do not find I am like to be save,
for I learnt all my Lying there; the sure thing my Mast^r taught me was, never
to speak truth to a Custom^^, and is that the w^y to be saved?


Enter Esquire Buffoon. Ald. That is not Lying, Nephew, it is but the myst^ry of
our professions, and for advantage of trade we all hold fraud to be a little
lawful.


Her. O here comes your Heir, and mine, this is your Uncle Sirrah.


Sq. Sirrah! Sir, if you were twenty Fathers, I write my self Esquire.


Ald. Well said Boy, I comm^nd the^.


Sq. Are you my reverend rich Uncle Al^erman Buffoon?


Ald. Yes, Sir.


Sq. I hope you will excuse my Fathers rudeness for calling me Sirrah; really I
am ashamed of him, a poor Country Knight, void of manners. I understand Uncle
you will make me your Heir.


Ald. If you behave your self like a Buffoon I Will make you my Heir.


Sq. Then pray you Uncle pray to God to bless me; you are obliged indeed, Sir,
for I have not asked my Father Blessing these seven years.


Ald. And if good times come I^ll make you a Lord.


Sq. Then I shall be the first Buffoon that ever was a Lord.


Her. Not by a hundred; there has been, there is, and will for ever be Lord
Buffoons: we are an ancienter Family than the ^a-Fools, we came in with William
of Normandy, and the French Buffoons came out of the Irish Buffoons by a match
with King Pippin; and there the Buffoons are fixed, and will be to the end of
the world.


Ald. I honor thee Nephew for thy Learning, in deriving our Pedigree in a
diameter from the best Blood of Europe.


Sq. But Uncle, setting the House of Pippin aside,
I must needs go see the Players.

Ald. Players! thou foolish profane Boy, Players!


Sq. If you be not read in the History of Players, both men and women; 'twill
call your Breeding in question (...) besides, all the Princes in the world
allow of Players, and if the Buffoons should not then where is your Pedigree
from the House of Pippin?


Ald. Nay rather than call that in question, I Will allow of Players freely.


Sq. We admire Poets too in the Country most mightily, Uncle:


Ald. That Is more than we do in London, I assure you Sir.


Sq. I pity all those that do not, Uncle: but Father which do you ho^d to be
the most honorable, your Comic or Heroic Poet?


Her. O your Heroic without doubt, because he comes nearer the Romantic
strain than the other.


Sq. Romantic, what signifies the word Romantic?


Her. Why it comes from the word Romance, and Romance is the Arabic word for a
Swinger, and Swinger is the Hebrew word for a Liar.


Sq. By this you prove the Heroic Poets to be Liars.


Her. No, no, by no means; Romantickly inclined only.


Ald. Nephew, I admire thy parts: I Will home, and make thy Entertaimment to the
Dignity of the Buffoons; for I am more than proud that I spring from the Loins
of King Pippin. Exit Ald.


Sq. Uncle, we will most dutifully be with you forthwith. I must see the
Players Father, for I have tokens to deliver to one of them from two Country
Ladies.


Her. Prithee Ned, which of the Players is it?


Sq. It Is he that acts Drawcansir; the Ladies are damnably in love with him for
killing whole Armies Horse and Foot; one of 'em said she would give a hundred
pound to be with child by him of a young Drawcansir.


Her. Th^n he must get the other Lady with child of a young Army, for the young
Drawcansir to conquer. But prithee Ned, who are the Ladies? I Will warrant 'em
both Whipsters.


Sq. Like enough, for one is my Sister, and the other my Mother I says.


Her. You damned Rogue, to betray your Mother and Sister.


Sq. Betray! if that be all, they have been betrayed long since. Come away
Father.


Her. A plaguey witty Dog this. Exeunt.


SECOND ACT.
SCENE I.
Enter Guardian: Mariana and Fidelia meet him. Sell. NOw my Fidelia, how have
thou prosper'd? I know thou have vigorously pressed her to obey, for thou art all
Duty.


Fi. Not I indeed, this is your dutiful Daughter, Sir.


Sell. Is it possible? what charms, what fire did thou use to thaw that frozen
Virtue in her, that common enemy to all Honor and Preferment?


Fi. I have made her more in love with Greatness than ever she was with Virtue.
Come L^dy Convert, down of your knees, and crave pardon for your stiffnecked
rebellion; or out you turn to your old tattered Gransum Goody Virtue.


Ma. Sir, I beg your pardon for all my disobedience, and tender my duty to
whatever you command, and think it virtue in me to obey you.


Sell. I am over charged, and want room to entertain the joy thy dear compliance
brings. But now to our business, you two shall pass for my two Nieces, and in
short enjoy their Fortunes.


Fi. Well Sir, if we must pass for these great Fortunes,
How will you dispose of the real ones?

Sell. They must be dispatched, let me see we'll have 'em --


Fi. Murdered; come out with it, Father.


Sell. That Is too harsh a word for thy tender ear, is it not, my Jewel?


Ma. Indeed it startles me, pray ye give it a milder name: the word Murder is
enough to daunt a young beginner.


Fi. Fie, thou have no mettle in thee; think of Honor, that will fright all
Bugbears that awe the simple Conscience.


Sell. I Would give the world to have thee steeled, and wrought to her hard temper.


Ma. I would not have 'em murdered, but they may be desired to take a journey
into the other world.


Sell. There can be no offense in that; a tender Zelot may allow of Murder clad
in such mild words.


Fi. A pretty equivocation the Devil has helped us to, to embolden us to Murder.


Sell. Throw by your fears, or I Will throw by your lives: bloody words suit best
with bloody deeds, therefore I Will have no other phrase but Murder, startle that
dares.


Ma. Murder be it then; now I consider, Sister, it is very foolish to scruple at
the word, when we so freely consent to the deed.


Fi. Father, I must laugh a little; to tell you true, this cunning Baggage has
but dissembled virtue all this while, on purpose to discover your inclinations.


Sell. Mine is to murder 'em without the least fright or start of Conscience;
but it that were feigned Virtue thou managed'st with such Saint-like zele, by
Heaven I shall honor thee as the Metropolitan Hypocrite of all thy Sex.


Ma. And Sir, to show you how little I value Virtue, their deaths already are
contrived, and my faithful Servant has undertaken it.


Sell. How, how, my dear Child, how?


Ma. Thus, Sir; my good honest Maid has a Lover, to whom she is contracted, and
being a Seaman has already hired a Ship, to spirit them away into the North of
Norway, where they shall never more be seen or heard of.


Sell. The wisest of men could not have thought of so secure a course: but when,
O when shall this be done?


Ma. Instantly, we have already prepared our Cousins for a journey too; we told
them you would send them into France for better education, before any Suitors
should be admitted.


Sell. And all this ready done; let mankind after this never deal in mischief,
when there is a work the Devil cannot manage, a zealous woman shall have the
honor of it. I have prepared for thee, my Jewel, the brave Lord Arminger, a
man that has no stain to blast his better parts, but has a crystal fame that
all the world may see through.


Fi. Then I find I must provide my own Fool.


Sell. Thou art merry still; I have already rich Presents sent me by this Duke,
that Marquess, the other Earl: this Duchess for her Kinsman writes, that
Countess for her Brother, will all send Gifts; I do not receive 'em, nor they
carry 'em away, for in that Gentile manner great Ministers of State take Bribes.


Ma. I Sir, you have raised my spirits; the thought of Honor makes Murder seem
a little crime.


Sell. I, there fix thy soul, think on the blessings that attend on Greatness,
then who would not wade to the chin in blood?


Fi. To the knees, Father, is deep enough in conscience.


Sell. You are not known to the world, so that you may pass for them securely;
only the youngest that came from the North, the world has got some hint of her
country speech, which if thou can imitate, we shall cozen the world, live in
pleasure, and die in the Bed of Honor.


Fi. No, Father, they that deal justly die in the Bed of Honor; we that cheat
and cozen can die but in Honors Truckle bed.


Sell. Well said, good Madam Hudibras; come let us cheerfully dispatch this
Murder, and that settles all our Fortunes.


Ma. Our hands and hearts go all together.


Sell. This is the greatest satisfaction that ever yet my Soul received.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Lord Arminger, Bowman, Aimwell, Laton. Omnes. My Lord Arminger, your
most humble Servant.


Lo. I hope, Gentlemen, you likewise think I am yours.


La. We come to invite your Lordship to the sight of an extraordinary new sort
of Fool.


Lo. Not a finer than my Mr. Overwise I hope.


La. Your Lordships is a more affected Fool, he is for impossible projects, new
words, and fine phrases.


Lo. O he hates a common phrase as he does a common woman.


Bo. Then he is very impertinent, if he sees you kneeling he will advise you
how to pray, at dinner how to eat, in bed how to behave your self.


Lo. Those things make him a Fool, he would not be one else: he has one worse
fault than all those, he will whisper you eternally, always buzzing in your ear
like a Lincolnshire Gnat.


Aim. But our Fool makes Lying one part of his talent; it is Sir Hercules
Buffoon.


Lo. O I have heard of him, they say he has a Magazine of confidence.


Bo. Nay says it is impudence, and the greatest that ever came out of Norfolk.


Aim. Sir, there are Buffoons in other Countries beside Norfolk.


Bo. I grant you more than that, Sir; there are as worthy Gentry in Norfolk as
are in the world, and yet they may have a ridiculous Buffoon amongst them.


Lo. Aimwell methinks you are very fine; this dress is meant for Love or War, a
Mistress or Campaigne. O here comes my whispering Fool Overwise, 'y faith.
Enter Overwise.


Over. My Royal Earl; no, Earl is too common, I will call thee my Royal Count;
in thy Haven I ride safe at anchor from the surprising Cogboats, such as carry
small burdens of sense, I mean those whom men vulgarly call Fops.


La. Prithee Mr. Overwise, what is a Fop?


Over. A Fop! it is strange thou should not know what a Fop is, that art so
great a one thy self: I will tell thee, a Fop is the fruit of a Foplin, as a
Wit is the kernel of a Witlin.


Bo. I have heard of a Foplin, but never of a Witlin before.


Lo. He has every day some ridiculous thing would please the most morose
creature in the world.


Over. Aimwell thou art as gay as a Tulip, as glorious as a Milk-pail on a
May Day, that is all new my Count.


Lo. Thou art thy self every day new.


Over. I am upon a project, my Royal Count, of obtaining a Charter for the
sober Society of the Professors of Coffee; and I would honor the Peers and
Gentry so far, as to make 'em free of the Company.


Lo. It must needs be a great honor to be free of Coffee-House Hall.


Over. More honor than to be free of the Virtuoso's: but why, my
Gallantissimo's, do you not address to the rich Heiresses?


Lo. I declare the Guardian has courted me, but none must visit 'em till some
time be expired; the reason I know not.


Over. My Count, why may not I address? the Ladies perhaps may love a wise man
before a handsome m^n.


La. Where shall we find him? then let me put in, perhaps they may love a
peevish Fellow that will beat 'em, before a civil man that will court 'em. I
have a small Miss that I use barbarously, and I dare swear that she loves me
the better for it.


Aim. My French Garniture, a pox on 'em, is not yet arrived from Paris.


Lo. The Ladies will despise you if you have not all things French, for I
suppose they are of the same air and humor that quality is subject to, that
is, to admire a French Fan before an English Gown.


Bo. And a French Dog before an English Man.


La. The Men do worse, for they admire a French Feather above an English
Lordship; and a French Tailor above an English Father and Mother.


Lo. I must say this for the Ladies, where there is one Female Fool to admire
'em, there are forty Male.


Over. Really we are so fondly affected with the French, that we shall in time
send for French Men to get our English Children for us.


Bo. But they say, my Lord, the youngest Heiress that was bred in the North, is
the prettiest kind of creature, every thing she does or says becomes her.


Lo. Yes, and they say her Northern Speech is a great addition to her Beauty,
which is very strange; but being a Child it may the better become her.


La. She has a French Woman to wait on her, and she hates her mortally, and
desires all people to help her to curse her home again.


Over. Really they say she puts up a Paper every Sunday to the Parson in the
Pulpit, to desire the Curses of the Congregation against all French Tailors and
Tire-women.


Bo. Then they say she plays at several Sports, as Ramp-scuttle,
Cl^pper-depouch, and Come mother, saw you my cock to day? These Sports declare
her a sweet innocent creature.


Lo. But you have forgot Sir Hercules Buffoon, Gentlemen: pray ye let us go in
search of him.


Aim. My Lord, we shall all wait upon your Lordship.


Over. I will go in search of that strange sport called, Come mother, saw you
my cock to day? so I take leave.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha, ha. Exeunt.


SCENE III.
Enter Seldin, Seaman, and Maid. Sell. I understand, Sir, that you have
undertaken the disposing of my two Nieces.


Sea. I Will set them ashore where no Mankind inhabits, where they must be
starved to death, or torn to pieces by wild Bears.


Sell. I honor thee because thou make no scruple.


Sea. That Is for Children to boggle and be fearful: I Will give you an honest and
a just account of their Murder, Sir; and in so doing I hope I shall discharge
my duty with a good conscience.


Sell. What a sweet Minister of darkness has the Devil sent me!


Li. He is my Lover, Sir, my honest Lover: I have his heart as sure as my young
Ladies have mine. We two would commit more than Murder to make them great.


Sell. Your worthy faith shall be rewarded.


Sea. It Is enough; come call our foolish Seamates, we must not lose our ^ide. O
here they come.


Enter Mariana, Fidella, Innocentia, Belmaria. Sell. Alack my sweet and lovely
Nieces, why do ye weep? such tears are too precious for so slight occasion; all
Ladies rejoice at going into France.


In. I had rather gea to York shire than to France; now good my Honey Nuncle,
let us not gea to France, but send me back to my Naunt at York again.


Sell. Alas my sweet Niece, it is for your Breeding I send you; why weep you my
lovely Niece?


Bell. Something troubles me I know not what, and prompts me to beseech you on
my knees you will give us leave to stay.


Sell. Alack my dear Jewels, it is by advice I send you into France: your
Fortunes are great, and it is my duty to see your Education answerable; I should
be condemned by all the world else.


Bell. But good Uncle, why do you turn away our old Servants, that have been
with us from our cradles? they would be a comfort to us.


Sell. Because you shall have none but French about you, you will never learn the
Language else.


In. Marra the Devilst learn French for me; by my Saul can Yorkshire word
Nuncle's worth ten thousand French cans.


Bell. Dear Uncle, let us stay; we have both had horrid dreams last night, which
waked us into such dreadful tremblings, no Ague ever shook the body, as those
have done our fearful souls.


Sell. You are more a Child than your Sister, and what was your dream?


Bell. Why Sir, I dreamt I was set ashore by a Seaman in a cold Country, all
Frost and Snow, and I called out methought to the wicked Wretch that left me
there, but he like a cruel man ran from me, and there I perished without one
Bird or Beast of the Creation by to pity me.


Sell. I like not this.


Sea. Dam 'em get 'em aboard, and then no matter what they dream. I hate
peevish people that will not be murdered quietly, when it is their turn: come
dispatch 'em, Sir.


Sell. And what was your dream, you little fearful Fool?


In. Marry God help me Nuncle, I dreamed just sike ana grizely man as that set
me down in Frost and Snow, and ran away when he had done, and by and by there
came three hujus Bears, Nuncle; then I cried and scream'd out, and God wait not
can kerson Saul came to help me, then I said good sweet Honey Bears do not kill
me, and yet the hard hearted Devils worried me all to bits, and left not can
morsel of me alive.


Sell. Is it possible Instinct should give Nature such hints of truths to come!
's death what weep you for?


Ma. To practice hypocrisy, I may have occasion for it: beside, it is a kind of
complement to weep with them at parting.


Fi. Come, Sir, away with 'em, I fear they will work upon your good nature too,
and then all our hopes are cut off.


Sell. Thou were always my comforter, but now my counselor: I Will see 'em
aboard presently; come my dear Nieces, throw your idle dreams behind you; I
send you to the splendid Court of France, where all good manners and civil
breeding grow.


In. We have better manners ^ith half at York that have we, and one Yorkshire
Jig's worth a thousand French Dances that it is.


Bell. Dear Uncle, let our sweet Cousins go with us, that they may have the same
Education that is allotted for us.


Sell. Not for the world, the Town would report I bred my Children at your
charge, and so conclude I mean them part of your Fortune.


Sea. They consider nothing; come, Sir, the Tide serves, and go we^ must*


In. Now by my Saul that ill-look'd Beast frights me; ah thou's an ill-favored
grizely like Fellow that is sa.


Sell. Not one word more I charge you of all hands, I Will see you safe
ashipboard, pray for you, and farewell.


In. Ene Gods Benison and mine be with you Cousins, my heart gives me Iste be
dead Cousin, and if I die wa^s me, we'st never play at Clapperde-pouch again.


Fi. Yes, yes, dear Cousin, fear nothing. Exeunt.


SCENE IV
Enter Lord, Bowman, Laton, Aimwell, and Sir Hercules. La. Sir Hercules
Buffoon, no man more glad to see you; here is a most worthy and honorable Peer
of the Realm desires to know you.


Her. Not as a Lord, but as a man of parts I salute you.


La. My Lord has great parts and virtues, besides a man of great wit.


Her. Wit, p^ethee my Lord let us hear a little of it.


Lo. When you give me occasion for it you shall; in the interim assure your self
I have wit enough to honor and admire you.


Her. Prithee my Lord let us honor and admire one another till we find a reason
for it.


Lo. If we stay till then, we shall admire one another long enough.


La. Here Is another worthy person, his name is Bowman, Sir.


Her. Bowman, Bowman, by my life I honor and admire you to the Superlative
degree; you must needs be a swinging Liar.


Bo. Why so, Sir?


Her. Sir, I have a Hound of your name, as errand a Cur as ever came in field;
when my Dogs are hunting and at a fail, he is the first that opens, but the
Devil a Hound in the Pack will believe him, for he never spoke truth in's life.
So, Sir, if you be a true Bowman.


Bo. I Am as errand a Cur as your Dog Bowman.


Her. Despise not my Dog, for ought you know you may be both of a Family.


Lo. This is an insufferable Fool indeed.


Her. You Will not be angry I hope, a Hound is a Gentleman's Fellow in any ground
in England.


Lo. In any hunting ground in England I grant you, but we are men of no
Exceptions, nor you I hope.


Bo. Therefore good Sir Hercules let us have a swinging Lie now.


Her. You are a very idle Fool, Sir.


Bo. What mean you by that? I am no Fool, Sir.


Her. Then there is a Lie for you, and that is what you required.


Lo. It Is a kind of a witty Lie too.


Her. It Is so, my Lord, I have not spoke a word of truth to day; I said I
honored and admired thee, that is another Lie; for the Devil take me if I
either honor or admire thee; indeed I see nothing in thee to admire.


Aim. O Sir, Mr. Bowman is a man of most accomplished parts.


Her. He Is an ill-natured Fellow then, for he keeps 'em to himself. I believe
his good parts and terra incognita will be found together.


Lo. This is great wit Knight, but very severe.


La. Come Sir Hercules, be good natured, and let us have a --


Her. Lie, I know your meaning, to tell you truth, Sir: this is none of my
lying day.


Aim. No! have thou in the whole course of thy life any intervals of truth?


Her. O Sir, I Am an old man, and must think of the other world; and therefore
I Am allowed but three days a week to lie.


Bo. Prithee Knight who allows thee?


Her. Our Parson: I was forced to give him a Bull Calf to allow me them, I Would
been excommunicated else.


La. But prithee Knight, what do thou do the other four days?


Bo. He looks like an Ass I believe when he speaks truth.


Her. 'y faith so I do; it is very childish, and therefore I hate it: however
of those days I Am very godly and go to Church.


Lo. How to Church man! do thou think there is another world for thee?


Her. Yes faith do I, such a one as it is; but those days I go to Church, I
would not speak a Lie for the worlds wealth.


Aim. That day thou go to Church, I dare swear thou speak truth.


Enter Esquire Buffoon. Sq. You say right, Gentlemen; I have been his Son these
eighteen years, and he has never been at Church since I was born.


Her. You impudent Son of a Whore you.


Lo. O fie Sir Hercules, who is this you call Son of a Whore?


Her. My own Son of a Whore, whose should he be?


Lo. Nay, if he be the Son of a Whore, he ought to be thine.


Sq. Gentlemen, I Am not ashamed to own it, I am my Fathers own Son of a Whore
upon my credit.


Lo. Bowman, the Son is a finer Fool than the Father.


Sq. Yet my Mother's virtuous enough, if it were not for --


Aim. What, what, prithee out with it.


Sq. O Sir, she will lie most shamefully; that is, she would lie as a man would
have her.


Her. By my life the Boy's in the right, my Wife will lie with any man in
England.


Bo. Do you own her to be so common, Sir?


Her. No, I mean she will tell a lie with any man in England; why, the Devil
would not lie with her carnally, for she is as ugly as she is old: a man with all
his neighing youth about him, would not touch her with a Pair of Tongs.


Sq. She has not had a tooth in her head these thirty years, nor capable of man
these forty.


Her. The Boy's i'^h' right, the Jade's as lean as a Luke Olive, and as dry as
a Mummy, a Skelliton fit only to read Lectures on.


Bo. But Squire, if your Mother has not been capable of Man these forty years,
how came you to be but eighteen?


Sq. I am none of her Son, Man; I Am but a By-blow my Father got of a Cinder
woman one night a Serenading; so that you cannot properly call me the Son of a
Whore, but the Son of a Serenade.


Aim. Hark you Sir are not you a damned eternal lying Rascal?


Her. I by my life is he, but I cannot be angry he lies so impudently.


Sq. O dear Sir, now you complement: I assure you Gentlemen, my Father is the
Cock Lier of all Norfolk.


Her. My Son 'y faith; besides he is full of invention, and for that cause I
mean to bind him Prentice to a Poet*


Omnes. Prentice to a Poet, this is more than ridiculous.


Her. Yes, and my reason is, if he should prove dull, as it is many a Poets
case, yet they cannot deny him to be a Poet, because he has served his time
for it: beside^, as he is a Poet he sees Plays for nothing, and that is
considerable.


Bo. And must he needs be a Poet when he has served his time? Faith bind him
Prentice to a Lord, by the same rule he will be a Lord when he is our of his time.


Her. Now you joke: Yes indeed must he, but really do you know ever a Poet that
wants a Prentice?


Lo. Pray you Gentlemen manage these Fools; 'twill be worth-while.


Aim. Sir, I know a rare Poet, but he will have two hundred pounds with a
Prentice.


Her. I stand not upon that; but I Am for one of the primest of 'em, one of
those that swinges the Gods about.


Sq. No Father, I had rather be Prentice to a Comic Poet, that is witty
company; some of your Heroic Poets they say write rarely well, yet are the
heaviest, dull, insipid Animals over a Glass of Wine in nature.


Her. I, and some of 'em will fi^ch and steal out of the old Plays, and cry down
the Authors when they have done.


Sq. They have no more invention than there is in the head of a souc'd Makeril:
now they are turned Cobblers, they vamp and mend old Plays.


Her. Or rather turned Tin^ers, who stop one hole and make ten; so they mend
one fault, and make twenty.


Sq. But Gentlemen, am I to se^ve a seven years Pr^ntiship.


Aim. No Sir, but five. It Is with a Poet as with a red or sallow Deer; the
fifth year he is a Stag or Puck of the first head; so he that writes.


Sq A pretty kind of Similitude! And pray you Sir, do the Poets shed their
heads yearly as the Deer do?


Lo. No Sir, in that they differ, else they come the nearest of all creatures;
for every year they commence, and have new Titles: as for example, a Stag the
first year he is a Calf, the second a Brocket, the third a Brock, the fourth a
Staggard, and the fifth year a Stag of the first head.


Bo. So he that means to be a Poet the first year he is an Ass, the second a
Fop, the third a Witlin, the fourth a Wit, and the fifth year a Poet of the
first head.


Her. Aha Sirrah, here is Learning in this, it is ingenious and admirable.


Sq. But Sir, have not your Wits their degrees too?


Bo. O yes, there are your first, second, third, fourth, and fifth rate Wits
too.


Lo. I and your first, second, third, fourth, and fifth rate Fools too.


Sq. That we have in the Country: but why should a Poet be an Ass the first year?


Lo. A Poet is not an Ass, he is five years advanced above it; yet let any man
that has writ five years, look back into what he writ the first year, and he
will find himself an Ass I warrant you.


Sq. I believe I should make a good Fop, but I am positive I shall never make
an Ass as long as I live.


Bo. Never despair, I Will help you to an hundred Gentlemen shall make an Ass of
you presently.


Sq. I shall be extremely beholding to you, for the Devil take me if I know
which way to go about it my self.


Aim. Sir, your Father must requite this courtesy.


Sq. Command him any thing but his new Play, he is mighty choice of that.


Her. I confess I am a little fond of my Play.


Lo. That Is more than any man else can be I doubt.


Aim. Why is it not played? 'twas made in Norfolk I doubt.


Her. So all you Fops cry indeed, but your Cock Wits and your Cock Poets cry it
up to the Skies, it is so lashing a Satyr against the whole Nation, I should a
been hanged had it been played.


Bo. It Is a thousand pities 'twas not played then. But I am told it is a damned
Play, worse than ever Mr. Bays writ in all his whole Cart Load.


Her. Sir, I had as live you would stab me to the heart, as speak ^ll of my
Play.


Aim. But Knight, I hope you remember your promise to me.


Her. Upon my life thou shall have one of the rich Heiresses: the Guardian and
I are the intimatest Friends in the world. And so Gentlemen, let us go bind my
Son Prentice to this famous Poet.


Bo. Agreed, agreed, and there shall he be sufficiently abused. Exeunt.


SCENE V.
Enter Sir Marmaduke and Mariana. Sell. We are happy, Mariana: I saw my Nieces
under sail below the Hope, with a fair wind to blow 'em to destruction. We are
happy in thy Sister too, for never was so ingenious a Mimick; she imitates her
Northern Cousin, no Player ever acted like her. And the necessity of it is
great, for there is such notice taken of her Yorkshire speech, that should her
tongue be missing, we were all in question.


Ma. She does it so well, that she puts me but too much in mind of my poor
little Cousin.


Sell. Death do you repent! Value thy self upon thy Fortune, be proud, Mankind
shall pay thee homage, as if it were thy due and their duty. My heart is set
upon the highest pinnacle of pride, not for my self, I am proud for thee my
Jewel; and had I power, I would make the whole body of the earth bow to thee,
though it dropped out of the frame, and dashed it self into eternal atoms: yet am I
pleased to match thee to the great, the virtuous, and the valiant Lord Arminger.


Ma. The noble character that you so often have given him, has made an impression
here so deep, that before I see I love; report has conquered ever the siege is
laid.


Sell. Those blessed words create me a new man, young and vigorous: the course
of Nature, joined with envious Age, cannot prevent the sprightly youth I now
feel growing in me Enter Servant.


Ser. Sir, Alderman Buffoon is come to see you.


Sell. Alderman Buffoon do thou call him? prithee good Foolane tell Alderman
Buffoon that he may come in. It Is Alderman Buffoon I know him, a vast rich
Citizen; go you in Mariana, no more my Daughter but my Niece.


Ma. I understand you, Sir. Exit Mariana, Enter Alderman.


Ald. Sir Marmaduke^ I come to congratulate your good fortune.


Sell. Good fortune, in what Sir?


Ald. In being sole Guardian to your Brothers Daughters.


Sell. Where lies the good fortune of that?


Ald. O Sir, it gains you esteem in the world; besides, good advantage may be
made on it.


Sell. Advantage, what do you take me for a Knave?


Ald. F^eno, and yet I think you are no Fool.


Sell. All the Town knows their Fortune, what advantage then can I make, unless
I wickedly betray my trust?


Ald. Said like a worthy Gentleman, I know your Principles are honorable, your
Spirit high, but your Fortune is low, consider that.


Sell. Pray you come to your meaning, Sir.


Ald. An honest advantage may be made, and I come to offer it.


Sell. I would have you know, were there no other but the common thing called
Honesty, that would guard me from corruption. But here is a stronger tie, a
Tender Conscience; alas Doomsday is ever in my thoughts, and I dare not hear
you.


Ald. I wonder your High Spirit and a Tender Conscience should agree so well:
it is strange too, that having been so lavish as to spend your great Estate, you
should now be so good a Husband as to lay up for Doomsday, a thing so far off.


Sell. Death Sir, do you come to affront me?


Ald. No, I say again an honest advantage may be made, if there were twenty
Doomsdays. Will ten thousand pounds damn you, ask any man^ opinion: put case it
would, I know twenty Citizens with tender consciences, that make long prayers
too, and yet would run the risque of Doomsday for ten thousand pound.


Sell. O most fearful, I hope you have better thoughts of me: alas, I have a Grave
to think on, and in my Chamber stands my Coffin with my Father: skull upon it,
and when I awake they are the first objects that my eyes encounter; and can you
ever hope to corrupt me then?


Ald I never knew a tender conscience af^aid of an honest motion before: since
you're turned a simple Precisian farewell, Sir.


Sell. Nay pray stay, an honest motion may be heard at last.


Ald. Well said, than thus it is: I have a Nephew that I Will make my Heir, and
if you will match your Northern Niece to him, I Will settle five thousand pounds a
year on him, and at my death the rest: and I Will give you ten thousand pounds
for your consent; you know I can make this good.


Sell. Where Is your Nephew? fetch him presently; but I will take no money.


Ald. Well, well, who is your Goldsmith?


Sell. I have no Goldsmith, nor will I take money, it is vicious Bribery: yet now
you talk of a Goldsmith, Mr. Cash is as just a man as can be dealt with.


Ald. It Is enough, I understand you.


Sell. You must not understand me so indeed, Sir.


Ald. Away, away, you're too modest, too honest to live among men: I Will do it,
and bring my Nephew presently. Exit Alderman.


Sell. Ha, ha, I laugh to think how this Fellow will report my tender conscience
to the Citizens: well, if this Fool will fall into a Trap that never was laid
for him, then it is not I but Fate destroys him.


THIRD ACT.
SCENE I.
Enter Lord, Bowman, Aimwell, Poet, Servants, and Bottles. Lo. GEntlemen, pray
ye salute my Friend Overwise: he has undertaken to be the Poet to whom the
Squire is bound Prentice.


Omnes. Your humble Servant, Mr. Overwise.


Over. Gentle Worthies, I am your contracted and betrothed Friend.


Lo. Can there be a finer phras'd Fool than this?


Bo. No certainly, he is our contracted and betrothed Fool.


Over. My Lord: no, the word Lord is too common, it tastes of Vulgerality.


Aim. Gods so, there is a fine word Vulgerality is your own coining, Sir.


Over. Sta^p'd in my own Mint, Sir. I hope so to refine the English Tongue,
that the Dukes and Peers of France will come over hither to learn the Language.


Aim. That Is a great project, do you hope to see it in your own life time?


Over. No question, Sir: do you hope to see Paul's built?


Aim. Yes without doubt.


Over. At the same time I expect the Peers of France to learn the English
Tongue.


Lo. But Mr. Overwise, prithee what are those Squirts and Bottles for?


Over. They are proper instruments to initiate an Ass withal: you must second
me, as I have ordered the ceremony; he will really be very much abused.


Bo. Abused! hang him, to murder him requires no more compassion than drowning
of a Kitlin. Enter Hercules and Squire.


Her. Save you my Lord, save ye Gentlemen; you honor me to come to this
ceremony, which is my Sons Master, Si^s?


Bo. This is the worthy person your Son is bound Prentice to.


Her. Are you a Poet, worthy Sir?


Lo. Yes Sir, he is one of those that swinges the Gods about.


Over. I am by my profession a poor Poet, Sir.


Her. That Is no wonder, for I never heard of a rich one in my life.


Over. O Sir, Poets like Philosophers despise wealth: the fame of worthy Wit is
all we aim at.


Her. You may aim, but never hit the mark I doubt: however it is an honorable
ambition. Well, what is he to be the first year?


Over. The first year he takes his degree of Ass?


Her. O'tis true, you told me of a ceremony to enter or initiate him into the
Order of Asshood.


Lo. I have heard of Manhood but never of Asshood before.


Over. Sir, the ceremony is great: the rule was among the ancient Poets, when a
man took his degree, to has in the Liquor of the Gods; but we modern Wits
steep our Brains altogether in Burgundy and Pontack, and we find it does the
business every whit as well.


Her. But how do you know that?


Over. By comparing the ancient and modern Wits together. Come Sir, you must
strip to your Shirt, get the Bottles and Glasses.


Bo. The ceremony to a stranger will seem to be a gross abuse, however I assure
you it is no more than what all men undergo that are bound Prentice to Poets.


Omnes. That we all upon our Honors do assure you.


Sq. Nay then I will undergo it whatsoever it be.


Her. We can suffer as much abuse as any Family in England upon the score of
Poetry.


Over. Come kneel down, Sir: now fill every Gentleman a Bumper of Claret. You
must know for six months together he must swallow daily two Verses, and by old
custom he must begin with Chancer, and so go through all the English Poets,
till he come to modern Mr. Bays. The ceremony is an ancient Copy of Verses,
taken out of the Records of Parnassus.


Her. Is it possible! Pray, Sir, oblige me with a Copy of Verses out of the
Records of Parnassus: what work shall we make in the Country with 'em, Boy?


Sq. I, Father.


Over. Are you all ready? kneel down, Sir.


Her. He will hurt his knees, pray ye let him have a Cushion.


Lo. By no means, it is absolutely against the Record of Parnassus.


Sq. Then hang Knees, Father.


Her. 's heart! what a deal adoo is here about making one an Ass!


Over. Silence: stand all ready charged.

Thy dull and stupid Blockhead must be washed, Throw the wine in his Face.
And in thy Face Bumpers of Claret dashed.
Pour on his head the best Canary Sack,
And down his throat Burgundy and Pontack. Pour wine
Wash all his Body with the choicest Wine,
That grows upon the fruitful River Rhine.
Leave not one dry thread upon his Shirt, They squirt him all over.
And do it with each of ye a lusty Squirt.

Her. Hold, 's heart hold! I think you mean to make an Ass of my Son indeed.


Aim. Who the Devil doubts it?


Bo. Why Sir, you know he is to be made Poetically an Ass.


Her. It Is true, but yet 'twou'd stir a man's blood to see ones Child used at
this Roguish rate.


Lo. Sir, by the Rules of Parnassus he ought to take his degrees upon the Rack.


Her. 's heart I Will have no Child of mine put upon the Rack, my Lord.


Bo. It Is not intended, that Act was abolished by reason of the torment.


Sq. Nay I Will endure any torment, rather than not be a complete Ass.


Her. I could find in my heart the Devil take me to step to Parnassus, and see
whether it be so or no.


Lo. You will not lose your labor; for really I have been there and read the
Record.


Sq. Pox of your Records, my Knees ache damnably: do they use to have Agues in
Parnassus? my teeth chatter in my head, I am so wet and so cold.


Over. Come we will make an end; Silence.

Here I produce a rare and precious Pill,
Made by the Doctors of Parnassus hill:
The virtue is, it will thy Brain inspire
With th'^iry ^lames of brisk Poetic Fire:
Having in it the refined Quintescence
Of Wit, true Wisdom, and well-worded Sense:
It being wrapped up in two lines of Chaucer,
You must with reverence swallow it down your Maw, Sir.

Her. Silence: come let us make an end.

In's Face let each man throw a full Beer Glass: Full Glasses thrown in's Face.
That ceremony done, rise up and pass
For a well-grounded and sufficient Ass.

Sq. Do you call throwing of Beer Glasses in a man's face a Ceremony?


Over. In Parnassus we do: now, Sir, I Will justify to the world you're an Ass.


Lo. A pretty thing to brag of! Two such Fools Nature never produced.


Her. I declare I like the Pill wonderfully; I must have one of 'em.


Sq. For all this I cannot fancy my self to be an Ass yet.


Lo. O yes, the very first minute you parted with your money, you were an Ass I
assure you.


Sq. How, you mean I was an Ass for parting with my money, my Lord.


Lo. I mean fairly by the Rules of Poetry.


Her. Then you're an Ass upon Record, Sirrah: now you're a Prentice your Hat
must not be on before your Master.


Lo. That Is your mistake, an Ass puts off his Hat to no man, but is void of all
manners: his talent is to be bold, rude, and saucy, without regard to Quality,
or any distinction of persons.


Her. If those Qualifications will do, I Will warrant him a sufficient Ass.


Bo. And now you are so, Squire, you must always have a Cane, but not in your
hand, it is to be worn ever under your arm, that when you turn about, you may
take the next man a slap over the Face.


Sq. Adad that is pretty; look to your chops, Father. But, Sir, are them Asses
that wear their Canes so?


Aim. They are shrewdly to be suspected.


Sq. I am an apt Scholar, I do but what you teach me, ha!


Her. I am thinking, my Lord, what contemptible Titles a man must pass over,
before he attains to the honorable name of Poet, as Ass, Fop, and Witlin.


Bo. Poet is an honorable title, it admits of no addition.


Sq. O Father, the fame of Poetry is above all mortal honor: Wealth and
Greatness perish, the man of Dignity dies; but Poets are eminently and
prodigiously immortal.


Her. By my life the Boy speaks rarely well already: if he talk thus wittily
being an Ass, how will he talk when he is a Poet?


Aim. Little better I assure thee.


Sq. Poets are esteemed above Princes; I have a reverend Author for it called
Tailor the Water-Poet;

When Nature did intend some wondrous thing,
She made a Poet, or at least a King.

Ben. Johnson would a given a hundred pounds (if he had had it, that is) to a
been Author of those two lines.


Her. Did ever Boy speak so rarely, Gentlemen! The Devil take me, I could find
in my heart to commence Ass my self.


Lo. Commence Changling, for thou were born an Ass.


Sq. Hark you Sir, now I Am entered I may censure Plays may I not?


Lo. Yes, yes, to censure Plays and Women is natural to an Ass.


Exit Squire. Over. Well my Earl, I value my self much upon this Frolic.


Lo. So thou may.


Aim. Sir Hercules, it is time to remember your promise, and to present me to
the Guardian: if thy Interest get me one of the Heiresses, here is my hand I Will
not murder thee.


Her. It Is enough, I Am so intimate with the Guardian, I Am certain he will deny me
nothing. Enter Footman.


Foot. My Lord, here is a Letter from Sir Marmaduke Seldin.


Lo. 'ods so, the Guardian to the Heiresses! Gentlemen, I must take leave, and
for a while grow serious.


Her. My Lord I thank you for this Honor: Bowman, prithee go with me. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Sir Marmaduke and Mariana at one door, French Woman at another. Woe. O
Sir, Sir, Sir.


Sell. What is the matter that you stare so?


Woe. Sir, my Country North Lady will no learn French of me: me must learn
Yorkshire of her, or she will beat my Brain.


Sell. That is just her humorous little Cousin, it is happy that she mimicks her
so well, that preserves us from suspicion. Enter Tailor.


Tay. O Sir, what sall me do! me have brought my Yorkshire Madam two new Gown
home, and begar she have cut off all her long Train to de very Calf of her Leg.
Enter Fidelia.


Sell. Here she comes: Fie, fie, Niece, I must chide you, Niece; they say you have
cut the Train of your Gowns, and quite spoiled 'em, Niece.


Fi. Nay Honey Nuncle they, ^e never the war for me; why lack a day they come
down to the varra heels of me yet, my Barn.


Ma. Nay Sister, you must be ruled, and wear your Clothes fashionably as I do.


Fi. Now oot upon thee Sister, ye wad have me wear a lang tale behind me, as
my Naunts brown Cow does at hame.


Ma. They are not Tails but Trains, Sister; great persons wear them as
Ornaments of State, as an honorable distinction from those of lower quality.


Fi. By my trooth but I's teld that naughty Sluts wear 'em as well as your
great Countesses.


Sell. I but Niece, Persons of Quality have Pages, Boys a purpose to hold up
their Trains.


Fi. Have they Boys to hold up their Tails behind? do not the unlucky Lads peep
in 'em some time?


Sell. Fie Niece, what have you said? those are paw words indeed.


Fi. Why Nuncle, did I say bawdiness now?


Sell. No not down right, but very near it I assure you.


Fi. Nay by my Saul Sister, gin my Naunt at York should but know that I said
bawdiness marra see'd shatter my brains oot, faith wad she.


Sell. Come sweet Niece be ruled, and let the French People dress you, and make
a fine Lady of you.


Fi. Wad my French Tailor were hanged, he stinks of wine as sour as a
Swine-trough; beside he is varra saucy with ma Nuncle.


Sell. Saucy, how saucy was he?


Fi. O my Saul Nuncle, gin I Would let him alane, he had taken measure of the inside
of me as well as of the out.


Sell. You damned Villain, ha! I never heard of such Draws, the man runs out. a
Rogue.


Fi. Nuncle, I Would have my Naunts Tailor, Billy Barton of York, make my Gowns for
me.


Sell. Prithee who is Billy Barton of York?


Fi. Marra he is the delicatest Tailor in all England, he makes my Lord Mayor of
York's Gowns, and Lady Mairises tee.


Enter Alderman and Squire. Ald. Come Sir, I mean to marry you to the Northern
Heiress. Sir, I have brought my Nephew and my Heir.


Sell. He is welcome, pray you Sir salute my Nieces. I should scorn to have this
Buffoon come into the presence of my Children, but for the convenience of
destroying him.


Ald. Here Is a Bill upon Alderman Marrow for ten thousand pound.


Sell. I Will not take it indeed Sir.


Ald. Come, come, you must and shall have it.


Sell. I Will not touch it truly, give it my eldest Niece if you please to buy her
Pins. A proud man may let his Daughter stoop to ten thousand pound. A kiss.


Ald. Fair Lady, here is a Paper of Pins will last you and your Heirs for ever.
Sir, I have brought the Deeds of my Estate to peruse and to keep, till our
Counsel settle things of all hands.


Sell. It Is enough, let us in and view the Writings.


Sq. Sir, I swear by Parnassus, you have got the most Suparlative Paragon of
the North; I am struck with an Amor as suddenly as he that fell in love while
he pulled on his Boots.


Ald. Sir, you have taken Sir Marmaduke over the Face with your Cane.


Sq. The mode must crave your pardon, not ^: the whole Congregation of Gallants
use it as a Novel lately come from France.


Sell. A most Superlative Fool! this is one of Nature's bold strokes, Niece; you
see a Monster there almost in the shape of a Man: use him accordingly. Exeunt
Sir Marmaduke and Alderman.


Fi. I understand you, Sir; let me alone to abuse him, Sir. Is thou to be my
Husband, sweet Honey Bearn?


Sq. Honey! what a loving Fool it is, she calls me Honey at first sight?


Fi. Now I prithee Honey help me to curse my French Woman.


Sq. I with all my heart Honey, A pox upon her, and confound her, where is she?


Fi. Honey thou mun let me bang thee some time, then thou't be my good Lad.


Sq. I with all my heart, bang all the Honey out of the Hive of Parnassus.


Fi. Stand fair then Honey, there is for thee now. Box of the ear.


Sq. The Devil you strike too hard, Honey.


Fi. Hang thee thou mun not frown, thou mun smile sweetly on me when I box
thee, now thou's my Defty: and will thou play finely with me, and not hurt me?
Box of the ear, he smiles.


Sq. Play finely with me and not hurt me! 's heart, I have got a little Whore I
think.


Fi. Now my Barn thou mun lake at, Come mother, saw you my cock to day?


Sq. Come mother, saw you my cock to day? 's heart, it is a Whore of a certain.


Fi. Thou mun play at Rampscuttle and Clapperdepouch with me, my Honey.


Sq. Clapperdepouch! Devil what a strange kind of a Wife shall I have? Come
then show me your Rampscuttle.


Fi. Thou mun first put on a Petticoat: my French Woman shall make a Lad Lass
of thee. Puts on a Petticoat.


Sq. Any thing to please you, Madam.


Fi. Then thou's my pretty French Woman, and I Will give thee a Honey Sugar Kiss.


Sq. I Will do her the honor to give her a Honey Sugar Kiss too.


Ma. A great honor indeed, what an absolute Fool is this!


Fi. Come Honey learn Rampscuttle, begin thus. Dance.


Sq. With all my heart; 's life what a mad couple shall we make!


Fi. That Is my Fool, will thou be my Fool, Honey? She turns round and claps
down, then he.


Sq. I Will be thy Fool, nay I Will be thy Cuckold, Honey.


Fi. Will thou? 'y faith and we have mad Lads, we make swinging Cuckolds in
York shire.


Sq. That Is nothing to be a Cuckold, Madam; my Father and Mother are Cuckolds,
we can prove our Geonoligy to be Cuckolds from the very Loins of King Pippin.


Fi. Whaw, whaw, marra the Devil take thee and thy King Pippin to boot. Now
play at Clapperdepouch, my Honey Bearn; Clapperd pouch, Clapperdepouch,
Clapperde, Clapperde, Clapperdepouch


Sq. This is the finest Wife for my turn that ever Mortal light on! O Devil you
have beat out my teeth, Honey.


Fi. The fashion mun crave thy pardon Honey, not She turns, and hits him on the
Face with his Cane. I; besides all the teeth of thy Geonoligy have been beaten
out up to King Pippin; what thy name Honey?


Sq. I am proud of my name, I was Christened Squire Buffoon.


Fi. By my Saul Buffoon is worse name than King Pippin.


Sq. Honey we are the ancientest Family of the Nation; our Mansion House is
called Buffoon, and our Coat is Three Buffoons.


Fi. Methinks you should give three Pippins too, and that would show your
Descent plainly from King Pippin.


Sq. If the Herolds are to be bribed, I Will have 'em. Come Honey, shall we go
behind the door, and play finely together, and get one another with child of
two young Pippins?


Fi. Marra out upon the Grisely Beast, wie wad ta make a Slot of me, and have
me play at Bawdiness with thee; Help, help, help.


Enter Alderman and Sir Marmaduke. Ald. How now, what is the matter?


Fi. Marra he is even a foul Beast, that is a Nuncle; he wad have me go into the
dark, and do naughtiness with him.


Sq. She asked me to play finely with her, and not hurt her; then what could I
say less?


Sell. This Rogue was composed of a courser stuff than the common Creation, of
unrefined Clay, such as Bearwards and Tinkers were made up of. You are content,
Sir, to settle all entirely upon my Niece and her Heirs.


Ald. Most freely, upon this Match I Will make my Nephew a Lord.


Sell. There are so many Buffoons stolen into Titles, that men would judge they
came not lawfully by them. Come Sir, let us go settle this Estate.


Sq. Why Honey, shall we not have one trial of skill for a young Pippin? Exeunt.


SCENE III.
Enter Sir Hercules, Laton, Bowman, Squire, and Clerk. La. Sir, be sure you
make my peace, or all the World shall not save your throat. I will be at the
door and hear all you say, Sir. Exit Laton.


Bo. If thou get'st off of this Knight, I Will prefer thee to the first Form of
Wits, and that is very honorable I Will assure you.


Her. I had rather be an honorable first rate Wit, than a first rate Alderman.
Enter Judge.


Bo. Thou art bravely disguised, have a good heart, here is the Judge.


Jud. Save ye Gentlemen, are you Sir Thomas Lovill, Sir?


Her. I am Knight and Baronet, if you please my Lord.


Jud. Then Sir, if you please your business.


Her. Second me Sirs: I come to inform your Lordship of the most notorious
Villain that ever wore the figure of a Man, one Sir Hercules Buffoon. The Law
no doubt will give your Lordship damage enough, for the scandalous things he
has said of you.


Jud. Of me, Sir? Scandalous things of me, pray you the words.


Bo. What the Devil does your Father mean tro, to be hanged?


Sq. For a good Lie he will venture that at any time.


Her. He said your Lordship loved a Bribe above your Allegiance, and that you
have unjustly given away an Estate for a Bribe of fifteen hundred Guineys.


Jud. That Is Action enough, down with those Guineys; what a Villain it is!


Sq. I, you would say so if you knew the Rogue as well as we do, my Lord.


Her. You Dog, I do not allow you to abuse me thus.


Jud. But Gentlemen, have you witness of this?


Her. Enough my Lord, my self and two Gentlemen more: not these, they can
witness another thing. One Laton hearing how Buffoon had abused your Lordship,
comes to him, and had down right killed him, but for these two Gentlemen.


Sq. It Is very true my Lord, I got a broken head with parting 'em, and this
Gentleman was run through the arm.


Bo. A pox on him I must own it now, he tells you true, my Lord.


Jud. Pray you what Laton is it that has fought for me thus?


Her. One Robin Laton my Lord: Buffoon's a valian Fellow, and yet this Laton
has cudgelled and beaten him to Stock Fish, my Lord.


Jud. That Robin Laton is my Kinsman; I turned him out of doors, it is much then
he should fight for me.


Her. Your Kinsman my Lord, he might be your Son by his desperate fighting for
you.


Jud. Say you so? if this be true, Gentlemen, I Will make him happy.


Bo. We can all witness it, my Lord: to say truth, Sir Hercules is a most
pernicious mischievous Rascal.


Sq. A notorious Villain, my Lord: there has not been a Rogue hanged these
seven years, that has deserved it so much as he has done.


Her. You Dog, remember this I Will maul you for it.


Jud. Well, I Will trounce the Rogue I warrant you: has he an Estate to make good
the damages the Law will give me?


Sq. Enough, enough, my Lord; hang him a damned rich Hell-hound!


Her. Zounds was ever man thus abused, Bowman? Nay, he said your Lordship was a
most Gigantick Whoremaster, and that you have nine Bawds lie leiger in the
Country to send up fresh Virgins to you.


Jud. Pox on him would he could make his words good: I Will firk the Knave, how
shall we do to take him?


Her. If your Lordship will grant me your Warrant, I Will bring him before your
Honor to morrow morning.


Jud. Clerk, write a Warrant presently, I Will not leave him worth a Groat, he
shall rot in Jayl.


Her. To see that Rogue a Beggar, would make me pray for your Lordship all the
days of my Life: the Knave called me Cuckold my Lord too.


Sq. Faith Sir, no Child can say absolutely who was his Father; Wives will have
their fancies, and why not yours?


Her. You abominable Rogue! My Lord, have not you an Office in your gift?


Jud. Yes I have Sir.


Bo. I Will tell you my Lord, this Buffoon, after Mr. Laton* had beaten him,
promised to get this Office of your Lordship for Mr. Laton, pretending that he
had you at such a hank you durst not deny him.


Jud. I never saw the Villain in my life.


Bo. Nay my Lord, the next day he told your Nephew he had got the Office for
him, and made him go presently to give your Lordship thanks for it.


Her. And the base Fellow, they say, was never with your Lordship.


Jud. No indeed Sir, and that made me angry with my Nephew to give me thanks
for that I never gave him; the man meant mischief.


Her. Was ever such a shameless Fellow, my Lord? By my troth give your Kinsman
the Office, and I Will give your Lordship two Brace of fat Deer every season, as
long as you live my Lord.


Jud. Give it me under Hand and Seal, that I may demand them as my due, and
I Will do it.


Her. With all my heart, my Lord.


Jud. Out of what Park, for the place must he expressed in the Writing.


Her. Zounds I Have never a Park, what shall I do? Out Whetstones Park in the
County of Middlesex, my Lord.


Jud. Whetstone, there is a place called Whetstone by Barn^t, but I never heard
of a Park there.


Her. That Is not the place; Whetstones Park is as well known as London, I would
it were an hundred miles off on it; I am so plagued with Citizens, that I cannot
have a Deer that is man's meat, but they steal it out of my Park, my Lord.


Clerk. Here is the Warrant against Sir Hercules Buffoon.


Jud. I Will sign it. Clerk, draw an Indenture for two Brace of Deer yearly out
of Whetstones Park in the County of Middlesex, upon forfeiture of five hundred
pounds, from Sir Thomas Lovill.


Bo. Here I shall burst out a laughing, I cannot hold. Enter Laton.


La. My Lord, here is one to summon all the Judges to Court.


Jud. 'ods so I must away then: Sir, I forgive you for defending my Reputation
so well, I give you the Office, and all my Estate after my death. Nephew, see
Sir Thomas Lovill sign the Obligation for two Brace of Deer yearly out of
Whetstones Park in Middlesex: and, Sir, I hope you will apprehend that Rascal
Buffoon for me. Exit Judge.


Her. I Will have him as sure as the day comes, my Lord.


La. Dear Knight, thou art come off with honor, thou art my Golden Calf, and
I Will worship thee.


Bo. Never had man so much ado to forbear laughing, as I have had at this
Whetstones Park.


Sq. I was fain to turn about and laugh.


Clerk. I had certainly laughed in the Judges Face, but for consideration of
you, Sir.


La. Clerk, take heed you be very just.


Clerk. As your own heart 'y faith.


Bo. How thou will get clear of the Judge, when he comes to have his Deer out
of Whetstones Park I know not.


Her. I have a harder task by half, I am to help Aimwell to one of the rich
Heiresses; I have told him a damned Lie.


La. Like enough, prithee what is it?


Her. I told him the Guardian and I were intimate Friends, old Acquaintants and
Schoolfellows; and the Devil take me if I ever saw him in my life, yet I am
resolved to face him down that we are dear Friends and old Acquaintants, and
that is as hard a task as ever impudence undertook.


Bo. Faith so it is, considering the great Spirit of the Guardian.


Her. I Will do it for all that.


Sq. Give me thy hand, Father, I commend thy impudence old --


La. Bravely resolved, come I will first treat thee, then go with thee, and
back thee manfully. Exeunt.


FOURTH ACT.
SCENE I.
Enter Lord Arminger, Guardian, Mariana, Waiters. Lo. WAit in the next Room.


Sell. I am prouder to have the great Lord Arminger under this mean Roof, than
haughty Princes are of Empire: and I bow with such reverence to your person, as
holy men do to the holy Altar, and with the same humility offer my Oblation up;
receive her as from Heaven, for she is fraught with virtue equal with the
Angels.


Lo. Sir, I admire you with more than common wonder: Guardians usually make
price of the innocent Orphans in their charge, but you are more than just, you
are kind, and to that degree which Parents have for Children.


Sell. I shall betray my self with violent fondness, such torrents of love flow
in me, that I think the World too little for her Dower.


Ma. Indeed, my Lord, his tender care seems to have more of Father than
Guardian in it, in which we hold our selves most highly blessed.


Sell. My good Lord, I leave you to make your Court, where doubtless you will find
your love most worthily and readily received. Exit Seldin.


Lo. Madam, your Uncle spoke largly of your Virtues to me, but nothing of your
Person; and now I see the cause, for it is impossible the capacity of Man should
reach the character of so much Beauty as I now behold, and all the rest must
needs submit to crown you Goddess of your admired Sex.


Ma. My Lord, you answer not your character, you were rendered to me the only
Man of Honor, Truth, and Justice; and I hear nothing but a^ery Complement,
fine Poetical Flattery, fit only to catch Girls.


Lo. Madam, by my Honor, and that is my dearest treasure, I flatter not, but
speak truth just as my heart conceives it: therefore I again declare, you are
the only Beauty that ever yet my eye encountered, and I find a dotage stealing
on me more than common love.


Ma. Hold, my Lord, I command you, for sure she may command that is so much
admired; therefore by that precious Gemm your Honor, are those sweet words
you have spoken truth?


Lo. Madam, by all the bliss I hope for I have no falsehood in me.


Ma. Then stop and go no further in your love I charge you, for I must never be
your Wife.


Lo. How Madam! I came prepared by your Uncle this day to marry you.


Ma. O my Lord, that day is further off, than the unknown uncertain hour of
Doom.


Lo. Madam, if there be cause for this your cruelty reveal it; and by the
Original of all Honor here I swear, this Bosom is your Grave to bury all your
Secrets.


Ma. I believe you, my Lord, with the same Faith I do Religion.


Lo. Madam, you have reprieved my Life, by thinking me worthy of your thoughts,
though unworthy of your love.


Ma. O my honored Lord, it is my unworthiness, not yours, that must for ever
keep this cruel distance.


Lo. What ever the reason is, that cannot be it: say you're contracted unknown
to your Uncle, say any cruel thing but that.


Ma. Then I declare, the noble character my Uncle gave me of your Lordship,
sprung in me a true and perfect love, which made my desires so violent to see
you, that since, my life till now was more uneasy than a sick man's restless
night, and yet must never marry.


Lo. Never was man pleased and startled so at once! Infinitely pleased to hear
you say you love, but strangly startled that you never must marry: the thought
frights me; the Ghosts of murdered men shake not guilty Slaves, as that resolve
shakes me: I find Man is not fortified to bear the frights of love. I beseech
you, Madam, if you have cause for this your resolution, give me some ease by
imparting it.


Ma. It is so dreadful for a good man to hear; but if your Lordship will ask my
Uncles leave to carry me and my Sister abro^d, you then shall know why you and
I must never marry.


Lo. Your resolution has dispersed my spirits so, they are never more to be
collected: all within me lies confused; a mad man's bloud's in better temper,
and I am all on fire till I am satisfied


Ma. My Lord, I am destroyed if you reveal me.


Lo. You are more cruel in distrusting that, than in refusing me.


Ma. Your pardon, and henceforth my trust shall ever rest in you.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Sir Hercules, Bowman, Aimwell, Laton, Overwise. Aim. You have put me off
from time to time, and I am resolved to be no longer fooled; therefore try your
Interest you boast of with the Guardian, or --


Her. Well Fool, doubt not me in the least: this is the greatest strait I ever
yet was put to, Bowman; for me to salute, and impudently embrace a man of his
high spirit, and face him down that we are dearland intimate Friends, and yet
never saw him, the Devil take me it is a damned audacious task.


Bo. However go forward, here is my hand thou shall not suffer.


Her. Then dear Impudence stand my friend this one push, and I Will own thee for
my Patron all my life.


La. Here comes the Guardian, bear up Knight!


Omnes. Your most humble Servant, Sir. Enter Seldin.


Sell. Gentlemen, I am to crave your pardon, my Niec^s are not this day to be
seen; however the freedom of my house I tender you with all the respect
imaginable.


Her. Sure Sir Marmaduke you will let your intimate Friend see your Nieces:
dear Rogue, how do thou do? Own me for your Friend and Schoolfellow, 'twill
be thousands in your way. This worthy Gentleman, dear Friend, thou must know.


Sell. It will concern me more to know you, Sir; for in my life I never met such
confidence.


Her. Why how now Marmaduke, has your Guardianship made you proud? have you
forgot your self?


Sell. What the Devil means this Fellow? Gentlemen, who knows this Creature? or
who brought him hither?


Aim. We all know him, and he brought us hither, pretending more Interest in
you than all Mankind besides.


Sell. Upon my Honor, Gentlemen, I never saw the man before.


Her. Thou shameless Fellow, can thou with so bold a face say, thou know
me not?


Aim. You are found out 'y says Knight.


Her. Hang him, he knows me better than he knows his Housekeeper.


Sell. I am at a stand, and know not how in this case to behave my self.


Her. I commend thee, Marmaduke, for driving a Jest so far: the Devil take me,
Gentlemen, if I thought it had been in him. I loved thee dearly before, but
this jocose humor of thine makes me admire thee; dear Rogue, let me hug and
kiss thee, sweet Boy.


Sell. Stand off, or as I am a Gentleman I Will strike you; which nothing could
make me do in my own house, but such an impudent provocation.


Her. Did you ever in your lives see a Jest so well managed, Gentlemen? he does
it so rarely well, that I dare swear you all think him in earnest.


La. Yes in good faith do we.


Her. By my life so should I, but that I have known him these fifty years.


Sell. Pray ye, Gentlemen, open the Scene, and discover what Buffoon this is.


Her. Buffoon, mark ye that, as if he did not know me, and yet name me: he will
carry it thus till I am angry with him.


Bo. Overwise is whispering of him, he will trouble him worse than Buffoon. Sir,
I am one that honor you, my name is Overwise; by that you may judge I am no
Fool, Sir.


Sell. ^s death, this is a worse Fop than the other.


La. But Knight, if Sir Marmaduke jokes, he does it rarely well.


Her. He is the Devil at joking: but that I would not say it to disgrace him,
he has been an old Player at Black Friars.


Sell. You eternal Dog, I Will cut your throat: Gentlemen, come ye to affront me?


Bo. Hold good Sir, we come upon no such unworthy design I assure you, Sir.


Over. Sir, read Seneca, and he will teach you patience.


Sell. Dam thee Fop, is patience to be exercised in thy company?


Her. But you Friend Marmaduke, now it is time to leave fooling, and to own me
for your old Friend, as you have done these fifty years, or hang me if I do not
declare you a proud foolish Fellow.


Sell. Gentlemen, I love wit and joking, no man more; therefore if this be a
Court Fool, or a public Buffoon, declare it, and he is welcome.


Her. Incomparable we^^, incomparable! does he not carry it rarely well,
Gentlemen!


Aim. I know not what to think, are they acquainted or no for a wager?


Over. No more than thou art with a reverend Divine, or the Emperor of Iapan.


Aim. Then is this Rogue Buffoon the Original of Impudence, and the rest of
Mankind mere Copies. He whispers.


Sell. 's death your whispering torments me more than his impudence: Gentlemen,
pray ye let me know the name and quality of this confident person.


Her. Away, away Fools! 's heart he knows name and quality better than he knows
his Children. I Will show you by an infallible token that I know him, for he has
a Mole of his right Buttock as broad as both my hands.


Sell. By my life a Villain, and he lies, Gentlemen.


Her. Why show the contrary, and that is demonstration. Sure he will not let
down his Breeches to disprove me.


Sell. I know not whether to laugh or to be angry. Pray ye, Gentlemen, let ^e
know his name.


Bo. Sir, his name is Hercules Buffoon.


Sell. O I have heard of him: S^r Hercules, I must be b^tter known to you.


Her. A good jest, as if you and I need to be better known.


Sell. Nay Sir, I Will own any thing you say to keep up your humor.


Over. But one ear more with you, Sir; I Am one that love curiosities, have you
really such a Mole of your ^uttock?


Sell I can be angry no longer: where the Devil were thou bred, that thou
delightst so in Lying?


Her. Now Sirs, I Will tell you how we two Arch Rogues robbed my Mothers Orchard
of all her Wall Fruit, her Peaches, Heart Cherries, and her great Dutch
Strawberries.


La. Pray ye Sir, are Strawberries a Wall ^ruit?


Her. You must know those were Greenland Strawberries, and there they grow up
to be ^ast great Trees, and are nailed against the walls as Vines are.


La. By reason of the great heat of the Climate, I suppose: beca^se Greenland
you know lies under the Line.


Her. It does so; thou have traveled or read Maps I find. But, Sir, ^o clear
our selves of robbing the Orchard; we drew forty huge over grown Carps out of a
Pond, each six foot long at le^st.


Bo. How, Carps six foot long! th^t's tw^ yards, Man.


Sell. But then you must consider they were overgrown Carps.


Her. Right, a monstrous overgrown Carp may be nine foot long. But, Sir, we put
'em in the Peach tree^, then fetched my Mother to see 'em; and when we come
back, the C^p* were skipping from tre^, eating the f^uit as the Devil drove
'em: so my Mother wondered at it, and we were clea^ed of the Robbery, old B^y.


Aim. Now the Devil thy Tutor take thee; for every motion of thy tongue thou
deservest a whipping.


Her. This Fellow is an infatuated Jew, believes nothing, not so much as a
Greenland Strawberry tree.


Aim. Did you never tell a Lie with Sir John Mandevil for a wager?


Her. Yes, and made an Ass of him too. I Will tell you a thing that I am sure
this Fellow will give no credit to.


Aim. Now thou speakst truth I am sure of it.


Her. Sir, I have been in a strange Country, where all Creatures are
prodigiously bigger than in other parts of the world, though of the same
species: for example, I have seen a Be as big as an Eagle.


Bo. Pray you how big were the Hives then?


Her. Full as big as Westminster Hall, only they are round.


Over. A good Simile; for we have a sort of English Vermin, that bring all the
Honey of the Nation to that Hive indeed.


Her. I have seen a Cabage tree higher than the Monument upon Fish-street-hill.


Omnes. Thou Boy, thou Boy!


Her. You do not believe me then: the Devil take me if these homebred Fellows
can be saved! they neither know nor believe half the Creation.


Aim. The Country thou speakst of is thy own creation.


Her. Marmaduke, upon my credit all their Main Masts for their Capital Ships
are made of Cabage stauks, and the Planks of the Ships are all Cabage leaves;
and better Timber by half than your English Oak.


Bo. If the Planks of their Ships be Cabage leaves, prithee what are the Sails
made of?


Her. Upon my life all their Sails are made of Spiders webs.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha.


Her. You ignorant Fops what do you laugh at? a Spiders web there is ten times
stronger than all the Canvas Sails in the world: and the Spiders are bigger
than the Kings fine Cranes in the Park, but twenty times longer legged. The
first time I saw them, they looked like Lincolnshire men walking i^th' Fens
upon Stilts.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha.


Aim. If every man here should cut an inch of his tongue out, he would have
enough lef^ I warrant ye to tell a Lie.


Over. Really if one inch were off, it is possible he might speak truth; and if
one inch will not do, my opinion is to cut it clear out.


Bo. Prithee Knight, what is the name of the Country where these wonders grow?


Her. It Is called, it is called Terra Incognita; all the Seamen in the world know
it; never a Skuller of the Thames but knows Terra Incognita Fool!


Bo. It Is as well known as the North East Passage to the Indies; the Seamen
know it as well as they know the Garden of Eden.


Her. Why there is no question in the world of it, Man.


Aim. If thou should be condemned to speak truth all thy life, what a case
were thou in!


Her. I Will hold thee five Guineys the next thing I speak of shall be truth, and
deposit in Sir Marmaduke's hand.


Aim. Done for five Guineys, there Sir.


Her. And there Sir. You know I told ye Gentlemen, that the Guardian and I were
old Acquaintants and intimate Friends, and may I perish if ever I saw him in my
life before this hour; speak truth now, Guardian.


Sell. The man speaks truth now upon my honor, Gentlemen.


Her. Then I have won. Now I Will hold thee five Guineys more that I never speak
truth again as long as I live.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha, ha. Enter Servant.


Ser. My Lord Arminger is come, and desires to see you.


Sell. Gentlemen, I must crave your pardon, great business calls me from ye, but
I desire ye to take the freedom of my house.


Exit Seldin, and Enter Alderman and Squire. Her. Uncle, what makes you here?


Ald. I have matched our Squire to the Northern Heiress, and settled all my
Estate upon the Lady.


Bo. Sir, your Nephew cannot marry till he is out of his time, for he is
Prentice to a Poet.


Ald. How, Prentice to a Poet!


Sq. Yes, and a greater honor than to be a Lord: Uncle, you would say so if
you knew the Records of Parnassus; I have taken the degree of Ass already.


Ald. Ass! Poets are the wittiest men of our Nation, then what relation can an
Ass have to a Poet, Blockhead?


Sq. O Uncle, you would a blessed your self to a seen me pass the grand Ceremony
of an Ass: First, I kneeled in my Shirt, then all these Gentlemen (according to
the Rules of Parnassus) threw a hundred Bumpers of Claret in my face.


Ald. Bumper! prithee what is a Bumper?


Sq. For shame Uncle, not know what a Bumper is! Bumper is the Parnassus word
for a Beer Glass top full.


Her. O the Learning of Parnassus exceeds all the Greek, Hebrew, Scotch, Welsh,
and Irish in the world.


Ald. I find they made an Ass of thee indeed.


La. But you must know 'twas done by the Laws of Parnassus, where the Records
of Poetry are most sacredly kept.


Ald. ^ecords of Parnassus, prithee what place is Parnassus?


Sq. It Is a place of rest for the Souls of the Poets; for you must know they
never go to Heaven, but when they die their Souls are con^emned to Parnassus,
there to sing Madrigals, every one in praise of his own Poetry to all eternity.


Aim. And that doubtless pleases them better than going to Heaven.


Ald. But will abusing a man inspire him with wit?


Her. The Ceremony without question will, ^or never was Boy so improved.


Ald. But will his wit get him an Estate, as mine has done?


Her. Nay by my faith I cannot say that.


Ald. Then a Wit is a pitiful poor Creature, and I Will warrant you one that will
borrow money of his very Father: I have more wit than a hundred of 'em.


Sq. I Uncle, you got your wit out of Eternal Hopkins.


Ald. Come let me see your Master.


Over. I am the person that honors your Nephew so far as to make him my
Prentice.


Ald. Honor him! he honors thee thou vainglorious Poet: but I do not blame
thee, for it is natural to you all. But (...), I Will try whether you're a Poet or
no; break a (...) without (...).


Over. Hold Sir, a Jest is not so quickly at a Poets command.


Ald. Then you're a dull insipid Poet, and will never go to Parnassus. To tell
you true I like not your Profession, therefore I Will buy the Boys time out; I Will
give you a hundred pound, that you may take some lawful Calling: for Poets and
Players are never useful but of a Lord Majors day, when they are mounted on a
Padgeant.


Bo. What think you of the Authority of the Nation, that allows them?


Ald. For all that we Citizens are always of our own opinion; and I say again,
Poets and Players are never useful but when a King is crowned, or a Lord Mayor
is chosen; and it is the opinion of the Court of Aldermen, and I Will stand in it.
Exeunt.


SCENE III.
Enter Lord Arminger and Mariana. Ma. I am here by promise to give your
Lordship Reasons why you and I must never marry; and prepare your self, for
I Have a story blood and horror are the least things in it.


Lo. Bless me, it startles all my Spirits to hear sweet Innocence talk of
blood; you must be virtuous, such Sweetness cannot deceive.


Ma. My Lord I am false, a lewd Impostor, and not the Heiress whom you came to
marry.


Lo. How! you have not lest me sense enough to wonder! my blood wants motion,
and life is stealing from me, and not sensible: speak again, for it is
impossible you should ever be wicked.


Ma. I am not the Heiress, but Sir Marmaduke Seldins own Daughter: and the true
Heiresses, my dear and lovely Kinswomen, are --


Lo. Are what, where, speak.


Ma. Murdered: what opinion have you of my Virtue now, my Lord?


Lo. I rather fear your Senses than your Virtue yet: some wild extravagancy
has seized your parts, and made your Tongue strike false: such a heavenly
Fabric cannot be tenanted with Devils, therefore deliver truth in short, and
let me be at ease.


Ma. Our cruel Father forced our consents to that more cruel murder, and had we
refused, we had infallibly met our own deaths.


Lo. Hold, my heart has met so violent a storm, 'twill everset: I bear a weight
of grief heavier than Atlas burden. Pray you speak of something else, my ears
are filled with so much wickedness, they have no room for more; pray you speak
the rest as softly as you can.


Ma. Then thus, my Lord; having met my Father in all his bloody purposes.


Lo. Bless me, how unconcerned she talks of Blood! her tongue persuades one
way, and her heavenly form another.


Ma. But the contrivance of the^s deathr so infinitely surpised and pleased my
Father, that he trusted our Engines with the bloody deed.


Lo. Bless me! how my opinion comes and goes! you seem to rejoice, Madam.


Ma. Then hear me, Sir: My own Servant having a Seaman to her Lover, hired a
Ship to carry them to the North of Norway, and there to set the Innocent
ashore, where none but the merciless inhabit: and being shipped, my jealous
Father saw them under sail below the Hope, and rhen returned well satisfied.
But our Servants by our order the next tide brought 'em back, and here I thank
Heaven they are safe, and have escaped the wicked purpose of my Father.


Lo. I thank Heaven too, both for your virtuous act, and their preservation:
how glorious do you now appear! you shine so bright, your dazzling Virtues hurt
my tender sight: I dare not gaze too much.


Ma. My Lord, preserve your sine managed Tongue for the lovely Beauty that
deserves it; you came to court the true Heiress, and Fate has purposely
preserved her for you. Enter Lidia.


Lid. O my sweet dear Lady, your Cousins will receive you with such joy, I fear
an Extacy will follow: I Will call them presently.


Ma. Now you shall behold a Beauty worthy of the Lord Arminger, whose Parts and
Fortune parallel yours: but had she no wealth, and were as low as poor Mariana,
the power of her Beauty would humble the proudest of Monarchs, and make him
stoop to court her.


Lo. Had she all this Beauty, and the Worlds Treasure in her own Exchequer, she
could no more tempt me to love her, than she could tempt the dead. A Ma^ble
Statue her Beauty may give life and motion to, sorce it to weep, and tell its
amorous passion, make it die for love, and so turn Statue again. All this I
think is in the power of Love, and yet it cannot work a change in me, my heart
is linked so firmly to your Virtues. Magic cannot break the chain.


Enter Belmaria, Innocentia, Fidelia, Lidia, Seaman. Ma. O my dear and lovely
Belmaria! my pretty Innocentia!


Fi. We have embraced and kissed already, Sister; wept for joy, and given
thanks: not so much as my ungodly Seaman old Captain Hammock but has rendered
thanks, to see us together again.


Bell. O you dear Preservers! how shall we reward your Virtues! how shall we
proclaim the honor due to your merits! It Is fit the World should know that
Heaven reigns in Women.


Fi. I, but the wicked World will hardly believe it.


In. O let me kiss and clip, and hug thee! O thou's my goodly Cousin, thou wad
not let us be murdered, Honey; no more wad thou, thou pratty Creature thou.


Fi. Sister, whilst we rejoice to see each other, we lose our selves in
neglecting of my Lord.


Ma. My Lord, most earnestly I crave your pardon.


Lo. This precious love you show each other requires my praise and wonder, not
my pardon: Your Servant Madam, yours lovely Innocentia.


In. What pratty words he said to me, Cousin!


Bell. We ought to rejoice at the sight of these Miracles, these Cherubins; for
such Virtue, my Lord, deserves such heavenly Attributes.


Lo. Madam, you cannot say enough; they are Angels only wrapped up in Mortality,
disguized in lovely Flesh and Blood, to show the world what blessed Creatures
the whole Sex of Womankind were meant.


In. Now waise me Cousin, that my Tongue could but tattle as prattily as this
deft Lords does.


Bell. My Lord, we intend equally to divide our Fortunes with them, to be less
grateful would render us unworthy of our lives, which they so virtuously have
preserved.


In. Marra Sister, my Cousin shall have half of every thing I have; thou'st
have half my Portion, nay by my Conscience thou'st have half my Husband when I
have him.


Fi. But Cousin, suppose this brave Lord were your Husband, would you let me
have half of him?


In. Now by my Saul I think I should not: A wattanerin he is too pratty a man to
part with, Cousin.


Lo. Lovely sweet Innocence! I thank your kind opinion, Madam.


Ma. Good Belmaria, did you say half your Portions? my Lord, have they not
brave and generous Souls, does it not add to their Beauties, and make them look
more lovely, speak my Lord?


Lo. With great astonishment I admire their offer! the worst of men must needs
adore such Gratitude!


Ma. And the best of men despise us, should we accept the offer.


Lo. It was my fear you would, when you so highly extolled their Generosity.


Ma. My Lord, if we have done good, the deed rewards it self: Virtue's a free
gift from above, and to be bought and sold no more than Heaven.


Fi. Virtue was never mercenary yet; and if it should, my Lord, we have not
such a stock as to sell it out by retail.


Bell. This is obstinacy, not honor, to refuse a Friendship just^y due to you:
you would make us ungrateful to raise your selves a Fame.


In. Let this deft Honey Lord be Judge now, they saved us fra being devoured by
wild Bears, Honey Lord; then should not we give them half we have, thou pratty
man thou?


Fi. Dispute this no more, but come to the point: I present your Lordship with
the real Heiress, my Sister was but a false Nine-pin put upon you.


Ma. It Is true my Lord, this is your true prize, and worthy of your Greatness.


Bell. Hold Cousin, shall I be offered up to one* that may re^use me? that (...).


In. Marra wad to the Lord of Heaven they wad all say so; then I hope at last
he wad come to be my sweet Honey Husband.


Ma. We are now to think of safety, for home we must not go; therefore we beg
your Lordship to take us into your protection.


Omnes. We all desire that favor, my Lord.


In. Favor, marra it is even a Blessing, and good Honey Sister let us never go
fra this pratty Lord whilst we live.


Lo. I receive you, Ladies, with such care as tender Mothers take of Infants;
and if my Honor, Life, and Fortune can preserve you from your Fathers cruelty,
you are safe.


Sea. Your safety lies in securing your Father, Madam; bring him to public
justice, and then you're safe.


Ma. O say that no more; my Lord and Belmaria, you have milder tempers, we have
preserved your lives, and to publish my Fathers shame were to murder us.


Fi. The ill he meant you see is mercifully prevented; how ungrateful then
would you all appear to us! but thy Nature like thy horrid Aspect is all rough
and surr'd; thy love to her is surr'd all over like a sick man's tongue, so that
love in thee is a perfect Fever; and when you are well, it is no longer love,
but turns again to brutish Seaman.


Lo. What way can you propose to secure your selves, and conceal your Fathers
shame, Ladies?


Ma. If we could find a way to bring him to repentance.


Bell. I, dear Cousin, that were a blessed work indeed, we could all wish that,
but how?


Ma. Why thus: your Lordship we desire to get my Father hither, and tell him we
are fallen desperately ill, indeed distracted; say something has app^ared to
us, and frighted us, and desire him to come with all speed, lest we die before
he has a sight of us.


Fi. Very good; my two Cousins, Lidia, and her Seaman, shall appear at that
window like Ghosts, call him Bloody Murderer, bid him repent, and so vanish.


Ma. That must shake his Spirits being guilty, and I hope may work upon his
hardened heart.


Lo. We all hope that; I much approve of this contrivance, and if you please
I Will instantly about it.


Bell. My Lord, we shall for ever own the obligation.


In. Good Honey Lord, take heed my naughty Nun^le do not kill you now.


Lo. Sweet lovely Innocentia, I thank you; your faithful Seavant, Ladies. Exit
Lord.


In. Faithful to us all! marra Ise sure Iste have the least share of you then.


Bell. Come dear Mariana, this trial I hope will bring your poor Father to an
humble penitence.


Ma. It is the only blessing upon earth my Soul prays for.


Fi. I hope for something else upon earth before I die, Sister.


Omnes. We shall all rejoice to see you both enjoy your wishes. Exeunt.


FIFTH ACT.
SCENE I.
Enter Buffoon, Bowman, Laton. La. O Sir Hercules, there is rods in piss for you
'y says, my Uncle is so incensed against thee, for putting that damned Joke of
Whetstones Park upon him, that he resolves to have the whole Nation searched,
but he will have thee.


Her. I thought a Deer out of Whetstones Park had been welcomer to him than all
the Venizon in the world; how came he to know it?


Bo. Why it seems he inquired of some of his Brother Lawyers where about in
Middlesex a place called Whetstones Park stood; and withal told 'em he had
bargained for two Brace of Deer yearly out on it during his life.


La. Upon that they all fell a laughing at him ready to split, and told him it
was a Park of Bawdy-houses; which made him fall into so great a rage, that he
has sent his Clerk, Constables, and Devil and all to search for thee.


Her. Why you know 'twas Sir Thomas Lovill with the wooden Leg, that put
Whetstones Park upon him: I Will go to him as I am Sir Hercules, and bid him
produce his lame Knave Sir Thomas Lovill: have thou the Deed of thy Fathers
Estate, Man?


La. I have it Old Boy: he was so pleased that I fought with thee in the
defense of his Reputation, that he gave me the Deed presently; and the Lawyer^
assure me, that it is a^ firm a Deed as ever yet was ma^e.


Her. Then never ^ear me, I Will get off well enough I Will warrant you.


La. I Will own the whole to him; come we'll contrive it as we go.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Lord Arminger and Guardian. Lo. Sir Marmaduke, I have something to
impart to you; but you being subject to violent passions, I am not willing to
communicate such unwelcom news to you.


Sell My Lord, to show the dear respect I bear you, passion shall be my slave
for once; I Will stop his violent source, and yoke him to humility: therefore let
me know the worst of ill my cruel Fate has destined.


Lo. In short your Nieces are fallen desperately ill.


Sell. Is that all, my Lord? if they be sick we will have a Doctor.


Lo. Not sick, but worse; a ghastly fear and trembling has possessed them,
something appears to 'em and frights 'em; for they ran to me and cried, Save
us, Save us; and asked me if I saw nothing, and pointed with their Fingers,
crying aloud, There they are, There they are: have they ever had such Fits
before?


Sell. Often my Lord, often; ever when they dream of Hopgoblins, the next day
they run to me for shelter: dam 'em their base womanish fear will destroy their
glorious preferment.


Lo. Their desperate Fits would make me think 'em guilty of Murder, but for my
full persuasion of their sweet and blessed innocence: and what unspeakable
comfort it is to be innocent! what say you Sir?


Sell. Yes, it is a fine childish comfort, for to be innocent is to be ignorant,
to be ignorant is to know nothing, and they that know nothing are unworthy to
be reckoned of the race of Man. And that is my opinion of Innocence, my Lord.


Lo. I am troubled to hear this, it is no religious Answer.


Sell. It was no religious Question. I would see my Nieces, are they here, my
Lord?


Lo. Yes, they are here, bloody Villain: I Will fetch those blessed Innocents,
which by thy virtuous Daughters were preserved. Ghost above.


Sell. Ha, ha! what thou art a foolish Scarcrow called a Ghost, art thou not?


Lo. Who is it you speak to? what is it you s^e?


Sell. Nothing, I speak to nothing, I see nothing, do you my Lord?


Lo. No, Sir; but such distracted starts as those your Nieces had.


Sell. Then good my Lord withdraw; in short the Devil and I have conference once
a week, and now is the time.


Lo. I Will fetch your Nieces, their Virtues may fright your Devil ^way.


Exit Lord. Sell. Now thou venomous Serpent clad in ghostly white, come down,
that I may kill thee over again, and so have thee doubly damned


Sea. Thou can not Fool hurt me, I am an aerie Spirit.


Sell. Come down, and I Will knead and mould thy aerie Spirit into substance, that
I may tear it into air again: what art thou?


Sea. A damned Soul of thy preferring, dispatch and die; the Devils are stark
made in Hell, that thou art so long on Earth; therefore make haste, they want
thee.


Sell. If the Devil wants me, let him if he dares come fetch me; I dare him and
his whole Host of Furies, bring Proserpine his Wife; and in spite of all his
Guards I Will keep her here on earth, and make Prince Pluto my Cuckold; and what
a shame 'twou'd be to Hell to have it said, Miss Proserpine is kept.


Sea. Cease thy madness, Fool; I am that Seaman who undertook the bloody Murder
of thy Nieces, but was prevented by being all drowned at Sea.


Sell. Drowned, art thou sure of it?


Sea. Too sure.


Sell. Then take notice I am their Heir at Law; come down sweet Ghost, and let
me kiss thee; for never did Spirit bring such blessed news.


Bell. O wicked Uncle repent.


In. Repent, for thou's my naughty Nuncle.


Sell. What a Yorkshire Ghost! what Northern Devil is thy Guardian now?


Sea. Since thou can not wretched man repent, behold us all in flesh and
blood, and clad in pure innocence.


Sell. Alive, all alive! O happy hour, O blessed minute! Come, come down, dear
Nieces, and behold your poor Uncle rejoicing in his tears, to find you all thus
secretly preserved: what Saint was it that saved you?


Bell. Your virtuous Children, so we come, good Uncle.


In. Take heed thou dissemble not, good Nuncle. Exeunt above.


Sell. My own Daughters betray me! I that thought my subtilty above the reach of
Devils, by Children to be deluded! O dam 'em! how like innocent truth their
words fell from 'em, and I an infatuated Fool believed!


Enter Lord, Fidelia, Belmaria, Innocentia, Lidia, Seaman. Lo. Sir Marmaduke, I
take you in my arms, and am o'erjoy'd to see such penitential tears flow from
you.


Sell. O my Lord, I find my Children have made known my wicked purpose, and my
shame confounds me so, I dare not look upon your virtuous Figure: O let me see
my heavenly Babes.


Ma. Here dear Father, let us for ever kneel, and for evermore thank Heaven for
this your blessed conversion.


Fi. O dear Sir, what comfort it is to see you satisfied that these are safe.


Sell. A blessed comfort indeed, they are Saints, my Lord, too good to dwell on
Earth, and therefore shall to Heaven, thus Stabs Mariana; Lord and Seaman
disarm him. ye Devils!


Lo. Hold thou cursed Wretch! take his Sword from's side, whilst I disarm him
of his Dagger.


Fi. Run, run for Surgeons; let all the Household run.


Lo. Household! employ the whole World for Surgeons, and let all the business of
the Earth stan^ still, till Mariana be recovered.


Ma. Have merry on my distressed Father, my Lord.


Sell. A curse on thee for a Religious Jilt.


Lo. What can he now expect but public justice! for all the Records of Hell
cannot produce such wickedness as is in thee: but for Mariana's sake yet
repent, and all shall be forgot


Sell. Repent! Seaman, that Lord's turned Fool: did Quality ever trouble it self
with repentance before? it lies not in the road of Greatness: Fetch me the
Devil, and I Will thank you; I have revengful work for him and his whole Tribe:
give me my Sword.


Sea. You are in no con^ition to be trusted with a Sword, Sir.


Sell. Lord, of all Mankind trust not that treacherous Slave; he once seemed to
me the bravest, and the bloudiest Villain that ever Man or Devil employed; and
the false Dog turned tail, proved honest, and betrayed me. My Children too
proved false; who would stay in this wicked world! I and my damned Issue will
out on it: to see them ^ry in torments, would please me better than to be a
Monarch.


Lo. Thou Wretch, think of thy Soul, and then repent.


Sell. I cannot, revenge allows no time to think of Souls: the Heralds know
every thing takes place of Penitence, that comes sneaking behind, and is
allowed no place of Honor; but Vengeance rides in the front of the battle, and I
his right hand man: therefore this Tongue shall never utter any wor^s, but
Vengeance, Furies, and Torments; Torments, Furies, and Vengeance: revenge,
Devils, revenge. Exit Seldin.


Lo. What an Example of Desperation's here! Pray you, Si^, be careful of hi^
till I sen^ Ministers to comfort him. I wonder so wicked a man should have such
virtuous children! Exeunt.


SCENE III.
Enter Judge and Clerk at one door; Bowman, Laton, Buffoon, Squire, at another.
La. Clerk, take heed, be sure you be true to us.


Clerk. I Will stick as close to you as your Shirt, Sir.


Her. Save you, my Lord; I understand one Lovill, a Rogue with one eye and a
wooden leg, has informed you that I have with most reproachful and ignominious
words bespattered your Judgship.


Jud. Oho! then it seems you are Sir Hercules Buffoon, that have as you call it
bespattered me: write a Warrant, Clerk, I Will clap you up, and clap an Action of
ten thousand pounds upon you for scandal, Sir.


Sq. That will be a damned Clap indeed, Clap him up, and Clap an Action; this
Judge talks of nothing but Claps, I believe he knows Whetstones Pa^k better
than I do.


Her. Clap me up! I scorn your words, my Lord: bring that Villain Lovill to my
^ace, to justify his words if he dare.


Jud. I am afraid, Clerk, he dares not come, because of the roguish bargain he
put upon me, of two Brace of Deer out of Whetstones Park; it seems a Park of
Ba^dy-houses: Rogue! Rogue!


Sq. My Lord, I Will take that bargain off your hands; I Will give you two Brace of
Fallow Deer for your two Brace of Whetstone.


Jud. Yours is such another Park as Whetstone, I suppose: but for Lovill I Will
clap him up in a Jayl, where he shall never come out.


Sq. Another Clap! this old Fellow has been a Swinger in's days.


Her. He Is a sherking Knave and no Knight, my Lord.


Jud. How came he to be called so then?


Bo. In the time of the Civil Wars he found friends it seems to get a bla^k
Warrant for a Baronet, and not finding a good Customer for it, he sawcily
bestowed the Honor upon himself.


Jud. He is the first Subject that ever made himself a Knight.


Her. Not by some few, my Lord: but I am told you threaten to undo me, for
which I Will clap an Action of the Cas^ upon you, my Lord.


Sq. Then there will be Clap for your Clap, and the stone in your foot still,
my Lord.


Jud. If I find this Lovill, I Will purge your ill manners for you.


Her. The Rogues Oath will not be taken, he has been Knight of the ^ost these
twenty years; there came in his Knighthood, it is his trade, he has nothing else
to live on.


Jud. Did you ever hear two men rail at one another thus, Sir?


Bo. I think the like was never known, my Lord.


Jud. Well, till Lovill be found I Will secure you, Sir.


Her. I defy both Law and Lawyers, for I have a Protection.


Jud. A Protection! I believe the Devil voids Protections faster than Children
void Worms; let me see it, Sir.


Her. I have it not yet* but if you will call for a Pen and Ink I Will write my
self one presently.


Jud. This Fellow seems to be some Jester rather than a Knight.


Bo. He may be a Jester, and yet a Knight too.


Jud. But hold Clerk, was not this Gentleman here with Sir Thomas Lovill?


Bo. My Lord, I was not here; I have a Twin Brother indeed very like me, I
suppose it might be him.


Jud. That may be, but I am certain this young Squire was here, and said he was
Lovill's Son.


Sq. My Lord, I was not here; I have a Twin Brother indeed very like me, I
suppose it might be him.


Jud. This Fellow's a Fool, and not a Squire sure.


Sq. My Lord, a Fool and a Squire are Twin* too, you will scarce know one from
the other.


Jud. Clerk, sure this is Sir Thomas Lovill's Son.


Sq. I had rather be thought the Son of a Whore: Lovill's a Rogue that deals
with Pick-pockets, and can help people to stolen goods again.


Bo. This is you all this while, Knight.


Jud. You all deny the truth: Sir Buffoon, you will deny too that my Nephew
cudgelled you.


Her. I scorn to be cudgelled; I confess he caned me indeed, and he kicked me
so, that my Haaches look as black as a Westpha^ia Ham, or the Traitors Quarters
upon the City gates.


La. Upon my word, my Lord, I never caned nor kicked him; nor did I ever in my
life see the man before this day.


Jud. Did you not beat him then for abusing me so grossly?


La. No, my Lord.


Jud. Then give me my Deed again, Sirrah.


La. No, my Lord.


Jud. Why did you own, you base Fellow, that you were caned and kicked?


Her. Because, my Lord, I take delight in Lying; it is my darling virtue, I love
it better than you love Whetstone Venison, my Lord.


Jud. You Rascal, I Will have you ^udgell'd because you scorn it.


Bo. O my Lord, exercise your patience, and take some other course.


Jud. Then I suppose that you, Sirrah, hired that Rogue Lovill to tell me
stories of your Valor, to wheedle me out of my Estate.


La. I did so, my Lord.


Jud. You impudent Fellow, have thou the Face to justify it?


La. Yes, my Lord.


Jud. And this ridiculous Squire is Lovill that Rascal's Son.


Sq. Yes, my Lord, and I am this Knights Son too, my Lord.


Jud. You abominable Fool, how can that be?


Bo. Because, my Lord, Sir Hercules disguised himself with a black pa^^h and a
wooden leg, a purpose to put this trick upon you.


Jud. Clerk, bear witness, here are two Knights found in one, person, both
confessing each other to be notorious Rogues; here is a Pilory in the case,
beside^ Whipping in abundance.


Her. You have done well, ou^s what have you brought me to!


Jud. The misfortune is, that these two Knights have but one back to bear all
the whipping due to 'em both.


Her. I defy your whipping; pull off my Coat, look you here, Sir; I am the
Court Fool, and here is my Fools Coat to protect me.


Jud. Death! had ever Lawyer so many tricks put upon him, cheated of my Office,
my Estate; and not content with that, but thus grossly to abuse me too?


La. Your Conscience knows you cozened my Father grossly, and I have got it
again by a trick, so there is trick for your trick, and the stone in your foot
still.


Jud. I think there is a flaw in the Deed, if there be Villain, I Will make thee
the wretch^d'st Beggar in the Nation.


Bo. We have been with Council, and they say it is the firmest Deed that ever
yet was drawn; so that you have the credit of being the best Conveyancer of all
the Town.


Jud. Then am I the first man that ever was undone by being too good a Lawyer;
but I Will find some other way to destroy thee, thou accursed Villain. Exeunt
Judge and Clerk.


Sq. As angry as you are, I expect my bargain of Whetstones Park, my Lord.


Her. Now Boys let us to the Tavern, eat, drink, and rejoice; for Dagon the Law
is beaten down, and shall be no longer worshipped. Exeunt.


SCENE IV.
Enter Fidelia and Innocentia. Fi. How do you, my dear Innocentia? my Soul
mourns to hear you say you're sick, Child.


In. Prithee ^ousin do not call me Child; by my Saul I have Woman's thoughts in
me, my head aches so it plays Riveskin with me; waes me my Heart greips me too.


Fi. You mistake, Jewel; it is the Belly that gripes, not the Heart.


In. Nay God wait it is even my Heart that is it; I can do naught but think of
that pra^ty Lord, Cousin, then my Heart g^i^es me so, that Ise even ready to be
dead; what means that, have thou any skill to tell me, Cousin?


Fi. Alas my dear Cousin, I doubt you are in love.


In. Now waes me* Ise quite undone then; thou knows* Cousin, that sweet Honey
Lord kissed my hand even now, and he kiss^d it so prattily, that I have kissed
it a thousand time, since, because that pratty Lord kissed it; and is that love
think thou Cou^in?


Fi. I, and desperate love too; shall I tell him how you love him, Cousin?


In. I, and even Gods B^nnison and mine light on thee for it: but I doubt,
Cousin, thou'll speak can word for me, and tw^^ for thy self.


Fi. O sie Cousin, do not think I am so treacherous.


In. By my Saul Ise sure I should serve thee sea.


Fi. Poor sweet Jewel, I pity thee exceedingly.


Enter Lord Arminger. Lo. O Fidelia rejoice, your Sisters wound proves but a
scratch; all danger's past, she is dressed and coming forth.


Fi. I heartily rejoice: but, my Lord, this sweet Creature is so in love with
your Lordship, that if you be not civil to her, I really think 'twill kill her.


Lo. Heaven forbid, pretty Lady! be assured I pay you my respects with all the
love my Honor can give way to.


In. Let me but once a day look at thy pratty Face, and then kiss my hand for
me thou deft pratty Man, and that is all the blessing I desire in the world.


Enter Mariana. Lo. Assure your self of those and thousands more: but behold
your sweet Sister, O my dear Mariana, Providence I hope has lent you life, to
make mine easy to me.


Ma. Stop there, my Lord; made not you a Contract with my Father, to marry
Belmaria the eldest Heiress?


Lo. I grant I did so, Madam.


Ma. And was not I without a Fortune falsely put upon you? did you not court me
as Belmaria, and truly love me as Belmaria?


Lo. Your Fathers Dagger is in every word you have spoke, and has not scratched
but wounded.


In. Now waes me, my pratty Lord's in love with thy Sister, Cousin.


Lo. Mariana, you accuse me as if I had broke my Faith: by Heaven I never yet
was false.


Ma. You will be, if you persist in a love sprung from a false foundation; you
made love to an Impostor, a false woman; and now you know the Cheat, are you so
weak to think your Honor is engaged to make that Courtship good to that
Impostor?


Lo. An Impostor is the welcom'st blessing upon earth to me, if it appear in
your lovely Figure.


In. Now by my Saul he is more in love with her, than Ise with him, waes me.


Ma. I believe, my Lord, you truly love me, and that is my only Curse.


In. Ten thousand like Curses fall on me, they would be my best Blessings,
Cousin.


Ma. When I consider how falsely, how by a trick you came to love me, I must in
honor pronounce my own doom, an^ say I Will never marry.


In. God in Heaven keep her ever in that mind.


Ma. The wrong else to Belmaria would look, as if we saved her from one murder,
to execute a worse upon her.


Enter Belmaria. Bell. Mariana, you nor your Lord have injured; but had your
Father proved faithful, perhaps I had been your Bride, my Lord.


In. Waes me, what shall I do, my Sister's in love with him too! wad I had been
devoured with wild B^ars.


Ma. Had my Father been faithful, Belmaria says you had been hers: mark that,
my Lord; can you after this ever make court to me? my Lord, this heart, and
every drop of blood within it, has more love for you than Dido quitted life
for; yet all this can I conque^ to be just, therefore must not in point of
Honor marry. What strong Arguments I use to destroy my self!


Fi. I thank Fate I am not in Love's Lime twigs, for here is the Devil and all
to do: In point of honor fo^sooth one will not marry, and the other will not
marry; so that I find the Punctilio's of Honor will destroy Gene^ation, and
is it not pit^ such a Lord should die, without leaving some of his Brood behind
him* Cousin?


In. I God he knows is it.


Lo. I know she loves me, I Will try her with a small design: Mariana, I find
your resoluti^n fixed, and no persuasion can make you mine; therefore I will
take your advice, and apply my self to fair Belmaria: so your Servant, Madam;
sweet Belmaria, now I address to you.


Ma Hold, hold, I ^ie I die. They run to her.


Lo Say you will be my Wi^e, and th^n I Will quit Belmaria.


Ma. Any thing rather than see that cruel sight again.


Fi. Marry her presently, my Lord, lest Honor get the upper hand again


In. Help, help, my heart is broken quite in two. Falls down.


Fi. Alas my sweet Cousin! Do you take her up, my Lord, and she will do well again


Lo. How do you do, dear Innocentia?


In. Is it the pratty Lord that comes to help me? then I is varra well again.


Ma. Then we are happy, my Lord, and I am wholly yours: but how does my Father
all this while?


Lo. He desires to go into the Country with two Ministers, who gave me great
assurance of his conversion. We will marry then with all convenient speed.


Bell. I hope, my Lord, you will be our Guardian, and let us live together, and we
are satisfied.


In. And good Honey Lord, let us never part whilst we have one hour to live.


Lo. By my life we would not quit you for all the world's wealth; and I Will make
it my whole business to match you to Honorable Fortunes.


Enter Alderman, Squire, Bowman, Laton, and Aimwell. Ald. With your leave, my
Lord Arminger; we hear Sir Marmaduke Seldin is distracted and dying, and that
your Lordship is made Guardian to the two Heiresses.


Lo. The Ladies are pleased to think me worthy of that Trust, and I have
undertaken it.


Ald. The Northern Lady is to marry my Nephew, my Lord: to that end, Sir
Marmaduke caused me to settle my Estate entirely upon her; the Match is gone so
far, my Lord.


Sq. Nay it is gone further with us young Folks, for we have played at
Clapperdeponch together; therefore it is too late to break off the Match.


In. By my Saul I never played at Clapperdepouch with thee: did my Nuncle mean
to wad me to sike ana Fool as thee!


Sq. Why this is not my Clapperdepouch Uncle.


Fi. Why no, I is thy Clapperdepouch Honey.


Sq. What the Devil is there two Clapperdepouches! I am sure one must be false.


In. Ise sure Ise the right Northern Heiress.


Sq. Then thou art the false one, Honey: I have heard of False Dice, and False
Nine-pins; but to have a False Clapperdepouch put upon a man, is more than ever
I heard of.


Ald. My Lord, I will not stand to this bargain, for my Estate is settled upon
the Northern Heiress.


Lo. No, Sir, I have read the Deed, and it is settled upon Fidelia Seldin.


Ald. Then I am cozened, my Lord, and abused.


Lo. Not so, Sir, 'twas your own voluntary Act: besides, I have married her
Sister, and I hope you will think it no disparagement for me to call you Uncle,
and you me Nephew; and to have your Kinsman call me Brother.


Ald. My Lord, I shall take it for the greatest honor in the world.


Sq. A much greater honor than our Alliance with King Pippin; and so I receive
Fidelia Seldin for my Wife.


Ald. And I receive you, my Lord, as my Nephew, and your Lady as my Niece.


Enter Sir Hercules Buffoon and Overwise. Her. And I receive you as my Son and
Daughter: by this Match you honor us, as you are a Noble Lord; and we honor
you, by making you a Kinsman to King Pippin.


Over. My Earl of Honor, I have one Project, the which if your Lordship will
counte^ance --


Lo. You know I was always your Friend, and ever will be.


Over. Then my Earl you must know, my Ancestor was the first Inventor of Short
Hand, and you see of what use it is to the world; but at first it was extremely
laughed at, as no doubt my Project will be.


Bo. There is no question of it in the least.


Lo. Pray you let me hear your Project as briefly as you can.


Over. Briefly! I find I am troublesome, I humbly refuse then, my Lord.


Aim. I would not give a Doit to hear it.


Over. My Lord, I humbly grieve that I have rudely refused: my Project is this.


Lo. I will not hear it now, Sir.


Over. Then I pity you, my Lord -- Young Man, thou shall hear it.


Sq. By my faith but I will not.


Over. Now, Sir, it is my opinion, that you sprung not from the Loins of King
Pippin.


Her. Sir, do you affront the Family of the Buffoons?


Sq. I Will affront your Coxcomb with Mahomets own Semitor, that cut off Orene's
head.


Over. My Lord, upon my Honor that very Semitor hangs up now in Gresham College.


Lo. Now, Sir, I Will hear your Project, for your Semitors sake at Gresham
College.


Over. My Lord, you know all the World now writes Short Hand, and my Project is
that, which I am I confess really fond of.


Bo. That Is more than any man else will be, I doubt: well, what is it?


Over. Sir, I communicate only to my Lord: Ladies, you may hear if you please:
my Project is, Ladies; well, I value my self extremely upon it.


In. Marra the Devil hama, gin this be not a worse Fool than thy Clapperdepouch
Cousin.


Over. Well in short, as all the World writes Short Hand, so I would teach all
the World to speak Short Hand, and by an Act of Parliament have it called the
Short Hand Tongue.


La. Speak Short Hand, and have it called the Short Hand Tongue! Jack Adams for
that; ha, ha, ha.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Over. Did not I before hand tell your Lordship I should be laughed at?


Lo. You did so indeed most Prophetically.


Over. Nevertheless, my Lord, I shall proceed; for I have really computed, that
a long-winded Minister shall p^each a Sermon in the Short Hand Tongue, in as
little time as a Horse shall run a Four miles course, and that is exactly seven
minutes, Madam.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Bo. Why do you laugh, Gentlemen? I think 'twou'd be great Service to the
Nation, to have a Sermon preached in seven minutes.


Aim. Then Sermons would not be tedeous, nor people would not sleep at Church.


Her. Nor would they have time to make love there, as I have done often.


Sq. Nor would Sunday Pies be burnt in the Oven, nor Meat over roasted, nor
would Farmers have time to make Bargains at Church.


Over. Right, Sir: I will undertake to make the Merchants of the Change* and
Lawyers at the Bar, plead all their business in the Short Hand Tongue; nay, and
the Judges shall give Sentence in the Short Hand Tongue.


Sq. And men shall be hanged in Short Hand Ropes, and then they will feel ^o
pain.


Over. Right; an^ what ease would it be to the World, to have all the whole
business of a day done in seven minutes!


Sq. Then should we have all the rest of the day to be drunk in.


La. I believe thou speakst Short Hand already, Squire; for always when you are
d^unk, thou putst twelve words into one.


Sq. That is not Short Hand, it is called Clipping the Kings English. I hope
Sir, you will teach Women to scold in Short Hand Tongue, and that would be great
Service to the Nation.


Bo. Good my Lord, let us laugh this insufferable Short Hand Fool quite out of
the Land.


Omnes. The Short Hand Tongue! ha, ha, ha, away Fool away.


Over. I Will make you all Fools with one Philosophical Question, Tell me whether
at the great or the small end of a Spiders Egg does Nature make Production?


La. Thou art the Product of an Ass I Am sure.


Sq. Pray you Sir, let me ask you one question, Is your name Overwise or
Otherwise?


Over. It is not proper for me to say, I Will quarrel with you; but, Sir, I Will
make a Cess^tion of Friendship with you, and so draw upon you.


Bo. Hold, hold; put up, put up; away Short Hand Ass.


Over. Well I pity all Fools, from the Gentleman to the Lord and Lady Fools,
and so I take my leave. Exit Overwise.


Sq. I hope you will take your leave in the Short Hand Tongue.


Aim. My Lord, we hope you will befriend us so far, as to admit us Suitors to
these Heiresses.


Lo. Gentlemen, were I not concerned, I would serve you frankly; but being
their Guardian, were you my Brothers I would not betray my Trust; but will
match them to men of such Honor and Wealth, as shall deserve their Fortunes:
and this Resolution you cannot take unkindly.


La. No my good Lord, your answer has fully satisfied us.


Bell. What a Noble Lord is this, Cousin?


Ma. Come pretty Cousin, I Will give you half I have now; nay, I Will give you half
my Husband.


In. Thank you Honey Cousin, but Iste be a little Whore then, shall I not?


Ma. No sweet Cousin, I Will have a care of that.


Fi. My Lord, we must see honest Captain Hammock here and his Miss well
rewarded, and all is done.


Lo. And it shall be done to their Satisfaction.


EPILOGUE.
Wrote and spoke by J. H. Com.
MEthinks (Right Worthy Friends) you seem to sit,
As if you had all taken Physic in the Pit.
When the Play's done, your jaded Fancies pall:
After Enjoyment thus it is with us all.
You are
Mere Epicures in Thinking; and, in fine,
As difficult to please in Plays as Wine:
You Have no true taste of either, judge at random,
And cry, De gustibus non disputandum.
One's for Vin d'Hermitage, Love's lofty inditing;
Another Old Hoc, he a Style that is biting;
Both hate Champaign, and Damn soft natural Writing.
And some forsooth
Love Rhenish Wine and Sugar, Plays in Meeter;
Like dead Wine, swallowing Nonsense Rhimes make sweeter*
There Is one's for a Cup of Nants, and he it is odds,
Like old Buffoon, loves Plays that swinge the Gods.
True English Topers Racy Sack never fail;
With such Ben. Johnson's humming Plays prevail.
Whilst some at Tricks and Grimace only fleer;
To such must noisy frothy Farce appear;
These new Wits relish Small Smart Bottle Beer.
French Gouts, that mingle Water with their Wine,
Cry, Ah de French Song, Gosoun dat is ver' fine*
Who never drink without a relishing Bit;
Scapin methinks such sickly Tastes might hit*
Where w' entertain each squeamish nicer Palate
With Sauce of Dances, and with Songs for Salad.
Since then it is so hard to please (with choicest Diet)
Our Guests, wh'm Wit and Sense do daily riot:
Since Wit is damned by those whom Wits we call;
As Love that stands by Love, by Love does fall;
When Fools both good and bad (like Whores) swallow all
"I wish for your sakes the Sham Wits of the Nation
"Would take to some honest, some thriving Vocation.
"The Wit of our Feet, you see every Night,
"Says more to our purpose than all you can write:
"Since things are thus carried, a Wit's such a Tool,
"He that makes the best Plays, does but best play the Fool.
A Dreaded Fool's your Bully,
A Wealthy Fool's your Cit;
A Contented Fool's your Cully,
But your Fool of Fool's your Wit.
They all Fool Cit of's Wife,
He fools them of their Pelf;
But your Wit's so damned a Fool,
He only Fools himself.
O Wits, then face about to Sense! Alas,
I know it by my self a Wit's an Ass.
For (like you) in my time
I Have been Foolish in Rhyme;
But now so repent the Nonsensical Crime:
I speak it in Tears, which from me may seem odly,
Henceforth I Will grow wiser; Damn Wit, I Will be Godly:
That when by new Grace I have wiped off old Stains,
In time I may pass, not for Count, but Sir Haynes.
FINIS.

