The Dangerous Rule: OR, A SERMON Preached at Clonmel in the Province of
Munster in Ireland, Upon Aug. 3. 1657. Before The Reverend Judges for that
Circuit.

By S. L. Master in Arts, and lately Fellow of C.C.C. in Oxon.

(...).

London, printed by J.C. for Tho. Newbery over against the Conduit in
Cornhill, 1658.

To the Right Honorable Richard Pepys, Lord Chief Justice of the Upper Bench,
and Counselor of State in Ireland.
And John Bysse, Esquire Recorder of the City of Dublin; Judges of Assize, For the
Province of Munster.
My Lords,
IN Obedience to your Lordships, I do here present you with a Copy of that
Discourse which was so lately preached before you. I dare not quarrel with it
now, lest that should implicitly Question your Lordships Judgments, and the
Judgments of several other persons of Quality, who have been pleased to
approve of it: Yet this I must say, That I was so far from thinking it might
become the Press; as that in such an Auditory, and upon so solemn an occcasion,
I judged it unworthy of the Pulpit. But since your Lordships have thought
otherwise, and because it scarce savours of good manners to contradict either
your Thoughts or Commands, I have thus submitted it to your Lordships
Pleasures; though I am not altogether insensible what sundry prejudices will
attend it. It Is suited to a particular Season, and therefore, like musical
notes, harmonious in their due time and place, but nothing less when dis-joyned
from these: nor dare I wish, that it might again become fashionable, since that
were to imprecate public mischiefs. 'Twill be distasted by some, because it
seems to derogate from the deserved worth of a good Conscience; though its
Author was so far from this, that he could more gladly have pleaded against
Laws without this Balance, then against Conscience without their Conduct: only
men were leaning rather toward the later extreme; and if he seems to bend a
crooked Tree too much on the contrary hand, his intent is no other but to make
it straight in the close. 'Twill be censured by others, for prefering
Achitophel before David; for advancing carnal Reason too highly, and too much
slighting the assistance of Gods Spirit: but this was as far from my thoughts,
as to speak of it, had been besides my purpose. That the Lord does thus
eminently help those, who by prayer and faith, wait upon him, is a most
comfortable and precious truth: yet I humbly conceive, that such assistance can
be expected only in those Undertakings, to which God calls men, not to which
they call themselves: And then too, in the diligent use, not in the slothful
and supercilious neglect of lawful means: for this lesson the Creator has
taught us by his own practice: If Omnipotency design the restoration of a
languishing Hezekiah, Isa. 38.21. Joh. 9.6.
or his sight who was born blind; a lump of figs, clay, and spittle must be
applied: And as diseases in the natural body are not curable without Physic;
so neither those in the Politic without Laws. Nor have I pleaded for what is
amiss in these: it is true, I have compared them to the sweetest Music; and do,
I confess, judge known Laws the beauty and harmony of a Commonwealth; yet if
this Harp be out of tune, or want a string, let some skilful ear, and cautious
hand be entrusted with its Reformation. But to vote Laws redundant and
unnecessary, as too many have done; to break these bands in sunder, and cast
these silken Cords of Reason from us, were to antidate Divine vengeance in one
of its most terrible threatenings; even with our own hands to stretch out upon
these Nations the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness. This
Discourse is yet subject to a farther disadvantage; 'twil fall, no doubt, into
the hands of many, whom obscurity or non-observation of our late Exorbitancys,
may render strangers to its just ground and plentiful occasion; though this was
not only the over-jealous surmises of some, nor the discontented and secret
mutterings of others; but things visibly acting both in our Native Country, and
here: Nor could the utmost care of our Honorable and pious Governors (their
Excellencies the Lord Deputy Ireton, whose memory is still precious; the Lord
Deputy Fleetwood, a person so eminently gracious, that this Age has scare
paralleled him; the Lord Henry Cromwell, whom God has furnished with wisdom and
conduct even to admiration:) I say, the utmost care of these, and of those
other worthies, who were still drawing in the same yoke with them, could not
suddenly redress this: for when once a Distemper has seized the blood and
vital Spirits, the head may more easily condole then cure it. And really we, in
this phlegmatic climate, grew strangely infected with that State-malady, this
following Sermon declares against: some Persons of very considerable Quality,
were not ashamed to tell you, that they expected are long to carry all the Law
of England in their pockets. Nor were these esteemed such Lovers of Books, as
to make that Pocket-Companion very bulkish neither. I cannot but smile, (and
the Lord grant it may be with a thankful heart) when I call to mind how neatly
we were courted by the smooth and still voice of plausibility, into a consent
to our own ruin. And that design goes on most dangerously, which makes least
noise: for the screaking wheel is more interrupted then the silent. But I must
humbly crave your Lordships pardon for this tedious diversion from your more
serious Employments; and I shall here break it off, the rather because it is no
less then a public Injury. That the weighty Undertakings now recommended to
your care, may be managed in the fear of that God, before whose more dreadful
Tribunal your selves with the meanest of those whom you are now to sentence,
must ere long appear; shall be his earnest request at the Throne of Grace, who
is,

From my Study in Clonmel, August 5. 1657. Your Lordships most unworthy
Servant, Sam. Ladyman.

The EPISTLE to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THis ensuing Discourse is adapted to the temper of the times, and smartly
militates against the wildness of irregular Decisions and Determinations; and
was therefore deservedly courted to come forth, and appear upon a public
Stage: that so in it, as in a Glass, the World might behold the Monstrosity,
and rugged deformity of Conscience, when seated upon the Throne, as Queen
Regent; whilst standing Laws are constrained to lie gasping under her Imperious
Feet, and are sullied unto the reproach of useless and absurd.

The declared Design is to make Conscience a Court of Chancery, to mitigate the
rigor of the Laws, as if they were a Torrid zone, under which there were no
living. The following Hints and Observations, are in order to thy satisfaction.

1 There are many in the World, who appearing before the Bar of Conscience,
have gone away complaining, that her little Finger has lain heavier on them,
then the dreaded Loins of the Law. None have been more miserably hampered,
perplexed, and injuriously oppressed, then such, who (if we would be so simple
as to believe some men) have been most conscionably dealt withal.

2 They who are against Law, are usually such as are ignorant of the Laws, and
understand not the Profundity and Equity of them; and how they are with much
mysterious wisdom, contrived and accommodated to the state and condition of the
people, whose obedience to them is exacted.

3 They who would lay aside the use of Humane Laws, are usually such as speak
undervaluingly of the Law of God, and reject it as a Rule.

4 They who would have their own Consciences Judges in other men's matters, will
hardly be persuaded to run the hazard of standing to the Verdict of another
Man's Conscience, especially if the Law be for him.

5 Conscience is wont to favor the Cause of such as are of corresponding
Principles. Sameness of Opinion often turns the Scales. How often has a
dissent in Judgment, though mixed with abundance of tenderness, made men dance
attendance, for a just Dispatch? which great Inconveniency had been prevented,
if prescribed Rules had been observed.

6 It Is observable, that many who are invested with a Military Capacity, are no
great Friends to the Laws of the Land. A Justice of Peace is looked upon with
an evil Eye, by a Man of War. Colleges are accounted dangerous Citadels, which
must therefore be assaulted; and Courts of Justice, strong Holds, possessed by
men of dangerous imposing Principles, which must therefore be demolished. Books
and Records are the Enemies Ammunition, which must be seized on, that so the
Adverse Party may be weakened. Laws have been so accustomed to deep silence in
times of War and public Contest, that Men cannot endure they should ever after
be heard to speak out, and declare their Mind freely.

7 Where Conscience bears the sway in the Commonwealth, it would likewise be
Supreme in the Church; abhorring all Forms and obliging Rules, but its own: and
what has been the Product of this, let our present Confusions testify.
Liberty in Opinion, will quickly resolve into a Liberty in Practice. Thus are
Men's Souls destroyed, under pretense of preserving their just Liberties from
being invaded

8 Their acquaintance with Ireland is but very slender, who have not known it a
place abounding with Civil as well as Sacred Antinomians. How refreshing is
that Wind to the disconsolate Inhabitants of a weary Land, which frowningly
blows in the Faces of such as have approved themselves to be keen Enemies to
Irelands Peace and Settlement? so that Law as well as Religion, begins to lift
up the Head out of a Deluge and Inundation of boisterous Discouragements, with
which it was overwhelmed; which is unto us as a Resurrection from the Dead, and
as Light breaking forth out of Obscurity.

This small Tract has in it much reason; which, if attended, may serve to
convince Gainsayers, and confirm the Orthodox: which, that it may do, is the
Prayer of him, who is a Friend to the Laws both of God and Man,

J.E.

A SERMON preached at Clonmel in Ireland.
2 SAMUEL 19.29. I have said, Thou and Ziba divide the land.


WHere the word of a king is, there is power. If David said it, who durst
contradict it? The Son's Precept, Eccles. 8.4. was but a Transcript of the
Father's Practice: though the Verdict he here passed be ever so unreasonable,
yet may not Mephibosheth say unto him, What do thou?

I know there are some learned and worthy Authors, (as you may read in their
Comments upon this Scripture) who would have this Text to speak no more, then
David's ratifying his former princely Act of Grace and free Donation, recorded,
chap. 9.9, 10. But we must beg leave at present to dissent from these, and to
side with such as differ from them; the rather, because the Context seems to
warrant our so doing.

I did lately in this place, and upon the like occasion, lay down the Nature,
Bounds, and End of an Oath: and as the Subject of that Discourse, did
principally concern the Witnesses; so shall this, the Judge.

In the words now read unto you, there are these Branches.

1. A Controversy decided betwixt Ziba and Mephibosheth. 2. The matter both of
this Decision and Controversy; the Life, good Name, and whole Estate of
Mephibosheth: for had the Treason Ziba charged him with, been made good; he had
forfeited all. 3. The Judge, and 'twas David, a wise and holy Man, one after
God's own Heart, Act. 13.22. one deeply engaged, both by Friendship and
Covenant, to Jonathan and his Seed, 1 Samuel 20.15, 42. 4. The Definitive, though
most unjust Sentence, That the Plaintiff and Defendant should part stakes: the
Land must be equally divided, betwixt abused Mephibosheth, and his perfidious
Servant. 5. Lastly, A double Cause of this untoward Decree: the one appears in
open and public view; the other lies more close in David's Bosom. The latter
of these we call, Proegumena; the former, Procatarctica.
1. The Causa Procatarctica, was Ziba's Treachery, Bribes, and Falsehood;
together with his plausible management of those his Calumnies: and probable
Slanders, 2 Samuel 16.3.
if subtly ordered, with over-credulous Judges, do very easily pass for
Truths.

2. The Causa Proegumena, was that Arbitrary, yet lame Rule by which David
proceeded; this not being, what it ought to have been, the known Laws of that
Commonwealth; but either his Princely Pleasure, or Private Conscience; for both
seem lapp'd up in the Prologue prefixed to his Decision, Why speak thou any
more of thy matters? thou know we have more weighty Affairs now in hand,
which would not be thus interrupted: Besides, I have said, Thou and Ziba divide
the land; that is, I have heard, as his Accusation, so thy Defense; and do
think it very unconscionable for thee to forfeit all, yet loath am I that Ziba
should have nothing: wherefore 'twill not be amiss to divide the Estate;
however, I am resolved to have so, nor will I reverse my Sentence.

Though each Branch of this Text would afford us several pithy Observations,
yet we must wave them at present; and from the Judge, his Sentence, and the
Rule by which he proceeded, raise only this Doctrine:

That without the guidance and superintendency of known Laws, Doct.
the Consciences, even of wise and good men, are but an unsafe Rule in matters
of Judicature.

Were the Scripture silent in all other places, yet is this one Example to
prove this Doctrine abundantly sufficient. The least David could have done in
this Cafe, had the Equity of that known Law, recorded in these words, Life for
life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, Deuteronomy. 19.21. had this, I say, been his
Control and Guide, he could not have done less, then restored Mephibosheth to
his whole Estate, and hanged up Ziba for his slanderous Accusation: for since,
Psalm. 101.5.
if that had been true, the Master had deserved to lose his head; it being
false, 'twas but equal that the Servant should forfeit his. And even at this
day, among the Turks, the false Witness undergoes that punishment, which the
Accused, had the Charge been proved, was liable to suffer.

But no longer to insist upon this Example in the Text it self, our Savior
seems to justify the Truth of this Proposition, Proof
while he refuses to act by so Arbitrary a Rule, as his own Will or Conscience:
for me thinks we may so understand him, Luke 12.13, 14. Who made me a Judge or
a Divider over you? As if he had said, You know I am not entrusted with the
management of those Laws, by which Controversies about Meum and Tuum ought to
be decided; and to determine these Differences by a Rule so boundless, as men's
own private Judgments, is not safe; nor shall I do it.

I believe there were other Inducements, which persuaded Christ to wave, what
this importunate Suitor would have put upon him: Perhaps, lest intermedling
with Temporals, should interrupt that more necessary and spiritual work for
which he was sent: Perhaps, that he might not cherish the then-almost
Epidemical mistake concerning the Messiah, of his coming a Temporal Prince: Or,
perhaps, that he might not give his Adversaries an occasion to charge him with
an affection of Jurisdiction or Magisterial Power over the People. But as these
wise and holy Ends had their Influence upon him, so might that also which we
first assigned.

The last Proof I shall trouble you with at this time, shall be that rash and
rigorous Sentence denounced against the Samaritans, by James and John, Luke
9.54. how do the Consciences of these men, though Christ's own Disciples, like
Sulphurous Aetna, belch our flames? how gladly could they have transformed that
Samaritan Village, into another Sodom? yea, what satisfaction to them, for
those Clouds which dropped Fatness upon other places, to rain Fire upon this?

But to draw nearer our own Times, we may remember when Conscience sat as a
Queen upon the Supreme Seats of Judicature in this Commonwealth; when she acted
without Control, and advanced her self above all we called Law: did she not
then give sufficient proof what a dangerous Pilot we were like to find her? In
what an insolent and furious manner began she to invade our Rights, both as
Christians and as Men? Had her Magisterial Dictates stood, our two standing
Ordinances must have fallen; our Laws had now lain buried in that heap of
confusion, which had been but the unavoidable consequence of their own
subversion; our Teachers had been driven into corners; our Gospel-Sun had been
wrapped up in a plenary Eclipse; our Eloquent Orators, and Learned Counselors,
had been numbered among unnecessaries: in England, our Books, our Colleges had
been burned; in Ireland, drowned: here a Deluge; there a Flame, had been their
Executioner. Had the Decrees of Conscience stood, our Charity had been as cold
as our Zeal was hot; men not only straitning their Bowels, and refusing to
give; but widening their Arms with resolution, to take away what our pious
Ancestors had bestowed. Never could Dionysius applaud himself more in his
Sacrilege, when he spoiled Aesculapius of his Golden Beard, and Jupiter
Olympius of his costly Robe; then we our selves in our Religious Plunder: the
Alms of the Sick and Lame, the Fatherless and the Widow, were by Conscience
voted a well-pleasing booty, even by some reputed both judicious and godly.

And thus both by Scripture and Experience, we have proved our Doctrine:

That without the guidance and superintendency of known Laws, the Consciences,
etc. The Grounds or Reasons of this Point, are several: I shall demonstrate it
by a fivefold Argument.

The first is taken from known Laws, Arg. 1.
what they are. And why may I not call them the very Heart and Soul of a
Commonwealth, the Hinges upon which it turns, and the Basis up-upon which it is
built? These licked the Civil Body (which otherwise had been but Rudis,
indigestaque Moles, a confused Lump, an heap of Rubbish, a mere Chaos) into
that comely shape which now adorns it. A Kingdom without Laws, Isai. 34.13.
is rather a Den of Thieves, a Court for Owls, Isai. 13.21.
an Habitation for Dragons, a Place much fitter for Satyrs to dance, and for
Monsters to hide themselves, then for Men to dwell in. So highly did the
Agathyrsi prize their Laws, that in Aristotle's time, for remembrance sake,
they sang them; as others did also before Letters were invented: whence some
will have the Rules of Music called (...) and doubtless the ravishing Melody
of Orpheus his Harp, was no other then the harmonious murmur of wholesome Laws,
by which he drew Beasts, or Men as rude as they, into Humane Society. (...).
Known Laws are for the most part, but so many commendable Customs in black and
white; the Wisdom and Experience of former Ages, bundled up, and transmitted to
Posterity: and what a folly to place Conscience, which is but of yesterday, and
knows little, in the room of these? Nor may the narrowness of humane
Understandings, the weakness of Men's Judgments, derogate from their just
Repute; for though there be but a little Light in a Glowworm, a little Heat in
a Spark; yet many of these together, will afford a moderate-Lustre, a
convenient Warmth. And suppose there be but a small pittance, but a single beam
of Light, but a spark of Knowledge in a single Intellect; yet does not this
reflect upon those Laws, which were the Products of Concentricated Beams; of
sundry Sparks laid together, and blown into a Flame: I mean, of many
well-informed Consciences and Understandings, united in a glittering
Constellation; and sitting in Council for their Good, who live under their
Influence: For, what more proper Periphrasis, then this of a Parliament? what
was the Roman Senate, but such? Now to trample under our feet the serious and
unbiased Deliberations of these Assemblies; to contemn the twisted strength of
known Laws, those well-compacted Combinations of Conscience and Judgment; and
above these, to exalt the shallow capacities of single men; were to complain of
going to Jerusalem, and to erect Calves at Bethel: to call Law, a burthensom
piece of Exuberancy; to cry against this Political Structure, saying, Race it,
race it, even to the foundation: what is this but to remove the ancient
Landmark, placed by Prudence and Necessity? to pluck up the Hedge, and lay all
in Common: and then the Nimrods of that Age, the mighty Hunters, would divide
the Spoil. I never think of this Design, and its Promoters, how handsomely they
labored to cheat us of our Laws, (the only Guardians of our Estates and Lives)
but it minds me of the Wolf in the Fable, who advised the Sheep to dismiss
their Dogs, that he at pleasure might devour them.

If any should here object those mischiefs which too often have attended Laws;
that, Object.
like the Bramble, they tear the Fleece, rather then shelter the Sheep: that
they serve only to perplex poor men; and are themselves wrested by the
wealthier; or, as Spiders Webs, catch lesser Flies, while the greater escape:

We might in part deny this charge. Answ.
But suppose 'twere true; There is one Maxim which fully answers it: Abusus
non tollit usum; the abuse of a thing, can neither null its use, nor in Justice
lessen its credit: for if so, what shall we think of the choicest Blessings,
which are abused to Gluttony and Drunkenness? yea, of that Manna, and Food of
precious Souls, the Scripture it self, which some wrest to their own and others
destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16.

Besides, the Evils before alleged, cannot in Equity be charged upon the Rule;
but upon those who so wickedly managed it: and if their actings were so
enormous, while they had a just and righteous Law to guide and check them; how
much more irregular would these have been, had they been a Law unto themselves?

This is the first Argument.

The second is taken from Conscience, Arg. 2.
what that is: and under this Head, we have five Reasons: for we shall by and
by show you, that Conscience, even in wise and good men, is, 1. a subordinate;
2. a flexible; 3. a defective; 4. an uncertain; 5. an arbitrary Rule: and each
to these are enough to prove it (without the guidance of known Laws) a most
dangerous Pilot in matters of Judicature.


Conscience is but a subordinate Rule; Reas. 1.
it is dependent upon, and acted by something above it self: it both hears and
sees with the eyes and ears of another faculty: it is not a guide to the
Understanding; but the Understanding a guide to it: it is methinks the
Understandings Echo; it only repeats what that dictates, and adds to it a
commanding fiat. Conscience is but the reverberation of intellectual Beams: its
actings are little other then a chewing over of that Light which it borrows
from this Fountain. But Laws are the more immediate Products, and direct
Emanations of sundry united and mature Judgments. Now to draw a Curtain before
some splendid Light; and to examine matters of weight and intricacy, (and that
matters of Judicature are such, we shall show anon;) by some feeble
Glimmerings, and faint Reflections; what were more imprudent and pernicious?
Philosophers have called the Will, caeca Potentia; and without the
Understanding, Conscience is but mera impotentia. Indeed, there is no such
distinct faculty in the reasonable Soul; though Theology treats of it, yet
Philosophy is silent concerning it. Its two most proper and principal
Operations, (...), and (...), what are they, but the intellectus practicus,
recoyling upon it self? Its (...), what is that, but an applicatory
contemplation of those Rules by which it esteems it self obliged to act? Nor
can Conscience thus look forward upon its Law, or backward upon it self; unless
the Understanding lend it Light: which Truth (besides the present occasion we
have for it) does in some measure detect the groundless scrupulosity of this
age; in which we are afraid of compelling Children and Servants, (and with
these you may rank the ignorant Natives of this Country) to hear publicly, and
learn the Principles of Religion; lest we should force Conscience: as if there
could be a (...), or (...), without a (...) an excusing or accusing our selves,
without the knowledge of those divine Truths, which must measure our actions:
even Paul himself must see the Law, before he could see his sin, Romans 7.7. But
this is beyond my purpose.

This is the first Reason drawn from Conscience.

Conscience is a very flexible Rule, Reas. 2.
it is pliable to every passion; it is easily tainted with prejudice; it is
biased by self-interest: and therefore without Laws a most dangerous guide,
etc.

1. Like a broken Bow, every passion is able to make it start aside, and forget
its business: Diis proximus ille quem ratio, non ira, movet. It Is a rare thing
to find that man, whom, not Rashness, but Reasons governs. How easily is
Conscience biased with foolish pity? then which, in a Judge, scarce any thing
is more dangerous: both the Truth and sad Effects of this, he that runs may
read, in Eli's carriage to his Sons: his gentle Reproof, how ill did it become
their horrid and notorious Practices? 1 Samuel 2.23
how far was it beneath the just rigor of those holy Laws, which they had
transgressed? what dishonor brought it to the Name of God? Verse. 17.
what Judgments upon his people? The vilest Miscreants, what Encouragement
would they take in their wickedness, were Conscience only to be their Judge?
how would base Natures presume to bribe it with their tears? and how apt were
it to be so dealt with? I have often observed, (and do think it is not the
least Ground of that experimented Maxim, Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae)
that Misery will extract Compassion toward our most bloody Enemies, our
greatest Opposites: nay, the very pains and charge, which, even wicked actions
expose men to, were Conscience the Judge, must be looked upon. It Is pity Ziba
should lose his Asses, his Journey, and his Good Will too. Were this the Rule,
the cry of Justice against a Thief, an Adulterer, would scarce be heard, amidst
the sad and loud Complaints of Wife and Children: but such foolish pity would
destroy a Commonwealth: though this Affection be most commendable in others,
yet is it blameworthy in a Magistrate. But more of this in the Application.
And since Envy, Malice, with several other of the Passions, do more violently
prosecute their Ends, then this of Pity; what has been said of it, might with
advantage be spoken of them. 2. This flexible Rule, is easily infected with
prejudice: while Conscience sits Judge, those have a singular advantage, (if I
may use that vulgar saying) who cry Whore first, who are the Plaintiffs. This
poor Mephibosheth knew, to his cost. David is so biased by the Servants
precedent Information, that the greatest satisfaction his Master, whom he had
slandered, can expect, is to come off with loss: half his Estate he must
forfeit; and it is well he scapes so. How were that Princes eyes stricken
blood-shot with Ziba's false Gloss? nor did this prejudice, like Paint upon
Church-Windows, only keep out Light; but, as he that looks through a colored
Glass, thinks all Objects of that dye; and knows not how to undeceive himself,
unless he change his medium: so does David's Conscience, being thus tainted,
judge Mephibosheth's righteous Cause of its own color. Thus known Laws would
not have done: they are not so easily stained, but keep their native
complexion. (...), they are deaf as well as blind; they scorn to lend an ear
to men's secret whisperings; but approve much better of Solomon's Rule then
David's Practice, Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause-seemeth just;
but his neighbor comes and searches him. 3. This flexible Rule is easily
bended by self-Interest. Did those that sit in Judgment lie under only the
controlls of Conscience, how readily might they say, The Case is altered, when
they perceive it either to concern themselves, or any who could but purchase
their Favor? Have you read that story concerning Judah and Tamar? Genesis 38. and
did you observe how suddenly his Judgment varied? self-centriety drew
Conscience to two opposite Points in an instant: in the 24 verse, he commands
her, without farther deliberation, to be burnt. But good men will be partial
toward themselves. When he understands by whom she was with child, though
this aggravated her Crime also, (for what before he thought Whoredom, now
proved Increst) how easily did this Judge remit the punishment? Were Conscience
ever so quick-sighted; (though we shall anon prove its eyes to be but dim)
could it, like some well-touch'd Needle, point exactly where it ought; yet as
Iron would that, so would Gold draw this aside: as the juxta-position of the
smallest Loadstone would put the Needle into a quivering posture; yea, make it
dance the Round, not knowing in what part of the Compass of settle: even just
thus is every selfish Respect, apt to deal with Conscience. And how dangerous
were it in the midst of a troubled Ocean, to sail by a Weather-cock-Needle? How
impossible for the most skilful Artist to work exactly by a Leaden-Rule?
This is the second Reason drawn from Conscience.

Conscience is a defective Rule; Reas. 3.
it is too scant to measure out Justice in its due and full proportion. We have
already proved it to be but a reflected Light; and it is a known Maxim, Quod
Radii reflexi sint semper imbecilliores, that reflected Beams are more feeble
then direct ones. If with a strong Hand you strike a Ball against the Floor,
visible Experience will show you, that it makes not its Rebounds with so
forcible a motion as it was carried thither. Nay, the Light by which Conscience
proceeds in its work, is but a Reflection of a Reflection: for even the
Understanding it self sees but with borrowed eyes. Stars have no Native Luster
of their own: but that which sparkles in them, they derive from an higher
Fountain; and so does the Intellect. Conscience receives its Light, but at the
second or third Rebound. And how impotent are the Moon-Beams, when compared
with the Sun's more powerful and active Rays? But besides this, even Reason it
self, which holds the Candle, while Conscience reads, is but a poor contracted
thing. Homer's Wisdom might have been abbreviated into as narrow an Epitome as
his Works: a Nut-shell would have held them both. How few are there that
understand what recta ratio means? Do not the Wisest see weakness enough in
themselves to make them blush? How easily does the next plausible Author, or
able Disputant turn us from what but now we thought, a well-resolved Judgment?
Did not the Wise Philosophers bathe themselves in the dirty Puddles of Error?
Aristotle votes the World Eternal. Plato places rational Souls in fixed Stars.
Heaven must be their Mansion House; while earthly Tabernacles are fitted for
them. Pythagoras thwarts at once both Scripture and Reason: though that
asserts, The Spirits return to God that gave it, Eccles. 12.7. Yet this
Philosopher, upon its parting with its Body, clips its Wings, and keeps it
here; and rather then fail, even Bruits of the most ignoble species, must give
it Entertainment. In his Opinion, Actaeon's Dogs, having eaten their Masters
Body, might drink up his Soul. We must confess, (for the Word of Truth has
spoken it, Genesis 1.27. compared with Col. 3.10.) that the Image of an Infinite
Wisdom, was once imprinted upon the Soul of Man: and the Stoics gazed so long
upon, but the ruins of this beautiful Object, till, like Narcissus, they grew
enamoured of their own Pictures. It Is true, Reason was once a most bright and
glorious Torch: but alas! being confined to the dull and dusky Lanthorn of
humane Bodies, this Candle of the Lord, (for so the wise Man calls it) is waxen
dim, Pro. 20.27.
and shines but weakly. And if the Window be grown so darksom, which should let
in Light to direct the Conscience in the ways of Equity, Truth and Peace: if
Reason, which is the only Guide to its feet, and Lamp to its paths, be thus
over-cast with the shades of Error, without the assistance of known Laws, it
can be but an unsafe Rule in matters of Judicature.

This is the third Reason drawn from Conscience.

Conscience is a most uncertain Rule, Reas. 4.
I mean not only incertitudine Objecti; for its flexibility has proved that in
part already; but incertitudine Subjecti: even those who were to walk by it,
could never be acquainted with it. Whence would ensue an impossibility of
obedience; the dis-joynting of a Commonwealth; with a continued fear and
diffidency in the minds of Subjects. And 1. these, though innocent, would
always be in a trembling posture, always in fear of the Revenger: for unless
Consciences were all cast in the same mould; those very Actions which please
themselves, as being correspondent to their own Light, might incense their
Rulers. 2. And since Obedience is nothing else but the correspondency of Men's
Behavior to the Laws of their Magistrates; which cannot be without a knowledge
of those Laws; this, where the Rule were so unsearchable and hidden a thing as
Conscience is, would be impossible. Not without just cause therefore, has the
Prudence of al Ages, made Promulgation, de essentia Legum, this must ingredi
Definitionem. Suarez and Aquinas dare not venture upon the description of a Law
without it: it is the publication of Acts and Ordinances, which stamps upon them
their commanding power. Subjects till then, are neither bound to own them, nor
submit unto them. Some do thus expound Paul's circumcising Timothy, that
notwithstanding this Ordinance were long before abrogated, yet was not that so
publicly declared till Paul afterward did it himself, Gal. 5.2, 3. I want
time to show you how the Supreme Legislator has still divulged his Will and
Pleasure to his Subjects: Romans 2.14, 15.
first by the silent voice of Natures secret Dictates: then, by the louder
noise of Thunder upon Mount Sinai: and since, in a more Gospel-strain, Heb.
1.1, 20 Mat. 5, 6, 7 cap.
by the milder blasts of Sion's Silver Trumpets: And to what end was all this?
but that the rebellious Sons of Adam might not think with an ignorantia
invincibilis, to palliate their Disobedience. But 3. the uncertainty and
variableness of this Rule would dis-joynt a Commonweal: 'twould suddenly speak
it; yea, of necessity make it an Heterogeneous Body: for according to the
indifferent capacities of those Men who were to judge, 'twould be partly Hay,
and partly Stubble; partly Gold, and partly Dirt. Laws were always esteemed the
very form of the Politic Body; and the compositum cannot be unum quid, where
the form is multiplex. I remember an Exercitator in these times, has urged
this Argument against the erecting of Judiciary Courts in each County; That the
various Constructions, which would be made in these Courts, though upon one and
the same Law, must needs breed great confusion; and in a short time make the
Commonwealth strangely unlike it self. Then how much greater confusions must
our Constitution beget? in which the Laws will be as various as the Minds of
Men; among which there is such disparity, that these words, Quot homines, tot
sententiae, have now for some hundred years been thought to spell a Truth. Were
Conscience the Rule in matters of Judicature; what commends a Man in this City,
in this County, might hang him in the next: what this Magistrate enjoins as a
Duty, another, living perhaps in the same Town, whose Conscience is of a larger
or more contracted size, shall forbid as a Vice: what Monsters would Cities,
Kingdoms, Commonwealths be, were this project set on foot?


This is the fourth Reason drawn from Conscience.

Conscience is most arbitrary Rule: Reas. 5.
were a Judge confined to no other Bound, since this and the Will lie
cloistered up in the same Breast, he might pretend the one, and yet be acted by
the other: his private sic volo, sic jubeo, would quickly supplant it, and
supply its place. Nor can any thing be more dangerous, then for the Wills of
some few, though good Men, to become Laws unto all others. Did I say, their
Wills? yea, their vilest Corruptions. David's Lust must be Joab's Law, and
Uriah's Death, 2. Sam. 11.15. The Envy of some, and the Ambition of others,
would be the poor Plaintiff's non ultra, like the Decrees of the Medes and
Persians, unalterable. And what insufferable enormities would this of necessity
produce? To enthrone Conscience in the Seats of Judicature, were to put so
unlimitted a Power into the hands of ordinary Men, as has always make Kingdoms
and Nations to groan under it, when executed by the wisest and best of Princes.
Though Joab, Shimei and Adonijah, died justly, and their Blood let it rest upon
their own Heads; yet the manner of their Condemnation, were enough to make the
most innocent Subjects tremble. Were Conscience the only Rule in matters of
Judicature, the description of an Heathen Tyrant, and Christian Magistrate,
would be one and the same: this Motto, Stat pro Ratione Voluntas, would
indifferently serve them both. And have you read their Pressures who live in
the Torrid Zone of the Turkish Empire, who sweat and sigh under the weight of
that Iron Scepter, which is weilded by the Ottoman Race, where the Sultan's Nod
is enough to strangle the Greatest Persons in his Dominions? why know, that to
invest Conscience with the forementioned Authority, were to place a Monarch
equally absolute in each petty Jurisdiction.

This is the fifth and last Branch of the second Argument drawn from Conscience.

The third is taken from our Judges, Arg. 3.
or the Managers of this unsafe Rule, What they may be: And although we have
hitherto supposed them to be David's for Piety, and Solomon's for Wisdom, (and
many such we presume this Age affords) yet in time they may be, the weakest and
worst of Men. Any, who can but draw the specious vail of an high Profession
over the most notorious Actings; any whom Estate or Cunning, can usher upon the
public Stage, and render conspicuous among the vulgar: yea, some perhaps, no
less forlorn in Practice and Principles, then those foretold by Christ, John
16.2. who shall think the Blood of God's faithful Servants, a well-pleasing
Sacrifice: and whether to trust these with the weilding and forging of a Civil
Sword; whether to put so sharp a Tool into such mad Men's hands, be not
dangerous, let any judge.

This is the third Argument.

The fourth is taken from matters of Judicature, Arg. 4.
what they are: And they are sometimes matters of intricacy, and always matters
of weight.

1. They are sometimes matters of intricacy; and we have already demonstrated a
scantness in Conscience to measure such: men's single and indigested thoughts,
without the assistance of known Laws, are seldom able to dis-entangle them: for
omnis festinatio caeca est, they are the words of Seneca: He cannot describe a
Country, who rides Post; nor those Judges search an intricate Cause to the
bottom, who make haste. And it is not imaginable, that our conscientious
composers should dwell long upon what is brought before them, if their labors
be not well rewarded: for though the novelty of such a Trust may make them
Zealous for a season; yet this without Oil will soon decay. They Will read, and
quickly learn to construe so much Latin, Propter Officium datur Beneficium,
That Pains and Profit ought to be Concomitants. And now, though the Grand
Pretense in the Infancy of this Constitution, must be the Subjects Ease, and
the greedy Lawyers deserved Ruin; yet the event will prove, that the fairest
proportion of Justice, may be purchased by the heaviest Purse. Nor are the best
of Men secured from this Temptation; for, a gift blinds the wise, and
perverteth the words of the righteous, Exodus 23.8.

But 2. they are always matters of weight. Solomon's Observation, touching the
terrible effects of a Prince's wrath; that it is as Messengers of Death, Pro.
16.14.20.2.
and his Fear like the roaring of a Lion; are chiefly grounded upon this Truth:
not only Men's trifling Concerments; but whatsoever is most dear unto them,
falls under the Jurisdiction of their Magistrates: and that Fence will not
become our Closets, which may yet secure our Gardens: what speaks our Lumber
sufficiently safe, would render our Plate and Jewels hazardous. Though it were
but a pardonable oversight, to adventure the disposal of some supernumerary
Enjoyments, without the Conduct of known Laws: Yet since our Estates, our
Lives, our Liberties do all depend upon the Breath of a Judge: and (to let pass
what we have spoken in the third Argument) since the Mercies of Men are
Cruelties, (for so much may be inferred, as the Antithesis will evince, from
the Reason of David's choice:) I say, 1 Chr. 21.13
it being thus; 'twill be dangerous leaving this Breath arbitrary or subject to
no other Check but that of Conscience, a Rule which cannot be measured by any
other above, or without it self. But more of this in the next.

This is the fourth Argument.

The fifth and last Argument to prove Conscience without Laws an unsafe Rule,
Arg. 5.
etc. is taken from some grand Inconveniences which would follow upon this (I
mean, besides those which may be rationally drawn from what we have said
already) and they are among many others these three.

1. Were the known Laws of a Nation cancelled, the Jus positivum laid aside,
and Conscience seated in its Room; this would inevitably drive us to the
Judicial or Moral Law, or else to the Scripture it self, as our final Umpire in
all Contentions; for sin being only the swerving from some received Rule, 1
John 3.4. Romans 5.13. these Judges, unless some such Rule stand by them, can
pass no Judgment upon their own or others Actions. And should the Magistrate
regulate his Conscience by the Judicial Law, how unsuitable were that in many
things to the present state of these Nations? Were Theft among us only punished
with a restoring fourfold; how many thousands may be found, who rather then
work, or want, would venture that? If by the Moral Law, without some large and
voluminous Comment, (too large, I fear, to be often read) even wise Men would
be unable, by its sole Direction, to determine many, yea, most Controversies.
And although the Word of God be a most Holy and Perfect Rule; yet the
deplorable Experience of these Times, is Proof sufficient, that this also may
be wrested to the indirect and collateral Aims of wicked men: How easily, how
often is it abused by the Ignorance of some, and the Corruption of others?
Were the Application of this Righteous Law left to Conscience, the Quakers
Dreams might commence uncontrollable Edicts. Some would leave their Wives,
their Children, their Families; and our Savior's Words, Mat. 19.29. must both
justify and commend them. Were this left to Conscience, Tarquinius his
Counsel would be practiced in these Nations; our tallest Poppies, Men of
Estates and Eminency, must be cut off: Community, that now exploded Levelling
Principle, would resurgere e Sepulchro, rise out of its loathsome Grave, (where
long may it lie buried) and tread, what has hitherto opposed it, under its
feet, unless you will expunge Acts 2.44. which proves, that they parted their
Goods, and had all in common. Were Conscience once commissioned, to expound and
apply Sacred Truths to Civil Matters, how soon would some enlarge the Borders
of this Paradox, Dominium fundatur in Gratia? Not only Power, but Possession;
both a Right to Rule, and a Right to Enjoy, would be founded in Grace: this
dangerous Tenent, That the Godly must have all, and others nothing, would march
furiously with a Jus Divinum proclaimed before it; because the Lord has said,
that the meek shall inherit the earth; Psalm. 83.11
and Paul tells the Corinthians, that all was theirs, 1 Cor. 3.22. 2. To
appoint Conscience without the superintendency of Laws, our Rule in Matters of
Judicature, would put the Legislative and the Executive Power, in one and the
same hand. This is another grand Inconveniency, which the Prudence of our
Ancestors has carefully prevented, by causing these to run in different
Channels. It Is a good Note of the Lord Verulam's, That Judges ought not, Jus
dare, sed, Jus dicere: their Work is not to make, but to apply the Rule; whiles
he that steers by no other Compass then his own Conscience, does both. Which
(to omit, that the Emphasis of Tyranny must needs attend it) would make Men
shie and timorous, how they denounce the justest Sentence; and likewise cause
much odium to reflect upon them, from such as fall within their reach; because
the Law that punishes, shall be esteemed his that judges. We scarce ever
observe, (which I speak not in disparagement of that way; so it be free, and
not forced; for doubtless, it is a most commendable and Christian course, 1 Cor.
6.5.) I say, we seldom observe a Difference, though but in ordinary and petty
matters, referred to Arbitrators; but those who undertake it, from one side or
the other, shall contract ill Will, for doing but their Duty in it: while known
Laws, standing in the room of a third Person, even he that feels the smart of
these, cannot but applaud their Rectitude, with the faithfulness of his Judge,
and quarrels only with the obliquity of his own Actions. 3. To leave Conscience
thus independent in Judiciary Proceedings, would render the most unjust
Magistrates unaccountable, since no Sentence could be so horrid and villainous,
but might take Sanctuary in the Bosom that pronounced it: for it is impossible
to convict such of Irregularities, who may plead a Conformity to that Rule,
which none can examine but themselves. If John of Leyden, the Prodigy of this
last Century, will say, It Is his Conscience to have fifteen Wives at one time:
to seize the Estates of all who dare not join with him in his wicked Projects:
to convert heaps of learned and useful Volumes into a Flame: to murder his own
Wife only for pitying the languishing Inhabitants of poor Munster, the
miserable Scene, upon which were acted these Abominations. And if that
Conscience be his Rule: these Practices need no further Justification; his ipse
dixit must stand: it is not for Man to contradict it, since God alone can try
the reins, Jer. 17.10.
These are the three grand Inconveniences, and our fifth or last Argument.

The Doctrine thus confirmed, will afford us these following Uses: viz. A Word
1. of Exhortation; 2. of Caution; 3. of Encouragement; 4. of Humiliation; 5. of
Instruction.

Are the Consciences of Wise Men an unsafe Rule? Use 1.
Then hence let me speak one Word to those Honorable and Learned Persons, whom
Providence has appointed to sit in Judgment in this Place, and at this Time.
And, my Lords, let this Text and Doctrine, persuade you to stick close to those
Laws by which you are governed your selves, and ought to judge others. That
Magistrate is not fit to act, who is so shackled with the scrupulosities of his
private Conscience, or rather overweening Fancy, as not to keep pace with the
Rule he is sworn to walk by. We doubt not, (and let his Name be praised for it)
but the Lord has, in a high measure, bestowed upon you Solomon's Portion, even
wise and understanding Hearts. And if Laws were only the free Ebullitions of
Reason, there were some Pretense why that Wisdom without these, might be your
Guide: But your Lordships know, That the Jus Proprium in most Nations, is
little other then the Product of Experience and Necessity: for ex malis Moribus
fiunt bonae Leges. And those that chase the Wild Boar, must not think to make
their pursuit in a straight Line (though that were more beautiful and
commodious) but must follow as they are led. Even so our Lawgivers in all
Ages, (being to pursue the Vicious Humors of Unreasonable Men, through their
untoward Mazes, and wild Maeanders) did sometimes step out of the Paths of
Reason, 'cause what they followed was Irrational. Hence it is that Laws differ
as much as Climates; what one Country explodes, the other applauds; while
Reason is the same in all Places. That Is the first Branch of this Use, Let your
own private Reason strike Sail to known Laws.

Secondly, As Judges may not rely upon their own Understandings; so neither
listen to the Pleadings of their own Affections: for the Judge himself is
condemned, when the Guilty is acquitted. As Prejudice must not persuade your
Lordships to torture Laws; so neither Pity to gagge them. These are the Sylla
and Charibdis, the two Rocks your Lordships ought carefully to avoid: for he
that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both are
an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15. And wonder not at this, since Lenitas
erga malos est crudelitas erga bonos; when the Wicked are pardoned, the
Righteous are punished.

If any object, Object.
That Mercy and Justice interwoven, is that Robe which best becomes a Judge;
and that Magistrates, being called gods, ought to imitate the Lord in that,
even as in other Attributes:

We answer by granting the Allegation, Answ.
but with this Difference, That God has mercy upon whom he will have mercy;
but they, upon whom they ought: for though it be his Glory to conceal a thing,
yet is it their honor to search out a matter, Prove. 25.2.

This is the first Use, A Word of Exhortation.

Is our Doctrine a Truth? Use 2.
Then take heed of being again decoyed into the least Approbation of these, or
the like Destructive Principles: That Commonwealths may be governed without the
known Laws: That conscientious Men, without the guidance and superintendency of
these, can steer a State. Recollect what has been alleged, concerning the
impossibility of this. What though thou art thy self raised above that
Oppression and Mischief which would ensue upon it? yet remember, thy poor
Neighbors are not, and thy Children may not be. There are some, who (like that
traitorous Underminer of his Father's Kingdom, 2 Samuel 15.) do stand in the
Gate, wishing that they were Judges in the Land; and that Men might bring their
Suits to them, for they would do them Justice. But know, that there is much
difference between Absalom on Foot, and Absalom on Horseback; he kisses in one
posture, but kills in the other: He that is courteous in the Stirrup, is
churlish in the Saddle. The Hedghog is no sooner entertained in the Fox's Den;
but he sets up his prickles, and tells his Host, If he like it not, he may
leave him there. Could the grand and primary Projectors of this reformed Model,
have accomplished their Ends, though they seemed before to want Fingers, yet
would they then have found Claws. It Is dangerous tasting Poison, though wrapped
up in Sugar. And this Design of Extirpating Laws, and Enthroning a pretended
Conscience in their room, was too loathsome to be otherwise swallowed; too
deformed to appear without a vail: for if the Wolf will enter the fold with the
Sheep's consent, he must wear their Livery.

Do any object, Object.
That this Discourse and Caution are both out of season?

My Answer is, Answ.
That I could wish them more out of season, then I fear they are: for that
Physician must love his Profit too well, who is quarrelsome because his
Neighhours are not sick. Besides, though God has blown this Cloud from off
Men's Understandings at present; yet how soon its scattered parts may reunite,
and a second time overspread us, we do not know.

This is the second Use, A Word of Caution.

Is the superintendency of Laws so requisite, etc. Use 3.
Then let this encourage Magistrates, both in their Work, and in their Way. In
their Work: For this Doctrine speaks it highly necessary. We cannot live; our
Commonwealth cannot stand: but without it, sinks under its own unweildy Bulk.
And because, to have no Rule, and having one, to want Knowledge how to use it,
is the same thing; This Doctrine does commend their Way too: for our
Magistrates are acquainted with this Rule; they are versed in the known Laws of
these Nations, without which, Justice would be defective, even lame as well as
blind; and Conscience but a feeble Reed, shaken with the Wind of every
passion: Law is the Compass, by which our Magistrates direct their Course; and
the want only of this Pilot, made David's Judgment so Oppressive, his
Sentence so Injurious.

This is the third Use, A Word of Encouragement.

Is Conscience without Laws, etc. Use 4.
Then let this humble the wisest and best of Men, while our Doctrine displays
before them their own Frailties. Let them blush to see what poor contracted
things they are; how easily turned aside with every slanderous Breath; how
unable to judge, even the smallest matters.

Nor may any object, what some have said concerning Natures Law, (from which
(...), or primary act of Conscience, differs only ratione) that this Law is
the clearest Light, the best Guide; for I have heard that already: and that
those who act according to its Dictates cannot err; for I have heard that too.
I have read these and other the like Encomiums of Nature: Idem beat vivere and
secundum Naturam, ad illius Legem Exemplumque formari sapientia est. But pray
who was it that thus commended Nature, but some conceited Stoic; some purblind
Heathens, who had lost their eyes with doting so fondly upon so foul a
Mistress? Does not Scripture teach us, that Nature is brutish, blind and dark?
Does not Experience teach us, that Conscience is turned and Ignis fatuus, and
leads us into the paths of Error? 'Twas once indeed a Star of the first
Magnitude a bright and shining Taper: But alas! how is it now depraved? how
surrounded with smoke and blackness? It receives its Light only from an
eclipsed Sun, from a beclouded Intellect; and that Moon which does so, will
shine but feebly.

This is the fourth Use, A Word of Humiliation.

If the Consciences of wise and good Men be so unsafe a Rule, etc. Then, Use 5.


1. Hence we may learn, what pitiful work would wicked Men and Fools have made?
what lamentable Stories would a little Experience have told of such? How many
Innocents must have groaned under the Pressure of their Ridiculous and Unjust
Decrees? If a Sentence so Unreasonable, (as this in our Text) drop from David's
Mouth, what may we expect from Readiness? Ziba so far prevailed with the Former,
as to rob one Man of his Estate; but Doeg so far with the Latter, as to bereave
some Hundreds of their Lives: Fourscore and five of the Lord's Priests may dye
their Ephods in their own Blood, 1 Samuel 22. He chose the better part, who
desired, rather to Live under the most cruel Tyrant that acted by a Declared
Rule, then under the best Prince without it. And if the Holiest Men in these
Nations, without the Guidance of known Laws, be incapable of so great a Trust;
Then, doubtless for the Consciences of Malicious Selfish Hypocrites to be made
the Standards of Right and Wrong, had been most sad, and dangerous.

2. Hence we may learn, to look back, with silent Admiration, upon that
desperate Rock we have escaped; to review that Unavoidable Ruin, which so
lately threatened us, with a thankful Astonishment. It Is not long since we saw
some seated in the room of the Judge, who neither knew the Laws, nor pretended
to act by them. It Is not long since Wise Men in a Distracted Posture, stood
gazing upon each other, listening diligently what horrible Desolations their
misguided Zeal would give Birth unto, whose Grand Consultations were, how to
raze the Foundation of this Commonwealth, and Extirpate its Laws. Has that Eye
which neither slumbers nor sleeps prevented this? Break forth into praises for
so great, so undeserved a Mercy.

3. Hence we may learn, To bless the Lord for that eminent Assistance and
Direction he graciously vouchsafed his Servants lately assembled in Parliament:
To bless the Lord for giving them Courage and Resolution to assert the known
Laws of these Nations, the standing Rule by which they must be governed: To
bless the Lord for putting into their hands that Ariadne's Thread, which has
been their Conduct to so hopeful a Settlement, through the thick Darkness of
former and late Confusions: Yea, To bless the Lord that out Supreme Magistrate
is now a second time engaged by Oath to Manage his Great and Weighty Trust,
according to the Laws of this Commonwealth: And that in so good a Measure God
has restored our Judges as at the first, and our Counselors as at the
beginning.

FINIS.

