A LETTER INTERCEPTED, FROM THE Popish-Printer in Fetter-Lane, TO His Friend
Heraclitus.
My Dear, Dear, Dear, R.
MY Pangs thicken so fast upon me, that although I have Midwiv'd my self of
many little Shams, it is my fear I shall cry out for Madam Celier at last: but
alas! She Is incastrate, and St. Bridget knows when we shall have the benefit of
her skill.

Well! I was still afraid I should burst with Ignoramus's, and this last Bout
in the Baily has given me so strong a Fit, that I must beg the use of your
Beads for me. Certes, that Heretic Care has Influenced them. But how unhappy
are we! all the Jurors Coats are Drabdeberry, and Impenitrable; so close that
we cannot pick one hole in 'um.

And the misfortune is, that we are like to lose our poor Friend Whip-Cat, for
since the good Wives Pusses have forsaken his House, a new Plague is come to
him; the Rats and Mice have gathered on him in such Legions, that they have
devoured the whole Stock of Parmisant he bought in Holland: so that it is feared
he must take another Voyage to new store himself; or put Madam Joanna to the
charge of getting him a Pot of Extreme-Unction, as she did for Capricorn.

And the unlucky Whigs have enlarged their Dominions into the very Bowels of
the Church, so that scarce a Divine of Sense or Honesty in the Church of
England, but is as Incredulous of a Protestant Plot, as themselves.

Our Evidence too are so bemir'd, and stuck in the Bog, that the very Boys
hissed 'um, and they had been certainly thrown into Fleet-Ditch, had not the
Proverb saved 'um, which says, He that is born to be Hanged shall never Drown.

Booth they says in Pimlico, and for fear of Martial Discipline, is gone to
his Colors in the King-Bench; though it is thought his Name was never on the
Captains List.

Narrative drew his Sword, and swore, Damm him, to the Rabble; upon which
occasion, an unlucky Baggage brought me this Epigram by the Penny-Post.

On Narrative's Drawing his Sword.
Your Popish-Priests are Sons of War,
Soldiers of Fortune Jesuits are;
Justice Rewards 'um with a Rope, or Hatchet;
But the Pope gives 'um Heaven, if they can catch it.
Oh! the intolerable Charge we have been at to bury this Cursed Plot, for
Masses, Pardons, Evidences and Perjuries! And still it stinks so damnably, that
it nauseates every Passenger. Curle on all Romish-Bulls! I thought their Horns
had been strong enough to have tossed all Protestant Princes out of their
Thrones before now: but vae nobis! the Heretics stand their ground: and here is
the Plague, the English Gentry cannot be prevailed upon to truck away their
Title to the Abby-Lands on so slender a security as the Popes Broad-Seal. Well,
Brother, What shall we do? we have had so many Con-stults already, that its
certainly in vain to call another: and for those Consecrated Heads that are in
Newgate, though when they were out they designed to give Laws to Kingdoms, yet
now we see they are like Witches in Custody, their power forsakes them.

But the great Plague of all is, our own Party begin to laugh at our Artifices,
and more then that, some of 'um clapped at the Hieroglophicks wherein the
Prentices exposed us on Queen Besses Night: and have not stuck to say, We were
no better than so many Apes, Baboons, and Mimmicks.

And it vexes me consoundedly to think how I shall answer for all the
transposing of my Wit and Railery upon Tap-skin, etc. with which my Weekly
Labels do so Crawl, that there is Littera Scripta in the Case; and I fear the
Salamancha Sermon will be turned upon us, and an Epitaph upon the Tridentine be
Inscribed to our Memories.

And is this at last the Reward we are to meet with after the expense of our
slender Wits, and Fortunes in the Service of Holy Cause? Ungrateful World!
must we after all our Merits be made Pendulums to tell the Rabble what time of
day it is? How glad would we be if we might but commute for the Dicipline of
having our Noses grubd against the Grate, and Skins soundly Clawed, and
curried? Alas! there were some Relief in this, and we might come off, as some
of our Dear Sisters do, from the Dancing School behind St. Brides, with sore
Backs, and brazen Faces. But Fate alas! has another Game to play with us: This
is evident by the Omens that have of late befallen us. For, as for thee,
Heraclitus, thy risible Faculty has quite lest thee, and instead of laughing,
thou do Grin the most wretchedly, thou do already look like one of our
Fathers that has been strung up by the Left Ear a day or two in the Sun. And
poor Roger's Fiddle is cursedly out of tune, all the small Catlings are broken,
nothing but the two bigger strings left, that make the lamentable sound of O
hone! O hone!

What think thou can be the meaning of these dismal Prodromes? I fear the
cursed presage of 'um, for already I have so perfectly received the very form
of Hanging into my consideration, that sometimes I am feeling in my Pocket for
a piece of Silver to give Ketch at the dead lift. But prithee, if thou art yet
able to set Pen to Paper, let me have thy Opinion of the most effectual means
(if there be any) to prevent these direful Catastrophes. But anon I intend to
meet thee at the Constult at the Wonder. Vale Vale Vale.

TONIE TOMP -- N

FINIS.
London, Printed for Jonathan Low. 1681.


