A LETTER OF THE Presbyterian Ministers In the CITY of LONDON, Presented the
First of Jan. 1645. to the Reverend Assembly of DIVINES, Sitting at
Westminster, by Authority of Parliament, AGAINST TOLERATION.

Now Reprinted, with some Animadversions thereon.

LONDON, Printed for J. Johnson, 1668.

A Preface to the Reader.
IT is sufficiently known, how the Presbyterian Party, in this Nation, having
by the help of the Covenant, and force of Arms, rooted out (as they thought)
Episcopal or Prelatical Government, Established by the Known Laws of the Land,
soon found themselves supplanted in their new intended Uniformity (pressed on
all men with a most zealous Rigor) by their younger Brother, Independency:
which under the smooth pretensions of Liberty of Conscience, and Toleration,
threatened Presbytery with the same destruction. Hereupon the Presbyterian
Ministers of London, meeting at Sion College, drew up this ensuing Letter to
the Assembly, convened at Westminster, to possess them with the unlawfulness of
Liberty of Conscience and Toleration; especially aiming at Independency, their
feared Rival. But the Intelligent Reader will easily discern how their own
Arguments recoil upon themselves. How dangerous and wicked it is in their
Judgment to Tolerate, (much more to perpetuate by a standing Law) Schism in
the Church; whether of Presbytery, or Independency, of which they are so
equally guilty, that it will be very difficult, if not impossible, for an
impartial understanding, to condemn the one, and to acquit the other: Yea, it
will appear by their own Reasons here alleged, how necessary it is to the
preservation of Truth and Peace, that an Uniform Obedience be yielded to one
and the same established Rule of Ecclesiastical Polity, lest otherwise the
people be seduced and drawn away from our Congregations; the Godly, Painful,
Orthodox, and Conformable Clergy be discouraged; all sorts of Sectaries
emboldened to desire, and endeavor the like Indulgence; the Civil State, by
endless Divisions, weakened; and the Church first distracted, and at last
destroyed.

The God of Peace and Truth grant us a right understanding in all things. Amen.
To our Reverend, Learned, and Religious Brethren, the Prolocutor, and the rest
of the Divines Assembled, and now sitting at Westminster, by Authority of
Parliament: These present.
Reverend and Beloved Brethren,
WE are exceedingly apprehensive of the desireableness of our Churches Peace,
and of the pleasantness of Brethrens Unity, knowing that when Peace is set upon
its proper Basis, viz. Righteousness and Truth, it is one of the best
possessions, both delectable and profitable; like Aarons Ointment, and the dew
of Hermon. It is true, by reason of different lights, and different sights
among Brethren, there may be dissenting in Opinion; yet, What is the keeping
Conventicles, or private Meetings, but separating from our Church Communion.
Why should there by any separating from Church Communion? The Churches Coat
may be of diverse colors, yet, Why should there be any rent in it? Have we not
a touchstone of Truth, the good Word of God; and when all things are examined
by that Word, then that which is best may be held fast; but first they must be
known, and then examined afterward. If our dissenting Brethren after so many
importunate entreaties, would have been persuaded (either in zeal to the Truth,
or in sincere love to the Churches peace and unity among Brethren, or in
respect to their own reputation by fair and ingenuous dealing, or Yet the
Ministers of this persuasion made as little Conscience of their Subscriptions,
Promises, yea, Oaths of Cananical Obedience to their respective D^ocesans.
in conscience to their promise made with the Minister of London, now five
years since, or any such like reasonable consideration) at last to have given
us a full Narrative of their Opinions, and Grounds of their Separation, we are
persuaded they would not have stood at such a distance from us, as now they do:
But they chose rather to walk by their own private lights, than to unbosome
themselves to us their most affectionate Brethren; and to set themselves in an
untrodden way of their own, rather than to wait what our Covenanted
Reformation, according to the Word of God, and Show us the example of one
Reformed Church, which allows her Ministers Liberty not to use her
Established Rites and Ceremonies.
examples of the Best Reformed Churches, would bring forth. But the offense
does not end here, it is much that our Brethren should separate from the
Church, but that they should endeavor This is plainly our Brethrens Design and
Endeavor at this time.
to get a Warrant to authorize their Separation from it, and to have liberty
(by drawing Members out of it) to weaken and diminish it, till (so far as lies
in them) they have brought it to nothing; this we think to be plainly unlawful;
yet this we understand is their present design and endeavor. Wherefore
(Reverend Brethren) having had such large experience of your zeal of Gods
glory, your care of his afflicted Church, your earnest endeavors to promote
the complete Reformation of it, and of your ready concurrence with us in the
improvement of any means that might be found conducible to this end; we are
bold to hint unto you these our ensuing Reasons against the Toleration of
Independency in this Church.

1. The desires and endeavors of Independents for a Toleration, are at this
time extremely unseasonable and praeproperous: for,

1. The Reformation of Religion is not yet perfected and settled among us,
according to our Covenant. And why may not the Reformation be raised up at last
to such purity and perfection, that truly tender Consciences may receive
abundant satisfaction for ought that yet appears?

2. It is not yet known what the Government of the Independents is, neither
would they ever yet vouchsafe to let the world know what they hold in that
point, though some of their party have been too forward to challenge the London
Petitioners as led with blind obedience, and pinning their souls upon the
Priests sleeve, for desiring an establishment of the Government of Christ,
before there was any model of it extant.

3. We can han hardly be persuaded, that the Independents themselves (after all
the stirs they have made amongst us) The Presbyterians (although often
pressed thereunto) will not declare wherewith they would be all concluded, how
far they mean to got and where to stay in their desires of Toleration or
Condescension.
are as yet fully resolved about their own way wherewith they would be
concluded, seeing they publish not their model (though they are nimble enough
in publishing other things) and they profess Reserves, and new Lights, for
which they will (no doubt) expect the like Toleration, and so in infinitum. It
were more seasonable to move for Toleration when once they are positively
determined how far they mean to go, and where they mean to stay.

II. Their desires and endeavors are unreasonable and unequal in diverse
regards.

1. Partly because no such Toleration has hitherto been established (so far as
we know) in any Christian State by the Civil Magistrate.

2. It Is notorious, Presbytery would not in the late times Tolerate Episcopacy.
Partly because some of them have solemnly professed, that they cannot suffer
Presbytery; and answerable hereunto, is their practice in those places where
Independency prevails.

3. And partly because To grant Indulgence unto a few, would offend many more
of all parties. Why may not Independents, and all other Sectaries, desire the
same favor in case they provide Readers or Curates.
to grant to them and not to other Sectaries who are free born as well as they,
and have done as good service as they to the public (as they use to plead)
will be counted injustice and great partiality; but to grant it unto all, will
scarce be cleared from great impiety.

III. Independency is a Schism, for,

1. Ye already do, and (in case your Toleration be granted) will draw our
Members from our Congregations, which ye acknowledge true Churches.
Independents do depart from our Churches, being true Churches, and so
acknowledged by themselves.

2. They draw and seduce our Members from our Congregations.

3. Ye do in effect set up separate Churches.
They erect separate Congregations under a separate and undiscovered Government.

4. Ye receive not the Sacrament (except some few) in our Churches, but at
private Meetings.
They refuse Communion with our Churches in the Sacraments.

5. Their Ministers refuse to preach among us as Officers.

6. Their Members, if at any time they join with us in hearing the Word and
Prayer, yet they do it not as with the Ministerial Word and Prayer, nor as acts
of Church Communion.

No Schism is to be Tolerated, as ye grant. But Presbytery is a Schism now, as
much as Independency was by you declared to be then: Wherefore, according to
your own grounds, it is not to be Tolerated.
Now we judge that no Schism is to be Tolerated in the Church, Schisms.
(...), 1 Cor. 1.10. 1 Cor. 12.25. Divisions.
(...), Romans 6.17. with 1 Cor. 3.3. Gal. 5.20.

IV. Should Presbytery be Tolerated, it would produce all the very same evils
in Church and State, you affirm Independency (if Tolerated) would have done;
and the same reasons strongly prove, that as Independency was not, so
Presbytery is not to be Tolerated.
Many mischiefs will inevitably follow upon this Toleration, and that both to
Church and Commonwealth.

First, to the Church, as,

1. Causeless and unjust revolts from our Mivistry and Congregations.

2. Our peoples minds will be troubled, and in danger to be subverted, as Acts
15.24.

3. Bitter heart-burnings among Brethren will be fomented and perpetuated to
posterity.

4. The Godly, Painful, and Orthodox Ministry will be discouraged, and despised.

5. The life and power of godliness will be eaten out by frivolous Disputes,
and vain Janglings.

6. The whole course of Religion in private Families will be interrupted, and
undermined.

7. Reciprocal Duties between persons of nearest and dearest Relations, will be
extremely violated.

8. The whole work of Reformation, especially in Discipline and Government will
be retarded, disturbed, and in danger of being made utterly frustrate and void,
whilst every person shall have liberty upon every trivial discontent at
Presbyterial Government and Churches, to revolt from us, and list themselves in
separated Congregations.

9. All other Sects and Heresies in the Kingdom will be encouraged to endeavor
the like Toleration.

10. All other Sects and Heresies in the Kingdom will safeguard and shelter
themselves under the wings of Independency, and some of the Independents in
their Books have openly avowed, that they plead for Liberty of Conscience as
well for others, as for themselves,

11. And the whole Church of England in short time will be swallowed up with
distraction and confusion. And God is not the Author of confusion, but of
peace, 1 Corinthians. 14.33.

Secondly, To the Commonwealth. For,

1. All these mischiefs in the Church will have their proportionable influence
upon the Commonwealth.

2. The Kingdom will be woefully weakened by Scandals and Divisions; so that
the enemies of it, both Domestical and Foreign, will be encouraged to plot and
practice against it.

3. It is much to be doubted, lest the Power of the Magistrate, should not only
be weakened, but even utterly overthrown, considering the principles and
practices of Independents, together with their compliance with other Sectaries,
sufficiently known to be Anti-Magistratical.

V. Such a Toleration is utterly repugnant and inconsistent with that Solemn
League and Covenant, for Reformation and Defense of Religion, which not only
both Houses of Parliament, but also persons of all sorts in both Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, have subscribed, and with hands lifted up to the most
High God, have sworn: Which Covenant likewise, both you, and we, and those that
most earnestly pursue the establishment of this Toleration, have made, (or
should have made) in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts,
with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great
day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. For,

1. This is opposite to the Reformation of Religion, according to the Word of
God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches, Article 1.

2. The Toleration of Presbytery is no less destructive to the Conjunction and
Uniformity of all the three Kingdoms, then Independency.
It is destructive to the three Kingdoms nearest conjunction and uniformity in
Religion and Government, which might lead us and our Posterity after us as
Brethren to live in Faith and Love. Art. 1.

3. Seeing Presbytery is as much a Schism from Episcopacy, as Episcopacy or
Independency was from Presbytery, why do ye now, instead of extirpation, desire
the Toleration of it, contrary to your Covenant?
It is plainly contrary to that extirpation of Schism, and whatsoever shall be
found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness, which we have
sworn sincerely, really, and constantly to endeavor without respect of
persons. Art. 2.

4. Toleration of Schism rendereth Magstrates and M^nisters access^ry to the
Errors, Sins, and Destruction of Seduced and Deluded people.
Hereby we shall be involved in the guilt of other men's sins, and thereby be
endangered to receive of their plagues. Art 2.

5. It seems utterly impossible (if such a Toleration should be granted) that
the Lord should be one, and his name one in the three Kingdoms. Art. 2.

6. This will palpably hinder the Reformation of Religion, inevitably divide
one Kingdom from another, and unhappily make Factions and Parties among the
people, contrary to this League and Covenant; of which evil Offices, whosoever
shall be found guilty, are reputed in the words of the Covenant, The Toleration
of deformity, even in little matters, sometimes causes Factions and Parties
amongst the people. Let us have a care we be not Incendiaries, or evil
Instruments for Sacrilegious Spirits to work by, ill-affected as well to
Presbytery as Episcopacy.
Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, to be discovered, that they may
be brought to public trial, and receive condign punishment, Art. 4. and 5.

These are some of the many considerations which make deep impression upon our
Spirits against that great Diana of Independents, and all the Sectaries so much
cried up by them in these distracted times, viz. A Toleration, a Toleration.
And however, none should have more rejoiced then our selves in the
establishment of a Brotherly, Peaceable, and Christian Accommodation: yet this
being utterly rejected by them, we cannot dissemble how upon the forementioned
grounds, we detest and abhor the much endeavored Toleration, Our bowels, our
bowels, are stirred within us, and we could even drown our selves in tears,
when we call to mind how long and sharp a travel this Kingdom has been in for
many years together, to bring forth that blessed fruit of a pure and perfect
Reformation; and now at last after all our pangs and dolors, and expectations,
this real and through Reformation, is in danger of being strangled in the Birth
by a lawless Toleration, that strives to be brought forth before it.

Wherefore (Reverend and Beloved Brethren) we could not satisfy our selves
till we had made some discovery of our thoughts unto you about this matter; not
that we can harbor the least jealousy of your zeal, fidelity, or industry in
the opposing and extirpating of such a root of gall and bitterness as
Toleration is and will be, both in present and future Ages; but that we may
what lies in us endeavor mutually to strengthen one another resolutions
against the present growing evils, and that our consciences may not smite us
another day for sinful silence, or sluggish deficiency in any point of duty
tending to the Glory of Christ, Honor of the Truth, Peace of the Church,
Perfection of Reformation, Performance of our Covenant, and Benefit of present
and succeeding Generations.

From Sion College, London, December. 18. 1645. Subscribed by us your
affectionate Brethren and Fellow Laborers in the work of the Ministry, to
whom truth and peace is very precious.

FINIS.

