A Letter of Advice from a PROTESTANT OUT OF IRELAND TO THE Masters of
Apprentices In the CITIES of London and Westminster.
Gentlemen,
We have had the Advice to the Apprentices, we hope you will Concur with them
in this Honorable Undertaking, seeing it is You, your Families and Estates,
that is struck at, by your and their Enemies. Methinks we should hear you
Masters saying, We would be glad our Apprentices would appear in this
Honorable Work, which will be so Honorable for them, in being so Courageous
for the Protestant Cause, which so much of the World approve.

Secondly, It will be much for our Honor in this, that we have not only
allowed this Liberty, but we have Encouraged them, and sent them out like Men.
Gentlemen, this will be for your Honor, and will raise a Monument of Praise to
your never to be forgotten Name, in after Ages, of Loyalty and Stedfastness to
so good a King and Queen, as God has by his good Hand of Providence brought to
the Royal Thorn: Besides, how kindly the King will take it, if you be found in
this Honorable Undertaking, especially in this juncture of time, when on all
Hands there is so much occasion. Do as you would be done by, consider how many
poor Distressed Protestants here are Ireland, that is drove from Post to
Pillar, have no House to go to, no Bed to lie on; in short, no Relief: Now
suppose it was your Case (as you know not how soon it may be) what would you
desire from your Brethren but Relief; and would you not think it unkind if they
should not send it to you? And if Scotland also, as well as we, should stand in
need of your Assistance, would not this be a sad thing? and what may you
expect, but if a Blow do fall, it will come on you at last, either upon Body,
or deep in the Purse: And we believe for the Trade you now have, there may be
several Thousands of Apprentices spared, and no lack of them. Consider also,
how much of a Disloyal Spirit it will show to be in you, if you do not
Encourage these your Servants, who are willing to venture theit Lives, for the
safety of your selves and Families; and also if you do not Encourage this, and
the Enemy do come upon you on one hand or the other, may you not have just
cause to Retort upon your selves with these Reflections, you might have had
opportunity of using the means that has been effectual in former Ages, but you
would not Encourage it; perhaps some of you may say, That it will be time
enough to send out my Servant when the King calls for the Auxiliaries; Good
Sir, that will be no Point of Honor to go when forced to it; for that is as
much as to say, We will let our Lives and Liberties, and all go till they be at
the last gasp, before we design to do any thing to save them, and give Relief
to them; and in the mean time, where is your Love to your King and Country,
Religion and Liberty? Consider on these things and every one that would be
counted a Loyal Man, let him Encourage the Work, and help to Cure the Wound
before it be too late; we believe you had rather have their go then your
selves; so leave you to consider on it.

Lycensed according to Order.

London, Printed for Robert Smith in the Year, 1689.


