A LETTER SENT To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM LENTHAL Esquire Speaker of the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England; Concerning the Securing of Windsor
Castle for the Parliament And a Declaration of the Officers and Soldiers of
the Regiment of Foot belonging to the Tower of London, December 24. 1659.

Read in Parliament, December the 28. 1659.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, 1659.

A Letter, sent to the Right Honorable William Lenthal, Esquire, Speaker of the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England; Concerning the securing of Windsor
Castle for the Parliament.
Read in Parliament, December. 28. Right Honorable,
YOur Commissioners for the Command of the Army, having from Portsmouth Ordered
us to march unto Major Breman with such Forces as we could raise, for the
restoring the Parliament whilst we were at Henley, and had sent to find out
Major Breman that we might add to his number what we could; upon Intelligence
that the Forces with him were marched toward London, we resolved to march
nearer London, in order to a conjunction with him as soon as we had particular
Notice of the place of his Rendezvous nearer London: and in our march being
informed from undoubted hands, that some of Colonel Hewson's Regiment of Foot
were designed for Windsor-Castle, to keep the same against the Parliament; and
being also assured, That Colonel Whichcott the present Governor, had not only
joined with those that put the late Treacherous Force upon your Honor, but
also had endeavored to raise Forces in this County against the Parliament, and
offered Commissions to that purpose unto several Persons: And upon further
Intelligence, that the Cavaleers had some Design upon the place, in order to a
Conjunction with some of their Adherents in London, and knowing their Guards to
be very Weak and insufficient for a place of so great Consequence, We thought
it our Duty, in order to the Parliaments Service, to secure this Castle with
the Forces now with Us, and did Summon the same accordingly: and as we were
upon our March thither within two miles of this Place, we received further
Orders from the said Commissioners, to march with our Forces unto this Place,
and to remain here until further Orders: and looking upon this as an Act of
Divine Providence concurring with our Intentions, We immediately sent two of
our number to persuade Colonel Whichcott to admit our Horse into this Castle;
who submitted to our demand; and thereupon we thought necessary to draw
together the Soldiers under his Com^ and whilst our Horse were in the Castle,
and to inform t^^m of the vileness of their defection from the Parliament, and
assisting those that had betrayed the Trust reposed in them, and that we hoped
they had done it through Ignorance, being misled by their Officers; and
therefore we presumed to assure all the Soldiers of Indemnity: if they should
return to their due Obedience to Your Honors, and their faithfulness to the
Cause engaged in, and should sign the Engagement of those Horse under Major
Breman (which we read unto them); and thereupon they unanimously declared, That
their Hands and Hearts should be unto that Engagement. Yet we have thought it
our Duty to place Guards in the Castle with some of the Horse with us, and to
give an Account of what we have done, to your Honor, and to expect the
Parliaments Pleasure therein; We have no more but our most humble
Congratulation of the Parliaments happy Return to the Exercise of their Trust,
and with our hearty Prayers to God to direct your Great Counsels, We remain,

Right Honorable, Your most humble faithful and obedient Servants, Jo. Butler.
Rob. Huntington, Joh. Wildman. John Brown. John Phelps.

Windsor-Castle, 27. December. 1659.
A Declaration of the Officers and Soldiers of the Regiment of Foot belonging
to the Tower of London, December. the 24. 1659.
WE being fully convinced, that it is our Duties to return to our obedience to
the Parliament, from whom We have received our Commissions, after a late
unhappy defection from Them; Do hereby Declare our Resolution (through Gods
Grace) to be true and faithful to Them as our Superiors; and to stand by
Them, with the hazard of our Lives and Fortunes, against all opposition which
may be made against Them; and shall not suffer our Selves to be drawn hereafter
from our Duty and obedience to Them. As an Evidence of our real Intentions, We
have this Day delivered up the Possession of the Tower, to the Honorable
Speaker of Parliament, and other Worthy Persons on the behalf of the Parliament.

Io. Miller Nich. Cordy John Iennings Henry Sharp Will. Foster Abraham Spooner
Robert Acres Will. Risse William Starlin* Phil. Brown Isaac Dreyme Henry Beale
Nath. London Will. Haukins John Ryves Peter Seen Simon Knight.

Read in Parliament, December. 28. 1659.
FINIS.

