The LADIES INVENTION; BEING A Thousand Pounds for Sixpence, to the Fortunate,
And the Triple Adventure made into one Lottery.
THe Undertakers of these two Lotteries have joined their Books cut out and
their Interest together, for the more speedy and full drawing of the same,
which now cannot be doubted but it will be done in few days: of which notice
shall be given, and the Adventurers in the Triple Adventutre are desired
forthwith to change their Tickets, for others in the Ladies Invention. Moneys
are now actually paying into the Goldsmiths, and all things are preparing for
the drawing the said Lottery.

The Trustees of the Ladies Invention thought this Method much more
advantageous, and satisfactory to the Adventurers than to draw that Lottery two
Thirds full on the 8th of December Instant, which the Undertakers must have
been constrained to do, if then drawn.

All other Lotteries have either proposed great Deductions, or Abatements
(which is not allowed in this) or else have proposed such vast and unreasonable
Disadvantages, as near 1700 Blanks to one Prize, that they seem rather to be a
great Discouragement to any Adventurer, than to deserve the Name of a Fair
Lottery. The Number of Prizes.
Lots. l. 1 1000 1 500 3 each 100 10 each 50 40 each 20 100 each 10 300 each 5
200 each 3 400 each 2 2450 each 1 Prizes 3554

Now the Prizes here are above treble the number than are generally proposed,
viz. 3555, and among them very considerable Ones, as you see; so that tho the
Disadvantage is 140 Blanks to one Prize in this, yet the vast Advantages made
up by great Prizes, as 100, 500, 100, 50, etc; and those numerous too, makes a
full amends to the Adventurer, and consequently must be deemed the Fairest
Lottery ever yet set on foot; especially seeing that 1555 Prizes are now added
to the first Proposals.

Thus for Six pence Adventure only, there is a fair prospect of getting a
Thousand Pounds, which is forty Thousand times as much in real value as your
Adventure, and twenty Thousand times as much in other Lots, etc.

The Advantage in this Lottery above others, is, that the Stake you lay down,
or Adventure you make, is so little in proportion to the vast Gains the
Fortunate may obtain, that it is preferable to any other.

And for Satisfaction of such Persons as shall be Adventurers, the following
Goldsmiths are appointed to be Casheers; in whose Hands the Moneys arsiing from
the several Books will be deposited: And every Benefit, or Prize, after
compared with the Books will be paid by Mr Benj. Tudman at the Crown in
Lombardstreet; Mr Rich. Hoare, at the Golden Bottle in Fleetstreet; Mr John
Pearson at the Unicorn in the Strand, Goldsmiths.

The Undertakers because they would have it drawn completely full, have been at
vast Charge and Expense to send Books into the Country, which has been seldom,
or never done before, so that the Trouble and Expense in managing this, is, and
will be of necessity greater than any other.

These Worthy Gentlemen have been pleased to promise the Undertaker to see the
fair Dr wing of it; which will be done at Frank's Coffee House behind the Royal
Exchange. The Honorable Mr O Brien, Sir Benjamin Titebburn, Knight; James
Isaackson, Esquire Dr William Coward, Captain John Knap, Richard Halton Gent.

In the mean time the Engine is preparing for that purpose, which be after a
new Mode, made of Glass, that the Billets may be visible to every Spectator,
with 4 Doors out of which the Tickets will be drawn; so that it will be
impossible to have any thing mdre fairly and equally Performed.

And every Book-keeper for the Satisfaction of all his Friends that take
Tickets from him, shall have liberty to roll up and sow the middle Billets in
the Book, and put them into the Engine with his own Hands: The Prizes shall be
daily printed as drawn, and signed by the Undertakers and Trustees.

And for a further Encouragement, and Satisfaction to all the Adventurers in
this Lottery, the Undertakers do promise that as soon as the Prizes are all
drawn, all the Blanks remaining in the Engine shall be duly taken out,
Registered and Filed, in order to be searched, that every Adventurer that
pleases may there find his Number Tickets.


