A LETTER Sent by AN OXFORD SCHOLAR To his Quondam SCHOOLMASTER;

Wherein the PARLIAMENT is proved either not to be at all, or to be at Oxford:
Their pretenses detected, some objections answered, and the Kings cause so
asserted, that the Schoolmasters Answer does acknowledge himself convinced.

As also the Scholler's Reply to that Answer, wherein he has inserted a
Love-Elegie from one of the five Members to his Paramour, and his repulse in
her Answer.

Printed for W. WEBB. M.DC.XLII.

To the READER.
REader, I anticipate thy censure with my own, acknowledging that there is
nothing of worth in these scriblings, but the cause; so that I am just like
that Shoemaker, who discours't to Apelles about the thigh, when his skill
reached no higher then the ankle. I should have remembered Scaevola, who would
be no Jack of all Trades; but when some Clients asked him counsel in the Law,
he referred them to Caesellius: and when the builders asked advise of Plato the
Philosopher, he sent them to Euclid the Geometrician. I acknowledge the error
of my piety; I should have left these State affairs to Statists; and whilst
they build, it had been preferment for me only to carry away the rubbish, so
that the greatest reward that I can desire, is pardon. But how little I did
itch after a public name, thou may know by this, That I am ashamed to tell
thee who I am: and indeed, it was for fear of being public that I desired to
be in Print; for some false Copies were threatened the Press, unless I would
publish a true one; so that thou will quickly pardon the act, when thou
considerest the end: for I did only commit this sin, that I might avoid it.

The true Copy of a LETTER sent from an OXFORD Scholar to his quondam
Schoolmasters.
SIR.
YOu will esteem it a soloecisme in your Quondam scholar, that he should
think it no false Syntaxe to Catechize his Master, and may wonder that twenty
years do not blush to instruct threescore; but by way of relation to your
many Lectures, you must pardon my gratitude if I read you one; for since the
Act does always carry proportion with the object, I am sooner to discard my
reverence to a Teacher, then my Loyalty to a Prince. For whom as I must spend
every drop of blood to fight his cause, so I will shed every drop of ink to
assert it: and though the assailant is weak, yet the cause is so strong, that
I doubt not but to convince your faith, however I may fail of your
acknowledgment. Since as Hannibal overcame Italy with Italian Forces, so I may
beat your own swords to the injury of your foreheads, which you hold up for
the defense of 'em; for when the Parliament (those I mean who are Nicknamed
so) do prove that Rebellion in the Execution, which they yet disavow to have
been in the Intention, their hands do so lowdly give their toungs the lie,
that I can confute their words by noe stronger arguments then their actions.
Hence it is that I admire at His Majesty's unwearied goodness which has robbed
His senses of so many hours sleep, whilst it has stoop't to a confutation
of those actions which for their evidence are indisputable. To prove the object
of sense, is a task for schoolboys; and I cannot wish my Enemies so well, as
the honor to fall by Hercules. Now Sir, that you may rightly aim at the
mark, I desire you (as Archers use) to shut one eye; I mean, that of
Prejudice. Bolt not your ears to the message, because it is I that bring it; be
not deaf to good counsel, because you are resolved That no good thing can
come out of Oxford. Be not like those Indians, who would not go to Heaven for
fear of meeting a Spaniard there: Nay, be not like your old self, who did
therefore detest the Liturgy and Hierarchy, because 'twas common to us with
Papists. Could the Devil teach me goodness, I would be his Disciple. There is
no better way to compose a good Protestant, then by imitating the superstitious
Capouchins in continual prayer; the Papisticall Paduans in holy chastity;
their Knighthood in the defense of Orphans and Widows; the Pagan Turks in
pity and charity; the Savage Tartars in honesty, truth, and chastity; the
Cyprians in affability and hospitality to strangers; the Heathen of Peru in
liberality to their God, King, and Country. Be not then (good Sir) like those
Harlots of Vlna, who paint their teeth black, because the dogg's are white. Be
not at such a stubborn and resolved enmity with us, as to foster Rebellion,
because we are loyal; nor say with the Lyrick Poet, Quodcunque ostendis mihi
sic, incredulus odi.

Marius did not disdain to learn of Hannibal; nor had he freed the Romans at
Caudium, had they not been conquered at Cannae: think it no brand to your
credit to be your Scholars Proselyte. O devote not your self to the darkness
of Egypt, because it is I that would lead you into the light of Goshen; nor be
the less in love with a retractation of your heresy, because the motive to it
is vile. Truth lies not now (as Antiquity faign'd it) in a ditch, but is so
obvious to the eye, that if you (being a Scholar) stumble at her, I shall
think it is not because you are blind, but that you will not see. Those
(indeed) whose slender souls see no farther then their eyes, who not able to
distinguish betwixt the Name and the Thing, call the Conspiracy the Parliament,
whose grosser minds being fed only by hopes and fears, are too thick to
take in the finer nourishment of Reason; those (I confess) may be quickly
cozened of their loyalty. But that your Intellect should be be-nighted with
such a Cymerian darkness, as not yet to be unclouded by the beams of our
English Sun, (The Declarations of his Majesty;) This stagger's my
understanding.

1. O consider with remorse of conscience how this Kingdom now labors with
the Falling Sickness, and (like men of that disease) lies throbbing her own
bowels; the extremity of whose malady has so taken away the sense of it, that
the giddy Rout stopping their ears to Accommodation (like the drunken
Lapithae) despise their Physician.

2. Consider how fertile our Land is in a Cadmus crop, when we may change but
the name, and speak Lucan of our selves, Bella per Angliacos plusquam civilia,
etc. And the then State of Rome was but the prophecy of ours: for, Nec quenquam
jam far potest Caesarve priorem,
Pompeiusve parem.
That is, The King will admit no Rival, Pym no Superior.

3. Consider what a disastrous event will attend this so unnatural a
Rebellion; that the lesser Gods (though Gods) had no sooner complotted to bind
Jupiter, but there was a Thetis to detect the Treason, and a Briareus to
defeat it: and though both sides yet run like Parallel lines, yet they can
never end in the same Center.

4. Consider when you read Homer to me, what a special notice you commanded me
to take of that Periphrasis, by which he calls the King the Pastor of his
people, -- (...). Now for Sheep to butcher one another, were admirable; but to
bring their Shepherd to the shambles, prodigy.

5. Consider that Asperius nihil est humili, etc. -- and what a combustion this
Kingdom is already in, whilst these Phaetons of State aspire to rule in
CHARLES his Waine: nay, how it is like to be confounded into its old Chaos,
unless a Thunderbolt dismount 'em from the Sunn's Chariot.

6. Consider in what detestation future Parliaments will be had, whilst
Posterity reflects on this; believing that then they will offend by
Prescription, when Rebellion is authorized by so high a Title; when the Court
of Justice shall be a Topic for the approvement of Vice, and by the same
Logic will dispute down that Confistory, by which they prove Episcopacy
unlawful, because some Bishops have been bad. Nay, it will pass into a
Proverb with the simplicity of the Vulgar, to rank the English Parliament
with the Spanish Inquisition. for wickedness and the world are both of one
growth; they will think that Neroni sufficient Nero, that the Iron age is likely
to be no mending one; and will be sure to remember, That when Scipio the father
had endangered Carthage, Scipio the Son ruined it. This makes them sit so
long, because they think they sit their last.

7. Lastly, consider our Sovereign under a double notion, how (as a Christian)
He rules Himself, and (as a King) His Country. How the goodness of His
Majesty stands in equipage with the splendor of it. How He is so composed and
made up of Grace and Favor, that he is a Prince as 'twere accomplished for the
indearing of His people; we should vindicate him not only as the father, but
(as the Graecians did Helena;) -- (...), As the Bridegroom of his Country:
for our dearest Relations, which like divided streams, run several ways,
must all meet in him as in their proper Ocean. Add this as an Epilogue to your
considerations, that you would take it very ill if the lower Classis of your
School (but the Plebeians of that your Kingdom) should take the Burchen
Scepter out of your hand, and employ it about your breetch. This (with pardon
to my youth) is to prepare you for a fit Reader, lest your sufferage should be
bespoke, and taken up on to'ther side; for since Truth cannot comply with an
erroneous Judgment, nor hold conformity with that rule by which it was not
made: I desire you to read over what my shallow apprehension of these State
matters is, with an unpreoccupied understanding.

The Parliament at first had not long sat, when some Pygmes of fortune, out of
a natural Antipathy with those of taller growth, did anxiously labor to make
them shorter by the head; and being Eaglesighted, they endeavored to prune off
those spreading branches, which interposed as a Skreene betwixt the Sun and
them. Now, because the people were to act that Tragedy, of which themselves had
laid the Plott, they must study some imposture by which to juggle out their
affections; so that Justice it self did now begin to be accessory, and
Religion the Pimpe for vice. Atheism was to be work't in under pretext of
Reformation; Protestancy to be work't out under the name of Papisme.
Licentiousness was solicited under the mask of Liberty; Inconveniences to be
taken away for the introducements of Mischiefs. Dirt was to be cast on the
Ermyn, and then he to be accused of being foul. He was to be argued of Popery,
and so of Perjury. His very Declarations were accused of a curious garb of
Rhetoric, and found guilty of an Idaea; both majestic, and yet decent. Their
writings were to be credited even for their slovenly conveyance. The Frenzy
of the Pulpit had the reputation of Zeal, and men possess't with the spirit
were esteemed as inspired. Some parts were to be let blood for the preservation
of the whole; and instead of purging ill humors, they were to change the
Crasis of the body. Like pictures that look several ways, or like the ninth
Orb, they were to move Westward in compliance with the King, and direct East
in the progress of their own designs. The power of Sovereignty was shaken to
confirm the right of it, that so the people might rebel with the more
obedience; and (as I dare swear many have done) that they might do ill with a
good conscience, and fight against their King in a discharge of their
allegiance. Anon they pretend to Enthusiasme, and (as Numa from Egeria, or
Mahumet from the Angel Gabriel) to have direction even from God. So that now
(like opposite lines in a Globe, which by being drawn asunder, meet) the
Puritan is Papist, (omitting the shriveing men from perjury after the battle
at Brainceford) not only in King-killing, but also in infallibility. For by
this time Pym is Pope of England, as well as Urban of Rome. His assertion is
his proof, and the action of which he gives the reason, is the reason of the
action; so that Petere principium is to argumentize best. The vulgar are of
Hiero's mind. (...), they put their salvation into his hands; and to
whatsoever he shall do, they resign up their consciences, as well as their
consents.

This foundation of a Ruin being laid, (that my Letter may not swell, I will
give but one instance) they vote down Bishops, because they have too much
knowledge to be seduc't into their faction, and too much conscience to be
work't to it. Here the King must have no suffrage, unless He make it theirs:
and as if His Oath did only serve to solemnize His Coronation, they think it
not enough for Him to part with His Prerogative, unless He will dispense with
His Religion too: they had rather His Oath were broke, then the Bishops kept.
The King again is refractary, and whilst they vote Perjury to be no sin, He
denies to make it an Act. The Militia is to be settled in their hands who are
interessed and engaged in this growing Treason, that they may awe Him to their
Votes, to which they cannot woo Him. And notwithstanding those evidences at
Edgehill and Brainceford, besides the suborning of Pampheleteers for their
Abettors, as of some to prove the King a Papist, and those perfidious that will
believe Him; of others that do aver Him to be Vniversis minor, though
Singulis major; of a third sort, who would have the Subjects coordinate with
Him, not subordinate to Him, and the like; I say notwithstanding all this, they
are so famously impudent, as to proclaim themselves loyal, and the Rabble so
eminently stupid as to believe 'em. His Majesty (like a prudent Halcyon) fore
seeing a tempest would be shortly, whilst the clouds were over his head,
forsakes the unruly Ocean; and removes the Parliament to York, though the
Title stayed behind at London: for put the King's part of the Parliament
(notoriously known to be the major) in one scale of your Judgment and the
lesser part of London in the other; then suppose (not grant) the balance in
Aequilibrio, yet the King (who is heavier then both) being put to the greater
part, must needs outweigh the less: so that now you are brought to this
Dilemma, that either the Parliament is not, or that it is not at London.

Ob. 1. But you say, the King cannot break off the Parliament. I answer, that
the King is an essential part of it, and therefore it is all one for him to
leave it, and to break it off, for the causality of intrinsecall causes is the
union of them; and though the parts united are not distinguished from the whole,
but ratione ratiocinata, yet taken asunder they include a third entity; so that
they of London are but an (...), and only in potentia essendi, being not a
body; and yet having no repugnancy to the making one, when they shall unite
themselves with the King: and though as yet but ciphers, yet they may make a
number, when the royal figure shall be prefixed.

Ob. 2. You say, He has promised not to break it off. But the most absolute
promise is implicitly hypotheticall; and though His Majesty did grant them a
perpetual Session, yet granted with a proviso, that they intrench't not on His
Prerogative; insomuch, that the promise does no longer obtinere, when once they
have rambl'd beyond the pale of their conditions. Besides, if this Parliament
was to have any end, (as doubtless by sitting whilst they list, was not meant
sitting whilst they live) it was to be broken off by the major part, (who are
with the King) and not to remain 'till the consents of all, for that all will
not consent so much as to adjourne, much less to end it, is manifest by this,
that they are hereby exempted from the trial of their offenses; from which the
name of Parliament (though it should not yet) has priviledg'd 'em* for it was
held unlawful, that the King should proceed against those five Members
according to Law; and to accuse Traitors was a breach of privilege. Therefore
each single person will desire to continue himself a whole Shire or
Corporation, because that has been a trick to authorize the highest
Treasons, and is the Tenure by which they hold both their Lives and Livings; so
that they love the continuance of the Parliament, as condemned strumpets do
the continuance of their great bellies, only to save 'em from the Gallows.

Ob. 3. You say, so many are more judicious then one, and therefore their
verdict to take place. But suppose the negative and affirmative Votes are even;
if there be no Vmpire to decide, then either they must cast lotts on whose side
it shall pass, or they are just like Caligula, who mustered up his Soldiers
to gather Cockelshells; or like Cato in the Theater, Qui ideo tantum venerat,
ut exiret; and we should find them Registered with this (...): In Parliament
above five hundred men
Sat down to Vote, and so rose up again.


Ob. 4. You say, the Kings Prerogative is not lessened, whilst they assume so
much. You must pardon my unbelief if it be no part of my Creed: for the King
and they being now Antipodes, their Zenith must be his Nadir; the more those
Stars do ascend our Horizon, the more this Sun must fall down; for the
latitude of Dominion must be some way completed in the body Politic, as the
latitude of Qualities in the body Natural; as where there are but three
degrees of heat, there must be five of cold, according to that known Maxim,
Gradualis ambitus contrarietatis supplenda est ex uno, aut altero contrariorum.
Now the King and those Rebels being Diametrically opposite, what you add to
their Authority, you must take from His.

That therefore the King is an absolute Monarch, and by much superior to both
Houses, (He being deputed by God, and they but by the Country) though my
ignorance in these high matters makes me fear to say I Will prove, yet I Will
endeavor to illustrate by these emergent Arguments.

1. From the Universe, which is governed by one God; from whom also all Kings
had their first institution. Hence Euripides in his Andromache, (...).

2. From the Commonwealth of Cranes, from whom (says Aelian, l. 3.) mankind
at first learned their (...), and (as Plato in his Politicum) they never
encampe against the Troglodytes, but with due observation to their General.

3. From all vegetable bodies, which (if the parts be equal) will be
homogeneous; and (if there be many heads) monstrous.

4. From all mixed bodies, which Philosophy will not allow should have a
Temperament ad Pondus; for there is a Monarchy in their qualities, which would
cease to be active, were they all equal; because Similia non agunt invicem.

5. From the confusednesse and mischief of the contrary; for the government of
the Consuls, Decemviri, and Tribunes, were incompatible with the Romans* and
inconsistent with an Empire of so long a durance; which forced them to that
government which they had formerly refused; (viz.) of Kings called Emperors.
This made Ulysses in Homer, break forth to the Graecians in his (...), etc. --

6. From the suffrages of best Authors; and of infinite I will cite but few.
Plutarch (De tribus Reip. generibus) proves this the best, and brings Plato's
Politicum to confirm it. In Herodotus ( l. 3.) when Otanes had made a speech
for Polyarchy, Megabyzus for Olygarchy, and Darius for Monarchy, the four
(...) preferred the last, which Pythagoras proves from the very nature of
Numbers* whence Plutarch observes, that with Homer, Unity is convertible with
goodness, and multitude with vice; which appears by the contrary
significations of (...) and (...).

7. From the inferior Heavens, which do move at the pleasure of the Primum
mobile. From the Elements; of which the lower so little aspire into the
Territories of the highest, that they do not Levitare in suis locis. And
lastly from all that is in Nature, or above it, for God had more skill in
setting, (when he composed the Harmony of the world) then to make all the parts
in unison.

To conclude therefore, I will infer from what I have said, these 6
Corollaries.

1. That the Praedicament of a Common wealth is to be made according to Sub and
Supra; and that ours as well as the rest, ought to have a Summum genus in it.

2. That the King is the very soul of the Kingdom, and that soul an act, of
which the will as well as the understanding is a substantial faculty; and that
those Rebels are but untamed affections, proceeding from the sensitive
appetite, which Aristotle calls (...), the beastly part of the body.

3. That the Machivillians in London ( -- O quis iniquae tam patiens urbis! --)
have not only endeavored, but have de facto altered the government of this
Kingdom, of which the Oligarchs are in London, whilst the Monarch resides in
Oxford.

4. That they have turned Machiavel's precept into practice, Divide and impera,
for they have uncemented a great part of the Members from the Head, by
invenoming His Name, and imbittering their natures* by striking into them the
pannick fears of villenage; and by setting up an Idol at Westminster for
poor Ignorance to fall down 'to; so that the abused multitude (fancying them
to be what indeed they are not) do not only adore their own Workmanship, but
(what is worse) their Creature.

5. That as they falsely protest they war not against the King, but His evil
Counselors, so we may truly swear, that the King fights not against the
Parliament, but the Disturbers of it.

6. Lastly, that they have nothing in them of a Parliament, but the bare Notion
and Place; and that the best of their actions do look no otherwise, then as
if (with Herostratus) their Authors committed them for no other end, then to be
notorious enough for a Chronicle* which for the unworthiness shall be
registered in the same Catalogue with Litisar the Dyer in the days of Richard
2. Joseph the Blacke-smith, (H. 7.) Robin Ket the Tanner ( Edw. 6.) Jack Cade
(H. 6.) Wat Tyler and Jack Straw ( R. 2.) But rather then the King shall want
strength to overwhelme these Rebels, I doubt not but the clouds will drop
down in a shower of Locusts to devour them, as sometimes in Norwey it has
rained Lemmers. I doubt not but the people will be one day dis-infatuated; That
their Seducers (like Actaeon) may be eaten up by their own Hounds. But should
our success be worse, I would not think their cause the better; knowing that
the Arm is let blood, when the disease lies in the Stomach: and whilst God
punishes it is for their faults, I shall esteem their Victory their Judgment.
So steadfastly resolves

The most sollicitous of your welfare * * *

The SCHOOLEMASTER's Answer.
I Have read your Letter, which has made me your Convert; for the pathos of
your style has had such strong influence on my reason, and the savage
performance of those Rebels does so disprove their fair promises, that I
confess my self overcome, and must Herbam porrigere. Now that your Letter may
convert others by my example, I desire you (with the concealment of my name)
to make it Publici juris: for I would Palinodiam canere so loud, that all the
world might hear it. For that respect's sake which you once did bear to me
your Master, let it in Lacem prodire; for there are imperfect Copies flowne
abroad from my hands, which some intend to commit to Press, Publicae
utilitatis ergo. My haste (for I am now giving Homer's Lecture) will let me say
no more, then that I am

A Loyal Subject and a loving friend.

The Gratulatory REPLY to that ANSWER.
SIR,
YOu cannot imagine in what an extremity of joy I now live, not so much that I
had the honor, as the happiness to convert you, as well for my own sake, in
whose tender'st thoughts you had a great proportion; as more especially for
yours, who can now look unhoodwinck't on those men of darkness, who seek to
sacrifice a Majesty to their wild lusts. with whom a great part of people do
commit Idolatry, (as the poor Indians worship the Devil) that they may do
them no harm; not fearing them for love, but loving them for fear: and so
they do not pay them the Tribute of Reverentiall, but Servile Homage. Poor
souls! who hope to flatter Hell into a Sanctuary and so loose their refuge by
running to an Asylum, like Fannius in Martial, who died to avoid death. Dic
mihi, non stultum est ne moriare, mori?

Another part of men thinking Rebellion stronger then Justice, does comply with
it, because they have too much to loose. A third quite contrary, because they
have too much to get. And the last and most to be deplored, (whose
understandings are abused by those grand Machivillians) fight against the King
in His own Cause, offend Him in His Defense, and destroy the Essence of
Parliament, to preserve the Privilege of it: As if Parliaments (like the
waters of Bethesda) could not cure a leprous Commonwealth, before they were
troubled: Or as if the Kingdom (like a Watch) could not possibly be mended,
unless the wheels and parts were taken asunder. I dare say the least of these
four faults was yours; which as you were so much Man as to commit, so you have
been so much Christian as to repent. And because I was so luckie as to purge
your affections, though perhaps not so wise as to clear your Reason; I will
write as pathetically as my slender skill will give leave (and the cause
inspire) to my Cozen B. for perhaps my youth may work stronger with him, then
that age which can woo him wiser; especially, because I know he loves me well,
and has so fair an example as your self to follow.

Thus far, Sir, I have wrote sadly to you, give me leave to entertain you
now with a little mirth: It is the Love-Elegie of a Politic Amorist, which if
he did not make himself, but procured some body to do it for him, yet I dare
swear the sense is all his own. I have sent the Answer too, if both can but
procure one smile from your serious forehead, I shall think the pains of
writing it well paid for.

Carmen Eroticon ab uno Membrorum quinque, ad Dilectissimam suam amicam D. C.
ILle ego prognatus de nigrescente Caballo,
Quem fertur moriens sponte dedisse Pater,
En Patrem refero, (petulans genus extat equorum)
Pronus in amplexus ( Diva Corinna) tuos.
Ille ego cordato cujus moderamine, vobis
Nondum clauduntur (Parliamenta) fores,
Quem ratis Angliacae Typhin, quem quisque popelli,
Regalis currus Automendonta vocant,
Quique Stuartiadis Caroli Diademata vinco,
Vincor captivus (Pulchra Corinna) tuus.
Curribus en jungit binas Cytheraea columbas,
Cantat Io victrix, ecce Triumphus, ait.
Et tibi subjectus, jam nunc dedisco rebellem;
Quem nequiit pietas flectere, flexit amor.
Et licet haud valeo Dominum tolerare Carollum,
Te fateor Dominam (sancta Corinna) meam.
Ah me discipulum Veneris plus fulmine sternunt,
Ex oculi pharetris spicula jacta tuis.
Nec tam regales fasces amor urget habendi,
Quam quibus ingenii sis potienda modis.
Aureus in gremium patulum tibi (chara) venirem,
Vt quondam Danae Jupiter imbre suae.
En tibi submitto jugulum; si jusseris ipsa,
Sedulus in funes obvia collae dabo.
Non me latratu terret canis iste trifauci,
Quando concubitum (lux mea) quaro tuum.
Iphias o Capaneu non tunc magis arsit amore,
Quum fertur rapidis desiliisse rogis.
Saepius ad trutinam tua dum voco membra, videtur
In tete solam multa fluisse Dea.
Inque domo menti petulans Cytheraea residit,
Inque tuis oculis coesia Pallas adest.
Occupat and frontem spaciosam sospita Juno,
Incolit and digitos praevia lucis Ews.
Cum subit in mentem nox ista novissima, quando
Miscuimus placido membra silenda toro;
O mihimet geminus quoties occurrit ocellus,
Qualiter and lepidus front renidet Amor;
Quum memoro beves humeros, habilesque papillas,
Vlnas candidulas, and juvenile fomur;
(Quod caput est formae) capitis dum cogito formam,
Et meditor positam non sine lege comam;
Istam praecipue simulac ego cogito partem,
Partem quam verbis indigitare pudet;
Ah quo tunc rapior! quantis tunc astibus uror?
Quam furiis instar pectore saevit Amor?
Distrahor hinc at que hinc; and curas mente voluto,
Vt rudis indomito fluctuat unda mari.
Millena in mentem subeunt molimina nostram,
Dum rabidus meditor qua potes art capi.
Vtque saginatus reserato carcere Taurus,
Obvia cum fuerit crebra Juvenca, salit;
Seu velut in luxum praeceps fuit ifte Caballus,
Qui Matrem passim fertur amasse meam;
Sic pariter totum spirant mea corda Pryapum,
Seu mihi per somnum (pulchra puella) subis;
Sic mea turgescunt aliter languentia membra,
Seu mihi per mediam tu subis (Alma) diem.
Quum fato fungar, sic sic lascivia vitam
Auferat; ah placuit sic mihi saepe mori.
Nec pudibunda nimis metuas ab amante procari,
Famellas novi saepe fuisse procos.
Pulchra Laertiaden iterumque iterumque Calypso
Heu precibus cassis usque manner rogat.
Dardanium juvenem sitiebat Punica Dido;
Cynthia cum labiis Endymiona petit.
Et licet agrestem (modo vati credis) Adonin
Idaliam dicunt saepe procasse Deam.
Quanta sit Idalia expendas, and Cynthia quanta,
Sunt utraeque Deae; fac imetere Deas.
Tu tamen haud procus es, velut hae; sed and ipsa procaris.
Solus ago, solum tu patiare velim.
Sis procul a fastu, neve assimilere Sabinis;
At faciles aures tu perhibere velis.
Quid si vel nasus, vel frons mihi desit eburnea?
Murice nec Tyrio subrubuere genae?
Est color incertus, ne tu confide colori;
Decipitur pulchro Graia puella viro.
Pelle licet tenebrae dominantur, Lux tamen intus;
Vileo si membris, splendeo mente tenus.
Quid licet harmonico careant mea membra tenore?
Et male concinnus quilibet artus erit?
At Caro pinguescit, mihi sunt and mollia crura;
Suraque suppetiit semivieta mihi.
Squalidus est oculo, digitis arridet obesus;
Quod forma minus est, hoc mihi supplet adeps.
Millibus ex multis (experto creed) puellis,
Gaudia quae mihi fert plurima, pinguis erat.
Hoc est in causa, quod nunc (uxore relicta)
Nostri festinant ad tua rura pedes.
Nempe voluptatis nihilum mihi frigida conjux
Suppeditat, pene est iste senilis ager.
Mandamus tritis semen sine foenore sulcis;
Nullaque tondetur falcibus inde seges.
Sed tuus (o utinam!) pariat mihi gramina Campus,
Viderunt agri vix tria lustra Tui.
Aetas non unquam retro retro-acta vocatur;
Florem, dum florem, Carpo (Corinna) tuum.
Qua^docunque tamen nos conveniemus in unum,
Corpore molliculo fac sine Test fruar.
Non quasi castratus spado, sic sine Testibus essem,
Sed quia lascivum nolo patere torum.
Secretisque jocis fac alta sllentia praestes;
Quum placidum nobis hoc peragetur opus.
Nam non Privatus, sed jam Res publica fio;
Et mihi vel Coecus quilibet, Argus erit.
Aptius idcirco cum prima crepuscula lucent,
Ad lectum veniam (blanda Corinna) tuum.
Et mihi furtivos aditus transenna fenestrae
Astruet, a dextra qua patet uda palus.
Nuper enim cum nocte toro convenimus illo,
Infidae (memini) ter crepuere fores.
Tunc indoctus eram, nunc usu promptior exto;
Et magis assidue jam taciturnus ero.
Neve tuus videat Genitor, Custodibus (etsi
Carceris insontem) Parliamenta dabunt.
Mutuo tunc nobis aderit satis ampla voluptas;
Qua quoad eveniat, (Diva Corinna) Vale.
The ANSWER.
WHat, Latin Sir? why there is no man
That e're thought you an English Roman.
Your father horse could teach you none,
Nor was it e're your mother tongue.
Your education too assures
Me, that your Poem is not yours.
Besides, I thought you did detest
The language of the Latin beast.
But now your impudence I see
Did hereby show it is modesty.
Each syllable would blush, you thought,
If it had been plain English taught.
And that your foul debauched stuff
Might do its errant fast enough,
Forsooth your wisdom thought it meet
That words might run, to give 'me feet.
Pardon me, Sir; I me none of those
That love Love-Verse, give me your Prose.
I wish each Verse to make delay,
Had turned lame Scazon by the way.
I read a Hell in every line
Of your polluted fescennine.
Your Verses stunck; to keep 'em sweet
You should have put socks on their feet.
And that the Answer which I shall
Now write, may be methodicall.
I Will briefly make ('it is not amiss)
An Anacephalaeosis.
And first I looked for Nestor, when
Mere Cupid trickl'd from your pen.
Who was your father, you make proof
By your Coult's tooth, though not your hoof.
She that was great with you, you hold
Did not lie in, but was with fold.
I wonder one so old, so grave,
Should yet such youth, such lightness have.
Of the five Members, you alone
Shall be esteemed the Privy one.
Who (like the Gnostics) preach; your Text
Increase and multiply; and next
Convincing Doctrines you deduce,
Put out the lights, and so make Use.
You say I am a maid exceeding
Apt to be taught by you good breeding.
But where there is breeding, it is said,
There Is none, unless a broken maid.
Turn Papist (stallion,) they will dispense
With whoredom by an Indulgence.
Turn Friar, that thou may be free
At once with a whole Nunnery.
There 'twill be virtue to ride on
The Purple Whore of Babylon.
Thou may as soon be Turk, as King;
And that, o that is the Tempting thing.
Then thou may glut thy appetite
With a Seraglio of delight.
I am no Proserpine, that thus
I should desire an Incubus.
But you must Vote (if me you will win)
No Fornication to be Sin.
You say the House takes it not well,
The King against Rebels should rebel;
And that is the reason why you stand
To be Dictator of the Land.
Which moved me to a mighty toil
Of getting Vardigrease and Oil;
'Cause such Itch Medicine is a thing
That Is fittest to anoint you King.
You say youl'd undergo and do
Wonders, would I undergo you.
For my sake you would Cobbler play,
Your Trade should be to underlay.
For me you'de spend your chiefest blood;
Pray spend it on the Sisterhood.
You wish to die in those great fights
Of Venus, where each wound delights.
And should I once to Heav'en take wing,
You Would follow me though in a string.
Thank you (good Sir) it is our will
You your last promise do fulfill.
There Is nothing spoke that pleases us
Like your [In funes sedulus.]
Next come those idle twittle twats,
Which call me many God-know's what is:
As hallowed, beautiful, and fair,
Supple, and kind, and Debonaire.
You talk of women that did woo;
When I am mad, I Will do so too.
Then that my father may not spy
The coupleing of you and I,
He shall be guiltlesly detected
As a true Subject, ill-affected:
And so the Protestant shall lie
In Jail for fear of Popery.
[From hence it is that every Town
Almost is now a Prison grown,
Where Loyalty lies fettered; then
You do commit more Sins, then Men.]
But those your words I have thought best
Should punished be, by being press't.
And that this body Politic
May then be well, which lye's now sick;
May the Greek P, that fatal Tree.
This Spring bear all such fruit as thee.
FINIS.

