A LETTER Sent from A worthy Divine, To the Right Honorable, The Lord Mayor of
the City of LONDON.

Being a true Relation of the battle fought between His Majesty, and his
Excellence The Earl of ESSEX.

From Warwick Castle the 24. of October 1642. at two a clock in the morning.

Together with a Prayer for the happy uniting of the King and Parliament, fit
to be used by all good Christians, daily in their houses.

LONDON, October. 27. Printed for Robert Wood.

1642.

A LETTER SENT FROM A Worthy Divine, to the Right Honorable the Lord Major of
the City of LONDON.
SIR,
YEsterday, being the Lords day, His Excellency intending to march from Kinton
a little Village in Warwickshire, toward Banbury to relieve it, unexpectedly
an Alarm came about eight a clock in the morning, that the Enemy was advancing
within two or three miles, which accordingly proved so; and it pleased God to
make my self the first Instrument of giving a certain discovery of it, by the
help of a prospective Glass from the top of an Hill, when the two Armies were
drawn into Battalia; about two a clock in the afternoon, a very sore and fierce
Battle began, which continued about four hours in mine own sight and hearing,
much blood was shed, and a gallant spirit expressed by our Infantry, even to
such a degree of Valiantness, as may crown every common soldier with the
honor of a Commander. But the left Wing of our Horse being charged by the
Kings right Wing, was suddenly put to flight, so that the right Wing in which
your Son was placed, did the best service for the Cheualty. Where your Son is
(or any of the rest of my Lords Guard) I know not, I hope they are safe,
because upon diligent enquiry, I yet hear no hurt of any of them. However; if
you have consecrated a Son to so Noble a Service, I doubt not but you will
endeavor to bear it cheerfully, if you should hear that he is either slain or
wounded. We have lost none of our Commanders (as we can yet understand) except
Colonel Charles Essex, and Sir James Ramsey, who is either killed or taken; We
have taken Prisoners from the Kings side, the Lord of Lindsey General of the
Field, with his Son Colonel Vavasor, who was Commander of the Kings Guard and
Standard, which likewise we have taken: As also Colonel Lunsfords, who are now
both at Wirwick Castle, we did beat the enemy out of the Field, and gained four
peeof Ordnance. This morning it is expected that 3. or 4. fresh Regiments on
our side, as namely Colonel Hampdens, Colonel Granthams, Colonel Barkhams,
and the Lord Rochfords Regiments should join with the rest. The residue of our
Army to fall on the remainder of the Kings Forces, hoping for as glorious
success as before. Colonel Vavasor assures us, that the King himself for some
time was in the Army, we hear no certainty yet concerning Prince Rupert, some
say he is slain. A few of our Wagons were burned and plundered by the Enemy,
who wheeled about into our Rere, but our Musketeers played bravely upon them
in the mean time, and recovered our Wagons again, and six pieces of Ordnance
which we had lost, our Enemy had the wind more with them, but we had more of
the Hill, we had but twelve Regiments in the Field, about fifty troops of Horse
(I think) at the most, and some 2. Regim. of Dragoons. His Excel. maintained
the fight most gallantly. And our Noble Lords, as the L. Wharton, Willoughty of
Parham, Roberts, etc. did as bravely. All this has God enabled our Army to
perform, though from wedensday till this moment of my writing, the
Commonsoldiers have not come into a bed, but lodged in the open field, in the
wet and cold nights, and most of them scarce eat or drank at all for 24. hours
together, nay, I may say for 48. except fresh water where they could get it;
Mr. Ash was marvellously preserved from the cruelty of four Cavaleers which set
upon him, one of them cut off his hat and raised his hair with his sword, but
never touched his skin, God has brought most of our Ministers this night to
Warwick, Mr. Ash amongst the rest, and Mr. Marshall, whose danger was no less:
For my own part, after I had discharged my duty as far as I was enabled, by
passing from Regiment to Regiment, and Troop to Troop to encourage them, at the
latter end of the fight, not knowing what the issue of things might be, in the
darksome Evening; while it was yet light, I rid to Warwick amongst hundreds of
drawn swords, and yet was saved from the least touch of a blood thirsty hand.
The Cavaleers some of them pursuing our Horsemen, which as I said before,
forsook their ground in the left Wing of the Army, and fled to Warwick. Thus
much I made bold to enform your Honor, that you may be able to speak
confidently, and stop the mouth of false rumors: You shall do me a favor if
you please to let my noble friend Sergeant-Major Skippon read this Letter,
because it is news proper for his element; I desire Mr. Case (next to my
humble respect to your good Lady) may know that I love him and his. If you
shall think it fit to print this Relation, perhaps it may be useful, if done
speedily: You need not doubt of the truth of any part of it.

Vale,
A Prayer for the King and Parliament, fit to be used by all good Christians
daily in their Houses.
O God, the great Protector and guider of all Kings and Kiugdomes, mercifully
look with thy favonrable eyes of mercy, upon this distressed Kingdom, and so
inspire the heart of our Royal King Charles, whom thou have called to the
state and government of this Kingdom, and who through thy mercy, has taken
upon him the same, that he may effect all things to the honor and glory of thy
name, and that he may receive the increase of all virtues, wherewith being
decently adorned, he may both be able to avoid the monstrousness of vices, as
also to come unto thee right gracious: and grant O merciful God, that there
may be a true peace, and unity between Him and His Parliament and that thou O
God, so inspire him with thy holy spirit, that he may hearken to his
Parliament, and be ruled by them in all things that may be for the good of His
sacred Person? and for His whole Kingdom; and with the same holy spirit so
inspire the hearts of this Parliament, whom it bath pleased thee to call
together from several parts of this Kingdom, for the general good of the
same, that they may do nothing but what may be to thy honor and glory, and
that they may grow and persever in all manner of virtue, setting all things in
due order for the good of the kingdom; and that thy true Religion may here
again be thoroughly settled amongst all men: Thou would O God that none should
perish, favorably look upon the souls deceived by divelish deceit of
heretical Popish Sectaries and impiety, and remove from their hearts all such
foulness, that they may be united to thy holy Church; and that all manner of
wars or diffentions amongst thy people may be purged, and that thy servants
earnestly craving thy mercy, the cruelty of their enemies be dispersed, thy
Church truly settled, our king and Parliament faithfully united, we may evermore
praise thee with inceasant thankfulness, who live and raignest one true and
living God, world without end, Amen.

Laus Deo in aeternum.

FINIS.

