A LETTER OUT OF HOLLAND, Dated April 30. STILO NOVA, Wherein is shown the
Desperate and Distracted Condition of those COUNTRIES and PEOPLE.

WITH A PROPHECY enclosed, Made by one of their own Astrologers; Who Predicts
many Strange and Wonderful Things that will happen amongst The STATES OF THE
UNITED PROVINCES.

London, Printed by J. C. for R. Robinson, near Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn, 1672.

A LETTER Out of HOLLAND, Dated April 30. Stilo Nova.
SIR;
I Have endeavored, according to my promise, and your desire, to give an
Account (in some kind) of the present Constitution of this Country and People,
and what happened since you left this place: You having so well informed your
self of things before, as it will be in me but a vain repetition to speak of
what you know and understand better then by any new Relation that I can give.
Here are great and heavy Taxes laid upon all conditions of men, especially the
poor peoples Industry and Labors, which has caused many in a sad and
lamentable manner to Petition the Lords for a Relief and Ease from these
Unsupportable Burdens; but can have no other Redress, then that they must
endure all. I must confess the necessity of this War, and the present danger of
this Country, require more then our Abilities can supply; notwi^hstanding the
vain Reports of our great Banks and rich Treasures we endeavor to cheat the
World with, only as a Political means to draw in Seamen and Soldiers to fight
for the Injustice of a War brought justly upon our selves by our Infidelity and
Ingratitude.

All our seem^ng Encouragements, and large proffers of Pay, on purpose to
animate our own people to take up Arms, will not do; but on the contrary,
finds so great an unwillingness and coldness in the affections and hearts of
our Subjects, as we already begin to despair of a good Success, and fear a
Revolution within our selves, that may cause such a Subversion, as will either
bring us to a Confession of our Crimes, or under the Subjection of the King of
Great Britain.

It is not possible for us to hold out long, if this War continue* I am well
assured, that the Consequences of our Animosities, and Intestine Troubles, must
needs be dangerous to this Country; and that little hope we have left, solely
depends upon the Good or Bad Event of the first Sea Fight: If we are beaten,
our own people will make way for a further Conquest, and by our Civil
Dissentions open a Gap to let in a Foreign Enemy.

Sir; I have sent enclosed a Prophecy of one of our own Astrologers, which
adds not a little to our present Troubles: It has not been publicly made
known, for fear of the Authors prejudice. I have, as near as I could, rendered
it English verbatim to the Original: The knowledge you have in that Science, is
better able to judge of the Order of the Heavens then I am, and so give a more
Judicial Account of their Effects.

I desire you would be pleased to assist me in the securing and settling of my
Estate with you: I am resolved to put my self under the protection of your
Great and Generous Prince, and to render my self one of his Faithful and
Obedient Subjects. I am not of this Opinion alone, but many more of my own
Countrymen; and would gladly, if they could get their Estates into England,
live under your Government. Perhaps some may wonder why we are thus so
unnatural to our Country: we must tell them, that the Injustice of our Great
Statesmen does not only set our Estates and Consciences upon the Rack, but
makes our Country so unnatural to us, that we are no longer able to dispense
with this Irregularity, but will rather submit our selves to a Just, though
Foreign Prince: And that we hope, by this means, to expiate for that part of
our Ingratitude we have been ignorantly guilty of, by living honestly under Him
who has offered us Protection.

The Prophecy.
THat the Planets and Fixed Stars have an Influence upon all Sublunary Bodies,
is a general Approved Truth; and opposed by none, but such as are Ignorant of
their various and Mysterious Motions: But that these Influences are Coercive,
or have in them an Inevitable Fate, I dare not Assert; Nam Astra inclinant, sed
non Cogunt And though it is true, that the Almighty Creator does many times
signify Future Events (by these His Creatures) upon Kingdoms and States; yet
as true is Deus Astra Regit: For which cause I could have wished, that these my
Predictions might have com'd to a more Public View; that so foreseeing the
Danger, we might have endeavored to prevent it. But I durst not be too bold in
its Open Publication, but only Communicate it to some Private Trusty Friends.

In the year 1654. January 16. happened an Opposition of the two Superior
Planets, Saturn and Jupiter, Saturn being 24 Degrees and 43 Minutes in Leo, and
Retrograde; Jupiter being in Aquarius 24-43, where I begun my Observations.

My second Observation was January 15. 1671/2, Saturn in 17 Degrees of Pisces,
and Jupiter in 17 of Virgo Retrograde.

My third and last Observation was upon the Suns Ingress into Aries, the 9th of
March following: The positure of the Heavens, at that instant, seeming to
accomplish what the other two malevolent Aspects did threaten upon these
places; Viz near the Maze, the Texel, and particularly the Province of Zealand;
in the year 1672.

That near the Maze shall be great Effusion of Blood, that a Foreign Fleet
shall appear, and not only stop the Trade of these parts, but threatens us with
Great and Imminent Dangers. Some Great Persons shall be in danger of loosing
their Heads; the Common People shall rise in a Tumultuous manner; and threaten
the Ruin of some States men: It will be likely to fall heavy upon one Ancient
Person, and he will be much troubled to quell their Fury, though it be with the
hazard of his own Life; notwithstanding, the People will not be so satisfied,
until they Drink his Blood, or he Banish himself for the expiation of those
Evils they imagine him to be Guilty of.

The Texel seems to be threatened with Fire, and Fights both by Sea and Land.

Amsterdam will have a great share in these Troubles, and appear to be most
sensible, when they shall find a want of Provision will be the cause of a
great Mortality, not only there, but the Country round about. If they should
chance to escape this, it will fall with greater violence upon some other part
of their Provinces, which will be of as great consequence toward their Ruin,
as if immediately on themselves.

Zealand must have its share, and to be feared, most of all: Their Great
Preparations will be to little purpose; and if they hold out for a time, it
will be well, so they make good Conditions. Inundations of Seas, and Eruption
of Banks, will add much to their Miserable Condition; and, e're it be long,
shall be Subject to a Prince, whose Government shall be more Just then their
Own; and shall live (if they be truly obedient) with far greater satisfaction,
though at first somewhat strange; and fewer Taxes, then heretofore they have
done.

Religion here will be most safe; and though she lapse for a while, yet will
quickly recover of her Distemper, and Shine with as clear a Light of Truth, as
ever.

That there shall be loss of Towns by a Land-Army, especially upon the
Frontiers of Brabant: Great Endeavors for the raising of Men for Sea and Land;
but will find greater Difficulties then they expect. Fears and Jealousies will
possess the Hearts of the Generality; that many will not only leave their
Habitations, but Fly their Country for their own Safety.

FINIS.

