A LETTER, Of a JESUIT OF LIEGE, Concerning the Method of Establishing the
CATHOLIC RELIGION, In the Kingdom of ENGLAND.
IT is to be admired with what affection the King prosecutes the affair of our
Society; greeting the whole College by the Reverend Father Provincial and
earnestly recommending himself to our prayers, most graciously admitted to him
Provincial Father Jo: Regnes returned again into England (the Dukes and Earls
being commanded to wait some hours for accession) whom he asked in the presence
of the Queen in a familiar manner, how many novices and how many scholars he
had, the Provincial answered of the later about 20 of the former above 50 he
repled that he should have need of double or treble the number to perform that
whith he designed for the Society and commanded that they should be well
exercised in preaching for he said that England did at this time want such. I
doubt not but you have heard of the Kings sending letters to Father de la
Chaise Confessor to the French King concerning the affair of the house of
wattenens in whith he affirmed that whatsoever was don by the English Fathers
of the Society might be imputed to him, Father Clare Rector of the same house,
acting in the same business at London found easy access to the King, and in
like manner easily obtained his desire; The King forbade him to kneell and kiss
his hand as the manner is, saying indeed your Reverence once kissed my hand,
but if I had then known as now I do that you were a Priest I would have rather
kneelled and kissed your Reverence. After the busniess was over, the King in a
familiar discourse told this Father he would either Convert England or dye a
Martyr and had rather dye to morrow with the conversion of it than Reign
happily and piously 50 years with out it; Then he calls himself a son of the
Society, in whose progress he said he rejoiced in as his own, and it is hard to
express how thankful he showed himself when he was told by the most Reverend.
N. that he was made a partaker of all the merits of the Society, out of whith
he declared his Confessor should be (who it is as yet is not known) some report
it to be the Reverend Father Provincial, whereof as yet there is no certainty.
Many think that an Archbishopprick, most a Cardinals Cap will be given Father
Edmond Petere who stands fairest in the Kings favor, to whom for a month or
two since, that part of the Royal Palace is given, together with the Royal
Chapel lately built, in whith the King whilst he was Duke of York did
usually reside; where you may every day see I know not how many Courtiers
waiting to speak with his Eminence, for it is said so they call him. The King
does very much make use of this man's Council and many of the Catholic Nobility,
who possess the Chief Offices in the Kingdom, to find out a way of promoting
the Faith without violence. Not long since certain of the Catholic Nobility
objected to the King that they thought he made too much have to establish the
Faith, to which he answered, I growing old must go forward speedily, otherwise
if I should fortune to dye perhaps I should leave you in a worse condition than
I found you, they replied why then was he so unconcerned in the Conversion of
the daughters and heirs of the Kingdom he answered God will provide an heir,
leave my daughters tome to be converted, you bring your own slaves and others
to the faith by your exemple. In many Countys he has made the Catholics chief
and in a short time we shall have Justices of the peace as they call them in
almost all places we hope the affair at Oxford will succeed well, one of our
Divines always remains therein a publik Catholic Chapel of the Vice
chancellor, who has converted some students. The Bishop of Oxford himself seems
to favor the Catholic cause very much, he proposed in Council whether it was
not expedient, that one College in Oxford at the least should be granted to the
Catholics, that they may not be compelled to study beyond the seas at such vast
expenses, but what answer was given is yet unknown. Two of our party together
with other nobles being invited to a Feast the same Bishop drank the Kings
health to a certain heretical Baron there present, wishing him a happy
success in all his affairs, and added that the protestant Religion in England
seemed to him to be in little better condition than Buda was before was
attacked, and those who defended it were in a manner mere Atheists. Many do
embrace the faith, and lately five of the chief Earls have publikly professed
it. The Reverend Father Alex. Regnes or Provincial, to whom is committed the
care of the Chapel of the most serene Elector Palatines Ambassador, employs
his whole time in resolving and satisfying the questions of heretics doubting
in their Religion, who you may see walking before the door of the Chapel, by
two's and threes, controverting amongst themselves some thing concerning the
Faith. We are uncertain that Prince George, professes the Faith, our abode in
England having been so short. We teach the best sort of morallity at Lincoln,
Norwich and York; at Warwick we have a public Chapel defended from all Injury
by the Kings Soldiers. We have also bought a house in the City of Worchester.
In the Country of Lancaster the Catholic cause flourishes much, in some of
the new Catholic Churches on Sundays above 1500 are numbered to be present at
Sermon; at London the cause does not go forward worse, many Chapels are so
frequented by the people on Sundays, for Divine Worship, that many of them are
not big enough two of ours Darmes and Berfal constantly say Mass in the
presence of the King and Queen, Father Edmond Newil before the Queen Dowager,
Father Alex. Regnes in the Ambassadors Chapel above mentioned others in other
places; for the Chieff London College there are several Houses bought in the
Savoy, as they call it, near Somerset House the Queen Dowagers Palace for about
eighteen thousand livers; in reducing of which into the form of a College
they labor very hard, that the Schools may be opened before Easter. In a
short time a Catholic Viceroy is to go into Ireland, no other will satisfy the
Kings will, to establish the Catholic cause there; for certain the Parliament
will meet at London in the Month of February, from whom the King is resolved to
require three things, 1. that by a general vote the Catholic Lords shall be
admitted into the Upper-house. 2. That the Oath or Test be annulled. 3. Which
is the chief, that all penal Laws, made against the Catholics be repealed,
which, that he might the more securely obtain', he desires it to be signified
to all, that he is certainly resolved to put all those out of their
employments, who will not act strenuousely for those things, besides a
dissolution of the Parliament.
At which resolution some Heretics being affrighted, came to a certain Earl to
be advised what to do, to whom, said he, the Kings will is sufficiently known
to us, what he once says, he will certainly do, if you love your selves, you
ought to submit to his will. There are great preparations for a War at London,
and a great Navy is to be ready against whom is uncertain. The Dutch are
jealous, wherefore they begin to arm. Time will show more.

Liege 2. Febr. 1687.

