A LETTER TO A MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT.

WITH TWO DISCOURSES Enclosed in it.

I. The One showing the Reason why a Law should pass to punish Adultery with
Death.

II. The Other showing the Reasons why the Writ, De Haeretico Comburendo,
should be abolished.

Non partis studijs agimur, sed sumsimus arma
Consilijs inimica tuis, ignavia fallax.
Printed Anno 1675.

The Publisher's Advertisement:
These Papers are made public, not in Presumption to inform the Parliament;
but only to give them an Occasion, to think of the Subjects they treat of, it
being wholely unimaginable but that the United Wisdom of the NATION will find
out better and other Reasons for the Establishment of the Things they propose.

My Dear Friend.
WHen I review alone the grand Entertainments of Learning, I used to meet with
in your Conversation, the Wit of the Poets, the Reason of the Philosophers,
your Excellent Observations upon the Actions of Persons illustrious in Arms,
who have lived in the several Ages of the World, my Affliction is almost
unimaginable to be separated from you: When you went up to the Parliament,
there is nothing could have stayed me (who can scarce be happy a Moment of my
Life without you) behind you in the Country, but my Infirmity of Health, and a
certain Desire of enjoying the Comfort and Pleasures of the Spring. You know,
when we parted, how I conjured you always to bear in Mind that grand Rule,
Inter pericula libertatis aut veritatis silent amicitiae et inimicitiae, and
then the Light of your own Mind will dispel and overcome the Darkness of others
without Noise or Tumult: This World is governed by particular Hatreds and
Friendships, not by the Reasons of Things; and there is nothing can keep you
constant in your Integrity, but the having a perpetual Eye to that Rule. I also
then told you, you should look abroad as well as at home, keeping your Eye on
Foreign Affairs; for although Hannibal be not yet ad portas, Philip is at
Olynthus. I have herein enclosed the Papers I promised you, in which I claim no
Property against your absolute Power over them, do what you will with them: You
know, the one contains a Discourse showing the Reasons why Adultery should be
Punished with Death; the other, why the Writ, De Haeretico comburendo, should
be Abolished. Adultery, it is the greatest of all Thefts, a Theft of which no
Restitution can be made, -- Nulla reparabilis art,
Laesa pudicitia est, deperit illa semel.


Marriage of late has been looked on as an Engine, a Toil to cath Mankind in;
the Magistrate had need encourage it to prevent Depopulations: and to be
always secure and certain of our Wives, is in my Judgment the best of
Encouragements. As to the Abolishing the Writ, de Haeretico comburendo, you
know I ever have had a Pity and Charity for Mankind, acknowledging in all a
Communion of Minds and Mortality, and particularly for those that dissent from
me in Religion, Omnis animus veritate invitus privatur: No Beauty is so
pleasant, so agreeable to the Eye as Truth is to the Soul; and all would love
it, if they could discover it: As there is but one certain Existence of Things,
so there is but one determinate Truth of them, the same to all Understandings,
God's and Man's both. If after all my Search and Labor in Knowledge, I cannot
discover a Beam of Truth to guide and lead me into an Unity of Mind with God,
am I to be made a Criminal, and dealt with as a Malefactor? He is Infinite, and
knows all Things; but my poor Understanding knows one Thing, and doubts of a
Thousand: We are here in the Body tristi et obscuro Domicilio; and the inspired
Apostle himself says, we see darkly, and but through a Glass. God has
unfolded himself in as great Variety in the Minds of Men, as he has done in
the Material World: The Seed of Religion springs up variously in Human Souls,
as we see the seminal Forms do out of the Earth; and would it not be Madness or
Folly to destroy and cut up all Trees and Plants but the Oak? I am not without
all Jealousy, that it is possible, we in England may return back again to the
Church of Rome, not only because I see in History Monarchies more subject to
Changes then Commonwealths in Matters of Religion, and observe how
indefatigable that Infallible Church (in its own Judgment) is to revenge our
Schism from it upon us, and so may weary us out at last, and how unsafe they
apprehend themselves at Rome, while the Power of the Sea is in the Hands of
Heretics; but chiefly from the wild Philosophy and Atheism of the present Age,
Atheism being a Preparation to receive any Color or Tincture in Religion. I
would have the Law of Burning of Heretics repealed, lest we should see that
Day. It is a Law Sanguinary with a Witness, written like Draco' s in Characters
of Blood, as barbarous as that of Ordeal, or Trial by Battle, built upon no
Reason, but upon a Self Opinion every Sect has, that it has a Monopoly of God
to it self, and upon no Scripture I know of, but the Monkish Gloss, Haereticos
de vita.

My Dear Friend, Although Gentlemen of fine Parts are sooner debauched in
popular Assemblies under a Monarchy, then Men of plainer Wisdom; as Native
Beauty is less subject to be tempted by others, then Beauty accompanied with
the Ornaments of Art: I doubt not at all your Integrity in this Parliament, you
are not a Man of fluttering Principles betwixt Kravery and Honesty, you will
herd in your Vote with no Cabal, but go with the Squadron volante, as Reason
upon every Debate appears to you; I know you account a Liberty of Judgment in
an uninterested indifference of Mind without Fears or Hopes, a Grandeur and
Excellence above the Rewards of Wealth from the Court, or of Fame from the
People; nor am I afraid that amidst the Pleasure or Business of the City, you
will depart from the Contemplative Life, but be alone with your own Mind, and
drink of the Spring of Truth there, which overflowed so constantly your
Conversations with me in the Country: Non Venus, aut vinum sublimia pectora
fregit,
Officiumve fori --


And, as for our Friendship, which has been a Communion of Minds and Fortunes
for several Years, I have no Cloud, no Umbrage of Jealousy toward you.
Friends in this World are not like Satyrs or Centaurs without real Existence,
as Cardan under a Mel ncholy complains they are; I am sure I have found one
which (as he says) he never was so happy in his Life to do. I will detain you
no longer from the Care of the public Affa^rs. I am Dearest Sr

April 17. 1675. Your most sincerely affectionate Friend.

A short Discourse why a Law should pass in England to punish Adultery with
Death.
Publicus assertor, vitiis suppressa levabo
Pectora, vindictae quisque favete suae.
Ovid.
IT will be necessary before I give my Reasons why such a Law should pass, that
I do explain what Adultery is, the Notion of it being ordinarllly mistaken.

Adultery is the lying of a Single or Married Man with another Man's Wife, and
not the lying of a Married Man with a Single Woman. Thus it was constantly
apprehended among the Jews, to whom God gave the Law, Thou shall not commit
Adultery: And David's Sin was the taking the poor Man's Ewe Lamb from him,
which lay in his Bosom, when he had Flocks enough of his own. I presume, there
is none doubts the Christian Magistrates Power to make such a Law; Death is
already amongst us the Penalty for less Crimes: We punish boldly with Death a
Horse-stealer or a Cutpurse without any Scruple at all; and is not my Property
in my Wife of dearer and nearer Concern to me, then my Horse, or a little
Pocket-money?

The primary Law of Nature is the Observance of our Contracts; for indeed,
without this there could be no Government: the State of Nature would still have
continued; this Crime intrenches highly on this Law, dissolving the
Family-Government; it is a Breach of the Solemnest Contract (entered into pro
bono publico, Marriage being seminarium Reipubl.) imaginable: That is the
Nature of the Crime, but the Magistrate is chiefly to concern himself in the
Consequences of it; and they are more mischievous where the Woman breaks the
Contract on her Part; for thereby a Spurious Issue that robs the Husband by
wholesale of his Estate, of all his own and his Ancestors Acquisitions, is
brought into his Family. The Crime is then a Complication of all the Wickedness
in Lust, Breach of Faith and Robbery; And therefore I may justly infer that
seeing Men equally concur with Women to transact it, they are justly equally
punishable.

If a Man shall violate the Companion of the King, or the Companion of the
Eldest Son and Heir of the King, it is high Treason: by this we see the Care of
the Law, no Spurious Issue should inherit the Crown; should we not take some
proportionable Care of our own Estates?

We may do well to reflect upon the Example of other Nations, as of the Jews
(for many Ages the only known People of God) amongst whom Adultery was punished
with Death, upon the Example of the Gentes moratiores among the Heathens; of
the Athenians, who upon Solon's Law punished this Crime Capitally; of the
Romans, who in Imitation of Solon's Law, set down for their Law in the 12
Tables, Moechum in adulterio deprehensum necato. Afterward in the Roman State
it was lawful for the Husband, until the Lex Iulia in Augustus his Time, Uxores
in adulterio deprehensas sine judicio impune necare.

We may also consider what the Christian Church has done for the Suppression of
this Sin: In the first and best Times of Christianity they did all they could
(having not jus vitae ac necis) against it. The Penance then for it was
perpetual to the Hour of Death. Zepherynus Bishop of Rome, anno 216. moderated
the Penance, but the African Churches, and particularly the grand Tertullian
opposed it as an Innovation.

The Ancyran Council, anno 315. ordains 7 Years Penance for it. And the
Council of Eliberis ordains, that he that commits Adultery again after Penance
for the First Fault, should not be taken into Communion at the Hour of Death.

In after Ages, when the Roman Church was resolved upon a Corlibacy in her
Clergy, It was necessary the Sin should be looked on with a gentle Eye, and now
it is dwindled down into a Peccadillo, but is in Truth like the Pecadillo of
not believing in God at all; for if ever he gave a Law to Man, it is one to
prohibit Adultery. Several of the Reformed Countries, who have recovered
themselves from under the Empire of Wit and Fraud over their Consciences by
that Church, punish the Crime at this Day with Death.

As for us in England, our present Law is not without the Infusions of the
Roman Church upon it in this Case; all the Remedy the injured Husband has by
our Law, is, to sue a Divorce in the Spiritual Court, and be cozened with a
Sentence of Separation a Mensa and Thoro, a Crafty Invention against the plain
Gospel.

If the Husband kill the Adulterer, or his Wife found by him in ipso actu, the
Law excuses him in this Case from Murder, but condemns him of Manslaughter,
and hangs him if he cannot read; what a poor Remedy has the Injured Man? If he
kill the Adulterer deliberately, not provoakt by Ocular Demonstration, it is
Murder. Besides all this, the present Law being so defective, the Crime grows
upon it; it is common, and this Age gives it the soft and gentle French Names of
Gallantry and Divertisement, in Apology for it: What ought the Magistrate to do
in this Case, but to pursue this Crime as far as his Hand can reach, to the
Grave it self, and then Expectet Deum Ultorem?

A short Discourse showing the Reasons why the Writ, De Haeretico comburendo
should be abolished.
Chrysippus non dicit idem nec mite Thaletis
Ingenium dulcique senex vicinus Hymeto.
Juvenal. Paena errantis est doceri. Plato cited by Grotius.
BEfore I give my Reasons, it will be necessary to show the State of the Law at
present upon this Writ: Before the Sta^^te, 2 H. 4. cap. 15. No Person could be
convict of Heresy, but by the Archbishop and all the Clergy of the Province,
but by that Statute any particular Bishop might in his Diocese convict of
Heresy, and issue forth his Precept to the Sheriff to burn the Person he had
convicted; a Law whereby the Clergy gained a Dominion over the Lives of the
Subjects independent upon the Crown: it was repealed by the Stat. 25. H. 8.
cap. 14. but so as particular Bishops may still convict; but without the Kings
Writ, De Haeretico comburendo, first obtained, no Person convict can be put to
Death; and so the Law stands at this Day.

My REASONS are these.
I. The Continuance of this Writ in force amongst us, is a standing Reproach to
the Christian Religion we profess (a Religion of Love and Peace) If it be not
to be propagated in the whole by Force and Bloodshed, certainly a Part of it as
a particular Point of Faith in it, is not. In the Gospel of Christ all the
Punishment of Heresy and of Infidelity it self, are adjourned over, and left
to the other World.

II. If an Act pass to abolish this Writ, it will be an Act of Indulgence in
part, and give an Assurance to all Persons of a different Judgment from the
present established Church, that they are secure as to their Lives under the
Government.

III. If Popery should ever return back into England, there must a Parliament
sit to repeal such an Act, before any Protestant for his Opinion could be put
to Death.

IV. Such an Act would leave the Power of the present Church to convict,
excommunicate and imprison Untouched* only would take away their barbarous
Execution of her Sentence.

If it be objected, the Writ is grown Obsolete and disused and so need not be
taken away: The Answer is obvious; Not so obsolete neither: It was used in King
James's Time; However, it is fit it should not remain as a Snare among our Law;
for the Case concerns Life or Death: and the Papists use the Writ constantly
against the Protestants; but they never against them.

FINIS.

