A LETTER Humbly Offered To the Consideration of all Gentlemen, Yeomen,
Citizens, Freeholders, etc.

THAT Have Right to Elect Members to serve in PARLIAMENT.

Keep not back Council ( says Ecclesiasticus) when it may do Good.

Take Council of thine Heart (says the Book of Wisdom) for there is none more
faithful unto thee than it.

Consularius nemo melior quam Tempus.

LONDON, Printed for E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall, Anno Dom. MDCXCVI.

A LETTER Humbly offered to the Consideration of all Gentlemen, Yeomen,
Citizens, Freeholders, etc.
Gentlemen,
You are the Persons I have made choice to Address, without other Design than
the service of my King and Country; and shall therefore request no farther
favor, than if you think it not for the Honor, Interest and Safety of your
selves and Government, to comply with what is Humbly offered, then to Reject it,
and enjoy your own Opinions.

It Is matter of Truth, too well known to you all, what general Repining and
Complaints, have long been amongst you, at the decay, and almost total loss of
your Trade, your scarcity of Money, the bad Credit of your Bills, abroad and at
Home; the ill payment of your Rents, and the dull prospect in view of being
better; the Cause of which (with almost universal consent) has been laid on
those worthy Gentlemen, your Representatives in Parliament; not considering how
much ye have contributed to your own Misfortunes, nor how nighly it concerns ye
(especially in matters of so great moment, wherein the Happiness or Ruin of you
and your posterity must inevitably follow,) to apply your selves to, and advise
with your respective Representatives; for it is taken pro Confesso, they
represent what ye would have them to Represent; for they are your Mouths, as
Aaron was to Moses, but if ye are silent, how can they Divine to please ye?
Their Act and Deed becomes yours, which by the Laws of God and Man, ye are
bound to observe: Therefore, when ever you are deceived in your Expectations,
the blame must be your own, and not those worthy Persons that Represent ye; for
it is humbly supposed that it is not, was, or ever will be believed, but the
Body Corporate, can as well Judge what their true Interest, and real Wants and
Grievances are, as the Members thereof, howsoever qualified: Nor can ye believe
by virtue of your Choice, that ye remove Men into the Infallible Chair, or that
ye can Metamorphise a Schoolboy into a Statesman, or a Lawyer into an Honest
Man: No, Dear Country Men, believe me, they are the very same they were before,
and differ nothing from your selves, but the Honor ye do them to serve for ye
in Parliament.

It Is now presumed the Eyes of the whole Nation are opened, and no longer to be
imposed on by the Sophistry of Dr. Lock, nor the Author of, Decus and Tutamen;
nor the rest of that Fraternity, however Dignified or Distinguished: Qui Nigrum
in Candida vertunt, who still are pursuing the Mischievous Contrivance they
have laid, with a Cunning, excelling the most refined Politics of the Jesuits,
industriously insinuating the Dishonor and Loss, the Advance of our Coin would
be to all' degrees of Men in general: And this has been glibly Swallowed, and
gone down like Sugarplums that enclose a deadly Poison, without perceiving the
Snake and the cunning Fallacy of their Assertions, has unfortunately Influenced
too many worthy Gentlemen, that notwithstanding are sincere Lovers of his
Majesty and Government, whose Eyes it is hoped Experience has unLOCKt.

It Is not doubted but there may be more Phylosophical and Logical Arguments,
offered to your Members this Session in Parliament, to strengthen and confirm
them in their former Judgment: There Is the aforesaid Decus and Tutamen ready
Trumpt up, and two Letters to Mr. Lock, about the advance on Money; and it may
be, several others on the Stocks: these rub one another, and tell ye how much
the Nation is obliged to Dr. Lock for his excellent Advice, and would persuade
ye to believe it is the Honor, Safety and Welfare of the Kingdom, irrecoverably
to run in Debt, to lose their Credit Abroad and at Home, to starve your selves
for want of Money and Trade, excessively to raise the Interest of Money; and
consequently, lessen the Value of your Lands: and these are the real
Advantages, (whatever flourish they may put on the matter) Experience
demonstrates, has been the consequence of their pernicious Advice; and without
offense to that Gentleman be it spoken, he has done more Mischief by his Humane
Folly, (if it merit no worse Name) than Ten thousand Impressions of his Humane
Reason can Compensate: But it is not an easy Task to bring Men to own an Error
in Judgment though they know it.

Your selves, taught by your daily Experience in your respective ways of
Dealing, can better Judge what is for your own good, than all the Philosophers
in Europe, their Heads being generally filled with Notions and Matters, more
Speculative and Argumentative than either true or useful.

It seems to me little less than a Miracle, that any one should still presume
to say, the present weight and value of our Coin, has not been a great and
grievous loss and Misfortune to the Nation, and an unfortunate Disappointment
to those Great and Glorious Enterprises designed by his Majesty: Since the
Government has pleased to signify so much; for the Act of Parliament Prohibits
the Exportation of our Coin, on forfeiture of the whole Sum to his Majesty, and
inflicts Six Months Imprisonment on the Melters of it down; which plainly shows
the Melting and Exporting of our Coin, is known and believed to be
advantageous, or there needed not a Law to prevent it; for assuredly no Man
will do it to his loss nevertheless there are those, who with great confidence
affirm the contrary, and will tell ye, the carrying our Money Abroad, or that it
goes for more any where else, is a Romance, a mere Fancy and that nothing can
be got by it; though every one knows this to be notoriously false, and is like
Mr. Lock's affirming the advance on Silver, would not bring one Grain more into
the Kingdom; and with as good assurance he might have said, the rise of Gold
brought not one Guinea more into the Kingdom, nor the fall Carried one out: But
to convince these Gentlemen of their Mistake, the Government was further pleased
to take notice, that great Sums were daily exported, and that the aforsaid Act
did not prevent it; and therefore thought fit in Council 25 of June last, to
Order, viz. That whereas many evil disposed Persons, to make unreasonable and
unlawful Gains to themselves, do presume on Breach and Violation of the said
Laws, to export beyond the Seas, great Sums of the Gold and Silver Coins of
this Kingdom; which Practices, if not timely prevented, may occasion a great
Diminution of the Wealth of England: And for Encouragement, to Discover and
Seize all such Gold and Silver Coin as shall be put on Board any Ship or
Vessel, in order to be Exported, or in the keeping of any person passing out of
this Realm, there is the same Reward given to the Discoverers, as for the
discovery of Bullion Exported, contrary to Law: That is, to have one Moiety as
a Reward for their Diligence.

You plainly see it is evident beyond Contradiction, that our Gold and Silver
Coins are Exported; that the Exporters thereof make Great Unreasonable and
Unlawful Gain to themselves; which if not timely prevented, must daily more and
more Impoverish the Kingdom: So that the matter in Controversy now is, which
way to prevent it.

It Is humbly presumed this order of Council has proved as Ineffectual for
prevention of this Grievance, as the Act before mentioned: And should another
Act or Acts be made, That all Money discovered to be Exported, should be given
to the Discoverers, and the Exporters to be Hanged, or Boiled in Oil alive; or
any other Torment or Penalty, 'twould still be as Ineffectual as the former:
For as Dr. Lock wisely Observes, the true Liberty the Hollanders have of
Exporting their money, does not impoverish them; nor the severe Penalties the
Spaniards impose on those that Export their Coin, does not prevent their want
of Money: This is our Case, and plainly demonstrates the Folly and Fallacy of
the Dr. for neither can the Spaniard, nor we, or any other Nation, confine
their Money at Home by any law, when it is more advantageous to Export it:
Witness the French, Dutch, and other Nations that have plenty of Money amongst
themselves, because it is a loss to Export it; and 'twas the same with our Clipped
Money. Another Touch of the Doctors Fallacy is, That a piece of Wood or Cork
divided into 12 parts, will stop no bigger hole in a Boat if made into 18 or 24
parts: This is true, where there is but one hole to stop; but if the Dr. and
the Rest of that Tribe were to go a Voyage in that Boat, and had a piece of
Cork divided into 12 parts, and by their own Law to be Hanged if they cut it
into any more; and when they come to Sea, they find 24 holes in the Boat, would
they then Argue whether 'twere necessary to Cut the Cork into 24 parts or not?
But if they should, and in the mean time the Boat Sink; would not the World say
they had the just Reward of their own Folly? Though I am apt to believe they would
venture their Necks to save Drowning, and by good fortune, might escape
Hanging; though most men will judge they deserved it: Let them take the Moral as
they please. He farther tells ye, That if a Million of Bullion, Gold or Silver,
was yearly brought into the Kingdom, 'twould not Increase our Wealth: It Is
Right, for we had not a Year since a Million of Guinea's and more; but by his
good advice and assistance, the Nation is not now six pence the richer for them.

But to come to the Matter, it is most certain there are so many ways securely
to effect the Exporting of our Coin, that renders the Discovery thereof
Impossible. They can, and do pack it up in Bales of Cloth, Serge etc. and many
other sorts of Goods* They can melt it down with Lead, and Export it for Lead;
and several other ways there are, that should the Officers appointed to Inspect
those matters, see it; yet they cannot easily know it. Nay, I know ways how the
property of ten Thousand pounds worth of Gold and Silver for a small Charge may
be so altered, that scarcely one Goldsmith in a Thousand shall know what it is;
and were I not afraid of doing more harm than good, I would here discover it:
This Trick is too well known and practiced by the Jews, and other Dealers the
Exporters of our Coin, who for that purpose have a general Correspondence through
the World. Therefore since none of the aforesaid Methods do or can put a stop
to those pernicious practices of Melting and Exporting our Money, there remains
only one Expedient, viz. To make our Coin of such Value as they shall have no
advantage to do it, which will Infallibly answer the End, and requires not a
Law for its Prohibition.

It was not the Terror of Hanging, nor the Reward for the Discovery of
Clippers, that prevented one shilling from being Clipped, whilst any Advantage
could be made thereby; nor will the Penalty of Death secure your House, your
Goods, or Money, if you leave the Door open.

That the Gentlemen of the aforesaid Tribe may have some Color for their
designed Mistake, they tell ye, That the Advance of our Coin is only a new
Notion, a mere Chymaera, a fairy Treasure, and that no thing can be more
dishonorable and disadvantageous to the King and Kingdom, than to alter their
Ancient and Lawful standard Coin of England, as they call it; though the standard
Weight of our Silver Coin has been no less than Nine several times altered and
advanced since the 28 th of Ed. the First, when the Standard Fineness was the
same as now, and the Gold Coin has many more times been Advanced without any
Loss, or Dishonor to the King or Kingdom, as can be Learned; and it had been
happy for this Nation, if the present undervaluing of our Gold and Silver had
done no more harm. However, those Gentlemen stick so close to their Ancient
Lawful standard Money of England, as if themselves believed, and would persuade
others to do the same, that our Money had been of the same weight it now is
ever since Noah's Flood, and that it must continue the same to the Day of
Judgment, or rather till we have none left; or no Man can be paid in the
Lawful Money of England: For say they, the Nobility in their Lands and Rents,
the Clergy in their Annuities, the Soldiers in their Pay, the Merchants in
their Trade and Exchange, and all persons in their private Deeds and Contracts,
must be injured. When in short there is not one word of this true: For then all
Deeds and Conveyances are illegal that were before the last of Queen Elizabeth,
and since the Money has been clipped; because 'twas not paid in that Species we
now call the Ancient, Lawful, Standard Money of England, though its Antiquity
bears no longer date. For in the time of Edward the First, a Pound weight of
Gold was coined into but 13 Pounds in tale, and the like weight of Silver into
20 Shillings and 3 Pence; and therefore they may as well call that unlawful
which is not paid by that Standard, being the True, Ancient, Lawful Standard of
England; but every Age since, (and no doubt before, if we could know it) has
produced sufficient Reason for altering their Coin, which has gradually been
advanced through the several Reigns for 300 Years, till the last of Queen
Elizabeth, when the Pound weight of Gold was coined into 33 l. 10 s. and the
like weight of Silver into 3 l. 2 s. in tale, the present Standard of our
Silver: But the Gold Coin has considerably been advanced since; for in the 2d
of King James the First, the Pound-weight Gold was advanced to 37 l. 4 s. in
tale, and the next Year to 40 l. and in his 9th Year by Proclamation he
advanced 2 Shillings on every 20, which made it 44 l. 10 s. in tale, the
present Standard for Gold; and though Guinea's at first were, and still are
coined to that standard, at 20 Shillings per Guinea, nevertheless they went not
at that price; for the People, finding they were undervalued, did of
themselves, by general consent advance them 1 Shilling and 6 Pence, which made
the Pound weight of Gold current at 47 l. 16 s. 9 d. and with the now
additional 6 d. is 48 l. 19 s. in tale, which is 15 l. 9 s. advanced on the
Pound-weight of Gold since the last of Queen Elizabeth, and the Pound-weight
Silver to this time has not been advanced a Farthing.

This Disproportion would have drained the Nation of the greatest part of their
Coin unhoarded, had not the Clippers prevented it; who notwithstanding were
great Villains, and thereby intended the Nation's ruin: But as God Almighty
does often turn the vilest Actions and Designs of wicked Men to the good of
Kings and Kingdoms; so in this, though doubtless there have been more Iudas's and
Ahitophel's than one, and the late Hellish Designs, both open and private
against His Majesty and Government, will assuredly terminate in their own Shame
and Confusion.

It Is plain, the new Coins of King Charles and James, were all melted down or
carried away, but what was hoarded; and though the Government did not then
advance their Silver, which would certainly have been a great advantage, yet
the Clippers did the same in effect by diminishing the quantity, with this
difference only, that what the Public ought and might have gained, served only
to enrich these Vermin and others their Appendants, Goldsmiths, Bankers and
other Dealers in Money.

When ever the Gold and Silver Coins are not in proportion to each other, or
undervalued; either one or other, or both will be exported: Of this Grievance,
Sir Walter Raleigh in his time made complaint to the King, as a great and
growing Loss to the Nation. And it is very observable, That in the 5th of Edward
the Sixth, the Silver Coin of this Kingdom was intolerably debased, there being
but Three Ounces of Silver to Nine Ounces of Allay, which extravagantly
advanced the Pound weight of Silver to 14 l. 8 s. in Tale, when the
Pound-weight Gold was current but at 28 l. 16 s. so that two Pounds of Silver
would purchase one Pound of Gold; which by stealth exported, would at that
time, beyond Seas, buy more than ten Pounds of Silver; which again brought
here, would purchase 5 l. of Gold, etc.

By this means the Kingdom was drained of the greatest part of their Gold, and
had left only a base paultry Money: This was a great and notorious Abuse on the
King and Kingdom; and he, poor King, was ill served: But there were two sorts
of Men of Business then, as well as now. However, this lasted not long before
they felt their Error and Folly; for the next Year the King advanced his Gold
from 28 l. to 36 l. in Tale, and this never-failing Rule brought back the Gold
again, and reduced his Silver to 3 l. in Tale: This proportion, of about 1 to
12; that is, 1 Pound of Gold to equal the Value of 12 Pounds of Silver, was the
proportional difference nigh 300 Years. But at this time in England 1 Pound of
Gold will purchase more than 16 Pounds of Silver; so that Silver and Gold bears
not true proportion to each other, and both are undervalu'd, and therefore both
exported; and be assured, that Truth it self is not more true, than if our Gold
and Silver will make better Market in any other part of the World than at Home,
'twill be conveyed thither, Mauger all Law and Punishment to the contrary.
Whatever Advantage some Gentlemen may propose to themselves by running down the
Value of Gold and Silver, I cannot tell; but it is most certain, all Countries
will carry their Gold and Silver to those places where 'twill yield most, or
buy most Commodity, and not where it is of least value.

We have great reason to thank God, that our Laws are not like those of the
Medes and Persians, who doubtless were a most sagacious People, of great reach
and foresight; whose Decrees required no alteration, amendments, nor others to
explain them; and, by what we can learn, they were comprised in few and
significant Words, comprehending more Solid Matter in six Lines, than we
usually express in six Sides of Paper, multiplicity of Words only rendering the
Sense ambiguous and sometimes contradictory: Whence proceeds so many Flaws,
Mistakes, and Amendments, in Public and Private Business; and the Growth of
this Misfortune has been in proportion to the Increase of the Professors of the
Law, as is evident by the Disparity of Deeds, Conveyances, etc. made 3 or 400
Years ago with those now made; which reminds me of a Story when the Morocco
Ambassador was here, and one day passing by the Temple, asked what stately
Place that was; was answered, The Temple, formerly the Residence of the Knights
Templers of Jerusalem, but now for the Professors of the Law. He called on
Mahomet, and blessed himself, and said, he did not believe there had been half
so many Lawyers in the World, as to fill that great Place: But was answered,
There were many more Great and Noble Places, formerly the Habitations of
Persons of great Quality, that were now likewise filled with Students and
Professors of the Law. Bless me! said he, what Use or Benefit can they be to
your Country? Certainly ye must be the most Litigious People in the World, or
the greatest part of them must starve! They told him, That, together with the
Work they cut out for themselves, the one by finding Faults and Flaws with what
the other did, kept them in that Grandeur. He said, He believed as much; for
that, in his Country, he remembered but of two Lawyers in his time, and they by
the like Practices made such Disturbance amongst the People, that his Master
was forced to hang them both. Not that I offer this Reflectiously on the
Gentlemen of the Long Robe, but Reverence and Honor the Professors of the Law,
that Honor their Profession; though the Practice and Original Intention of the
Law seems to be inverted, which was to relieve the Oppressed, and right the
Injured, without delay of Time or great Charge, which now the expensive
tediousness of Law-Controversies, in most Cases, redounds more to the Advantage
of the Professors than the Commodity of the Injured, which it is humbly hoped
Time may rectify.

But to return to the Matter, it is our Happiness, that Our Laws may, and will
be altered when found Necessary for public Good; though the Author of a Letter
about the Currency of Clipped Money in his postscript, speaking of the present
Weight of our Coin, says, He need not remark to you that the Words in the Act
shall remain to be, being Indefinite, imports as much, as if it had been said,
shall always remain to be of the same weight as now. Which it is Humbly thought,
can no more be in the power of any Parliament to do, than it was to have kept
the Money till this time to the Standard of Ed. the first. The same Author with
an unbecoming Confidence strikes at his Majesty's Prerogative, and Asserts it
to be a pernicious Doctrine publicly Vented, That the King by his Prerogative
might alter the Standard of our Coin; though I presume not to know the Limits of
Prerogatives, or Power of Parliaments: Yet this I am sure, that His Majesty's
just Prerogatives extend as far as any of his Royal Predecessors, Kings of
England: And Chamberlain, in his Present State of England, tells ye, That
anciently, by the Lawyers, the Royal Prerogative was called Sacra Sacrorum, by
which the Kings of England had power to appoint the Metal, Weight, Purity, and
Value of the Public Moneys; and, by his Proclamation, make any Foreign Coin to
be Lawful Money of of England. And, as I am informed, there will scarce one Act
of Parliament be found for the various Alterations of our Coins this 400 Years;
but his Majesty, of his Goodness and Clemency, was pleased to say in his
Speech, November. 22. 1695. This is a Matter of so very great Importance, that I
have thought sit to leave it entirely to my Parliament. Let the Gentlemen Con
those words, (I have thought fit) and he goes on to beg pardon for the Omission
he had liked to have made, in not publishing this Impudence; but had it been in
some former Reigns, there had been no Omission in giving him his Just Reward,
and his Book its Desert.

Gentlemen, It Is now time to consider what has, and now does, occasion those
General Complaints, for want of Money and Trade, and what may be the proper
Remedy.

There are many Reasons for the present Scarcity of Money, besides the
Exporting of our Coin.

1. The Bulk of Guinea's, which alone carried on the whole Trade of the Kingdom
for some time, and answered every Man's Bills and Occasions, without Complaint
of Scarcity, Non-payment or Stock-jobbing Notes, or Bills, at 14, 16, and
sometimes 20 per Cent. discount, these are partly exported by Foreign Dealers
to their Private Advantage, and partly hoarded up at Home for the same end,
willing to have the Advantage themselves they know others make by their
Exportation. This has made what we have left, a dead and useless Cash, and the
Obligation and Encouragement to Coin more is taken off by Act of Parliament, to
the First of next January, excepting the Royal African Company, for their own
use, and declares, That the Importation of Guinea's from beyond Seas, may prove
prejudicial to the Kingdom; and therefore enacts, That all Guinea's imported
from the 2d of March last, to the 1 st of next January, shall be forfeited, the
one half to the King, and the other to the Informer.

There Is no doubt but this Act has effectually answered its end, because it is
no advantage to bring them over: And what Forfeitures there have been thereon,
I know not; but, by the want of Guinea's, we may suppose the Nation wants more
than a Million of its Current Cash.

2. By Recoining of about Four Millions of Clipped Money, and supposing a Million
more to Coin, will make something more than Two Millions and an Half, and the
Loss must be nigh as much more of the Current Cash.

3. By the Non-Currancy of Bank and Banker's Bills, Goldsmith's, and other
Notes, the Nation may be deprived of nigh a Million of Current Credit more,
which makes Four Millions and an Half, besides the great Sums of Money daily
exported: This makes a great Hole in the necessary running Cash of the Kingdom,
required to answer our Domestic Commerce and Occasions. Sir William Petty in
King Charles the Second's Time, estimating the whole Running Cash of the Nation
at Six Millions, and Mr. Lownds computes the whole Silver Coin Clipped and
Unclipt, Hoarded and Current in England, before their melting down, to be but
Five Millions Six Hundred Thousand Pounds; so that, notwithstanding our
Occasions are greater than ever, for Money to satisfy the National Debts,
Arrears, and Desiciency of Funds; and that our Necessary Preservation calls for
more large Supplies; yet we have Four Millions and an Half less Cash and Credit
to do it with, than a Year since: Nor can it be believed, that all the Plate in
the Kingdom will make good this Sum; and we are sure, at the Price it is now at,
none will be brought in: And in their own Words we may truly say, That, Instead
of real Gold and Silver we had before, we have now a Fairy Treasure in our
Glorious New Money, that no sooner appears but vanishes.

It Is worth observing, That 'twas not the Quantity or Smalness of the Clipped
Money, so much as the Quality, the Adulterate Baseness of the Metal, False
Impression, and the Difficulty of knowing passable from not passable, and the
Trouble in receiving and paying, to distinguish Six Pences from Shillings, etc.
These were Inconveniences that loudly cried for a Reformation; not but
Experience demonstrates ye could buy as much of any Commodity here for Five
Shillings, that weighed not Half a Crown, as you do now for Five Shillings,
that weighs as much more, and paid as much Rent, Debts, etc. as now, and equal
to it for all Uses, Exportation excepted; where it is natural to believe an
Ounce of Silver will purchase more than Half an Ounce; the same, if they bring
their Coin hither. Now, supposing that every Man in the Kingdom had as much New
Money, as they Before had of Clipped Money, the Nation would not be one Half
Penny richer than before: If ye can buy no more Land, pay no more Rents or
Debts with it, nor buy more Commodities at home with it, as certainly ye cannot;
then it is neither better or worse in Value, but the same, only with this
Difference, that you have as much more Silver in your Coin as served the same
Use before, and so have but Half the Quantity of Money you might have; and
before ye were assured none could be carried away to your Loss, but ye have now
no Assurance but it may all; and the only Advantage is, that it is more
commodious for Tale, and not so easily counterfeited as before, though too much
practiced already.

It will be Objected, the Damage the Merchants would sustain by their Foreign
Bills and Remittances more than now: This is only a Mistake; for before our
Clipped Coin in Specie was carried beyond Seas for Payments, and they met with
such Loss and Difficulties as well as our selves, in the Receipt and Payment,
they did not fall their Exchange, though the greatest part of the Current Cash in
the Kingdom this 30 years, has been Clipped Money more or less: For the Exchange
does not regard the intrinsic Value, but the extrinsick Value and Denomination
it bears in the respective Countries.

For if I pay here 100 l. that is, 32 l. 3 Ounces, One Penny Weight, and Two
and Twenty Grains of Sterling Silver, to receive the like Value in Holland at
36 Dutch Skillings per Pound Sterling: If I expect to receive the same Weight
of Silver there, I am mistaken; and it is possible I may not have Half that
Quantity, which nevertheless is no Loss to me, because it answers my End;
'twill pay my 100 Pounds Debt there, or answer any other occasion, as well as
if I had the same Quantity of Silver that I here paid; and this is properly
called Exchange: But if I carry my 100 l. to Holland, and exchange it but for
100 l. of their Money, I make an ill Exchange, and give them twice the Silver
they give me, which cannot be expected to return again, but by the same
Disadvantage to us, as it is Advantage to them to keep it: Nor is it any
Difference whilst the Coins of Countries are not exported, but their Commerce
maintained by Bills of Exchange, whether I pay 100 Guinea's here, to receive
100 Cockle-shels in Holland; or pay 100 Guinea's in Holland, to receive 100
Cockle-shels here: So I can in one Country pay or purchase as much for one, as
I can in the other for the other: Nor can the Advance of our Coin prejudice any
Merchants, but those that Export it to the Public Damage, who more deserve an
Halter than a Gold Chain for their Encouragement: It Is by such unprofitable
Merchandising, that the Nation has been robbed of so great and immense Treasure,
since the 1. of Q. Elizabeth, there having been Coined more than Twenty Two
Millions of Silver Money of the same Weight Standard and Fineness as now is;
and now the whole Silver Coin in the Kingdom, will scarce amount to Four
Millions; and granting there are Two Millions more in Plate, than was at that
time in the Nation, there will be Sixteen Millions of Silver Coin, besides
Gold, the People have been robbed of, to gratify the avaritious self-ended
Designs of unprofitable Merchants, within something more than an Hundred Years,
for want of Raising the Value of our Coin; which growing Inconveniency to the
King and Kingdom, Sir Walter Raleigh wisely foresaw, and fore-warned. It Is
worth considering what we have had for this Treasure: Why, there is fine China
Babies, Cabinets, Skreens, etc. with Monkey-fac'd Pictures, fine Silks, Muslins
and Calicoes; and I cannot tell ye how many Hundred Thousand Tuns of Fine and
Foul French Wines into the Bargain. These are poor Remains of such a Treasure;
and can any Man in his right Senses believe that the present Standard of our
Coin, which it is plain, has already robbed the Nation of so much Money, will
now be the Means to bring it in again? O Moria! Now could I wish my self a
Second Erasmus to sing forth thy Encomium.

It is the Design of those Gentlemen to puzzle the Country with the Balance of
Trade, and tell them it matters not what the Coin is, it is the Balance of Trade
must make us rich: It Is true, that must, if any thing does; but, by their
Methods, we can never turn the Scale. In short, the Balance is thus, If we
carry out more Gold and Silver than we bring in, the Nation is so much the
poorer; and you see before, which way the Balance has turned this Hundred
Years; but of late, being drove by Necessity, when the Silver-Coin was so bad,
that little could be taken with safety, and that most of the Gold was
exhausted, and, as now, no Trade to bring in more, the People, by a good Policy
of their own, with Universal Consent and Good-liking, and to their Mutual
Advantage, did Advance their Gold, which was in such proportion to the
Silver-Coin then, that neither could be carried away, without great loss to the
Exporters: This soon brought over great Plenty of Gold, and put New Life into
us, set all Hands at Work on our own Manufacturies and Produce, and
sufficiently turned the Balance on our side; and for one Guinea then exported,
we had more than a thousand brought in; and for one hundred Pounds of our own
Manufactury now exported, there was then a thousand; and all our own Gold was
coined into Guinea's: This brought us True and Real Riches, great Plenty of
Money and good Trade throughout the whole Kingdom, made all Men easy, and
busily employed, enabled them cheerfully and willingly to pay their Taxes,
Rents, their Bills and Credit, and the War with France made no more Impression
on our Minds or Pockets than it now does on the Great Mogul. We sold them our
Commodities at good Rates, and we had Gold and Trade enough amongst our selves,
which was the thing we wanted; and those Clothiers and other Dealers on our own
Manufacturies, that could then employ 3 or 400 Persons, have now neither
Business nor Money to employ 50, and many have quite left off Trading. This the
Government was pleased to take notice of by Order of Council, May 30. 1696.

WHereas their Excellencies, the Lords Justices, have received Information in
Council, That many Persons concerned in the Woolen Manufacturies, in several
Parts of this Kingdom, have entered into Unlawful Confederacies and Agreements,
whereby they have Engaged and Obliged each other, under Penalties, not to
Employ any Persons in Making the said Manufacturies; and, in regard such
Practices and Confederacies are highly Criminal; and, if not timely prevented,
may put a stop to the General Trade of this Kingdom, and occasion a Disturbance
of the Public Peace, it is Ordered, That Mr. Attorney General do prosecute the
Offenders, to the uttermost Severity of Law. It Is not the Interest of Tradesmen
to leave off their Trade; and as they cannot live without Trade, so they cannot
Trade without Money and Gain; nor when 100 l. Bill shall be answered with 5 l.
in Specie, can they pay their poor Work-folks, and are forced to desist: And
it is humbly supposed, there is scarce a Corporation in England, has not felt the
Effects of this mistaken Opinion, and believe their Lost Trade and Money can any
ways be retrieved, but by what they know brought it them before; that is,
advancing the Coin: For if they have not, by undervaluing our Coin, this 7 or 8
Months, brought one Ounce in ten of Silver to the Mint, but what we drain from
our selves, why should we believe, that for the time to come they can? We must
consider, that we have no Mines of Gold and Silver, as the Spaniard has, yearly
to replenish our exhausted Store, and therefore merits our most serious
Consideration, how we shall bring Silver from abroad to the Mint, if all the
Plate in the Nation was run down and exported, if we cannot bring it in now
without it. The Public and Private Plate ought to be our last Shift, except we
sell or pawn our Lands: And I appeal to all Men, if the Nation has not been
better able this Seven Years to Maintain the War with France, without Melting
down their Plate, and without knowledge of those General Complaints for want of
Trade and Money, as has been only for Seven Months last past, since the
undervaluing of the Coin. If they object, the Occasion of this Misfortune is,
the Mony's not being all coined: That is no Reason; for, before any of it was
coined, there was little Silver current, but Gold enough, without complaint;
and, notwithstanding all that has been coined since, there is not so much Money
as was before.

Therefore, since the Design of all Trade, is the procuring of Gold and Silver,
and that can only be had for our Manufacturies and Commodities; for we purchase
not Gold and Silver with Gold and Silver, and the undervaluing of ours will not
make other Countries to undervalue theirs; for then they lose the Advantage of
Drawing the Silver to themselves for their Commodities; nor would the advance
of our Money, have any influence on them to advance theirs; because they could
then have no advantage by Trading with us and Buying our Commodities: Therefore
it matters not from whence we have it, or whether we go to the East or
West Indies to fetch it: If it comes Home to us, it answers our end; and they
have only our Labor and Manufacture for it, of which we can never be drained.

But, say they, the Foreign Merchants will under-sell ye with your own
Commodities. It Is false: For if I sell a Dutchman a Piece of Cloth for so much
Gold or Silver, cannot I fell a Spaniard or Portuguese as much for the same
quantity of Gold and Silver? And when we have the Gold and Silver, we may make
our own Markets for our Commodities.

Gentlemen, if ye think it more for the Honor and Safety of the Nation when
your Plate is melted down, and you have no more Money than before, when every
paultry Alehouse could show more Plate than a French Count, and most Taverns
could equal those of the First Rank in France; when every Porter or Carman had
more Guinea's in's Pocket, than now many Gentlemen of Estates; when the Army
neither abroad nor at home is paid; when ye shall pay 16 or 20 per Cent. to dig
out your own Money that is buried in Banco; and more than that, to raise Money on
your Tallies; and that no Personal Security how good soever will be taken, and
on your Lands or Plate ye must give more than 10 per Cent. and glad to get it
so; and this will reduce your Lands to about Ten Years purchase: And those
Gentlemen have a fine time on it, whose Lands are encumbered and now compelled
to pay the Money: For if there be but half the Money to circulate as the Nation
requires, that doubles the Interest, though not by Law, yet not to be procured
without it, and you can have but half your former Value for your Lands; and
nothing is more the Interest of landed Men, than to Multiply the Money amongst
our selves, which will advance their Lands to 25 Years Purchase, and more,
proportionable to the lowering the Interest. It Is mentioned in the Public
News, that the States of Holland have lately borrowed 5 Millions of Florins in
14 Days time at 4 per Cent. and I wish, that Money here for his Majesty's
Service might be raised for the same Interest; but this must be the effect of
plenty of Money, which as naturally decreases Interest, as the Scarcity advances
it. If ye can believe these things to be for the Honor and Safety of the King
and Kingdom, 'twill be no difficult matter to persuade ye to send your Leather
to France, and wear Wooden Shoes.

The Continuance of these Grievances, must dishearten the People at home, and
we shall be so far from a Terror to our Enemies abroad, that we shall be
contemptible and forsaken by our Friends: For, It Is Money commands all things,
says Solomon; and, as the old Proverb has it, makes the Pot boil, though the
Devil Piss in the Fire; and it is like Blood in the Veins, if it stagnate, and
the circulation be impeded, or let out by too great effusion, the destruction
of the whole Body must unavoidably ensue. I shall not presume to prescribe a
Remedy, and put a Stop to these great and growing Evils, being the Business of
those Honorable Gentlemen your Representatives, and your own, in what you can
assist in a Matter of so great Consequence, where too many cannot be consulted;
for that good which is most defusive, does most good and is best; and Solomon
says, In the Multitude of Counselors there is Wisdom. And possibly the greater
part of the Scriblers on this Subject may have private ends, different from the
good of the Public: And therefore, how specious soever their Reasons may
appear to ye, it is your own Interests and the Public Good ye must consult, and
believe, that the intention of Money is plentifully to circulate amongst your
selves; and to encourage those profitable Merchants, that, for your Cloths and
other Manufacturies, bring ye in Gold and Silver, who can receive no damage
from the advance of the Coin; and for the other Merchants that have already
carried away such Vast Sums; (and if not prevented) will much more, ye may be
as complesant to as you please.

I shall only remark, That when all the Clipped Money is recoined, if it went for
as much in tale as it did before, with the addition of so much as may make an
equality in Payments; that is, to make the difference of every 100 Pounds
weight of Clipped Money equal, no Man could say he was injured, since he is paid
in a better Coin than he lent; and it is equal whether Ten Shillings he lent, be
paid in Ten Pieces, or One: And the remainder of the Twelve Hundred Thousand
Pounds, to make good the Coin, may be employed to other uses more advantageous
to the King and Kingdom, than amending the Coin. This would make us as rich as
we were before, increase Trade, and bring great quantities of Plate to the Mint
from abroad and at home, and the Nation once more happy again; which may more
easily be altered, when found necessary, than we can bring Silver from beyond
Seas, when we want it.

The imaginary loss, in paying the Armies beyond Seas, will vanish, for the
Soldiers will have no loss thereby: For if they are to have Sixpence per day,
more or less, if paid in Money from hence, they must have so much as will make
that Sum there, let the Exchange be what it will; and we had better lose
Twopence in a Shilling, than Twelve-pence; and the one, like our Clipped Money,
will be sure to come back; and the other, like our New Money, will be sure to
stay there. And his Majesty, long since, recommended to the Parliament to find
out Means to prevent so great a Loss to the Nation, as the carrying out Money in
Specie: But what Methods that Honorable House have taken to prevent it, I know
not; nor, to the best of my remembrance, have seen any thing public relating
to it.

It is not impossible, but we might furnish our own Armies at least with Corn
and Cheese, and many other things from hence, without sending Money thither to
but it, which would much diminish the Charge of our Army.

It is not impossible, but we might have furnished the Duke of Savoy, when an
Ally, and other Allies, that have our Assistance, instead of Money, with Corn,
if cheap, here; and with Guns, Pistols, Swords, Powder, Bombs, Ball, Clothes,
Hats, Stockens, Shoes; all Furniture for Horses, and many other things, which
would have done their Business as well as Money. But it may be said, They could
buy them cheaper at Home: That cannot be; for they cannot have them cheaper, than
for nothing; and the Money would have been spent at Home, and created a Trade,
and have been no loss to the Nation, if we part only with our Labor and
Product.

It Is worth observing the advantageous Policy the French King has made use of,
during this War, who, from the beginning, has greatly advanced his Coin, and by
that Policy chiefly, has been able to Cope with, and Baffle, the United Force
of the greatest part of Europe; and yet it is very remarkable, that those
Gentlemen who so highly extol that Monarch's other Policies, run Counter in
this, and say, he is a Prince that has but little or no Trade, and may do it;
but it is beneath us, that are a Trading Nation. This is a mean shift; and it
had been happy for this Kingdom, if we had traded to so good advantage as he
has done; he has not let the Merchants run away with his Gold and Silver, but
makes it to enrich Himself and Country, and not them, but by bringing it in: He
has neither Gold or Silver the Produce of his own Country, no more than we; nor
has he so much as Lead or Tin of his own growth, nor many other useful
Commodities, and yet he wants not any of them more than we, for ought we can
learn: He maintains an Army three times as numerous as ours, and at prodigious
Charge in Maintaining his Garrisons, and great Fleets; has Armies in all places
where we have, and more, and sends great Sums to his Confederates the Turk, and
the King of Poland, whilst living; besides the great Charge in Maintaining his
roguish Iacobite Emissaries and others, in most Countries in Europe, and Lords
it over his Neighbors: And these are all the Inconveniences that we can know
he has found this 8 Years, by the Advance of his Money, a quite different Story
to what our last 7 Months has brought us to; and 'twill easily be believed,
that he would not have continued it, if it had been a disadvantage to him. And
why that which is so advantageous to him, and was so to us, whilst the Clipped
Money went, whose diminished Weight made us on equal Terms with him, should now
be thought our loss? And it is well known his Gold Pistoles have been the chief
Artillery that has made him Lewis l' Grand.

Now, Gentlemen, he that can tell ye of one real Benefit the Nation have had,
or are like to have, to balance these Inconveniences the present Standard of
our Coin has brought on the Kingdom, ought to be to you, more than the great
Apollo.

I shall add, That the City of London have given ye all a good President, in
their late Request to their Representatives in Parliament; wherein they make
their earnest Request, That they would use their utmost and joint Endeavors,
at the first Sitting down of the Parliament, that the Plot may be thoroughly
examined into; and that the Conspiratiors who have hitherto made it their
business, not only to keep a Private Correspondence with our Enemies, and to
deliver up the Ships, and Effects of our Merchants and Traders into their
hands; but also, to betray His Majesty's Councils, and so destress and
undermine the best of Governments, may be detected: Without which, they humbly
offer it as their Opinion, That all other Endeavors for the Preservation of
the King and Kingdom will prove ineffectual. Therefore, if ye now omit what ye
think necessary for your own Good and Safety to Offer, ye must blame your
selves: Nor can ye but be truly sensible of the great Blessing we enjoy above
other Nations in our Religion, and beloved Liberties, under the best of Kings,
whom Heaven has Crowned with all Royal Virtues; whose Goodness has left it
entirely to his People, to make themselves a Great, Rich and Happy Nation; and
has pleased to Recommend it to the Consideration of his People, whether there
do not still remain some Inconveniences relating to the Coin, which ought to
be remedied. Though after all we may too fitly be compared to the Image in
Nebuchadnezzar's Vision. We have a Golden Head, it is true, but Members of
Brass, Clay and Iron.

That all may Unite for the Glory of God, the Honor and Preservation of His
Majesty and Government, the Good of the Protestant Religion in general; and may
Heaven Defend them from the wicked and mischievous Designs of their Open
Enemies, and False Friends, is the Hearty Prayer of, GENTLEMEN, Your Humble
Votary.


