LADY ALIMONY; OR, The Alimony Lady.

An Excellent Pleasant New COMEDY Duly Authorized, daily Acted, and frequently
Followed.

Nolumus amplexus Sponsales; era novellos
Nocte parent Socios; qui placuere magis.
Lucret. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Vere and William Gilbertson, and are to be
sold at the Angel without Newgate, and at the Bible in Gilt-spur-street, 1659.

The Actors personated in this Dramatick.
Eugenio the Duke. Cashiered Consorts. Sir Amadin Puny Sir Jasper Simpleton Sir
Arthur Heartless Sir Gregory Shapeless Sir Tristram Shorttool Sir Reuben
Scattergood
Alimony Ladies Madam Fricase Madam Caveare Madam Julippe Madam Joculette Madam
Medler Madam Tinder
The Ladies Platonic Confidents. Florello Caranto Palisado Salibrand Morisco
Tillyvally
Gallerius Ghost. Timon the Composer. Trillo the Censor. Siparius the
Book-holder. Chorist. Constable Watch. Country Boors. Tra-panners. Pages with
other Officiats.
Scene Sivil

Lady Alimony.
Actus primus.
Scaena prima.
Enter Trillo. Trillo. HEy Boys! -- Never did my Spirit chirp more cheerfully
since I had one. Here is work for Platonicks. Never did Ladies, brave buxom
Girls dispense at easier rates with their forfeited Honors. This were an
excellent age for that Roman Carvilius to live in: who never loved any sheets
worser then those his Wife lay in. Nor his Wife any lodging worse, then where
her decrepit Consort slept in. Divorces are now as common, as scolding at
Billingsgate. O Alimony, Alimony a Darling incomparably dearer, then a
seere-icy Bed possessed of the spirit of a dull unactive Husband! A fresh flowery
Spring, and a chill frosty Winter never suit well together. He were a rare
Justice in these times of Separation, who had the Ceremonial art to join Hearts
together as well as Hands: but that Chemical Cement is above the Alchymy of his
Office: or verge of his ministerial Charge. -- Hey day! who comes here? The
very professed Smock-satyr, or Woman-hater in all Europe. One, who had he lived
in that State or under that Zone, might have compared with any Swetnam in all
the Albion Island.


Scen. 2.
Enter Timon; Siparius, and a Page. But sure he has some high design in hand,
he pores so fixtly upon the ground, as on my life he has some swinging stuff
for our fresh Dabrides, who have invested themselves in the Platonic Order:
and retain courage enough to make an exchange of their old Consorts with their
new Confidents and amorous pretenders. -- Let us hear him, he mumbles so
strangely, he must surely either disburthen self, or stifle his teeming Birth
for want of timely delivery.


Timon. Good, as I live wondrous good: this is the way to catch the old one. Be
all things ready Siparius?


Sip. How do you mean Sir?


Tim. What a drolling bufflehead is this. -- He has been Book-holder to my
Revels for decads of years, and the Cuckoldry Drone, as if he had slept in
Triphonius cave, all his days, desires to know my meaning in the Track of his
own Calling! -- Sir, shall I question you in your own Dialect? Be your
Stage-curtains artificially drawn, and so covertly shrouded, as the squint-eyed
Groundling may not peep in to your discovery?


Sipar. Leave that care to me Sir; it is my charge.


Tim. But were our Bills poasted, that our House may be with a numerous
Auditory stored; our Boxes by Ladies of quality and of the new dress croudingly
furnished; our Galleries and Ground-front answerably to their Pay completed?


Sip Assure you self Sir, nothing is a wanting; that may give way to the Poets
improvement.


Tim. Thou say well; this is indeed the Poets third day: and must raise his
Pericranium deeply steeped in Frontineack, a fair revenue for his rich Timonick
Fancy; or he must take a long adue of the spirit of Sack and that noble Napry
till the next Vintage. -- But Siparius.


Sip. Your will Sir.


Tim. Be sure, that you hold not your Book at too much distance: the Actors,
poor Lapwings, are but pen-feathred: and once out, out for ever. We had a time,
indeed, and it was a golden time for a pregnant Fancy; when the Actor could
imbellish his Author, and return a Pean to his Pen in every accent. But our
great disaster at Cannae, then which none ever more tragical to our Theater,
made a speedy dispatch of our rarest Roscio's, closing them jointly in one
Funeral Epilogue. -- Now for you Boy, as you play the Chorus, so be mindful of
your Hint. I know you to be a Wag by nature; and you must play the Waggish
Actor.


Page. I shall not sleep in my action Sir; if your line have so much life as to
provoke a laughter; I shall not strangle the height of your Conceit with a dull
gesture: nor weaken the weight of your Plot with too flat or unbecoming a
deportment.


Tim. Thou promisest fairly; go on.


Trillo. And so does Timon too, or his judgment fails him. -- Well, I will
accoast him. -- Health to our stock of Stoical wit, ingenious Timon. -- Come
Sir, what brave Dramatick Piece has your running Mercury now upon the Loom? The
Title of your new Play, Sir?


Tim. Every Poast may sufficiently inform you: nay the Fame of the City cannot
choose but echo it to you: so much is expected: neither shall you discover a
Mouse peeping out of a Mountain, believe it.


Trillo. No; nor a Monkey dancing his Trick-a-tee on a Rope, for want of strong
Lines from the Poets pen.


Tim. You are in the right on it, Trillo; These Pigmies of mine shall not play the
egregious Puppies in deluding an ignorant Rabble with the sad presentment of a
Nulla sides spectanda feris, nec gratia victis.

Corpora distendunt verubus assanda nefandis.


roasted Savage.


Trillo. Your Conceit is above the scale of admiration. -- But the Subject of
your Invention, Sir, where may you lay your Scene: and what Name you bestow
upon this long expected Comedy?


Tim. My Scene, Trillo, is Tempora sunt Cuculi gratissima labilis anni;

Cornua sunt sponsis iristia, laeta Procis. Auson.


Horn-Alley: the Name it bears, is LADY ALIMONY. The Subject I shall not
preoccupate: Let the Pancies of my thirsty Auditory fall a working; if ever
their small expense confined to three hours space were better recompensed; I
will henceforth disclaim my Society with an happy Genius: and bestow the
remainder of my time in catching Flies with Domitian.


Trillo. Excellent, Excellent. I am confident your acrimonious spirit will
dis-curtain our Changeable-taffaty Ladies to an hair.


Tim. Thou know my humor; and let me perish, if I do not pursue it. Thou
have heard no doubt, how I never found any branch more pleasingly fruitful, nor
to my view more grateful, then when I found a Woman hanging on it: wishing
heartily that all Trees in mine Orchard bore such fruit.


Tril. If your wish had proved true, no doubt but your Orchard would have
rendered you store of Medlers. -- But your hour, Sir, your hour.


Tim. You know, Trillo, our Theatral time to a minute. One thing I must tell
you; and you will attest it upon our Presentment: That never was any Stage,
since the first erection of our ancient Roman Amphitheaters, with suitable
Properties more accurately furnished: with choiser Music more gracefully
accommodated: nor by Boys, though young, with more virile spirits presented.


Tril. I Am already nouz'd in your Poetical Spring: and shall henceforth wish
for your sake, that all Crop-ear'd Histriomastixes, who cannot endure a civil
witty Comedy, but by his rackt exposition renders it downright Drollery, may
be doomed to Ancyrus, and skip there amongst Satyrs, for his rough and severe
censure.


Tim. Parnassus is a debtor to thee Trillo for thy clear and serene opinon of
the Muses and their individual Darling: of which Meniey, to imprint our
Addresses all the better in your memory, our Stage presents ever the most
lively and lovely fancy: Where th'Stage breaths Lines, Sceans, Subject, Action
fit,
The Age must admire it, or it has no Wit.



Tril. Yet I have heard Timon, that you were sometimes Stoical, and could not
endure the noise of an Interlude, but snuff at it as the Satyr did at the first
sight of fire.


Tim. All this is most authentically true: But shall I unbosom my self
ingeniously to thee, my dear Trillo? As his hate to Woman made Eupolis eat
Nettle pottage; so became I fired in my spirit: my experience of a Shrow drove
me to turn the shrewd Comedian: and yet all our Boxes are stored with complete
Doxes: nay some, whose carriage gives life to this days action.


Tril. May the Poets day prove fair and fortunate: full Audience and honest
Door-keepers. I shall perchance rank my self amongst your Gallery-men.


Tim. We shall hold our Labors incomparably heightened by the breath of such
approved Judgments.

Enter Messenger. Sir, here is a proud peremptory pragmatical Fellow newly come
into our Tyring-room, who disturbs our preparation; vowing like a desperate
Haxter, that he has express Command to seize upon all our Properties.


Tim. The Devil he has; what furious Mercury might this be?


Mes. Nay, Sir, I know not what he may be, but sure if he be what he seems to
be, he can be no less then one of our City Hectors, but I hope your spirit will
conjure him, and make him a Clinias. -- He speaks nothing less then braving
Buff-leather Language: and has made all our Boys so feverish, as if a
Quotidian Ague had seized on them.


Tim. Sure it is one of our Trapanning Decoyes, sent forth for a Champion to
defend those Ladies engaged honor, whom our Stage is this day to present: This
shall not serve their turn. -- Call him in; we will collar him.


Tril. Hah-hah-hah! This will prove rare sport, to see how the Poets Genius
will grapple with this Bandog.


Scen. 3.
Enter Haxter. Hax. Sir!


Tim. Surly Sir, your design!


Hax. To ruin your Design, illicentiate Play-wright. Down with your Bills Sir.


Tim. Your Bill cannot do it Sir.


Hax. But my Commission shall Sir. -- Can you read Sir?


Tim. Yes Sir, and write too, else were I not fit for this employment. He reads
the Paper.


Tril. With what a scurvy skrude look the Myrmidon eyes him? -- He will surely
bastinado our Comedian out of his Laureat Periwig: -- Hold him tugg Poet, or
thou runs by Poetical Pinnace on a desperate shelf.


Tim. What bugbear has your terrible Bladeship brought us here? A Mandat from
one of our own society, to blanch the credit of our Comedy! You Are in a wrong
Box, Sir, this will not do it.


Hax. You dare not disobey it.


Tim. Dare not! A word of high affront to a professed Parnassian: I dare exchange
in pen with you and your penurious Poetasters Pike: and if your valor or his
swell to that height or heat as it will admit no other cooler but a downright
scuffle, let wit perish and fall a wool-gathering, if with a cheerful brow I
leave not the precious Rills of Hippocrene, and wing my course for Campus
Martius.


Hax. Slid this Mus^us is a Martiallist; and if I had not held him a feverish
white-liver'd staniel, that would never have encountered any but the seven
sisters; that Knight of the Sun, who employed me, should have done his errand
himself: well, I would I were out of his clutches: The only way then is to put
on a clear face, lest I bring a storm upon my self. -- Virtuous Sir, what
answer will your ingenuity be pleased to return by your most humble and
obsequious vassal?


Tim. Ho Sir; are you there with you Bears! How this Gargantua's spirit begins
to thaw? -- Sir, you Punto of valor --


Hax. I have indeed, puissant Sir, been in my time, rallied amongst those
Blades: but it has been my scorn of late to engage my Tuck upon unjust grounds.


Tim. Tucca, thy valor is infinitely beholden to thy discretion. -- But pray
thee resolve me, art thou made known to the purport of thine errand?


Hax. In part I am.


Tim. And partly I will tell thee, this squirt squibbe, wherewith that
pragmatical Monopolist Nasutius Neapolitanus has here employed thee to obstruct
our Action, shall be received and returned with as much scorn, as it was sent
us with spiteful impudence: -- Let him come, if he like; he may trouble himself
and his own impoverished patience: but we shall slight him on our Stage, and
tax him of frontless insolence.


Hax. You shall do well Sir.


Tim. Well or ill, Sir, we will do it. -- Pray tell me brave Spark, what
Archias may this be, who takes thus upon him to excize the Revenues of our
Theatral Pleasure to his purse? Be his monopolizing brains of such extent, as
they have power to ingross all Inventions to his Coffer: all our Stage-action
to his Exchequer?


Hax. I would be loath to praise him too much, because your transcendent self
prize him so little -- but his Travels have highly improved his expression.


Tim. We know it Don, and he knows it too, to his advantage. -- But no man
knows the issue of his Travel better then Timon. It is true, he addressed his
course for Malagasco: but for what end? to learn hard words; school himself in
the Vtopian tongue: and to close up all, he stickt not, Xerxes-like, to deface
Bridges, in the ruins whereof poor Gentleman, he irreparably suffered.


Hax. To my knowledge, he speaks no more then authentic truth: For I my self
in my own proper person got a snap by a Neapolitan Ferret at the very same
time. Ever since which hot Aetnean service; my legs have been taught to pace
Iambicks: and jadishly to enterfear upon any condition. This to himself.


Tim. Thus much for your dispatch; only this: -- Be it your civility, valiant
Don, to present my service to his Na^ed Savages; Monkeys, Babouns and
Marmosites: advising withal your Master of the Bear-yard; that he henceforth
content his hydroptick thoughts with his own Box-holders; and self he lose by
his outlandish Properties, be it his care to pick out some Doxes of his own,
lest those She-sharks whom he has employed upon that trading occasion, abuse
his confidence.


Hax. Your Commands, Sir, shall be observed with all punctuality.


Tim. Do so brave Don, lest I call you to account, and return your wages with a
Bastinado. -- But withal tell that Cockspur your magnificent Mecaenas, that he
keep at home, and distemper not our Stage with the fury of his visits: lest he
be incountred by my little Tarriers, which will affright him more then all his
Spanish Gypsies.


Hax. Account me, invincible Sir, your most serviceable slave upon all
interests. -- Well, I have secured my crazie Bulk as well from a basting as
ever mortal did. And if ever I be put on such desperate adventures again, let
this weak raddish body of mine become stuck round with cloves, and be hung up
for a gammon of Westphalia bacon to all uses and purposes. Exit.


Tril. So! you have conjured down the spirit of one furious Haxter.


Scen. 4.
Tim. And just so must all our Tavern Tarmagons be used; or they will Trapan you,
as they did that old scarifide Friar; whose bitter experiences furnished with
ability enough to discover their carriage and his feverish distemper.


Boy. Sir, all our Boxes are already stored and seated with the choicest and
eminentst Damasella's that all Sivil can afford: Besides Sir, all our Galleries
and Groundstands are long ago furnished: The Groundlings within the yard grow
infinitely unruly.


Tim. Go to Boy; this Plebeian incivility must not precipitate the course of
our Action. -- How often have they sounded?


Boy. They Are upon the last sound; but our expectance of that great Count, whose
desires are winged for us, foreslow our entry.


Tim. These Comic Presentiments may properly resemble our Comet Apparitions;
where their first darting beget impressions of an affectionate wonder, or
prophetic astonishment. The world I must confess, is a Ball racketed above the
line and below into every hazard: but whimseys and careers challenge such
influence over the Judgment of our gallant refined Wits; as their Fancies must
be humoured, and their humors tickled, or they leave our rooms discontented.
So as, the Comedians Garden must find Lettice for all lips: or the disrelish'd
Poet must be untruss'd, and paid home with a swinging censure. -- This must be
my fate, for I can expect no less from these Satirical Madams; whose ticklish
resentment of their injured honor will make them kick before they be galled:
but Timon is armed Cap a Pe against all such feminine Assailants. They shall
find my Sceans more modest, then some of their actions have merited. -- And I
must tell thee one thing by the way my ingenious Trillo, that I never found
more freedom in my spritely Genius, then in the very last night, Extrem^ necte
nullam Scaenis jaeliciorem re^eri. Afran.
when I set my period to this living Fancy. -- But time and conveniences of the
Stage enjoin me to leave thee. -- Make choice of thy place, and expect the
sequel.


Tril. May your Acts live to a succeeding age,
And the Ladies Alimony enrich your Stage.

Exeunt. After the third Sound. PROLOGUE.
MAdams, you are welcome; though our Poet show
A severe brow, it is not meant to you.
Your Virtues like your Features, they are such,
They neither can be prized nor praised too much:
Loved and admired wheres'ever you are known,
Scorning to mix Platonicks with your own:
-- Sit with a pleasing silence, and take view
Of Forms vermillion'd in another hue.
Who make free Traffic of their Nuptial Bed,
As if they had of Fancy surfeited:
Who come not here to hear our Comic Sceans,
But to complete imaginary Dreams
With realler Conceptions: if you mind them,
"Their New Loves stand before, Old Loves behind them:
And from that Prospect this Imprezza read,
"Rich Pearls show best, when they are set in lead.
Such be your blameless Beauties, which comply
With no Complexion but a Native dye,
Apt for a Spousal hugg: and like rich Ore
Admit one choice Impression, and no more.
Those Faces only merit our esteem,
"Seem what they be, and be the same they seem.
For they who Beauty cloathe with borrowed ayrs,
May well disclaim them, being none of theirs.
Here shall you see Nature adorned with skill,
And if this do not please, sure nothing will.
Act. 2.
Scen. 1.
Enter two Boys. 1. Boy. ROom, room for the Ladies of the New dress.


2. Boy. Thou styles them rightly Tim; for they have played the snakes, and put
off their old slough: New Broom sweeps clean: Frosty age and youth suit not
well together. These Bonaroba's must sat their appetites with fresh Cates, or
their sharp attractive stomachs will be quickly cloyed.


1. Boy. True Nick; had thou known their nightly quartring as well as I have
done, thou would hold them rare Coyducks for retreving new game: and storing
their Lobbies upon all adventures.


2. Boy. Why, Tim, art thou one of that Covy?


1. Boy. Let it suffice thee, Wag, I know all their Fagaries to an hair. I have
not played such a Truant in my place; as to become their Pe De during all the
time of their restraint: and not to attain the Principles of a Puny-Bolt: a
faithful secret Pimp deserves his constant pay.


2. Boy. But in good sadness resolve me, were these dainty Dabrides ever in
restraint?


1. Boy. As close coupt up, believe it, as any Parachito's ever were: only
they assumed to their pretended aggrievances to exclaim against their hard
fortunes, in being matched with such impotent and defective Husbands. And now
they have by long flickring and strong favorites got out oth' Cage: and
wrought themselves into Alimony.


2. Boy. Uds so, will their dainty fingers tug in Alume work?


1. Boy. What an ignorant Puppy thou art? This is no Alume work, but such a
calcinated Metal, as it will run like Quicksilver over all their Husbands
Demains: and in very short time make a quick dispatch of all his Long acre.


2. Boy. Trust me Tim, these be mad-mettal'd Girls: brave Braches to breed on.


1. Boy. What a wanton Monkey is this? -- He Is but newly bred, and he can talk
of Wenches breeding! -- well, thou will grow a Cock of the game, if thy
pen-feathred youth mount to it: -- But silence, Wag, the She-Myrmidons are
entering the stage: and I am pricked out for the Chorus.


Scen. 2.
Enter six Ladies fantastically habited; in a wanton and pleasant posture:
passing over the stage, they are encountered by six amorous complemental
Servants. Every one singling forth his Mistress, for discourse. 2. Boy. What
humerous Tomboys be these?


1. Boy. The only gallant Messalinas of our age. That Love-spotted Ermin, is
Madam FRICASE, a woman of a rampant spirit; a confident pretender to Language:
and for the Latin, she makes her self as familiar with the breach of Priscians
head, as if it were her Husbands.


2. Boy. Who is she that looks like a mouted Scaledrake?


1. Boy That spit-fire is Madam CAVEARE, one whose assiduate trading brought
age upon her before her time. But Art has taught her to supply furrowed
Deformities with Ceruss Boxes: and to repair a decayed Complexion with an
Italian fucus. This with other fomentations have so enlivened her, as they
render her no less active then if she at last Grass had but casten her Colts
tooth. The next in rank is that mincing Madam JULIPPE, who would not bear a
Child for a world (though her endeavors be pregnant enough) for fear she
should dis-feature the comeliness of her body.


2. Boy. Yet she is a Medler.


1. Boy. A mellow one, and as ready to fall in Autumn upon all occasions.


2. Boy. What may that gaudy gugay Lady be, that throws such scornful looks
upon our Galleries?


1. Boy. That Is a brave Martial Millanoise: Semiramis never had a more
imperious spirit: she styles her self Madam JOCOLETTE; a jocund Girl on my
word: and one that will not engage her honor, nor barter in a light Commodity
for nothing. She was a Tyrewoman at first in the Suburbs of Millan: but falling
into an ebb of fortune, and hearing the quaint and various fancies of our
Country Damasella's; she took upon her this adventure to improve her annual
pension. Which she has by the dexterity of her wit and incomparable curiosity
of art highly enlarged, and by this unexpected means: for it happened, to give an
addition to her future happiness, that one Sir GREGORY SHAPELESS, a Mundungo's
Monopolist, a paltry-penurious-pecking pinchgut, who had smook'd himself into a
Mercenary title of Knightship, set his affection upon her soon after her
arrival here; whom thou may imagine, Nick; to be no sooner wooed then won. But
scarcely were their marriage sheets warm; till her dissembled fancy, having no
other bait but Lucre to feed it, grew cold. And the Mundungo Knight became
pitifully Crest-faln: more in love with the World then his Italian Doxy. A
divorce she sues and so happily pursues: as by the sollicitancy of her private
Ingles, she became whole sharer in his trucking fortunes. Since which time, she
pastures freely upon the Common without fear of Enclosure.


2. Boy. Why should she not? A barren ranging Do having once leapt over her
own Pale, may incroach, though not with security, upon any others Liberty.


1. Boy. That next her in rank and as right as my leg in her career, is Madam
MEDLER, a cunning Civil Trader: who with much simpring secrecy, as one that
would seem sparing in discovery of her Husbands Debility; calls her Sir
TRISTRAM SHORTTOOL a good well-meaning man, and one that might content any
woman under the Aequinoctial Line, if Nature had measured him right. Whereas
his sufficiency has been elsewhere tried: which his many Branches sprung from
other stocks, may sufficiently witness; being Ciens of his own inoculating, and
at his own proper charge for breeding. As for that Lady with the inflamed face,
Madam TINDER; her desires are so strong and enlarged; as that Torrid Zone where
she sometimes planted, could not accommodate her supplies. -- And let this
serve thee, Nick, for a short Character of these Alimonial Ladies.


2. Boy. Those Platonic Servants of theirs are upon a strong debate with their
amorous Mistresses.


1. Boy. But note my precious Wagge, how infinitely they seem tickeld with the
Accounts which those Ladies return them of their Court-proceedings.


3. Scean.
Florello. You over-glad me Madam Fricace with your select discourse, closing
so fairly with our expected wishes.


Caranto. No conceit
Struck more on fancy then the tale you told me;
It Is so attractive, Madam Caveare,
It acts delight without a passive Object
And forms an Embrio in the phantasy
By Loves mysterious Spell: may Ida's Court
Never see Caranto exercise his Revells
If he neglect those ceremonial rites
Which Love and Duty have obliged him to.
"May all the Orbs make Music in their Motion
And smile on our enjoyment.

Palisado. Fair Iulippe,
Your choice has crowned me; Nor shall track of time
Raze out that Impreze with your free assent
Has here engraven: Palisado's zeal
Shall merit your affection, if endeavors
May mount to such a pitch, as they may cheer
My hopes in retribution: Secrecy
Or what may most suit with a Ladies honor
Shall in this breast keep constant Century.

Salibrand. If Salibrand fall short, may he be forced
To sue his own Divorce. -- Dear Ioculette
May your estrangement from a loathed Bed
Complete your choice with a delightful change.

Morisco. Balls, Treats, Reer-Banquets, Theatral Receipts
To solace tedious hours, shall entertain
My mellow Medler: and when Evning pleasure
Shall with in livening vigor summon more
Duly-reserved Offices; which Love
In her arrival, her desired repose.
Shall pay his loyal tribute; only due
To Crowns and Nuptial Rites: or as pure times
Make these divisions legal, to supply
Defects by abler Farmers: which defrai'd
Proves man to be himself: I Will vow no more,
Only give leave to your devoted servant
Whose purest victim is a constant heart
To make this tender good: -- Before I fail
In acting your content, may youthful heat
Disclaim its interest in me: and this spirit
Active and spritely lose his native strength,
Nay thaw it (...) to atoms, and resolve
To Opick powder, juice of Cucumber,
Or what may show most chillness in the blood.

Tilly-vally. Like brave Platonic you profess much love,
Which you ennamle with gilt promises,
But my affection's conscious of no guilt
Nor a rhetoric tincture: Some can speak,
And call the heavens to record, when their fancy
Mere Planet-struck, has fixed their influence
On various Objects: -- this deludes poor Wenches,
And makes them melt like Cerusse: -- Heavens forgive them,
I Am none of that light Leven: nor Florello,
Caranto, Palisado, Salibrand,
Nor you Morisco: moments of delight
May prompt unmannag'd youth to damned protests
And vows which they intend not: whereas, Madams,
Your choice has made you happy in your change.
This shall my dear affianc'd Tinder find
In her Embraces; and in those conclude
Stolen waters be the sweetest.

All. Excellent;
Thou shall be styled the Platonic Pithias.

Friscase. Our faith is not confirmed by Oratory.
If Man, he cannot falsify his trust
In offices of love: we leave our own
For your enjoyment; were there piety
In making Love the Anvil of your treason?
No, no; we shall not entertain a thought
That may suggest suspicion: nor retain
In our late widdow'd breasts a crime so foul
As Jealousy: let our Cornuto's harbor
That marrow-eating Fury. -- Dear Florello,
Hold my exchanged Love complete in thee.

Cavear: Hold same opinion of thy Caveare,
My best Caranto.

Iulippe. Treasure like esteem
In thy Iulippees choice, brave Palisado.

Ioculette. In Ioculette, active Salibrand.


Medler. Thy spriteliest Revels may they be reserved
For thy endeered Medler, my Morisco.

Tinder. So may thy hopes be crowned in thy Tinder,
My valiant Tilly: and rest thus resolved,
That th'tender tinder of my tried affection
Shall never obscure its luster, if neglect
Extinguish not that heat.

Tilly. May the Frigid Zone
Sooner contract my sinews.

Morisco. And Loves Grove
Become an Hermits Cell.

Sal. And our Revels
A sullen Stoic Dream.

Palisado. And this exchange
A period to our joys.

Caranto. And our protests
Affrighting shadows.

Florello. Or what is worst of all,
May those Contents which you expect from us
Discover our defects: and make you wish
Your Nuptial Beds untoucht.

All. May all these fall
And crush us with their grandeur.

Ladies. Be it so.
And if our levity disvalue vows,
Or what may most oblige us; may like censure
Impeach our perished honors. They retire.

1. Boy. -- So, the match
Is clapped already up: they need no witness.

2. Boy. Trust me, they couple handsomely, as if they had been married after the
New fashion.


1. Boy. These need no dispensation: Fancy can act it without more ado.

A mad match soon shuffled up.


2. Boy. But what shuffling would there be, if any of these wanton Gossips
should cry out before their time?


1. Boy. That cry, my dainty Wag, would be soon stifled. There be many ways,
as I have heard my old Granham say, who had been in her youth a Paracelsian
Doctors Lemman, to impregnate a Birth, and by secret applications, apozems and
cordials, not only to facilitate but expedite their production.


2. Boy. And what of all this?


1. Boy. Why then Tim, the only safe way for these gamesom Maquerella's is, to
antidate their Conception before their separation: This has been an approved
Receipt; and upon a long consult, found so and returned authentic: Joy or
Grief produce wondrous effects in humerous Ladies.


2. Boy. Thou art a cunning sifting Ningle for all rogueries.


4. Scean.
Enter again the Ladies with their Platonic Confidents. 1. Boy. What! so soon
returned; upon my life there is some amorous design on foot either in displaying
of the weakness of those Ram^-heads whom they have deserted: or some Pasquil of
light mirth, to ingratiate their late entertained Servants.


2. Boy. No Drollery for love sake:
Facetious fancies are the least profane.

1. Boy. That Is a precious strain of modesty, Nick, make much on it:
-- Let Us fasten our attentions -- They are moving.

Florello. Dear Madam Fricase, present those Sceans,
Those love-attractive Sceans, your Noble self
With these long injured Ladies tendered
To your Prudential Senate.

Fricase. Sure Florello
You much mistake them; can you call them Sceans
Which just complaints exhibit? true, they might,
They might have proved to us and to our honors
That lay at stake, and by spectators thought
Highly engaged, nay desperately exposed
To a Judicial sentence: a Decree
Of fatal consequence.

Caranto. But pregnant wits
Stored with maturest judgment, polite tongues
Calmed an approaching storm.

Palisado. Nay, made you gracious
Before those rigid Consuls.

Sal. For my part,
I never knew a good face spoil a cause
Though th'Bench were never so gravely ancient:
Nor ripe in years.

Morisco. Beauty's a taking bait
Which each fish nibbles at: this Appius felt,
A reverend Sage, whom furrowed brow, loose lip,
Strait line of life, a rough distempered cough,
Aged Catarrhs, a shivered shell turned earth,
where naught appeared that might partake of man
Save a weak breathing motion: yet could He
Send forth light wandering eyes: and court Virginia
With a dull admiration: so the Bard
Describes his daring-doating appetite,
Which he pursued, yet thought none durst discover:
Appius had silent tongue, but speaking eyes,
Yet who says Appius loves Virginia, lies,

Tilly. Not I, I vow: let age attire it self,
And in that garish habit fool his soul
With fruitless wishes: what is all this to me?
Pigmalion may with his incessant vows
Sweetened with fancies incence seek t'enliven
Motionless marble: but such statues render
Icy content: Imagination may
Make The Image seem a Leda: yet the Swan
Retains her feature and her nature too.
-- Let Us leave these apprehensions; they suit better
With sh^dy then essentials favorites.
-- Good Madams, second our desires; let us hear
How you were dealt withal.

Florello. Our instancy
Begs so much favor.

Caranto. It will cheer our spirits
In the relation of your fair Proceedings.

Mor. Where the issue crowned your suit with that success
No Fates seemed more propitious.

Palisado. We must hav't;
You know what longing means.

Sal. Come, who begins?


Ladies. Stay, Gallants, wing not your too speedy course
With such Pegasian quickness, our consent
Should go along: our interests are concerned
To perfect your desires.

Florello. And we presume
Your acquiescence will accomplish it;
Our mutual loves close in that harmony,
That though the ayrs of Music still admit
Their closure in Divisions, our joint strings
So sweetly tuned, may run their Diapason
Without a Discord.

Fricase, By which sense we gather
That we must prove your Fiddlers;

Florello. You mistake me:
We hold you instruments; your fancies strings
To actuate our motion with that fullness
Arion never attained too.

Ladies. We must yield
Or they will storm us.

Fricase. Yet let our conditions
Bring them within our lists. -- Well, our surprise
Must make you parties in the discovery.

All. For Loves sake how?


Fricase. As thus; we stand at Bar
TO express our grievances: and you must set
Grave Censors or Examinates, to discuss
The weight of our Complaints.

All. Content; we will do it.


Ladies. But do it exactly, or you spoil the plot.


Caranto. Slid, doubt not Ladies, we have wit enough
To frame Intergotaries, so you make answer,
And with your quickness do not puzzle us.

All. Advance, advance, let us mount and play the Consuls.


The Confidents ascend the higher Seats, erected after the form of the Roman
Exedra's: And the Ladies with Petitions in their hands standing at the Bar. 1.
Boy. How will these dainty Dotrels act their parts?


2. Boy. Rarely no doubt; their Audience makes them confident.


Scean. 5.
Florello. Now fair Ladies, what wind has blown you hither?


Fricase. The storm of our unsufferable wrongs
Call unto you for Justice.

Caranto. And your Beauties
Injoyns our just assistance. -- Show your griefs.

1. Boy. This is a Caranto-man with all my heart! must
Beauty be his Land skip on the seat of Justice?

2. Boy. Pray thee give them line.


Fricase. Should I discover my misfortunes, Consuls,
They would enforce compassion even in strangers
Who know not my Extraction. -- My descent
Besides the Fortunes I derived from them
Who gave me Being, Breeding, with whats'ere
Might complete youth, or give imbellishment
To Natures curious workmanship, was known
To shine more graceful in the eye of fame
Then to remain obscure: yet see my fate,
My sad occurring fate!

Florello. Express it Madam.


Fricase. I married, Reverend Consul, and in that
Lost both my freedom, fortune and my self.
My former single sweet condition
Clothes that remembrance in a sable weed,
Resolves mine eyes to Niobees, whose teirs She feigns to weep, in resentment
of her former estate.
Might drop to marble, and erect an urn
T'inhume my funeral spousals.

Caranto. Alas poor Lady.


1. Boy. Pitiful Senator, if he have not drunk some
Coffie to keep him waking, he will questionless fall a-sleep,
or melt into tears before he delivers his sentence.

Palisado. Whence sprung this stream of infelicity,
Resolve us Madam?

Fricase. From mine hapless match;
A tender stripling, whose unmanly chin
Had never known Razor, nor discovered
A youthful down: yet his minority
Was by ore-powring friends accounted fit
To match with my maturer growth: But time
Displayed their folly who enjoined me to it
And my misfortune most: light was his brain
But weaker far his strength to satisfy
Those lawful Nuptial heats, which breathed in us
An active fire. -- Now I appeal to you
Judicious Consuls;

2. Boy. Hold there, Madam; under favor, these brave Senators you appeal to,
are more for Execution then Judgment.


Fricase. Could the patience Aside.
Of Grissel, were she living, reap content
In such enjoyments? Could she suffer youth
Quickened with blooming fancy to expire
And quench her heat with such an useless snuff?

Florello. A match unsufferable.


Caranto. Opposing Nature.


Palisado. Nay, what in time would quite depopulate
And make the World a Desert.

Sal. Higher wrongs
Cannot inflicted be on Woman kind.

Morisco. Nor meriting an heavier censure.


Tilly. Nor,
Aspersing more dishonor on that sex,
That most endeared sex, to which we owe
Our selves and fortunes: for should their choice Beauties
Suffer a pillage by desertless hands,
Forced to a loathed Bed, and made a prey
To seered age, or to unripened youth,
How soon might these imparallel'd Deities
By fixing their affections on strange faces
And their more graceful posture, which they valued
Above their churlish consorts, become strangers
To their due spousal rites: How soon engage
Their honor to th'Embraces of a Servant
Of brave deportment, spritely eyes, neat limbs,
A virile presence, and a countenance
'Twixt Ajax and Adonis; neither fierce
Nor too effeminate: but mixed 'twixt both,
"Neither too light to scorn, nor stern to loath?
'Twas this brought Troy to ruin: for had Helen
Espoused where she had loved, poor Menelaus
Had never been branched, nor Troy reduced to flames,
Nor Priam and his Hecuba the grounds
Of sad-succeeding stories.

1. Boy. A gallant Consul, trust me; he has got by heart the Ballad of the
Destruction of Troy to a syllable.


Florello. Honored Colleague
You show your self both learned and eloquent.
Madam, be pleased to solace discontent
With a retired repose: we have discust
And balanced the grandeur of your wrongs
In a judicious skale: and shall apply
Proper Receipts to your aggrievances
When we have heard the rest.

1. Boy. Receipts of their own application, I warrant thee.


Caranto. Madam Caveare,
You here appear as a Complainant too.

Cave. And none more justly: -- never was woman matched
To such a stupid, sottish animal;
One that is composed of Nonsense, and so weak
In Masculine abilities, he never read
The Wife of Bathes Tale, nor what thing might please
A woman best: -- my Curtain Lectures have
No influence on him. -- I must confess
He Is simply honest; but what is that to me?
He apprehends not what concerns a woman:
Nor what may suit her quality in state
And fit dimension.

Caranto. A most unfitting Husband.


Caveare. It was my parents caution I remember,
But 'twas not my sad fate t'observe that Lesson,
Never to fix my fancy on a person
Who had no Sage in's pate: lest progeny of fools
Should make my race unhappy: this has made
My thoughts mere strangers to his weak embraces,
Nor shall I e're affect him.

Florello. Madam, no Law
Would in the Spartan State enjoin a Lady
So nobly accomplished to confine
Her fancy to such fury.

Palisado. This objection
Admits no long debate.

Sal. Her rich deserts
Adorned with such choice native faculties,
And graced with art to make them more complete,
In humane reason should exempt her youth
From such a servile yoke.

Morisco. In ancient times
When wisdom guarded Senats; a Decree
Confirmed by public Vote enacted was,
That none should marry till he had observed
Domestic discipline; and first to bear
With a composed garb the indignities
Of a Zantippe, if his fortune were
To cope with such a fury: and to calm
Her passion with his patience: -- now grave Colleagues
What comfort might this injured Lady drain
In these puntileo's which import her state,
From this Insensate Sot?

Tilly. Exchange his Bed
And sue his Patent for the Fatuano:
And to display him to his visitants
In clearer colors; let this Motto be
Engraven on those walls deep-ach't with time:
Defective in his Headpiece here he lies,
Object of scorn to all surveying eyes.

2. Boy. So, poor scatter-brain, he has got his judgment already.


Caranto. Praxatiles could never portray him better,
Nor lodge his sconce more fitly. -- You may, Madam,
Conceive how sensibly we feel your wounds,
And with what promptness we shall expedite
your long-expected cure.

Palisado. Madam Iulippe,
You come next in rank; declare your griefs,
And if our judgments hold them meriting
Our just relief, we have compassionate hearts
And powerful hands to vindicate your wrongs
To the utmost scruple.

Iulippe. If they weigh not heavy
Let me incur your censure. -- Patriots,
For I appeal to your judicious bosoms
Where serious Justice has a residence
Mixed with a pious pity: I shall unravel
The Clew of my misfortunes in small threeds
Thin-spun as is the subtle Gothsemay.
Deep wounds, like griefs, require contracted lines,
Few words, long sighs, Accents that want express.
First give me leave one beamling to bestow
On my obscured, once glorious family.

All. Madam proceed, Fame made it eminent.


Iulip. But now contemptive, by marrying one
Who bears the shape of man, and that is all,
A base-white-liver'd Coward: whose regard
To his lost honor stamps him with that brand,
That hateful stigma which humanity
Scorns as the basest complice.

Palisado. Style it Madam.


Iulip. Pusillanimity. -- That Ranter breaths not
Who with his peekt Monchato's may not brave him,
Baffle, nay baste him out of his possessions:
His fortunes he esteems not, so his person
May be secured from beating.

All. Matchless Coward.


Iulip. Nor is this all; 'has sought t'ingage my Bed,
My Nuptial Bed and honor, nay those sheets,
Where I may safely vow, never man lay in
Beside my husband.

2. Boy. Very like; But how many when he was not there? Aside.


Florello. No misfortune worse
Nor humor hateful to a virile spirit,
Whereof your noble family partakes
Then want of courage.

Palisado. Tush, Sir, that is not all,
Her line in time might grow degenerate
And blanch the living memory of those
From whence she came.

Caveare. There Is none who here appears
Before you Conscript Consuls, but can give
Store of evincing instances of this:
For matching with Sir Jasper Simpleton
An hair-brained puppy, most of all my brood*
Run like shell headed Lapwings in careers
Just as their own supposed father did
Simple Sir Jasper, whose small doze of sense
Proportioned their discretion. -- Till a change
Impregnated me more wisely.

Fricase. So did I
Suffer in my raw Puny Amadin;
Though all my fears summed up their period,
And in it crowned my wishes for one Boy,
Who while he lives, I think, will prove a Boy,
I had by my young stripling: who can trace
His fathers steps directly: all his games
Wherein his lineal youth takes sole delight
Are yert-point, nine pins, job-nut, or span count*
Or riding cock-horse, which, his Dad admires
Smiling to see such horsemanship performed:
Now I appeal to you, whose judgments are
Maturely serious, if these tomboy tricks*
Might not perplex me and enforce me too
To act what my affections prompt me do!

Ioculet. If one complain of the minority
Of her thin-douny Consort: and you Madam
Of his Simplicity whom you have chus'd,
And you Iulippe of his Cowardice,
Whom with averseness you have made your spouse;
What grounds of discontent may I conceive
Unhappy Ioculette, in my choice
My nightly torture; whose Embraces be
Worse then those snaky windings unto me
Dipped in Medusa's Charms.

Caranto. Unbare your wound.


2. Boy. Nay, let that be the least of your fears; -- she will do that to an hair.


Ioculet. Know then judicious Consuls
These arms are forced to inwreath a shapeless mass
Of all Deformity: a Bear unlickt,
One whom Thersites that disfigured Greek
So far excelled in native Lineaments,
Proportion, Feature, and Complexion,
(All rare attractives to the eye of Love,)
As amorous Nar^issus in his prime
Surpast the roughest Sylvan that the woods
E're nursed or harbored: yet enjoined am I
To hug this Centaur: who appears to me
A Prodigy in Nature.

All. It Is a fate
Exacts compassion: and deserves redress.

Florello. Such a complete and exquisite a beauty
Accomplished in all parts --

Caranto. Nay qualified
With rarity of arts to make her sex
With pious emulation to admire
Her choice perfections --

Palisado. And all these obscured,
Soiled, sullied, perished by the immeriting touch
Of a misshapen Boor --

Sal. Such precious gems
Set in ignoble metals cannot choose
But much detract from the native graceful luster
Which they retained by means of that base Ore
Imp^ls their Orient splendour. --

Morisco. This is nothing
To the injury her lineage may receive
From his deformity.

Tilly. I must confess
That threatens much of danger: yet I read not
That Vulcans poult foot or his smutted look
Blackned with Lemnian Sea-coal, brought the issue
Be got by Venus, if he any got,
To change their amorous physnomy --

Morisco. He may thank
Mars for that active courtesy, or it had
Disfigured much his spurious progeny.

Florello. Well Madam, we compassionate your choice
In your Sir Gregory Shapeless: and shall find
A quick receipt to cure your discontent
With a new-molded and more pleasing feature
Then your sad fate enjoys. -- Repose, till we
Have run through all your griefs, and felt your pulses.

2. Boy. For shame sake, no further my dainty Doctors.


Aside. Florello. With th'symptoms or gradations as they stream
In your desertless Sufferings; Paroxisms,
Or what Extremes may most surprise your fancies:
In these, our serious Judgments shall supply
Such sovereign Cordials: as you shall not need
No use nor application of more help
Then what we shall prepare: let this suffice,
It rests in us to cure your maladies.
-- Excuse us Madam Medler, these debates
Have kept us from discovery of your wrongs.

Medler. Then which none more depressive: -- would you judge
The Musician good that wants his Instrument:
Or any Artizan who goes to work
Without provision of a proper tool
To manage that employment? -- Modesty
Bids me conceal the rest: my secret wants
Require an active tongue: but womanhood
Injoyns me silence.

Morisco. Alas I Am sensible
Of her aggrievance ere her dialect
Can give it breath or accent.

Medler. But you say,
And our experience has informed us too
In that essential truth, that we must first
Disclose our wounds, if we expect a cure:
Let your impartial judgments then give eat
To a distressed Ladies just complaint.
In my first years, as now I am not old,
My friends resolved, to supply a portion,
Which my descent though good could not afford,
To match my youth unto a man of age,
Whose Nest was richly feathered, stored of all
But native vigor, which expressed it self
As if all radical humor had been drencht
In a chill shady bed of Cucumbers
Before our Nuptial Night: often had I begged
With sighs and tears that this unequal match
Might be diverted: but it might not be,
The fullness of his fortunes winged them
To consummate the match: this pleased them,
But me displeased, whom it concerned most.

Florello. The issue, Madam!


Medler. None, nor ever shall
With that seer suckless Kex.

Morisco. Never was Lady
So rarely beautified, so highly wronged.

Car. What flinty worldling were those friends of yours
To value Fortunes more then your content?

Palisado. To prostitute your honor to a clod
Of mouldred earth?

Sal. And in an icy bed
To starve your blooming comforts?

Tilly. This exceeds
All spousall suffering, which preceding times
In our Italian stories ever read
Or in their sable Annals registered.

Flor. Much of Sir Tristram Shorttool, so I think,
Men call your Husband, have I ofttimes heard
And his penurious humor: But your wrongs
Were strangers to me, till your own relation
Displaid their quality; which to allay,
Nay, quite remove, transmit the care to us
And our directions, to supply your wants,
We should be just to all, but still retain
A bosom pity to the weaker sex;
If we observed not this with tenderness,
We should not merit this Judicial Seat
Whereto --.

1 Boy. These Dabrides raised you.


Tilly. Now Madam Tinder your aggrieves are last.


Tinder. But not the least: what woman could endure
In spousal rights to have a stranger share
In her enjoyments? or remain deprived
Of her propriety by losing those
Appropriate dues which Nature has ordained
And sacred rites approved? -- You see I Am young,
And youth expects that tribute which our sex
May challenge by descent.

All. Her Plea is good.


Tinder. Would you not reverend Consuls hold it strange,
To see a savage unconfined Bull,
When the Pasture's fruitful, and the milk-pail full,
And all delights that might content a Beast,
Range here and there: and break into those grounds
Which are less fertile, and where neither shade
Affords him umbrage, nor smooth-running Brooks
Streams to allay his thirst: nay, where the grass
Too strew for fodder, and too rank for pasture
Would generate more fatal maladies
Then a whole College of State-Empyricks
Or Countrey-Farriers had art to cure?

Florello. Such Bullocks, Madam, well deserve a baiting.


Tilly. And beating too.


Tinder. Yet this is my condition.
For marrying one Sir Reuben Scattergood,
A Person in appearance like enough
And well-dispos'd for ought my watchful Eyes
Could long discover^ but his Father dead
And his revenues by his Death swollen great,
His Nuptial Bed he leaves: and entertains
Such mercenary Prostitutes as fancy,
His loose-exposed Fancy, lured him to.

Caranto. Injurious Ribald.


Palisado. Hateful Libertine.


Tilly. Had she been old, or crook't, or any way
Deformed.

Sal. Or ill-condition'd.

Morisco. Or averse
When he was active.

Florello. Or run retrograde
To his just pleasures: these might have abridg'd
And weakened his affection: but when beauty,
Composed temper and a graceful presence
Clothed both with majesty and a sweet smile
Of such attractive quality, as the Adamant
Cannot more vertually enforce its Object
Then these impressive motives of content:
He merits not the Title of a Man,
Much less the embraces of so choice a spouse,
Who violates his faith; deceives her trust.

Caranto. I am directly, Sir, of your opinion.


Palisado. So I;

Morisco. And I.

All. So all of us concur,
To make our Judgments more unanimous.

Tinder. And to confirm't, may you be pleased to give
Attention to a story I shall tell,
As true as strange to manifest the Affronts
My Patience has endured, and to what height
His Luxury ascended?

All. Madam do,
We shall lend ready Ears to your discourse.

Tinder. It chanced one day, and ofttimes so it chanced,
For doubtful thoughts have ever jealous eyes,
That my suspicion had begot a fear,
That my neglectful Husband had a kindeness,
And more then usual, unto my Maid,
A proper Maid, if so she might be called:
Now to possess my self whether those grounds
Whereon I built might just inducements be
Of my late-hatched fears, I made pretense,
(What is it Jealousy will not design?)
To go from home* But this was no recede
But a retire: for in the Evening time
When those two amorous pair expected least
Such an unwelcome visit, I repaired
To a close Arbor set with Sycamours,
The Tamarisk and sweet-breathed Eglantine,
That local Object which I fixed upon
Not of my self, but by direction,
Where I found out what I suspected long,
Such wanton dalliance as the Lemnian Smith
Never discovered more when he prepared
His artful Net t'enwreath his Eriena
Impaled in Mars his arms.

All. Could you contain
Your passion in such Aretine a posture?

Tinder. With much reluctance I did indeed,
Curbing my temper which was much enraged
With this too mild expression: -- Fie for shame*
Minion I Will have none of this work, not I.
You may when it it is offered you, said he.

1. Boy. Ha, ha, ha. This was a bold-fac'd Nigler, trust me Wag. Aside.


Florello. Was It not enough for him to enjoy his pleasure,
But he must jear you too?

Caranto. As if you were
A Stale to his light dalliance?

Palisado. Or a scorn to his embraces.
Was her servile beauty
Exposed to sale, dishonor of her Sex
To be compared to yours?

Sal. Whose native splendor
Without the help of Art, which makes complexion
By borrowed colors much unlike it self;
May challenge a prerogative in the rank
Of our compleatest Features.

Morisco. It seems strange
How you could brook the affront without revenge
On that insulting Prostitute.

Tillival. No doubt
She would take hold of opportunity
By the foretop, and repair her pressing wrongs
By private satisfactions, which works best
When their Revenge seems sleeping and at rest.
This Lady would not rate her worth so small
As to forego both Use and Principal.

2. Boy. No; reverend Favorite, you will find this Madam Spitfire of a keener
metal then so. She Is right tinder: no sooner touch then take.


Florello. Ladies, We Have heard your different Complaints
Forcing our just compassion and resolves
To tender your condition and redress:
What may the purport be of your Petition
Relating to your grievances?

All-Lad. A freedom
From our dis-relish'd Beds.

All-Plat. It Is granted you.

Ladies. With Alimony to support our state
In this division.

Platon. Your suit is just,
Should we oppose it, we might wrong our selves.

1. Boy. Very likely; for they mean to be made whole Sharers both in their
Persons and Personal Estates: -- This is brave judicial Brocage. Aside.


Florello. Speak Fellow Colleagues, Shall I limit them
What we in Justice hold expedient
For the Alimonal Charge proportioned them,
And in what measure to supply their Wants?

All. Do so Florello, we shall second it.


Florello. Thus I conceive, these Ladies have resigned
Their title, property and interest,
In whole and not in part which they enjoyed
In their defective Husbands. -- Were It not just
In lieu oth' whole which they have here disclaimed
That they should seize upon the Moity
Of their Revenues whom they have here deserted
As useless Instruments unto the State?

Platon. A just proportion:

Ladies. We submit to it.


2. Boy. And so ye may well, if your Husbands will yield to it.


1. Boy. These be nimble shavers Nick as well as sharers: they know how to cut
large thongs out of other folks leather.


Flor. This crowns our wishes, when with joint consent
We close out votes and render you content.

Caranto. Dismount, dismount, let us exercise no more They descend,
These purple seats, their stories stand too high
For our Ascent: Only let us thus much know
Whether our Parts were acted well or no.

Ladies. Above expectance: singular in all,
But best in your Conclusion.

Fricase. You did well
In your proportioning of our Alimony,
Molded to the moity of their estates
Whom we have justly left: but we had less
Allotted us in more Authentic Courts.

Palisado. That was not in our verge to regulate.


Caveare. Nor skills it much: we have a competence
Aspiring to Exceedings; and in this
More blessed because exempted from those bonds
Which our long servitude inchain'd us to.

Florello. Of Consuls then, which title we usurpt
To cheer your fancies, we shall now become
Your Servants, Confidents or Favorites,
Or how you please to style us: -- we are all
Affianc'd yours: firm as the solid Rock
In your reserved Councels and what may
Hold correspondence with your interests,
But soft and malleable as liquid amber
In its resolving temper when delight
Shall sport it in your bosom, and admit
A sociable dalliance.

Fricase. Your free discourse
Grounded on former proofs of constancy
Has so indeer'd me, I am wholly yours.

Cav. Madam, we mean not you shall have it so;
You Have broke the ice, and we will trace your steps;
Former experience has engaged me
To fix on my Caranto.

Iulippe. Palisado shall
Enjoy my love.

Ioculette. I for my Salibrand.


Medler. Morisco mine.


Tinder. Tinder shall Tilly's be.


Tilly. Pure tender Tinder of affection,
The new-blown Bloom that craves a native warmth
To cherish its young growth shall not receive
More solace from those Orient rays which shine
On its fresh-springing beauty, then your choice
Shall in my dear embraces.

Tinder. I shall try you.


1. Boy. Thus walks the poor Gentlemen's Revenues to raise these Doxes Alimony:
and thus runs their Alimony to feed these youngsters riot.


Platon. Our joy's completed: -- Seal this joint Conveyance
With those ambrosiack signets of your lips. They kiss.
"One house did hold, one house shall hold us twain,
"Once did we kiss, and we will kiss again.

2. Boy. How Turtle-like they couple!


Act. 2.
Scen. 6.
Upon these Platonicks private Parliance, Dalliance and Embraces of their
Ladies* Enter Sir Amadin Puny; Sir Jasper Simpleton; Sir Arthur Heartless* Sir
Gregory Shapeless; Sir Tristram Shorttool; Sir Reuben Scattergood; in a
melancholy discontented mode; with their Hats over their eyes. Sir Amadin. Is
this th'Platonick Law; all things in common?


Sir Jasper. Must all forego their wives that are not wise?


Sir Arthur. Or be divorc't because we dare not fight?


Sir Greg. Or lose our Mates because we are not handsome?


Sir Trist. Nay, 'cause we are not armed so well as others be,
Forfeit our Consort and our Fortunes too?

Sir Reuben. Yes, that is the plague on it, -- lose a light-heel'd trull,
That in my judgement's nothing: but to lose all
Or Moity of that all, or any part at all
For a poor nifling toy that is worse then nothing,
It Is this that nettleth me. -- I must confess
Tinder that light-skirt with impetuous heat
Sometimes pursued me, till that quenchless fire
Burst into flames of boundless jealousy
Which crossed mine humor: for variety
Relisht my pallat: -- Phoenix brains be rare
But if our dishes had no other fare
They would offend the stomach, and so sat it
As grosser meats would give a better taste:
Such was my surfeit to a Marriage Bed.
My Fortunes I prefer before her beauty,
Or what may most content the appetite.
Money will purchase wenches: but this want,
This roguish thing called want makes wanton thoughts
Look much unlike themselves: it is this white metal
Enliveneth spirits, knits our arteries
Firm as Alcides: He that binds himself
Apprentice to his wife merely for love,
May he, pen-feather'd widgeon, forfeit's freedom
With whatsoever is dearest to the vogue
Of his affections: she were a rare piece
That could engage me or oblige me hers
With all those Ceremonial rites which Flamins use
To Hymen's honor: Beauty, still stay I,
Will breed a surfeit, be it never so choice
"Nor eye-attractive: I should choose a Grave
"Before one Mistress all mine Interest have.
O my Alimony, Alimony; this is the goad that only prickels me!

Platon. Those be your Husbands, Ladies; -- how pitifully they look?


Ladies. Alas, poor Cuckolds. These Platonicks discover the Knights: and
scornfully eye them.


Knights. Ladies, we were sometimes your Husbands.


Ladies. True,
You were so; but your known defects have razed
That style of Wedlock: and infranchis'd us
From that tyrannick yoke. -- We Are now our own,
Nor shall our Beds by you be henceforth known.

Sir Amadin. What have I done?


Fricase. Nothing, Sir Amadin;
And that is sufficient to divide us two.
Your puny years must grow in strength and sinews
To prove you man before you can partake
In my enjoyments: th'Court has so decreed,
And by resentment of that injury
Your blooming youth unripened for delight
Has done to me your hapless Virgin Bride,
Held fit to number me amongst these Ladies,
All different sufferers; and for supportance,
As every thing, you know, would gladly live,
Allots us Alimony.

Florello. So, his score's paid. Aside.


Sir Jasper. Madam, look on Sir Jasper.


Caveare. Honest Simpleton
And so I will, just as the Fowler is wont
On a caught Dotrell; till your wasted brains
Rise to more growth, I from my widdow'd Bed
Will rise untoucht: these breasts shall never give
Their nursing teats unto a Brood of Fools.

Caranto. So, good Sir Jasper, you have your Doom in Folio. Aside.


Sir Arthur. Receive me dear Iulippe.


Iulippe. For what end?
Have you stolen from your Colors? -- Oh I hate
A Coward worser then a Maidenhead
Basely bestowed; -- these Paphlagonian Birds,
These Heartless Partridges shall never nestle
Under my feathers: till your spirit revive
And look like man, disclaim your interest
And injured title in Iulippe.

Palisado. So;
He must first learn to fight, e're she to love. Aside.

Ioculette. What would Sir Gregory?


Sir Greg. That you would love me.


Iocul. No; you must cast your slough first: can you see
Ought in your self worth loving: have you ever
Since our unhappy meeting used a Glass,
And not been startled in the sad perusal
Of your affrightful Physnomy? -- Sir, hear me,
And let me beg your patience if you hear,
Ought may dis-relish you; -- when the Camel shall
Transhape himself into a nimble Wesil
Or such like active Creature: and this Bunch
Which Nemesis has on your shoulders pitched,
This Bunch of Grapes I mean, shall levelled be She lies her hand upon his
Shoulders.
And brought into proportion by a Press
Equally squeezing, till it shall retain
Adonis feature, I shall value you
And hug you for my Consort: But till then
Excuse my strangeness.

Salibrand. So, his Cause is heard.
He must unshape himself to gain her love.

Medler. Sir Tristram Shorttool, have you ought to do
In this pursuit of fancy?

Sir Tristram. Something Madam.


Med. But small to purpose: Sir Tristram you have been
A man of Reading: and on Winter Nights
You told me tales, for that was all you did,
What strange adventures and what gallant acts
Redoubted Knights did for their Ladies sakes,
But what did you for Medler all the while?
Did you e're toss a Pike, or brandish Blade
For her dear sake? -- Go to, I shall conceal,
And with a modest bashful veil in-shroud
What Sense bids me discover. -- Let me Sir
Advise you as a Friend; for other styles
Relating to an Husband, I shall never
Henceforth resent them; with a free comply:
Love suits not well with your decrepit age;
Let it be your chief care to intend your health:
Use Caudels, Cordials, Julips, Pectorals,
Keep your Feet warm, bind up your nape oth' neck
Close against chilling airs, that you may live
An old man long: -- but take especial care
You button on your nightcap --

Morisco. After the new fashion Aside.
With his loave Ears without it.

Medler. This is all;
Only your absence.

Morisco. So good night Sir Tristram. Aside.


Sir Reuben. Sweet Madam Tinder. Sir Reuben offers to kiss her.


Tinder. Keep your distance Sir;
I love not to be touched.

Sir Reuben. Are you so hot
My tender Tinder?

Tinder. No Sir; look to the Clime
Where you inhabit; there is the Torrid Zone.

Tilly. Yes, there goes the hair away. Aside.


Sir Reuben. Can you not love?


Tinder. Not One that loves so many.


Sir Reuben. Alas pretty Peat,


Tinder. Pray Sir, hold off your hand;
Truck with your low-priz'd Traders; I must tell you
Mine honor's higher rated.

Sir Reuben. Be it so;
I wish you would disclaim your Alimony,
With that indiff'rent touch as you do Love,
You should not need a Dispensation, Madam,
It should be granted unpetitioned.

Tinder. I Am confident it would: -- nor shall the coolness
Of your affection, bring me to an ebb
Of favor with my self: Plant where you please,
I Will henceforth scorn to hugg my own disease.

Tilly. So, Sir Reuben's dispatched; and like a Ranger may tappice where he
likes. Aside.


Sir Reuben. But hark you Madam, what be these brave Blades
That thus accouter you? are they your Platonicks,
Hectors, or Champion-Haxters, Pimps or Paliards;
Or your choice Cabinet-Confidents?

Tinder. You may
Exact account from them.

Sir Reuben No; but I will not;
Long since I Have heard a Proverb made me wise,
And armed me Cap a pe against such accounts:
"Whos'ere he be that tuggs with durty foes,
"He must be foiled admit he win or lose.

Tin. Shall I acquaint them with your Adage, Sir?


Sir Reuben. Do if you please.


Tinder. No Sir, I am too tender
Of your endangered Honor. -- Should a baffle
Engage your fame, and I the instrument
It would disgust me.

Sir Reuben. You are wondrous kind.
But pray you tell me, is this Favorite
Or Turn-key of your Council in the rank
Of generous Hectors? I would be resolved
For it concerns me.

Tinder. Pray good Sir, as how?


Sir Reuben. Since it is my fate, I would be branched nobly
Lest mine adulterate Line degenerate
And raze the ancient splendour of mine House,
As many noble Families have done
By mixing with inferior Apple-squires,
Grooms, Pages, Ushers, which in time begot
Such middle Wits in this our middle Region,
None could distinguish them from Corydons,
Nor well discover whence they might derive
Their prime descent, unless it were by the Crest
Their Footmen wore: or what their Coach presented
In it is rear quarter. -- All your Sir Reuben begs
Aims mainly at your Honors privilege,
Which shielded I Am secure; and it is this,
"Let choice hands meddle with your Tinder-box.

Tinder. Make that your least of fears. -- We Will keep our fame,
Amidst this freedom, still unblemished*

Knights. So, we have all received their final Answers.


Sir Reuben. Nor do I mean to draw up my Rejoinder.
"He who will lose his wits, or break his heart
"For such a Wench as will not take his part:
"And will not shun what he may safely fly,
"May He a Bedlam or a Beggar dye.

Knights. Farewell inconstant Ladies.


Ladies. Adue constant Actaeons.


Exeunt omnes. The Ladies ushered in by their Confidents. Act. 3.
Scen. 1.
Enter two Citizens. 1. Citizen. IS it for certain that the Dukes voyage holds
for Salamanca?


2. Citizen No doubt on it: his resolution is so firmly fixed, no motion can
decline it. And if we may credit Fame, which seldom errs in all, though it
exceed in many; never was Fleet more bravely rig'd, better prepared, nor with
more Military strength furnished, nor more virile spirits accompanied, nor by
more expert Commanders at any time since the Battle of Lepanto conducted.


1. Citizen. It was thought he would not personally have engaged himself in
this adventure: but have deputed some experienced General for perfecting this
grand design: and imposing a final period to an Action of such high consequence.


2. Citizen. It Is true; but those many aggrievances, aggravated with numerous
Petitions presented by our Sivil Merchants, wrought such strong effects upon
the sweet compassionate nature of the good Duke; as that endeared resentment,
which he retained upon those Merchants relation, touching the infinitely
surcharging losses which they had suffered though the hostile Pyracy of the
Salamancans, as he made a solemn Vow to engage himself in their quarrel: and
either revenge the injuries and indignities they had sustained, or seal his
just desires with the sacrifice of his dearest life.


1. Citizen* Were the Merchant losses great?


2. Citizen. In Shipping infinite: and by Accomptants of approved trust,
computed to many millions: for besides Vessels of lesser burden in one
Sea-voyage being driven by contrary winds upon the Coasts of Calabria, they
lost at one time ^the Panther, Libard, Bugle, Antilope, Caracts of great and
formidable sail: such as would have made their party good against all
Assailants, had they not been dispersed and weakened by violent tempests:
Besides, the unexpected Herocane, which dashed all the endeavors of the best
Pilots that all their Fleet afforded: yet reduced to this strait and sad
exigent, they found no Islander so compassionate as to pity their deplorable
Condition: but rather such as were ready to add fresh affliction to their late
suffering, by seizing on whatsoever remained estimable in their forelorn
Vessels: and exposing them without the least remonstrance of humanity or civil
hospitality to the mercy of the winds. This it was which winged the Duke to
this Expedition: choosing, as report goes, the Revenge for his Ship of War, and
that only man of War, wherein he means to steer his course, return his errand
and requite his Quarrel.


1. Citizen. The Duke's a Person of a gallant spirit.


2. Citizen. I dare affirm it Sir; that the State of Sivil was never with more
prowess, prudence, nor Martial Policy at any time managed; which not only his
prosperous exploits abroad, then which none more successive: but likewise his
vigilant care and, command at home may sufficiently manifest. For his late
Declaration under his Great Seal has discovered the incomparable zeal he had of
serving both Court and City: in commanding all such useless and incommodious
Weeds, as Trapanners Tarpaulins, with all our abusively entitled Hectors, that
they should by a peremptory day depart the City and Line of Communication in
relation to the Court: since which time, they have resolved for want of better
supplies to hazard the remainder of their broken Fortunes upon a desperate
adventure for Tunis.


1. Citizen. In such glorious designs levelling at honor, they declare
themselves really Hectors.


Enter a Mariner. 2. Citizen. What news Segesto?


Mariner. The Duke's upon his march: and near approaching.


1. Cit. How quick's his Spirit to redress our wrongs!


Act. 3.
Scen. 2.
Trumpets and Kettle-drums sounding, with other Martial Music usually observed
in that Country. Enter Duke Eugenio, Officers and Soldiers; with Colors
displayed. Duke. Thus far on our address: may prosperous gales
Breath on our Sails: Sails on our just designs
In vindicating of our Countries fame
Too long impaired by suffering injuries;
Till which redrest our Honor lies at stake
And we made Aliens to our own estate.
March on then bravely that it may appear
"Our Courage can revenge as well as hear.

They march over the Stage with Trumpets, Fifes, Drums and Colors. Manentibus
Civibus. 1. Cit. This gallant resolve of the Duke pursued with such alacrity
can never be sufficiently admired; and to engage his Person too in so perilous
adventure --


2. Cit. And all this in vindication of the Merchants honor and their Interest.


1. Cit. Trust me, he appears bravely.


2. Cit. His disposition from his youth foretold What Is manhood would assay --
whence comes this noise?


Enter Boy. Boy. Room for our Bravo's, Cadets; they march along in ranks and
fyles. Their pockets grow shallow, the Taverns and Ordinaries, they vow to be
Infidels, so as they have inlisted themselves Soldiers of fortune.


1. Cit. These be those Trapanners, whom the Duke has proscribed, or I mistake
it.

Let us observe their posture.


Act. 3.
Scen. 3.
Enter Captain, Tripanners, Terpaulins, with other Runnagado's orderly
marching. And in the rear, Benhadad a Quaker. With Tobacco Pipes. 1. Tripan.
Rouse Buckets and Tubbs. -- Hey for Tunis and Argiers.


Captain. Keep your ranks my Comrades, and fight valiantly.


2. Tripan. What else Captain, we cheated before for nothing, and now having
nothing we mean to fight for something.


3. Tripan. 'Slid Bullies, I think the Duke has done us a pleasure.


1. Tripan. Pray thee, how Boy?


3. Tripan. I Will tell thee, the short and long on it: Before, if any of us had
been so valiant, as few of us were, as to borrow money on the High way, we were
sometimes forced to repay it at the Gibbet: but the world is turned upside
down; if we get it, we may keep it, and never answer for it.


1. Tripan. Hey Boy, art thou in that Lock? -- But noble Landprisado, let us
have a Sea-Sonnet before we lanch forth in our Adventure* Frigot. They say the
Sirens love singing.


Captain Agreed Wags: but which shall we have?


1. Tripan. That old Catch of Tunis and Argiers; good Captain, it suits best
with our voyage.


Captain. To It then my Hectors* and keep your Close as you do your march. The
Sirens will not relish you if you sing out a tune.


The Sea-Song. Capt. To Tunis and to Argiers Boys,
Great is our want, small be our joys;
Let Us then some voyage take in hand They join in the close.
To get us means by Sea or Land.
Come follow me my Boys, come follow me,
And if thou dye, I Will dye with thee.
Have thou a Wife? I have one too,
And Children some as well as thou,
Yet who can see his Brats to starve
So long as he has strength to serve?
Come follow me my Cubbs, come follow me,
And if thou dye, I Will dye with thee.
Methinks, my Boys, I see the store He fixes his eyes as upon Objects in a
Landscape.
Of precious Gems and golden Ore;
Arabian Silks and Sables pure
Would make an Haggard stoop to the lure.
Come follow me, etc.
No worthless mind e're honor sought,
Let Us fight as if we feared naught,
If Bullets fly about our ears
Let Us laugh at death and banish fears,
Come follow me, etc.
And if thou can not live so stench
But thou must needs enjoy thy Wench,
If thou my Boy such pleasure crave
A dainty Doxie thou shall have.
Come follow me, etc.
Courage my Sparks, my Knights oth' Sun,
Let Sivil fame what we have done,
We Would better ten times fight a Foe
Then once for all to Tyburn go.
Come follow me, etc.
Come let us away, mount, march away,
This Calm portends a prosperous day,
When we return it shall be said
That by our voyage we are made.
Come follow me, etc.
But if we never again return,
Enclose our ashes in an urn,
And with them spice a Wassal-Cup,
And to Good Fellows drink it up.
Come follow me, etc.
Which Health when it is gone about
And stoutly set their foot unto't,
No doubt they shall enrolled be
In The Book of Fame as well as we.
Come follow me spruce Sprigs, come follow me,
And if thou fall I Will fall with thee.
Enter a Rank of Tar-paulins, pressed for the same Adventure; marching over the
Stage: and joining in the Catch. An Health-Cup in the Leaders hand. Tar-paulin.
When this Grand Health is gone about,
Where you as sloutly stood unto't,
Doubt not, you shall recorded be
In The Book of Fame as well as we.
March after me, etc.
And when this Bowl shall run so round
Your Legs can stand upon no ground,
Fear not, Brave Blades, but you shall be
Sworn Brothers made as well as we.
March after me, etc.
No other Obsequies we crave,
Nor quaint Inscriptions on our Grave;
A simple Shroud's a Soldiers share,
Which if He want, he needs not care:
March after me, etc.
Such vails are all we wish at last,
Which if we want, the Care is past.
This done, to think of us were just,
Who drink not, yet as dry as dust:
March after me, etc.
While you act what we did before,
Discharge with Chalk the Hoastess Score,
And if the Hussy challenge more,
Charm the maundring Gossip with your ^ore.
March after me, we will frolic be,
And if thou dye, I Will dye with thee.

Act. 3.
Scen. 4.
Benhadad furiously accoasts them. Benhadad. I proclaim you all Edomites;
Dragooners of Dagon; Ding-dongs of Dathan: -- A generation of Vipers. --


1. Tripan. No, Father Benhadad, your gravity is mistaken grossly, we are rather
A generation of Smoking Tobacco. Pipers.


2. Tripan. Go to Holy Benhadad, stand you to your Calling as we to our Arms.
Thou art for converting the Great Turk, and we for lining our Pockets with
Tunis gold. Where if we get our design, hold to thy Principles, but no farther
then thou can maintain them; and we shall create thee our Household Chaplain.

Enter Mariner. To Sea, to Sea; the Winds are prosperous.


Captain. And may we prosper with them. -- So farewell Sivil and her dainty
Doxes.


All. Ran tan; hey for Tunis and Argiers.


Exeunt, Colors displaid, with Fifes and Drums. 1. Cit. Such was the Dukes
care to remove these Weeds,
Whose fatal growth might choke maturer Seeds.

2. Cit. Good Governors wise Gardeners imitate,
These cheer their Plants; those steer a planted State.

Exeunt. Trillo from the high Gallery. I cannot, Gentlemen, contain my self;
-- Timon thy Genius has surpast it self;
Thy Scene is richly various: -- preaze on still,
These Galleries applaud thy Comic skill.

He takes his Seat again. Act 3.
Scen. 4.
Enter Constable and Watch in ^ug Gowns, Bills and Dark Lanthorns. Constable.
Come along with your horns, my Lads of metal. It was the Dukes pleasure before
his departure, that we should be appointed the Sinks and Sentinels of the City,
and that none should have ingress, egress or regress but by our especial
authority and favor. -- But harm watch, harm catch; for my part since I crept
into this office, I am woven into such a knot of good fellowship, as I can
watch no more then a Dormouse: nay, I am verily persuaded if I hold Constable
long, the Deputy of the Ward will return me one of the seven Sleepers. But let
me advise you, my Birds of the Capital, that you walk not after my Example: be
it your care to watch while I sleep. Many eyes are upon you; but my eyes grow
heavy; my days society bids me take a nap.


Watch. But one word, good Master, before you drop into your slumber: Report
goes that there be Spirits that petroul familiarly in this Century; what shall
we say to them, if they pass by?


Constable. Bid them stand.


Watch. But what if they either cannot or will not?


Constable. Let them then take themselves to their heels: and thank God you are
so well rid of them.


Watch. One word more good Constable, and then good night. -- Be these the
Spirits that allure our Children with spice and trinckets to their Skippers,
and so convey them to the Barmoudes?


Constable. In no wise Neighbors; these Spirits come from the Low Countries:
and though at the first sight very frightful, yet appearing unaim'd they become
less fearful.


1. Watch. Nay, if these pretty Familiars come to our Guard naked, we shall
prove hard enough for them.


2. Watch. Well, Neighbor Rugweed, let us not presume too far on our strength:
These Spirits be a dangerous kind of Whifflers: and like our Robin Good
Fellows will play their Legerdemain tricks, scudding here and there in a trice:
and nimbly snap you when least suspected.


Act. 3.
Scen. 5.
Enter Gallerius Ghost. From the Cinnerian depth here am I come
Leaving an ERRA PATER in my Tomb,
To take a view which of my Fellows be
The thrivingst Artists in Astronomy.
Rank one by one in Astrologick row,
And dying see whom thou did living know.
He makes his Figure. Mount gainful CRINON, for to thee we give,
As thou deserve, the sole Prerogative:
For thy divining lines have purchased more
Then all our prime Professors got before.
Jason won much at Colchos, but thy gain
Has linkt thy shoulders in a Swedish Chain.
Rich Divination! But what is knowledge worth,
If People do not credit what is set forth?
This was Omnia temporibus cecinit Cassandra futuris.

Que ventura suts -- vix unquam credita Teucris. Melitus.


CASSANDRA's loss: whom we allow
And hold a Prophetess as true as thou;
But not so well believed: -- take heed my Blade,
Thy late Predictions cannot retrograde,
And give thine erring Notions such a check,
As they unlink that chain which decks thy neck.
Signs sometimes change their influence we see,
I wish the like Event befall not thee.
The Golden Number and Saturnian line
Have been propitious to thee all thy time:
Thy Says held Oracles: thy Observations
For Death, War, Weather held by foreign Nations
As positive Maxims: yet one Critical point
Will throw this artful Fabric out a joint.
Dog days each year affords, if thou find none,
Thy Forune's clearer far then any One.
Let me then caution thee divining Crinon,
Lest thy own Bosom prove thy treacherous Sinon,
Let not opinion make thy judgment err,
"The Evening Conquest crowns the Conqueror:
Hope of reward or one victorious Field
Is no firm ground for any one to build:
"May ill success cloth him with discontent,
That ballanceth the cause by the event.
Next him ascend ERIGONUS, whose Art
Richly imbellish'd with a loyal Heart
Will not permit thy thoughts to stoop so low
As to pretend more then thy Notions know,
Or can attain to: Thou have taken content
With as much freedom under strait restraint.
As Pibrack in his Paradox expressed,
Inwardly cheered when outwardly distressed.
I have much mused while thou converst with us
Of the Gradations oth' Celestial House,
Yet had none of thine own to shelter thee,
This was an humor that transported me,
To see a mind so large, and to discourse
As if he had got Fortunatus purse.
This caused me think that we did greatly err
In holding thee a mere Astrologer,
Though It be a sacred-secret Speculation
And highly meriting our admiration:
But rather some rare Stoic, well content
With his estate how e're the World went.
Yet when I saw thine artificial Scheme
Exactly drawn, as none of more esteem,
I wondered much how such choice Art could want,
Unless the whole world were grown ignorant.
I heard of late what I did never dream
Thy farming life had drawn thee to a Team,
Preferring the Culture of an Husbandman
Before a needful Astrologian,
Who in this thankless Age may pine and dye
Before he profit by Astronomy,
For though I must confess an Artist can
Contrive things better then another man,
Yet when the task is done, He finds his pains
Sought but to fill his belly with his brains.
Is this the guerdon due to Liberal Arts
T'admire the Head, and then to starve the Parts?
Timely prevention thou discreetly used
Before the fruits of Knowledge were abused.
"When Learning has incurred a fearful damp,
"To save our Oil, it is good to quench our Lamp.
Rest then on thy enjoyments, and receive
What may preserve a Life, reserve a Grave.
This with convenience may supply thy Store,
And logde thee with content; what would thou more?
While He who thirsts for gold and does receive it,
Pules like a Baby when he is forced to leave it.
For you LIBERIUS, I Would have your look
For your improvement on your Table book;
Where you shall find how you bore once a Name
Both in the rank of Fortune and of Fame,
But others rising to an higher merit
Darkened that splendour which you did inherit,
Or those mistakes which caused you err so far
As your late years have proved Canicular:
To waste more paper I would never have you,
For I Am resolved your Book will never save you,
Nor you from it receive a benefit,
Suppress then, Pray thee, thy leaf-falling Wit;
Merlins Collections will not serve thy turn,
Retire, retire, and slumber in mine Urn.
Dotage has chilled thy brain, in silence sleep,
"He Is wise enough that can his Credit keep.
For you COLUMBA and rare PEREGRINE,
It is your fate, to nestle in a Clime
Of disadvantage: wisdom bids you build
Where you may dwell; and sow in such a field
Where you may reap the harvest you have sown,
"Arts unimprov'd are to no purpose shown.
Those only may be truly said to know
Whose Knowledge pays their Country what they owe:
And with the Be, from labor never cease
Till they have stored their Hives with sweet increase.
Which thriving industry infused by nature
In such a small Political a Creature,
Might by a Native Modul render thee
Conducts of Science in Astrology:
(...) Apes.
For she accounts it as a fruitless toil
To brouze on Suckets in a barren soil.
For you ALATUS, mount with ayrie wing,
And to your scattered Nest some feathers bring:
Though popular esteem afford delight,
It cannot satisfy the appetite.
Fame is a painted meat and cannot feed,
Nor sat the Stomach when it stands in need.
This was mine own condition; -- while I lived
I to the highest pitch of Fame arrived;
All the Rialto founded with my praise,
Yet silence shrouded this within few days,
For after some few Funeral tears were shed,
My memory died, before tears went to bed.
Yea, in my life time, when my state grew low,
My fame found none she would conduct me to:
And let this caution thee:-though thou swell great
In men's conceit this will not get thee meat:
"The only means to raise friends, fame and store
"Is to make Industry thy Providore.
For ATRO-LUCUS, SERANDS they be such
I would not touch them, lest I should too much
Impeach their branded fames: one word for all,
As their disgrace is great, their knowledge small:
Let these Daemonicks practice less in Black
It will discolor all their Almanac.
But this was not my Errand: I would know
How Ladies with their Husband suit Below!
Those frolic Girls I mean, and of none else,
Who were induced by mine and Crinons Spells
To choose strange Bed-fellows: -- Pray Mephistophilus appears and resolves him.
tell me how,
Dear Mephistophilus; those Wantons do.
Meph. All out of joint: they have left their Husbands bed.


Gallerius. By this it seems they were not rightly wed;
There was no Justice in it: for if there had,
Should they break loose, they would be judged mad.
-- But now mine hour approaches, I must pass
Down to that vault where late I lodged was.
Fix Mephistophilus this on that Gate,
That those who knew me may collect my Fate.

Mephistophilus having fixed this Inscription on the Portal of the Gate, they
descend. Inscription.
The ASTRONOMICAL ANATOMY in a shadowed Physnomy; recommended to Posterity.
Dissected and presented in the Empyrical Ghost of D. NICHOLAS GALLERIUS.

-- Facilis descensus Averni.
Enter Watch distraughtedly letting fall their Lanthorns. Watch. Spirits,
Spirits, Spirits.


Enter Constable rubbing his eyes. Constable. Where, where, where?


Watch. Here, there, and every where.

Now in the Porters Lodge, then in the Air. --

Constable. A foutra for such ranging Mawkins. -- I Will tell you fellow
Officers, for I have been since my weining sufficiently schooled in the Office
of a Constable; that we have no Legislative power (do you mark me) to commit
any Person be he never so notorious a Delinquent, if he fly, or as our
Falconers say, mount up into the Air; we are not bound to follow him, neither
to attach nor commit him; and why says the Law? because it is not in our power
to catch him. But if he strut in the street, you may command him to come before
me the Constable, as I am the Representave Body of the Duke; or before your
selves, being the Representave Body of your Constable: and if the Person so
taken remain under safe Custody, and he fly, if you overtake him by speed of
foot, or by help of the Belmans Mungrel, you may by the Law of Arms lay him by
the Heels.


And so dismiss the Watch. Exeunt. Act. 3.
Scen. 6.
Enter Sir Amadin Puny, Sir Jasper Simpleton, Sir Arthur Heartless, Sir Gregory
Shapeless, Sir Tristram Shorttool, Sir Reuben Scattergood. Sir Reub. Doubt
nothing, my fellow-Knights of Hornsey; the Plot is so neatly and nimbly laid,
as it cannot but hold stitch.


All. But be the Favorites Suits got, Sir Reuben?


Sir Reuben. They are brought to our Lodgings already. To try a Conclusion, I
have most fortunately made their Pages our Coyes by the influence of a white
Powder; which has wrought so powerfully on their tender pulse, as they have
engaged themselves ours back and edge. -- Sunt munera vinc^^n s^^vis.


Sir Tristram. It Is true; but how shall we pursue this Project; that we may act
to purpose, what your Ingenuity has contrived?


Sir Reuben. Leave that to me; be it your care to follow my direction, and if I
make not these Haxters as hateful to our Hossies, as ever they were to us who
were their Husbands; set me up for a Jack-a-Lent, or a Shrove-Cock for every
Boy to throw at. The Net is spread, and if they escape the nouze, they must have
more eyes then their own to discover it.


Sir Amadin. Excellent, excellent; I long till I be at work.


Sir Reuben. It will admit no delay, Sir Amadin, I assure you. We have not
over-watcht this night to no purpose: this very morning by times we must be
fitted with our Properties: and with a scornful neglect pass by that
Rendezvous, where our gamesome Ladies expect their youthful Platonicks.


Sir Gregory. Revenge to me's far sweeter then to live.


All. To It, to it, for loves sake let us to it.


Sir Reuben. The Plot is laid with such industrious skill,
If this take not, I do not know what will.

Exeunt. Act. 4.
Scen. 1.
Enter Madam Fricase, Madam Caveare, Madam Iulippe, Madam Ioculette, Madam
Medler, Madam Tinder. Madam Fricase. HOw tedious morns these be in our
expectance
Of what we tender most?

Caveare. Credit me Madam,
My Marriage day from the rising Sun to Night
Seemed not so long, though it was long enough,
As the slow-running course of this Morns visit.

Iulippe. Desires cannot endure protractive hours,
The Poet has confirmed our thoughts in this,
Placing our Action far below our Wish:
"Sooner quenched is Loves fire
"With fruition then desire.

Ioculette. That Poet surely was neither Mantuan, Lucian, nor Claudian.


Medler. No Sister; nor Alcaeus, Eubaeus, nor Apuleius; but some cold-Cucumber
spirited Zonocrates, who never knew actually how to hug his Mistress.


Tinder. This is the hour and place.


Fricase. It is so; and no doubt but our feathered Favorites have over flown us.


Act. 4.
Scen. 2.
Enter Vintress and Drawers. Vintress. What do you lack my Princely Beauties?


Caveare. What your Sex cannot furnish us with; my dainty Dabrides.

Did you entertain no Gallants lately?


Vintress. Not any, Madam; but Gallants are men of their words; they will stand
to their tackling upon occasion: will you be pleased Noble Ladies in their
absence, to bestow your selves in a room: or to procreate your selves, take a
turn in the Garden?


Medler. Slid does she hold us for Andalisian Studs, that can breed by the air,
or procreate of our selves?


Fricase. Well, her meaning is good; we will accept her offer: and take a walk
or a cheerful repose at our pleasure: and in it let each of us for want of more
real Objects, entertain an imaginary apprehension of their absent Lover.


Knocking within. Drawer. Anon, Anon Sir; -- quick, quick as Erebus, good
Jeremy. -- Uds so, what a clattering they make? I verily think our old Titere
Tews and Bugle Blews are come to Town, they keep such a damnable quarter.


2. Drawer. They knock as they were mad men in the Percullis; -- quick, quick,
more Attendants in the Unicorn. -- There goes none to the Anwarp. The Lion and
the Roebuck have not one Drawer to attend them. -- Who goes into the Ladies
Garden?


1. Drawer. We shall have a brave Term, if we stir not our stumps better,
Exeunt.


Iulip. The Elyzian Groves so richly beautefied,
Decked with the tufted verdure; watered
With Crystal Rills, and clothed above conceit
In native Diapry: may Emblems be
Of this delicious Platform, where each sense
May sat its quest with sweet satiety.

Iocul. And th'edifying sense with melody. Voices of Nightingals
Hark how that evening quire of Nightingals
Warble with shrillest notes, pricks at their breasts,
Tereus incestuous Crime; as if it had been Dum Philomela canit, spinam sub
pectore figit; Crimen ut incestus se meminisse dolet.
A fact inexpiable: wherein we doubt
What we should do if were put unto't.
This is a Garden sure of great frequent.

Caveare. Lucullus nor the Roman Argentine
Had never the like: nor with compleater beauties
More gracefully imbellish'd: it might be
Styled the Spring Garden for variety
Of all delights: Balls, Treats, and choice Invites
Addressed for amorous Parliance: and indeed
To make the Bargain up: -- you know my meaning,

Fricase. Thou art a dangerous Beagle. -- What say you Ladies.
In this perpetual Spring-like sweet retire
To gratify her court'sie and conduct
Who tendered these respects, let us have a Frolic;
A Jovial Frolic till the Platonicks come.
Whom we must chide, and with some discontent
Tax for their slowness.

All. The motion's wondrous good,
We all assent to it.

Ioculette. But in this assent
Scatter such freedom as it may appear
Our Fortunes be our own: and that no eye
Of jealousy or parcimonious thrift
Can bound our humor. -- Lets call up the They ring the Bell. Drawer.

Enter Drawer. Your pleasures Madams.
All. What have within Boy?


Drawer. Cakes, Creams, stewed Prunes, Olivets, Tongues, Tarts, and --


Caveare. What else, you Jack of all Trades! Does your Mistress take us, you
nitty napry Rascal, for her Bordella's Blouses?

Bring us here Pistachie Nuts,
Strengthening Oringo Roots,
Quince, Peach, and preserved Apricock
With the Stones pendant to it*
With such incentive and salacious Cates,
As quicken hours, and sharpen appetite.

Drawer. You shall, you shall Madam; -- On my life these be the Ladies of the
New Dress; they will never be satisfied.


Exit. Caveare. Let us imagine our selves now to be planted in the Sparagus
Garden; where if we want any thing, it is our own fault. A fair Alimony needs
no pawn; it will discharge a Tavern Bill at any time.


Act. 4.
Scen. 3.
Enter again the Vintress and Drawer with Wine and Fruit. Vintress. How is it
Noble Ladies? -- Your Honors shall want no rarities that our Storehouse may
afford you.


Caveare. A Glass of Muscadella for me. Here Madam Fricase, to Mounsieur
Flore^^o.


Fricase. This Curt'sie Madam, must not beget in you a forgetfulness of Caranto.


Caveare. So nearly he is embosom'd, you need not fear it.


Iulippe. Nectarella for me* here princely Ioculette to your Salibrand.


Ioculette. Mean time remember loyal Palisado.


Iulippe. No Individual can be well forgot.


Medler. Medaa shall be mine. -- This Madam Tinder to your Tilly Valley.


Tinder. First to your own Morisco* -- So this Health's gone round.


Fricase. Now when our throats are clear, let us join together
In some choice Musical Air.

All. Agreed, agreed;
What shall we have?

Fricase. What may enliven love,
And feather fancy with Icarian Wings.

All. We must be mounting then. -- Your Subject, Madam.


Fricase. Le Drollere Amaranto.


All. Dainty Airs.
And lines to suit them: -- We shall follow you.

Song in various Airs.
What shall we poor Ladies do,
Matched to Shallops without brains,
Whose Demains are in grains,
And their wits in madding veins,
Stored with Neapolitan Mains?
Give us spritely Sprigs of Manhood,
None of these Swads nor airy Squibs,
Who would fain do but cannot.
Poor Ladies how we dwindle! They alter the air upon the close of every Stanza.
Who can spin without a Spindle?
Valor never learned to tremble,
But in Cupids dalliance nimble.
Little good does that stud with a Stallion,
Fancies Alien, weakly joynted,
Meanly manned, worse appointed,
Who would do if he knew how,
But alas he would but cannot.
Penelope though she were chaste,
Yet she bad her Spouse make haste,
Lest by his sojourning long,
She might chance to change her Song,
And do her Ulysses wrong;
What then may we who matched be
With these Haggards madly manned,
Who would gladly do but cannot?
Shall our youthful hopes decline;
Fade and perish in their Prime:
And like forced Andromeda
Estranged from Fancies Law!
Shall we Wives and Widows be,
Bound unto a Barren Tree?
Ushers come and Aple-Squires
To complete our free desires:
Platonicks there be store
Fitly framed and trained to man it.
Bavin once set a fire
Will not so soon expire;
Let Us never stay with such as they,
Who gladly would but cannot.
Shall we love, live and feel no heat
While our active Pulses beat?
Shall we hug none of our own,
But such as drop from the Frigid Zone?
Let Us rather bid old Love adieu,
And in the Requests suit for some New
Who have the heart to man it:
Tell us not this nor tell us that,
A Kid is better then a Cat,
And though he show we know not what,
He cannot.
Fricase. As I Am a Virgin, Ladies, bravely performed;
Once more Frontineack, and then a Walk.
She drinks. This Wine wants Flavor, Sapor, Odor, Vigor;
Taste it, dear Madam, it is as pall and flat
As a seer Fly-fl^p.

Drawer. Our last years Vintage, Madam, was but small.


Caveare. It seems so by your measure: this would never
Quicken the Spirit, nor inflame the Blood.

One of the Ladies looking out, discovers their deserted Knights attired like
their Favorites: with their Cloaks over their faces. Lady. They come, they
come, they come.


All. Let Us entertain them with a joint neglect.


Act. 4.
Scen. 4.
As their Husbands pass along, they take occasion of discourse one with
another. Knights. Let us pass by them with regardless scorn.


Sir Reub. Pox on these overacting Prostitutes, They interchange these
Expresses as they pass by their Ladies room.
They sat mine appetite.

Sir Tristram. Fancy so fed
Begets a Surfeit ere it gets to bed.

Sir Gregory. B're I Platonic turn or Confident,
Or an officious Servant to a Puss
Whose honor lies at stake, let me become
A scorn to my relations.

Sir Arthur. Or when I
Engage my person, like a professed Boult,
To vindicate a Mistress, who for sale
Would set her Soul at hazard; may my Grave
Be in the Kennel: and the Scavinger
The Penman of my Epitaph.

Sir Jasper. Or I
Embrace a Monkey for a mass of treasure.

Sir Amad. May never down seize on this dounless chin,
When I become an Usher to her sin.

Sir Reuben. So; let them chaw of this: -- our Scean is done,
Wee^ leave the rest to their digestion:
-- We must return those Adamits their Clothes
To make their visits in, or they are lost men;
But it were strange should they recruit again. Exeunt.

Act. 4.
Scen. 5.
Fricase. How is it Ladies?


Caveare. Sure, wee'^ in a dream,
Whence comes this strangeness?

Iulippe. From the too much freedom
Of our affection: had we kept them still
At a discreeter distance, we had played
The wiser Falkners: and caused them stoup
Unto our Lure with eager appetite.
Fruits offered are least valued; got by stealth
Or by surprise, they are precious.

Ioculette. Shall we sleep
With this affront?

Medler. Our Spirits were remiss
Should we not pay them home in their own Coin.

Tinder. Let Tinder lose her Name, her Family,
And Alimony which she values most.
If Tilly suffer not for this disgrace.

All. We vow the like: revenge may be excused,
"For Love resolves to Hate when it is abused. Exeunt. All.

Act. 4.
Scen. 6.
The Favorites appear to their half bodies in their Shirts, in rooms above.
Florello. Why; you whoorson Rogue; where is my suit?
-- As I hope for mercy, I am half persuaded, that this sliphalter has pawned
my Clothes.

Caranto. Nay; as our rooms be near, our fates are all alike.
If my visit be admitted, I must present it naked.

Ioculette, When she sees her Salibrand so unmodiously accoutred, she will jeer
him out of his Periwig, and render him an Adamite Cap a Pe.


Palisado. Never were Servants without a Dress, less suitable to Ladies of the
New dress.


Salibrand. We shall be held for Sale-men, or Knights of the White Livery, if
we encounter them thus habited.


Morisco. Nay rather for Knights oth' Poast; who had forfeited their broak't
Suits for want of swearing.


Tilly. Nay, for Tumblers, Truckers, or Sculler-men: Plato in all his
Commonweal had never such naked followers. Their Pages bring their Clothes.


Florello. Now, you hemp-strings, had you no time to nim us, but when we were
upon our visits?


Pages. Your Suits, Sir, were not without employment.
They were seam-rent, and stood in need of stitching.

All. Go to Rogues, you will never hang well together, till you be stitcht in
an halter.


Pages. Well, we got more clear gains by this shift, then you will by your
visit. Aside.


Caran. We trench too much upon these Ladies patience:
Better too late then never; let us haste
To crown their longing hopes with our attendance.
Delays in visits quicken our desires,
And in their Objects kindle secret fires.

They come down buttoning themselves. Fastus in Antidotum frigoris, processit
and urget
Insolitos motus, lepidaeque Cupidinis astus,
Vestibus amictus laceratis, alget and ardet.
Solin.
Flor. It Is high Meridian I wee've lost the time
Of our appointed treatment.

Caranto. Let Us contrive
Some neat evasion covertly disguised
To bear the face of truth.

Salibrand. It would do well,
Let Us mould it as we go unto the Garden.

Moris. 'Twere vain to call; they are long ere this dismissed.


Palisado. And with incensed spirits; which to allay
Were a Receipt worth purchase.

Tilly. The wound's so green
It must admit a Cure: Our confidence
Prepares us best admittance: -- go along.

Act. 4.
Scen. 7.
Enter the Alimony Ladies at the other door. Florello. How opportunely does
this season meet
To give us freedom in our intercourse!

Morisco. There is a secret influence, no doubt,
Designed to second us in our desires.

They go toward their Ladies. Florello. Madam.


Fricase. We were Mad dames indeed, should we give freedom to such injurious
Favorites.


Caranto. This is stormy language; I ever thought our late neglect would nettle
them.


Fricase. You can affront us, Sir, and with your wit
Take a deep draught of Lethe and forget.

Florello. Forget^ Slid I did never affront you.


Fricase. No;
Nor with a scrude contemptuous look pass by us
When we were at our Treat: and with a scorn
Not only slight us, but impeach our fame.

Florello. I call the Heavens to witness, never I.


Fricase. Perfidious Wretch, this did I hear and see,
And such Records cannot deluded be.
Your Words, Sir are registered.

Florello. Pray, let us hear them.


Fricase. You begun first with what your ulcerous flesh,
If I be not deceived, infected is.

The Favorites, as they appeared to their half bodies in the preceding Scene;
so the deserted Knight become spectators of those public affronts done them by
their Ladies, only presenting themselves, and so withdrawing. Husbands. Hah
hah hah -- How neatly be these Widgeons caught in their own Springes!


Trillo from the Gallery. Bravely continued, Timon, as I live
Each subtle strain deserves a Laurel sprig.
Fricase. "Pox on these over-acting Prostitutes
"They sat mine appetite.

Caranto. What might I say
That should dis-relish Madam Caveare?

Caveare. You rant it bravely Sir; "Fancy so fed
"Begets a surfeit ere it gets to Bed.

Iulippe. You Palisado stand more resolute;
"E're I Platonic turn or Confident,
"Or an officious Servant to a Puss
"Whose honor lies at stake, let me become
"A scorn to my relations.

Ioculette. "Or when I,
(Thus I deblazon you, base Salibrand)
"Engage my Person, like a professed Boult,
"Would set her Soul at hazard, may my Grave
"Be in the Kennel: and the Scavenger
"The Penman of my Epitaph.

Medler, "Or I,
(Thus you renounce your Medler, Don Morisco)
"Embrace a Monkey for a mass of treasure.

Tinder. Nor would Sir Tilly be one hair behind
In scornful dereliction of our sex.
"May never down seize on his dounless Chin
"When He becomes an Usher to our sin.

Florel. The Devil's a Witch, and have impostur'd them.


All. Platon. Do you believe all this?


Ladies. As we do you
Stains to true love and all society.
Henceforth observe your distance as you tender
Fame, Freedom, Life: -- else we do vow Revenge
Shall dog you at the heels. Exeunt.

Florello. So, we are lost;
We must go cast about for some New Ayry,
For these be fledged and flown.

Caranto. By this prevention
I Will hate a Mistress of such rare invention.

Palis. It seems their Spleans for picking quarrels sought,
In pressing what we neither spoke nor thought. Exeunt.

Act. 4.
Scen. 8.
Enter two Sivil Merchants. 1. Merchant. Our Duke Eugenio is safe returned
Laden with Trophies, Spoils and Victories.

2. Mer. Those Hectors too who lanched forth for Tunis*
Have shown their valor: and enriched their Fortunes
Which languish'd in despair before this voyage
Above expectance: rich Rix Dollers are
Sown like Pactolus sand: their pockets crammed
With Indian Ore.

1. Merchant. What will not prowess do
Where hope of honor, promise of reward,
Or Countries fame, th'attractiv'st lure of all,
Give spirit to men's actions?

2. Merchant. This appears
Instanced in them to life: for by their hazard
Successfully completed, Foreign Sails
Never came so richly fraughted.

1. Merchant. It were well
The rest of our stout Myrmidons, whose Courage
Stands for the Wall, or in a Tavern quarrel,
Or an Highways surprise; to raise a stock
To feed their debaucht visits, were so employed:
It would secure our Commerce.

2. Merchant. This good Duke
Will regulate no doubt, his State Affairs
With that Composure, as no fruitless weed
Shall promise to it self long nourishment
Within the Coast of Sivil. -- What means this?

A noise of Clarions, Surdons, Fifes, Plausulets within. Messenger. The Dukes
approaching in triumphant state:

Herald. Make clear the way, room for his Excellence.
Never did Sivil show more like her self,
Nor beautified with a more graceful presence
Since her foundation.

Actus quintus.
Scena prima.
Enter Duke; Trumpets and Drums sounding: Colors victoriously displaid:
Field-Officers with Soldiers martially ordered in rank and fyle. Herald. WHat
a Majesty
Without all servile affectation
His personating presence clothed with state
And Princely posture seems to represent!

All. Conquest and Affability contend
Which to his countenance may pretend most right.
His Spirit's too evenly poised to be transported
With the success of Fortune. -- Let us hear him.

Duke. Safely arrived, thanks to the Powers above,
Here are we come: our Enemies subdued,
Our wrongs redrest, our Merchants satisfied*
No foreign force to oppose us: thus has time
Crowned our addresses with triumphant palms,
And by just War begot a thankful Peace.

All. Long live Eugenio Sivils Governor.


Duke. Our constant care shall gratify your love.
Mean time, let these brave Soldiers sharers be
In our success: whom you and wee'r to hold
Such joint Assistants in our Victories
As their redoubted prowess merits fame,
And competent rewards to recompense
Their noble Service: For believe it friends,
Never were hazards better seconded,
Nor by their valor to a period
Sooner reduced; so prosperous was our fight
In darkning those who took away our light.
And having now composed these broils abroad,
We Are to look homeward, and redress those wrongs
Which nestle in the Bosom of our State,
So much more dangerous because Connivance
Has wrought them into Habits: These, we fear,
Pretend a Privilege, because the face
Of Greatness gives them countenance: but our Laws
Must be no Spider-webs to take small Flies,
And let the great ones 'scape: -- we have resolved
"Greatness shall be no subterfuge to Guilt.
This must we act with speed and closely too;
For Secrecy winged with Celerity
Be the two Wheels which manage Moral States
And Martial actions: after short repose
These we will chastise: and by a due survey
As just Complaints shall be exhibited,
Measure our Censure to the Peccants Crime.
Nor must we spin out time: we have designed
Our very next day for Aggrievances
Of Court and City; where our absence might
Admit, perchance, more freedom to offend.
"The only way to salve a deep disease
"Is to give what may cure, not what may please.
Wherein delays prove worst: "Artists apply
"Receipts, before distempers grow too high.

Exit Tubis and Tympanis sonantibus; conspicuo Aulico^um and Stratiotum coetu
comitante. All. Under such Guardians may we live and dye.


Exeunt Plebei. Act. 5.
Scen. 2.
Enter a Regiment of Trapanners and Tar-paulins, with Drum and Colors:
gallantly marching in their victorious Return and prosperous success from
Tunis. 1. Offic. Sa, sa.


2. Offic. Ran, tan.


3. Offic. Tara-tantara -- thus far from the Isle of Canary. Is not this better
my Boys, then Trapanning an old D^olling Friar for a sequestered Bond? -- Hey
Boys, here be those Indian Ratts, that cant and chirp in my Pocket; as if
after a long Apprenticeship, they He shakes his Pocket. sought to be made
Freemen. But I must not yet enlarge them.


2. Offic. O ^e pitiful Simpletons, who spend your days in throwing Cudgels at
J^ck a Lents or Shrove-Cocks.


3. Offic. Nay, in making Gooselings in Embers: and starting as if they were
Planet-struck at the weak report of a Pot-gun.


1. Offic. My wish shall be for all that Puny-pen feathered Ayry of Buzardisme
and Stanielry:

"That such as They who love to stay to suck their Mammies teat,
"May live at home, but never find one to give them Clothes or Meat.

Lansprade. Come along Wags, let us in a frolic way march to our old Friends in
new Suits: and reserve a scrude look for a three penny Ordinary.


2. Offic. Along, along* -- But utter not too much language, honest pockets;
till a Question be asked you.


He shakes his Pocket. All. Hey for a Fee-Farm Rent in Tunis!


Exeunt capering. Act. 5.
Scen. 3.
Enter two Country Boors. Husband. Content thee, content thee Christobel --


Wife. Yes surely, that is a trim word: but when trow you, had I it? As I am an
honest woman, I have been this Goodman Fumblers wife so many years, and he
never yet gave me content. It Is such a dry Pilchart, he deserves nothing more
then basting.


Husb. Fie, Christobel, fie; for shame hold thy tratles: is it my fault, if
thou be barren?


Wife. Barren, you Codshead! Lies the fault there you Island Curre: nay, all
the Parish will witness for me, that I was not barren before I met with you. --
Barren Stich^l! that shall not serve thy turn. -- In plain terms Iosalin,
since Thou cannot content me one way, thou shall another.


Husband. What would my Duck have?


Wife. What, my Drake, the Law will give me.


Husband. Law!


Wife. Yes you wizzard; I have already fed a glib-tongu'd Parret with a Coif on
his head, that will trounce you.


Husband. What have I done, my Malmsey?


Wife. Nay, your doing nothing, you Dumplin, has brought you into this pickle:
The short and the long on it is this, I will have Ale-mony.


Husband. Alemony! what means my Chicken by that?


Wife. I have been neither so long nor ill taught by my Betters, but I know the
meaning of Alemony well enough. My Landslady Ioculette, God bless her, is
matched to as handsome a frolic youngster as one can see on a Summers day: yet
she dislikes him, and has recovered a good stock of Alemony. I love to follow
the example of my betters: Set your heart at rest Iosalin, I must and will have
Alemony.


Husband. Thou shall have any thing my Conny Cristobel, so thou will rest
contented.


Wife. Nay Husband, you know well, that I am forced many nights to go to rest
weakly contented. But if I chance to trudge to Court; I mean to lie all open;
you shall hear I intend not to lay leafs on my wounds: The Duke, I hear, is a
merciful man; and will not suffer any of his poor Subjects to fall short of
their due.


Husband. Well, Girl, thou shall find me ready to appear before his Grace, at
any time.


Wife. You Will have a gracious bargain on it then doubtless. -- Trust me Iosalin,
you will distemper all our Ladies at Court, if you push at the Gate with your
Ramhorns.


Husband. She Is possessed, sure.


Wife. No, not yet; but I mean shortly to be possessed of my Alemony; you shall
play no more the sharking foist with me, you fumbling Fiddler you. -- I hope I
have friends at Court, that will take Course that I may have my whole due; and
then foutra for Iosalin. Exit.


Husband. Well, the thought is taken; I see one must thank God for a Shrow as
well as for a Sheep: though the Sheep have more wool on his back, and affords a
more savoury repast at the board. Hanging and Wedding go by Destiny: and I hold
the former to be the happier destiny of the twain: yet He that will practice
the art of swinging in a Halter, either to please or cross a Shrows humor, let
him hang like a Puppy without hope of pity: and dye intestate to make his Wife
heir on it: till some nimble Younker become his successor, and stumbling on his
Grave, laugh at the Cuckoldly Slave.


Exit. Act. 5.
Scen. 4.
Enter the Cashiered Confidents in a discontented posture. Florello. Summoned
to appear! for what? -- What have we done!


Caranto. Incensed those humerous scornful Ladies.
Thence rose the ground, I durst wager my Bever on'c:
They ought us a spite, and their Information has don't.

Palisado. This falls pat on their resolves: for those disdainful Wenches in
the heat of their Passion, vowed jointly that Revenge should kick up our heels.


Salibrand. Our heels are not so short, though theirs be. Should they pursue
this Information, it would dart highly on their dishonor.


Morisco. Honor! what may that be in this age but an airy Title? These
Bonarobas have not lost the art of ingratiating nor deluding their Servants.
There be Chimneys enough at Court to convey their smoke. Beauty and Confidence
keep strong Sentinels in Loves Army.

They cannot want Sollicitors in a place of Liberty.


Tilly. Let them hold to it: Their Complaints are but squibs in the Air. Such
Whifflers are below my scorn, and beneath my spite.

Let Us bravely on: I should account his fate
The worst of ills, that is foiled by Woman's hate.

Florello. Yet 'twas Alcides heavy fate, and He
Was stronger far then twenty such as we. Exeunt.

Act. 5.
Scen. 5.
Enter the Alimony Ladies. Fricase. Conveen'd to Court! some Mask, or princely
Ball, I Will gage mine honor on it. We must be employed, sisters.

Caveare. And usefully too I hope.


Iulippe. I see well the Court can do nothing without our City Revellers.

Trust me I am with Child till I get to it: but my desires are enlivened for a
sight of my Lord especially.


Ioculette. Or your special Lord Madam. We smell your meaning. As I am
virtuous, he deserves your smile or whatsoever may most indear him. I have
known none at any time court Love with a more graceful nor accurate presence.
He can be both seriously amorous: and amorously serious.


Medler. Surely, Lady Ioculette; you set him at a rate far above the Market:
you value him not as if you meant to sell.


Ioculette. No, nor buy neither: I have no property in such a rich penniworth.
For if I had, I should wish --


Medler. I know what Madam.


Ioculette. Good now, thy conceit


Medler. Shall I freely unbosome me?


All. Pray thee, Madam, do Madam*


Medler. You would wish that his puny Baker^ legs had more Essex growth in
them; for else they would make ill Butchers ware.


Iocul^tte. Thou art a shrude Wench, trust me.


Tinder. Well Ladies, I know a new minted Lord, that can act the Spanish Don,
with a peakt beard and a starcht look to an hair.


Fricase. O Madam Tinder, I guess where you are: but he wants a little of your
spirit: He can cringe and caress better then he dare fight: A Ladies honor
might perish under such a feverish Champion.


Caranto. For loves sake, let us make haste* Nothing will be done, till we come.


Enter Cristobel with a Crutch. Cristobel. Good Madam Land-lady, take lame
Cristobel, along with you;

She means to have about for her Alemony.


Ioculette. We shall not want then for handsome Attendance. Exeunt.


Act. 5.
Scen. 6
Enter Gentleman Usher. Give way, -- make present way for his Excellence and
his Consuls.

Enter Duke Eugenio and his Consuls. After them the deserted Knights; the
Platonic Confidents; the Alimony Ladies; the Tunis ingagers. Duke. As we have
viewed and cleared our foreign coasts,
Wee'r now to prune those wild luxurious Sprayes
Which give impede unto this spreading Vine,
Our flowery Sivel; whose succeeding Fame
Acquired by Civil Discipline exacts
Our care and yours, grave Counselors of State.
It Is not enough with Balms to close the skin
And leave the wound t'exulcerate within;
For He, whose care's to cure the Core without
And searches not the bottom, spoils the Root.
Let Us first then look on Vices which put on
The face of virtue; and where modesty
(Merely dissembled) clothed with taking Beauty
Arms it self strongly against all Opposition:
Nay, what retains ofttimes such influence
On reverend Scarlet, as it darks the light
Of Judgment; and makes Elders fix their eyes
On rare-light Objects, which so strangely takes
As they make Judges vices Advocates:
But here is none such, I hope: Our State is free,
And so our Patriots and State-Consuls be.
Complaints inform us, and we wondered much
At th'first perusal, how a Feminine Nature
So sweetly pleasing, should be so depraved.

Fricase. What means the Duke?


Caranto. I relish not the discourse.


Duke. Have we not here some Ladies oth' New-dress,
So newly styled and in their Honor soiled,
Who have deserted whom they ought to love?

Ladies. Is this the Court-Mask, and the Ball we looked for? Aside.


Duke. Be you those Ladies?


Cristobel. I am one of them forsooth.


Ladies. We are the same, so like your Excellence,
And now redrest.

Duke. We understand no less;
Your Alimonies signed by our Court!

Cristobel. They have not signed mine, if it please your Dukeship.

Truly I am a very impudent lame Woman: and my Husband a feeble weak-doing man,
your Grace must needs grant me Alemony.


Duke. See what Examples, Ladies, you have given
To simple Women! -- I shall here propose
Two tenders to your choice: either receive
(And with a Conjugal Indeerment too)
Your late deserted Husbands, or prepare
The Remainder of your days to entertain
A strict Monastic life: your Sentence's past,
Choose which you please.

Ioculette. I never shall endure
A closter'd life unless I had a Friar; Sir Gregory Shapeless shall be my
Platonic.

Medler. Rather then none, I Will take Sir Tristram Shorttool.


Iulippe. I for Sir Arthur Heartless.


Caveare. I must put on my Nightgown for Sir Jasper Simpleton.


Fricase. Sir Amadin Pu^y then must be my joy,
Who will be still, I think, a Puny Boy.

Imatr. Well, since we are to this condition grown,
It Is better far to use our own then none.
While I of youthful Favorites bereft
Will live with Scattergood, if ought be left.

Sir Reuben. Nay, Madam, but it were not amiss if you knew first, whether
Scattergood will live with you or no. Release your Alimony, and I Will resign my
right in your propriety: and in my widdow'd life mourn in sack -- lo infinitely.


Duke. This Iuncto must be fixed on firmer grounds,
Coolness of Fancy acts not on the Object,
Which it pretends to love: -- Join hearts to hands,
And in this second Contract reunite
What was so long divided: Love's a Cement
Admits no other Allay but it self
To work upon the aff^ections: -- be it yours,
(For virile spirits should be so demeaned,)
With pleasing candor to remit what is past,
And with mild glosses to interpret thus
In their defense still to the better sense:
"Their frailties in your Ladies wrought these failings,
"Which pious pity should commiserate
"And seal it with Indulgence: Then intend
"Your Office, Madams: which is to redeem
"Your late-abused time: which may be deemed
"Richly recovered being once redeemed.

Ladies. May all our actions close with discontent,
When we oppose their humors.

Knights. Say and hold; They salute and take hands.
And this Act of Oblivion shall be signed.

Duke. This does content us highly: Powers above
Makes Lovers breach renual of their love.

Cristobel. And must Cristobel too pack home to her
Husband without her Alemony?

Duke. Or to thy death an aged Prioress.


Cristobel. Nay, but by your good favor, I Will meddle with none of your
Priorities; I Will rather go mumble a crust at home: and chuck my old Iosalin.


Duke. Nor is this all; our sentence must extend
Unto those Ladies Favorites; whose hours
Strangely debaucht, made spoil of women's honors.

Ladies. We hate them worse then Hell.


Favorites. Good your Grace; we are reclaimed.


Duke. That Is but an ayry Note.
When Practical, we will hold it Cordial.
Mean time we do adjudge you to the Quarries;
Where you shall toil till a relation give
Test of your reformation: -- Look on those
Tunis-ingagers, who were timely drawn
From their Trapanning Course: and by their hazard
Secured through valor, raised their ruined Fortunes
Above Expectance: when your work is done,
We shall find like Adventurers for your spirits
To graple with, and rear your blanched repute.
Leave interceding, for we are resolved.
Now Conscript Consuls, whose direction gives
Life to our Laws: we cannot choose but wonder
How your impartial judgments should submit,
As if they had been biased, to grant
These Alimonies to their loose demands.
Sure such Decrees would not have relished well
Your jealous Palats, had you so been used.
"Wives to desert your Beds; impeach your Fames,
"In Public Courts discover your defects,
"Nay, to belly your weakness: and recover*
"For all these scandals, Alimonious ways
"To feed their boundless riot!

Consul. They Are annulled,
Our Courts will not admit them*

Duke. It Is well done,
For Gentlemen t'engage their State and Fame,
And Beds of Honor, were a juggling Game.
So we dismiss you: -- may the Palms of Peace
Crown Sivils State with safety and increase.
Whereto when our reluctant actions give
The least impede, may we no longer live.

Exeunt omnes, Trumpets sounding. Epilogue.
YOu see our Ladies now are vanished,
And gone, perchance, unto their Husbands Bed
Convinced of guilt: where if they cannot tame
Their loose desires, but still retain the Name
Of ALIMONY LADIES; you shall hear,
They will not forfeit what they hold so dear,
Prohibited delights: and in that stain
With blushless dalliance visit you again.
Nor shall we build on these our confidence
Who give less reins to Reason then to Sense:
Yet for redemption of their Husbands Lands,
Seal our Acquittance with your graceful hands.
Naviter incumbens Cal^mo, sine merce laboro;
Merce carens, Vates nomine, verus ero.
Haec thalami Socias Alimonia fecit iniquas;
"Haud Aries uni sufficit unus Ovi. Arnold*
FINIS.

