A LETTER to a Friend, upon the Dissolution of the Late Parliament, and the
Calling of a New One. Together with a LIST of those that were against making
the Prince and Princess of Orange, King and Queen.
SIR,
AS I do fully acquiesce in the Wisdom and Authorny of the King in his
dissolving of the late Parliament: So I Am perfectly persuaded, that he did it
upon motives relating to his own Honor, and to the safety and happiness of his
People, and not in subserviency to any Prerogative Design, nor to please
himself with an Exercise of Regal Power. And I will venture to say, that
nothing could have induced him, so abruptly, as well as unexpectedly, to have
dismissed a Parliament, that first advanced him unto, and then by so many free
and vast Contributions, endeavored to support him in the Throne, but the
finding them unserviceable to the Uniting of Protestants, the vindicating of
our Laws and Liberties, and the punishing of those who had subverted our
Constitution, which as they are the only Justifiable Grounds, both of his
coming hither, and of his accepting the Royal Authority; so nothing less than
the pursuing hose Ends, can vindicate his descent into England from being an
Unrighteous Invasion; and his ascending the British Ihrones, from the Reproach
of an Ambitious Usurpation. How could a Prince of his Integrity and Wisdom
think that the obtaining and wearing of a Crown was honorable and just, while
the Reasons upon which he received and possesses it, were not only controuled,
and reproached, but exposed and ridiculed? Nor is it possible for His Majesty
to believe, that the Late King was so hainously guilty, as to forfeit all Right
to Sovereignty, while those who advised him unto, and were the Ministers of all
his misgovernment, whom the Law makes chiefly, if not only accountable, were
esteemed Guiltless and Innocent. He could not but foresee, that the Abdication
of King James is easily Reversible, and that he himself holds his Crown very
precariously, if there were nothing to justify the Enthroning the one, and the
Dethroning the other, but the hasty and Arbitratious Vote of the Majority of the
Two Houses. And he must needs look upon all that was alleged, concerning the
Late King's violating the Original Contract, and his subverting the Laws of the
Constitution, as Fiction and Dream, while there were none to be found, that
counseled him unto, or assisted him in it.

And as this justifies the Wisdom of His Majesty in the dissolving of the late
Parliament, so we may from hence easily conclude, both upon what prospect and
hope he has been pleased to call a New One, and by what measures those to whom
the right of Electing Members does belong, are to guide themselves in the
Ensuing Choice. Nor do we only want a Parliament that may confirm establish,
and support His Majesty in the Throne, but which may proceed on those
Principles, as does render his Accession to it necessary, as well as honorable
and just. And as the Nation is once more furnished with an opportunity of
choosing such a Representative Body, as may vindicate and assert its Ancient
Laws, Rights and Liberties; so there is a fresh advantage offered us, of
testifying our Loyalty to his present Majesty, and of promoting his Greatness,
as well as of providing for our own future safety. I need not tell you, that
the Ends to be proposed in the Service of those who are to be Elected, are,
that Your Throne may be settled upon firm and righteous Foundations; and that
all His Majesty's Subjects may live at ease and unity under His Government.
It Is therefore first incumbent upon all wise and honest Men, that they elect
such to represent them, as may both allow and confirm unto the King all the
Ancient and Legal Rights of the Crown, and yet at the same time recover and
secure all those Privileges unto the People, which the invading and wresting
from them, gave occasion unto, and can alone justify the late Revolution.
Whosoever seeks to enrich the King with the Spoils of his Subjects, and so
adorn them with what our Late Monarch ravished from them, can design no less,
than that the same Fate should befall him, which overtook his Predecessor;
which is the robbing him first of his Peoples Affections, and then of his own
Authority. 2dly, It Is no less the Duty, than it is the Interest of all that
would have the Nation formidable to its Enemies, and the King successful in his
Undertakings, that they depute and authorize those to act for them in
Parliament, who without subverting or undermining the Church, may not only
preserve unto Dissenters, that Liberty vouchsafed unto them for worshipping
God; but who may restore them unto, and vest them in, all the Common Rights and
Privileges of Englishmen. Nor will it be easy to persuade so great a Company
of People, that they find their account in the late Revolution, unless they be
admitted by Law to enjoy the same Advantages under the present King, which by
dispencing with, and an usurpation over the Law, they were possessed of under
the last. 3dly, We are to esteem them the fittest of all others, to be returned
to serve in the Ensuing Parliament, who are likeliest to maintain in our Allies
a confidence of us, and to encourage them both to continue the Confederacy, and
to pursue the Ends of it. And therefore as we would not give jealousy unto
them, and weaken the Union amongst themselves, and with us, we ought to avoid
the choosing of those that have heretofore promoted the Grandeur of France, or
that have either sought the Destruction of the Dutch, or expressed a malice and
rancour toward them. 4thly, As we would not betray both the King and our
selves, we are to choose none but such who are entirely in his Majesty's, and in
the Kingdom's interest; Which as it is impossible to believe of them, who
acknowledge him only a King in Fact, but not by Right; so it is not easy to
conceive how they should be forward and zealous to support him in the Throne,
who opposed his coming to it. The Enemies to King James's Abdication are not
like to be true and lasting Friends to King William's Sovereignty. In short, it
is the duty of all that love the present Establishment, to be against those,
whom you find them to be for, that refuse to swear Allegiance to their present
Majesty's. Nor are they worthy of the Vote of an honest Man, who are not
satisfied with the Protection of the Royal Power, unless they have both the
mastery of it, and the exerting and applying of it to the oppression of their
Fellow Subjects. It Is not a King, but a Tool under that name, which they
desire. And instead of allowing him to be the Universal, and Equal Ruler of all
His People, they seek to reduct and degrade him to be the Head of a little and
Peevish Faction. Which that His Majesty may be preserved from all Temptations
unto, through the wise Choice of those that are to sit in the following
Parliament, is the unfeigned desire of,

Sir, Your humble Servant. Berks
Lord Norris.
Buckingh.
Sir Ralph V^rny.
Camb.
Sir Levinus Bennet Sir Robert Cotton Sir Robert Sawyer.
Cornwall
Sir B^urcher Wrey Fran. Roberts Sir John St. Aubin Charles Godolphin Nich.
Glynn John Tann^r Alexander Pendarvis James Praed John Rashleigh Fran. Vivian
John Specot Sir Jos. Tredenham Hen. Seymor Sir John Coriton John Prideaux
Cumberland.
Sir Christ. Musgrave.
Lerby
John Coke.
Devonshire
Sir Edw. Seymor Christo. Bale Sir John Fowell Rawlin Mallack William Carry
Henry Nortleigh Sir Arthur Chichester Edm. Walrond Will Hayn Will. Coleman.
Dorse^shire
Tho. Strangways John Pole Sir Robert Nappier Edw. Nicholas Rich. Fowns Will.
Okeden.
Durham
Will. Lampton Robert Byerly George Morland.
Gloucestershire
Will. Cook The. Master Sir Fra. Russell.
Herefordshire
Hen. Cornwall.
Huntingtonshire
John Bigg.
Kent
Sir John Banks Sir John Twisden Caleb Banks.
Lanc^shire
Fran. Cholmondley Sir Edw. Chisnall.
Leicestershire
Sir Tho. Halford Tho. Babington.
Lincolnshire
Charles Ber^e. Sir John Brownlow.
Middlesex
Sir Charles Gerard Ralph Hawtrey.
Monmouth
Marq. of Worcester.
Norfolk
Sir Will. Cook Sir Nevill Catlyn Sir John Turner Sir Fran. Guybon.
Northamptonshire
Edw. Montague Gilbert Dolben Sir Justinian Isham Lord Wenman.
Northumberland
Will. Forster Philip Brickerstaff Sir Ralph Car Roger Fenwick.
Nottingham
Lord Eland.
Oxon
Sir Robert Jenkinson Sir Tho Clarges Hen. Berty Sir Jon Doyley.
Rutland
Sir Tho. Mackworth.
Salop
Edw. Kynaston Andrew Newport Sir Fran. Edwards Sir Edw. Acton George Weld.
Somerset
Sir Rich. Heart Sir John Knight Edw. Berkley Sir Will. Basset Sir Will. Portman
John Sandford Sir Francis War Francis Lutterel Nathan. Palmer Sir Edw. Windham
Will. Helyar John Hunt Tho. Sanders.
Southampton.
Franc. Morley Sir Benj. Newland Sir Robert Holms Earl of Ranelagh Thomas Done
Franc. Guin William Etrick John Pollen.
Staffordshire.
John Gray Robert Burdet John Chetwind Sir Henry Gough.
Suffolk.
Sir John Cordell Sir John Rous Sir John Barker Tho. Glemham Sir Hen. Johnson
William Johnson Sir John Poley Thomas Knyvet Hen. Pooley Sir Robert Davers Sir
Thomas Harvey.
Surry.
John Weston White Tichburn.
Sussex.
Sir William Morley John Alford Charles Goring Jun. Will. Morley.
Warwickshire.
Sir Richard Verney Sir Roger Cav^ Lord Digby William Colemore.
Westmorland.
Richard Lowther William Cheyne
Wiltshire.
Lord Cornbury Robert Hyde. Richard Lewis Peregrine Berty Henry Chivers Walter
Grubb Charles Fox Sir Edm. Warnford John Dean Sir John E^nle Sir George
Willoughby.
Worcestshire
Henry Parker Sir John Matthews.
Yorkshire
Earl of Danby Sir John Jennings Christopher Tancred.
Brecon.
E. Jones of Buckland.
Denby
Sir Rich. Middleton Edward Breh^n.
Glamorgan
Thomas Mansell
Pembroke
Sir William W^gan.


LONDON: Printed in the Year 1690.


