THE LADIES LOSS AT THE ADVENTURES OF FIVE HOURS: OR, THE Shifting of the
Veil.

Printed in the year 166^.

The Ladies Loss, etc.
YE Females that Do at Adventures
For hours five (or less, as't Enters)
And sometimes chance to shift the Veil,
Not only of the Head, but Tail;
Come listen, for it may concern ye,
How Mulier formosa Superne
Desinit. In Janivere,
Where some were not, though many were
All in the Fields of Lincolns Inn,
The Folk beginning to Begin,
For Poet (hight the Lord knows what)
Had made a Play of this and that;
Whereto resorted grave and fickle
As Saints did erst to Conventicle:
Some dressing Heads instead of Vailes,
With Periwiggs; and some the Tails,
As it appeared; by foul mischance,
When Lady trimmed in the Mode of France,
Dropped Utensils from 'twixt her legs,
(No matter whether Malls or Peggs)
A pretty kind of fashion, that-
For Girls to Periwig a Twat!
It Is sign (perhaps) it keeps good orders,
When it is confined within the Borders.
How came the custom with the pocks,
Puts Member Privy under locks,
And not Italian? What mishap
Occasion could this After-clap?
Was it, O Mother Gibbs, thy care
To fit the Lady to a hair,
And fasten Ware upon thy word,
That leaves her Ware like Tail of Bird;
To every Stage-wright made a scoff,
Like Coot, with Periwigg stripped off.
'Twixt Madams Legs (as sung the Poet)
But 'twas so lately done, all know it.
But do not (Muse) thus fondly rail
On the nice- Trimmer of the Tail;
Perhaps her Art was not in fault,
Securing every slight assault;
Presuming, Wight, would come to hand,
Like a Dutch Cow, or Wench well manned,
And not endanger (as it chances)
Both Member and Appurtenances,
To the rude hands of Blade so rough,
That mistakes Merkin for a Muff,
And carries all off with a vengeance,
Then rubs away (as erst did St. John's)
And never minds for to restore,
Or leave behind, what is lost before.
Oh Varlet vile! who with fierce handing
Have done more mischief (notwithstanding)
Then Wallace with his Tool so stayward,
Can make amends for, though like Bayard
He never so stiffly could stand to it,
This gain that loss could never recruit:
For (as an Author says) her Mounsieur
Coming that night with thoughts to trounce her,
And finding his Tatterdemalian
As b^ld as Huswife clipped Italian,
Who in her Infancy with unction,
Is so un-hair'd for future function,
That after Oils and Labors expense,
A Barber there shall never earn six pence.
He thus rebuk't her, -- Be gar Madam,
Me think your Ladyship have had 'um:
The case is altered since I foutred;
Your Cunny is not well accoutred:
Undressed below the Busk you be,
Some honest Lad from Muscovy
Will you present with fur of Rat
To furnish out your Twit-cum-twat;
A Pox upon this filthy Paltry
Commodity, that snodes like Palfrey:
And though at first he was full fervent,
Kissed hand, and cried, Your humble Servant:
And Lady sad for work oth' day,
Did lose her Night-work as they say.
So fared it with Absolon,
Who found a Beard, expecting none.
When Gossip (to his great amazement)
Turned Tail for Smeller, out of Cazement,
Womanaging so cleaverly,
That Nab kissed Tout full savorly,
And started back, like Horse cries Wy-hee
At Female-Beard, to hear her Ty^hee.
But let us return, (what e're it cost)
In quest of what our Lady lost:
Some call it one thing, some another:
But, while the Learned make a pother,
And, in sundry Disputes are,
We Will term it Muff for Lady-ware;
Though it be neither Budge nor Miniver,
Worn in the days of good Queen Guinever:
The Sisterhood in Bloomsbury,
Have other name to call it by;
But hold not fit that every Lunges
Should understand it, more then Spunges,
Which for a special Friend, or so,
They will produce; but if not, no.
Had this befell in time oth' Rump,
'That struck them into such a dump,
That (Stage-men all) who ever gav't ye,
Before Committee Men of Safety
Had been led captive, where he should
Show whence it came, and whither 't would:
For they would soon have spent their Verdict,
And made a Law, none should interdict.
(If Harry Martins lucky wit
Had not by chance discovered it.)
First, to secure all that were
Confederates with this Enginere,
Who (as presumed) had found a trick
To Beard the Body-Politick:
Next that a Privy-search be made
Throughout the City, though the Trade
Seem rather Foreign then Domestic,
(As being intricate and mystic:
Besides, the Hogow, or the stench
Was (some say) Spanish, some say French)
Last, that the Author should be sent
To suffer condign punishment.
A Presbyter (for sometimes they
Will shuffle in to see a Play)
Listening with open mouth, as wide
As are in length of's Ears; the Hide
By chance espied in clutch of Player
(Who much admired the twirle oth' hair)
This pretty Muff for Lady-ware;
Who, as he nicely did it handle,
Upheaving Spectacle to candle,
Quoth he, This is some Popish shred,
Or shaving of some Fryer's head;
A piece of Nuns work, fastened on
The English Whore of Babylon,
Sent hither by the Lord knows whom,
No more then does the Pope of Rome.
An invention, 'twill move your laughter,
For us to run a whoring after.
So down he threw't, and fled from thence,
And troth I have not seen him since;
And (sooth to sayn) as matters go,
I care not wh're I do or no.
But Lady gay, who dropped the Muff,
It seems did know him well enough,
And having (as she thought) a claw
Against this Gospel-Wright at Law,
As having seen Commodity,
Last in his hands (though odd it be)
Unto her Lawyer did complain,
Who told her that her case was plain,
And Wright should render, or he would make him,
And where she found her goods, to take 'em.
But Presbyter having good witness,
That Stager's wife had tried its fitness,
After it was from his hands given,
(Intending with her to be even)
Removed the cause with certiorari,
Where (as I hear) it is like to tarry.
But one thinks 'twould have done as well,
By petty Herald with a Bell:
O yes!
If any one of what account
Soever in the Town or Count --
ry, Have taken up an Instrument
Which Women use for Ornament
To set forth Member that is private
(As the main thing that people drive at)
Wherewith being dressed, the naked Fubs
Looks not unlike the Ace of Clubs,
Or as the Song says that is told
By Fiddler touching Marygold,
Which if it chance to slip, or so,
When as the Sign's in Scorpio,
The Mortal that was in conjunction,
Looks somewhat like the Man oth' Moon
That goes off with a bush on's back;
One cannot say -- it is Eye is black:
But (as discerning Authors say)
The Ground is black, the Eye is gray,
Befitting Jane as well as Cisley,
Whose special mark is, that it is grisley;
Whereby appears (as Damrose Page sed)
Such things are used amongst the aged.
But be she either Wife or Virgin,
Or Widow, it is not worth the urging:
Did you but know, you would not deny her,
Who ever brings it to the Crier,
Shall have for's pains in coming home,
The pleasure to cover and come.
'Till when the thousandth Maidenhead.
Is to be let unfurnished.
FINIS.

