THE Ladies Preparation To the Monthly SACRAMENT. Consissing of Prayers,
Meditations, and Ejaculations, before at, and after Receiving the Lords Supper.
After the Warning is given in the Church for the Celebration of the Holy
Communion, COMPOSED For the Private Use of a Devout Lady.

And at the Request of Friends made Public.

LONDON; Printed by W. B. for Simon Neale, in the Long-Walk near Little
Britain, 1691.

Licensed, February, 10th. 1691.

THE WARNING On the Sunday Before the COMMUNION.
DEARLY Beloved on Sunday I and purpose, through Gods Assistance, to Administer
to all such as shall be Religiously and Devoutly disposed, the most Comfortable
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, to be by them received, in
Remembrance of his Meritorious Cross and Passion, whereby alone we obtain
Remission of our Sins, and are made partakers of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc.

A Soliloquy on the Warning.
BLESSED for ever be thy Name, O Lord! who pitying our Ignorance, have
Revealed to us this Heavenly Mystery of thy precious Body and Blood, and
foreseeing our weakness, have built our Faith on so firm a Certainty. Justly, O
my God! Do thou require our absolute assent to thy word, since thou
graciously providest such grounds to assure us. Thy self with thine own blessed
Mouth have taught it, thy Apostles with their dearest Blod have confirmed it,
and thy Churches in all Ages have faithfully delivered it.

II. HOW Beautiful, O Lord, are the Feet of thy Holy Messengers. Who brings us
Peace and Reconcilement with thee; who teaches us the way to Eternal happiness,
and by their pious Offices, help us to go thither; if they teach us Spiritual
things, it is just we should give them Temporal, make us, O Lord, entertain them
as Workmen sent by thee, with respect to their Persons, and Obedience to their
words, and according to our power, with a free supply of their necessities.

III. THUS does our gracious Lord send forth his Ministering Spirits to invite
us to a Heavenly Banquet: Their spiritual means Conveys our Prayers up to him,
and brings his Blessings down to us, in all our ways they direct us, and bear
us in their Hands, lest at any time we dash our Foot against a Stone: When we
labor they Assist us, when we repose they implore for us the Divine
Protection, when we are tempted, they Encourage us to stand fast, and when we
Conquer, they Crown us with their Prayers and Praises.

When you first awake use these Ejaculations, as a Key to Open the Morning.
LIghten mine Eyes, O Lord, that I Sleep not in Death, Psalm. 13.3.

IT is high time to Awake our of our Sleep of Sin, for now (since we have
received the Light of the Gospel) our Salvation is nearer, then when we first
Believed.

THE Night is now spent, and the day is approached, let me therefore cast off
the works of Darkness, and put on the Armor of Light.

GIVE me Grace, O Lord, to walk Honestly as in the day, net in Rioting and
Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying.

BUT put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not Provision for the Flesh, to
fulfill the Lusts thereof, Romans 13.11, 12, 13, 14.

At Up-rising.

IN the Name of the Father, who has Created me, and of the Son, who has
Redeemed me, and of the Holy Ghost, whh has Sanctified me, be Ascribed all
Glory and Power.

BLESSED be the Holy and Undivided Trinity, now, and for Evermore, Amen.

I laid me down and Slept, and rose again, for the Lord has Sustained me.

Then Humbly on your Knees, lift up thy Heart unto God, and say.

HOLY, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come; I
Worship him that lives for Ever, and cast my Self before his Throne; thou art
worthy, O Lord, my God, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power; for thou have
Created all things, and for thy Wills-Sake they are, and were Created.

II. INTO the Hands of thy Blessed Protection, and unspeakable Mercy, O Lord, I
this Day Commend my Soul and Body, with all the Faculties, Powers, and Actions
of them both, beseeching thee to be Ever with me, to direct, Sanctify, and
Govern me, in the ways of thy Law, and in the Works of thy Commandments; that
through thy most Mighty Protection, both here, and Ever, I may be preserved in
Body and Soul, to serve thee, the only true God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Then use the Morning Prayer, etc. Which is Annexed to these Devotions.

Meditations for Monday Morning.
COME, My Soul, let us begin our appointed Task, and dilligently mind our own
Employment: Let us not lose one day in Idleness, nor Distract our thoughts with
Repining at the advantages of others, God is our absolute Lord, and may do with
his own as he pleases. If we began our Repentance late, our delay was
dangerous; but we ought not to Despair: If we have labored long in his
Service, our Wages are safe; but we must not presume on our own Endeavors.

II. THY Holy Mysteries, O Lord, I believe, O help my unbelief! Let not any
difficulties make me doubt thy Truth, nor too long a doubting provoke thy
Wrath: Every word of thine shall be fulfiled in their Season. Sometime thou
Visitest thy Children with the Chastisement of a Rod; sometimes thou favourest
them with the Smiles of Prosperity: But all at last shall Cooperate to their
Good.

III. NO matter at all, for the Favor of Men, happy are they who find Grace
with God: They shall Conceive in their Hearts the Blessed Jesus, and bring him
forth in their Holy Lives, and Reign with him in his Kingdom; and of his
Kingdom there shall be no End. Here we perhaps may weep for a time, and be
poor, and Afflicted in this troublesome World: But hereafter our Lord will
Plant us about the Throne of his Father, and make us sit down with him in his
own Kingdom; if we heartily Love him and keep his Commandments.

IV. GIVE me, O Lord, thy Holy Grace, to Love with Charity the Defects of
others, perhaps mistaken by me, and rely on thee for Defense of my self, most
sure of Relief if I wait thy Providence; for thy Mercy forsakes not the
Innocent for Ever. Sometimes thou suffer thy Servants to be tried; but wilt
always at last, either Deliver their Patience, or Crown their Perseverance.

The PRAYER.
O Most Glorious Lord God, in thy Son Jesus Christ, my most Merciful and Loving
Father, I Miserable and Wretched Sinner, Dust and Ashes, do here in all
Humility of Soul, Prostrate my self before thy Glorious Majesty, Humbly
acknowledging and Confessing against my own Soul, that I am laden with
Iniquity, and by my Sins have defiled myself, defiled my Habitation, defiled
this good Land wherein I Sojourn.

II. O Lord, Righteousness belongs hnto thee, but unto me Confusion of Face;
I have Sinned against thee, and done amiss, and dealt very wickedly, and have
added to the Number of my Fore Fathers Numberless Transgressions; Here Name the
Particulars.
notwithstanding thou have multiplied thy Blessings upon me in many
Prerogatives.

III. BUT to my shame O Lord, I Confess that no Creature has been so
unthankful unto thee as I have been; for instead of bringing forth the Fruits
of Righteousness and Holiness, I have turned all thy Blessings, Graces and
Mercies into Wantonness, so that I have been a Provocation of thine Anger, and
of thy Fury, from the day of my Birth; even until this very moment.

IV. And though thou have caled me to knowledge of the Faith in thee, and thou
have Revealed unto me that inestimable Treasure of thy Love unto me in Christ
Jesus, yet notwithstanding I hade retained only the name, but nothing of the
Work of a Christian, but have Dishonored thee, and Blasphemed thy Name; but O
Lord, in the midst of Justice, Remember Mercy, call not to Remembrance my
former Transgressions, but Assist me by thy Grace to a speedy Repentance,
before I go hence, and be no more seen. Amen.

Read the Psalms, and Proper Lessons for the Day.

Monday Evenings Meditations.
EVER, O Lord, thou beginst thy great Design with Prayer, and thy Prayer with
Retirement from the Distractions of the World* thou call whom thou please,
and they come to thee; thou choosest whom thou wil'st, and freely bestowest on
them thy precious Gifts; it is not of him that Wills, nor of him that runs; but
of God that Vouchsafes to have Mercy: Have Mercy, O Lord! and chase away those
unclean Spirits that too often haunt my Fancy, and walk up and down my weak
Memory; Chase them away, least as they disturb my Peace they ruin my Innocence.

II. GIVE me O thou Author of all my Good, a lively Faith in thee, that I may
believe thy Truth, and hope thy Promises; that I may Love thy goodness, and
continually Bless thee for all thy Mercies; who came into the World, not to
Judge the World, but to save it: Save me O glorious Son of Justice, and with
thy Heavenly Beams Illuminate my Heart, that bringing my Works to the Light, I
may Learn to hate my own Darkness, and Condemning my self, Escape thy Judgment.

III. LORD in thy Hands are the Times and Seasons, which thou kindly disposest
in advantage of thy Servants; that thy Favors may Encourage their Virtue, and
their Virtue increase thy Favors: Thou rewardest the Chastity of Virgins, and
the Fidelity of Wives; thou Crownest the Holiness of Widows, and the
perseverance of all who constantly love thee.

IV. GIVE, me O Lord; thy Holy Grace, that my days may pass in Innocence, and
my Innocence sustain me in hope: give me thy Holy Grace, that my hope may
increase to Confidence, and my Confidence be Established in Peace, and then in
Peace dismiss thy Servant. Lead me, O thou Light of the World, where thou usest
to walk, that my Eyes may happily see thee: Show me thy Blessed self, O thou
Glory of Heaven, that my Soul may fast Embrace thee.

The PRAYER.
I. O Eternal God, I have in a great measure deserved thy wrath, I have
Committed presumptuous Sins, with a high Hand against thy Divine Majesty; I
have Crucified again the Lord of Life, and have Trodden under Foot the Son of
God: I have counted the Blood of the Covenant which Sanctifies me, an Unholy
thing, and have done despite unto the Spirit of Grace.

II. INSTEAD of making head against those Temptations and Lusts that hourly be
set me, by Prayer, calling to thee for thy Grace to Assist me against them, and
by Fasting and Austere Mortification, by beating down my Body that I might not
Conspire with Satan, and my own Corraptions that betray me unto Sin; I have
Pampered the Flesh, and suflered my self to be led Captive at the Will thereof.

III. I have not Subdued or Mortified the Works of the Flesh; I have not
endeavored to cleanse my self from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit: Here
Name the Particulars.
I have not made a Covenant with my Eyes, neither have I kept the door of my
Lips, but as if thou had sent me into the World, not to serve thee, but to
serve my own Lusts.

IV. I have been abominable in all my ways; yea, O Lord, I have Committed too
great Evils, I have departed from thee, the Ever-living God, and leaving thee,
the Fountain of all Blessedness and Happiness, in my Heart, have set up the
Creature; I have set my Affections, not on things above, but on things below;
the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, these have
been the Gods that I have Served.

V. THVS, have I sold my self to Commit wickedness; I have made all the Members
of my Body Instruments of Sin, and all the faculties, both of Soul and Body,
Weapons of Unrighteousness, to obey it in the Lusts thereof; O Lord, thou have
found Iniquity even in my Holy things, I have been negligent in hearing of thy
Word, unprepared at the Receiving of thy Sacrament, Indevout in my Prayer,
weary of their length, and displeased at the return; For these and all other
negligences, and Ignorances; O Lord, be Merciful to me a Sinner. Amen.

Read the Psalms and Proper Lessons appointed for the Day.

Meditations for Tuesday Morning.
LORD, make me Study how to follow thee, and readily undertake any Labor to
find thee; not for the benefits thou sometimes give me here, but for the
blessings thou will surely give me hereafter: Strengthen my faith, O Lord, and
graciously instruct me, purify my intention sincerely to seek thee.

II. LET me not so apply my mind, O Lord, to any trivial Observances, that I
begin to omit my more serious Duties; let me not so attend to the inventions of
Men, that I grow to transgress the Commands of my God. O guide me gracious Lord
in thine own safe way, and those solid exercises which really improve me, and
make my heart as well as lips draw nigh thee, those blessed truths, which thy
self at first revealed, and thy Holy Apostles has fully confirmed, may those
alone be my principal rule, and every other Doctrine bow to them.

III. LORD how ungrateful are we compared to thy ancient Followers! Thou
chargest us to remember thy benefits, and we forget them; thou command us to
Publish thy Mercies, and we conceal them: Behold, O blessed Jesu, I fall down
at thy feet, reach forth thy Hand and heal me, that I may Glorify thee the God
of the Universe: Too often have my Ears been Deaf to thy Voice, and my Tongue
Dumb to thy Praise; too often have my Eyes been Blind to thy Directions, and
all my senses impediments to thy Service.

IV. We are often Wise in what imports us least, and utterly ignorant of our
greatest concern; we can industrously argue what Weather it will be, but strive
not to discern the seasons of Grace: Forgive, O Merciful Lord, the
perverseness of our nature, and leave us not to our selves, least we perish
without bope. O make us deeply Sigh in Compassion for the Sins of others, and
yet more deeply still, in forrow for our own.

The PRAYER.
MOST gracious God, I have been very negligent of thy Service, and those duties
whereby I should have been bettered in the ways of Godliness, by my ill
performance have made me worse; my very Prayers have been turned into Sin, and
those Sacrifices whereby I should have propitiated thee, has removed thee at a
further distance from me, and though thou in thy Mercy and tender compassion
have oppossed me in my Sins, and called me to Repentance, yet notwithstanding I
have rusht into all manner of Wickedness, Here Name the Particulars.
as the Horse into the Battle, and have gone from bad to worse.

II. THY Judgment have not Awaked me, nor thy Mercies won me to Obedience; I
have not harkened to the Voice of thy Ministry, nor to the Secret, Checks of my
own Conscience, nor yet to the good motions of thy Holy Spirit, all directing
me, this is the way, walk in it, and you shall find rest unto your Soul; yet
notwithstanding all the good means thou have used to reclaim me, and to bring
me home to thee, I have still gone on in a stubborn Course of Sin, to the
dishonor of thy Name, the wounding of my own Soul, the Scaldal of others, and
the increasing the great dreadful Account, that I must one day make, at the
Judgment Seat of Christ.

III. FOR these O Lord, and many other Sins, all thy Waves and Storms have gone
over me; when thou have smitten me, I became void of understanding. and was so
far from being humbled, that I laid it not to Heart, nor considered that it was
an Evil, and bitter thing to depart from thee, O Lord, my God; woe unto me, I
have pulled away the Shoulder, I have stopped my Ear, that I might not hear; I
have made my Heart harder than the Adamant, and the neither Millstone
impregnable; for all thy Judgments have not pierced me, nor made those
impressions of Compunction and Sorrow, which are the end whereof thou did
send them; so that to my own shame and Confusion I may say, my spots are none
of the spots of thy Children, nor thy Punishments the Chastisements of a loving
Father, but of an Angry Judge.

IV. I have too just reason to fear thy Afflictions under which I mourn, they
are not a Wind to Fan and Purge me, but a Whirl Wind to Scatter and utterly
destroy me, as if the Sentence were already past and the Decree gone forth, as
if my Days were at an end* because the shadows of the Evening are so far
stretched out; but yet O Lord, be not weary of thy repentings; though thou have
been pressed under the Load of my Sins, be not Angry with me for Ever; but in the
midst of Justice remember Mercy. Amen.

Read the Psalms, and Lessons appointed for the Day.

Tuesday Evenings Meditations.
LEARN O^ my Soul to Confess a Truth, though never so much to thy own
Diminution; Learn to Advance the Honor of thy God, though never so much to
thine own depression. They who humble themselves shall be exalted, and they who
exalt themselves shall be humbled. Learn to decline the Applause of Men, and
Banish from thy thoughts all conceits of thine own worth; learn to speak lowly
of thy self, and to mean as thou say.

II. OFTEN does our weakness judge of others, and perhaps our Malice censure
their Qualities: We rashly conclude upon outward presumptions, and little
consider their inward worth; we are apt to undervalue whom we familiarly are
acquainted with, and scarce can think highly of them whom we have once known
low. Heal us, O thou great Physician of our Souls! Heal us of all our Diseases;
and above them all, of our Rude Impatience toward those that would Cure us.
Whatever they do who know thee not, let not thy Church dishonor thee, nor
those of thine own Household undervalue thy Mercies: Let not our unbelief Chase
thee away, nor our ingratitude overcome thy goodness.

III. DISDAIN not O my Soul! the Company of thy Inferiors, but accommodate thy
self to their Innocent Customs; help them with thy Prayers, if thou can not
with thy Power, and thy Lord in due time will Bounteously reward thee, he keeps
the good Wine till the last, and then he will fill us to the brim with joy.

IV. TEACH me O Lord, to Treat with every one according to their quality, and
neither scorn my Inferiors, nor indiscreetly exalt them: Teach me to humble my
Soul before thy Majesty, and sincerely Confess I am an unprofitable Servant;
unprofitable to thee, O Lord, not to my self; while I gain by thy Service the
Wages of Eternity: If by thy Grace, I believe thy word, and Obey thy Law, and
with my whole Strength Love and Adore thee: When I have done all that I ought,
which alas! is more then I do, I must still Confess I Am an unprofitable Servant.

The PRAYER.
O Lord, Create in me a clean Heart, and renew a right Spirit within me; let
the Assistance of thy Holy Spirit of Grace preserve me from Sin for the time to
come; for without thy preventing me, I cannot but Sin; visit me therefore O
Lord, with thy Salvation, that I may live undefiled in the way of thy
Commandments, and see the Felicity of thy chosen, and rejoice and give thanks
with thine Inheritance.

II. TO this End, send thy Holy Spirit into my Heart, to teach me to deny, all
ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live Righteously, Godly, and Soberly in
this present World, remembering the great Account I am to make at the last day;
O let it subdue every Proud thought, and vain imagination, that shall exalt it
self against the Scepter of thy Kingdom.

III. GIVE me, I beseech thee, either Peace from temptations, or Victory over
them; in all Assaults of my Ghostly Enemy, let thy Mighty hand have
pre-eminence and bring mighty things to pass, even Victory and Deliverance unto
me the unworthiest of thy Servants, that so by the Assistance of thy Holy
Spirit, I may Crucify the Old Man, Mortify the Works of the Flesh, subdue my
Corruptions, Here Name the particulars.
Vanquish Satan, and Triumph over the Powers of the Kingdom of Darkness.

IV. O put thy fear into my Heart, that I may never depart from thee; put thy
Love into my Heart, that my Luke-warmness being raised us to the Flames and
Fervency of Cherubims, I may love thee above all things, and loving thee above
all things, I may fear to offend so good and so gracious a God as thou Art;
wash away all my sins in that Sea of Blood which thy Son Christ Jesus shed for
me and for the sins of the whole World; and grant that I may receive the full
benefit of his Death and Passion, in this most Holy Sacrament, with a free
Pardon of all my sins and manifold transgressions. Amen.

Then Read the Psalms and Lessons appointed for the day.

Meditations for Wednesday Morning.
BLESSED are they that had rather endure Affliction with the People of God,
than to enjoy the Pleasures of sin for a Season? This O my Soul, is the way to
beatitude; how strange soever it may seem to our sense: these are the Words of
the Eternal Verity, how improbable soever they may sound to our Ear; choose
whether here thou will be falsely happy for a while, or truly happy hereafter
for ever: if we resolve for the Bliss of the Life to come, we are like to meet
with Affliction in this; and if we place our Felicity in this, we are sure to
meet with Misery in the other.

God be Merciful to me, a sinner.
II. LORD, either make me think my self Blind enough, to need the guidance of
the wise, or be indeed wise enough to guide my self, that I may enter at last
by thee, the door of Life, and feed my Soul on thy joys for ever. Deliver me, O
Lord, from increasing my guilt by sinning against my knowledge, or hoping in my
Ignorance to excuse my guilt; call me after thee, who art gone before, and make
me hear thy Voice and follow it.

O Lord, hear me, and be merciful unto me, for thy Name sake.
DELIVER me, O Lord, from those desperate Sins, which so rarely are pardoned,
that they are said to be unpardonable: Deliver me from resisting the motions of
thy Spirit, and from Choking the Convictions of my own Conscience; Deliver me,
O Lord! and never let the Divil of Blaspemy enter into me, or any of thy
Servants, but enter thou, O Dearest Jesu, and possess my Heart for ever: cast
out by thy powerful Grace every wicked Spirit which Molests me; and Conquer my
strong Corruptions; that else will overcome me.

O Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.
IV. DELIVER me, O Lord, from every least degree of uncharitable provoking my
Neighbor; that I Imbitter not my Life with Mutual Animosities, nor make void
my Piety by an obstinate wilfulness; but observing the Rules of my wise
Redeemer, escape the Miseries that would spring from my Follies. Deliver me, O
Lord, from every least degree of unduly loving my Neighbor; that I set not my
Heart upon sensual pleasures, nor Imbroil my Memory with Impute thoughts.

Good Lord, Deliver me.
An humble Confession of Sins before the Holy Sacrament.
HAVE Mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the
multitude of thy Mercies do away mine offenses, for I will confess my
Wickedness and be sorry for my Sin. O Lord, I am not worthy to be counted
amongst the poorest of thy Servants: I am not worthy to be fed with the
smallest Crumbs which falls from the Table of thy Ordinary Providence, but to be
shut out of thy presence for ever with unbelievers and Reprobates.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
II. O Lord, I am the vilest, and the worst of sinners, full of Pride, Vain
Glory, Impatient of Scorn, or just reproof; disobedient to my Superiors, and
churlish and ungentle to my Equals and Inferiors, I am Angry and Peevish many
times without Occasion, envious at Good and rejoyceing at Evil; I am negligent,
Idle and useless, timorous, base, jealous and impudent, ambitious and very hard
hearted, unmortified, and effeminate in my Life, indevout in my Prayers,
without fervency, or affection. [Here name your particular sins.]

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
III. I am guilty of Gluttony, and Curiosity in Meat and Drink, making
Provision for the Flesh, from whence, has sprung forth impure thoughts, which
have made me prone to unclean and unjust Actions; and the spirit of unchastity,
has entered and unhallowed the Temple of my Body, which thou have Commanded to
be a receptacle for thy Holy and Blessed Spirit.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
ALL my senses, have been inlets of sin, mine Eyes have been Adulterous,
wandering and Covetous; my Ears delighted with obscene Words, slanderous and
reproachful Speeches; my Palate loose, wanton and intemperate; my Tongue
talkative, Lying, Rash, and Malicious; Flattering, Irreligious and Censorious,
my Hands have been unclean and slothful, my desires unreasonable and
unsatiable; all the Members of my Body, and the Faculties of my Soul, have been
Servants of sin, and Weapons of unrighteousness.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
V. I have not, O Lord, been guilty of my own sins; but I have also been guilty
of the sins of others, not only by neglecting to reprove or hinder them in the
ways of sin, but I have encouraged them, by taking off their Fears, and
hardening their Consciences, and had tempted them directly to their Ruin and my
own, but thy preventing Grace put a stop to so great a Misery.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
VI. THY Mercies, O Lord I have abused thy judgments, I have despised, and have
turned thy Grace into Wantonness; I have committed sin, and have repented, and
have sinned again. I have set up resolutions, but have immediately broke them;
I have tied my self up with Vows, but presently have been tempted, and yielded
by little and little, till I was willingly lost, and my Vows signified no more
than vain Promises.

Lord be merciful to me a Sinner,
VII. O Lord, I stand guilty, of another heap of sins, my secret ones which are
innumerable, sins of Omission, and sins willingly neglected; sins of wilful
Ignorance, and voluntary mispersuation; sins of forgetfulness, and sins which a
watchful Spirit might have prevented; the multitude of them, O Lord, Confounds
me, and the remembrance of them is horrible; they are a sight too loathsome,
and unsufferable is their Burden.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
VIII. YET, O Lord thy merciful Eye has spared me to this present, and have
not cast me into Hell, among the Damned, which by my sins I have long since
deserved, and to have been locked up to an Eternity of Torments, with
insupportable amazements; too long, O Lord, I have sinned against thee, and
long since deserved thy severest Scourges; I have committed iniquity in thy
sight, and cannot escape thy Justice, but by flying to thy Mercy.

O Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
The PRAYER.
O Lord, give me a deep Contrition for my sins. and a Hearty Detestation and
loathing of them, give me Grace entirely, presently, and for ever to forsake
them; and grant that I may walk with Care and Prudence, with Fear and
Watchfulness all my days, performing my Duty with Diligence and Charity, with
Zeal, and a never fainting Spirit.

II. Deliver me, O Lord, from extreme Calamities here; and Deliver me from
Eternal Vengeance hereafter, look down with Compassion on the Work of thine own
Hands, and gently Chastise me with thy Rod of Discipline, but suffer not my
weakness to be Oppressed with too heavy Afflictions, nor my Patience Tempted
above my Strength.

III. INSTRVCT me how to Redeem my time, to trust in thy Mercies, and to make
the best use of the means of Grace, for the Working out my Salvation with Fear
and Trembling; that thou may have the Glory in Pardoning all my sins, and I
reap the benefit of all thy Mercies, let all thy Graces guide me to a Holy life
here, that I may Reign with thee for ever hereafter in thy Kingdom of Glory.
Amen.

Read Plal. 6.32.38. 1 Lesson, Ezekiel. 16. 2 Lesson St. Mat. 7.

Meditations for Wednesday Evening.
LORD, not the meanest Circumstance of my Life, but is known to thee; not the
least Assistance I need, but thou kindly providest a particular supply; let me
but do what thou have appointed, and I am sure to find true, all thou have
promised; thy Commands are sweet and easy, O give me Grace to Obey them! Thy
Directions are clear and safe; O guide me still to follow them.

II. BEHOLD, dear Lord, to thee I come, and open before thee all my
Infirmities; my mind is Sick of the Palsy, and my Faculties be numbed with a
Dead Sluggishness; I am apt to censure the good Works of others, but slow to
the performance of any my self; heal me, O thou Heavenly Physician, whose Mercy
both Cures the Sick and Pardons the Penitent; O make me quickly rise from the
sins wherein I have lain too long, and strengthen me to Conquer my Corrupted
Nature; that I may walk toward thee my Eternal home, and praise thy Name for
ever more.

III. Whether alas! Do my Passions lead me? How desperately does one Darling
Sin engage into others. Deliver me, O Lord, in the first beginnings, and suffer
not my Faults, to become strong and Customary, lest I grow at length to despise
reproof, and hate my reprover. Herod knew John to be just, yet kept him in
Prison; he heard him gladly, yet Cut off his Head; nothing so imbroyl'd as a
vicious Life; nothing so full of Contradiction as a wicked Conscience.

IV. CLEANSE thou my Heart, O Lord, from all Vain and unlawful thoughts, my
Mouth from all Foolish and Idle words, and my whole Life from all Wicked and
unprofitable Deeds; for in that great and terrible day, by what I am, I shall
be justified; and by what I am, be Condemned; how many in that day, will rise
up against me! How will my own Conscience Reproach and Confound me! If I
neglect such motives to repentance, if I refuse the wisdom of the Son of God,
who came down from the highest Heavens himself to teach me.

The PRAYER.
O Lord God, whose Power is Infinite, and Purity such, that it cannot endure
the beholding any thing that is unclean; how should I that am Forlorn Dust and
Ashes, very sinful Flesh, presume or dare to present my self before thee? When
I look on the vileness of my Nature, and the sinfulness of my Life, I cannot
choose but Cry out and say, woe unto me, I am undone, I am one of Unclean Lips:
The very Prayers I make to crave Pardon for my Sins, are stained in the
uttering, and must needs add to my Transgressions, if in Judgment, or Justice,
though should weigh or examine them.

II. BUT, O Lord, thou art a God of Infinite Compassion, Pardoning Iniquity,
Transgression and Sin, that would not the Death of a sinner, but that he be
convered and live; thou have not only Allowed me, but Commanded me to call upon
thee, in all my troubles and distresses; thou have promised that at what time
soever a sinner does Repent him of his sins, thou will put away all his
Iniquities out of thy Remembrance.

III. IN Obedience therefore to this thy Command, and in Confidence of this thy
Promise, I am Emboldoned at this time to appear before thee, Renouncing all
merit, and trust, all Confidence and Affiance in my self, and relying only on
thy Mercy, and the Sovereign Mediation of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in
whom only thou art well pleased, and through whom, thou can not be offended
with me.

IV. O Lord, hear thine own Son for me O Lord, hear thine own self in me; that
Blessed Spirit of thine, which makes Intercession for me, with Groans and Sighs
that cannot be expressed; Pardon and Forgive all my sins, both Original and
Actual; of Omission or Commission, of Thought, Word, and Deed, of Ignorance,
Infirmity, or Presumption, Here Name the Particulars.
which I have at any time Committed against thee; Nail them to the Cross of
Christ, that they may never rise up in judgment against me, either to shame me
in this World, or Condemn me in the World to come.

V. BVRY them in the Bottomless Sea of thy Mercy and forgetfulness, that they
may never appear before thee to hinder thy Favors unto me; Seal the Remission
of them to my Soul and Conscience, that they may not Distract or Disturb me in
my Devotion; and Crush and Subdue the Rebellions of my Nature, that they may no
longer Reign in my Mortal Body; and having Cleansed and Purified me, from all
Spots and Stains of Sin, I beseech thee, O Lord, to pour thy Grace and Holy
Spirit into me, that may enable me to walk before thee in Holiness and
Righteousness, and in Sobriety, all the days of my Life.

Read Psalm 51.102.130.140. 1 Lesson, Ezekiel. 18. 2 Lesson, Romans 12.

Meditations for Thursday Morning.
O My Soul, we are very inconstant; sometimes we endeavor to heartily Repent,
and after a while miscarry again; often we pretendedly resolve to amend, and
yet sometimes forget our good purposes! Bewail thy Infirmities, Renew thy
Intentions, and be of good Comfort; our Lord has overcome the World: He
overcame it with his own strong Arm, and left thee Rules, and Grace, and
Sacraments to help thee; that, if thou can not have Peace with thy Enemies,
thou may at least have Victory over them:

II. Often, O Lord, thou invitest us to thy Holy Table, and often do we neglect
and refuse to come; thou invitest us to the Pleasures of a Virtuous Life, and
the continual Feast of a good Conscience, thou providest a Heavenly Banquet,
and make thy Son himself our Delicious Entertainment; O Cloth us, Gracious
Lord, with the Wedding Garment of Charity to thee, and one another; that we may
Enter with Joy into the Marriage Chamber, and Sit down as happy Guests in thy
Kingdom for Ever. Let us not Trifle away our time in Wandering up and down, nor
prefer a Petty Interest before thy Glorious Rewards, least we be Confounded
when our King shall come in Majesty, and Command the unprepared into Chains of
Darkness.

III. THOU art, O Jesu! the true Celestial Manna, of which whoever Eats shall
Live Eternally; thou art the Bread of God that Descended from Heaven, of which,
who ever Feeds shall never Hunger: Cast me not out, O Lord, whom thy Mercy has
Adopted into thy own Family; but give me this Bread of thy Children for Ever.
Thou who came down to do thy Fathers Will, and has taught me it is thy
Father's Will, that of those he has given thee, none be lost.

IV. Murmur no more among your selves, unhappy Atheistical Dis-believers of the
Mysterries of Heaven; be no more Incredulous, but submit your Reason to him
whom you know to be Infallible. The Bread I will give is my Flesh for the Life
of the World, which Received by Faith, is the Souls Nourishment. Draw them, O
Heavenly Father! that they may come to thee; receive them, O Gracious Jesus!
and Teach their Hearts to believe what thine own Blessed Mouth has so clearly
taught them.

The PRAYER.
OH! Most Glorious, and most Power full Lord God, whose dwelling is above the
Heavens in Light in Accessible, and thine Eyes run to and fro, to behold the
things which are in Heaven and in Earth; neither is there any thing which is
not Naked and open unto thee; for thine Eyes are Ten Thousand times brighter
than the Sun, beholding all the Ways of Men.

II. LOOK upon me O Lord, who am the unworthiest of all thy Servants, thou have
made me a Member, O Lord, of that Mystical Body whereof thy Son Christ Jesus is
the Head, make me therefore sensible of the necessities of the Catholic
Church; I beseech thee to be merciful unto it, and to every Member of the same,
wheresoever Dispersed, howsoever Distressed, or by Whomsoever Despised
throughout this Universal World.

III. Oh Lord, call them that are yet Strangers, and have not yet heard of thy
Name; reduce and bring home those that are gone astray, and wander; raise up
all that are fallen, and confirm and strengthen such as do stand; bind up all
that are Broken, and heal all that are Bruised; Unite us all in soundness of
Doctrine, by the Spirit of Truth, in holiness of Life, by the Spirit of
Sanctification, and in Brotherly Compassion, and Christian Affection, by the
Spirit of Love.

IV. O Lord, I beseech thee, to open the Bowels of thy Mercy, and to pour out
thy tenderest Compassion upon all such as mourn under the weight of their
Afflictions; many are the troubles of thy poor Servants, and thou only know
how to deliver them out of all their troubles; whether therefore any be
inwardly distressed in Soul, Mind, or Conscience, or outwardly Afflicted in
Body, Estate or good Name; I beseech thee, give them speedy case out of their
misery, or Patience to endure what thou shall be pleased to lay upon them.

V. I beseech thee to open the Eyes of those that lie on their Beds of
Sickness; Oh! thou that art the God of Health, and sender of Sickness;
Sanctify thy Visitation unto them, make their Beds in their Sickness, lay no
more upon them than thou will give them strength and Patience to bear, and if
it may stand with thy Gracious Will, grant that they may recover their former
Health, to do thee Service hereafter.

VI. BUT if thou that know what is best needful for them, have determined at
this time, to take any of them unto thy self, O Lord, I beseech thee to fit and
prepare them for the hour of Death; give them a true feeling of their sins, and
a lively apprehension of thy mercy in Christ Jesus, that so surely Repenting of
thee one, and cheerfully laying hold on the other, they may with Confidence and
Comfort resign up their Souls into the Hand of thee their most merciful Creator
and Redeemer. Amen.

Read the Psalms, and Lessons for the Day.

Meditations for Thursday Evening.
PREPARE my Heart, O God, to receive thee, whom my Soul loves; for thou have
the Words of Eternal Life: Blessed O gracious Jesu, be the sweetness of thy
Spirit, which so kindly invitest me to refresh my weariness. I know, and thine
own sure word has told me, If I Labor for thee here, I shall rest with thee
hereafter. Lord, make me follow thee wherever thou go, and strive and run to
be first in thy Presence; there I shall meet a Mercy that will regard and pity
me; there I shall find a goodness that will teach and relieve me.

II. WRITE all thy Holy Truths in my Soul, O Lord, and Print thy Love in the
Center of them all; there let it sit as Sovereign Governor, and absolutely
dispose of all my interests: Let it command my Tongue to confess thee, and no
fear of Danger make me ever deny thee; let it command all my Powers to serve
thee, and nothing but thy Love find place in my Heart.

III. O when shall I come to thy Holy Table, to taste of thy most delicious
Banquent; to hear those Sweet and Ravishing Words, He dwells in me, and I in
him: sweet in excess to the Soul that loves, and Tastes the joys of this
heavenly Converse, and feeds on the wonders of this admirable Union: He dwells
in me, and I in Him. O Blessed and Glorious Words! What can be said more full of
Grace and Strength and Supernatural Mystery? Here they alone are my Heaven on
Earth, and will hereafter be my Heaven in Heaven.

IV. To thee my great Creator! I humbly Sacrifice the Noblest faculty thou have
given me; to thee, and to the Obedience of thy Truth, I entirely Resign and
Captivate my understanding. Thy Words, O Lord, in thy Holy Sacrament, are
Spirit and Life unto me; O make my Faith be quick and Active to thee, in
receiving so great a Salvation: Shall I go back and forsake my God, because he
humbles himself to approach toward me? Shall I refuse to Learn of my Master,
because his Lessons exalt me, above my Nature.

The PRAYER.
O Lord, I am too weak to serve thee, in my Natural Power, and not careful to
improve the Aids of thy Spirit; I am full of inconsideration and carelessness,
desirous to be accounted Holy of Men, but careless of being so to thee, my God;
I am unstedfast, O Lord in all my ways; Here Name the Particulars.
but, enable me to confess my Faith, in despite of all the Oppositions of
Satan; to Publish thy Laws, submit to thy dispensations, and to Glorify thy
Holy Name, by Holy living and dying.

II. BLESS me, O Lord, with all the Blessings, and Assistance of thy Spirit and
Providence; let the Daily Sacrifice of Prayer, and Eucharist in thy Church
never cease, but for ever be presented unto thee, United to the intercession of
our Lord, and for ever prevail for the obtaining to all her Sons and Daughters,
Grace, and Blessing, Pardon, and Holiness, Perservance, and Glory. Unite my
Heart and Tongue; take away the Spirit of Error and Division from me, that my
Religion and Devotion may increase, whereby thy Truth may be promoted, and thy
Name Glorified, and me thy unworthy Servant Instructed, and Comforted, let thy
Spirit Rule, and all Interest Stoop and Obey, Publish, and Advance the Intorest
of the Lord Jesus.

III. EXTEND thine Accustom^d goodness to all thy People; to Old Men, Prudence,
and Liberality to Young Men, Obedience, Temperance, Health and Diligence, to
Merchants, Justice, and Faithfulness; to Mechanics, and Artisans, Truth and
Honesty, to all Married Pairs, Faith, and Holiness, Charity, and sweet
Compliances; to all Christian Women, the Ornament of a meek, and a quiet
Spirit, Chastity and Charity, Patience, and Obedience, a Zeal of Duty and
Religion.

IV. TO all that are Sick and Afflicted, distressed in Conscience, or
Persecuted for it, give Patience and Comfort, a sincere Repentance, and a
perfect Resignation, a love of God, and a Perseverance in Duty, proportionable
Comfort in this Life, and an Eternal weight of Glory in the Day of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Amen.

Read the Psalms and Proper Lessons appointed for the day.

Friday Mornings Meditations, On the Life of the Holy Jesus.
On the Incarnation of our Blessed Redeemer.
O Most Blessed Jesu, who for the Redemption of the World, Vouchsafest to be
made Man; by the ever Blessed Merits of thy Mysterious Incarnation, grant me to
become one Spirit with thee, who became one Flesh with me.

Nativity.
II. Blessed Jesu, who wast Born of a pure Virgin, by the power of the Holy
Ghost; grant me by the same Almighty Power, to possess a pure Virgin Soul, in a
pure and Chasse Temple of my Body, and to be Fruitful in all good works to my
lives end.

Circumcision.
III. Blessed Jesu, who was Circumcised, and made Obedient to the Law for Man;
grant unto me, I humbly beseech thee, the true Circumcision of the Spirit, that
my Heart, and all my Members may be Mortified from all Carnal and worldly
Lusts, that I may in all things Obey thy Blessed Will.

Baptism.
IV. Blessed Jesu, by the Merits of thy Holy Baptism, wash me thoroughly from my
Wickedness, and Cleanse me from my Sins, whereby I have Defiled those
Sacramental Waters of my Baptism, and perjuriously broken my Vows and Promises
made therein.

Fasting.
V. Blessed Jesu, who did Fast Forty Days and Forty Nights; Pardon and
Forgive me all the manifold Acts of Rioting, and excess I have been guilty of:
and give me Grace to use such Abstinence, that my Flesh being subdued to the
Spirit; I may ever Obey thy Godly motions in Righteousness, and true Holiness
to thy Honor, and Glory.

Temptation.
VI. Blessed Jesu, who in thy Holy Fasting, was Tempted by Satan, and by thy
Almighty Power, did Conquer him; grant me, by thy Blessed Spirit, Devoutly to
entertain the Holy Duties of Prayer and Fasting, that by the Power of thy
Victory over the Devil, I may have Strength and Power of over Satan; the World
and the Flesh, and continue thy Servant to my Lives End.

Doctrine and Example.
VII. Blessed Jesu, who in thy Prophetical Office, did Preach the Gospel, and
Hea^ all manner of Sicknesses and Diseases among the People; and by thy
Doctrine and Example, art the way and the Truth that leads unto Life * Grant me
to believe a right, all thy Revelations, to Obey all thy Commands, to walk in
thy Steps, and to follow thee, the Light of the World, that I walk not in
Darkness.

Christ Conspired against and Betrayed.
VIII. Blessed J^su, whose precious Life was Conspired ^gain7s;^, by
Dis-believing J^wes, and were Betrayed, and Sold by one of thy own Disciples
for a Vile Price: Deliver me, I Humbly Beseech thee, from all the Conspiracies
of my Ghostly and Bodily Enemies, but especially from the Treachery of my own
Heart, and the Rebellion of my Flesh, which for things of no Value, betrays my
Soul to its utter Ruin and Destruction.

His Agony in the Garden.
IX. Blessed Jesu, thy bitter Passion was in a Garden, where thy Soul was
sorrowful, even unto Death; Sanctify, O Lord, all my Infirmities and Passions,
Comfort me in all my Troubles, and Compose my my mind with such a frame of
Spirit, that I may be sensible with a Godly Sorrow of that Heavy Wrath and
Curse for sin, which thou sufferedst for me, and all the World.

His Bloody Sweat.
X. Blessed Jesu, who upon the Cold Earth, did Sweat Drops of Blood, under
the Load of our Sins, and Apprehensions of thy ensuing Sufferings; thou
offerest up strong Cries and Tears unto him that is able to save: O that my
Heart might inwardly Bleed Tears of Compassion and Contrition, and vent forth
fervent and effectual Prayers with Tears of Devotion, as to be heard in Heaven,
and healed of all my sinful Infirmities.

His Submission.
XI. Blessed Jesu, who did submit with Patience unto the Will of thy Heavenly
Father; Endue me with the same Spirit of meekness and Patience, submitting my
self unto the Will of God, in prosperity and adversity, Health and Sickness,
Life, and Death.

His Apprehension.
XII. Blessed Jesu, thou wast Apprehended, and bound as a Malefactor, but were
clearer than an Angel of Light; O let not my Soul be Arrested by Infernal
Fiends, to Eternal Horror in the other World, but from the Eternal Malice of
the Spirits of Darkness, and from the Bonds and Chains of my Sins. Good Lord
Deliver me.

The PRAYER.
O Lord, most Holy, my sins are more in number than the Hairs of my Head, and
the weight of them Cries a loud to Heaven for Mercy; I beseech thee, O God the
Father of Heaven, thou great Creator and Preserver of Man, despise not the Work
of thine own Hands, O God the Son that came into the World to save Sinners,
Remember not my Offenses, neither seek thou Vengeance of my sins, but good Lord
spare me thy unworthy Servant, whom thou have Redeemed with thy most Precious
Blood, and be not Angry with me for ever; O God, the Holy Ghost, that Despisest
not a Broken and Contrite Heart, let it pity thee, to see these thy Temples of
my Soul and Body thus Ruined by sin and wickedness; O Holy, Blessed, and
Glorious Trinity, Three Persons, and One God, have Mercy upon me a Miserable
Sinner.

II. A Sinner, and a grievous Sinner I am; teach me, O God, to grieve that I am
so, give me a Broken and a Wounded Spirit for all my Transgressions; Break this
Stony Heart of mine, yea take away this Heart of Stone from me, and give me a
Heart of Flesh, that I may tremble at the Voice of thy Law, and melt at the
Sight of thy Judgments, and Accuse and Condemn my self, and be ready to join
with thee to do Justice upon such a sinner as I am; but least I should faint
through the smart of the many fresh Bleeding Wounds which my sins have given my
Soul; Oh! do thou uphold me by thy Right Hand, and pour into my Wounds that
precious Balm of Gilead, a true and a lively Faith in the full satisfaction that
thy Son has made to thy Justice, for the sins of the whole World, and through
his Cross and Passion, through his most Precious Death and Burial, through his
Glorious Resurrection and Ascension, I beseech thee, be thou Reconciled unto me.

III. O Lord, for his sake, Pardon all that is past, lay none of my sins to my
Charge but Blot them all out of the Book of thy Remembrance; Wash me, O wash
me, thoroughly from my sins, and cleanse me from my Unrighteousness, in the
Blood of Jesus Christ. Lord let his Blood that speaks better things than that
of Abel, cry louder for mercy in thine Ears, than do my sins for Vengeance, be
sprinkle my Polluted, but Penitent Soul, In the Blood of Jesus, that thy wrath
may pass over me, and that the light of thy Countenance may shine upon me.

IV. SEAL unto my Soul, the free Pardon and forgiveness of all my sins, and say
unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation; Oh! do thou by thy Spirit assure my Spirit
that I am thy Child, and that thou art Reconciled unto me, in the Blood of
Jesus, and to this end, work into me, a Detestation of all my former
Wickedness, help me in the Mortification of all my Vile and Corrupt Affections;
Crucify in me the Old Man, the whole Body of sin, that I may Die unto Sin, and
live unto Righteousness; and be made a fit Partaker at thy Holy Table.

Read Psalm. 22.40.54. 1 Less. Genesis 22. to v. 20. 2 Less. St. John 18.

Friday Evenings Meditations. On the Passion and Death of the Holy Jesus.
His Arraignment and Condemnation.
BLESSED Jesu, thou wast Seized, and Led as an Innocent Lamb to the Slaughter;
thou wast Reviled, falsely Accused, and Unjustly Condemned, by unjust Earthly
Judges, who was thy self the most just Judge of Heaven and Earth; O Lord, be
not a Severe and Angry Judge, when I shall stand before thy Tribunal, but be
thou my Mediator and Advocate to answer for me; and I humbly beseech thee, to
Deliver from the Accusations of the Devil and his Angels, from the Accusations
of all those who have been Conscious of my many sinful Pollutions, and from the
Accusations of my own Conscience in the day of Judgment.

Spitted Upon.
II. Blessed Jesu, whose Face was fairer than the Children of Men, ^^d bri^hter
than the Sun in its (...)ory, was Spit upon by f(...) and Ignominuos Persons:
Oh! turn thy Face away from my sins, whereby I have Polluted my Soul, and
Profaned thy Name: But hide not thy Face from me, who for my sins did not
turn thy Face from being Spit upon by the Barbarous Jews.

Buffeted.
III. Blessed Jesu, who wast Cruelly Treated by the Soldiers, with their
Intolerable Rude Cuffs, and hard Injurious Buffets: Grant Lord, that though I
may feel, yet let me not be Vanquished by the Buffets of Satan.

Forsaken of his Friends.
Blessed Jesu, thou wast Content to be forsaken of all thy friends, and dearest
Disciples, and to be left in the hands of Cruel Men, who Thirsted after thy
precious Blood; O leave me not destitute of thy Divine Presence, when I am
Assaulted by my Ghostly Adversaries; but be for ever with me, and defend me
from all their Malice, and protect my Soul in all dangers.

Denied by Peter.
Blessed Jesu, thou with infinite goodness and meekness, lookedst back on St.
Peter, when he denied, and forswore thee, and by thy gracious look, did call
him back, both to himself and thee, by true Repentance: Oh look thus upon all
Back-sliders from thee, for their sincere Conversion; and look upon me also,
and be merciful unto me.

Scourged.
Blessed Jesu, thou was Whipped by a merciless Crew of Soldiers, and thy
Delicate skin was Torn, and redoubled with their Lashes, that the Blood
Streamed down thy Innocent Sides; but since, O merciful Lord, thou was wounded
for my Transgressions, and Bruised for mine Iniquities: O let thy Chastisement
procure my peace with Heaven, and grant that by thy Stripes my Soul may be
healed.

Crowned with Thorns.
Blessed Jesu, thy Head was Crowned with Thorns, and those beaten into thy
Temple, with much Rage and Fury: Pardon, O Lord all those sins, my Eyes, Ears,
and Tongue, those Instruments of my Head have been guilty of: Break not the
Bruised Reed, my broken Heart, with the pressure of thy heavy Wrath, but let
thy Thorns the Fruits of the Curse which we Contracted and thou sustainedst,
deliver me from the Curse due for my sins.

Renouncing the World.
Blessed Jesu, who art the King of Glory, yet wast Content with a Cross for thy
Throne, a Wreath of Thorns for thy Crown, and a Reed for thy Scepter; thy
Entertainment was Gaul and Vinegar, and for thy Robes, only a little Linen to
cover thy Nakedness: O that I were so wise, as from thy example, to despise all
the Gilded Glories, and Vanities of this Life, and to choose with Moses to
suffer Affliction, with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of sin
for a Season.

Bearing his Cross.
Blessed Jesu, who did with Patience bear thy Cross, till it sunck thy Body to
the Earth: O let me not sink under thy Cross, nor shrink from it, but rather
cheerfully to take it up, whatever it be, and carefully to under go all the
Sacred Acts of true Repentance; following thee, O Lord, who sufferedst for me,
leaving me an Example, that I should follow thy steps.

Crucified.
Blessed Jesu, who did Hang on a Cursed Tree, to Abolish the Curse contracted
by Eating the Fruit of the Forbidden Tree, thou wast numbered with the
transgressors, and Crucified among Thieves: O draw my hard and Stony Heart unto
thee, and deliver me from that Curse which my sins have Contracted, and rank me
not among the Goats on the Left, but among the Sheep on thy Right Hand, in the
great day of Judgment.

His Body Tormented.
Blessed Jesu, all the parts and Members of thy Body were stretched on the
Cross; thy blessed Arms and Legs were by such violence distended, that the
Joints were disparted, the Veins burst, the Sinews Cracked, the Skin Rent, the
Flesh Tore, and all the Bones Started a side: thy Innocent Hands and Feet were
Nailed, for the sinful works of my Head, Heart, Hands and Feet; but I beseech
thee Nail them to thy Cross, which were the cause of thy Crucifixion, hide in
thy Wounds, who wast Wounded for my transgression, and write those Wounds of
thine in my Heart, not with Ink, but with thy Blood, which was shed for me.

The Sufferings of his Soul.
Blessed Jesu, the Sufferings of thy Soul, was exceeding great, being like
melted Wax in the Furnace of God's Wrath, for the sins of the World, when the
fullness of thy sufferings being accomplished, thou Commendedst thy Spirit into
the Hands of God: Grant O Lord, that I may Die unto sin, and Live only unto
thee, and by thy bitter Cross and Passion, Cleanse me from all Filthiness of
Flesh and Spirit, that I may perfect Holiness in thy Fear.

The PRAYER.
O Lord, without thee I am not able to do any thing, much less any thing that
is good; come therefore, Oh thou Father of Lights, dispel and scatter from my
Soul the Foggy Mists of sins and Ignorance, that in thy Light I may see Light;
come O thou Power of God, and set up thy Throne in my Soul, and sway thy
Scepter there, and bring into subjection every high thought, and every high
imagination that exalts it self against thee: Come O thou Wisdom of God, and
discover to my Soul the Folly of Sin, the Vanity of the World, and the
deceitfulness of my own Heart.

II. TEACH me, I humbly beseech thee to Eschew Evil, and Cleave to that which
is good; Come, O thou goodness of God, and shed abroad the love of God in my
Heart, that I may love thee my God above all things, and my Neighbor for thy
sake: Yea, my very Enemies for Jesus Christ his sake, and after his Example,
who Died for me, while I was yet his Enemy; fit me with all Graces, necessary
for all Events, with strength to resist all the Temptations of Satan, to keep
my self unspotted from the World, to subdue my Passions, my Vile and Corrupt
Affections, with Patience to bear Afflictions, and with a contented Resolution,
to undergo whatsoever thy hand shall be pleased to lay upon me, that whether it
be in Life or in Death, in both I may be thine.

III. I know O Lord, my sins are increased above measure, and my Iniquities are
gone over my Head; Nay, they are gone up to Heaven, and have pulled down thy
Vengeance upon me; yet how long Lord will thou be Angry? for ever? Shall thy
Jealousy Burn like Fire? O remember not against me, the sins and offenses of
my Life past; but let thy tender Mercy speedily prevent me, lest I be brought
to great misery; help me, O help m, O God of my Salvation, for the Glory of thy
Name; O deliver me and be merciful unto my sins for thy Names Sake.

IV. But in the midst of Judgment Remember Mercy; Pardon all my crying sins,
Reverse thy fearful, though justly deserved judgments, and that which is the
most dreadful of all judgments, and continues thy judgments, bardness of Heart,
contempt of thy Word and Commandment; restore thy wonted though undeserved
Mercies; give Peace in my time, O Lord, and let the Gospel of Truth flourish,
even until thy Sons coming to Judgment: and that for his sake, who is the
Prince of Peace, and that shed his most precious Blood to purchase our Peace.

V. O thou, that art the Author of Peace, and lover of Concord, Compose I
beseech thee, all unhappy differences, and divisions that are among us; take
away from all Men's Hearts the Spirit of Division and Contention, the Spirit of
Blood Thirstiness and Revenge, the Spirit of Pride, Blindness of Heart. Vain
Glory and Hypocrisy, of Envy, Hatred, Malice, and all Incharitableness; and
give us the Spirit of Peace, Unity and Concord; the Spirit of Moderation, the
Spirit of due Obedience, and above all the Spirit of thy Fear, that we may at
length meet and live in the Unity of the Spirit, and in the Bond of Peace, and
with one Mouth Praise thee, our God, and with one Heart, love one another

Read Psalm. 69.88. 1 Lesson. Isa. 53. 2 Lesson. 1 Pet. 2.

Saturday Mornings Meditations.
LORD, I confess without thee my endeavors are in vain, and without thy
blessing my hopes can never succeed, but I also know thou rewardest those who
Obey thee, and failest not to relieve with a generous bounty, those who depend
on thee; O give me 1. Thy Grace to observe my part, and I Will not fear the
performance of thine; thou call to thy self the Poor and Humble, to Eat and
Drink at thy Holy Table; those who faithfully live together in Unity; thou
graciously invitest to thy Royal Feast: prefering them all to thy friendship
here, that they may be partakers of thy Glory hearafter.

II. MY Soul, if thou at any time loose the presence of thy God, thou will
besure to find him at his Holy Table, there seek him with Grace and
perseverance, seek him with Prayers, and Sighs, and Tears; and be sure at last
thou shall find him with joy: He hides not himself, that we may not find him,
but that we may seek him, and be hereafter more fearful to loose him: Despair
not, he again will show himself, only go on and seek him still with hope; and
be sure thou will meet him at his Heavenly Feast.

III. HAPPY are the Ears that hear thee speak, O Blessed Jesu (...) Happy are
the Hearts that feel the Power of thy Word. O thy Holy One of God! For thou
Command with Authority all Unclean Spirits, and they Obey thee. rescue me, O
Lord, from the Snares of Satan's Temptations, and Powerfully Chase away the
Enemies which disturb my Peace; that they Tear not my mind with distracting
thoughts nor trouble my repose with impure fancies.

IV. SO sweetly efficacious is thy Grace, O Lord, that immediately it draws all
Souls unto thy Heavenly Banquet; so kindly Condescending is thy Clemency, that
thou presently embracest them in thy Arms of Mercy, when they come unto thee,
thy own blessed Mouth, has meekly spoke the mildest Lesson to win us to thee; I
will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice; for I came not to call the Righteous, but
Sinners to Repentance; Lord, I consess my sins, I confess my need of thy
Mercies: but my hope is great, that thou will abundantly Pardon me, whilst I
hear thee so graciously remember thy Ancient Promises, and so powerfully urge
them in favor of sinners; quicken my Faith, O Lord, and make it Active, that I
may receive thee with thankfulness, who so kindly call me.

The PRAYER.
OH Eternal, most Gracious, and Merciful Father, I am here come into thy
Presence, with Confidence, seeing that my Conscience tells me, I have broke all
thy Commandments, as I have sinned in Thoughts, and Words, in Thoughts more
than I can think, and in Words more than I am able to Express; the number of
them are so great, that I have scarce Room for any more; I am impure, but thou
of purer Eyes than to behold iniquity.

II. BUT if thou should enter into judgment with me, I were not able to
stand before thee, I Confess there is but one way, to sly from thee, as an
Angry God, which is to sly to thee, as a reconciled Father, reconciled in the
Blood of thy Son Jesus Christ, to fly from the strict Bar of thy judgment, to
thy tender Bowels of Compassion, not according to my Merits, but according to
my necessities, so I humbly beseech thee Pardon all my sins past, and
strengthen me against sin, for the time to come.

III. TO this end, I beseech thee Awaken my Dead Conscience, confirm my
judgment, enlighten my understanding, conform my Will, Reform my Life, Inflame
my Zeal, Strengthen my Faith, and that from henceforth, I may live unto thee,
and serve thee, Lord give me Repentance, not to be repented of, that hope which
will not make me ashamed, and that Peace of Conscience which passes all
understanding: give me the World, but that World which passes knowledge, give
me Faith, but that Faith which is in Christ, and that Wisdom which leads to
understanding.

IV. Lord prepare my Soul and Heart to meet thee, at thy Holy Yable, that I may
feed my Soul with thy loving kindness, and not depart from thence without a
Blessing; give me Grace evermore to fear thee, and to preserve a tender Sense
of my Duty toward thee, and Conscienciously Obey thee in all things, that so
by the Virtue of his Sacrifice of himself, all my sins may be Washed away in
his Blood, and be remembered no more.

Read the Psalms and Proper Lessons appointed for the day.

Saturday Evenings Meditations.
BEHOLD me, O Lord, in this State of Misery, and no hope left me, but in thy
Mercy ^ ^here I must lie kept down with my sins, unless thy Clemency take pity
on me. Enlighten, O Lord, the Blindness of my understanding, and Straighten the
Crookedness of my Will, and heal all the Infirmities of my weak Nature: O do
thou thoroughly Cure me that I sin no more, but immediately take up my Heart,
which too long have Cleaved to this Earth, and bear it after thee, to walk from
henceforth the ways of thy Commandments.

II. WHEN thou art present with me, O thou Heavenly Spouse, of my Soul! When
thou art pleased to stay and dwell in my Heart, how strangely do thou fill it
with joy and sweetness! Whatever happens, I cannot be sad while thou art with
me, nor pleasant if thou leavest me: infuse thy Holy Love into mine Heart, O
Lord, and make me faithfully hold it fast for ever; that I loose not my self by
neglecting thy Grace, but preserve them both to Eternal Life.

III. BUT alas! How quickly am I weary of praying to my God; how apt to give
over my expectance from him! Who yet, as soon as he sees my necessities, begins
my relief, and leaves nor off till he has perfectly finished it: Let me not
fear, but believe and Obey, and my Soul shall be safe; why am I so impatient
when any trouble befalls me, and why do I disparage the extraordinary
proceedings of God? though I am Dead in sin and sorrow he can revive me, and
give me strength to walk in the ways of Life; he will give me, that Bread which
came down from Heaven, yea his own self, which he gave for the Life of the
World.

IV. BUT it is not for Flesh and Blood to follow thee, O thou great Exemplar of
Sublime perfection! It Is not for Flesh and Blood to perform the Excellencies of
an Evangelical Life; but to the Almighty Grace of God, nothing is impossible;
every exense is welcome to me, every little difficulty is enough to divert me;
I am afraid of the hardship of Poverty, I am in Love with my Kindred and
Acquaintance; and never can Nature alone overcome these difficulties; but thou,
O Lord, can find a remedy, and compose in me such a frame of Spirit, whereby
I may Vanquish all those thoughts which keep me from thy Glorious presence.

The PRAYER.
OEternal Lord God, Infinite in thy Greatness, Incomprehensible in thy Glory,
whose Pure and Just Eves cannot behold either Sin or Sinners with the least
look of approbation; be not offended with me thy unworthy Servant, O Lord who
art a Merciful and Reconciled Father to all such sinners as sincerely desire,
and endeavor to Repent and believe; thy providence has preserved me unto this
moment, to offer unto thy Majesty my Evening Sacrifice, beseeching thee, to
make me a fit partaker at thy Holy Table.

II. I have been a foul and flat Idolator, erecting the Idols of my own profit
and pleasure, in the Chapel and Closet of my Heart, and then, and there have
fallen down upon the bended Knees of my Soul, and worshipped them, by regarding
my lust more than the fulfiling thy Will in thy Word; that Sacred Name of
thine, whereby I hope to be Saved, I have taken in vain, I have done that on
thy day, the Lord's Day, which I can justify or a Vouch on no day; I have not
given that Reverence and Respect to my Superiors; I have broken all thy
Commandments of the Second Table in my Demeanor toward my Neighbor, and in
my Deportment to my own Soul and Body.

III. O Lord, I have been ashamed to confess my sins in the presence of the
World, but I have been Vile, and bold, and no whit ashamed to commit them, when
I knew full well, that thee, the great God, of Heaven and Earth, did at that
instant behold me, Oh! lend me thy Spirit effectually, to admire thy Patience
and ^ongSuffering toward me, who permits such a Prefane and Presumptuous
sinner at this hour of my Life still to remain from everlasting Burnings.

IV. SVRELY, Lord, there are many in that Pit of Perdition, whose sins against
thee, were never Aggavated with those high Circumstances; O Lord, I have no
Varity of Reasons to move thee to Mercy, I have no Exchange of Motives to
persuade thee to Pity, but only the same, over and over again, for thy own
sake, for thy Names sake, for thy Mercies sake, for thy Son, and my Savior
Christ Jesus his sake, forgive mySins, for they are great; wash the Guilt and
Filth of my sins away in his Blood; and Lord for the time to come, give me
Grace to spend the remainder of my days to thy Glory: In whose most powerful
Name. I sue unto thee, for all that is comprehended in this my weeks
preparation (or whatever else for want of Memory I have Omitted) in thy most
perfect form of Prayer; sayong, Our Father, etc.

Read the Psalms and Lessons for the Day.

Sunday Mornings Meditations at Home.
WELCOME Blessed day unto my Heart, but far more Welcome unto my Soul; I have now
put off the Old Man with his Affections and Lusts, and I must now put on my
Wedding Garment, even the Lord Jesus Christ, that I may be made wholly
conformable to him, in the Image of his mind: that my Soul may be Clothed with
his Righteousness, and all its faculties proportioned and vested according to
the perfect Pattern of Christ's Life.

II. THIS is the day of the Holy Feast, therefore, my Soul, lay aside all Cares
and Impertinences of the World, remember this day is appointed for thee, a day
of Traffic and Intercourse with Heaven; O Lord, therefore will I magnify thy
Holy Name, and evermore adore thy goodness; O What a happy opportunity my God
have thou given me, of receiving the greatest favor, I can receive in this
World? even the Body and Blood, of my dearest Savor.

III. O Lamb, of God, thou have used many Arts to save me, when I was lost,
thou have given thy Life to Redeem me when I was a Slave to Sin and Satan, and
thy Holy Spirit to Sanctify me; O now come Lord Jesus, come quickly: My Heart
is desirons of thy Presence; Thirsty for thy Grace, and I am earnest to
entertain thee, not as a Guest but as an Inhabitant to dwell with me forever.

IV. LORD, the place thou art Invited to, is full of Passion, and Prejudice,
Disobedient, Lustful, and Intemperate, and full of sad Remembrances that I have
often provoked to Jealousy and to Anger thee my God, my dearest Savior, him
that died for me, him that Suffered Torments for me, that is Infinitely good to
me, and infinitely good and perfect in himself; Lord I am as sure thou did
the great Work of Redemption for me, and all Mankind, as that I am Alive: This
is my Hope, the Strength of my Spirit, my Joy and my Confidence: Here I will
dwell, for I have a delight therein: Here I will live, and here I desire to Die.

V. LORD, whither shall I go but to thee? Thou have the Words of Eternal Life:
as the Heart desires the Water Brooks. So longs my Soul after thee, O God, my
Soul is a Thirst for God, yea even for the Living God, when shall I come and
appear before the Presence of God? O send out thy Light, and thy Truth, and
bring me unto thy Holy Hill, and to thy dwelling: and that I may go unto the
Altar of God, even unto the God of my Joy and Gladness: and with my Heart will
I give thanks to thee, O God, my God.

A Prayer at Home, before the Sacrament.
OBlessed Jesu, it is thy Blessed Body, that my Soul longs for, and to be
satisfied with thy Precious Blood, for its Purification and Nourishment;
Vouchsafe Holy Jesus, to enter this Day into the House of thy Servant: that
with Holy Zacheus I may within receive from thee, that joyful Benediction. this
day is Salvation come to thine House.

II. THY Body, O Blessed Jesu, is my Food, and thy Righteousness is my Robe,
thou art both the Priest and Sacrifice, the Master of the Feast, and the Feast
it self, my Souls Physician, the Light of my Eyes, and the Purisier of my
Stains: O Enter now into my Heart, and cast out from thence all Impurities,
even all the remains of the Old Man.

III. AND grant I may partake of this Holy Sacrament with much Reverence, Holy
Relish, and great Effect, receiving thence the Communication of thy Holy Body
and Blood, for the Establishment of an unreprovable Faith, of an unfeigned Love,
for the fullness of Wisdom, for the healing my Soul, and preservation of my
Body, for the taking out the Sting of temporal Death, and for the Assurance of
a Holy Resurrection, for the Ejection of all Evil from within me, and the
fulfiling all thy Righteous Commandments, and to procure for me a Mercy, and a
fair Reception at the Day of Judgment.

IV. O God, the Bread of Heaven, and Life of the World; I have sinned against
Heaven, and in thy Sight, and am not worthy to be made partaker of thy most
Holy Mysteries: But Vouchsafe as a Merciful God, to make me worthy, by thy
Grace, that I may not receive thy Holy Body and Precious Blood to my
Condemnation, but unto the Remission of my sins, and Everlasting Life. Amen.

Intercessions.
O God have Mercy upon poor Mankind, enlighten all that sit in Darkness, and in
the Shadow of Death, reveal thy Son, and his saving Gospel to those Asiaticks,
Affricans, and Americans, that never heard of a Crucified Jesus, add the
fullness of the Gentiles, to the Recollection of the Jews, that there may at
length be one Sheepsold, under that one good and great Sheepherd Christ Jesus.

II. BE merciful to this Church, in which I am a Member, and Cause thy Face
evermore to Shine upon it; Bless those whom thou have Anointed over us, our
Sovereign Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary, grant that their People
may Obey them, and they may Obey thee, and do all things to thy Honor and
Glory.

III. BLESS, Katherine the Queen Dowager, her Royal Highness the Prineess Ann
of Denmark, with all the rest of the Royal Family, endue them with Heavenly
Graces, make them happy Instruments of thy Glory here, and partakers of thy
Heavenly Kingdom hereafter.

IV. BLESS the Pastors of thy Church, the Bishops and Clergy, grant that by
their sincere Preaching, and Assiduous Prayers, and Ministries, they may
Glorify thee, the great lover of Souls: give unto the Ministers of Justice,
the Spirit of Government, and Zeal, Courage, and Prudence to the Nobility,
Wisdom, Valor, and Religious Magnanimity; Succor all in Affliction, help them
to Right that suffer Wrong, be with those that are in Prison, and preserve thou
those that are appointed to Die.

V. BLESS my Relations, ( Here Name them) Assist them in their Wants and
Necessities, keep them in thy Fear and Favor unto their Lives end; forgive my
Enemies, Persecutors and Slanderers, and turn their Hearts: Bless all those who
do accompany me this day at thine Altar, and for all others who meet in thy
Name, and Communicate in Remote Parts; grant that through this Blood of Jesus,
we may all be Cleansed from our Sins, and Purged from all our Iniquities.

VI. O leave us not, as we have deserved to be left, wrapped up in our own
Confulions, he thou more merciful to us than we have been unto ourselves;
Supply whatsoever is wanting in the Government; Establish what remains;
Dissipate and Scatter Scandals; Stop and Prevent all rising and growing
Heresies; make us all so far of one Heart and one Mind; that we may jointly set
our selves to the rooting up of all Atheism, Profaneness, Superstition,
Faction, Heresy; any thing which exalts it self against thy true and sincere
Worship.

VII. GIVE to the whole Land fair Seasons of the Year, good Government, Health
and Plenty; an excellent Religion undivided and undisturbed; frequent
Celebration of this thy Holy Ordinance; through Christ our Lord.

VIII. AND now lift up your Head, O ye Gate of my Soul; and be ye lifted up O
ye Everlasting Door of my Heart, that the King of Glory may come in, that he
may come in at this time; and take Possession of me, and Dwell and Reign in me
for ever. Even so O Lord, for the sake of the Son of thy Love; in whom only I
trust to be accepted; and in whose Name and Words I call upon thee; Our Father,
etc.

When you go forth of your Chamber or Closet.

I Will go into his Tabernacle, and fall low on my Knees before his Footstool;
the Lord preserve me in my going out and my coming in; from this time forth and
for evermore.

When you enter the Church; which ought to be sometime before the Service
begins.

O How Aimable are thy Dwellings thou Lord of Host. I will come into thy
Tabernacle and fall low on my Knees before thy Footstool: and will wait for
thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of thy Temple; thy Testimonies O Lord
are very sure, and Holiness becomes thy House for ever.

When you cast your Eye on the Font and Pulpet.

Then recall to mind that Solemn Vow, you openly took at your Initiation into
the Church, to forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of
this Wicked World; and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, etc. and let the
other put thee in mind, the many good Sermons thou have heard from thence, and
the few thou have practiced.

Being seated, turn to the Psalms and Lessons, Epistle and Gospel for the Day,
that you may have them ready; if there be any leisure time before Divine
Service begins, fall on your Knees and say.

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was; and is, and is to come, fit us
all for thy Service.

Good Lord Pardon all here, that prepares their Heart to seek thee.

Merciful Lord, Graciously accept us all, that come hither to present our
selves our Souls and Bodies unto thee, for Jesus Christ's sake, that Vouchsafed
to present himself Bodily in the Temple for us, in great Love and Humility.

Then join with the Prayers of the Chuch, and be Attentive to the Sermon. When
Sermon is ended, fall on your Knees and say.

O Lord, by reason of my sins, I am unworthy to appear in thy presence, to
offer up any Sacrifice unto thee, grant Merciful Lord, I beseech thee, both to
me and all thy faithful People, Pardon, and Peace, that being Cleansed from all
our sins, we may serve thee, with a quiet mind through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

When you go up to Communicate.

I will wash my Hands in Innocence, and so will I go to thine Altar.

O send forth thy Light, and thy Truth, that they may lead me, and bring me to
thy Holy Hill, and to thy dwelling.

When you Kneel before the Altar.

Thou art Worthy, O Lord, to receive Blessing, Honor and Power, but I am not
worthy thou should come under my Roof, or that thy praise should come within
my polluted Lips.

But Blessed Lord, thou Vouchsafedst to enter the House of a Publican, and to
receive a Kiss of an unclean sinner; O receive such a sinner as I am, disdain
not to enter under my Roof, despise not my humble Addresses and Supplications.

O let thy Sacrifice, be an expiation for all my sins, and now forever Seal thy
Pardon by thy precious Blood for all my offenses, and receive me Graciously.

When you cast in your Offering.

O Blessed Jesu, who did accept the Poor Widows two Mites, which she cast
into the Treasury; I beseech thee, be graciously pleased to accept this Poor
Offering from me the unworthiest of thy Servants.

Then dilligently harken to the Exhortation, and seeing the Table spread, and
the Elements of Bread and Wine set thereon, Meditate with thy self after this
manner.

Meditations.
THIS O my Soul, is the Table of the King of Kings, and the Lord of Heaven and
Earth; it is a Feast, where himself is present, and all his Holy Angels, those
Glorious Spirits do behold, love, and wonder that the Son of God should become
Food to the Souls of his Servants; be astonished! O my Soul at this great
Mystery, that he who is unchangeable, should be broken in pieces, and enter
into the Body to support the Spirit, and yet at the same time remain in Heaven,
while he Descends to thee upon Earth; that he should Die for thee, and then
give himself to thee for ever to Redeem thee from sin, and misery; that he
should become Man, and make thee, a partaker of the Divine Nature:

II. O Lord I am unworthy to come to thy Table, but I come with as Thirsty a
desire as the Chaced Heart which pants after the Water Brooks, and with as
Hungry an Appetite as a Poor half starved Creature to a full Table O Lord I am
not worthy of the least Crum that falls from the Table of thy Ordinary
Providence, but I come in Obedience, to thy Command, O receive me as a poor
Sinner, laden with sin, and let thy precious Body and Blood, which I am now
ready to participate off, Cleanse me from all sin and wickedness.

When the Minister says, draw near with Faith, and take this Holy Sacrament.

Lift up thy Heart in this Ejaculation.

O Lord, I am unworthy of this Invitation to thy Holy Table; but a sinner must
not refuse thy call, therefore in all Obedience and Humility I come.

Then join Humbly with the Minister in the Confession.

After the Absolution is Pronounced, use this Ejaculation.

O Lord, I beseech thee, grant me a true Repentance, and a lively Faith, that I
may receive all the Benefits of thy Death and Passion, even the Confirming and
Strengthening me in all goodness to my Lives end.

When that Comfortable saying of St. Paul is repeated, that Christ came into
the World to save Sinners.

Say with all Humility.

O Lord, I am the greatest and chiefest of sinners, but thou alone are the
Propitiation for my sins.

After the Preface is ended, Therefore with Angels, and Archangels, etc. Use
this Ejaculation.

I will evermore praise thy Name, O thou that dwell in the Heavens from the
rising up of the Sun, until the going down of the same, and will Laud and
Magnify thy Holy Name, now, and forever.

When the Prayer of Consecration is said, and the Minister reads the Words of
Christ's Institution, and you see him Order the Bread and the Wine repeat this.

O Lord, thou have provided two distinct Pledges of thy Love, to us Poor
sinners, who had been utterly lost, had not thy Almighty goodness found out a
Remedy to Save us.

When thou see the Bread broken and the Wine poured out. Say.

Thus was thy Holy Body broken for my sins upon the Tree of shame, and thy Side
was Pierced with a Spear, which gushed forth Blood; thus wast thou Wounded for
my Transgressions, and Bruised for mine iniquities, but by thy Stripes I am
healed.

When the Minister Receives in both kinds.

O Lord, Purify and Cleanse my Heart by thy Holy and Blessed Spirit, and
prepare my Soul to Receive thee, the great God of Heaven and Earth: Come Holy
Jesus, and take Possession of my Soul, Purify it with thy precious Blood, and
dwell therein for ever. Amen.

Immediately before Receiving.

Grant me, O Blessed Lord, so to Eat the Flesh of thy dear Son Christ Jesus,
and to Drink his Blood, that my sinful Body may be made Clean by his Body, and
my Polluted Soul washed through his most pre^ious Blood.

II. O Lord Purify my Heart and Mind. Strengthen my Faith, and increase my
Charity; for though I am weak, though I am unworthy, though I am unprofitable,
yet I am thy Servant: Lord, hear my Prayers, and let my Cry come unto thee.

III. O Lord thou have said, that he that Eats thy Flesh, and Drinks thy
Blood, has Eternal Life.

Behold the Servant of the Lord, be it unto me, according to thy Word.

When the Minister presents thee the Holy Bread, say softly after him.

The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for me, preserve my Body and
Soul unto everlasting Life.

Here take the Bread with Reverance, and proceed.

I take and Eat this in remembrance, that Christ Died for me, and will Feed on
him in my Heart, with Faith and Thanksgiving.

When you Eat the Bread, say.

By thy Crucified Body, Deliver me I humbly beseech thee from this Body of Sin
and Death.

After the Bread.

O Blessed Jesu, this Holy Bread, which I thy most unworthy Servant, have now
Received, is that Bread which came down from Heaven, and gives Life unto the
World: O that I may now feel its Virtue, and Efficacy, in Elevating up my Soul
to Heaven, and there to have my Conversation fixed, whilst I remain on this
sordid Earth, that when I shall be taken from hence, I may have my Consummation
and Bliss, in thy Celestial Mansions, there to behold thy Face in Glory, who
art now the Food of my Soul in Grace; O Lord, my God, and my Redeemer. Amen.

Before Receiving the Cup.

What reward shall I give unto the Lord; for all the benefits he has done unto
me? I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord; I
will pay my Vows now in the Presence of all his People.

When you receive the Cup of Blessing from the Minister say with all humility
after him.

The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for me, preserve my Body
and Soul unto everlasting life.

Here take the Cup with Reverence and proceed.

I Drink this in Remembrance, that Christ's Blood was shed for me, and am
thankful.

After the Cup.

O let this most precious Blood of thine Purge away the Filthiness of my
Corrupt Heart, and Purify the Dross of my Guilty Conscience, from all
Lukewarm, and Dead Works, to serve thee, the living God, in Holiness and
Righteousness, all the days of my life.

Then Meditate.

O Lord may this Holy and Blessed Sacrament, of thy most precious Body and
Blood, which I (though much unworthy, by reason of my manifold sins) have now
received, Seal unto my Soul, both Pardon and Peace, and that now being made
whole, I may sin no more.

II. O Lord, most holy, I do verily believe, thy Body was Crucified, and thy
Hands and Feet Bored through, and that thy Blood was shed out of thy Body, and
a Spear run into thy Blessed Side; as really as I have Received this Bread, and
this Wine separately; for the perfect Remission of all my sins, and I believe,
that in the Receiving this Bread and Wine, I have spiritually Received thy Body
and Blood, whereby my sins are wholly washed away, and my sinful Soul refreshed
and Purified: O Lord, this I believe, O help my unbelief.

III. LORD, now let tho^ thy Servant depart in Peace according to the Word.

For mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou have prepared before the
Face of all People.

To be a Light to Lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of thy People Israel.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Meditations whilst others ^re a Communicating.

Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, and are fed, though it be with the
Crumbs that fall from thy Table.

Happy are those Servants; whom when their Lord comes he shall find so doing.

Behold, thou art whole, sin no more, least a worst thing happen unto thee!

As you have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, Col.
2.6.

Blessed be the Holy and Undivided Trinity, now, and for ever more. Amen.

When thou art going Home, and see an Object of Charity, remember Psalm. 41.1.

Blessed is the Man that provideth for the Sick and needy, the Lord shall
deliver him in the time of Trouble.

Sunday Evenings Meditations at Home, after Receiving the Holy Sacrament.
O Lord, when ever I enter thy Holy Temple, let me leave behind me my Bargains
and Business, and carry nothing thither but Adoration for thy Majesty, and
Prayers for my necessities: thou who did open the Mouths of little Children
to praise thee; enable the weakness of me thy Servant to Obey thee: Lord I am
thy Temple, and should be Consecrated entirely to thy Service: Enter O Gracious
Jesu! into my Heart, and thoroughly purge me from all impieties.

II. GOOD God! How tenderly do thou Consult to preserve us Wretches! How
kindly resolve to send even thine own, thine only, thy Beloved Son to Redeem
us? This is our Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our Eyes. But, O! How did
our graceless World entertain him then? and how does it now? Yet still he
continues his Correspondence with us, and daily comes to meet us on his Holy
Altars; he there Feasts our Souls, with his Body and Blood, and Chears our
Hearts with his Holy Spirit.

III. O the indulgent Providence of our God! How many ways has he contrived to
save us! How many Messengers has he sent to instruct our Ignorance! How many
Ambassador, to reclaim us to our Duty! What could an insinite Power and
Goodness do, that he has not done! What could the Vilest Ingratitude do, that
we have not done! often he sends a Blessing to invite our Love, and we abuse it
into Pride and Wantonness; sometimes he sends a Cross to Check our Vanity, and
we turn it into Murmuring and Dis-Obedience.

IV. LORD, Grant that I may persevere in Grace, and with all humble Obedience,
learn how to carry my self in all my Necessities; let me go to my God with Fear
and Reverence, let me Prostrate my self at his Sacred Feet, and with an humble
Confidence, say to his Mercy, Lord if thou will, thou can bring it to pass;
all I am concerned to fear is, my person is unworthy, or the things I Petition
for, unfit to be granted; else I securely may rely on thy Bounty; and withthe
least doubt, say to thy Power, that nothing to thee is Impossible.

As I have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so will I walk in him, Col. 2.6.

A Prayer of Thanksgiving, after Receiving of the Sacrament.
To be Used at Home.
O Thou Infinite Ocean of Mercy from whence flows all the benefits, we receive,
and enjoy, and to whom all Praise, Glory and Honor, is most due; I desire
with all the most highest Affections, of a sincere Heart, to Laud, and Bless
thee for those Transcendent Mercies and Blessings, thou have at this time and
at all others bestowed upon me; [Here Name the Particular Mercies.] Lord what
is Man? even poor sinful Dust and Ashes, that thou should thus Regard him,
as to send thy welbeloved Son into the World, to purchase his Redemption, even
with the Price of his own most Precious Blood? but Lord, what am I the vilest
of sinners, that I should partake in this Atonement, wh^ have so often
Trampled him under my Feet?

II. O the Riches and fullness of thee my Savior, who have now admitted me to
the renewing of that Covenant I entered into at my Baptism, but have since by
my own perverseness so often broken, that I who am unworthy of the Daily Bread
which I Eat to support the Body, should participate of this Spiritual Bread
which nourishes the Soul to Eternal Life, and that the God of Holiness should
Condescend to so Vile a Wretch! O Lord, I beseech thee, suffer me not for the
time to come to turn thy Grace into Wantonness, or make thy Mercy an Occasion
of Carnal Security, but let this wonderful loving kindness of thine win me to
Obedience, that since my Savior has Suffered and Dyed for me, I may no longer
live unto my self, but to him.

O Lord, thou have now been pleased to enter my Heart, O never let me permit
any one Lust to Chase thee from it, but as thou have so dearly bought me with
thy precious Blood, do I beseech thee, still keep possession of me, and suffer
no unclean thing to take me out of thy keeping; to this purpose be thou
Graciously pleased to be Vigilant ever me, and Prosect me from all my Ghostly
Enemies; but more especially deliver me from the Deceitfulness of my own Heart,
which is ever ready to yield it self a Prey: And where thou perceivest I am
either by Nature or Custom most Prone and Weak, there I beg of thee to exalt
thy Power in preserving me. [Here Name thy greatest Temptation.]

IV. O let the Sufferings of my Crucified Savior for my sins, and the Solemn
Vow I have have now made against them, never slip from my Memory, but let the
remembrance of the one make me perform the other, that I may never engage with
those Lust, which Nailed his Hands and Feet, Pierced his Side, and made his
Soul sorrowful to Death. But now having a new resigned my self to him, I may
serve him in Righteousness and Holiness, all the days of my Life.

V. LORD, support my Weakness in this warfare, and be thou my Strength, for I
am not able to struggle with the least Temptations. How often have I fainted in
the Encounter? How many Sabbaths have I profaned, and how many Sacramental Vows
have I broken? And yet, O Lord, I carry about me the same deceitful Heart to
betray me to the breach of this last Duty. But O thou, who art for e^e^
u^changeable, e^due me, I (...) beseech thee with such a stedfastness of mind,
that I may never swerve from thy Commandments, but bring forth Fruits meet for
Re: pentance, that I may arrive to Life Eternal, through the Merits, and
Mediation of my Crucified Lord, and Savior. Amen.

VI. Almighty God, who have promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in
thy Sons Name; I beseech thee mercifully to incline thine Ears to me that have
made now my Prayers and Supplications unto thee, and grant that those things
which I have faithfully asked according to thy Will, may effectually be
obtained, to the relief of my Necessity, and to the setting forth thy Glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

VII. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that I am
able to ask or think, according to the Power that works in me, unto him be
Glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages, World without End.
Amen.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Sweet and
Comfortable Fellowship of his Holy and Blessed Spirit be with me, and remain
with me, now and forever. Amen.

Private Devotions, and Divine Thoughts to be used every Day in the Week.
A Morning Prayer to be Used after the Ejaculations, at Up Rising.
O Omnipetent and Everlasting God, I Bless and Praise thy Holy Name for thy
preservation of me this night past, even to this present; I beseech thee, in
all that I shall do this day, presper thou the Work of my Hands, O prosper thou
my Hand-work.

II. Ill all that I shall think or say, let the words of my Mouth, and the
Meditations of my Heart be such as may be ever acceptable in thy sight; O Lord,
my Strength, and my Redeemer, that thou may for ever Vouchsafe to be with me
both in and Death.

WHEREIN (for the short time of my Life here,) give me Grace so to behave my
self, as in thy Presence: Fearing nothing so much as thy displeasure; hating
and Sorrowing for nothing so much as my sins, loving and rejoicing in nothing
so much as in thee, and thy Glory.

IV. and for the time of my Death, I beseech thee, in thy good Providence and
Mercy, so to Order it, that I be not found either unproxided, or unwilling to
depart, in that kind of Death, and by that means which thou shall appoint; but
so to be ever affected in Faith and Love, as they that long to be delivered
from this Body of sin, into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God.

V. IN this hope I rest, and into thy Blessed Protection and Mercy this day I
commend my Soul and Body: My Relations and Friends; beseeching thee so to
Sanctify and Direct us in the ways of the Laws, and in the works of thy
Commandments; and to give thine Angels such charge over us, that through thy
most Protection, both here and ever, we may be preserved in Body and Soul to
serve thee, the only true God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A Hymn for the Morning.
LOrd I do now lift up my Eyes,
And leave my sluggish Bed,
But why I wake, or why I rise,
Comes seldom in my Head.
Is it to Sweat and Toil for wealth,
Or sport my time away;
That thou preserv'st me still in Health.
And give me this new day?
No, no, unskilful Soul, not so;
Be not deceived with Toys:
Thy Lord's Commands more wisely go,
And Aim at higher joys.
They bid us wake to seek new Grace,
And some fresh Virtue gain:
They call us up to mend our pace,
Till we the prize attain.
That Glorious prize for which all Run,
Who wisely spend their Breath:
Who when this weary Life is done,
Are sure of rest in Death.
Not such a rest as here we prove
Disturbed with cares and fear.
But endless joy, and peace and Love;
Unmixed with Grief and Tears.
Glory to thee, O bounteous Lord!
Who giv'st to all things breath:
Glory to thee, Eternal Word!
Who sav'st us by thy Death.
Glory, O blessed Spirit to thee,
Who fill'st our Souls with love.
Glory to all the Mystic three,
Who Reign one God above.
Amen.
Ejaculations for the Day.
At your Apparelling, say.

BLessed Jesu! that the shame of my sinful Soul may not be seen, Cloth it with
thy spotless Robes of Righteousness, and Adorn it with all the Ornaments of all
manner of Grace and Virtues. Amen.

When you are Apparelled.

O most aimable Jesu, the true Spoufe of my Soul, give me the Wedding Garment
of Divine Love, and perpetual Charity. Amen.

Washing your Hands.

O Blessed Lord, who so loved us, as to Wash our Souls in thy precious Blood;
Purify I beseech thee, my Heart and my Hands from all the spots and filth of
sin. Amen.

In Washing your Mouth.

O Divine Wisdom, which proceedest out of the Mouth of thy Heavenly Father, I
humbly beseech thee with thy Grace to Purge my Lips from all Wicked and Vain
words, that my Mouth may never open but to thy praise, and the improvement of
others. Amen.

In Washing your Eyes.

O thou Celestial Light, who Illuminates every one that comes into the World,
enlighten the Eyes of my Soul, that in all things I may perfectly see and
perform thy blessed will and Pleasure. Amen.

Beholding your Face in the Glass: Say.

All Flesh is Grass, and the Glory of it as the Flower of the Field, which may
quickly sade away and be no more seen. Favor is deceitful and Beauty is vain,
but a Woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised.

Going forth of thy House or Chamber, say.

Show me, O Lord, thy ways, and teach me thy Paths; Direct my steps according
to thy word, that no Injustice Rule over me, make perfect my goings in thy
Paths, that my steps be not moved.

As you Travel or Walk by the way.

Blessed are those that are undefiled in the way, and walk in the Law of the
Lord.

When the Clock strikes, or you see the hour of the day.

Our time passes away like a Shadow, and we bring our Years to an end, as it
were a Tale, that is told: But Lord, so teach me to number my Days, that I may
apply my Heart unto true Wisdom.

As you Ascend any high place, or go to Church.

Who shall Ascend into the Hill of the Lord: or who shall rise up in his Holy
place? Even he, that has Clean Hands, and a pure Heart: and that has not list
up his mind unto Vanity, nor sworn to deceive his Neighbor.

When you are on a high place, say.

Thy Mercy O Lord, reaches unto the Heavens: and thy faithfulness unto the
Clouds.

Beholding pleasant Fields, and Variety of Objects.

O Lord, how manifold are thy Works: In Wisdom have thou formed them all, the
Earth is full of thy Riches, thou openest thine hand and fillest all things
living with plentiousness.

Upon hearing, or seeing any thing Extraordinary.

Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel; which only does wondrous
things, and blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever: and all the Earth
shall be filled with his Majesty. Amen, Amen.

When you go to Read, or Meditate.

Open thou mine Eyes, O Lord; that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law:
And grant that what ever I Read or Meditate may conduce to the full
understanding of thy Will, and my ready Obedience thereunto.

Being wearied therewith.

Lord, let me not be weary in well-doing, remembering that in due time I shall
Reap, if I faint not.

When you go about any worldly Employments.

Deliver me O Lord, from every evil Work, and stablish me in every good Word
and Work.

When you are Discontented or Sad.

Why art so full of heaviness O my Soul: and why at thou so disquieted within
me? Put thy trust in God: For I will yet give him thanks for the help help of
his Countenance. Cause thy Face O Lord to shine upon thy Servant: O show me the
Light of thy Countenance, and I shall be whole.

When you Hunger and Thirst.

Blessed are all they that Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, for they
shall be filled with thy abundant goodness.

When you are asked an Alms, and are able to give.

It is more blessed to give than to receive, he that Sows sparingly shall
Reap sparingly, and he which Sows bountifully shall Reap bountifully.

When you hear any Person, Evil spoken of.

Deliver me, O Lord, from Lving Lips, and from a Deceitful Tongue.

Upon sight of your Sins, and mispending of (...).

O remember not the Sins and Offenses of my Youth, or Riper Years, but a
cording to thy tender Mercy, think thou upon me, O Lord for thy goodness,

After thou have Rehearsed the the Lords Prayer, the Twelve Apostles Creed, and
the Ten Commandments. Think upon these good Rules that are to be observed and
practiced, and what sins are to be avoided.

The two Precepts of Charity, or the Laws of Nature.
TO love God above all for his own sake.

To love all Men as our selves for Gods sake, and to do unto others, as we
would they should do unto us, Deuteronomy. 6.5.10.12. Matt. 7.12.

The Sacraments of the Church.

The principal and truly so called, as generally necessary to Salvation, are
two Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

The three Teological Virtues.

Faith, Hope, and Charity, 1 Cor. 13.13.

The Four Cardinal Virtues.

Prudence, Justice, Fortitud, and Temperance.

Three kinds of good Works.

Fasting, Prayer, and Alms, Deeds, Matt. 6.

Pray, and Labor for the Seven gists of the Holy Ghost.

1. The Spirit of Wisdom, 2. And understanding. 3. The Spirit of Council. 4.
And Ghostly Strength. 5. The Spirit of Knowledge. 6. And Piety. 7. The Spirit
of a Holy and Godly Fear, Isa. 11.2.

To those add the Twelve Fruits of the Holy Ghost.

Love, Joy, Peace, Patience, Mercy, Goodness, Long-Suffering, Meekness, Faith,
Modesty, Shame-Facedness, Sobriety, Gal. 5.22.

Endeavor to perform these Seven Spiritual works of Mercy.

1. To instruct the Ignorant, Matt. 18.15. 16, 17. 2. To Correct offenders,
Jam. 5.12. 3. To Gouncel the Doubtful, Gal. 6.6. 4. To comfort the Afflicted,
Prove. 27.9. 5. To suffer Injuries with Patience, Eccles. 5.8. 6. To forgive
Offenses and Wrongs, Romans 15.1. 7. To Pray for others, Mark. 11.25.

Likewise forget not these six Corporal Works of Mercy.

1. To feed the Hungry, and to give Drink to the Thirsty, Mat. 15. 2. To Cloth
the Naked, Mat. 25. 3. To harbor the Stranger and Needy, Tob. 1. 4. To visit
the Sick, Isa. 58. 5. To Minister unto Prisoners and Captive, Tob. 12. 6 To
Bury the Dead.

Observe the eight Beatitudes, Mat. 5.

1. Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. Blessed are they that Mourn, for they shall be Comforted.

3. Blessed are the Meek, for they shall inherit the Earth.

4. Bressed are they which do. Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, for they
shall be filled.

5. Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain Mercy.

6. Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall see God.

7. Blessed are the Peacemakers for they shall be called the Children of God.

8. Blessed are they which are Persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is
the Kindom of Heaven. Labor to avoid the Seven deadly sins, as they are
commonly so called.

1. Pride, Luke 14.11. 2. Covetousness, Act. 20.35. 3. Luxury, 1 Cor. 16.15. 4.
Envy 1 John 3.14. 5. Gluttony, Romans 14.7. 6. Anger, Mat. 11.29. 7. Sloth, Jer.
48.10. Pray for the seven contrary Virtues.

1. Humility. 2. Liberality. 3. Chastity. 4. Gentleness. 5. Temperance. 6.
Patience. 7. Devout and Earnest serving of God, and being dilligent.

Four Sins that Cry to Heaven for Vengeance.

1. Wilful Murder. 2. Carnal Sin against Nature. 3. Oppression of the Poor. 4.
Defrauding Workmen of their Wages.

The Four last things to be remembered.

1. Death. 2. Judgment. 3. Hell. 4. Heaven.

Ejaculations when toward Bedtime.

I will not suffer mine Eyes to Sleep, nor mine Eyelids to Slumber, neither
the Temples of my Head to take any rest, until I find out a place for the Lord;
an habitation for the Mighty God of Jacob.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O Almighty God, my Glory and my hope, my Lord and Master, the Father of Mercy,
and God of all Comfort, I present to thee, the Sacrifice of a thankful Spirit,
in humble and joyful acknowledgment of those infinite favors by which thou
have this day, and all the whole term of my life, supported my state, enriched
my Spirit, comforted my Sorrows relieved my necessities blessed and defended my
Person, instructed my Ignorance, and promoted my Eternal Interest.

II. WHOM have I in Heaven but thee, or whom on Earth have I desired, or may
desire in Comparison of thee whose Nature is Goodness, whose Will is Power, and
whose Work is Pity; I humbly beseech thee to Pardon my sins [Here Name the
Particulars.] and accept of this Evening Sacrifice, abate my Pride, and remedy
all my other imperfections; Oh multiply thy Grace upon Humility, and manifest
thy Power in my infirmity; plead thou my cause, O Lord with thy Heavenly
Father, and be thou for ever my Mediator and Advocate.

III. AS thou have ordained the day for Labor, and the night for Rest, I
beseech thee to protect me this Night; let the Eve of thy Providence watch over
me, and thy Holy Angels pitch their Tents about me, that being safely delivered
from danger, and refreshed with moderate Sleep, I may be enabled to perform my
own employment, and faithfully persevere in the duties of thy Service; and so
daily advance to new Victories over my Passions, and more perfect observance of
thy Commandments; till having passed my days in thy fear, I may end them in thy
favor, and rejoice with thee for ever in thy heavenly Kingdom, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, who with thee, and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns ever
one God, World without end. Amen.

A Hymn for the Evening.
NOw, my Soul the day is gone,
Which in the Morn was thine:
Now its Glass no more shall run,
Its Sun no longer shine.
True alas! the day is gone,
O were it only so:
Is it not lost as well as done?
Cast up thy Counts and know
Are we so much nearer Heaven,
As to the Grave we bow?
Has our sorrow made all even,
And cleared the Debts we owe?
From what Vice have we refrained
To break the course of sin:
What new Virtue have we gained,
To make us rich within?
Time is well bestowed on those,
Who well their time bestow:
Whose main concern still forwards goes,
Whose hopes still riper grow?
Who when e're the Clocks proclaim,
Another hour is past,
Have an Art to set their aim,
And thoughts upon their last:
That their last and happiest hour,
Which brings them to their home
Where they sing, and bless the power,
By which they thither come,
O my God, of Life and Death,
The everlasting King!
Since thou givist to all their Breath,
May all thy Glory sing.
Glory, Honor, Power and Praise,
To the Mysterious three:
As at first beginning was,
May now, and ever be.
Amen.
As you undress your self, say.

The time is now approaching, when I must put off this Body of sinful Flesh, as
I do now these Garments which cover it; grant O Lord, that I may put off the
Old Man which is Corrupt according to the deceitful Lusts, and put on the New
Man, which after thee, O God is Created in Righteousness and true Holiness.

As you enter into your Bed, say.

In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Crucified, I lay me down to rest; bless
me O Lord, defend and Govern me, and after this short and miserable Pilgrimage,
bring me to everlasting happiness, Amem.

A Prayer at settling to Sleep.
O Jesus Christ, whose unwearied Eye, neither slumbers nor sleeps, but
continually watches in defense of thy Servants, receive me I beseech thee, into
thy Protection, and grant that when my Body is a sleep, my Soul may wake to
thee; and hereafter behold that Blessed and heavenly Life, where thou with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, Art eternal Governor, and where the Angels with
the blessed Souls are Citizens for ever. Amen.

When thou art in Bed, and can not sleep, exercise thy self in this
Meditation.

S^and in awe, and sin not, Commune with your own Heart upon your Bed and be
still.

I will lay me down in Peace and will take my rest: For thou Lord, only make
me to dwell in safety.

Have mercy upon me O Lord, now, and at the hour of Death.

II. O Lord preserve me while I am waking, and defend me when I am sleeping,
that my Soul may continually watch for thee, and both Body and Soul may rest in
thy Peace for ever. Amen.

The Holy and undivided Trinity, be now and evermore my defense, against all
Perils and Dangers of this Night. Amen.

FINIS.

