THE MAN-CHILD BROUGHT FORTH IN US: OR GOD MANIFEST IN FLESH.

By JOHN LEWIN a member of the ARMY

2. Cor. 13.5. Know ye not that Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates.
LONDON, Printed for G C, at the west end of Paul's.

THE MAN-CHJLD BROUGHT FORTH IN US: OR GOD MANIFST IN FLESH.
9. of Isaiah 6, 7. For unto us a child is borne, unto us a son is given; and
the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his Name shall be called
wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
peace. And of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end,
etc.
THIS prophecy or promise is of a child, a son that shall be borne and
given; which man-child, is God manifest in flesh, in the flesh of the Saints,
as the Son; and then shall all these names be manifest to be God in flesh;
wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
peace: And the loftiness of man shall be brought down, and the Lord alone
exalted, in that day; this is for the comfort of Saints, such as wait for God,
the glory of the Son to be revealed in them; and this glory shall be before
we be a ware: Isa. 66.7. Before she traveled, she brought forth: before her
pain came, she was delivered of a man child. Which is the glory of the Son in
the Saints, such as wait for the appearance of God; and then all other glories
shall be destroyed, all other but God; Isaiah 66.1. Thus says the Lord; The
Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: where is the house that
ye build unto me? and where is the place of my rest?

There were glorious houses under the Law; and there were Churches under the
Gospel; and now Saints are much troubled and busied about a house to God, and
much at a loss in it, in their church-fellowships: Here says God, Heaven is
my throne, and the Earth is my footstool, where is the house that ye will
build to me? That God that fills all creatures, his glory fills the Saints: and
since you are a house, but to this man will I look, even to him that is poor
and of a contrite spirit, there is the habitation of God.

All these forms have been, and my hands has made all these: But to this man
will I look. This should take the people of God off from all forms and
church-fellowships, and building of houses to God; because the weakest Saints,
the least Saint, are the habitation of God; a poor contrite spirit, broken into
pieces, ground to powder, one that sees no good in himself, one that trembles
at every word of God, these God dwells in, and they are the habitation of God;
therefore who will build God a house? Isa. 51.13, 14. He that puts his trust in
me; That is, he that waits for God, for the appearance of God, as in the next
verse, and shall say, cast ye up, that is, prepare a way for the Lord, as men
do when they prepare a way, they cast up earth and stones, and so make a
cauce-way for passing; and so says the Lord, cast ye up, that is prepare for
him, wait for him, and take away all stumblings, as men do all blocks when
they prepare a way; that the Lord may dwell amongst us, what then? He shall
possess the land, and inherit my holy mountain, what is that? Jer. 31.23. He
shall call thee the habitation of Justice, and mountain of holiness: So that
Saints are the mountain of God; and the Tabernacle of God is amongst the sons
of men: There be many lets and stumblings that do hinder the appearance of
God, not in respect of outward forms, Church fellowships; but in our own
spirits; we think it wonderful that God should dwell in flesh, mortal
flesh, sinful flesh; and other lets there are which do much hinder the way of
God, or a manifestation of God in us: but God says in the 15. verse of that
56. of Isa. Thus faith the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose
name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of an
humble and contrite spirit: that is, that God which dwells on high, in the lofty
place, the holy one, the high one, he dwells in the contrite one, though he be
high; yea in the weakest Saints, though they seem to be quite dead.

Now when God is manifest in us, then his name shall appear to be wonderful,
when the Man child is brought forth in us, his name shall be called wonderful
in us, in his appearance, his name shall be read wonderful in the foreheads
of the Saints, when he appears: David when he comes to see God filling all
places, and all creatures, and all as one to God, he magnifies him, and says,
Whether shall he go frrm God; in the 139. Psalm 13, 14. ver. For thou have
possessed my reins, thou have covered me in my Mothers womb. I will praise
thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made, marvelous are thy works and
that my soul knows right well. That is, that God that fills all, and is
wonderful in all whither shall I go from God? I am wonderfully made: which is
the appearance of God in him. And in the 12. of the Revel. 1. There appeared a
wonder in Heaven, a woman being with child, cried to be delivered: This woman
here now that is spoken of in Heaven, it is the Saints who are in the Spirit,
that wait for the appearance of God in them; and this is called a wonder: his
name shall be called wonderful; his name shall be called wonderful to others;
God in us shall. In the 13. of the Acts 41. Behold you despisers, and wonder,
and perish: I work a work in your days which ye shall not believe, though a
man even declare it to you: wonder and perish, for I work a wondrous work:
that is, the bringing forth of God in flesh.

Now as I said before, when this shall be manifest, all other glory shall fade,
the most glorious things of all, all our living in forms, as in the 66. of
Isaiah 3. ver. He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a man, he that sacrifices
a Lamb, is as if he cut off a Dogs neck. All these were things that God
commanded under the Law, and the antitype of these were under the Gospel;
these signified some thing under the Gospel: now God when he appears, he will
make these not only to be vain, but vile, as the offering of an Idol; these
Ordinances shall be revealed so to be, when the Lord shall appear: and as our
most glorious things, our greatests lights: as in the 60. of Isa. and the
19.21. Revelation 22. ver. and 22. of Revel. and 5. when God appears, the
Jerusalem that comes down from above, the holy City, a City not forsaken; this
is the appearance of God of God in the Saints: in the 21. Revel. 1-23. I saw a
new Heaven and a new Earth, and I saw the holy City, the new Jerusalem coming
down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband: and
I heard a voice out of Heaven saying, behold the Tabernacle of God is with men,
and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and G^d himself
shall be with them, and be their God: This new Jerusalem is God manifest in the
Saints, the flesh of the Saints, the habitation of God, the tabernacle of God;
when this is manifest, our most glorious things shall fade; as in the 22. ver.
of this 21. Revel. I saw no Temple there, for the Lord God Almighty and the
Lamb were the Temple of it, and the City had no need of the Sun nor the
Moon, for the glory of God did lighten it: Ye know the Sun and the Moon
are the ordinary means of light, in the world; so our ordinary means of light
has bin the teachings of men; when God appears, we shall be all taught of
God: knowledge shall cover the Earth, as water covers the Sea; we shall know
God as we are known: So I say, as our most glorious things, so our confusions,
our darkness, and misse-apprehensions of God, that is contrary to God; and in
this his Name shall be called wonderful, the mighty God: his appearance in the
Saints, destroys al things besides him, he is called a consuming fire,
everlasting burnings; the rod of his mouth, the breath of his nostrils, shall
destroy all things, that now hinders a manifestation of him, the mighty God:
63. of Isa. 1. ver. when he comes to apeare he comes traveling in the
greatness of his strength, mighty to save: when God appears in the saints,
he will make an utter Consumption of all our Confusion, and darkness, every
battle of the warrier is with a confused noise, but this shall be with burning
and fuel of fire: for, unto us a child is born, all our backslidings, and
disorders, and goings back, our reelings as a drunken man to and fro, 24. Isai.
19.20.22.23. is not our condition such? now who is it that does not reele and
stagger, and knows not which way to look, knows not with what party to side?
Is not the Earth removed as a cotage, and does not the Lord visit the host of
the high ones, and gathers them stogether as into a pit, as prisoners? all
this of the Lord.

when the Lord comes to appear, all these our Confusions and staggerings, shall
be Consumed: 24. Isai. 23. ver. when the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount
zion and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients Gloriously. when he shall reign
in mount zion, that is, be all in all in the saints, they are called The
Mountain of holiness; then will the Lord bring down the noise of strangers,
as the heat in a dry place, even the heat with the shadow of a cloud, and
the branch of the terrible ones shall be brought low, and he will destroy in
this mountain of holiness, the face of the covering, cast over all people, and
the veil that is spread over all nations: whatsoever it be; after the mark in
the right hand, or in the forehead, our forms, or uniformities, or our most
glorious appearances, shall fade: and they shall destroy no more in my holy
mountain says the Lord.

Now when God will do this his work in the earth, he will make a short work
of it; as in the 66. of Isai. 5. ver. Hear the word of the Lord, you that
tremble at his word; your brethren that hated you, that cast you out, for my
names sake, said; let the Lord be glorious; but he shall appear to your joy,
but they shall be ashamed* that is, that those that wait for the appearane of
God in them, that wait for the glory that shall be revealed in them, they
shall be hated of their brethren, they shall be hated for my names sake; those
Saints that bear up the name of God, and exalt the name of God, and would have
the name of God read in them; they are hated of their brethren.

I believe the people of God who live in the last times, they shall be brought
into less compass then ever they were: it is said; your brethren shall hate
you: under the law there was the great Jewish Church, there a whole Nation were
in fellowship: afterward under the Gospel there were none but saints by
calling: afterward, when the spirit of Antichrist came in the night of
darkness, and the Apostles power was gone, and the power of the beast came in
with all manner of signs and lying wonders, then all the whole world, and
Kingdoms were Christians, there was the Church of Rome, and the Church of
Spain, and the Church of France, and the Church of Scotland, and England, then
all were the Church of Christ; then, as Reformation came in, the Church grew
less and less; then all the world were Popish; afterward we came to be
Protestants, and after that prophessers, then puritanes, and Separatists, and
then to independants and antinomians; so that still the people of God come to
be less and less still in number; so I believe the people of God that walk
in the spirit, in the last times shall be fewer then before.

Those that wait for God; for the appearance of God, that wait for the glory
of the Son to be revealed in them: these are the fewest that ever were; take
all that are one in fellowships and judgments, and they are more then those
that wait for the glory of God; and therefore those that wait for his
appearing are hated of their brethren:

Therefore this is for the comfort of the Saints: before she traveled, she
brought forth, before her pain came, she was delivered* the sense I
understand thus; that those that wait for God, the glory of God to be revealed
in them, the Lord will appear before they be aware, not only in them, but
afterward in many more: before she traveled she brought forth; that is;
unexpectedly and suddenly God will appear before we be aware, not only in
them, but in many more:

This deliverance; before she traveled; is the deliverance of a man-child; it
is a bringing forth of Christ in us: this is in few words the meaning of it;
that Christ is in us; Christ in our flesh, God in our flesh, in every Saint, in
the least Saint, there God dwells; although not discovered, not manifested, yet
is the child in the woomb; it is there, and has a being, thought not brought
forth; even so God dwells in us though not manifested; and when God is
manifested in our flesh, then the Man child is brought forth; and this the Lord
will do. It Is true, there be some that travel to bring forth Christ; and some
that be in pain to do it, but it shall not be so with all: for some shall
have Christ brought forth in their flesh before they be aware: see a scripture
or two; 16, of John, 20. ver. Verily, verily I say unto you, that ye shall
weep and Lament, but the world shall rejoice: and ye shall be sorrowful, but
your sorrow shall be turned into joy. A woman, when she is in travel, has
sorrow, because her hour is come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child,
she remembers no more the auguish, for joy that a man is born into the world.
and ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your hearts
shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you: the meaning is this; you
shall see Christ in the spirit; as he says unto them, in the 16: ver: A
little while and ye shall not see me: and again a littile while, and ye shall
see me: because I go to the Father: they should in a little while, se him; and
they should not: what is that? they did not know: but Christ shows them, what
it was: when Christ was in the flesh they did see him; but when he was taken
out of the flesh, they did not see him; but when Christ shall come in the
spirit, they shall see him again: a little while, and this fleshly appearance
shall vanish; but afterward you shall see me again:

When Christ was in the flesh, they looked upon him as one distinct from them,
they did not see him in their flesh: they shall see God in their flesh, as he
was in his flesh; says Christ he that sees me, sees him: those that see
Christ in truth, do not see that flesh only, but God in that flesh: he that
sees me, sees the Father: so when we see Christ truly, we see not only that
flesh; but God in that flesh: now says Christ, when I go a way, the spirit
shall come: that is in your flesh: and you shall see me again: as in the 16. of
John 18, and 20. ver. I Will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you.
Yet a little while, and the world sees me no more, but ye see me: because I
live ye shall live also, at that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and
you in me, and I in you.

When Christ shall come again, we shall know him in the appearance of the
Father: the flesh is nothing, but the manifestation of the Father; you shall
know, that you are in Christ, and Christ in you: you in me as I am in the
Father: as God was in his flesh, so God shall appear in your flesh: that God
that was manifest in his flesh; shall be manifest in ours; and that is Christ.

Before God was manifest in the Disciples flesh; Christ told them, they should
weep and lament: but the world shall rejoice* the people of God in these
times; before God was manifested in them, they did sorrow: before there was the
appearance of God in them, we may see how sorrowful they were; they thought
that Christ had been gone, and that they had lost their master: but says he, I
will see you again: so you shall rejoice; I will see you: that is to say, that
God that was manifest in that flesh, shall appear in yours also: again in the
12. of Reve. and the 1. ver. And there appeared a great wonder in Heaven, a
Woman clothed with the Sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a
crown of twelve stars; and she being with child, cried, traveling in birth,
and pained to be delivered. This woman that is here spoken of, in Heaven; it is
the Saints that are in the spirit; even the weakest Saints; for God will
appear in the weakest Saints:

A woman was traveling, and at length, delivered of a man-child: and in the 5.
ver. of the same Chap. The child was caught up to God,

The bringing forth of Christ, is a bringing forth of God, that is, when God is
reveled in us, and appears in us, and manifest in us; there is the man-child:

This is for comfort and for joy, for those that wait for the appearance of
God in them: Know this that God will appear before we be aware: this should
encourage the people of God, and keep their hearts in remembrance of this
truth, that we are the tabernacles of God, the place where God dwells; as in
this book of the Rev. John saw a new Jerusalem, a City coming down from above;
which is, nothing but God dwelling in us, the City of God, where he dwells:

When God comes to appear and dwell in us; then shall that song be sung, as
it is in the 12. Reve. and the 10. ver. And I heard a loud voice, saying in
heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and
the power of his Christ; for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which
accused them before our God day and night.

Now I say this should speak comfort to those that wait for the appearance of
God, to those that love his appearance, and those that mourn for him: there
be some that mourn for his appearance, and some that love his appearance:
here is comfort for both; for before she traveled she brought forth and before
her pain came she was delivered: it is much encouragement; that God, who, is
the high and holy one, will appear before we be aware; before her pain
came, she was delivred* who has heard such a thing? that Kingdom should be
born at once, suddenly and unexspectedly, God will appear, not only in us, but
in many others.

I know nothing but my own spirit; and speak nothing but my own experience:
I will not lay any exhortation, upon any man's spirit: I have been a while, and
not long, waiting for the appearance of God; that God might be manifested in my
flesh, and do cry in pain to be belivered: Now in this time, my thoughts are
carried out after too many things, and not upon this only, to wait for God; and
this has bin my weakness: I have been and am so troubled at what one man,
another, and the world will say, and how to answer all these, and the like: I
say, this is our weakness.

If we could but wait upon God until he be manifest; and then all men shall
fall for, the loftynesse of man shall be brought down and the Lord all one,
shall be exalted, in that day: see what the prophet says, in the 31. of
Jerem. 21. ver. set thee up way-marks, make thee high heaps, set thy heart
toward the highway, even the way which thou wentest: the meaning is, take
away all hindrances: Take away; that is, prepare for God: Then, turn again O!
Virgin, daughter of Israel; turn again to these thy Cities: how long will thou
go about? oh, thou backsliding daughter: these are our backslidings of
flesh, when God is not presently revealed in us; we gadde from one thing to
another; and our thoughts rove up and down, and are careful to answer this
man and the other; now we should do nothing, but turn to God: How long will thou go about, oh, thou backsliding daughter.

Behold the Lord has created a new thing in the earth; a woman shall compass a
man; a woman shall; that is, the weakest Saint: the Lord has done it, it is in
being already; it is no new thing, but only there wants a manifestation of it;
the thing is done already; God is come, and has dwelt in flesh, and taken it
into union already with himself:

A woman shall; that is, the weakest Saint, shall compass Christ, the
man-child: they shall do it, this is not an uncertain word; but this word,
Shall, houlds forth the certainty of it all:

Though a woman, the weaker vessel, that is the weakest Saint; yet there God,
and and his great power will appear: this should keep our hearts from
gadding, wandering, and going about; for God will appear, he will manifest
himself: this is for our comfort; that when God shall thus appear, then shall
that speech be used; When I shall turn back their Captivity: The Lord bless
thee, oh, habitation of justice, and mountain of holiness: the Lord bless
thee, that is the Saints, who are the habitation of God, and mountain of
holiness:

Although this proverb be not used as yet, it shall be used; when he shall
bring again their Captivity; that is, when the Lord shall appear and be
manifest in us: when the Lord shall arise to the prey, then they shall confess
this; the Lord bless thee, oh, thou habitation of justi, and mountain of
holiness? in whom the holy God dweleth: Upon this I awaked, and beheld, and my
sleep was sweet unto me: it seems the prophet was in a sleep, yet he
awaked, and it was very sweet unto him that God would appear at last:

This is for comfort to those that wait upon God; for his appearance will be
before we be aware: and I say, that as surely as God will appear in us, and
manifest himself in us, so he will in many more:

Who has hard such a thing as this? That A Nation should be borne at once: we
shall see many companions, that is a comfort to us; all though I confess, were
there no man in this world that did wait for God, yet I should be quiet,
silent and rest in the lotte: I know the vision will speak, and will not
tarry, it is but for an appointed time; and then God will appear; till then we
should be quiet and wait for him, as Christ was; he tells his discipees, you
shall al leave, me but the Father is with me; though you do leave me, yet I
have the Father with me, I am not alone: if all the world do forsake us, yet
if God live in us, we shall be satisfied; but nevertheless, if we wait upon
God in deed, we shall see more that have the appearance of God in them:

A Nation in one day; 60. Isa. 2, 3. ver. the the Lord shall arise on thee, and
his Glory shall be seen upon thee; and then, the Gentiles shall come to thy
light, and kings to the brightness of thy riseing: lift up thy eyes round
about; that is when God shall appear in Saints, then many more shall come in,
and God will appear in them:

When the name of God shall be read upon the Saints, that is the new name; and
thou shall be caled by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name; and
then the Gentiles shall see thy Righteousnss, and all Kings thy glory: that is,
they shall clearly see God in them: Isa. 61. Chap. 19. ver. where the prophet
says, the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy
Glory: Zacha. 3.7. ver. Thus says the Lord of hosts; if thou will walk in my
ways, and keep my charge, then thou shall judge my house, and I will give thee
places to walk in among those that stand by; what is that? It is to live in,
and walk with God; only to wait for, and upon God; and only to be with God:
What is his Courts? The place where God walks and dwells: If we continually
wait for the appeareance of God, and live in him; he will give us places, or
walks among those that judge his house, among those that know him and live in
him; he will give us places among the highest, we shall be as high with God as
any are; there be some with God, that live only in God, if we wait upon him, we
shall be among those, even the highst: hear now o Joshuah the high Priest, thou
and thy fellows that sit before thee; for they are men wondered at, for
behold, I will bring forth my servant, the branch.

Hear Oh! Joshuah thou and thy fellows, that is, Christ and those who are
Christ's, are men wondered at; as the word will bear it, monstrous men: those
that live up to the glory of Christ, are men wondered at; but I will bring
forth the branch, the man-child: Christ; that is the branch: behold God will
appear in you, and not only in you, but in many othors also: a glorious
appearance of God, is a bringing forth of the branch, a bringing forth of
Christ in us. Isa. 60. Chap. 14. ver. the sons of those that afflicted thee,
and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy
feet, and they shall call thee, the City of the Lord, the Zion of the holy one
of Israel: although Saints may be an afflicted people, a flock trodden down, and
few; yet God shall he so manifest in them, that they shall be called the City of
the Lord, the Zion of the holy one of Israel; though few, yet a City, and a
most Glorious City: I will make glorious the place of my feet; the place of
Gods residents, the glory of Lebannon shall be given unto it, and I will make
thee an eternal Exellency, in stead of our ordinary light, teachigs of men;
the Lord will be unto us an everlasting light and thy God thy glory: this glory
we wait for, to see God dweling in us, that men may see us the Tabernacles of
God; for God to be our light and our glory, for God to dwell in the light of
every one of us, and that all Nations may see his saving health, or his
salvation; that we may see that light, reason, understanding and discretion, to
be nothing but God; we are apt to think we had all these in us of our own:
Reason understanding, and wisdom, are all of the Lord; if we could but see it,
it is the very appearance of God: Acts. 17.23. That God (says Paul) whom ye
ignorantly worship, him declar I unto you: now all the world, in what forms
soever, think they worshid God; some on way, and some another: this God (says
Paul) I declare, he made the worlds, and he dweleth in no Temple made with
hands, nor is worshipped with men's hands, seeing he gives to all breath and
life; he is not far from never one of you; if possible ye might feel, and
find him; for in him we live, and move, and have our being. I know many are
very zealous to worship God, in their way: this God is in us; and they shall
see, when God appears, that he is not far from every one of us.

And again, as it is comfort to see God in us; so it is, to see God working all
things; all things that come to pass in the world are of him; our devisions,
earthquakes, noises and thunderings; and our laboring in the fire, that which
is most wearisom, e is also of the Lord; Hab. 2. Chap. 13. ver. Behold, is it
not of the Lord of host, that men labor in the fire, and the people shall
weary themselves for very vanity: All our crafts, trads, and polisie, these are
of the Lord; is it not of the Lord that men labor in the fire, in heat and
trouble:

O! how sweet would this be how calmly should we live; seeing no thing but God
in all these actings, controversies and troubles; it is the Lord: and I think
the is making an end of the kingdom of he man of sin; and gloriously to
appear himself in the Saints, and to write his name, holiness in the earth; in
that day there shall be upon all actions, and transactions, holiness to the
Lord; and upon the bells of the horses, and upon every pot in Jerusalem; and in
that day there shall be no more the cananite in the house of the Lord; not any
thing that is vile or profane: now to see God in all this is much comfort:
David when he see Gods appearing to him, cries out whom shall I fear? the Lord
is my light, and my salvation, he is the strength of my life; of whom shall I
be afraid? he does not say, I had life, and light, and salvation, given me; but
God is my light, and strength of my life: so when God appears, our life shall
be more vigerous and fuller of God: our shadows, living in our selves, and
fancies shall vanish; and we shall only see our life in God, yea, a well-being
in him: this life and glory will appear, if we wait for God: before we be
aware the noise of God will be heard; arise my love, my faier one and come
away. 85. psalm. 8, 9. ver. I will harken what God the Lord will speak, for he
will speak peace to his people; surly his salvation is nigh them that fear
him, that glory may dwell in our Land. 35. Isa. 01. ver. and the Redeemed of the
Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their
heads, they shall obtain joy and gladnsse, and sorrow and sighing shall fly
away. and God will be seen to come leaping upon the mountains, and skipping
upon the hills: and we shall see the winter is past away, and our darkest night
to be a clear day; and our glory shall be God in us, as flowers adorn the
earth: the time of rejoicing shall be as the singing of birds in the spring,
and the noise of the turtle shall be heard in our Land; even groanings of love:
oh! blessed are they that wait for God, and the pure in heart, for they shall
see God: they that wait upon God shall understand; those that wait since the
daily sacrifice has been taken away, till the end of the time that this
abomination which makes desolate is set up, blessed is he that waits til the
end, for he shall rest, and stand in the lot at the end of the days: and when
God is manifest, it shall be said in that day, Lo this is our God, we have
waited for him, he shall save us; this is the Lord, we have waited for him,
we will be glad and erjoice in his salvation.

Zeph. 3. Chap. 14. ver. Sing oh! daughter of Zion, shout oh Israel! be glad
and rejoice, with all thy heart; oh daughter of Jerusalem, for the LORD, thy
GOD, is in the midest of thee.
FINIS.

