(...). OR, Some seasonable and modest Thoughts, in order to the furtherance
and promoting the affairs of Religion, and the Gospel, especially in Wales.
Mainly Tending to the discovery of the evils of extremes, and the spirit of
Error and dissension, that hinders the success, and the begetting of a due
temper and moderation of Judgment, with an universal love and peace amongst
us.

All, rationally, materially, and very moderately handled.

By I. L. Esquire.

The first inscription, receiving the second Edition, with some Letters and
passages of M. Baxters (the famed Minister of Kiderminster) unto the Author in
order to the contents, conceived of very special use to this season and
consideration of the godly judicious Ministry.

London, Printed for N. Ekins, and are to be sold at the Gun near the West end
of Paul's, 1659.

Si quid hic pietati, si quid bonis moribus, si quid sacris literis, si quid
Christanae ecclesiae consensui, si quid ulli veritati dissentaneum a me dictum
est? id nec dictum esto. Grotius in Proleg. de jure Belli and Pacis.

To the right Honorable Sir Arthur Hasilrigge, one of the most Honorable
members of PARLIAMENT.
I Pray let it not amuse you that these rude papers salute you from so remote a
corner of the Land, Wales
by them you may perceive some scantling of the extent of your great virtues
and merits, and if they bring along a trouble to you in the perusal (even but
of this one page) you may thank your own goodness as accessory to it, who now
about 12 years past was pleased to afford a more then ordinary acceptance to
some poor leaves of the same Authors, to which these do relate as to matter and
subject, entitled The Parliament explained to Wales. And Sir, having remembered
you of so much, I will now acquaint you with almost a wonder, and that you will
hardly believ: I then as I thought, having been delivered of that birth, yet I
have ever since, and still do, go in travail with it; for truly ever since that
time I parted from you, at your then house at Islington, I never scarce enjoyed
a good hour all along of those leaves, what with reproaches now, threats and
dangers then, I praise God, my patience has undergon no small temptations;
^or, quid non Parliamentu^
but how? and how far? you shall briefly otherwise be informed, only let me
add, may the Lord send us less Law, and more Justice, hoping that those
worthies and you, whom God has so signally owned, and who already have done so
great things, and much more is expected from, will hold it no great matter of
difficulty, to relieve and rescue a poor oppressed friend (suffering in, and
for your Cause) from the phangs of Laws and malicious Malignants. Indeed I did
lately, in the late Ld Protectors time, make some special applications to
those of my Countrymen eminent about him, for my protection and indemnity,
but they were so intent upon their ambition, that they would not remember poor
Joseph, and what was offered in my behalf to their Sympathy they did not
Christian-like lay it to their hearts, but courtier-like clap it in their
pockets, for which I wish them forgiveness; But Sir, these leaves, whatever
their matter and handling is, I am sure their tendency is good, the first
Edition was three years past, to the then Protector; but still my said
Countrymen, to whose hands, after a chargeable winter journey, I trusted them
(it seems jealous they should tell some tales) still obstructed them. This
second Edition because mostly occasioned, through some passages unto me, M.
Baxter
in order to them from an excellent man (whose name I know it precious to you
and all good men) I send forth under your patronage (for honest men and books
had need to be well guarded these times) for so much as is mine, as I then said,
they pretend no higher inspiration, then some harmeless reading, and truths (as
wise men say) lying in abdito, may happily sometimes be descryed amidst the
shades of woods and mountains, rather then in the noise and throng of the
world: they tend to the discovery of the evils of extremes, and as the same
rare soul said, M Baxter
all overdoing in the work of God, is undoing: This solely hinders our
happiness, and I verily believe, this spirit of dissension was never nearer a
discovery then now; and I hope such a spirit as was between Joseph and his
Brethren, is making toward us, and then not only England, but great Britain
for ever happy, and for ever glorious, and I hope those poor leaves, and
especially, what is of Mr. BAXTERS, will abundantly contribute toward that
great felicity. And truly it is most pitious, that amongst Christians, all
parties being so near together in their principles, should be so wide, and
distant in their affections; not unlike, as is reported of some spired
mountains with us in Wales, where shepherds may talk one with the other on the
tops, In sumsis eorum verticibus pastores confabulantes a mane ad vesperam vix
convenirent. Cambden. ex Gyr.
but scarce can meet together in a days travail; so in the many necessaries,
and fundamentalls, we come all close together yet unhappily, for some lower
opinions and circumstantialls, we ever stand at distance and will never shake
hands: and it would please God all good men would duly lay it to heart, what a
wound Religion, and Christianity suffers thereby, and to look beyondour selves,
and to consider, that even Turks and Pagans are confirmed in their
superstitious darkness, by our divisions, and the only way to hasten this
great blessing to our selves, and the world, would be, for all good Christians,
especially of the Ruleing and Ministerial rank, by degrees, to suffer those
false fires (for lights I dare hardly call them) of passion and prejudice,
clean to go out in them, and to let, right Reason, and Grace, Gods two great
luminaries, kindly to rule and shine in their Orbs, their minds and
intellects. But HONORABLE SIR, Not to keep you from your great affairs too
long in this Porch, and to end with one word more to my self, truly SIR, I
find my drooping thoughts not a little revived, behold the prange disposings of
divine providence before our eyes, to
that after a harsh Comma given to the Old-Cause and Parliament, methinks like
those rivers ingulfed into the Earth, after a great space have again their
resurrection; or like the glorious eye of Heaven Eclipsed by the saucy moon,
recovers and appears to the World in it is former luster. These should be
wondrous things in our eyes, the same great invisible hand that wrought all
this protect, and direct them and you in the great concernments of his name and
glory among us. By this much I verily believe yo do perceive, I am one that
would fain be bungling and doing of some good, might I be but left quietin my
privacie to steal through the World, and to be from the injuries, Protected
and malice of wicked malignant enemies, and like the snail to retire and live
(without molestation) in the shell of my own poor enjoyments is all my
ambition, and if your piety will be pleased to prove the Instrument of God to
obtain me but thus much, and what compensation for my great wrongs, (in any
proportion as they shall be made appear) as shall seem good to justice, I do
not doubt but Almighty God will give a plentiful return of blessings into your
bosom for it, and my prayers shall ever faithfully be for you and all the
other Worthy Patriots at our Helm, for the Lordlong to continue and direct them
and you for his glory amongst us, even to the fulfilling of that blessing of
the Prophet in these our days, for Justice to slow like a stream, and Judgment
like a mighty torrent throughout all the parts of the Land.

Honorable Sir, Your obliged, and devoted Servant, John Lewis.

AN INTRODUCTION, WITH Some modest advertisements touching the Author; and a
brief view of the progress hitherto in the affairs of Religion and the Gospel
in WALES.
Good Readers,
I Shall humbly beg from all of you, that the unworthiness of the Author may
not prejudice any truths that here may offer themselves unto you. Many
professing themselves to be Patriarks and Masters of Religion in my Country of
Wales, Evangelizo manu and scriptione, Raynold, in praefat.
I thought my self also a little concerned to bring in my poor mite in the way
I was most capable of; and with my Hand, as they with their Iongue, to further
so blessed a work. I may truly say, that I have had ever a genius to the
affairs of Religion, and this thirty years known something from it, and have
had some blessed experiences of Gods dealings in my own soul, and have been
something versed in Men, and Books of several sorts, though but a slender
proficient, and not read only one side (as they say) of the leaf, and those
that run in one strain of Opinion, which indeed merely begets stiffenesse, and
obstinacy, and an aptness to jangling and dissension, the only bane of
Religion, I might also add, that I was the first of my Country that did
publish any thing in order to the Parliament, The Parliament explained to
Wales. 1646.
and what Reproaches, Dangers, and Discouragements I incurred, I list not to
mention; for my part, I envy not any that came in at the eleventh hour, and I
hope my portion is reserved for me in a better World. I was in the number of
those that were named in the Act of the Propagation of the Gospel in Wales,
all which together I hope will warrant me to offer my poor thoughts unto the
World, in an affair of so much consequence to God and my Countries good; and
the great Searcher of hearts can witness, I have no design to humor any, or
to cross any in the ways and Principles they have laid, but merely to show
the dictates of my own poor Judgment and Conscience in a business of so much
moment to God, and the good of souls.

It has been my prayer that it should give offense to none, and the
Judiciously godly I doubt not will discern so, and that it is my heart that
has most guided my hand throughout, That some well meaning men will dart their
misprisions and censures at it, is my expectation; but I shall pity and pray
for them; but dare undertake if they will be pleased to read and understand
without prejudice (which I confess a hard task) they may at last konne me
thanks, and find herein something to enable their Judgments, to grow up to
their affections, and may in good time prove, though the less aerie, Notionall
and Talkative, yet the more firm, practical, and peaceable Christians.

And I pray let it be understood, that it is merely calculated and intended
for the Horizon of mine own Country, and as to the State of Religion there, and
not to others that are in the higher Regions of Spiritualities; and yet if such
may have any benefit, I shall think my labor the more happy, and give God the
glory.

I humbly in the last place beseech all, that what is here tendered with some
pains, candor, and good will, may not be received with mistakes, and
uncharitableness, in confidence whereof I shall proceed.

The advancement of Religion, and the Gospel, is such a work, that God and his
Angels, and all good men have their eyes in special manner beholding it, and
how awefully; then should all such as have to do with it stand affected? and my
heart gives me, there should be yet more in it, than what is hitherto done and
seen. I am assured the Commissioners and Ministers hitherto employed in it (for
all the Calumnies against them) wanted not much zeal and real good intentions
therein; they put out most of the old Ministers, and for ought of them I know,
most of them well deserving it, but the defect and complaint is, that their
vacant places are not yet sufficiently supplied, and those that are come into
their places, are such, that make it their whole work and business, most of
all, only to preach (not but that I account Gospel Orthodox preaching a holy
and necessary ordinance, and we should all blesss God for it) but that many
could wish and desire with it some other parts and duties of Religion, Conandu^
est inter Christianos, ut publica religionis facies existat. Call. Instit. lib.
4. cap. 20.
and some more provisions for the frequent and reverent use and comfort of the
Sacraments, and other usual administrations; for without question, I humbly
conceive, they are functions that are proper and pertinent to the Ministers,
and they are the means to maintain the face and visibilitie of Religion (if not
some sense and reverence of God among the common people) indeed Religion, or
divine worship in a larger sense, and the Gospel, (though pity they should
ever be parted) are not altogether the very same things (as I shall clearly
show in a more proper place) and the not right distinguishing of them, does
cause amongst us some mistakes, if not inconvenience; hence the people now
generally mutter and say, that when they customarily assemble, they come (as
indeed out of a Principle of nature) to serve and worship God, and not merely
to hear and be instructed. Now as for some thousands that are said to be
converted amongst us by late preaching (my charity bids me hope, really to
Christ, and praise be to God for it) yet others in opposition to them complain,
that far many more thousands, for want of preaching, or any other public
duties of Religion, and the distance and scarcity of Ministers (at least such
as they will attend to) are ready to make defection, and fall away to Popery,
if not utter profaneness, and neglect, and contempt of all Religion, wherein
no doubt Gods Glory will suffer, little less than it is advanced in the other.

And I humbly conceive this is an impartial view of the progress hitherto in
the work of Religion, and the Propagation of the Gospel amongst us, for the
help and furtherance whereof I shall further offer unto you what follows.

The hindrances of the success of Religion, and the Gospel, discovered.
I conceive it will be most available to the design, to discover, first what
Lets and Obstructions lie most in the way, and after to propound the Remedies
and means to promote it; Certainly our Lets and hindrances of success,
proceed from some mistakes and dissentions amongst us; and I have often mused
seriously, wherein this spirit of error and discord does lie; and in my poor
judgment it chiefly lurks in mere words; and I have thought it is no marvel
the Apostle has so often and emphatically warned us to beware of them, 1 Timothy
2. 6. 4.
charging before the Lord that they strive not about words; and indeed if we
look upwards through the whole ages of the Church; (...).
we shall find they have been ever unhappy and fatal to it; one word,
Arianism.
or rather syllable or letter, rent and ruined the ancient glorious Church of
the East, and Mr. Calvin bemoaning the same unhappiness of Words in his time,
as when some not content with words, the primitive Church was necessitated to
make use of, but would have words out of Scripture with more inconvenience,
Instit. lib. 1. c. 13. Sect. 3.
they did, says he, ob nudas voculas digladiari, so brabble and quarrel
about words, that verit as altercando amittitur, and charit as odiose rixando
dissolvitur, Truth, Love and Charity, was lost and gone. And it please God we
had not cause to make it our own complaint in these days; I verily think there
has not been an age more guilty of this vanity and unhappiness than we are.
I list not hear to offer you a list of the words we contend and differ about,
I believe there is scarce a word that belongs to the Body of Religion, whether
those from Scripture, or used in Divinity, and the Church, that has been left
unquarrelled with by some or other; and I pray God the word Scripture it self,
calling it Bible, and the ancient Greek names, and Titles of the Books, as
Genesis, Exodus, etc. may be left quietly alone; nay, many words of the
Language, but of civil use, are gainsaid (such a turbulent Villain is this
spirit of Error and Dissension) the Remedy whereof (with all humble submission
to the godly wise) and especially safest for Religion, were to rest and stand
content with words, Usus penes quem arbitrium, and jus, and norma loquendi. Hor.
as use and custom has delivered them unto us, for they have been ever held
to be the sole Masters of Words, and to give the Law and stamp unto them; and
it is worth taking notice of, that many times words of good and harmless
signification, through Ignorance and prejudice, become in time to be taken in
the worse sense; which did we understand, and not behold them through the false
glass of prejudice, clearly in their first innocent institutions, and right
meaning; a wise man would but laugh at the variances about them, though some of
them passing through the revolutions of corrupt ages, may carry some cause of
offense with them, yet so to strive for them, even to so much trouble and loss
of Charity, I conceive is a Remedy worse than the disease, and many can make
that wise use of them, as to bear with them as some petty monuments of the
Truth, and Antiquity of Christian Religion, etc. And I conceive it would be a
labor well bestowed, for some able hand, to open and explicate all such words
in Religion, as the Vulgar take offense at, that every body might not call this
and that superstition and Antichristian, without more ground than his own weak
fancy; and doubtless it would be a course that would much conduce to settle
men's judgments, and allay their differences, and a means to avoid that other
mischief, and cause of variances, our pronenesse to be falling and reeling
from one extreme to another, as our care to shun superstation; we slip
sometimes into a worse angle, and wider from Religion, which is Profaneness;
both which words I shall somewhat open anon; in the mean time I could heartily
beg it from the able Ministers, to make it more their work, than hitherto I
have seen, to open and unfold unto the people those main and Cardinal words of
Religion, as that most glorious and awefull name God, oh that we could
consider what we speak when we name it! the Word of God, Mirabilis iste
animus usque ad horrorem stupendus. August. in confess.
the Spirit, Heaven, Hell, and all other Principal and fundamental words of
Religion, every which word is, and is not, much more than what every one thinks
that have them frequent in their mouths; this I say I could heartily commend
unto the Orthodox good Ministers; which people being solidly instructed and
grounded in, would doubtless more kindly and happily bring on the work of grace
in them, when those other speculations which I see without this groundwork,
do but swell and distemper the fancy, and thence the strange opinions and
imaginations of many poor well-meaning souls in these days,

Thus far of words in general, as they foment our Error and dissentions; I
will now offer as for our present design, to open some usual words, which
being not thoroughly understood by all, do minister much matter of mistakes and
contention about them, as also some brief observations upon them, but still
with submission to the Judiciously godly.

The Word Propagation explicated.
THe word Propagation properly (as every Schoolboy knows) signifies the
cutting down of an old Vine, And the old Ministers with us, know it home in
this sense.
and planting young ones in their stead; but in the sense of Religion, it has
ever very properly been used, as much as to extend and enlarge, and in that
signification we take it. It being so, let us grant the word a twofold sense
(as it has been used, and is in order to Religion) the first we may call the
ancient Propagation, as in the primitive times, people from Infidells and
Pagans were converted to acknowledge and believe Christ, etc. And as multitudes
and Nations did come so to believe, this was called the Propagation of the
Gospel; now in this sense, some among us mutter at the word as a disparagement
to our Country, who from our Ancestors, the Britains have received the Title of
Christianity, with some of the first of the World, as all Histories and
Antiquity does grant, and also to the honor of our Nation, we must confess as
a great mercy of God to us, that since that best Act one of the worst Kings
ever did, Henry the eighth, our incorporation into England, we are much
improved in all points of civilitie, and Religion, far above what our
Ancestors were; now besides this, we may also call Propagation in a more modern
sense, as when those that go under the general name of Christians, and yet are
dissolute, and unchristian, and unholy in their lives, and brought by means of
the Gospel, and converted, into a better state of virtuous and holy Christian
living, and fear of God, and in this sense we may well admit of Propagation,
and heartily wish it amongst us, and all the World; for it is a sad
observation, that a great Author makes, that Christians in that general term
and in gross, are thought to be the impurest part of all mankind; Dr. Hamond in
practical Catechism.
it is able to shame us eternally, to hear how the Turks and Mahometans do
exceed us in our lives, with whom Drunkenness is punished with death, in so
much it is thought, that because of their reverence in their Mosches (or
Churches) their many works of devotion, Piety, and Charity, their Justice,
Temperance, and other moral virtues, Mr. Ross on the Alcoran.
to be main causes of the growth of Mahometanism; and on the contrary, our
irreverence and neglect of Religion, and loose lives, to be the main hinderance
of Christianity; who but that will seriously consider this, and not say,
welcome Propagation, or Propurgation, or something among us, or whatever to
reform and amend us.

The Words Religion and Gospel opened, etc.
NOw partly clearing what we mean by Propagation, the word Religion and
Gospel come opportunely in. I formerly hinted, they are not altogether the
same; for as mankind, we have all a common interest in Religion, but as
Christians and believers in Christ we belong to the Gospel; by the mere
instinct and impulsion of nature, all men are prone to acknowledge and adore
the Divine Power (or God) and this, and all that pertains to the reverent
performance of this, is properly called Religion or Divine Worship; now it is
said, that most of our late endeavors were wholly to promote the Gospel, and
preaching it, and that only the believers and Elect in Christ are the better
for; Now upon a reckoning, I presume hardly the moyetie, or half the people in
Wales would be granted to belong unto Christ and Salvation, but admit the
number more or fewer; now the Gospel and preaching it, being only that which
takes up our thoughts and care, I would know what provision should there be,
for that number that belongs not to Christ; I am confident none is so
uncharitable as to say, let them shift as they may, therefore if not for their
souls behoof and benefit, yet for the honor and glory of God as mere
Creatures, there ought to be something whereby they might testify their duty
and Homage to their Creator, which the very dumb Creatures do in their kind,
the Stork in the Heavens knows her appointed times, Ier. 8.
and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow knows the time of her
coming; and were there not this necessity from nature in respect of God,
there is another necessity from the respects of Humane Comerce and society,
for without some face and sense of Religion among men, they would grow savage,
and make no conscience of their Oaths and Promises in their actions and
dealings, which I need not further to exemplify unto the Judicious, therefore
along and together with the preaching of the Gospel, well were it that some
reverence and decorums of Religion were thought good to be maintained, for the
containing of all men in the aw and apprehension of God, and the maintaining of
civil honesty in their actions and dealings; And it would much avail to this,
to have the Administrations more duly and frequently performed, Legitimum
cultum definit ut genus humanum sub obsequio contineat. Call. Instit. lib. 1.
cap. 12.
and not to suffer such contempt to the places of divine worship, to which
scarce will be granted their very names, which use, and the language has given
them, and suffered (notwithstanding late good provisions for them) to decay and
ruin, without some course be timely taken; I know not how many may be
converted by preaching, but sure I am, too many are like to grow utterly
heathenish, and void of all Religion for the reasons aforementioned.

The word Preaching explicated.
THe next word in order is Preaching (the Gospel is coincident with this) but
so much mistakes and abuse there is concerning it, that the spirit of
dissension seems to be so wreathed about it, that I dread to attempt the
meddling with it; but if the good Reader will be charitable, and think me
non-either, that is against or above, this or any holy ordinance, I will give
my poor Judgment, and where I fail, I beseech the pardon of the Godly, and
that still he mind, that the design of my pen is in this, and the whole, for
Moderation, and against the evils of extremes; I will not trouble you with the
several meanings of the word Preaching in the Scripture, and the Ages of the
Church; but surely that which is meant by it in the pure primitive Gospel sense
is the Apostles (as Heralds) proclaiming and making known to the World, that
great Mystery hid from all former Ages, that Jesus Christ the Son of God was
incarnat and born of a blessed Virgin, etc. to be Savior of the World, and
the publishing of this, and the other heavenly Doctrine of Christ, as the
resurrection, and the fundamentalls of Faith, is, I humbly conceive to be, the
preaching meant in the Scripture sense, and to know and believe this, there is
an absolute necessity to Salvation; now the mistake is, that those Texts and
places of Scripture that mention the preaching in the forementioned sense, and
the necessity and efficacy of it, is sometimes wrested too violently to the
necessity of ordinary preaching, and Sermons, which certainly cannot be of that
absolute necessity as the former, because we are by course of Ages born where
Christ is owned and believed in the former sense, and have sundry helps, by
Education, Conference, Meditation, and good Books, to improve that knowledge;
But I conceive the preaching in our latter sense, and use, to be of very
special conveniencie and necessity for us, and our improvement in the
knowledge and ways of God, so it be right, Gospel, and Orthodox preaching,
and beyond all other private helps and means, when it is a public Ordinance
(because no doubt) of a more special blessing along with it; Objection.
but if some say that the Devil and evil spirits may be said in some kind to
believe in the first sense, I confess perhaps they do as to their
intellectuals, and historically, but so, as to their sorrow and horror: but
mankind believes at least to some glympses of hope and comfort, and the Elect
to their unspeakable joy, etc. The mistake partly of this necessity, made
Preaching, lately as it were, overflow its banks, and to overtop all other
Ordinances, and made that gap and tolleration for all pretenders, Exodus 36. 4.
that the complaint was like as of old at the offerings of the Temple, That the
people bring more than enough for the service of the work of the Lord; until
his Highness late seasonable Ordinance, has (and I hope still will more) like
Moses, then caused the people to be restrained from bringing more work into the
Sanctuary. And truly I have often much marvelled, how in ancient times, when
they had scarce any kind of Preaching, nor near those helps our times abound
with, they should so far out go us in holiness of life, Mortification, and
contempt of the World; they by Praying, Fasting, holy Hymns, frequent use of
the Sacraments, and other Exercises of devotion, and troubling not themselves,
nor the world, with Crochers and Notions, attained to higher pitches of
holiness than we know or feel; doubtless the holy Spirit has some other secret
way (besides the only sense of Hearing, and the means of words) to come into
the soul, as to Eliah, he was not in the wind, and fire, and earthquake, but in
the still small voice.

2 Now Preaching being thus stated, I could heartily commend, especially to our
younger Preachers, a due care of what they deliver unto the people, for they
(like Jacobs flocks before the Rods) apprehend and conceive but just as you put
before their eyes, Genesis 30
and to inform their Judgment especially in the principles of Faith, as well as
to move their affections, which later, without the former, makes them so easily
fly into peevish fancies; and not to obtrude and press upon their credulity
that every thing they deliver is Scripture, and the Word of God, but what
undoubtedly is so; much may proceed from their own ignorance and frail
affections, as men; and that they would prescribe unto the people some sober
Rules for reading the Scriptures, for some, as soon as they can but read a
Chapter, prefer their own fansy before the soundest Interpretations, hence, and
the like, the strange opinions, and crased extravagancies of many in these
times (as those we call Quakers, and others deluded, but happly well-meaning
souls) I have often mused of them, and they are not strange, for I find such a
kind in all Religions that ever were, as the Illuminati in Spain, the Dervises
among the Turks, See Burtons religious melancholy, p. 739.
and indeed all Enthusiasts whatsoever, it proceeding from the over-intention
of the fancy and melancholy; and indeed they ought to be gained and reduced
rather with Physic, than reason; and this I say comes when the fancy like a
ship has overmuch sail, and the Understanding and Judgment want ballast,
Inciderunt in desiderium curiosarum visonum and digni habiti sunt illusionibus,
Aug. conf. l. 10.
and therefore it were a good remedy to spare many speculations and notions,
and to ground people in the substantials of Faith and Religion; move and
persuade them unto the duties and practices of a holy life; so that many that
have a desire to fear God, and to lead honest virtuous lives, yet if they agree
not with some in opinions and forms, they shall have but their cold
commendations, and style of moral men: Whereby sure I am, many good motions and
intentions are made abortive, and people quite discouraged from either being
good, or doing good. Methinks to feed the hungry, cloth the naked, relieve the
oppressed, are most proper works for all Christians, sure I am, upon that
account we are to expect our doom at the last day, and not according to our
notions and words, Psa. 39. 1. Socrat. Eccl. Hist.
but according to our deeds, we shall then be dealt with. We read of an holy
old plain man, that is said to be nineteen years learning one verse, which was,
I said I will take heed to my ways that I offend not in my tongue, as to
practice it; hence the ancients had a rule, Praedicatio brevis, Ruminatio
longa, Actio perpetua, short Sermons, long Meditations, and continual Practice.

3 For our better success in the word, one more caution I have to our Preachers
and Ministers, that is, I humbly conceive that it would not do amiss to
correspond and comply with the people in some of their more tolerable Modes
and Customs (at least) for a while, This is mentioned as only to the state of
Wales.
and not too rigidly inveigh against them; As their aptness to observe some of
the ancient Festivals, as the Nativity and Resurrection of our Savior, and the
like, referring to the great actions of our Redemption; All the Christian
Churches of the world, (laying aside Rome) as the Eastern and the reformed
Churches has ever anciently, and does observe them, and the charity and
hospital^^y of such times does much balance the abuse and corruptions imputed
to them; and with us in Wales the people generally from an ancient use much
spend the time in pious Hymns and Songs, celebrating the birth and actions of
Christ, which at least keeps them in some awe and reverence of God, and their
anniversary course no doubt makes some more impression upon them, than not at
all.

As also their not using the Lords Prayer, at least sometimes in compliance
with the peoples use: I confess, I think the blessed Prayer has been, as all
the rest of the Scriptures, abused; as in the conceit of the absolute necessity
of it at all times, and contenting with the mere formal utterance of it, to the
exclusion of other devotion; these abuses the people should be discreetly
advised of, and not utterly to disuse it, as I hear they do not in other places
of England and London, rather than so, I incline to believe with those, that
the Apostles, and the Church after them, ever used it in their devotions, and
the first I find that gainsaid the use of it, was the Pelagians, as in the
Synod of Militane the first charge against them was, Nova Haeresis, and nimium
perniciosa, tentat urgere inimicorum gratia Christi qui etiam nobis dominicam
orationem in piis disputationibus conantur auferre; That they endeavored to
take away the use of the Lords Prayer; whereby we see the antiquity of the use,
Dr. Usher in Primord. Eccl. Brit. p. 255.
and who we imitate in contemning it: Doubtless sometimes, at our more solemn
Devotions, at least, it might be as the Diamond in the Ring, and as the sweet
odor of our prayers. And it is observable, that upon a time when it as much
concerned Christian Religion in this Land as ever at the first conversion of
the Saxons unto it, Fana eadem and necesse est a cultu daemonum in obsequia
very Dei debeant commutari and Deum verum cognoscens ac adorans ad loca quae
consueverunt familiarius concurrant, and Boves daemonum solet sacrificio multos
occidere debet etiam hac de re, aliqua solemnitas immutari, vel natalitiis
sanctorum; nec Diabolo jam animalia immolent sed ad laudem Dei in esu suo
animalia occident.
Gregory the great advised his Agents here, to comply as much as may be with
them in their Pagan ways, To make use of their Temples to the service of God,
and even to go far with them in their Sacrifices of Beasts, And adds very good
Reasons as well proper to us. Nam duris mentibus simul omnia abscindere
impossible esse non dubium est. Bed. Eccl. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 30.
as to celebrate thereby the Christian Festivals, as accounting it hard at once
to draw them from their old ways, but by degrees; and so to gain them; the
Apostle seems to have been also thus minded, when to the weak, he became as the
weak, etc.

And the last thing I shall humbly recommend (especially unto the more learned
Ministers and Pastors) is the consideration and use of the Laws of Nature (not
corrupt) and Right Reason in the affairs of Religion; for where the Scriptures
are silent and dark, as they are most in matters of external Worship; Hence is
our best light, In his Gospel liberty.
as our own Mr. Cradock judiciously observes; as for instance, That which all
Nations, and the better and wiser sort of men have ever consented and agreed
in, Iuris naturalis esse colligitur id quod inter omnes gentes aut moratiores
tale esse creditur.
is held a Principle of the Law of Nature; Grotius de jure Bell. and Pacis, p. 6.
even but this one Rule well weighed and managed by judicious moderate men, one
would think it were able to ^out away most of all our vexed differences and
contentions; for our declination from this, and the Laws of Nature, betrays us
to most of the Errors and extravagancies of the times, as I shall further
observe hereafter, and leave it to the judgment of the able Ministers, who to
their hand may find help in this from some late As Grotius, Hooker, Seldom.
learned men: And so much for the word Preaching.

The word Saints unfolded.
THe next word as most proper to follow Preaching, is the innocent word Saint;
and certainly in the true Scripturesense the word sounds alike, as the word
Christian, Believer, or Elect, and proper to be used, so it be without
affectation; in the old Testament (as I conceive) sometimes it is used to
import the people of the Jews in distinction from other Nations, and in the use
of the Church, (I mean not that of Rome alone) it has been anciently used
partly to the Saints Triumphant in Heaven, and those that have been very
eminent in their times for Sanctity and Holiness of life, or some remarkable
service in the Church, as a style of honor unto them, and in this sense it
sticks unto the names of the Apostles, the ancient Fathers and others. I find
the word in the Original to signify a total opposition to earthly things,
(...) ab (...). private. and (...), unearthliless. So that earthli-mindedness,
and worldliness, and Saintship is inconsistent; for my part I heartily wish all
would labor to become such in holiness and innocence of life; and to abandon
all other unhappy names of Schism and divisions amongst us, and once again meet
in the old honest name Christian.

The Word Church explained, with observations on it.
THe next and last, is the word Church, and this is of various significations
even in Scripture, the word (...) usually (but improperly) translated Church,
signifies any number, Act. 19. 32.
Assembly, or Congregation, either in a good or bad sense; That rout and
company that would have killed Paul is called (...) or Church, and I believe
had the Translators foreseen what strife there is about the word in our days,
they would have used some other word, for some now violently would restrain the
word only to a number of persons, whereas they may be certain there is scarce
one word in Scripture, and those of greatest moment, but admit of more sense
than one; and granting this, the strife would be at an end; but indeed the
English, Being either Kyrk or Kirk Kyrk autem Kerk and Church sensu primario
significant curiacam seu dominicam domum. Seld. de Syn. p. 276.
or Saxon rather, word Church, properly signifies place, for Church in all the
Northern Nations language (as from their mother the Dutch) signifies the place
of Divine Worship, and comes from (...), or Dominica, or Lords house; and our
Welsh word Eglwys does more allude to (...), than the word Church. Having seen
something through the word, the first thing observable is to see the force of
passion and prejudice in some, even to wrench and transport them from the Law
and instincts of Nature, as either not to allow such places, or at least any
regard or respect toward them; for as from the Law and Principles of Nature,
all Nations never so barbarous acknowledge a supreme Divine Power, so as
naturally they have an impression to assign some places to the worship of the
same Power, and some answerable respect and reverence to the places; read, you
may of Nations that are so barbarous that they want Towns, and other ornaments
of civil Nations, but none there is but have their Aras and Templa, their Rites
and places to worship; and indeed such a strong byas, and impulse of nature
there is thereunto, that most (and some Christian) do slip rather into
superstition, and too much reverence, than be short in the worst extreme,
Profaneness, or too little to such places; As they say the Emperor of Russia
in his greatest pomp will alight from his horse, at the sight of every Church,
and to his devotions, and will not mount but go on foot whilst in sight of it;
I urge not for (as the Papists extreme) undue superstitious reverence to such
places, as if there were inherent holiness in them, but because of the end and
the service they are ordained to, I conceive them not to be so slighted and
contemned as they are by many. Methinks were there nothing else but that one
example of our Savior of whipping the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, and
that with such indignation and deliberation, it were sufficient to gain some
regard to such places, for our Churches are ordained to the same use and ends,
as the Temple was, and it was not Solomon's; and the Merchandise was for
religious ends, for sacrifice; from all which I conceive, it is clearly
evinced, that if no honor and respect be to be given, yet no scorn and contempt
is to be offered to such places. And what our common people in Wales are apt to
in this kind, out of this instinct of nature, some charge them with
superstition, which when they slip so far unto, I could wish them discreetly
reproved and instructed, but to suffer them to bend to the other worst extreme,
and persuade them to have no account or esteem to such places, but to value
them as every other ordinary place, this passes my judgment, and I know it
begets very hard thoughts, and I never heard or read any judicious Protestant
Divines, but seem to allow a kind of relative holiness to such places; As the
word (...) imports in the New Testament, John. 4.
as for that place commonly alleged of the woman of Samaria, that the true
worshippers is in Spirit and Truth, etc. this place is but abused and wrested,
as if places of Divine Worship, and to worship God in Spirit and Truth, were
inconsistent; our Saviors scope there was to take off that fond conceit of the
Jews, that only in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship, and
indeed by these words he imports the call of the Gentiles, as if he should say,
the Jews conceive none are to be saved but they, for so the opinion goes,
Salvation is of the Jews, but they are deceived, verse. 23.
the Gentiles shall be as capable of salvation as they, which is implied in his
very next words and verse. But the hour comes, and now is, that the true
worshipers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth, and what of all
this is against Churches or places of divine worship? here I might show how
Adam before he sinned had a place in Paradise, to worship God, the Patriarks,
their Altars, and the primitive Christians, the first thing they did after the
storms of persecutions was over, Eusebius. Eccle. Hist. lib. 6. 53.
was to build Churches and Oratories, and with what joy and solemnity you may
see by that famous Oration of Paulinus, which for brevitie I omit, and refer
you to the place.

And for the next and last observation upon this word, if I do distate any, I
beseech their Christian pardon, that there is a great sir, and ever by all the
World so accounted, which passes amongst us with little or no notice, and
acknowledged by many to be no such sin at all, which is called Sacrilege; The
Heathen Magistrate, Act. 19. 37. Romans 2. 22. See Sir Hen. Spelman de non
temerandis Esclesiis, and Mr. Clarks mirror of Gods Judgments in Tit.
Sacrilege. pub. 1654. In annot. Cas. p. 31. Miror non terreri cos qui vetus
Testamentum legunt Achanis, qui novum Ananiae exemple, and haec vel praecipua
causa est, cur ^am diu bella durant, non tanum quia propter is it a utrinq,
bellatur, verum etiam quia Deus contemptum sui sic ulciscitur.
excusing the Apostles Innocence, as quitting him from a great crime, says,
they were no Robbers of Churches; and in another place, Thou that abhorrest
Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? as if a greater sin (if possible) than
Idolatry; I know how some may flatter themselves with a late sense of the
Word; I partly know how all Nations, and Religions, and Christian Ages has
taken it, and I think the mistake of these times about it, comes from a
prejudice and misunderstanding the word superstition, as thinking that to be
superstition, which many times is not so, and so make good our Saviors
Proverb, Strain at a Gnat, and Swallow a Camel, but thus much I find (and all
others may) both by the Histories and experience of all times, that God has
never suffered this sin to pass without some signal Judgments either upon the
parties, or their near posterities; and the learned Grotius makes it his
wonder, that many are not deterred from it, from the Example of Achan in the
old, and Ananias in the New Testament.

And absolutely thinks (a place well worthy the perusal of Princes and
Governors of the Christian World) That the miseries, tumults, and wars of
Christiandome continue as a just vengeance of God for this sin. And sure I am,
Levit. 36. 37.
the Lord has ranked it amongst the Catalogue of his Judgments upon a Nation;
I will iay wast your Cities, and bring your Sanctuaries to desolation. I will
conclude all upon this word with a very remarkable passage out of once a
learned Statesman of this Land, which is so much the more to be admited, that
he so long before should foretell the humor, and as it were, the fortune, of
Religion in these days; he there discoursing of the Army of Israel, removing
their Camp, and the care and reverence they had of the Tabernacle, A remarkable
passage, or prophecy of Sir Wa. Rawleigh in Histo. of the World. Page 249.
which (says he) all ages have in a degree imitated -- Now in this superfine
age, all reverence of the Church where God is to be worshipped, and served, is
accounted a kind of Popery, insomuch that time would have it, if it were not
resisted, that God would be turned out of Churches into Barns, and thence into
fields, and Mountains, and the office of the Ministry robbed of all dignities,
and respect, and b^^ as contemptible as those places, all order, discipline and
Church Government, left to newness of opinion, and men's fancy, yea, and soon
after, as many kinds of Religions would spring up in England, as there are
Parish Churches, and every contentious and Ignorant person, clothing himself
with the Spirit of God; insomuch when truth shall appear (which is but one)
unto the simple multitude, no less variable than contrary to it self, the faith
of men will soon after dye by degrees, and all Religion will be held in scorn,
and contempt. Every word and syllable is his own, to be seen in the cited
place, and whether it was the foresight of a great Brain, or Prophecy, I know
not, but I pray God it may prove a false one.

I further humbly conceive as I showed formerly from words, so also our
mistakes and dissentions grow from our misconceiving the scope and use of the
holy Scriptures, as sometimes strai^^ing them to give us light and direction in
such things as happily God has not ordained them to reveal unto us, as in most
things as concern external worship, as Order, Decency, etc. Gosp. lib. p. 58.
p. 117. 13, 15.
as our Mr. Cradock does well observe, we mistake (says he) if we take the
Scriptures to be Aphorisms, Canons, and Theorems, and where they hold forth no
light, he referrs us to the laws of Nature and right Reason, the custom and
practice of the Saints in their Generations, for says he, if it has been a
general custom in the Church, and has been practiced by the Saints, time out
of mind, and God has not determined it, I will go along with them; and further
(says he) for my part, when I observe any custom in any Church, any thing
that is laudable, and comely, and God has not determined it, there is a kind
of honor and reverence that strikes into my heart, etc. Thus he, Aug. Epist.
86.
not unlike the determination of Augustine in the like case, In his de quibus
nihil certi statuit scriptura, mos populi dei, vel instituta majorum pro lege
tenenda sunt, that where the Scriptures are dark and silent, there the customs
of Gods people, and Judgment of our Forefathers are to be observed. The
Scriptures no doubt, are perfect and alsufficient as to those ends God has
ordained them, that is, to reveal unto us the Doctrine of Faith and Salvation,
but as to other appurtenances to the state and solemnities of Religion, and
external worship (about which our unhappy quarrels are) well were it we
could suffer our selves to be guided by the Judgment and Rules mentioned; the
want of this is our pronenesse to reproach each other with superstition, and
profaneness, and Antichristian; all of them I confess great evils, but
surely many times misunderstood, which causes so much scupulosities, tortures
of conscience, and uncharitableness amongst us, and therefore I could heartily
wish those words were once rightly stated amongst us; methinks to conclude all
things superstitious that are not expressly warranted in Scripture, is of some
perilous consequence; and of the two great evils, I humbly conceive
superstition to be less than profaneness, for superstition is acknowledged to
be a cultus perversus or a kind of Religion looking awry, whereas profaneness
in its proper sense is the great opposite of Religion; and yet such a prejudice
and mistake there is about then that we easier and with less reluctancie rush
into Prophanene than into superstition.

I find the learned deriving the word Profaneness from disorder and
confusion; and any degree to the contempt of divine worship, and the places,
imports the guilt; and were these words rightly rendered and understood, (...),
alluding to the Hebrew Babel and prophanatio a fano.
doubtless it would take off much of our matter, of differences, and
contentions.

2 I shall mention another mistake of some places of Scripture, fomenting
contention, as those texts that are produced and wresled to make against
natural parts, Knowledge and learning, as the 1 and 2 to the Corinth. Where is
the Scribe? etc. God has made foolish the wisdom of this World, and such
other places, whereby simple people are brought to conceive hard thoughts of
Gods excellent gifts, and ignorance most strangely promoted, the consequence
whereof I leave to the Judgment of the wise and truly Religious; doubtless
the Apostle does not condemn true wisdom and knowledge, but the false and
counterfeit wisdom of the Grecians in those times to whom Christ and his
Doctrine seemed foolishness; did we know what knowledge is, we would
infinitely be taken with the beauty of it, for what is it but the improvement
of natural Reason, and what is Reason, but a beam and ray of that divine light,
and a drop of that infinite Fountain of all excellencies and perfections, which
is God? Every good and perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the
Father of light, and doubtless in these Ages of the Church, it concerns
Ministers especially to be more knowing than others. In the primitive times
when the State of the Church did not seem so much to require it, as now, how
learned were they, is well known, insomuch that Julian the grand enemy of
Christianity, thought it as his only Engine against it, to forbid Christians
the means of learning, etc. and in this so knowing an Age, that even many women
are held learned, to have the Ministers simple and illiterate is as great a
scandal to Religion, as I can Imagine; I deny not but learning as all good
things else have been abused, but to have hard thoughts against it, especially
upon pretense of Scripture, I beseech all men of any Judgment and godliness
to consider, and that with the Apostle, that the Spirit of the Lord has
diversity of opperations, in some after this manner, in others after that, but
is the same God which works all in all. 1 Cor. 12.


THE CONTENTS of the First Part.
1. SOme modest Advertisements touching the Author, with a short view of the
progress in the affairs of Religion, and Propagation hitherto in Wales. 2
Errors and Dissension, the hinderance of the success; and discovery where this
spirit of Dissension does lie, which is showed to be in mere words, with rules
for the right understanding of words. 3 Some principal words, as Propagation,
Gospel, Preaching, Saints, Church, explicated, with observations; the use of
the Law of Nature, and right Reason, as to the affairs of Religion; concluding
with a remarkable passage out of Sir W. Rawleigh. 4 Some Texts and places of
Scripture, as mistaken, to foment Dissension, cleared, and the words
Superstition and Profaneness, somewhat explained.
(...) THE SECOND PART.
THe helps and means to advance Religion face of Order and Government to be
maintained up, De ea exterminanda cogitare immanem esse barbariem, Instit. lib.
4. cap. 20.
as to keep the Generality in some sense and awe of God (as formerly mentioned)
never till these days did I imagine any could be against it. Mr. Calvin
accounts it barbarism, and there reckons the Benefits of it, etc. And the
Apostle (no marvel) accounts Helps, 1 Cor. 12. v. 28.
Governments among the Gifts of the Spirit.

For the Ministers, I will not for brevity sake enter into Qualifications and
Gifts; those styles and titles given them throughout the Scriptures speak their
dignity, as says Calvin, Quid dici possit Magnificentius: and the Apostle upon
the consideration of it, concludes, Who is sufficient for these things? And
without question, 2 Cor. 2.
the state and condition of Religion in these ages of the Church, requires more
gifts and endowments, than in the Primitive Times, as the knowledge of the
State, and History of the Church, the writings and monuments of the Pillars of
Religion, the ancient Fathers, the skill in the Original Tongues, and other
Sciences; without which I confess one may be a good Christian, yet hardly can I
conceive one to be an able or accomplished Minister, without at least a
competent Measure of them; and to admit of others merely illiterate, and upon
the account of some spiritual Notions, and well-meaning men, without
endeavoring they should be qualified in some measure, as mentioned; is the
highway to disfurnish the Church of able and knowing Ministers: and to bring
utter scorn and contempt upon the Calling, and all Religion; Neither is it so
in Wales, as many would make believe, that we are such Ignoramuses. Praise be
to God, we have (I dare say) an able and knowing Gentry as ever; and therefore,
we are to wish such a Ministry, as will be able substantially to inform the
judgment, as with some easy similes to tickle the affections, if the honor
and reputation of the Ministry will be resolved to be maintained; else I know
who will best gain the style of Teachers.

scandalous Ministers to come in: Those that were ejected, doubtless many of
them did but well deserve it; yet of those I account some more tolerable than
others; as those of some lighter blemishes, and dissents in judgment, yet of
good Abilities, whereof there is store such, they kissing the Rod, and humbled
in the sense of their former failings, I could heartily wish they should be
restored (at least) to some encouragements to exercise their Gifts and Talents
in, and because the Harvest is great, and laborers few: and that for want of a
supply Gods worship and service is in hazard to suffer among us. In such an
exigence, we should not so much stand for whom we could wish, but accept of
such we needs must have, and give place to a Rule wise Men have, sometimes to
admit of an Evil, rather than an Inconvenience. And though happily they may want
the way and gift of Preaching, yet they may have those gifts, that may be of
other special uses to Religion: If they may not be so good for the Pulpit, they
may be for the Press, and such services of Religion. I might here start a
Question whether the Tongue or Hand has done most service to God in his
Church: The Apostle says, his speech was contemptible, and his letters
powerful. I will not enter into the bowels of this Question, but leave it to
the judicious; only I suppose with submission, that had it not been the Pen and
Writings (next the Providence of God) of the former ages of the Church; I can
hardly imagine (against such strength of opposition and errors) how Christian
Religion, and the pure truths of it could have devolved and arrived to our
hands; and those that have done signal services in the Church, was by their
pens, as anciently St. Aug. etc. who makes it his excuse to withdraw himself
from his former profession of Rhetoric; Illi professioni prae difficultate
spirands, ac dolor pectoris non sufficerem, Conf. lib. 9. cap. 5.
because he spent so much his breath and lungs; and amongst our Moderns famous
Dr. Reynolds, who was held not to be so well gifted for utterance; and
preaching, said, Evangelizo manu and scriptione, what he could not so well with
his Tongue and voiec, he preached with his hand and pen; So I say, for such as
cannot with us pass so well for preaching, may at least for their other parts
and abilities be at least accounted of us as the Gibeonites of old to be Hewers
of wood, and Drawers of water for the house of God; Josh. 9.
especially such as may be very useful to us in Wales for the Controversaries,
and for the translation of ancient and modern Books into the language, which is
something wanting of things in that kind, and has but its mere antiquity to
credit it: For which pains I humbly conceive, they might well be accounted
Members of the Ministry, and be accordingly encouraged and cherished, and not
leave us altogether useless to droop and languish away in sad melancholy, and
penury, as they do, etc. neither would; but that others that pretend to gifts
of another account, be but encouraged: But with these one or two Cautions; 1.
That the able Ministers frequently mind them, not to presume wholly upon the
strength of their gifts, and to endeavor to improve this by industry and
studying; and to be as in the nature of the Catechystae and Lectores of the
ancient times, before they rush into the public preaching the word.

Rules in reading the Scriptures; For we have now a days an aptness to be
self-conceited, and to prefer our own sense before the foundest interpretations.

gravity and reverence of the function does suffer; they instancing the youth
of Timothy, who was no ordinary person, but a rare soul, that prophecies went
of him, and Paul's holy hand was upon him; and is said to be learned in the
Scriptures from a child, which perhaps imports, not only the Canonical
Scriptures, but the whole Jewish Divinity, sure I am we little value the
Council of a Physician, Nisi quis apud Heb. 30. ann. impleverit nec principia
Geneseos legere permittitur. Seld. de suc. Heb. p. 442.
or Lawyer at the years of some Preachers: I find that Jerome says, That the
Priests would not be permitted to read the first words of Genesis, until 30
years old, the age our blessed Savior is said to begin to preach.

The Wants, and Remedies for a supply of Ministers among us in Wales.
I Confess after our late purgation of the Temple (I may say) and ejection of
Ministers; Churches have had lately a sad face among us: and I hear still to
this instant, that many principal Towns of Wales want Ministers, or any use of
the administrations publickely among them; Llanbadarn. vaur in Cardigan shire.
and what I cannot but upon my own sad experience mention; the parish whereof I
am being one of the goodliest Parishes of Wales containing in common compute
above 2000 Communicants, and diverse persons of special quality, has not, above
this twelve month had any settled Minister; the greatness of the impropriation,
being at least 1000 l. per annum, with the appurtenant profits, and the
smallness of the stipend being but 20 l. per annum being the cause of our
unhappiness: I could heartily beg a Minister suitable to the gravitie and
consider ableness of such a place; and I doubt not the piety of his Highness
and those in authority under him, Tyth.
will find a competency out of such a revenue, to furnish such places with a
due encouragement for an able Minister.

But all this as a Digression, now for our number and tolerable ejected
Ministers upon their reformation and submitting to the present Government may
be of use to the Ministry.

I doubt not, and know there are many of our Countrymen England, or in the
Universities, that would gladly offer their being and Talents among us; if they
see encouragements answerable to their minds; but are kept back because of
their incapacity with the judgment and forms of others, under whose checks
their disposition can hardly stoop, and pity it is to hear how many ingenuous
and hopeful persons droop and hang down the head, especially in the
Universities, resolving any other course of life and profession, rather than
the Ministry: and diverse upon such discouragements betaking themselves unto
Popish Seminaries beyond Sea; which, I pray God, may be timely considered, and
remedied among us; which being redressed may afford us a good supply in due
time.

The supply that many designs from the congregational English or Welsh books,
and that but of one strain and opinion, which, no doubt may enable, to become
good meaning Christians; but short (I conceive) of the dignity and title of
knowing and orthodox Divines, and Ministers, which doubtless in this
intelligent age, must have something of excellency more than ordinary, to keep
up the Honor and Reverence of the Calling and Religion; for as sometimes many
may be accounted good Preachers, and yet be none of the best Christians, so
many a good Christian may be none of the best Preachers, as to the gifts
mentioned, and the public Ministry.

Lamps of the Land, the Universities; indeed a favor from them (under his
Highness, whose goodness we lay claim to) as to have a dispensation for a
College or two among us in Wales, Such as Eaton and Winchest.
would, doubtless, highly advance us for a supply of able Ministers; but this
wish, without the least intrenchment unto our two Mother great Universities;
but as wholly derivative and subordinate to them, An honest way for a College
Revenue.
both for Professors and Degrees, or thence confirmed, but all will say, the
difficulty is the Matter of Revenue, and Maintenance; but where his Highness
the Protector has his smile toward, the Word difficulty signifies nothing;
and doubtless he that has hitherto given us such a plentiful taste of his
goodness, will not in such a matter of honor to himself and our Nation, be
wanting to us; and as for Revenues, I verily think those of the late
sequestrations of Churches well managed would afford much help; and if they be
short, let us consider the Revenues of our 4 Bishoprics, which are slipped
into several private hands, upon easy Bargains: And some are opinioned there
might an easy discovery out of such profits that might without offense to any,
be found for the advance of so pious a design.
And I could Christianly entreat them, and all others that have advanced their
store and fortunes by the late times, out of their abundance, to part with some
Mites toward so pious and honorable a work; indeed such Actions as these, and
to cloth the naked, and feed the Hungry; become the Servants and Champions of
Christ: Let us but consider, if former Ages had been so cold in their Charities
of this kind; We should not have beheld the goodly and venerable structures, as
the Churches and Colleges of this land; But some will say, all this was done
in times of blindness and Popery, to merit Heaven; and be that granted, yet in
this time of greater light, it will be our dishonor to do nothing but heap up
riches, etc. and though not to merit Heaven, yet to merit Honor to our name
from posterity, let us not stick to lay forth our selves in such Deeds: and I
doubt not but it would be much acceptable to God, and all Men of virtue.

The last Thing I shall propound in order to supply, is, Samuels) unto God and
his Ministry. This does much slead the Romish Dame in her heights of Glory and
Pride, by engaging the best Ranks and Nobility in their Ecclesiastic Orders.
And though I aim not at such a grandeur, and splendour as they; yet to choose
them out of the better sort for the Ministry (I humbly conceive) being thereto
qualified, would be an honest and Christian polity to maintain the reputation
of the calling; and I could wish all or there is to be observant of the Genius and
disposition of their Children, and they of the sweetest nature to assign over
to the service of God, and a supply of his Ministry. I confess formerly
hitherto we ordained them to the more advantageous professions, as the Law,
etc. But I doubt not but God in his good time, through his Highness wisdom,
will yet find a way of fair encouragement for his worship and service.

Having thus briefly showed our helps and Remedies, as to the Ministry, I
conceive also our Reconciliation about some trivial differences concerning the
Sacraments, and the other administrations; would avail our design, which I
shall humbly offer.

The Authors Modest judgment about Baptism, and reconciling the Differences.
MUch is the noise and difference concerning the use of this holy Institution
or Sacrament; Graves excitarunt in Ecclesia iurbas, nec tumultuari desinunt,
Instit. lib. 4. cap. 16.
a misery it seems, as I may say, fatal unto these last times, the Church never
troubling it self formerly in the kind as we do about it, which Mr. Calvin in
a more than ordinary strain of a pious passion, does bewail, Phrenetici
spiritus hoc saeculo, etc. Truly I look upon it as a judgment, for the great
abuse of it; for Baptism was by most made only a kind of Formality; little or
no care taken either by the Undertakers, or the Parents for the minding or
instructing of the Children in the holy Things and Promises of it: and this is
the cause why so many Christians are in name and title only, and so few indeed,
and really so. And hence every one thinking himself as good a Christian as
another; because (they say) Christened: The bad, or rather no Christian,
reproaches and persecutes the good, and woeful mischiefs and uncharitableness
grows betwixt all sorts; And though this be sad, yet wholly to deprive Infants
of the Benefit of Baptism, is, I humbly conceive, of worse consequence;
especially there being a golden Mean and Remedy that might be found against
the former evils: Doubtless Circumcision was a lively Type and Similitude of
Baptism, as Mr. Calvin (me thinks unanswerably) makes good; and though in some
Externals, and inconsiderable points, it holds not; yet in the substance, as
serving to the same use and ends, as Mortification, Remission of sins, and
Promises of Grace, Circumcision, and Baptism, does so clearly face and answer
each other, as I see no color for any to stand out, but such that love
Contention, more than Charity; The Objections are so well known, that I need
not (were I able) to resolve them, the Main indeed is, we find not in the New
Testament any Commission or example for it; yet finding that Families and whole
households were baptized, Acts 10.
it is as likely as not, that Infants might be amongst them, as there, where
the Keeper of the Prison is said to be baptized, and all his straightway: most
probably his Children and Infants were in the number. We find not in the New
Testament any precept, or instance to give the Sacrament to Women: or indeed,
any express positive command to keep and change the Sabbath: yet to follow the
stream and universal practice of the Church herein being best, and why may we
not for baptising Infants do the same. Let us but look up to the Primitive
Church, Fact tatum fuit in v^ter^ri Ecclesia, ut ex ((...) and Aug. constat.
Instit. cap. 16. lib. 4. sect. 30.
and we shall find that they did not only baptize Infants, but gave them the
Lords Supper, as Mr. Calvin confesses, and is used in some parts of the
Eastern Church still. And what say we to that dark place of the Apostle (which
he makes the great Argument of the Resurrection) the Baptising for the Dead;
whence is evinced, That if Baptism was thought to be availeable for the Dead,
then much more must it be for the Living. And if the Primitive Church thought
the Lords Supper necessary to be given unto Infants, 1 Cor. cap. 15. v. 29.
much more then may we think Baptism, etc. Mr. Calvin conceives that Infants
dying, and baptized, though wanting faith, Quos pleno lucis suae fulgore
illusttraturus est dominis, cur non iis -- si ita libuerit, exigua scintilla
irradiaret, and Sect. 19. ut supr^.
and those requisites believers in years have, that God may have some more
secret mercies, and irradiations of his countenance upon them, suitable to
their condition, We find our Savior a great friend of little ones, taking them
into his arms, and blessing them, and reproving his Disciples for hindering
them, saying, Of such were the Kingdom of God, were it but to imitate him, let
us descend into all the tenderness and compassion as may be of them, having the
whole Church of God (until a few of these last worst days) to lead us in the
use and practice of Baptising them.

But some of the more learned may say, Object.
that among the Ancients we find many were not baptized, until they came to
good years, as St. Augustine, and diverse others, etc. This makes nothing, that
though some particular men, for some reasons, were not then baptized until good
years; but that the generality, and those that descended from Christian
Parents, were baptized Infants. Some, as Austine and the like, were to grapple
with the objections of humane reason against the mysteries and simplicity of
Christianity, and until they had got the conquest, and be thoroughly resolved
and settled, did deferr Baptism; and the like might be allowed still, upon the
same score: Though it is more proper for Heathens, Jews, and Mahometans, than
those that descend from Christian linnage: It seems, as by what he says of his
friend Alipeus, ad ipsam Christianam fidem pigrius movebatur; that he and other
great wits made pauses, and came by degree to highest Christianity; partly I
say, as to be thoroughly satisfied, and happily to let the heat and temptations of
youth pass over: But this was, I say, but as to some particular men, whose
condition and conversion was notas usual: But generally the Children of
Christians is conceived to have been all baptized. And as for St. Et ^ignabor
signo Crucis ^^us, and jam i^de ab utero Matris mea Conf. 167, cap. 11 Flag^
tavi Christi mei baptismum -- and dilata est itaque innundatio mea: ibid.
Augustine the does darkly hint, that from his Mothers Womb he had some Earnest
or symbol of Baptism, or ^t; and yet there confesses a further desire of
Baptism, which upon his recovery he again delayed: which places, me thinks,
(with all humble submission) might discover unto us some kind of expedient to
remedy our differences about Baptism; and therefore I beseech let none
startle and be displeased at me for this expression of my very conscience;
that, me thinks, the piety and wisdom of worthy religions Divines and Ministers
amongst us, might easily bring about some such expedient, by considering the
right use of that ancient Rite in the Christian Church, called Imposition or
laying on of hands, (other names it has had) which, no doubt among other
sacred uses from the primitive Church has been ever used in favor of infant
Baptism, and the Lord has been pleased often to consign it with special
effects of his grace and blessing to that end: And I do not find any of the
judicious Protestant Divines or confessions against the right use of it, he
among them that I find less favorable to it, is Mr. Calvin; but he mainly is
against it as a Sacrament, and the abuse and corruption of it, as restraining
only to the hands of Bishops, and a seeming valuing it above Baptism, etc. and
where he seems a little against it; because those miraclous effects, are not
now seen to accompany it, Ubi gratia illa conferri defi^a quor^um pertinet manu
impopositio, I^sl. lib. 4. cap. 19.
as in the Apostles and primitive times (with reverence to his name) I humbly
conceive the same may as well be objected against praying, preaching, and the
other Ordinances as well, there appearing not now the same effects with them,
as in those first Times; but in the main, and what I drive at, viz. That
Children first baptized, and coming to the use of reason, should come to give
an account of their faith, and promises, Talem ergo manuum impositionem laudo
and restitutum in purum usum velim. Sect. 4. ibid.
and be instructed in the principal Mysteries of Christianity, with the
solemnity of Laying on of hands, and Benediction, Mr. Calvin is so far from
being against it, that he highly commends and approves of it, and wishes it
were again restored to its right use: And in the last Section concludes with an
Utinam morem retineremus quem apud veteres fuisse admoni, and even for those
very reasons which we are aggrieved, the extremes whereof, and inconveniences
on all hands, would be remedied (says he) as the care and negligence of
Parents would be stirred and awakened. Hac disciplina parentum ignavia
accuerur, major in populo Christiano fidei consensus. Nec temere novis and
peregrinis dogmatibus abriperentur, etc. ibid.
More Unity, Consent, and accord among Christians, and less aptness to slip
into variety of odd opinions in Religion, there being a constant Systeme and
Model of Doctrine among them. Further to demonstrate the want of such a means
amongst us, is needless. To baptize Infants, and only that as a Ceremony, as
by former experience, so as not one of a hundred baptized, I dare say,
generally came ever to understand their Conditions, and the weight of their
profession made, etc. and I confess a very great inconvenience this has along
with it, but on the other side, to deny Baptism to Infants, we know not the
danger of our uncharitableness to them. We are Antipodes, and cross to the
practice of the Church in all Ages, and foment endless Matter of Contention
amongst our selves. And to salve these foul extremes, surely there can be no
better Expedient and Mean, than some such Thing that is formerly mentioned.

The differences about the Lords Supper reconciled.
FIrst, some are not satisfied with the usual names, as Sacrament, Communion,
Eucharist, or the Lords Supper, and Breaking of Bread must carry it from them
all, I confess a very proper and ancient fit name; so it should not clash and
justle out the other forementioned reverent names, out of Humor and
affectation; and some conceive it favors more popishly than the other; because
of its allusion to the Communion in one kind among them; but were there no
strife but for the name, all would be well; for the persons receiving, there is
no small variance; indeed to make no difference, and to entertain all loose,
scandalous persons, has been a foul fault; but again to stand over-precisely,
and to admit none but such as can give clear evidences of grace, by
definitions, etc, may be somewhat an extreme. In the Primitive times, we find,
that all baptized, and did believe the Articles of Christian faith, and had no
notorious crimes, were accounted capable of the Sacrament. I wish all could
express and define spiritual things; but that is many times upon a persons
audacity and natural faculties, and one may define faith and want it, and
another not be so well able to define, and yet have it: As for the differences
concerning the gesture; some conceive it best to stand strict to the conformity
of the first institution; but that sounds not safe, but inferrs other harsh
circumstances; as it must then be in an upper Chamber, and in the night time,
after Supper, and a few Disciples, and they only Men, and not Women, and their
manner of sitting, not as ours; but as my poor Judgment, I could think
kneeling, the most beleeming gesture, because the only gesture of adoration,
and most reverence, and used generally in all ages; and to be against it,
because the Papists kneel at the Sacrament, were as well not to kneel at
prayer, because they so do. But as I said, the gesture in any kind should not
cause variance, it being not of the essence and substance of the thing, which
alone is of the heart and faith of the receiver; and to conform to the custom
of the Church and Congregation where one is, is Christian discretion, and safe.
Much it is to be wished, that the use of this Sacrament were more frequent
among us. The Sabbath, or Lords day, we find anciently styled Dies panis, or
day of breaking bread, etc. and which I will close with a worthy observation.
Possibly, we have reason to say, Dr. Tailor in the great exemplar, etc. Part.
3. 122.
that the wars of King domes, the animosities of Families, the infinite
multitude of Lawsuits, the personal hatreds, and the universal want of Charity,
which has made the world miserable and wretched, may in a degree be attributed
to the neglect of this great symbol, and Instrument of Charity; this blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

The other less principal administrations usual (until of late among us in
Wales) I mean Marriages and Burials, etc. Marriages, and Burials.
because of disagreement about them, I would be loath but mention them; the
late Act has stated the first, to whom I and all should submit; yet with
humble crave of pardon to give my poor judgment; I doubt not the wise makers
of the Act intended no otherwise, but God should be invoked upon solemnly in an
Act of so great moment, they were to deal with the civil and prudential part of
Marriages, and have therein well provided, and questionlesly implicitly
conceived the Religion and Duty to God in the Act; as where it is not
expressed, howlong Husband and Wife is to continue faithful; and loving, etc.
(at which there are vulgar Cavills) yet during life is employed; and it were to
be wished (in due time) there were some additionall Explanations of the Act in
that behalf in as for Marriages and Burials, and some Sacred Rites accompanying
them, I find through all Religions and Nations, that ever have been, which I
account from the Laws of Nature. Our Savior gracing Marriage with his
presence and first Miracle, and in which great Act, it is said, That whom God
has put together, let no man put assunder. And therefore doubtless his Name,
and some Solemnities answerable, were to go along, were it but to stamp an awe
and Reverence upon so weighty an affair to our life.

2. And for Burials the like is to be said, it being agreeable to the use of
all Nations (as an influx of Nature) and certainly the late omissions of our
Ministers has begot hard thoughts among the common people, they commonly
saying, That without that is, some presence of the Minister.
Burials they are left like Dogs, etc. Sure I am, the Directory, and the manner
and use I hear and see at London and England, is to perform something, as to
mind us of the immortality and resurrection, (the sense whereof is much feared
will be lost among us in Wales, without some better course be taken) what some
of our Preachers allege to the people, that there is no mention in Scripture,
but only we read our Savior and others were only buried, etc. I shall desire
humbly and friendly to acquaint them, that where only Burying and Burials are
only named; yet by implication, they must understand such Burials were
according to the Customs and Rites of such Nations, and what they had among all
Nations, and especially the Jews, I refer you to the learned to be informed.
See Godw. Antiq. 285.
They had their Cups of Blessing and Consolations, their conjugal
Sanctifications, and sacred Poems; And if the Pagan and Blinder Nations wanted
not some means to mind them of another future being; See Rab: Modena: trans.
1654.
how much more should Christians have some solemnities, (at least) to affect
the common people with the sense of the immortality and Resurrection.

A pathetick Conclusion to all that bear the name of Christians, unto Love,
Peace, and Unity.
BY this time we have perceived what so much hinders our happiness, and the
Prosperity of Religion among us. That it would please God all set their
Thoughts and Endeavors, to avoid all means that tends to Strife and
Dissentions, and every one to pray, and strive to have a part of that healing
Spir^t, his Highness in his pious Considerations commended to us; alas! that
we could but consider how Love and Unity concerns the interest of Christianity
in the World. The Humiliation, 24 of March 1654. Motive 1.
There are those that simply imagine (like the Donatists of old) that think
none belong to God, and are to be saved, but such of their own Judgment and
Opinion, and those confined to this narrow part of the world; doubtless, his
Church and People holds some proportion to his greatness and immensitie. We
read, That in every Nation he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted of him; and the Angels ar to gather the Elect from the four Corners of
the Earth, and before the Throne were of all Kinreds, and Tongues and Nations.
They that make the favorablest computation for the extent of Christianity, and
dividing the World into 30 parts, the Christians part is as 5. the Mahometans,
6. and Idolaters, 19. And Europe alone, the least of the other four Parts can
most entirely challenges it, and of it the Turk has his share, and consider
what a share and portion the Pope holds, the Remainder being but share and
portion of the Reformed Churches; in comparison of which, be it considered, how
little a share and piece our Land and Nation is, and consider amongst our
selves, how few we do account to be true Christians, and the Godly; and I
suppose, upon so rigid an Account the totum will hardly amount to make it our
Saviors Little Flock; for the Word Flock does import a number, which upon so
severe a reckoning among our selves as Christians, will in comparison of so
vast a body, and mass of men, hardly come up to Unites or Ones: so as to make
up this flock, we must have that Charity to look about into other Quarters and
Regions of the World. And doubtless, did we thus consider the fewness of
Christians, even in outward profession, it should move us to more charity one
toward the other, how different someve^ in some Matters of Judgment and forms.

2 It would be a great Motive to Love and Unity, to consider that the greatest
scandal and Reproach the Enemies to Christian Religion has, is to twitt us
with our Differences and Dissentions: and were it but to stopp their mouths,
and to keep off the disparagement and dishonor from our Religion, we should
incline all to Love and Charity among our selves.

3. It is the only probable means to set up the Kingdom of Christ in the
World, how to advance it in the World, and by what Means, I leave others to
their guess. But methinks (with all humble reverence to the Secrets of God)
the Lord in his good time will banish the Evil Spirit of Error, and Dissension,
that has so long annoyed his Church and People, and breath such a Spirit (as
that betwixt Joseph and his brethren) into them. For I conceive it somewhat
rational, that some such thing may be, for let us look up into the former state
of the Church, and we shall find nothing has been more banefull and
destructive unto it, than Dissentions and Errors, and therefore Peace, Unity,
and Charity must necessarily be thought most advantageous for its recovery and
advancement, and this happiness is most feared should betyde it, by its
greatest enemies, as our ingenious Countryman Mr. Howel observes, that the
Turks in their Letanie, pray, In Dedon. 1. p.
that the Discords and Dissentions of Christendom may continue, and when ever
it falls out otherwise, there are among them very fatal prophesies, as in the
Turkish History you may see.

There are those that hold it necessary there should be Heresies and Divisions
among us, from that Text, Opportet esse Hereses, etc. These words were but
occasionally to the Corinths, upon the disorder at that time among them
concerning the Lords Supper; 1 Cor. 11. v. 19.
and without doubt, not meant by the Apostle as to the tolleration of Errors or
Divisions. Let us do what we can, Nolens Volens, such infelicities we cannot
prevent or hinder. As we commonly say, there must be Sins, Sickness, and
Evils in the world, not that we should give way to them, but rather because
they will needs come upon us, we should use the more Care, Endeavor, and
Diligence, to avoid and prevent them. And that above cited place, There must be
Heresies, sounds alike with that place. Matt. 18. v. 7. It must needs be that
offenses come, but woe to that Man by whom the offense comes.

By the title you see here, we may discern how it concerns all who bear the
name of Christians, to be in the terms of Charity, Peace and Unity with each
other some excelent men I find that has laid this very much to heart, as Sir
Ed. Sandies, who (as the Epistolar says) gave such a blow to Popery, In his
Speculum Europae, or vie of Religion in the Western part of the world.
that such another would make his Tower fall about his ears, writing at least
50 past; besides those many passages of state, it contains many observable
things, as to our times; and all upon the deep sense of the miseries of
Christendom, and its distraction; and what rare passages he propounds for the
remedy upon those 5 sorts of Unities to be considered. 1. The Unity of verity.
2. The Unity of Persuasion. 3. The Unity of Charity. 4. The Unity of Authority.
5. The Unity of Necessity, p. 139. p. 201.
I leave to the judicious and charitable, and refer the knowing Reader, and all
in authority, to ponder, I cannot but mention that he there charges all that
are in extremes and those in all parties that stand in the terms of
scrupulosity, stiffnesse, and opinionativenesse, to be the Authors of the
Church its misery, and ruin of the glory and grace of Christendom; a List of
such Worthies we also find (and that most Protestants) In Annot. in Cass.
in the learned and charitable Grotius; and it would please God to incline the
worthy Ministers and Pastors of the Nations unto the study of Charity (at least
among other, though less) And certainly no other greater means to advance the
Kingdom of Christ. Dr. Hall Sermon.
unto their other Nations; and doubtless they would find from the Lord a more
plentiful blessing upon them and their labors, which I will close with a
sweet wish of an excellent man; Oh that our Tongues and Pens were hapily met
against the Common Enemy of Christendom, long ago had the Mahometane Moon
wained to nothing, and given way to the glorious Sun of the Gospel.

By this we may discern how much it concerns all that bear the name of
Christians to be at peace and unity then how much more us among our selves in
this Nation. Oh that we would duly consider, that God is the God of Peace; our
Savior the Prince of Peace; his Gospel the Gospel of Peace, and leaving the
world, his greatest Legacy he could bequeath was Peace; and that we would
consider that Divine comparison of the Apostle, Though we are many Members, yet
but one body, and make it our great work and business to have Charity with
each other; It is the very mark and badge our Savior has left, to distinguish
us from others. By this they shall know you are mine, if you love one another:
And the Apostle, as not valuing any thing with it, Pet. 4. 8.
bids us above all things to have servent Charity among our selves; And the
writings of the Apostle, though sparing in matters of other great moment; yet
Charity, as being that gift of greatest consequence to Gods Church and people
(and in the want thereof it has most, and still will suffer) does most
frequently inculcate it, and the mention of it runs like a golden vein through
all their Writings, as intimating how much we should value and practice it
above all Notions and Duties whatsoever. That we all having one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, May all with one heart, and one mouth, glorify God, the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Deo Gloria, minimis maximo.
Written by the same Author formerly, The Parliament explained to Wales, 1646.

Written by the same Author (but not yet published) Vox Sanguinis, or the want
of justice against Blood and Murder in Wales, with the corruptions of Iuries,
etc.

FINIS.

