LETTERS FROM THE LORD GENERAL HIS QVARTERS, AND THE particulars thereof.

ALSO, A great Victory at Malpesse, against 1000. of the Westmerland Forces,
of the Duke of Yorks Regiment, and others; where were taken prisoners: The
Major of the Duke of Yorks Regimen: of Horse. 2 Sergeant Majors more. 2
Captains, and other Officers. 3 Colonels slain upon the place. 2 Sergeant
Majors, and 40 Gentlemen, and other Officers slain. 200 Arms taken, and all
the pillage of the Field. And all the rest Routed, and fled.


AS ALSO, A Parley about the surrendering of Leverpoole, and the particulars
thereof. And 2 Ships of Irish Rebels expected there: with other matters of
great concernment.

The particulars being examined, and printed according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by Jane Coe. 1644.

A GREAT VICTORY obtained by Sir William Bruertons Forces, against the
Westmerland Forces, at Malpesse in Cheshire, August 26. 1644.
SIR,
IT has pleased God to give us a further victory against the Enemy, by a
small handful of Sir William Bruertons Forces; On Saturday last, being the 24.
of August, 1644. there came a Trumpeter from the Enemy hither to Nantwich, Sir
William Bruerton being then here in the Town: which Trumpeter coming to our
Court of guard, and there it being demanded of him whither he went, and from
whence he came: told the Officer that he came from Prince Ruperts Forces, and
had been Trumpeter to him, and was come to submit to the Parliament; and had a
business of consequence to declare to the Governor; and accordingly he was
brought to Sir William Bruerton.

And he declared unto Sir William Bruerton, that a party of the Westmerland
forces were marched with Colonel Baynes, Colonel Conniers, Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, the Princes Troop, and others, toward Chester by Malpesse, about
1000 men in all, to join with Prince Puperts forces there; whereupon Sir
William Bruerton sent out Scouts, and entertained this Trumpeter, and as you
shall understond found this Relation true.

So Sir William Brue^ron called a Council of War to consider upon this
business, and it was agreed, that what horse and foot could be drawn forth,
should presently be sent toward the Enemy; for the most of the horse were at
that present out upon another design: and accordingly 8 Troops of Horse, and 7
Colors of Foot Companies were drawn out on Sunday the 25 of Aug. at night, and
the Horse carried each of them a Musketeir behind them, and marched toward
Malpesse: and on Monday morning at break of day, when they came with in 2.
miles of Malpesse or thereabout, our foot alighted, and our Horse drew
themselves into a body, and marched in batalia before the Foot.

In the mean time the Enemy having intelligence hereof, sent out a
forlorn-hope: but our Horse wheeling about, appeared not on that side of the
Town which they expected; who discovering them, endeavored to get between the
town and them, which they did: and falling upon them, killed, and took them
all, and had their arms and pillage.

Then our horse gave them an Alarm in the Town: whereupon the Enemy issued
out, and marched against ours. Then Lieutenant Colonel Jones, and Captain
Zanchy led on Sir William Bruertons own Troops upon the forlorn hope, who
charged the Enemy gallantly, and with great courage drew on the rest. The
Enemy came upon them first with 2. or 3. Charges, and indeed fought furiously;
and Sir Williams horse made good their ground in despite of the Enemy. In
which Colonel Jones was so valiant, that he was shot in the thigh, and his
horse shot under him, and had like to have been taken, but that George Parker,
servant to Sir William Bruerton did valiantly fetch him off; and Captain Zanchy
had his horse shot under him: the Enemies loss we believe was great.

Then the Enemy sent out a party to ambuskado the hedges, on both sides the
forlorn hope: which being discovered, Captain Zanchy all this while making
good a Lane, which he held very advantageous, did hereupon leave the lane and
made way for the rest of our Forces to march up in a full body*

Then the Enemy appeared in 5 several Brigads, who being extremely vexed that
they had bin so baffled with such a small party, their Command marched up
against us with a great deal of fierceness, but few of them returned back
again; for we killed, took, and totally routed them, as you may see by this
enclosed list which I hrve sent you of the particulars thereof, we have taken
Prisoners Sergeant Major Cromwell, who Commanded as Mayor the Duke of Yorkes
Regiment of Horse, and also Serieant Mayor Maxie of Sir Charles Lucas his
Regiment, we have also taken Serieant Mayor Crathorne of Colonel Ferhars
Regiment, and Captain Thomas Clavering brother to Coll: Clavering of the North,
who is dead at Kendall, Captain Barker, Lieutenant Mountain, and other Officers
besides about 20 other Prisoners, and two of the Majors, and Lieutenant
Mountain, are wounded, Colonel Baines and Coll: Conyers are both slain, and
also Sergeant Mayor Heskey, and one of their Lieutenant Colonels, and some 40
Gentlemen and other under Officers, and between 30 or 40 common Soldiers; and
we hear by one that is come from Chester, that one Serieant Mayor that was
slain is brought to Chester to be buried, and that Sir Marmaduke Langdale is
there wounded with a shot in the back very dangerously, and also that Captain
Harris is brought thither wounded, and diverse others; and we hear that there
are two other Serjant Majors of theirs flame, but that I cannot affirm, we
have taken many Arms that were scattered up and down by the Enemy, and gained
all the pillage in the field, to God be the praise.

Sir William Brereton had provided us more horse if we had had need which came
up that very night, but God be thanked we had no need of them, for God was
pleased to give us this happy Victory before they came up to us.

Prince Rupert we hear is gone over the Forest of Deane, and so to Bristoll,
where no doubt Sir John Winter will do him the best assistance he can, and we
hear that 2000 Welsh are following of Prince Rupert, but of these these things
we shall hear more hereafter. In the mean time I cannot omit to declare the
valor not only of Lieutenant Colonel Jones and Captain Zanchy as before,
but also how Captain Church, and Captain Finch, behaved themselves very
gallantly in this Fight, and indeed generally all our Forces to God be the
praise who so blessed them, that with the said 8. Troops of Horse, and 7
Companies of Foot, did kill, take, and rout 1000 of the Enemies, and they had a
good mind to have followed them, but that it was too dangerous an attempt with
so few Horse to straggle from our Foot, who in this business did very good
service, in all this we had but one slain, and the Enemy took not one Prsoner
of our men.

We hear that Sir John Meldrum still proves Victorious in Lancashire, and has
again taken 140 horse and their riders; and that Liver-poole is now closely
beseidged, and the Town being summoned, the Lancoshire forces before it had a
very great expectation that it would be presently surrendered, but it fell out
otherwise, for the Malignants of the Town, with the Governor and Officers
persuaded the people to believe that there were 2. Ships with soldiers from
Ireland coming thither, who would certainly be there in few days to strengthen
the Town, and so for present they stand out, but are closely beseiged; and it
is hoped will be forced in short time to yield. Sir William Brereton, our
General his care in this and all other business is exceedingg great, and with
good discretion and judgment. He is to to call a Council of War, and you
will shortly hear further, if god be pleased to bless us, as he has done
wonderfully already, even above our expectation, to him be the praise.

Dated at Nantwich the 29 of August 1644.
A List of the particulars of that great Victory obtained against the
Westmorland Forces at Malpasse on Monday the 26 of August, 1644.
Taken Prisoners in this Fight.
MAjor Cromwell. Major Maxie. Major Crathorne. Captain Thomas Clavering.
Captain Barker. Lieutenant Mountain. Some other inferior Officers, Twenty
common Soldiers.
Wounded in this Fight.
Sir Marmaduke Langdale. Two Sergeant Majors. Captain Harris. One Lieutenant,
and other Commanders.
Slain of the Enemies party.
Colonel Baines. Colonel Conyers. One Lieutenant Colonel. Sergeant Major
Heskit. One Sergeant Major besides. Forty Gentlemen, and other Officers.
Besides diverse common Soldiers. Taken also about 200 Arms, and all the
Pillage of the Field.
Yesterday there came letters from my Lord Generals quarters, which certfie
that his Excellency does still make good his ground, and is in a very good
condition, and expects Sir William Waller to fall in the rear of the Kings
Army; as also that the Kings forces are very many, and the Gountry very base to
my Lord General, yet notwithstanding my Lord is very courageous, and his
forces cheerful, and make good the advantages still which they had gained of
the Enemy, and that they have many continued skirmishes, and for a battle, God
of his infinite goodness protect them.

FINIS.

