Mathematical RECREATIONS. OR, A Collection of many Problemes, extracted out
of the Ancient and Modern Philosophers, as Secrets and Experiments in
Arithmetic, Geometry, Cosmographie, Horologiographie, Astronomy, Navigation,
Music, Optics, Architecture, Stati^k, Mechanics, Chemistry, Waterworks,
Fireworks, etc. Not vulgarly manifest till now.

Written first in Greek and Latin, lately compi'ld in French, by Henry Van
Etten, and now in English, with the Examinations and Augmentations of diverse
Modern Mathematicians

Whereunto is added the Description and Use of the General Horologicall Ring:
And The Double Horizontall Dial. Invented and written by WILLIAM OUGHTRED.

LONDON: Printed for William Leake, at the Sign of the Crown in Fleetstreet,
between the two Temple Gates, MDCLIII.

On the Frontispice and Book.
ALL Recreations do delight the mind,
But these are best being of a learned kind:
Here Art and Nature strive to give content,
In showing many a rare experiment,
Which you may read, and on their Schemes here look
Both in the Frontispice, and in the Book.
Upon whose table new conceits are set,
Like dainty dishes, thereby for to whet
And win your judgment, with your appetite
To taste them, and therein to taka delight.
The Senses objects are but dull at best,
But Art does give the Intellect a feast.
Come hither then, and here I will describe,
What this same Table does for you provide.
Here Questions of Arithmetic are wrought,
And hidden secrets unto light are brought,
The like it in Geometry does unfold,
And some too in Cosmographie are told:
It diverse pretty Dyals does descrie,
With strange experiments in Astronomy,
And Navigation, with each several Picture,
In Music, Optics, and in Architecture:
In Statick, Machanicks, and Chymistrie,
In Waterworks, and to ascend more hie,
In Fireworks, like to Joves Artillery.
All this I know thou in this Book shall find,
And here is enough for to content thy mind.
For from good Authors, this our Author drew
These Recreations, which are strange, and true
So that this Book's a Center, and it is fit,
That in this Center; lines of praise should meet
W.

MATHEMATICAL Recreations Or a Collection of sundry excellent Problemes out
of ancient and modern Philosophers Both useful and Recreatiue Printed for
William Leake and are to be sold at the Crown in fleet street between the
two Temple gates.


TO The thrice Noble and most generous Lo. the Lo. Lambert Verreyken, Lo. of
Hinden, Wolverthem, etc.
My honorable Lo.
AMongst the rare and curious Propositions which I have learned out of the
studies of the Mathematics in the famous University of Pont a Mousson, I have
taken singular pleasure in certain Problemes no less ingenious than
recreative, which drew me unto the search of demonstrations more difficult and
serious; some of which I have amassed and caused to pass the Press, and here
dedicate them now unto your Honor; not that I account them worthy of your
view, but in part to testify my affectionate desires to serve you, and to
satisfy the curious, who delight themselves in these pleasant studies, knowing
well that the Nobility, and Gentry rather study the Mathematical Arts, to
content and satisfy their affections, in the speculation of such admirable
experiments as are extracted from them, than in hope of gain to fill their
Purses. All which studies, and others, with my whole indevours, I shall always
dedicate unto your Honor, with an ardent desire to be accounted ever,

Your most humble and obedient Nephew and Servant, H. VAN ETTEN.

By way of advertisement. Five or six things I have thought worthy to declare
before I pass further.
FIrst, that I place not the speculative demonstrations with all these
Problems, but content my self to show them as at the fingers end: which was my
plot and intention, because those which understand the Mathematics can
conceive them easily; others for the most part will content themselves only
with the knowledge of them, without seeking the reason.

Secondly, to give a greater grace to the practice of these things, they ought
to be concealed as much as they may, in the subtlety of the way; for that
which does ravish the spirits is, an admirable effect, whose cause is unknown:
which if it were discovered, half the pleasure is l^st; therefore all the
finenesse consists in the dexterity of the Act, concealing the means, and
changing often the stream.

Thirdly, great care ought to be had that one deceive not himself, that would
declare by way of Art to deceive another: this will make the matter
contemptible to ignorant Persons, which will rather cast the fault upon the
Science, than upon him that shows it: when the cause is not in the
Mathematical principles, but in him that fails in the acting of it.

Fourthly, in certain Arithmeticall propositions they have only their answers
as I found them in sundry Authors, which any one being studious of
Mathematical learning, may find their original, and also the way of their
operation.

Fifthly, because the number of these Problemes, and their dependances are
many, and intermixed, I thought it convenient to gather them into a Table: that
so each one according to his fancy, might make best choice of that which might
best please his palate, the matter being not of one nature, nor of like
subtlety: But whosoever will have patience to read on, shall find the end
better than the beginning.

To the Reader.
IT has been observed by many, that sundry fine wits as well amongst the
Ancient as Modern, have sported and delighted themselves upon several things
of small consequence, as upon the foot of a fly, upon a straw, upon a point,
nay upon nothing; striving as it were to show the greatness of their glory in
the smalnesse of the subject: And have amongst most solid and artificial
conclusions, composed and produced sundry Inventions both Philosophical and
Mathematical, to solace the mind, and recreate the spirits, which the
succeeding ages have embraced, and from them gleaned and extracted many
admirable, and rare conclusions; judging that borrowed matter oftentimes
yields praise to the industry of its author. Hence for thy use (Courteous
Reader) I have with great search and labor collected also, and heaped up
together in a body of these pleasant and fine experiments to stir up and
delight the affectionate, (out of the writings of Socrates, Plato, Aristotle,
Demosthenes, Pythagoras, Democrates, Pliny, Hyparchus, Euclides, Vitruvius,
Diaphantus, Pergaeus, Archimedes, Papus Alexandrinus, Vitellius, Ptolomaeus,
Copernicus, Proclus, Mauralicus, Cardanus, Valalpandus, Kepleirus, Gilbertus,
Tychonius, Dureirus, Josephus, Clavius, Gallileus Maginus, Euphanus Tyberill,
and others) knowing Art imitating Nature that glories always in the variety of
things, which she produces to satisfy the mind of curious inquisitors. And
though perhaps these labors to some humourous persons may seem vain, and
ridiculous, for such it was not undertaken: But for those which intentively
have desired and ^ought after the knowledge of those things, it being an
invitation and motive to the search of greater matters, and to employ the mind
in useful knowledge, rather than to be busied in vain Pamphlets, Play-books,
fruitless Legends, and prodigious Histories that are invented out of fancy,
which abuse many Noble spirits, dull their wits, and alienate their thoughts
from laudable and honorable Studies. In this Tractate thou may therefore
make choice of such Mathematical Problemes and Conclusions as may delight
thee, which kind of learning does excellently adorn a man; seeing the
usefulness thereof, and the manly accomplishments it does produce, is
profitable and delightful for all sorts of people, who may furnish and adorn
themselves with abundance of matter in that kind, to help them by way of use,
and discourse. And to this we have also added our Pyrotechnie, knowing that
Beasts have for their object only the surface of the earth; but hoping that thy
spirit which follows the motion of fire, will abandon the lower Elements, and
cause thee to lift up thine eyes to soar in an higher Contemplation, having so
glittering a Canopie to behold, and these pleasant and recreative fires
ascending may cause thy affections also to ascend. The Whole whereof we send
forth to thee, that desire the scrutability of things; Nature having
furnished us with matter, thy spirit may easily digest them, and put them
finely in order, though now in disorder.

A Table of the particular heads of this Book, contracted according to the
several Arts specified in the Title Page.
Experiments of Arithmetic. PAge 1, 2, 3, 16, 19, 22, 28, 33, 39, 40, 44, 45,
51, 52, 53, 59, 60, 69, 71, 77, 83, 85, 86, 89, 90, 91, 124, 134, 135, 136*
137, 138, 139, 140, 178 179, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 188, 208, 210, 213.
Experiments ^n Geometry. Page 12, 15, 24, 26, 27, 30, 35, 37, 41, 42, 47, 48,
49, 62, 65, 72, 79, 82, 113, 117, 118, 119, 214, 215, 217, 218, 234, 235, 236,
239, 240. Experiments in Cosmographie. Page 14, 43, 75, 106, 107, 219, 220,
225, 227, 228, 229, 230, 232. Experiments in Horologiographie. Page 137, 166,
167, 168, 169, 171, 234. Experiments in Astronomy. Page 220, 221, 222, 223,
224. Experiments in Navigation. Page 105, 233, 234, 237, 238. Experiments in
Music. Page 78, 87, 126. Experiments in Optics. Page 6, 66, 98, 99, 100, 102,
129, 131, 141, 142, 143, 144, 146, 149, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156, 157, 158, 160,
161, 162, 163, 164, 165. Experiments in Architecture. Page 16, 242, 243.
Experiments in Staticke. Page 27, 30, 32, 71, 199, 200, 201, 283, 204, 205,
207. Experiments in Machanicks. Page 56, 58, 68, 88, 95, 108, 110, 128, 173,
174, 176, 246, 248, 258, 259. Experiments in Chymistrie. Page 198, 255, 256,
257, 260, 262, 263, 264. Experiments in Water-workes. Page 190, 191, 192, 193,
194, 196, 247, 249, 250, 252, 253. Experiments in Fireworkes. From page, 265.
to the end.
FINIS.
A Table of the Contents, and chief points contained in this Book. PROBLEM. II.
HOw visible objects that are without, and things that pass by, are most
lively represented to those that are within. Page 6 Prob. 1 Of finding of
numbers conceived in the mind. 1, 2, 3 Prob. 5 Of a Geographicall Garden-plot
fit for a Prince or some great personage. 14 Prob. 37 Any liquid substance, as
water or wine, placed in a Glass, may be made to boil by the motion of the
finger, and yet not touching it. 54 Prob. 3 How to weigh the blow of ones fist,
of a Mallet, a Hatchet or such like. 9. Prob. 30 Two several numbers being
taken by two sundry persons, how subtly to discover which of those numbers
each of them took. 46 Prob. 4 That a staff may be broken* placed upon two
Glasses, without hurting of the Glasses. 12 Prob. 7 How to dispose Lots that
the 5, 6, 9, etc. of any number of persons may escape. 16 Prob. 13 How the
weight of smoke of a combustible body, which is exhaled, may be weighed. 27
Prob. 12 Of three knives which may be so disposed to hang in the air, and move
upon the Point of a needle. 27 Prob. 17 Of a deceitful bowl, to bowl
withal. 32 Prob. 16 A ponderous or heavy body may be supported in the air
without any one touching it. 30 Prob. 18 How a Pear, or Apple, may be parted
into any parts, without breaking the rind thereof. 33 Prob. 15 Of a fine kind
of door which opens and shuts on both sides. 30 Prob. 9 How the half of a
Vessel which contains 8 measures may be taken, being but only two other
measures, the one being 3, and the other 8 measures. 22 Prob. 8 Three persons
having taken each of them several things, to find which each of them has
taken. 19 Prob. 6 How to dispose three staves which may support each other in
the air. 15 Prob. 14 Many things being disposed Circular (or otherwise) to
find which of them any one thinks upon. 28 Prob. 19 To find a number thought
upon without asking questions. 33 Prob. 11 How a Millstone or other ponderosity
may hang upon the point of a Needle without bowing, or any wise breaking of it.
26 Prob. 20 and 21 How a body that is uniforme and inflexible may pass through
a hole which is round, square and Triangular; or round, square and ovall-wise,
and exactly fill those several holes. 35, 37 Prob. 10 How a stick may stand
upon ones finger, or a Pike in the middle of a Court without falling. 24 Prob.
22 To find a number thought upon after another manner than those which are
formerly delivered. 39 Prob. 23 To find out many numbers that sundry persons
or any one has thought upon. 40 Prob. 24 How is it that a man in one and the
same time may have his head upward, and his feet upward, being in one and the
same place? 4^ Prob. 25 Of a Ladder by which two men ascending at one time, the
more they ascend, the more they shall be asunder, notwith standing the one be as
high as the other. 42 Prob. 26 How is it that a man having but a Rod or Pole of
land, does brag that he may in a right line pass from place to place 3000
miles. 42 Prob. 27 How is it that a man standing upright, and looking which way
he will, he looks true North or South. 43 Prob. 28 To tell any one what
number remains after certain operations being ended, without asking any
question. 44 Prob. 29 Of the play with two several things. 45 Prob. 31 How to
describe a circle that shall touch 3 points placed howsoever upon a plain, if
they be not in a right line. 47 Prob. 32 How to change a circle into a square
form. 48 Prob. 33 With one and the same compasses, and at one and the same
extent or opening, how to describe many circles concentricall, that is, greater
or lesser one than another. 49 Prob. 34 Any number under 10. being thought
upon, to find what numbers they were. 51 Prob, 35 Of the play with the Ring.
52 Prob. 36 The play of 3, 4, or more Dice. 53 Prob. 38 Of a fine Vessel which
holds Wine or Water being cast into it at a certain height, but being filled
higher it will run all out of its own accord. 56 Prob. 39 Of a Glass very
pleasant. 58 Prob. 40. If any one should hold in each hand as many pieces of
money as in the other, how to find how much there is. 59 Prob. 41 Many Dice
being cast, how artificially to discover the number of the points that may
arise. 60 Prob. 42 Two metals as Gold and Silver or of other kind, weighing
alike, being privately placed into two like boxes, to find in which of them
the Gold or Silver is. 62 Prob. 43 Two Globes of diverse metals (as one Gold the
other Copper) yet of equal weight, being put in a Box as B.G. to find in
which end the Gold or Copper is. 65 Prob. 44 How to represent diverse sorts of
Rainbowes here below. 66 Prob. 45 How that if all the powder in the World were
enclosed in a bowl of paper or glass, and being fired on all parts, it could
not break that bowl. 68 Prob. 46 To find a number which being divided by 2.
there will remain 1. being divided by 3. there will remain 1. and so likewise
being divided by 4, 5, or 6. there will still remain one, but being divided by
7 will remain nothing. 69 Prob. 47 One had a certain number of Crowns, and
counting them by 2 and 2, there rested 1. counting them by 3, and 3, there
rested 2. counting them by 4, and 4, there rested 3. counting them by 5, and 5,
there rested 4. counting them by 6, and 6, there rested 5. but counting them by
7 and 7, there rested nothing, how many Crowns might he have? 71 Prob. 48 How
many sorts of weights in the least manner must there be to weigh all sorts of
things between one pound and 121 pound, and so unto 364 pound? 71 Prob. 49 Of
a deceitful balance which being empty seems to be just, because it hangs in
Aequilibrio, notwithstanding putting 12 pound in one balance, and 11 in the
other, it will remain in Aequilibrio. 72 Prob. 50 To heave or lift up a bottle
with a straw. 74 Prob. 51 How in the middle of a wood or desert, without the
sight of the Sun, stars, shadow, or compass, to find out the North, or
South, or the 4 Cardinal points of the World, East, West, etc. 75 Prob. 52
Three persons having taken Counters, Cards, or other things, to find how much
each one has taken. 7^ Prob. 53 How to make a consort of Music of many parts
with one voice or one instrument only. 78 Prob. 54 To make or describe an oval
form, or that which is near resembled unto it at one turning, with a pair of
common Compasses. 79 Prob. 55 Of a purse difficult to be opened. 80 Prob. 56
Whether is it more hard and admirable without Compasses to make a perfect
circle, or being made to find out the Center of it? 82 Prob. 56 Any one having
taken 3 Cards, to find how many points they contain. 83 Prob. 57 Many Cards
placed in diverse ranks, to find which of those Cards any one has thought. 85
Prob. 58 Many Cards being offered to sundry persons to find which of those
Cards any one thinks upon. 86 Prob. 59 How to make an instrument that helps
to hear, as Gallileus made to help to see. 87 Prob. 60 Of a fine Lamp which
goes not out, though one carries it in ones pocket, or being rolled on the
ground will still burn. 88 Prob. 61 Any one having thought a Card amongst many
Cards, how artificially to discover it out. 89 Prob. 62 Three Women A, B, C.
carried Apples to a Market to sell: A had 20. B had 30. C 40. they sold as many
for a penny one as the other, and brought home one as much money as another,
how could this be? 90 Prob. 63 Of the properties of some numbers. 91 Prob. 64
Of an excellent Lamp which serves or furnishes it self with Oil, and burns
a long time. 95 Prob. 65 Of the play at Keyles or Nine-pins. 97 Prob. 66 Of
Spectacles of pleasure Of Spectacles which give several colors to the visage.
98 Of Spectacles which make a Town seem to be a City, one armed man as a
Company, and a piece of Gold as many pieces. 99 How out of a Chamber to see the
objects which pass by according to the lively perspective. 100 Of Gallileus
admirable Optick-Glasse, which helps one to see the beginning and ending of
Eclipses, the spots in the Sun, the Stars which move about the Planets, and
perspicuously things far remote. Of the parts of Gallileus his Glass. 102
Prob. 67 Of the Magnes and Needles touched therewith. How Rings of Iron may
hang one by another in the air. 103 Of Mahomets Tomb which hangs in the air
by the touch of the Magnes. 104 How by the Magnes only to find out North and
South 105 Of a secrecy in the Magnes, for discovering things far remote. 106
Of finding the Poles by the Magnes 107 Prob. 68 Of the properties of Aeolipiles
or Bowls to blow the fire. 108 Prob. 69 Of the Thermometer, or that which
measures the degrees of heat and cold by the air. 110 Of the proportion of
humane bodies, of statues, of Colosses, or huge Jmages and monstrous Giants.
113 Of the commensuration of the parts of the body the one to the other in
particular, by which the Lion was measured by his claw, the Giant by his
thumb, and Hercules by his foot. 115, 116 Of Statues or Colosses, or huge
Images; that mount Athos metamorphosed by Dynocrites into a statue, in whose
hand was a Town able to receive ten thousand men. 117 Of the famous Colossus
at Rhodes which bad 70 cubits in height, and loaded 900. Camels, which weighed
1080000 l. 118 Of Nero his great Colossus which had a face of 12 foot large.
119 Of monstrous Giants Of the Giant Og and Goliath. 119, 120 Of the Carcass of
a man found which was in length 49 foot; and of that monster found in Creet,
which had 46. Cubits of height. 120 Of Campesius his relation of a monster of
300 foot found in Sicile, whose face according to the former proportion should
be 30 foot in length. 121 Prob. 71 Of the game at the Palm, at Trap, at
Bowls, Paile-maile, and others. 122 Prob. 72 Of the game of square forms. 124
Prob. 73 How to make the string of a Viol sensibly shake without any one
touching it. 126 Prob. 74 Of a Vessel which contains 3 several kinds of
liquor, all put in at one bung-hole, and drawn out at one Tap severally
without mixture. 128 Prob. 75 Of burning-Glasses. Archimedes his way of burning
the ships of Syracuse. 129 Of Proclus his way, and of concave and sphericall
Glasses which burn, the cause and demonstration of burning with Glasses. 131
Of Maginus his way of setting fire to Powder in a Mine by Glasses. 131 Of the
examination of burning by Glasses. 133 Prob. 76 Of pleasant questions by way of
Arithmetic. Of the Ass and the Mule. 134 Of the number of Soldiers that
fought before old Troy. 135 Of the number of Crowns that two men had. 136
About the hour of the day. 137 Of Pythagoras Scholars. 137 Of the number of
Apples given amongst the Graces and the Muses. 138 Of the testament or last
will of a dying Father. 138 Of the cups of Croesus. 139 Of Cupids Apples. 139
Of a Man's Age. 140 Of the Lion of Bronze placed upon a fountain with his
Epigram. ibid. Prob. 77 In Optics, excellent experiments. Principles touching
reflections. 141 Experiments upon flat and plain Glasses. 142 How the Images
seem to sink into a plain Glass, and always are seen perpendicular to the
Glass, an^ also inversed. 143 The things which pass by in a street may by
help of a plain glass be seen in a Chamber, and the height of a tower or tree
observed. 143 How several Candles from one Candle are represented in a plain
Glass, and Glasses alternately may be seen one within another, as also the
back-parts of the body as well as the fore-parts are evidently represented. 144
How an Image may be seen to hang in the air by help of a Glass: and writing
read or easily understood. 146 Experiments upon Gibbous, or unequal Sphericall
Glasses. How lively to represent a whole City, fortification, or Army, by a
Gibbous Glass. 147 How the Images are seen in Concave Glasses. 149 How the
Images are transformed by approaching to the center of the Glass, or point of
concourse; and of an exceeding light that a Concave Glass gives by help of a
Candle. 151 How the Images, as a man, a sword, or hand, does come forth out of
the Glass. 152, 153 Of strange apparitions of Images in the air, by help of
sundry Glasses. 152, 154 Of the wonderful augmentation of the parts of man's
body coming near the point of inflammation, or center of the Glass. 155 How
writing may be reverberated from a Glass upon a Wall, and Read. 156 How by
help of a Concave Glass to cast light into a Camp, or to give a perspective
light to Pyoneers in a Mine, by one Candle only. 156 How excellently by help of
a Concave Glass and a Candle placed in the center, to give light to read by.
157 Of other Glasses of pleasure. 158 Of strange deformed representations by
Glasses; causing a man to have four eyes, two Mouths, two Noses, two heads.
Of Glasses which give a color to the visage, and make the face seem fair and
foul. 160 Prob. 78 How to show one that is suspicious, what is in another
Chamber or Room, notwithstanding the interposition of that wall. 160 Corolary,
1. To see the Besiegers of a place, upon the Rampa^^t of a fortification 161
Corolary 2. and 3. Notwithstanding the interposition of VValls and Chambers, by
help of a Glass things may be seen, which pass by. 162 Prob. 79 How with a
Musket to strike a mark not looking toward it, as exactly as one aimed at it.
162 How exactly to shoot out of a Mu^ket to a place which is not seen, being
hindered by some obstacle or other interposition. 163 Prob. 80 How to make an
Image to be seen hanging in the air, having his head downward. 164 Prob. 81.
How to make a company of representative soldiers seem to be as a regiment, or
how few in number may be multiplied to seem to be many in number. 165
COROLARIE. Of an excellent delightful Cabinet made of plain Glasses. 165
Prob. 82 Of fine and pleasant Dyalls in Horologiographie. Of a Dyall of herbs
for a Garden. 166 Of the Dyall upon the finger and hand, to find what of the
Clock it is. 167 Of a Dyall which was about an Obelisk at Rome. 168 Of Dyals
with Glasses. 168 Of a Dyall which has a Glass in the place of the style. 169
Of Dyals with water, which the Ancients use^ 171 Prob. 83 Of shooting out of
Cannons or great Artillery. How to charge a Cannon without powder. 173 To find
how much time the Bullet of a Cannon spends in the Air before it falls to the
ground. 174 How it is that a Cannon shooting upward, the Bullet flies with more
violence, than being shot point blanke, or shooting downward. 174 Whether is
the discharge of a Cannon so much the more violent, by how much it has the
more length? 176 Prob. 84 Of prodigious progressions, and multiplications of
creatures, plants, fruits, numbers, gold, silver, etc. Of grains of
Mustardseed, and that one grain being sown, with the increase thereof for 20
years will produce a heap greater than all the earth a hundred thousand times.
178 Of Pigges, and that the great Turk with all his Revenne, is not able to
maintain for one year, a Sow with all her increase for 12 years. 179 Of
grains of Corn, and that 1 grain with all its increase for 12 years, will
amount to 244140625000000000000 grains, which exceeds in value all the
treasures in the World. 183 Of the wonderful increase af Sheep. 182 Of the
increase of Cod-fish. 182 Of the Progressive Multiplication of souls; that
from one of Noah's Sons, from the flood unto Nimrods Monarchy, should be
produced 111350 souls. 183 Of the increase of Numbers in double proportion,
and that a pin being doubled as often as there are weeks in the year, the
number of pinnes that should arise is able to load 45930 ships of a thousand
Tun apiece, which are worth more than ten hundred thousand pounds a day.
183, 184 Of a man that gathered Apples, stones, or such like upon a condition.
185 Of the changes in Bells, in musical instruments, transmutation of Places,
in Numbers, Letters, Men and such like* 185 Of the wonderful interchange of
the Letters in the Alphabet: the exceeding number of men, and time to express
the words that may be made with these letters, and the number of Books to
comprehend them. 187, 188 Of a servant hired upon certain condition, that he
might have land lent him to sow one grain of Corn with its increase for 8
years time, which amounted to more than four hundred thousand Acres of Land.
188 Prob. 85 Of Fountains, Hydriatiques; Stepticks, Machinecks, and other
experiments upon water, or other liquor. First, how water at the foot of a
Mountain may be made to ascend to the top of it, and so to descend on the
other side of it 190 Secondly, to find how much Liquor is in a Vessel, only
by using the tap-hole. 191 Thirdly, how is it, that a Vessel is said to hold
more water at the foot of a Mountain, then at the top of it 191 4 How to
conduct water from the top of one Mountain to the top of another 192 5 Of a
fine Fountain which spouts water very high and with great violence, by turning
of a Cock 193 6 Of Archimedes screw which makes water ascend by descending. 194
7 Of a fine Fountain of pleasure. 196 8 Of a fine watering pot for Gardens.
197 9 How easily to take Wine out of a Vessel at the bung hole without
piercing a hole in the Vessel. 198 10 How to measure irregular bodies by help
of water. 198 11 To find the weight of water. 199 12 To find the charge that
a vessel may carry, as Ships, Boats or such like. 200 13 How comes it that a
ship having safely sailed in the vast Ocean, and being come into the port or
harbor, will sink down right. 200 14 How a gross body of metal may swim
upon the water. 201 15 How to weigh the lightness of the air. 203 16 Being
given a body, to mark it about, and show how much of it will sink in the water,
or swim above the water. 204 17 To find how much several metalls or other
bodies do weigh less in the water than in the air. 204 18 How is it that a
balance having like weight in each scale, and hanging in Aequilibrio in the
air, being removed from that place (without diminishing the weights in each
balance, or adding to it) it shall cease to hang in Aequilibrio sensibly, yea
by a great difference of weight. 205 19 To show what waters are heavier one
than another, and how much. 206 20 How to make a pound of water weigh as much
as 10, 20, 30, or a hundred pound of Lead, nay as much as a thousand or ten
thousand pound weight. 207 Prob. 86. Of sundry questions of Arithmetic, and
first of the number of sands calculated by Archimedes and Clavius. 208 2 Diverse
metalls being melted together in one body, to find the mixture of them. 210 3
A subtle question of three partners about equality of Wine and Vessels. 213 4
Of a Ladder which standing upright against a wall of 10 foot high, the foot of
it is pulled out 6 foot from the wall upon the pavement, how much has the top
of the Ladder descended. 214 Prob. 87 Witty suits or debates between Caius and
Sempronius, upon the form of figures, which Geometricians call Isoperimeter,
or equal in circuit, or Compass. 214 1 Incident: of changing a field of 6
measures square, for a long rectrangled fiel of 9 measures in length and 3 in
breadth: both equal in circuit but not in quantity. 215 2 Incident: about two
sacks each of them ho^ding but a bushel, and yet were able to hold 4 bushels.
217 3 Incident: shows the deceit of pipes which conveygh water, that a pipe
of two inches diameter, does cast out four times as much water as a pipe of
one such diameter. 218 7 Heaps of Corn of 10 foot every way, is not as much
as one heap of Corn of 20 foot every way. 218 Prob. 88 Of sundry questions in
matter of Cosmographie, and Astronomy. In what place the middle of the earth is
supposed to be. 219 Of the depth of the earth, and height of the Heavens, and
the compass of the World, how much. 219 How much the starry Firmament, the
Sun, and the Moon are distant from the center of the earth. 220 How long a
Millstone would be in falling to the center of the earth from the superficies,
if it might have passage thither. 220 How long time a man or a bird may be in
compassing the whole earth. 220 If a man should ascend by supposition 20 miles
every day: how long it would be before he approach to the Moon. 221 The Sun
moves more in one day than the Moon in 20 days. 221 If a millstone from the
orb of the Sun should descend a thousand miles in an hour how long it would
be before it come to the earth. 221 Of the Suns quick motion, of more than
7500 miles in one minute. 221 Of the rapt and violent motion of the starry
Firmament, which if a Horseman should ride every day 40 miles, he could not in
a thousand years make such a distance as it moves every hour. 221 To find
the Circle of the Sun by the fingers. 223 Prob. 93 Of finding the new and
full Moon in each month. 224 Prob. 94 To find the latitude of Countries. 225
Prob. 95 Of the Climates of Countries, and how to find them. 225 Prob. 96 Of
longitude and latitude of the places of the earth, and of the Stars of the
Heavens. 227 To find the Longitude of a Country. 228 Of the Latitude of a
Country. 229 To find the Latitude of a Country. 230 To find the distance of
places. 230 Of the Longitude, Latitude, Declination, and distance of the
stars. 231 How is it that two Horses or other creatures coming into the
World at one time, and dying at one and the same instant, yet the one of them
to be a day older than the other? 232 Certain fine Observations. In what
places of the World is it that the needle hangs in Aequilibrio, and vertical?
233 In what place of the world is it the sun is East or West but twice in the
year? 233 In what place of the World is it that the Suns Longitude from the
Equinoctial paints and Altitude, being equal, the Sun is due East or West?
That the sun comes twice to one point of the Compass in the forenoone or
afternoon. 233 That in some place of the World there are but two kinds of
wind all the year. 233 Two ships may be two leagues asunder under the
equinoctial, and sailing North at a certain parallel they will be but just
half so much. 233 To what inhabitants, and at what time the sun will touch
the north-part of the Horizon at midnight. 234 How a man may know in his
Navigation when he is under the Equinoctial. 234 At what day in the year the
extremity of the styles shadow in a Dyall makes a right line. 234 What height
the Sun is of, and how far from the Zenith, or Horizon, when a man's shadow is
as long as his height. 234 Prob. 97 To make a Triangle that shall have three
right Angles. 234 Prob. 98 To divide a line in as many parts as one will,
without compasses or without seeing of it. 235 Prob. 99 To draw a line which
shall incline to another line, yet never meet against the Axiom of Parallells.
236 Prob. 100 To find the variation of the Compass by the Sun shining. 237
Prob. 101 To know which way the wind is in ones Chamber without going abroad.
238 Prob. 102 How to draw a parallel sphaericall line with great ease. 239
Prob. 103 To measure an height only by help of ones Hat. 240 Prob. 104 To take
an height with two strawes. 240 In Architecture how statues or other things in
high buildings shall bear a proportion to the eye below either equal, double,
etc. 242 Prob. 106 Of deformed figures which have no exact proportion, where to
place the eye to see them direct. 243 Prob. 107 How a Cannon that has shot may
be covered from the battery of the Enemy. 244 Prob. 108 Of a fine Lever, by
which one man alone may place a Cannon upon his Carriage. 245 Prob. 109 How to
make a Clock with one wheel 246 Of Water-workes. Prob. 110 How a child may
draw up a Hogshead of water with ease. 247 Prob. 111 Of a Ladder of Cords to
carry in ones pocket, by which he may mount a wall or Tower alone. 248 Prob. 112
Of a marvelous Pump which draws up great quantity of water. 249 Prob. 113 How
naturally to cause water to ascend out of a Pit. 250 Prob. 114 How to cast
water out of a fountain very high. 252 Prob. 115 How to empty the water of a
Pit by help of a Cisterne. 253 Prob. 116 How to spout out water very high. 253
Prob. 117 How to re-animate simples though brought a thousand miles. 255 Prob.
118 How to make a perpetual motion. 255 Prob. 119 Of the admirable invention
of making the Philosophers Tree, which one may see to grow by little and
little. 256 Prob. 120 How to make the representation of the great world 257
Prob. 121 Of a Cone, or Pyramidall figure that moves upon a Table 258 Prob. 122
How an Anvill may be cleaved by the blow of a Pistol. 258 Prob. 123 How a
Capon may be roasted in a man's travells at his sa^^le-bowe. 259 Prob. 124 How a
Candle may be made to burn three times longer than usually it does 259 Prob.
125 How to draw Wine out of water 260 Prob. 126 Of two Marmouzets, the one of
which lights a Candle, and the other blows it out. 261 Prob. 127 How to make
Wine fresh without Ice or Snow in the height of Summer. 262 Prob. 128 To make a
Cement which lastes as marble, resisting air and water. 262 Prob. 129 How to
melt metal upon a shell with little fire. 263 Prob. 130 Of the hardening of
Iron and steel. 263 Prob. 131 To preserve fire as long as you will, imitating
the inextinguible fire of the Vestales. 264
FINIS.
Ad Authorem D.D. Henricum Van Etenium, Alumnum Academiae Ponta Mousson.
ARdua Walkeri sileant secreta profundi,
Desinat occultam carpere Porta viam.
Itala Cardani mirata est Lampada docti
Terra, Syracusium Graecia tota senem:
Orbi terrarum, Ptolemaei Clepsydra toti,
Rara dioptra Procli, mira fuere duo,
Anglia te foveat doctus Pont-Mousson alumnum:
Quidquid naturae, qui legis, hortus habet.
Docta, coronet opus doctum, te sit tua docto
Digna, Syracusii, arca, corona, viri.
Arca Syracusiis utinam sit plumbea servis,
Aurea sed dominis, aurea tota suis.
MATHEMATICAL RECREATION.
PROBLEM I. To find a number thought upon.
BId him that he Quadruple the Number thought upon, that is, multiply it by 4,
and unto it bid him to add 6, 8, 10, or any Number at pleasure: and let him
take the half of the sum, then ask how much it coms to, for then if you take
away half the number from it which you willed him at first to add to it, there
shall remain the double of the number thought upon.

Example

The Number thought upon 5 The Quadruple of it 20 Put 8 unto it, makes 28 The
half of it is 14 Take away half the number added from it, viz 4, the rest is
10 The double of the number thought upon, viz. 10
Another way to find what Number was thought upon.
BId him which thinks double his Number, and unto that double add 4, and bid
him multiply that same product by 5, and unto that product bid him add 12, and
multiply that last number by 10 (which is done easily by setting a Cipher at
the end of the number) then ask him the last number or product, and from it
secretly subtract 320, the remainder in the hundredth place, is the number
thought upon.

Example.

The number thought upon 7 For which 700 account only but the number of the
hundreds viz. 7. so have you the number thought upon. His double 14 For which
700 account only but the number of the hundreds viz. 7. so have you the number
thought upon. To it add 4, makes 18 For which 700 account only but the number
of the hundreds viz. 7. so have you the number thought upon. Which multiplied
by 5 makes 90 For which 700 account only but the number of the hundreds viz.
7. so have you the number thought upon. To which add 12 makes 102 For which 700
account only but the number of the hundreds viz. 7. so have you the number
thought upon. This multiplied by 10 which is only by adding a Cipher to it,
makes 1020 For which 700 account only but the number of the hundreds viz. 7.
so have you the number thought upon. From this subtract 320 For which 700
account only but the number of the hundreds viz. 7. so have you the number
thought upon. Rest 700 For which 700 account only but the number of the
hundreds viz. 7. so have you the number thought upon.
To find numbers conceived upon, otherwise than the former.
BId the party which thinks the number, that he triple his thought, and cause
him to take the half of it: (if it be odd take the least half, and put one
unto it:) then will him to triple the half, and take half of it as before:
lastly, ask him how many nines there is in the last half, and for every nine,
account four in your memory, for that shall show the number thought upon, if
both the triples were even: but if it be odd at the first triple, and ev^n at
the second, for the one added unto the least half keep one in memory: if the
first triple be even, and the second odd, for the one added unto the least
half keep two in memory; lastly, if at both times in tripling, the numbers be
odd, for the two added unto the least halfes, keep three in memory, these
cautions observed, and added unto as many fours as the party says there is
nines contained in the last half, shall never fail you to declare or discern
truly what number was thought upon.

Example.

The number thought upon 4 or 7 The triple 12 or 21 The half thereof 6 or 10,
one put to it makes 11 The triple of the half 18 or 33 The half 9 or 1^, one
put to it makes 17 The number of nines in the last half 1 or 1
The first 1. represents the 4. number thought upon, and the last 1. with the
caution makes 7. the other number thought upon.

Note.
Order your method so that you be not discovered, which to help, you may with
dexterity and industry make Additions* Substractions, Multiplications,
Divisions, etc. and instead of asking how many nines there is, you may ask how
many eights tens, etc. there is, or subtract 8.10. etc. from the Number which
remains, for to find out the number thought upon.

Now touching the Demonstrations of the former directions, and others which
follow, they depend upon the 2, 7, 8, and 9, Books of the Elements of Euclide:
upon which 2. Book and 4. proposition this may be extracted, for these which
are more learned for the finding of any number that any one thinks on.

Bid the party that thinks, that he break the number thought upon into any two
parts, and unto the Squares of the parts, let him add the double product of
the parts, then ask what it amounts unto, so the root Quadrat shall be the
number thought upon.

The number thought upon 5, the parts suppose 3 and 2.
The square of 3 makes 9 the sum of these three numbers 25, the squa^e Root of
which is 5, the number thought upon The square of 2 makes 4 the sum of these
three numbers 25, the squa^e Root of which is 5, the number thought upon The
product of the parts. viz. 3 by 2 makes 6, which 6 doubled makes 12 the sum of
these three numbers 25, the squa^e Root of which is 5, the number thought upon
Or more compendiously it may be delivered thus.

Break the number into two parts, and to the product of the parts, add the
square of half the difference of the parts, then the Root Quadrat of the
aggregate is half the number conceived.

EXAMINATION.
THe Problems which concern Arithmetic, we examine not, for these are easy to
any one which has read the grounds and principles of Arithmetic, but we
especially touch upon that, which tends to the speculations of Physic,
Geometry, and Optickes, and such others which are of more difficulty, and more
principally to be examined and considered.

PROBLEM II. How to represent to those which are in a Cham^er that which is
without, or all that which passes by,
THis is one of the finest experiments in the Optiques, and it is done thus,
choose a Chamber or place which is toward the street, frequented with people,
or which is against some fair flourishing object, that so it may be more
delightful and pleasant to the beholders, then make the Room dark by shutting
out the light, except a small hole of six pence broad this done all the Images
and species of the objects which are without, will be seen within, and you
shall have pleasure to see it, not only upon the wall, but especially upon a
sheet of white paper, or some white cloth hung near the hole: and if unto the
hole you place a round glass, that is, a glass which is thicker in the middle
than at the edge: such as is the common Burning Glasses, or such which old
people use, for then the Images which before did seem dead, and of a darkish
color, will appear and be seen upon the paper, or white cloth, according to
their natural colors, yea more lively than their natural, and the
appearances will be so much the more beautiful and perfect, by how much the
hole is lesser, the day clear, and the sun shining

It is pleasant to see the beautiful and goodly representation of the heavens
intermixed with clouds in the Horizon, upon a woody situation, the motion of
Birds in the Air, of men and other creatures upon the ground, with the
trembling of plants, tops of trees, and such like: for every thing will be seen
within even to the life, but inversed: notwithstanding, this beautiful paint
will so naturally represent it self in such a lively Perspective, that hardly
the most accurate Painter can represent the like.

Now the reason why the images and obj^cts without are inversed, is because the
species do intersect one another in the hole, so that the species of the feet
ascend, and these of the head descend.

But here note, that they may be represented right two manner of ways; first,
with a concave glass: secondly, by help of another unequal glass, disposed or
placed between the paper and the other Glass: as may be seen here by the
figure.

Now I will add here only by passing by, for such which affect Painting and
portraiture, that this experiment may excellently help them in the lively
painting of things perspectivewise, as Topographicall cards, etc. and for
Philosophers, it is a fine secret to explain the Organ of the sight, for the
hollow of the eye is taken as the close Chamber, the Ball of the Apple of the
eye, for the hole of the Chamber, the Crystaline humor at the small of the
Glass, and the bottom of the eye, for the Wall or leaf of paper.

EXAMINATION.
THe species being pressed together or contracted does not perform it upon a
wall, for the species of any thing does represent it self not only in one hole
of a window, but in infinite holes, even unto the whole Sphere, or at least
unto a Hemisphere (intellectual in a free medium) if the beams or reflections
be not interposed, and by how much the hole is made less to give passage to the
species, by so much the more lively are the Images formed.

In convexe, or concave Glasses the Images will be disproportionable to the
eye, by how much they are more concave, or convexe, and by how much the parts
of the image comes near to the Axis, for these that are near are better
proportioned then these which are farther off.

But to have them more lively and true, according to the imaginary conicall
section, let the hole be no greater than a pins head made upon a piece of thin
brass, or such like, which hole represents the top of the Cone, and the Base
thereof the term of the species: this practice is best when the sun shines upon
the hole, for then the objects which are opposite to that plain will make two
like Cones, and will lively represent the things without in a perfect inversed
perspective, which drawn by the Pensill of some artificial Painter, turn the
paper upside down, and it will be direct and to the life.

But the apparences may be direct, if you place another hole opposite unto the
former, so that the spectator be under it; or let the species reflect upon a
concave Glass, and let that glass reflect upon a paper or some white thing.

PROBLEM III. To tell how much waighs the blow of ones fist, of a Mallet,
Hatchet, or such like, or resting without giving the blow
SCaliger in his 331 exercise against Cardan, relates that the Mathematicians
of Maximillian the Emperor did propose upon a day this Question, and promised
to give the resolution; notwithstanding ^caliger delivered it not, and I
conceive it to be thus. Take a Balance, and let the Fist, the Mallet, or
Hatchet rest upon the scale, or upon the beam of the Balance, and put into the
other Scale as much weight as may counterpoyse it; then charging or laying more
weight into the Scale, and striking upon the other end, you may see how much
one blow is heavier than another, and so consequently how much it may weigh for
as Aristotle says, The motion that is made in striking adds great weight unto
it, and so much the more, by how much it is quicker: therefore in effect, if
there were placed a thousand mallets, or a Thousand pound weight upon a stone,
nay, though it were exceedingly pressed down by way of a Vice, by Levers, or
other Mechanic Engine, it would be nothing to the rigor and violence of a blow.

Is it not evident that the edge of a knife laid upon butter, and a hatchet
upon a leaf of paper, without striking makes no impression, or at least enters
not; but striking upon the wood a little, you may presently see what effect it
has, which is from the quickness of the motion, which breaks and enters
without resistance, if it be extreme quick, as experience shows us in the blows
of Arrows, of Cannons, Thunder-boults, and such like.

EXAMINATION.
THis Problem was extracted from Scaliger, who had it from Aristotle, but
somewhat refractory compiled, and the strength of the effect he says depends
only in the violence of the motion; then would it follow that a little light
hammer upon a piece of wood being quickly caused to smite, would give a greater
blow, and do more hurt than a great sledge striking soft; this is absurd, and
contrary to experience: therefore it consists not totally in the motion, for if
two several hammers, the one being 20 times heavier than the other, should
move with like quickness, the effect would be much different, there is then
some thing else to be considered besides the Motion which Scaliger understood
not, for if one should have asked him, what is the reason that a stone falling
from a window to a place near at hand, is not so forceable as if it fell
farther (...) when a bullet flying out of a piece and striking the mark near at
hand (...) not make such an effect as striking (...) that Scaliger and (...)
this subject* would not be less troubled to resolve this, than they have been
in that.

PROBLEM IV. How to break a staff which is laid upon two Glasses full of
water, without breaking the Glasses, spilling the water, or upon two reeds or
straws without breaking of them.
FIrst, place the Glasses which are full of water upon two joint stools, or
such like, the one as high as the other from the ground, and distant one from
another by 2 or 3 foot, then place the ends of the staff upon the edges of the
two Glasses so that they be sharp, this done, with all the force you can, with
another staff strike the staff which is upon the two Glasses in the middle,
and it will break without breaking the Glasses or spilling the water.

In like manner may you do upon two Reeds, held with your hands in the air
without breaking them* thence Kitchen boys often break bones of mutton upon
their hand, or with a napkin without any hurt, in only striking upon the middle
of the bone with a knife.

Now in this act, the two ends of the staff in breaking slides away from the
Glasses, upon which they were placed; hence it comes that the Glasses are no
wise endangered, no more than the knee upon which a staff is broken, forasmuch
as in breaking it presses not: as Aristotle in his Mechanic Questions
observes.

EXAMINATION.
IT were necessary here to note, that this thing may be experimented, first,
without Glasses, in placing a small slender staff upon two props, and then
making trial upon it, by which you may see how the Staff will either break,
bow, or depart from his props, and that either directly or obliquely: But why
by this violence, that one Staff striking another, (which is supported by two
Glasses) will be broken without offending the Glasses, is as great a difficulty
to be resolved as the former.

PROBLEM V. How to make a fair Ge^graphic^ll Card in a Garden Plot, fit for a
Prince, or great personage.
IT is usual amongst great men to have fair Geographicall Maps* large Cards,
and great Globes, that by them they may as at once have a view of any place of
the World, and so furnish themselves with a general knowledge, not only of
their own Kingdoms form, situation, longitude, latitude, etc. but of all other
places in the whole Universe, with their magnitudes, positions, Climats, and
distances.

Now I esteem that it is not unworthy for the meditations of a Prince, seeing
it carries with it many profitable and pleasant contentmen^s: if such a Card or
Map by the advice and direction of an able Mathematician were Geographically
described in a Garden plot form, or in some other convenient place, and instead
of which general description might particularly and artificially be prefigured
his whole Kingdoms and Dominions, the Mountains and hills being raised like
small hillocks with turfs of earth, the valleys somewhat concave, which will be
more agreeable and pleasing to the eye, than the description in plain Maps and
Cards, within which may be presented the Towns, Villages, Castles, or other
remarkable edifices in small green mo^^e banks, or spring-work proportional to
the pl^tform, the Forests and Woods represented according to their form and
capacity, with herbs and stoubs, the great Rivers, Lakes, and Ponds to dilate
themselves according to their course from some artificial Fountain made in the
Garden to pass through channels; then may there be composed walks of pleasure,
ascents, places of repose, adorned with all variety of delightful herbs and
flowers, both to please the eye or other senses. A Garden thus accommodated
shall far exceed that of my Lord of Verulams specified in his ^ssayes; that
being only for delight and pleasure, this may have all the properties of that,
and also for singular use, by which a Prince may in little time personally
visit his whole Kingdom, and in short time know them distinctly: and so in like
manner may any particular man Geographically prefigure his own possession or
heritage.

PROBLEM VI. How three staves, knives, or like bodies, may be conceived to hang
in the air, without being supported by any thing but by themselves.
TAke the first staff AB, raise up in the air the end B, and upon him
cros-wise place the staff CB, then lastly, in Triangle wise place the third
staff OF* in such manner that it may be under AB, and yet upon CD. I say that
these staves so disposed cannot fall, and the space CBE is made the stronger,
by how much the more it is pressed down, if the staves break not, or sever
themselves from the triangular form: so that always the Center of gravitie be
in the Center of the Triangle: for AB is supported by OF, and OF is held up by
CD, and CD is kept up from falling by AB, therefore one of these staves cannot
fall, and so by consequence none.

PROBLEM VII. How to dispose as many men, or other things in such sort, that
rejecting, or casting away the 6, 9, 10 part, unto a certain number, there
shall remain these which you would have.
ORdinarily the proposition is delivered in this wise: 15 Christians and 15
Turks being at Sea in one Ship, an extreme tempest being risen, the Pilot
of the Ship says, it is necessary to cast over board half of the number of
Persons to disburthen the Ship, and to save the rest: now it was agreed to be
done by lot, and therefore they consent to put themselves in rank, counting by
nine and nine, the ninth Person should always be cast into the Sea, until
there were half thrown over board; Now the Pilote being a Christian
endeavored to save the Christians, how ought he therefore to dispose the
Christians, that the lot might fall always upon the Turks, and that none of
the Christians be in the ninth place?

The resolution is ordinarily comprehended in this verse.

Populeam virgam matter regina ferebat. For having respect unto the vowels,
making a one, e two, i three, o four, and u five: o the first vowell in the
first word shows that there must be placed 4. Christians; the next vowel u,
signifies that next unto the 4. Christians must be placed 5 Turks, and so to
place both Christians and Turks according to the quantity and value of the
vowels in the words of the verse, until they be all placed: for then counting
from the first Christian that was placed, unto the ninth, the lot will fall
upon a Turk, and so proceed. And here may be further noted that this Problem
is not to be limited, seeing it extends to any number and order whatsoever, and
may many ways be useful for Captains, Magistrates, or others which have
diverse persons to punish, and would chastise chiefly the unruliest of them, in
taking the 10, 20, or 100. person, etc. as we read was commonly practiced
amongst the ancient Romans: herefore to apply a general rule in counting the
third, 4, 9, 10, etc. amongst 30, 40, 50, persons, and more or less; this is
to be observed, take as many units as there are persons, and dispose them in
order privately: as for example, let 24 men be proposed to have committed some
outrage, 6 of them especially are found accessory: and let it be agreed that
counting by 8 and 8 the eight man should be always punished. Take therefore
first 24 units, or upon a piece of paper write down 24 ciphers, and account
from the beginning to the eighth, which eighth mark, and so continue counting
always marking the eighth, until you have marked 6, by which you may easily
perceive how to place those 6 men that are to be punished, and so of others.

It is supposed that Josephus the Author of the Jewish History escaped the
danger of death by help of this Problem; for a worthy Author of belief reports
in his eighth chapter of the third Book of the destruction of Jerusalem, that
the Town of Jotapata being taken by main force by Vespatian, Josephus being
Governor of that Town, accompanied with a Troop of forty Soldiers, hid
themselves in a Cave, in which they resolved rather to famish than to fall into
the hands of Vespatian: and with a bloody resolution in that great distress
would have butchered one another for sustenance, had not Josephus persuaded
them to die by lot and order, upon which it should fall: Now seeing that
Josephus did save himself by this Art, it is thought that his industry was
exercised by the help of this Problem, so that of the 40 persons which he had,
the third was always killed. Now by putting himself in the 16 or 31 place he
was saved, and one with him which he might kill, or easily persuade to yield
unto the Romans.

PROBLEM. VIII. Three things, and three persons proposed, to find which of
them has either of these three things.
LEt the three things be a Ring, a piece of Gold, and a piece of Silver, or any
other such like, and let them be known privately to your self by these three
Vowels a, e, i, or let there be three persons that have different names, as
Ambrose, Edmond, and John, which privately you may note or account to your
self once known by the aforesaid Vowels, which signify for the first vowel 1,
for the second vowell 2, for the third vowell 3.

Now if the said three persons should by the mutual consent of each other
privately change their names, it is most facill by the course and excellency
of numbers, distinctly to declare each ones name so interchanged, or if three
persons in private, the one should take a Ring, the other a piece of Gold, and
the third should take a piece of Silver; it is easy to find which has the
Gold, the Silver, or the Ring, and it is thus done.

Take 30 or 40 Counters (of which there is but 24 necessary) that so you may
conceal the way the better, and lay them down before the parties, and as they
sit or stand, give to the first 1. Counter, which signifies a, the first
vowell; to the second 2. Counters, which represent e, the second vowel; and to
the third 3. Counters, which stand for i, the third vowell: then leaving the
other Counters upon the Table, retire apart, and bid him which has the Ring,
take as many Counters as you gave him, and he that has the Gold, for every one
that you gave him, let him take 2, and he that has the Silver for every one
that you gave him, let him take 4. this being done, consider to whom you gave
one Counter, to whom two, and to whom three; and mark what number of Counters
you had at the first, for there are necessarily but 24. as was said before, the
surpluse you may privately reject. And then there will be left either 1.2.3.5.6
or 7. and no other number can remain, which if there be, then they have failed
in taking according to the directions delivered: but if either of these numbers
do remain, the resolution will be discovered by one of these 6 words
following, which ought to be had in memory, viz. Salve, certa, anima, semita,
vita, quies^ 1. 2. 3. 5. 6. 7.

As suppose 5. did remain, the word belonging unto it is semita, the vowels in
the first two syllables are e and i, which shows according to the former
directions, that to whom you gave 2 Counters, he has the Ring (seeing it is
the second vovvell represented by two as before) and to whom you gave the 3.
Counters, he has the Gold, for that i represents the third vovvel, or 3. in
the former direction, and to whom you gave one Counter, he has the Silver,
and so of the rest: the variety of changes, in which exercise, is laid open in
the Table follovving.

rest men hid rest men hid 1 1 a 5 1 2 e 2 3 i 3 2 1 e 6 1 2 a 2 3 i 3 3 1 a 7
1 2 i 2 3 e 3



This feat may be done also without the former words by help of the Circle A.
for having divided the Circle into 6 parts, write 1. within and 1. without, 2.
within and 5. without, etc. the first 1.2.3. which are within with the
numbers over them, belongs to the upper semicircle; the other numbers both
within and without, to the under semicircle; now if in the action there
remains such a number which may be found in the upper semicircle without,
then that which is opposite within shows the first, the next is the second,
etc. as if 5 remains, it shows to whom he gave 2, he has the Ring; to whom you
gave ^, he has the Gold, etc. But if the remainder be in the under semicircle,
that which is opposite to it is the first; the next backwards toward the right
hand is the second; as if 3 remains, to whom you gave 1 he has the Ring, he
that had 3 he had the Gold, etc.

PROBLEM IX. How to part a Vessel which is full of wine containing eight pints
into two equal parts, by two other vessels which contain as much as the
greater vessel; as the one being 5 pints, and the other 3 pints.
LEt the three vessels be represented by ABC, A being full, the other two being
empty; first, pour out A into B until it be full, so there will be in B 5
pints, and in A but 3 pints: then pour out of B into C until it be full: so
in C shall be 3 pints, in B 2 pints, and in A 3 pints, then pour the wine
which is in C into A, so in A will be 6 pints, in B 2 pints, and in C nothing:
then pour out the wine which is in B into the pot C, so in C there is now 2
pints, in B nothing, and in A 6 pints,. Lastly, pour out of A into B until it
be full, so there will be now in A only 1 pint in B 5 pints, and in C 2 pints.
But it is now evident, that if from B you pour in unto the pot C until it be
full, there will remain in B 4 pints, and if that which is in C, viz. 3 pints be
poured into the vessel A, which before had 1 pint, there shall be in the
vessel A, but half of its liquor that was in it at the first, viz. 4 pints as
was required. Otherwise pour out of A into C until it be full, which pour
into B, then pour out of A into C again until it be full, so there is now in
A only 2 pints, in B 3, and in C 3, then pour from C into B until it be full,
so in C there is now but 1 pint, 5 in B, and 2 in A: pour all that is in B
into A, then pour the wine which is in C into B, so there is in C nothing, in
B only 1 pint, and in 7 A 7 pints: Lastly, out of A fill the pot C, so there
will remain in A 4 pints, or be but half full: then if the liquor in C be
poured into B, it will be the other half. In like manner might be taken the
half of a vessel which conteins 12 pints, by having but the measures 5 and 7,
or 5 and 8. Now such others might be proposed, but we omit many, in one and the
same nature.

PROBLEM. X. To make a stick stand upon the tip of ones finger, without falling.
FAsten the edges of two knives or such like of equal poise, at the end of
the stick, leaning out somevvhat from the stick, so that they may counterpoise
one another; the stick being sharp at the end, and held upon the top of the
finger, will there rest without supporting: if it fall, it must fall
together, and that perpendicular or plumb-wise, or it must fall side-wise or
before one another; in the first manner it cannot: for the Center of gravitie
is supported by the top of the finger: and seeing that each part by the knives
is counterpoised, it cannot fall sidevvise, therefore it can fall no wise.

In like manner may great pieces of Timber, as Joists, etc be supported, if
unto one of the ends be applied convenient proportional counterpoises, yea a
Lance or Pike, may stand perpendicular in the Air upon the top of ones finger:
or placed in the midst of a Court by help of his Center of gravitie.

EXAMINATION.
THis Proposition seems doubtful; for to imagine absolutely, that a Pike, or
such like, armed with two Knives, or other things, shall stand upright in the
Air, and so remain without any other support, seeing that all the parts have
an infinite difference of propensity to fall; and it is without question that a
staff so accommodated upon his Center of gravity, but that it may incline to
some one part without some remedy be applied, and such as is here specified in
the Problem will not warrant the thing, nor keep it from falling; and if more
Knives should be placed about it, it should cause it to fall more swiftly,
forasmuch as the superior parts (by reason of the Centricall motion) is made
more ponderous, and therefore less in rest.

To place therefore this prop really, let the two Knives, or that which is for
counterpoise, be longer always then the staff, and so it will hang together as
one body: and it will appear admirable if you place the Center of gravity, near
the side of the top of the finger or point; for it will then hang Horizontall,
and seem to hang only by a touch, yet more strange, if you turn the point or
top of the finger upside down.

PROBLEM XI. How a millstone or other Ponderosity, may be supported by a small
needle, without breaking o^ any wise bowing the same.
LEt a needle be set perpendicular to the Horizon, and the center of gravitie
of the stone be placed on the top of the needle: it is evident that the stone
cannot fall, forasmuch as it hangs in aequilibra, or is counterpoysed in all
parts alike; and moreover it cannot bow the needle more on the one side then on
the other, the needle will not therefore be either broken or bowed; if
otherwise then the parts of the needle must penetrate and sink one with
another: that which is absurd and impossible to nature; therefore it shall be
supported. The experiments which are made upon trencher plates, or such like
lesser thing does make it most credible in greater bodies.

But here especially is to be noted, that the needle ought to be uniforme in
matter and figure, and that it be erected perpendicular to the Horizon, and
lastly, that the Center of gravity be exactly found.

PROBLEM XII. To make three Knives hang and move upon the point of a Needle.
FIt the three Knives in form of a Balance, and holding a Needle in your hand,
and place the back of that, Knife which lies cross-wise to the other two, upon
the point of the Needle: as the figure here shows you; for then in blowing
softly upon them, they will easily turn and move upon the point of the Needle
with ^ou falling.

PROBLEM XIII. To find the weight of Smoke, which is exhaled of any
combustible body whatsoever.
LEt it be supposed that a great heap of Fagots, or a load of straw weighing
500 pound should be fired, it is evident that this gross substance will be all
inverted into smoke and ashes: now it seems that the smoke weighs nothing;
seeing it is of a thin substance now dilated in the Air, notwithstanding if it
were gathered and reduced into the thickest that it was at first, it would be
sensibly weighty: weigh therefore the ashes which admit 50 pound, now seeing
that the rest of the matter is not lost, but is exhaled into smoke, it must
necessarily be, that the rest of the weight (to wit) 450 pound, must be the
weight of the smoke required.

EXAMINATION.
NOw although it be thus delivered, yet here may be noted, that a ponderosity
in his own medium is not weighty: for things are said to be weighty, when they
are out of their place, or medium, and the difference of such gravity, is
according to the motion: the smoke therefore certainly is light being in its
true medium (the air,) if it should change his medium, then would we change
our discourse.

PROBLEM XVI. Many things being disposed circular, (or otherwise) to find
which of them, any one thinks upon*
SUppose that having ranked 10 things, as ABCDEFGHIK, Circular (as the figure
shows) and that one had touched or thought upon G, which is the 7: ask the
party at what letter he would begin to account (for account he must, otherwise
it cannot be done) which suppose, at E which is the 5 place, then add secretly
to this 5, 10 (which is the number of the Circle) and it makes 15, bid him
account 15 backward from E, beginning his account with that number he thought
upon, so at E he shall account to himself 7, at D account 8, at C account 9,
etc. So the account of 15 will exactly fall upon G, the thing or number thought
upon: and so of others: but to conceal it the more, you may will the party from
E to account 25, 35, etc. and it will be the same.

There are some that use this play at Cards, turned upside down, as the ten
simple Cards, with the King and Queen, the King standing for 12, and the Queen
for 11, and so knowing the situation of the Cards: and thinking a certain hour
of the day: cause the party to account from what Card he pleases: with this
Proviso, that when you see where he intends to account, set 12 to that number,
so in counting as before, the end of the account shall fall upon the Card:
which shall denote or show the hour thought upon, which being turned up will
give grace to the action, and wonder to those that are ignorant in the cause.

PROBLEM XV. How to make a Door or Gate, which shall open on both sides.
ALL the skill and subtilty of this, rests in the artificial disposer of four
plates of Iron, two at the higher end, and two at the lower end of the Gate: so
that one side may move upon the hooks or hinges of the Posts, and by the other
end may be made fast to the Gate, and so moving upon these hinges, the Gate
will open upon one side with the aforesaid plates, or hooks of Iron: and by
help of the other two plates, will open upon the other side.

PROBLEM XVI. To show how a Ponderosity, or heavy thing, may be supported upon
the end of a staff (or such like) upon a Table, and nothing holding or
touching it.
TAke a pale which has a handle, and fill it full of water (or at pleasure:)
then take a staff or stick which may not roll upon the Table as EC, and place
the handle of the Pale upon the staff; then place another staff, or stick,
under the staff CE, which may reach from the bottom of the Pale unto the
former staff CE, perpendicular wise: which suppose FG, then shall the Pale of
water hang without falling, for if it fall it must fall perpendicularly, or
plumbe wise: and that cannot be seeing the staff CE supports it, it being
parallel to the Horizon and sustained by the Table, and it is a thing admirable
that if the staff CE were alone from the table, and that end of the staff
which is upon the Table were greater and heavier than the other: it would be
constrained to hang in that nature.

EXAMINATION.
NOw without some experience of this Problem, a man would acknowledge either a
possibility or impossibity; therefore it is that very touchstone of knowledge
in any thing, to discourse first if a thing be possible in nature, and then if
it can be brought to experience and under sense without seeing it done. At the
first, this proposition seems to be absurd, and impossible. Notwithstanding,
being supported with two sticks, as the figure declares, it is made facile:
for the Horizontall line to the edge of the Table, is the Center of motion; and
passes by the Center of gravity, which necessarily supporteth it.

PROBLEM XVII. Of a deceitful Bowl to play withal.
MAke a hole in one side of the Bowl, and cast molten Lead therein, and then
make up the hole close, that the knavery or deceit be not perceived: you will
have pleasure to see, that notwithstanding the Bowl is cast directly to the
play, how it will turn away side-wise: for that on that part of the Bowl which
is heavier upon the one side then on the other, it never will go truly right,
if artificially it be not corrected; which will hazard the game to those which
know it not: but if it be known that the leady side in rolling be always under
or above, it may go indifferently right; if otherwise, the weight will carry it
always side-wise.

PROBLEM. XVIII. To part an Apple into 2.4. or 8. like parts, without breaking
the Rind.
Pass a needle and thread under the kind of the Apple, and then round it with
diverse turnings, until you come to the place where you began: then draw out
the thread gently, and part the Apple into as many parts as you think
convenient: and so the parts may be taken out between the parting of the Rind,
and the rind remaining always whole.

PROBLEM XIX. To find a number thought upon without asking of any question,
certain operations being done.
BId him add to the number thought (as admit 15) half of it, if it may be, if
not the greatest half that exceeds the other but by an unite, which is 8; and
it makes 23. Secondly, unto this 23. add the half of it if it may be, if not,
the greatest half, viz. 12. makes 35. in the mean time, note that if the
number thought upon cannot be halfed at the first time, as here it cannot, then
for it keep 3 in the memory, if at the second time it will not be equally
halfed, reserve 2 in memory, but if at both times it could not be equally
halved, then may you together reserve five in memory: this done, cause him from
the last sum, viz. 35. to subtract the double of the number thought, viz. 30.
rest 5. will him to take the half of that if he can, if not, reject 1. and
then take the half of the rest, which keep in your memory: then will him to
take the half again if he can, if not, take one from it, which reserve in
your memory, and so perpetually halveing until 1. remain: for then mark how
many halfes there were taken, for the first half account 2, for the second 4,
for the third 8, etc. and add unto those numbers the ones which you reserved
in memory, so there being 5 remaining in this proposition, there were 2
halfings: for which last! account 4, but because it could not exactly be halved
without rejecting of 1. I add the 1 therefore to this 4, makes 5, which half
or sum always multiplied by 4, makes 20. from which subtract the first 3 and
2, because the half could not be formerly added, leaves 15, the number thought
upon.

Other Examples.

The number thought upon.
The number thought 12 The half of it 6 The sum 18 The half of it 9 The
sum of it 27 The double of the number, 24 Which taken away, rests 3 The half
of it 1 For which account 2 and 1 put to it because the 3 could not be halfed,
makes 3 this multiplied by 4 makes 12 The number thought 79 The greatest half
40 3 The sum 119 The greatest half of which is 60 2 The sum of it is 179
The double of 79 is 158 Which taken from it, rests 21 The lesser half 10. which
halve: The half of this is 5 which makes The half of this is 2 which is 10 The
half of this is 1, with 10 and 11 is 21. this 21 which is the double of the
last half with the remainder being multiplied by 4. makes 84, from which take
the aforesaid 3 and 2, ^^st 79, the number thought upon.
PROBLEM. XX. How to make an uniforme, and an inflexible body, to pass through
two small holes of diverse forms, as one being circular, and the other square,
Quadrangular, and Triangular-wise, yet so that the holes shall be exactly
filled.
THis Problem is extracted from Geometrical observations, and seems at the
first somewhat obscure, yet that which may be extracted in this nature, will
appear more difficult and admirable. Now in all Geometrical practices, the
lesser or easier Problemes do always make way to facilitate the greater: and
the aforesaid Problem is thus resolved. Take a Cone or round Pyramide, and
make a Circular hole in some board, or other hard material, which may be equal
to the bases of the Cone, and also a Triangular hole, one of whose sides may be
equal to the Diameter of the circle, and the other two sides equal to the
length of the Cone: Now it is most evident, that this Conicall or Pyramidall
body, will fill up the Circular hole, and being placed side-wise will fill up
the Triangular hole. Moreover, if you cause a body to be turned, which may be
like to two Pyramides conjoined, then if a Circular hole be made, whose
Diameter is equal to the Diameter of the Cones conjoined, and a Quadrangular
hole, whose sloping sides be equal to the length of each side of the Pyramide,
and the breadth of the hol equal to the Diameter of the Circle, this conjoined
Pyramide shall exactly fill both the Circular hole, and also the Quadrangle
hole.

PROBLEM. XXI. How with one uniforme body or such like to fill three several
holes: of which the one is round, the other a just square, and the third an
ovall form?
THis Proposition seems more subtle then the former, yet it may be practiced
two ways: for the first, take a Cylindricall body as great or little as you
please: Now it is evident that it will fill a Circular hole, which is made
equal to the basis of it, if it be placed down right, and will also fill a
long square; whose sides are equal unto the Diameter and length of the
Cylinder, and acording to Pergeus, Archimedes, etc. in their Cylindricall
demonstrations, a true Ovall is made when a Cylinder is cut slopewise,
therefore if the oval have breadth equal unto the Diameter of the Basis of the
Cylinder, and any length whatsoever: the Cylinder being put into his own Ovall
hole shall also exactly fill it.

The second way is thus, make a Circular hole in some board, and also a square
hole, the side of which Square may be equal to the Diameter of the Circle: and
lastly, make a hole Oval-wise, whose breadth may be equal unto the diagonall of
the Square; then let a Cylindricall body be made, whose Basis may be equal
unto the Circle, and the length equal also to the same: Now being placed down
right shall fall in the Circle, and flat-wise will fit the Square hole, and
being placed sloping-wise will fill the Ovall.

EXAMINATION.
YOu may note upon the last two Problemes farther, that if a Cone be cut
Ecliptick-wise, it may pass through an Issoc^^^ Triangle through many Scalen
Triangles, and through an Ellipsis; and if there be a Cone cut scalen-wise, it
will pass through all the former, only for the Ellipsis place a Circle: and
further, if a solid colume be cut Ecliptick-wise it may fill a Circle, a
Square, diverse Parallelogrammes, and diverse Ellipses, which have different
Diameters.

PROBLEM XXII. To find a number thought upon after another manner, then what
is formerly delivered
BId him that he multiply the number thought upon, by what number he pleases,
then bid him divide that product by any other number, and then multiply that
Quotient by some other number; and that product again divide by some other,
and so as often as he will: and here note, that he declare or tell you by what
number he did multiply and divide Now in the same time take a number at
pleasure, and secretly multiply and divide as often as he did: then bid him
divide the last number by that which he thought upon. In like manner do yours
privately, then will the Quotient of your divisor be the same with his, a thing
which seems admirable to those which are ignorant of the cause. Now to have
the number thought upon without seeming to know the last Quotient, bid him add
the number thought upon to it, and ask him how much it makes: then subtract
your Quotient from it, there will remain the number thought upon For example,
suppose the number thought upon were 5, multiply it by 4 makes 20. this divided
by 2, the Quotient makes 10, which multiplied by 6, makes 60, and divided by 4,
makes 1^. in the same time admit you think upon 4, which multiplied by 4, makes
16, this divided by 2, makes 8, which multiplied by 6 makes 48, and divided by
4 makes 1^; then divide 1^ by the number thought, which was 5, the Quotient is
^; divide also 12 by the number you took, viz. 4, the Quotient is also 3. as
was declared; therefore if the Quo^ient ^ be added unto the number thought,
viz. ^, it makes 8, which being known, the number thought upon is also known.

PROBLEM XXIII. To find out many numbers that sundry persons, or one man has
thought upon.
IF the multitude of numbers thought upon be odd, as three numbers, five
numbers, seven, etc. as for example, let 5 numbers thought upon be these ^ 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. bid him declare the sum of the first and second, which will be 5,
the second and third, which makes 7, the third and fourth, which makes 9, the
fourth and fifth, which makes 11, and so alvvayes adding the two next
together, ask him how much the first and last makes together, which is 8.
then take these sums, and place them in order, and add all these together,
which were in the odd places: that is the first, third, and fifth, viz. 5,
9, ^, makes 22. In like manner add all these numbets together, which are in
the even places, that is in the second and fourth places, viz. 7 and 1^ makes
18, substract this from the former 22, then there will remain the double of
the first number thought upon, viz. 4. which known, the rest is easily known:
seeing you know the sum of the first and second; but if the multitude of
numbers be even as these six numbers, viz. 2, ^, 4, 5, 6, 7, cause the party
to declare the sum of each two, by antecedent and consequent, and also the
sum of the second and last, which will be 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 10, then add the
odd places together, except the first, that is 9, and 13, makes 22, add also
the even places together, that is 7, 11, 10, which makes 28, substract the one
from the other, there shall remain the double of the second number thought
upon, which known all the rest are known.

PROBLEM XXIV. How is it that a man in one and the same time, may have his head
upward, and his feet upward, being in one and the same place?
THe answer is very facill, for to be so he must be supposed to be in the
center of the earth: for as the heaven is above on every side, Coelum undique
sursum, all that which looks to the heavens being distant from the center is
upward; and it is in this sense that Ma^^olyeus in his Cosmographie, and first
dialogue, reported of one that thought he was led by one of the Muses to hell,
where he saw Lucifer sitting in the middle of the World, and in the Center of
the earth, as in a Throne: having his head and feet upward.

PROBLEM. XXV. Of a Ladder by which two men ascending at one time; the more
they ascend, the more they shall be asunder, notwithstanding one being as high
as another
THis is most evident, that if there were a Ladder half on this side of the
Center of the earth, and the other half on the other side: and that two at the
Center of the World at one instant being to ascend, the one toward us, and the
other toward our Antipodes, they should in ascending go farther and farther,
one from another; notwithstanding both of them being of like height.

PROBLEM. XXVI. How it is that a man having but a Rod or Pole of Land, does
brag that he may in a right line pass from place to place above 3000 miles.
THe opening of this is easy, forasmuch as he that possesses a Rod of ground
possesses not only the exterior surface of the earth, but is master also of
that which extends even to the Center of the earth, and in this wise all
heritages and possessions are as so many Pyramides, whose summets or points
meet in the center of the earth, and the basis of them are nothing else but
each man's possession, field, or visible quantity; and therefore if there were
made or imagined so to be made, a descent to go to the bottom of the heritage,
which would reach to the center of the earth; it would be above 3000 miles in a
right line as before.

PROBLEM. XXVII. How it is, that a man standing upright, and looking which way
he will, he looks either true North or true South.
THis happens that if the party be under either of the Poles, for if he be
under the North Pole, then looking any way he looks South, because all the
Meridians concur in the Poles of the world, and if he be under the
South-pole, he looks directly North by the same reason.

PROBLEM XXVIII. To tell any one what number remains after certain operations
being ended, without asking any question.
BId him to think upon a number, and will him to multiply it by what number you
think convenient: and to the pro^^ct bid him add what number you please, or
(...) that secretly you consider, that it man be divided by that which
multiplied, and (...) divide the sum by the number which he (...) by, and
substract from this Quotient the number thought upon: In the same time divide
apart the number which was add^d by that which multiplied, so then your
Quotient shall be equal to his remainder, wherefore without asking him any
thing, you shall tell him what did remain, which will seem strange to him that
knows not the cause: for example, suppose he thought 7, which multiplied by 5
makes 35, to which add 10, makes 45, which divided by 5, yields 9, from which
if you take away one the number thought, (because the Multiplier divided by the
Divisor gives the Quotient 1,) the rest will be two, which will be also proved,
if 10 the number which was added, were divided by 5, viz. 2.

PROBLEM XXIX. Of the play with two several things.
IT is a pleasure to see and consider how the science of numbers does furnish
us, not only (...) recreate the spirits, but also (...) knowledge of admirable
things, (...) measure be shown in this (...) the mean time to produce always
some of them: suppose that a man hold diverse things in his hand, as Gold and
^ilver* and in one hand he held the Gold, and in the other hand he held the
Silver: to know subtly, and by way of divination, or artificially in which
hand the Gold or Silver is; attribu^e t^ the Gold, or suppose it have a
certain price, and so likewise attribute to the Silver another price,
conditionally that the one be odd, and the other even: as for example, bid him
that the Gold be valued at 4 Crowns, or Shillings, and the Silver at ^
Crowns, or 3 Shillings, or any other number, so that one be odd* and the
other even, as before; then bid him triple that which is in the right hand, and
double that which is in the left hand, and bid him add these two products
together, and ask him if it be even or odd; if it be even, then the Gold is
in the right hand; if odd, the Gold is in the left hand.

PROBLEM. XXX. Two numbers being proposed unto two several parties, to tell
which of these numbers is taken by each of them.
AS for example: admit you had proposed unto two men whose names were Peter and
John, two numbers, or pieces of money, the one even, and the other odd, as 10.
and 9. and let the one of them take one of the numbers, and the other party
take the other number, which they place privately to themselves: how
artificially, according to the congruity, and excellency of numbers, to find
which of them did take 10. and which 9. without asking any qustion: and this
seems most subtle, yet delivered howsoever differing little from the former,
and is thus performed: Take privately to your self also two numbers, the one
even, and the other odd, as 4. and 3. then bid Peter that he double the number
which he took, and do you privately double also your greatest number; then bid
John to triple the number which he has, and do you the like upon your last
number: add your two products together, and mark if it be even or odd, then
bid the two parties put their numbers together, and bid them take the half of
it, which if they cannot do, then immediately tell Peter he took 10. and John
9. because the aggregate of the double of 4. and the triple of 3. makes odd,
and such would be the aggregate or sum of the double of Peter's number and
John's number, if Peter had taken 10. if otherwise, then they might have taken
half, and so John should have taken 10. and Peter 9. as suppose Peter had
taken 10. the double is 20. and the triple of 9. the other ^umber is 27. which
put together makes 47. odd: in like manner the double of your number conceived
in mind, viz. 4. makes 8. and the triple of the 3. the other number, makes 9.
which set together makes 17. odd. Now you cannot take the half of 17, nor 47.
which argues that Peter had the greater number, for otherwise the double of 9.
is 18. and the triple of 10. is 30. which set together makes 48. the half of
it may be taken: therefore in such case Peter the took less number: and John
the greater, and this being don cleanly carries much grace with it.

PROBLEM. XXXI. How to describe a Circle that shall touch 3: Points placed
howsoever upon a plain, if they be not in a right line.
LEt the three points be A.B.C. put one foot of the Compass upon A. and
describe an Arch of a Circle at pleasure: and placed at B. cross that Arch in
the two points E. and F. and placed in C. cross the Arch in G. and H. then lay
a ruler upon G.H. and draw a line, and place a Ruler upon E. and F. cut the
other line in K* so K is the Center of the Circumference of a Circle, which
will pass by the said three points A.B.C. or it may be inverted, having a
Circle drawn; to find the Center of that Circle, make 3. points in the
circumference, and then use the same way: so shall you have the Center, a thing
most facill to every practitioner in the principles of Geometry.

PROBLEM. XXXII. How to change a Circle into a square form?
M^ke a Circle upon past-board or other material, as the Circle A.C.D.E. of
which A. is the Center; then cut it into 4 quarters, and dispose them so, that
A. at the center of the Circle may always be at the Angle of the square, and
so the four quarters of the Circle being placed so, it will make a perfect
square, whose side A.A. is equal to the Diameter B.D. Now here is to be noted
that the square is greater then the Circle by the vacuity in the middle, viz. M.

PROBLEM. XXXIII. With one and the same comp^sses, and at one and the same
extent, or opening, how to describe many Circles concentricall, that is,
greater or lesser one then another?
IT is not without cause that many admire how this Proposition is to be
resolved; yea in the judgment of some it is thought impossible: who consider
not the industry of an ingenious Geometrician, who makes it possible, and that
most facill, sundry ways; for in the first place if you make a Circle upon a
fine plain, and upon the Center of that Circle, a small pegge of wood be
placed, to be raised up and put down at pleasure by help of a small ho^e made
in the Center, then with the same opening of the Compasses, you may describe
Circles Concentricall, that is, one greater or lesser than another; for the
higher the Center is lifted up, the lesser the Circle will be. Secondly, the
compass being at that extent upon a Gibus body, a Circle may be described,
which will be less than the former, upon a plain, and more artificially upon
a Globe, or round bowl: and this again is most obvious upon a round Pyramide,
placing the Compasses upon the top of it, which will be far less than any of
the former; and this is demonstrated by the 20. Prop. of the first of Euclids,
for the Diameter ^. D. is less than the line AD.A.E. taken together, and the
lines AD.AE. being equal to the Diameter BC. because of the same distance or
extent of opening the compasses, it follows that the Diameter E.D. and all his
Circles together is much less than the Diameter, and the Circle BC. which was
to be performed.

PROBLEM XXXIV. Any numbers under 10. being thought upon, to find what numbers
they were.
LEt the first number be doubled, and unto it add 5. and multiply that sum
by 5. and unto it add 10. and unto this product add the next number thought
upon; multiply this same again by 10. and add unto it the next number, and so
proceed: now if he declare the last sum; mark if he thought but upon one
figure, for then subtract only 35. from it, and the first figure in the place
of tennes is the number thought upon: if he thought upon two figures, then
subtract also the said ^5. from his last sum, and the two figures which
remain are the number thought upon: if he thought upon three figures, then
subtract 350. and then the first three figures are the numbers thought upon,
etc. so if one thought upon these numbers 5.7.9.6. double the first, makes 1^.
to which add 5. makes 15. this multiplied by 5. makes 75. to which add 1^.
makes 85. to this add the next number, viz. 7. makes 92. this multiplied by
10. makes 920. to which add the next number, viz. 9. makes 929. which
multiplied by 10. makes 9290. to which add 6. makes 9296. from which subtract
3500. rests 5796. the four numbers thought upon. Now because the two last
figures are like the two numbers thought upon: to conceal this, bid him take
the half of it, or put first 12. or any other number to it, and then it will
not be so open.

PROBLEM. XXXV. Of the Play with the Ring.
AMongst a company of 9. or 10. persons, one of them having a Ring, or such
like: to find out in which hand: upon which finger, and joint it is; this will
cause great astonishment to ignorant spirits, which will make them believe that
he that does it works by Magic, or Witchcraft: But in effect it is nothing
else but a nimble act of Arithmetic, founded upon the precedent Problem: for
first it is supposed that the persons stand or sit in order, that one is first,
the next second, etc. likewise there must be imagined that of these two hands
the one is first, and the other second: and also of the five fingers, the one
is first, the next is second, and lastly of the joints, the one is as 1. the
other is as 2. the other as 3. etc. from whence it appears that in performing
this Play there is nothing else to be done than to think 4. numbers: for
example, if the fourth person had the Ring in his left hand, and upon the fifth
finger, and third joint, and I would divine and find it out: thus I would
proceed, as in the 34 Problem: in causing him to double the first number: that
is, the number of persons, which was 4. and it makes 8. to which add 5. makes
13. this multiplied by 5. makes 65. put 10. to it, makes 75. unto this put ^.
for the number belonging to the left hand, and so it makes 77. which multiplied
by 10. makes 770. to this add the number of the fingers upon which the Ring
is, viz. 5. makes 775. this multiplied by 10. makes 7750. to which add the
number for the joint upon which the Ring is, viz the third joint, makes 7^53.
to which cause him to add 14. or some other number, to conceal it the better:
and it makes 7767. which being declared unto you, substract 3514* and there
will remain 4.2.5.3. which figures in order declares the whole mystery of that
which is to be known: 4. signifies the fourth person, 2. the left hand, 5. the
fifth finger, and 3. the third joint of that finger.

PROBLEM. XXXVI. The Play of 34. or more Dice.
THat which is said of the two precedent Problemes may be applied to this of
Dice (and many other particular things) to find what number appears upon
each Dice being cast by some one, for the points that are upon any side of a
Dice are always less than 10 and the points of each side of a Dice may be
taken for a number thought upon: therefore the Rule will be as the former: As
for example, one having thrown three Dice, and you would declare the numbers of
each one, or how much they make together, bid him double the points of one of
the Dice, to which bid him add 5, then multiply that by 5. and to it add 10,
and to the sum bid him add the number of the second Dice: and multiply that
by 10: lastly, to this bid him add the number of the last Dice, and then let
him declare the whole number: then if from it you subtract ^50. there will
remain the number of the three Dice thrown.

PROBLEM. XXXVII. How to make water in a Glass seem to boil and sparkle?
TAke a Glass near full of water or other liquor; and setting one hand upon
the foot of it, to hold it fast: turn slightly one of the fingers of your
other hand upon the brimme, or edge of the Glass; having before privately wet
your finger: and so passing softly on with your finger in pressing a little:
for then first, the Glass will begin to make a noise: secondly, the parts of
the Glass will sensibly appear to tremble, with notable rarefaction and
condensation: thirdly, the water will shake, seem to boil: fourthly, it will
cast it self out of the Glass, and leap out by small drops, with great
astonishment to the standers by; if they be ignorant of the cause of it, which
is only in the Rarefaction of the parts of the Glass, occasioned by the
motion and pressure of the finger.

EXAMINATION.
THe cause of this, is not in the rarefaction of the parts of the Glass, but
it is rather in the quick local motion of the finger, for reason shows us
that by how much a Body draws nearer to a quality, the less is it subject or
capable of another which is contrary unto it? now condensation, and rarefaction
are contrary qualities, and in this Problem there are three bodies considered,
the Glass, the Water, and the Air, now it is evident that the Glass being
the most solid, and impenitrable Body, is less subject and capable of
rarefaction than the water, the water is less subject than the Air, and if
there be any rarefaction, it is rather considerable in the Air then in the
Water, which is inscribed by the Glass, and above the Water, and rather in the
Water then in the Glass: the agitation, or the trembling of the parts of the
Glass to the sense appears not: for it is a continued body; if in part, why
then not in the whole? and that the Water turns in the Glass, this appears
not, but only the upper contiguous parts of the Water: that at the bottom
being less subject to this agitation, and it is most certain that by how much
quicker the Circular motion of the finger upon the edge of the Glass is, by so
much the more shall the Air be agitated, and so the water shall receive some
apparent affection more or less from it, according to that motion: as we see
from the quickness of wind upon the Sea, or c^lme thereof, that there is a
greater or lesser agitation in the water; and for further examination, we leave
it to the search of those which are curious.

PROBLEM. XXXVIII. Of a fine vessel which holds wine or water, being cast in^o
it at a certain height, but being filled higher, it will run out of its own
accord.
LEt there be a vessel A.B.C.D. in the middle of which place a Pipe; whose
ends both above at E, and below at the bottom of the vessel as at ^* are open;
let the end ^ be somewhat lower than the brimme of the Glass: about this Pipe,
place another Pipe as H.L, which mounts a little above E and let it most
diligently be closed at H, that no Air enter in thereby, and this Pipe at the
bottom may have a small hole to give passage unto the water; then pour in
water or wine, and as long as it mounts not above E, it is safe; but if you
pour in the water so that it mount above it, farewell all: for it will not
cease until it be all gone out; the same may be done in disposing any crooked
Pipe in a vessel in the manner of a Faucet or funnell, as in the figure H, for
fill it under H, at pleasure, and all will go well; but if you fill it unto H.
you will see fine sport, for then all the vessel will be empty incontinent,
and the subtlety of this will seem more admirable, if you conceal the Pipe
by a Bird, Serpent, or such like, in the middle of the Glass. Now the reason
of this is not difficult to those which know the nature of a Cock or Faucet;
for it is a bowed Pipe, one end of which is put into the water or liquor, and
sucking at the other end until the Pipe be full, then will it run of it self,
and it is a fine secret in nature to see, that if the end of the Pipe which is
out of the water, be lower then the water, it will run out without ceasing: but
if the mouth of the Pipe be higher then the water or level with it, it will
not run, although the Pipe which is without be many times bigger than that
which is in the water: for it is the property of water to keep always exactly
level*

EXAMINATION.
HEre is to be noted, that if the face of the water without be in one and the
same plain, with that which is within, though the outtermost Pipe be ten times
greater than that which is within; the water naturally will not run, but if
the plain of the water without be any part lower then that which is within, it
will freely run: and here may be noted further, that if the mouth of the Pipe
which is full of water, does but only touch the superficies of the water
within, although the other end of the pipe without be much lower than that
within, the water it will not run at all: which contradicts the first ground;
hence we gather that the pressure or ponderosity of the water within, is the
cause of running in some respect.

PROBLEM. XXXIX. Of a Glass very pleasant.
SOmetimes there are Glasses which are made of a double fashion, as if one
Glass were within another, so that they seem but one, but there is a little
space between them. No^ pour Wine or other liquor between the two edges by
help of a Tunnell, into a little hole left to this end, so will there appear
two fine delusions or fallacies; for though there be not a drop of Wine
within the hollovv of the Glass, it will seem to those which behold it that
it is an ordinary Glass full of Wine, and that especially to those which are
side-vvise of it, and if any one move it, it will much confirm it, because of
the motion of the Wine; but that which will give most delight, is that, if
any one shall take the Glass, and putting it to his mouth shall think to drink
the Wine, instead of which he shall sup the Air, and so will cause laughter
to those that stand by, who being deceived, will hold the Glass to the light,
and thereby considering that the rays or beams of the light are not reflected
to the eye, as they would be if there were a liquid substance in the Glass,
hence they have an assured proof to conclude, that the hollovv of the Glass
is totally empty.

PROBLEM. XL. If any one should hold in each hand, as many pieces of money as
in the other, how to find how much there is?
BId him that holds the money that he put out of one hand into the other what
number you think convenient: (provided that it may be done,) this done, bid him
that out of the hand that he put the other number into, that he take out of it
as many as remain in the other hand, and put it into that hand: for then be
assured that in the hand which was put the first taking away: there will be
found just the double of the number taken away at the first. Example, admit
there were in each hand 12 Shi^lings or Counters, and that out of the right
hand you bid him take 7. and put it into the left: and then put into the right
hand from the left as many as does remain in the right, which is 5. so there
will be in the left hand ^4, which is the double of the number taken out of the
right hand, to wit 7. then by some of the rules before delivered, it is easy
to find how much is in the right hand, viz. 10.

PROBLEM. XLI. Many Dice being cast, how artificially to discover the number of
the points that may arise.
SVppose any one had cast three Dice secretly, bid him that he add the points
that were upmost together: then putting one of the Dice apart, unto the former
sum add the points which are under the other two, then bid him throw these
two Dice, and mark how many points a pair are upwards, which add unto the
former sum: then put one of these Dice away not changing the side, mark the
points which are under the other Dice, and add it to the former sum: lastly,
throw that one Dice, and whatsoever appears upward add it unto the former
sum; and let the Dice remain thus: this done, coming to the Table, note
what points do appear upward upon the three Dice, which add privately
together, and unto it add ^1 or 3 times 7: so this Addition or sum shall be
equal to the sum which the party privately made of all the operations which
he formerly made. As if he should throw three Dice, and there should appear
upward 5, 3, 2. the sum of them is 10. and setting one of them apart, (as 5.)
unto 10, add the points which are under 3 and 2, which is 4 and 5, and it
makes 19. then casting these two Dice suppose there should appear 4 and 1,
this added unto 19 makes 24. and setting one of these two Dice apart as the 4.
unto the former 24, I add the number of points which is under the other Dice,
viz. under 1, that is 6, which makes 30. Last of all I throw that one Dice, and
suppose there did appear 2, which I add to the former 30, and it makes 32,
then leaving the 3 dice thus, the points which are upward will be these, 5, 4,
2 unto which add secretly 21, (as before was said) so have you 32, the same
number which he had; and in the same manner you may practice with 4, 5, 6, or
many Dice or other bodies, observing only that you must add the points
opposite of the Dice; for upon which depends the whole demonstration or secret
of the play; for always that which is above and underneath makes 7. but if it
make another number, then must you add as often that number.

PROBLEM. XLII. Two metals, as Gold and Silver, or of other kin^^ weighing
alike, being privately placed into two like Boxes, to find which of them the
Gold or Silver is in.
IT is said that an Emperor was requested by one of his servants after he had
long time remained with him, to assign him some reward: to which after few
days the Emperor condescended, and caused him to come into h^s Treasury,
where he had prepared two Boxes* one full of Gold, and the other full of Lead*
both weighing, and of form and magnitude alike: and bid him choose which he
would have. Now many think that in this Problem one must be guided only by
fortune in this choice, and it is that which most makes a man happy in such a
choice: but the want of knowledge causes them so to judge which know not
otherwise. A Mathematician accounts it an easy proposition, and will
infallibly choose the chest of Gold, and leave the chest of Lead, without either
breaking, or opening any of the chests, and not go by chance and fortune: for
if he may be permitted to weigh those chests first in the Air, then in the
water: it is a thing clear by the proportion of Mettalls, and according to the
principles of Archimedes, that the Gold shall be less weighty by his eighteenth
part, and the Lead by his 11^^ part, wherefore there may be gathered in which
is the Gold, and in which is the Lead.

But because that this experiment in water has diverse accidents, and therefore
subject to a caution; and namely, because the matter of the chest, metal or
other things may hinder.

Behold here a more subtle and certain invention to find and discover it out
without weighing it in the water* Now experience and reason shows us that two
like bodies or magnitudes of equal weight, and of diverse mettalls, are not of
equal quantity: and seeing that Gold is the heaviest of all mettalls, it will
occupy less room or place; from which will follow that the like weight of
Lead in the same form, will occupy or take up more room or place. Now let
there be therefore presented two Globes or Chests of wood or other matter
alike, and equal one to the other, in one of which in the middle there is
another Globe or body of lead weighing 12. l. (as C,) and in the other a Globe
or like body of Gold weighing 12 pound (as B.) Now it is supposed that the
wooden Globes or Chests are of equal weight, form, and magnitude: and to
discover in which the Gold or Lead is in, take a broad pair of Compasses, and
clip one of the Coffers or Globes somewhat from the middle, as at D. then fix
in the Chest or Globe a small piece of Iron between the feet of the Compasses,
as EK, at the end of which hang a weight G, so that the other end may be
counterpoysed, and hang in aequilibrio: and do the like to the other Chest or
Globe. Now if that the other Chest or Globe being clipped in like distance
from the end, and hanging at the other end the same weight G. there be found no
difference; then clip them nearer toward the middle, that so the points of
the Compass may be against some of the metal which is enclosed; or just
against the extremity of the Gold as in D, and suppose it hang thus in
aequilibrio; it is certain that in the other Coffer is the Lead; for the
points of the Compasses being advanced as much as before, as at F, which takes
up a part of the Lead, (because it occupies a greater place than the Gold)
therefore that shall help the weight G. to weigh, and so will not hang in
aequilibrio, except G be placed near to F. hence we may conclude, that there
is the Lead; and in the other Chest or Globe, there is the Gold.

EXAMINATION.
IF the two Boxes being of equal magnitude weighed in the air be found to be
of equal weight, they shall necessarily take up like place in the water, and
therefore weigh also one as much as another: hence there is no possibility to
find the inequality of the mettalls which are enclosed in these Boxes in the
water: the intention of Archimedes was not upon contrary mettalls enclosed in
(...) Boxes, but consisted of comparing metta^^^, simple in the water one with
another: therefore the inference is false and absurd.

PROBLEM. XLIII. Two Globes of diverse mettalls, (as one Gold, and the other
Copper) yet of equal weight being put into a box, as BG, to find in which end
the Gold or Copper is.
THis is discovered by the changing of the places of the two Bovvles or
Globes, having the same counterpoyse H to be hung at the other side, as in N.
and if the Gold which is the lesser Globe, were before the nearest to the
handle D^, having now changed his place will be farthest from the handle DE,
as in K. therefore the Center of gravity of the two Globes taken together,
shall be farther separate from the middle of the handle (under which is the
Center of gravity of the Box) than it was before, and seeing that the handle is
always in the middle of the Box, the weight N. must be augmented* to keep it
in equil^^^^ and by this way one may know, that if at the second time, the
counterpoise be too light, it is a sign that the Gold is farthest off the
handle, as at the first trial it was nearest.

PROBLEM. XLIIII. How to represent diverse sorts of Rainebowes here below?
THe Rainbovve is a thing admirable in the world, which ravisheth often the
eyes and spirits of men in consideration of his rich intermingled colors
which are seen under the clouds, seeming as the glistering of the Stars,
precious stones, and ornaments of the most beauteous flovvers: some part of it
as the resplendent stars, or as a Rose, or burning Cole of fire* in it one may
see Dies of sundry sorts, the Violet, the Blew, the Orange, the Saphir, the
Jacinct, and the Emerald colors, as a lively plant placed in a green soil:
and as a most rich treasure of nature, it is a high work of the Sun who casts
his rays or beams as a curious Painter draws strokes with his pensill, and
places his colors in an exquisite situation; and Solomon says, Eccles. 43.
it is a chief and principal work of God. Notwithstanding there is left to
industry how to represent it from above, here below, though not in perfection,
yet in part, with the same intermixture of colors that is above.

Have you not seen how by Oars of a Boat it does exceeding quickly glide upon
the water with a pleasant grace? Aristotle says, that it colors the water,
and makes a thousand atoms, upon which the beams of the Sun reflecting,
make a kind of colored Rainbowe: or may we not see in houses or Gardens of
pleasure artificial fountains, which pour forth their droppie streams of
water, that being between the Sun and the fountain, there will be presented
as a continual Rainbowe? But not to go farther, I will show you how you may do
it at your door, by a fine and facill experiment.

Take water in your mouth, and turn your back to the Sun, and your face
against some obscure place, then blow out the water which is in your mouth,
that it may be sprinkled in small drops and vapors: you shall see those atoms
vapors in the beams of the Sun to turn into a fair Rainebowe, but all the
grief is, that it lasts not, but soon is vanished.

But to have one more stable and permanent in his colors: Take a Glass full
of water, and expose it to the Sun, so that the rays that pass through
strike upon a shadowed place, you will have pleasure to see the fine form of a
Rainebovve by this reflection. Or take a Trigonall Glass or Crystal Glass of
diverse Angles, and look through it, or let the beams of the Sun pass
through it; or with a candle let the appearances be received upon a shadowed
place: you will have the same contentment.

PROBLEM XLV. How that if all the Powder in the world were in closed within a
bowl of paper or glass, and being fired on all parts, it could not break that
bowl?
IF the bowl and the powder be uniforme in all his parts, then by that means
the powder would press and move equally on each side, in which there is no
possibility whereby it ought to begin by one side more than another. Now it is
impossible that the bowl should be broken in all his parts: for they are
infinite.

Of like fineness or subtlety may it be that a bowl of Iron falling from a
high place upon a plain pavement of thin Glass, it were impossible any wise
to break it; if the bowl were perfectly round, and the Glass flat and
uniforme in all his parts* for the bowl would touch the Glass but in one
point, which is in the middle of infinite parts which are about it: neither is
there any cause why it ought more on one side than on another, seeing that it
may not be done with all his sides together; it may be concluded as speaking
naturally, that such a bovvle falling upon such a glass will not break it.
But this matter is mere Metaphysicall, and all the workmen in the world
cannot ever with all their industry make a bovvle perfectly round, or a
Glass uniforme.

PROBLEM. XLVI. To find a number which being divided by 2, there will remain
1, being divided by 3, there will remain 1; and so likewise being divided by
4, 5, or 6, there would still remain 1; but being didivided by 7, there will
remain nothing.
IN many Authors of Arithmetic this Problem is thus proposed: A woman
carrying Eggs to Market in a basket, met an unruly fellovv who broke them: who
was by order made to pay for them: and she being demanded what number she had,
she could not tell: but she remembered that counting them by 2 and 2, there
remained 1* likewise by 3 and 3 by 4 and 4, by 5 and 5, by 6 and 6; there still
remained 1. but when she counted them by 7 and 7, there remained nothing: Now
how may the number of Eggs be discovered?

Find a number which may exactly be measured by 7, and being measured by 2, 3,
4, 5, and 6; there will still remain a unite* multiply these numbers
together, makes 720, to which add 1; so have you the number, viz. 721. in like
manner 301 will be measured by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; so that 1 remains: but being
measured by 7, nothing will remain; to which continually add 220, and you
have other numbers which will do the same: hence it is doubtful what number
she had, therefore not to fail, it must be known whether they did exceed
400, 800, etc. in which it may be conjectured that it could not exceed 4 or 5
hundred, seeing a man or woman could not carry 7 or 8 hundred Eggs, therefore
the number was the former ^01. which she had in her Basket: which being
counted by 2 and 2, there will remain 1, by 3 and 3, etc. but counted by 7
and 7, there will remain nothing.

PROBLEM. XLVII. One had a certain number of crowns, and counting them by 2
and 2, there rested 1. counting them by 3 and 3, there rested 2. counting them
by 4 and 4, there rested 3. counting them by 5 and 5, there rested 4. counting
them by 6 and 6, there rested 5. but counting them by 7 and 7, there remained
nothing: how many crowns might he have?
THis Question has some affinity to the precedent, and the resolution is
almost in the same manner: for here there must be found a number, which
multiplied by 7, and then divided by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; there may alvvayes remain
a number less by 1 than the Divisor: Now the first number which arrives in
this nature is 119, unto which if 420 be added, makes 539, which also will
do the same: and so by adding 420, you may have other numbers to resolve this
proposition.

PROBLEM. XLVIII. How many sorts of weights in the least manner must there be
to weigh all sorts of things between 1 pound and 40 pound, and so unto 121, and
364 pound.
TO weigh things betvveen 1 and 40, take numbers in triple proportion, so that
their sum be equal, or somewhat greater than 40, as are the numbers 1
3.9.27. I say that with ^ such weights, the first being of 1 pound, the second
being 3 pound, the third being 9 pound, and the fourth being 27: any weight
between 1 and 40 pound may be weighed. As admit to weigh 21 pound, put unto the
thing that is to be weighed the 9 pound weight, then in the other balance put
27 pound and 3 pound, which does counterpoise 21 pound and 9 pound, and if 20
pound were to be weighed, put to it in the balance 9 and 1, and in the other
balance put 27 and 3, and so of others

In the same manner take those 5 weights, 1, 3, 9, 27* 81, you may weigh with
them between 1 pound, and 121 pound: and taking those 6 weights* as 1, 3, 9,
2^, 81, 243, you may weigh even from 1 pound unto 364 pound: this depends upon
the property of continued proportionals, the latter of which containing twice
all the former.

PROBLEM. XLIX. Of a deceitful balance which being c^^^ty seems i^ be just,
because it hangs in aequilibrio: not^ithstanding putting 12 pound in one
balance, and 11 in the other, it will remain in aequilibrio.
ARistotle makes mention of this balance in his mechanic Questions, and
says, that the Merchants of purpose in his time used them to deceive the
world: the subtlety or craft of which is thus, that one arm of the balance
is longer then another, by the same proportion, that one weight is heavier then
another: As if the beam were 23 inches long, and the handle placed so that 12
inches should be on one side of it, and 11 inches on the other side:
conditionally that the shorter end should be as heavy as the longer, a thing
easy to be done: then afterward put into the balance two unequal weights in
such proportion as the parts of the beam have one unto another, which is 12 to
11, but so that the greater be placed in the balance which hangs upon the
shorter part of the beam, and the lesser weight in the other balance: it is
most certain that the balances will hang in aequilibrio, which will seem most
sincere and just; though it be most deceitful, abominable, and false.

The reason of this is drawn from the experiments of Archimedes, who shows
that two unequal weights will counterpoyse one another, when there is like
proportion between the parts of the beam (that the handle separates) and the
weights themselves: for in one and the same counterpoise, by how much it is
farther from the Center of the handle, by so much it seems heavier, therefore
if there be a diversity of distance that the balances hang from the handle,
there must necessarily be an ineqality of weight in these balances to make
them hang in aequilibrio, and to discover if there be deceit, change the weight
into the other balance, for as soon as the greater weight is placed in the
balance that hangs on the longer parts of the beam: it will weigh down
the other instantly.

PROBLEM. L. To heave or lift up a bottle with a straw.
TAke a straw that is not bruised, bovv it that it make an Angle, and put it
into the bottle so that the greatest end be in the neck, then the Reed being
put in the bovved part vvil cast side-vvise, and make an Angle as in the figure
may be seen: then may you take the end which is out of the bottle in your
hand, and heave up the bottle, and it is so much surer, by how much the Angle
is acuter or sharper; and the end which is bowed approaches to the other
perpendicular parts which come out of the bottle.

PROBLEM. LI. How in the middle of a wood or desert, without the sight of the
Sun, Stars, Shadow or Compass, to find out the North or South, or the
four Cardinal points of the world, East, West, etc?
IT is the opinion of some, that the winds are to be observed in this: if it
be hot, the South is found by the winds that blow that way, but this
observation is uncertain and subject to much error: nature will help you in
some measure to make it more manifest than any of the former, from a tree thus:
Cut a small tree off, even to the ground, and mark the many circles that are
about the sap or pith of the tree, which seem nearer together in some part than
in other, which is by reason of the Suns motion about the tree: for that the
humiditie of the parts of the tree toward the South by the heat of the Sun is
rarefied, and caused to extend: and the S^n not giving such heat toward the
North-part of the tree, the sap is lesser rarefied, but condensed; by which the
circles are nearer together on the North-part, than on the South-part:
therefore if a line be drawn from the widest to the narrowest part of the
circles, it shall show the North and South of the world. Another Experiment may
be thus: Take a small needle, such as women work with: place it gently down
flatwise upon still water, and it will not sink, (which is against the general
tenet that Iron will not swim) which needle will by little and little turn
to the North and South-points. But if the needle be great and will not swim,
thrust it through a small piece of Cork, or some such like thing, and then it
will do the same: for such is the property of Iron when it is placed in
aequilibrio, it strives to find out the Poles of the world or points of North
and South in a manner as the magnes does.

EXAMINATION.
HEre is observable, that the moisture which aideth to the growth of the tree,
is dilated and rarefied by the Meridionall heat, and contracted by the
Septentrionall cold: this rarefaction works upon the part of the humor or
moisture that is more thin, which does easily dissipate and evaporate: which
evaporation carries a part of the salt with it; and because that solidation or
condensation, so that there is left but a part of the nourishment which the
heat bakes up and consumes: so contrarily on the other side the condensation
and restrictive quality of the moisture causes less evaporation and
perdition: and so consequently there remains more nourishment, which makes a
greater increase on that side than on the other side: for as trees have their
growth in winter, because of their pores and these of the earth are shut up: so
in the spring when their pores are open, and when the sap and moisture is
drawn by it, there is not such cold on the North-side that it may be condensed
at once: But contrarily to the side which is South, the heat may be such, that
in little time by continuance, this moisture is dissipated greatly: and cold is
nothing but that which hardneth and contracteth the moisture of the tree, and
so converteth it into wood.

PROBLEM. LII. Three persons having taken Counters, Cards, or other things, to
find how much each one has taken.
CAuse the third party to take a number which man be divided by 4, and as often
as he takes 4, let the second party take 7, and the first take 13, then cause
them to put them all together, and declare the sum of it; which secretly
divide by 3, and the Quotient is the double of the number which the third
person did take. Or cause the third to give unto the second and first, as many
as each of them has; then let the second give unto the first and third, as
many as each of them has; lastly, let the third give unto the second and
first, as many as each of them has; and then ask how much one of them has;
(for they will have then all alike,) so half of that number is the number that
the third person had at the first: which known all is known.

PROBLEM. LIII. How to make a consort of music of many parts with one voice,
or one instrument only?
THis Problem is resolved, so that a finger or player upon an instrument, be
near an Echo which answers his voice or instrument; and if the Echo
answers but once at a time, he may make a double; if twice, then a triple, if
three times, then an harmony of four parts, for it must be such a one that is
able to exercise both tune and note as occasion requires. As when he begins ut,
before the Echo answer, he may begin sol, and pronounce it in the same tune
that ^he Echo answers, by which means you ^ave a fifth, agreeable consort of
music: then in the same time that the Echo follows, to sound the second note
sol, he may sound forth another sol higher or lower to make an eight, the most
perfect consort of music, and so of others, if he will continue his voice with
the Echo, and sing alone with two parts. Now experience shows this to be
true, which often comes to pass in many Churches, making one to believe that
there are many more parts in the music of a Quire, then in effect truly there
are because of the resounding and multiplying of the voic^, and redoubling of
the Quire.

PROBLEM. LIIII. T^ make or describe an Ovall form, or that which near
resembles unto it, at one turning with a pair of common Compasses.
THere are many fine ways in Geometrical practices, to make an Ovall figure
or one near unto it, by several centres: any of which I will not touch upon,
but show how it may be done promptly upon one center only. In which I will say
nothing of the Ovall form, which appears, when one describes circles with
the points of a common Compasses, somewhat deep upon a skin stretched forth
hard: which contracting it self in some parts of the skin makes an Ovall
form. But it will more evidently appear upon a Column or Cylinder: if paper
be placed upon it, then with a pair of Compasses describe as it were a circle
upon it, which paper afterward being extended, will not be circular but
ovall-wise: and a pair of Compasses may be so accommodated, that it may be
done also upon a plain thus. As let the length of the Ovall be H.K, fasten 2
pinnes or nails near the end of that line as F.G, and take a thread which is
double to the length of G.H, or F.K, then if you take a Compass which may have
one foot lower than another, with a spring between his legs: and placing one
foot of this Compass in the Center of the Ovall, and guiding the thread by the
other foot of the Compasses, and so carrying it about: the spring will help to
describe and draw the Ovall form. But in stead of the Compasses it may be done
with ones hand only, as in the figure may appear.

PROBLEM. LV. Of a pu^se difficult to be opened.
IT is made to shut and open with Rings: first at each side there is a strap or
string, as AB. and CD, at the end of which are 2 rings, B and D, and the string
CD passes through the ring B, so that it may not come out again; or be parted
one from another: and so that the ring B, may slide up and down upon the
string CD, then over the purse, there is a piece of Leather EFGH, which covers
the opening of the purse, and there is another piece of Leather AE, which
passes through many rings: which has a slit toward the end I, so great that
the string BC may slide into it: Now all the cunning or craft is how to make
fast or to open the purse, which consists in making the string BC slide through
the side at I, therefore bring down B to I, then make the end I pass through
the ring B, and also D with his string to pass through the slit I, so shall
the purse be fast, and then may the strings be put as before, and it will seem
difficult to discover how it was done. Now to open the purse, put through the
end I through the ring B, and then through the slit I, by which you put through
the string DC, by this way the purse will be opened.

PROBLEM. LVI. Whether it is more hard and admirable without Compasses to make
a perfect circle, or being made to find out the Center of it?
IT is said that upon a time past, two Mathematicians met, and they would make
trial of their industry: the one made instantly a Perfect circle without
Compasses, and the other immediately pointed out the Center thereof with the
point of a needle; now which is the chiefest action? it seems the first, for to
draw the most noblest figure upon a plain Table without other help than the
hand, and the mind, is full of admiration; to find the Center is but to find
out only one point, but to draw a round, there must be almost infinite points,
equidistant from the Center or middle; that in conclusion it is both the Circle
and the Center together. But contrarily it may seem that to find the Center is
more difficult, for what attention, vivacitie, and subtlety must there be in
the spirit, in the eye, in the hand, which will choose the true point amongst a
thousand other points? He that makes a circle keeps always the same distance,
and is guided by a half distance to finish the rest; but he that must find
the Center, must in the same time take heed to the parts about it, and choose
one only point which is equal distant from an infinite of other points which
are in the circumference; which is very difficult. Aristotle confirms this
amongst his morals, and seems to explain the difficulty which is to be found
in the middle of virtue; for it may want a thousand ways, and be far
separated from the true Center of the end of a right mediocritie of a virtuous
action; for to do well it must touch the middle point which is but one, and
there must be a true point which respects the end, and that is but one only. Now
to judge which is the most difficult, as before is said, either to draw the
round or to find the Center, the round seems to be harder than to find the
Center, because that in finding of it, it is done at once, and has an equal
distance from the whole; But, as before, to draw a round there is a visible
point imagined, about which the circle is to be drawn. I esteem that it is as
difficult therefore, if not more, to make the circle without a Center, as to
find the middle or Center of that circle.

PROBLEM. LVII. Any one having taken 3 Cards, to find how many points they
contain
THis is to be exercised upon a full Pack of Cards of 52, then let one choose
any three at pleasure secretly from your sight, and bid him secretly account
the points in each Card, and will him to take as many Cards as will make up 15
to each of the points of his Cards, then will him to give you the rest of the
Cards, for 4 of them being rejected, the rest show the number of points that
his three Cards which he took at the first did contain. As if the 3 Cards were
7, 10, and 4; now 7 wants of 15, 8. take 8 Cards therefore for your first Card:
the 10 wants of 15* 5, take 5 cards for your second card: lastly 4 wants of 15,
11, take 11 Cards for your third Card, and giving him the rest of the Cards,
there will be 25; from which take 4, there remains 21, the number of the three
Cards taken, viz. 7, 10, and 4.

Whosoever would practice this play with 4, 5, 6, or more Cards, and that the
whole number of Cards be more or less than 52; and that the term be 15, 14,
12, etc, this general rule ensuing may serve: multiply the term by the number
of Cards taken at first: to the product add the number of Cards taken, then
subtract this sum from the whole number of Cards; the remainder is the number
which must be subtracted from the Cards, which remains to make up the game: if
there remain nothing after the Subtraction, then the number of Cards remaining
does justly show the number of points which were in the Cards chosen. If the
Subtraction cannot be made, then subtract the number of Cards from that number,
and the remainder added unto the Cards that did remain, the sum will be the
number of points in the Cards taken, as if the Cards were 7, 10, 5, 8, and the
term given were 12; so the first wants 5, the second wants 2, the third wants
7, and the fourth wants 4 Cards, which taken, the party gives you the rest of
the Cards: then secretly multiply 12 by 4, makes 48; to which add 4, the
number of Cards taken makes 52, from which 52 should be taken, rest nothing:
therefore according to the direction of the remainder of the Cards which are
30, is equal to the points of the four Cards taken, viz. 7, 10, 5, 8. Again,
let these five Cards be supposed to be taken, 8, 6, 10, 3, 7; their differences
to 15, the terms are 7, 9, 5, 12, 8, which number of Cards taken, there will
remain but 6 Cards: then privately multiply 15 by 5, makes 75, to which add 5
makes 80, from this take 52 the number of Cards, rest 28, to which add the
remainder of Cards, make 34. the sum with 8, 6, 10, 3, 7.

PROBLEM. LVII. Many Cards placed in diverse ranks, to find which of these
Cards any one has thought.
TAke 15 Cards, and place them in 3 heaps in rank-wise, 5 in a heap: now
suppose any one had thought one of these Cards in any one of the heaps, it is
easy to find which of the Cards it is, and it is done thus; ask him in
which of the heaps it is, which place in the middle of the other two; then
throvv down the Cards by 1 and 1 into three several heaps in rank-vvise,
until all be cast down, then ask him in which of the ranks his Card is,
which heap place in the middle of the other two heaps always, and this do
four times at least, so in putting the Cards altogether, look upon the Cards,
or let their back be toward you, and throw out the eight Card, for that was
the Card thought upon without fail.

PROBLEM. LVIII. Many Cards being offered to sundry persons, to find which of
these Cards any one thinks upon.
ADmit there were 4 persons, then take 4 Cards, and show them to the first, bid
him think one of them, and put these 4 away, then take 4 other Cards, and show
them in like manner to the second person, and bid him think any one of these
Cards, and so do to the third person, and so the fourth, etc. Then take the 4
Cards of the first person, and dispose them in 4 ranks, and upon them the 4
Cards of the second person, upon them also these of the third person, and
lastly, upon them these of the fourth person, then show unto eaeh of these
parties each of these ranks, and ask him if his Card be in it which he
thought, for infallibly that which the first party thought upon will be in
the first rank, and at the bottom, the Card of the second person will be in
the second rank, the Card of the third thought upon will be in the third rank,
and the fourth man's Card will be in the fourth rank, and so of others, if there
be more persons use the same method. This may be practiced by other things,
ranking them by certain numbers: allotted to pieces of money, or such like
things.

PROBLEM. LIX. How to make an instrument to help hearing, as Galileus made to
help the sight?
THink not that the Mathematickes (which has furnished us with such admirable
helps for seeing) is wanting for that of hearing, its well known that long
trunks or pipes make one hear well far off, and experience shows us that in
certain places of the Orcades in a hollow vault, that a man speaking but
softly at one corner thereof, may be audibly understood at the other end:
notwithstanding those which are between the parties cannot hear him speak at
all: And it is a general principle, that pipes do greatly help to strengthen
the activitie of natural causes: we see that (...) contracted in a pipe,
burns 4 or 5 foot high, which would scarce heat, being in the open air: the
rupture or violence of water issuing out of a fountain, shows us that water
being contracted into a pipe, causes a violence in its passage. The Glasses of
Galeileus makes us see how useful pipes or trunkes are to make the light and
species more visible, and proportionable to our eye. It is said that a Prince
of Italy has a fair hall, in which he can with facility hear distinctly the
discourses of those which walk in the adjacent Gardens, which is by certain
vessels and pipes that answer from the Garden to the Hall. Vitruvius makes
mention also of such vessels and pipes, to strengthen the voice and action of
Comedians: and in these times amongst many noble personages* the new kind of
trunkes are used to help the hearing, being made of silver, copper, or other
resounding material; in funnell-wise putting the widest end to him which
speaks, to the end to contract the voice, that so by the pipe applied to the
ear it may be more uniform and less in danger to dissipate the voice, and so
consequently more fortified.

PROBLEM. LX. Of a fine lamp which goes not out, though one carry it in ones
pocket: or being rolled upon the ground will still burn.
IT must be observed that the vessel in which the oil is put into, have two
pinnes on the sides of it, one against another, being included within a circle:
this circle ought to have two other pinnes, to enter into another circle of
brass, or other solid matter: lastly, this second circle has two pinnes,
which may hang within some box to contain the whole lamp, in such manner, that
there be 6 pinnes in different position: Now by the aid of these pegges or
pinnes, the lamp that is in the middle will be always well situated according
to his Center of gravity, though it be turned any way: though if you endeavor
to turn it upside down, it will lie level* which is pleasant and admirable
to behold to those which know not the cause: And it is facil from his to make a
place to rest quiet in, though there be great agitation in the outvvard parts.

PROBLEM. LXI. Any one having thought a Card amongst many Cards, how
artificially to discover it out?
TAke any number of Cards as 10, 12, etc. and open some 4 or 5 to the parties
sight, and bid him think one of them, but let him note whether it be the
first, second, third, etc. then with promptness learn what number of Cards
you had in your hands, and take the other part of the Cards, and place them on
the top of these you hold in your hand; and having done so, ask him whether
his Card were the first, second, etc. then before knowing the number of Cards
that were at the bottom, account backwards until you come to it: so shall you
easily take out the card that he thought upon.

PROBLEM. LXII. Three Women AB.C. carried apples to a mark to sell, A had 20,
B 30* and C 40, they sold as many for a penny, the one as the other: and
brought home one as much money as another, how could this be?
THe answer to the Problem is easy* as suppose at the beginning of the
Market: A* sold ^ her apples at a penny an apple: and sold but 2. which was 2
pence, and so she had 18 left: but B. sold 17. which was 17 pence, and so had
13 left: C. sold 32. which was 32 pence, and so had 8 apples left* then A said
she would not sell her apples so cheap, but would sell them for 3 pence the
piece, which she did: and so her apples came to 54 pence, and B having left but
13 apples sold them at the same rate, which came to 39 pence: and lastly* C.
had but 8 apples, which at the same rate came to 24 pence: these sums of
money which each others before received come to 56 pence, and so much each one
received; and so consequently brought home one as much as another.

PROBLEM. LXIII. Of the properties of some numbers.
FIrst, any two numbers is just the sum of a number, that have equal
distance from the half of that number* the one augmenting, and the other
diminishing, as 7 and 7, of 8 and ^, of 9 and 5, of 10 and 4, of 11 and 3, of
12 and 2, of 13 and ^. as the one is more than the half, the other is less.

Secondly, it is difficult to find two numbers whose sum and product is
alike, (that is) if the numbers be multiplied one by another, and added
together, will be equal, which two numbers are 2 and 2, for to multiply 2 by 2
makes 4, and adding 2 unto 2 makes the same: this property is in no other two
whole numbers, but in broken numbers there are infinite, whose sum and
product will be equal one to another. As Clavius shows upon the 36 Pro. of
the 9th book of Euclide.

Thirdly, the numbers 5 and 6 are called circular numbers, because the circle
turns to the point from whence it begins: so these numbers multiplied by
themselves, do end always in 5 and 6, as 5 times 5 makes 25, that again by 5
makes 125, so 6 times 6 makes 36, and that by 6 makes 216, etc.

Fourthly, the number 6, is the first which Arithmeticians call a perfect
number, that is, whose parts are equal unto it, so the 6 part of it is 1, the
third part is 2, the half is 3, which are all his parts: now 1, 2, and 3, is
equal to 6. It is wonderful to conceive that there is so few of them, and how
rare these numbers are* 50 of perfect men: for betwixt 1 and 1000000000000
numbers there is but ten, that is; 6, 28, 486. 8128. 120816. 2096128. 33550336.
536854528. 8589869056, and 137438691328* with this admirable property, that
alternately they end all in 6 and 8, and the twentieth perfect number is
151115727451553768931328.

Fifthly, the number 9 amongst other privileges carries with it an excellent
property: for take what number you will, either in gross or in part, the nines
of the whole or in its parts rejected, and taken simply will be the same, as ^7
it makes 3 times 9, so whether the nines be rejected of 27, or of the sum of
2 and 7, it is all one, so if the nines were taken away of 240. it is all
one, if the nines were taken away of 2, 4, and 0; for there would remain 6
in either; and so of others.

Sixthly, 11 being multiplied by 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9, will end and begin with
like numbers; so 11 multiplied by 5 makes 55, if multiplied by 8, it makes 88,
etc.

Seventhly, the numbers 220 and 284 being unequal, notwithstanding the parts
of the one number do always equalize the other number: so the aliquot parts of
220 are 110, 54, 44, 22, 20, 11, 10, 5, 4, 2, 1, which together makes 284. the
aliquot parts of 284, are 142, 71, 4, 2, 1. which together makes 220, a thing
rare and admirable, and difficult to find in other numbers.

Eighthly, the numbers 3, 4, 5, (found out by Pythagoras) have an excellent
property in making of Rectangle Triangles: upon which the 47 Pro: of the first
book of Euclide, was grounded, that the square of the Hypothenusal in any such
Triangle, is equal to the square of the other two sides: that is 5, the
Hypothenusal multiplied in 5 makes 25, and 4 multiplied in 4 makes 16, and 3
multiplied in 3, makes 9. but 9 and 16 is equal to 25. or if these numbers 3,
4, 5, be doubled, viz. 6, 8, 10: the square of 10 is equal to the quare of 8
and 6, viz. 10 times 10 makes 100, and 8 times 8 makes 64, and 6 times 6 is 36;
which 36 and 64, put together makes 100, as before: and so may they be Tripled,
Quadrupled, etc.

The use of these numbers 3, 4, 5, are manifold, but it may be applied thus,
for the help of such which plot out Gardens, Houses, encamp Horse or Foot, etc.
Example, take 3 cords* one of 5 yards, another of 4 yards, and another of 3
yards, or the double, triple, decuple, etc. or all in one line, and make knots
at the terms of these measures, so these three parts will make a right angled
Triangle, as A.B.C. and it is easy with this Triangular cord to plot out a
Garden plat, a square building plat, or other long square. As suppose there is
a figure ^DGF. to be plotted, ED of 60 yards broad, and DG 100 yards long.
First measure out ED 60 yards, and at E and D place two pinnes or pegges; then
at E place the Angle of your Triangular cord B, and let the line of the
Triangle AB be in the line ED, which suppose at A make the cord AB fast in E
and A, then put the other two cords of the Triangle until they meet, which
will be in C, and place a pegge at C, take afterward a long cord, and by the
points E and C, augment it unto F 100 yards from E, and at F, place a pegge;
then at F, apply your Triangular cord, as you did at ^, and so may you draw the
line FG as long as ED, viz. 60 yards. Lastly, it is easy to draw the line GD,
and so the rectanguled figure or long square shall be plotted, whose breadth is
60 yards, and length 100 yards, as was required: and to examine this, measure
EG, then if FD be as long, the figure is true: otherwise it is defective, and
may easily be amended.

I^ one be taken from any square number which is odd, the square o^ half of
it being added to the first square, will make a square number.

The square of half any even number +. 1 being added to that even number makes
a square number, and the even number taken from it leaves a square number.

If odd numbers be continually added from the unity successively, there will
be made all square numbers, and if cubick numbers be added successively from
the unity, there will be likewise made square numbers.

PROBLEM. LXIV. Of an excellent lamp, which serves or furnishes it self with
oil, and burns a long time.
I Speak not here of a common lamp which Ca^danus writes upon in his book de
subtilita^^, for that is a little vessel in columne-wise, which is full of
Oil, and because there is but one little hole at the bottom near the week
or match; the oil runs not, for fear that there be emptiness above: when
the match is kindled it begins to heat the lamp, and rarefying the oil it
issues by this occasion: and so sends his more airie parts above to avoid
vacuitie.

But that which I here deliver, is more ingenious, the principal piece of
which is a vessel, as CD. which has near the bottom a hole, and a funnell or
pipe C. and then a bigger funnell, which passes through the middle of the
vessel, having an opening at D near the E top, and another at the bottom as
at E, near the vessel under it, so that the pipe touch it not: the vessel
being thus made, fill it with oil, and opening the hole C. the oil running
out will stop the hole at E, or throwing in oil into the vessel underneath,
until E be stopped; then the oil at C will not run* because no air can
come into the pipe DE. Now as the oil burns and consumes in the vessel AB,
the hole at E, will begin to be open, then immediately will C begin to run to
fill up AB. and E being stopped with the oil, the oil at C cease to run.

It is certain that such a lamp the Atheniaus used, which lasted a whole
year without being touched: which was placed before the statue of Minerva, for
they might put a certain quantity of oil in the lamp CD, and a match to
burn without being consumed: such as the naturalists write of, by which the
lamp will furnish it self, and so continue in burning: and here may be noted
that the oil may be poured in, at the top of the vessel at a little hole, and
then made fast again that the air get not in.

PROBLEM. LXV. Of the play at Keyles or nine Pinnes.
YOu will scarce believe that with one bowl and at one blow playing freely,
one may strike down all the Keyles at once: yet from Mathematical principles
it is easy to be demonstrated, that if the hand of him that plays were so
well assured by experience, as reason induces one thereto; one might at one
blow strike down all the Keyles, of at least 7 or 8, or such a number as one
pleases.

For they are but 9 in all disposed or placed in a perfect square, having three
every way. Let us suppose then that a good player beginning to play at 1
somewhat low, should so strike it, that it should strike down the Keyles 2 and
5, and these might in their violence strike down the Keyles 3, 6, and 9, and
the bowl being in motion may strike down the Keyle 4, and 7; which 4 Keyle may
strike the Keyle 8, and so all the 9 Keyles may be stricken down at once.

PROBLEM. LXIV. Of Spectacles of pleasure.
SImple Spectacles of blew, yellow, red or green color, are proper to recreate
the sight, and will present the objects died in like color that the Glasses
are, only those of the green do somewhat degenerate; instead of showing a
lively color it will represent a pale dead color, and it is because they are
not dyed green enough, or receive not light enough for green: and color
these images that pass through these Glasses unto the bottom of the eye.

EXAMINATION.
IT is certain, that not only Glasses dyed green, but all other Glasses
colored, yield the app^arances of objects strong or weak in color according
to the quantity of the dye, more or less, as one being very yellow, another a
pale yellow; now all colors are not proper to Glasses to give color, hence
the defect is not that they want faculty to receive light, or resist the
penetration of the beams; for in the same Glasses those which are most dyed,
give always the objects more high colored and obscure, and those which are
less dyed give them more pale and clear: and this is daily made manifest by
the painting of Glass, which hinders more the penetration of the light than
dying does, where all the matter by fire is forced into the Glass, leaving it
in all parts transparent.

Spectacles of Crystal cut with diverse Angles diamond-wise do make a
mavelous multiplication of the appearances, for looking toward a house it
becomes as a Town, a Town becomes like a City, an armed man seems as a whole
company caused solely by the diversity of refractions, for as many plains as
there are on the outside of the spectacle, so many times will the object be
multiplied in the appearance, because of diverse Images cast into the eye.
These are pleasurable spectacles for avaricious persons that love Gold and
silver, for one piece will seem many, or one heap of money will seem as a
treasury: but all the mischief is, he will not have his end in the enjoying of
it, for endeavoring to take it, it will appear but a deceitful Image, or
delusion of nothing. Here may you note that if the finger be directed by one
and the same ray or beam, which points to one and the same object, then at
the first you may touch that visible object without being deceived: otherwise
you may fail often in touching that which you see. Again, there are
Spectacles made which do diminish the thing seen very much, and bring it to a
fair perspective form, especially if one look upon a fair Garden plat, a
greater walk, a stately building, or great Court, the industry of an exquisite
Painter cannot come near to express the lively form of it as this Glass
will represent it; you will have pleasure to see it really experimented, and
the cause of this is, that the Glasses of th^se Spectacles are hollow and
thinner in the middle, than at the edges by which the visuall Angle is made
lesser: you may observe a further secret in these Spectacles, for in placing
them upon a window one may see those that pass to and fro in the streets,
without being seen of any, for their property is to raise up the objects that
it looks upon.

Now I would not pass this Problem without saying something of Galileus
admirable Glass, for the common simple perspective Glasses give to aged men
but the eyes or sight of young men, but this of Galileus gives a man an Eagles
eye, or an eye that pierces the heavens: first it discovers the spottie and
shadowed opacous bodies that are found about the Sun, which darknet and
diminishes the splendour of that beautiful and shining Luminary: secondly, it
shows the new Planets that accompany Saturn and Jupiter: thirdly, in Venus is
seen the new, full, and quartill increase; as in the Moon by her separation
from the Sun: fourthly, the artificial structure of this instrument helps
us to see an innumerable number of stars, which otherwise are obscured, by
reason of the natural weakness of our sight, yea the stars in via lactea
are seen most apparently; where there seem no stars to be, this Instrument
makes apparently to be seen, and further delivers them to the eye in their true
and lively color, as they are in the heavens: in which the splendour of some is
as the Sun in his most glorious beauty. This Glass has also a most
excellent use in observing the body of the Moon in time of Eclipses, for it
augments it manifold, and most manifestly shows the true form of the cloudy
substance in the Sun; and by it is seen when the shadow of the earth begins
to eclipse the Moon, and when totally she is over shadowed: besides the
celestial uses which are made of this Glass, it has another noble property;
it far exceeds the ordinary perspective Glasses, which are used to see
things remote upon the earth, for as this Glass reaches up to the heavens and
excels them there in his performance, so on the earth it claims
preheminency, for the objects which are farthest remote, and most obscure, are
seen plainer than those which are near at hand, scorning as it were all small
and trivial services, as leaving them to an inferior help: great use may be
made of this Glass in discovering of Ships, Armies, etc. Now the apparel or
parts of this instrument or Glass, is very mean or simple, which makes it the
more admirable (seeing it performs such great service) having but a unequal
Glass thickest in the middle, to unite and amasse the rays, and make the
object the greater: to the augmenting the visuall Angle, as also a pipe or
trunk to amasse the Species, and hinder the greatness of the light which is
about it: (to see well, the object must be well enlightened, and the eye in
obscurity;) then there is adjoined unto it a Glass of a short sight to
distinguish the rays, which the other would make more confused if alone. As
for the proportion of those Glasses to the Trunk, though there be certain
rules to make them, yet it is often by hazard that there is made an excellent
one there being so many difficulties in the action, therefore many ought to be
tried, seeing that exact proportion, in Geometrical calculation cannot serve
for diversity of sights in the observation.

PROBLEM. LXVII. Of the Adamant or Magnes, and the needles touched therewith.
WHo would believe if he saw not with his eyes, that a needle of steel being
once touched with the magnes, turns not once, not a year* but as long as the
World lasts; his end toward the North and South, yea though one remove it,
and turn it from his position, it will come again to his points of North and
South. Who would have ever thought that a brute stone black and ill formed,
touching a ring of Iron, should hang it in the air, and that ring support a
second, that to support a third, and so unto 10, 12, or more, according to the
strength of the magnes; making as it were a chain without a line, without
souldering together, or without any other thing to support them only; but a
most occult and hidden virtue, yet most evident in this effect, which
penetrateth insensibly from the first to the second, from the second to the
third, etc.

Is it not a wonder to see that a needle touched once will draw other needles;
and so a nail, the point of a knife, or other pieces of Iron? Is it not a
pleasure to see how the magnes will turn file dust, or move needles, or nails
being upon a Table, or upon a piece of paper? for as soon as the magnes turns
or moves over, it moves also: who is it that would not be ravished as it were,
to see a hand of Iron write upon a planke, without seeing the Magnes which
causes that motion* behind the planke, or to make an image of Iron to run up
and down a Turret: now infinite of such inventions is proper to be extracted
from the properties of the magnes.

What is there in the world that is more capable to cast a deeper astonishment
in our minds than a great massy substance of Iron to hang in the air in the
midst of a building without any thing in the world touching it, only but the
air? As some histories assure us, that by the aid of a Magnes or Adamant,
placed at the roof of one of the Turkish Synagogues in Meca: the sepulcher of
that infamous Mah^met rests suspended in the air; and Pliny in his natural
History writes that the Architect or Democrates did begin to vault the Temple
of A^sin^e in Alexandria, with store of magnes to produce the like deceit, to
hang the sepulcher of that Goddess likewise in the air.

I should pass the bounds of my counterpoise, if I should divulge all the
secrets of this stone, and should expose my self to the laughter of the world:
if I should brag to show others the cause how this appears, than in its own
natural sympathy, for why is it that a magnes with one end will cast the Iron
away, and attract it with the other? from whence comes it that all the magnes
is not proper to give a true touch to the needle, but only in the two Poles of
the stone: which is known by hanging the stone by a thread in the air until
it be quiet, or placed upon a piece of Cork in a dish of water, or upon some
thin board, for the Pole of the stone will then turn toward the Poles of
the world, and point out the North and South, and so show by which of these
ends the needle is to be touched?

From whence comes it that there is a variation in the needle, and points not
out truly the North and South of the world, but only in some place of the earth?

How is it that the needle made with pegges and enclosed within two Glasses,
shows the height of the Pole, being elevated as many degrees as the Pole is
above the Horizon?

What Is the cause that fire and Garlic takes away the property of the magnes?
There are many great hidden mysteries in this stone, which have troubled the
heads of the most learned in all ages; and to this time the world remains
ignorant of declaring the rrue cause thereof.

Some say, that by help of the Magnes persons which are absent may know each
others mind, as if one being here at London, and another at Prague in Germany:
if each of them had a needle touched with one magnes, then the virtue is such
that in the same time that the needle which is at Prague shall move, this that
is at London shall also; provided that the parties have like secret notes or
alphabets, and the observation be at a set hour of the day or night; and when
the one party will declare unto the other, then let that party move the needle
to these letters which will declare the matter to the other, and the moving of
the other parties needle shall open his intention.

The invention is subtle, but I doubt whether in the world there can be found
so great a stone* or such a Magnes which carries with it such virtue: neither
is it expedient, for treasons would be then too frequent and open.

EXAMINATION.
THe experimental difference of rejection, and attraction proceeds not from
the different nature of Stones, but from the quality of the Iron; and the
virtue of the stone consists only, and especially in his poles, which being
hanged in the Air, turns one of his ends always naturally toward the South,
and the other toward the North: but if a rod of Iron be touched with one of
the ends thereof, it has the like property in turning North and South, as the
magnes has: notwithstanding the end of the Iron Rod touched, has a contrary
position, to that end of the stone that touched it; yet the same end will
attract it, and the other end reject it: and so contrarily this may easily be
experimented upon two needles touched with one or different stones, though they
have one and the same position; for as you come unto them apply one end of the
magnes near unto them, the North of the one will abhor the North of the
other, but the North of the one will always approach to the South of the
other: and the same affection is in the stones themselves. For the finding of
the Poles of the magnes, it may be done by holding a small needle between your
fingers softly, and so moving it from part to part over the stone until it be
held perpendicular, for that shall be one of the Poles of the stone which you
may mark out; in like manner find out the other Pole: Now to find out which
of those Poles is North or South, place a needle being touched with one of the
Poles upon a smooth unequal body, (as the nail of ones finger or such like,)
and mark which way the end of the needle that was touched turns: if to the
South, then the point that touched it was the South-Pole, etc. and it is most
certain and according to reason and experience: that if it be suspended in
aequilibrio in the air, or supported upon the water, it will turn contrary to
the needle that touches it; for then the pole that was marked for the South
shall turn to the North, etc.

PROBLEM. LXVIII. Of the properties of Aeolipiles or bowels to blow the fire.
THese are concave vessels of Brass or Copper or other material, which may
endure the, fire: having a small hole very narrow, by which it is filled with
water, then placing it to the fire, before it be hot there is no effect seen;
but as soon as the heat does penetrate it, the water begins to rarefie, and
issues forth with a hidious and marvelous force; it is pleasure to see how it
blows the fire with great noise.

Vitruvius in his first book of Architecture, Cap. 8: approves from these
Engines, that wind is no other thing than a quantity of vapors and
exhalations agitated with the air by rarefaction and condensation, and we may
draw a consequence from it, to show that a little water may engender a very
great quantity of vapors and air: for a Glass of water thrown into an
Aeolipile will keep blowing near a whole hour, sending forth his vapors a
thousand times greater than it is extended.

Now touching the form of these vessels, they are not made of one like
fashion: some makes them like a bovvle, some like a head painted representing
the vvinde, some make them like a Pear: as though one would put it to roast at
the fire, when one would have it to blovv, for the tail of it is hollovv, in
form of a funnell, having at the top a very little hole no greater than the
head of a pin.

Some do accustom to put within the Aeolipile a crooked funnell of many
foldings, to the end that the vvinde that impetuously rolls* to and fro
within, may imitate the noise of thunder. Others content themselves with a
simple funnell placed right upvvard, somevvhat vvider at the top than
elsewhere like a Cone, whose basis is the mouth of the funnell: and there may
be placed a bovvle of Iron or Brass, which by the vapors that are cast out
will cause it to leap up, and dance over the mouth of the Aeolipile.

Lastly, some apply near to the hole small Windmils, or such like, which easily
turn by reason of the vapors; or by help of two or more bovved funnels, a
bowl may be made to turne^ these Aeolipiles are of excellent use for the
melting of mettalls and such like.

Now it is cunning and subtlety to fill one of these Aeolipiles with water at
so little a hole, and therefore requires the knowledge of a Philosopher to
find it out: and the way is thus.

Heat the Aeolipiles being empty, and the air which is within it will become
extremely rarefied; then being thus hot throw it into water, and the air will
begin to be condensed: by which means it will occupy less room, therefore
the water will immediately enter in at the hole to avoid vacuitie: thus you
have some practical speculation upon the Aeolipile.

PROBLEM. LXIX. Of the Thermometer: or an instrument to measure the degrees of
heat and cold in the air.
THis Instrument is like a Cylindricall pipe of Glass, which has a little
ball or bowl at the top* the small end of which is placed into a vessel of
water below, as by the figure may be seen.

Then put some colored liquor into the Cylindricall glass, as blew, red,
yellow, green, or such like: such as is not thick. This being done the use may
be thus.

First, I say, that as the air enclosed in the Thermometer is rarefied or
condensed, the water will evidently ascend or descend in the Cylinder: which
you may try easily by carrying the Thermometer from a place that is hot unto a
place that is cold, or without removing of it; if you softly apply the palm of
the hand upon the ball of the Thermometer: the Glass being so thin, and the
air so capable of rarefaction, that at the very instant you may see the water
descend: and your hand being taken away, it will softly ascend to his forms
place again. This is yet more sensible when one heats the ball at the top with
his breath, as if one would say a word in his ear to make the water to descend
by command, and the reason of this motion is, that the air heated in the
Thermometer, does rarefie and dilate, requiring a greater place; hence presses
the water and causes it to descend: contrariwise when the air cools and
condenseth, it occupies less room; now nature abhorring vacuity, the water
naturally ascends. In the second place, I say, that by this means one may
know the degrees of heat and cold, which are in the air each hour of the day;
forasmuch as the exterior air is either hot or cold, the air which is
enclosed in the Thermometer does likewise either rarefie or condense, and
therefore the water ascends or descends; so you shall see that the water in the
morning is mounted high, afterward by little and little it will descend toward
noone or midday; and toward evening it will again ascend: so in winter it
will mount so high, that all the Cylinder of the Thermometer will be full, but
in Summer, it will descend so low that scarce there will be perceaved in it any
water at all.

Those that will determine this change by numbers and degrees, may draw a line
upon the Cylinder of the Thermometer; and divide it into 4 degrees, according
to the ancient Philosophers, or into 4 degrees according to the Physicians,
dividing each of these 8 into 8 others: to have in all 64 divisions, and by
this way they may not only distinguish upon what degree the water ascends
in the morning, at midday, and at any other hour: but also one may know how
much one day is hotter or colder than another: by marking how many degrees the
water ascends or descends, one may compare the hottest and coldest days
in a whole year together with these of another year: again one may know
how much hotter one room is than another, by which also one might keep a
chamber, a furnace, a stove, etc. alvvayes in an equality of heat, by making
the water of the Thermometer rest alvvayes upon one and the same degree: in
brief, one may judge in some measure the burning of Fevers, and near unto what
extension the air can be rarefied by the greatest heat.

Many make use of these glasses to judge of the vveather: for it is observed
that if the water fall in 3 or 4 hours a degree or thereabout, that rain
insueth; and the water will stand at that stay, until the vveather change:
mark the water at your going to bed, for if in the morning it has descended
rain follows, but if it be mounted higher, it argues fair weather: so in
very cold weather, if it fall suddenly, it is snow or some sleekey weather that
wiil ensue,

PROBLEM. LXX. Of the proportion of humane bodies of statues, of Colossus or
huge images, and of monstrous Giants.
PYthagoras had reason to say that man is the measure of all things.

First, because he is the most perfect amongst all bodily creatures, and
according to the Maxim of Philosophers, that which is most perfect and the
first in rank, measures all the rest.

Secondly, because in effect the ordinary measure of a foot, the inch, the
cubit, the pace, have taken their names and greatness from humane bodies.

Thirdly, because the symmetrie and concordancie of the parts is so admirable,
that all works which are well proportionable, as namely the building of
Temples, of Ships, of Pillars, and such like pieces of Architecture, are in
some measure fashioned and composed after his proportion. And we know that the
Arc of Noah built by the commandment of God, was in length 300 Cubits, in
breadth 50 Cubits, in height or depth 30 cubits, so that the length contains
the breadth 6 times, and 10 times the depth: now a man being measured you will
find him to have the same proportion in length, breadth, and depth.

Vilalpandus treating of the Temple of Solomon (that chieftaine of works) was
modulated all of good Architecture, and curiously to be observed in many pieces
to keep the same proportion as the body to his parts: so that by the greatness
of the work and proportionable symmetrie, some dare assure themselves that by
knowledge of one only part of that building, one might know all the measures
of that goodly structure.

Some Architects say that the foundation of houses, and basis of columns, are
as the foot; the top, and roof as the head; the rest as the body: those which
have been somewhat more curious, have noted that as in humane bodies, the
parts are uniforme, as the nose, the mouth, etc. these which are double are put
on one side or other, with a perfect equality in the same Architecture.

In like manner, some have been yet more curious than solid; comparing all the
ornaments of a Corinth to the parts of the face, as the brow, the eyes, the
nose, the mouth; the rounding of Pillars, to the vvrithing of hair, the
channells of columns, to the fouldings of vvomens Robes, etc.

Now building being a work of the best Artist, there is much reason why man
ought to make his imitation from the chief work of nature; which is man.

Hence it is that Vitru^ius in his third book, and all the best Architectes,
treat of the proportion of man; amongst others Albert Durens has made a whole
book of the measures of man's body, from the foot to the head, let them read it
who will, they may have a prefect knowledge thereof: But I will content my self
and it may satisfy some with that which follows.

First, the length of a man well made, which commonly is called height, is
equal to the distance from one end of his finger to the other: when the arms
are extended as wide as they may be.

Secondly, if a man have his feet and hands extended or stretched in form of
S. Andrews Cross, placing one foot of a pair of Compasses upon his navill,
one may describe a circle which will pass by the ends of his hands and feet,
and drawing lines by the terms of the hands and feet, you have a square within
a circle.

Thirdly, the breadth of man, or the space which is from one side to another;
the breast, the head, and the neck, make the 6 part of all the body taken in
length or height.

Fourthly, the length of the face is equal to the length of the hand, taken
from the small of the arm, unto the extremity of the longest finger.

Fifthly, the thickness of the body taken from the belly to the back; the one
or the other is the tenth part of the whole body, or as some will have it, the
ninth part, little less.

Sixthly, the height of the brow, the length of the nose, the space between the
nose and the chinne, the length of the ears, the greatness of the thumb, are
perfectly equal one to the other.

What would you say to make an admirable report of the other parts, if I should
reckon them in their least? but in that I desire to be excused, and will rather
extract some conclusion upon* that which is delivered.

In the first place, knowing the proportion of a man, it is easy to Painters,
Image-makers, etc. perfectly to proportionate their work; and by the same is
made most evident, that which is related of the images and statues of Greece,
that upon a day diverse workmen having enterprised to make the face of a man,
being severed one from another in sundry places, all the parts being made and
put together, the face was found in a most lively and true proportion.

Secondly, it is a thing most clear, that by the help of proportion, the body
of Hercules was measured by the knowledge of his foot only, a Lion by his
claw, the Giant by his thumb, and a man by any part of his body. For so it was
that Pythagoras having measured the length of Hercules foot, by the steps which
were left upon the ground, found out all his height: and so it was that Phidias
having only the claw of a Lion, did figure and draw out all the beast
according to his true type or form, so the exquisite Painter Timantes, having
painted a Pygmey or Dwarf, which he measured with a fadome made with the inch
of a Giant, it was sufficient to know the greatness of that Giant-

To be short, we may by like method come easily to the knowledge of many fine
antiquities touching Statues, Colossus, and monstrous Giants, only supposing
one had found but one only part of them, as the head, the hand, the foot or
some bone mentioned in ancient Histories.

Of Statues, of Colossus, or huge images.
VItruvius relates in his second book, that the Architect Dinocrates was
desirous to put out to the world some notable thing, went to Alexander the
great, and proposed unto him a high and special piece of work which he had
projected: as to figure out the mount Athos in form of a great Statue, which
should hold in his right hand a Town capable to receive ten thousand men: and
in his left hand a vessel to receive all the water that flows from the
Mountain, which with an ingine should cast into the Sea. This is a pretty
project, said Alexander, but because there was not field-roome thereabout to
nourish and retain the Citizens of that place, Alexander was wise not to
entertain the design.

Now let it be required of what greatness this Statue might have been, the
Town in his right hand, and the receiver of water in his left hand if it had
been made.

For the Statue, it could not be higher than the Mountain it self, and the
Mountain was about a mile in height plumb or perpendicular; therefore the hand
of this Statue ought to be the 10th part of his height, which would be 500
foot, and so the breadth of his hand would be 250 foot, the length now
multiplied by the breadth, makes an hundred twenty five thousand square feet,
for the quantity of his hand to make the town in, to lodge the said 10
thousand men, allowing to each man near about 12 foot of square ground: now
judge the capacity of the other parts of this Collossus by that which is
already delivered.

Secondly, Pliny in his 34 book of his natural History, speaks of the famous
Colossus that was at Rhodes, between whose legs a Ship might pass with his
sails open or displayed, the Statue being of 70 cubits high: and other
Histories report that the Sarasens having broken it, did load 900 Camels with
the metal of it, now what might be the greatness and weight of this Statue?

For answer, it is usually allowed for a Camels burden 1200 pound weight,
therefore all the Collosus did weigh 1080000 pound weight, which is ten hundred
and fourscore thousand pound weight.

Now according to the former rules, the head being the tenth part of the body,
this Statues head should be of 7 cubits, that is to say, 10 foot and a half,
and seeing that the Nose, the brovv, and the thumb, are the third part of the
face, his Nose was 3 foot and a half long, and so much also was his thumb
in length: now the thickness being alvvayes the third part of the length, it
should seem that his thumb was a foot thick at the least.

Thirdly, the said Pliny in the same place reports that Nero did cause to come
out of France into Italy, a brave and bold Statue-maker called Zenodocus, to
erect him a Colossus of brass, which was made of 120 foot in height, which
Nero caused to be painted in the same height. Now would you know the greatness
of the members of this Colossus, the breadth would be 20 foot, his face 12
foot, his thumb and his nose 4 foot, according to the proportion before
delivered.

Thus I have a fair field or subject to extend my self upon, but it is upon
another occasion that it was undertaken, let us speak therefore a word touching
the Giants, and then pass away to the matter.

Of monstrous Giants.
YOu will hardly believe all that which I say touching this, neither will I
believe all that which Authors say upon this subject: notwithstanding you nor I
cannot deny but that long ago there have been men of a most prodigious
greatness; for the holy vvritings witness this themselves in Deuteronomy, Chap. 3.
that there was a certain Giant called Og, of the Town of Rabath, who had a
bed of Iron, the length thereof was 9 cubits, and in breadth 4 cubits.

So in the first of Kings Chap. 17. there is mention made of Goliath, whose
height was a palm and 6 cubits, that is more then 9 foot, he was armed from
the head to the foot, and his Curiat only with the Iron of his lance, weighed
five thousand and six hundred shekels, which in our common weight, is more than
233 pound, of 12 ounces to the pound: Now it is certain, that the rest of his
arms taking his Target, Helmet, Bracelets, and other Armor together, did
weigh at the least 5 hundred pound, a thing prodigious; seeing that the
strongest man that now is, can hardly bear 200 pound, yet this Giant carries
this as a vesture without pain.

Solinus reports in his 5 Chap. of his History, that during the Grecians
war after a great overflowing of the Rivers, there was found upon the sands
the carcass of a man, whose length was 33 Cubits, (that is 49 foot and a half)
therefore according to the proportion delivered, his face should be 5 foot in
length, a thing prodigious and monstrous.

Pliny in his 7. book and 16 Chap. says, that in the Isle of Crete or Candie,
a mountain being cloven by an Earthquake, there was a body standing upright,
which had 46 Cubits of height: some believe that it was the body of Orion or
Othus, (but I think rather it was some Ghost or some delusion) whose hand
should have been 7 foot, and his nose two foot and a half long. But that which
Plutarch in the l^fe of Sertorius reports of, is more strange, who says, that
in Timgy a Morative Town, where it is thought that the Giant Antheus was
buried, Sertorius could not believe that which was reported of his prodigious
greatness, caused his sepulcher to be opened, and found that his body did
contain 60 Cubits in length, then by proportion he should be 10 Cubits or 15
foot in breadth; 9 foot for the length of his face, 3 foot for his thumb, which
is near the capacity of the Colossus at Rhodes.

But behold here a fine fable of Symphoris Campesius, in his book entitled
Hortus Gallicus, who says that in the Kingdom of Sicilie, at the foot of a
mountain near Trepane, in opening the foundation of a house, they found a
Cave in which was said a Giant, which held in stead of a staff a great post
like the mast of a Ship: and going to handle it, it mouldered all into ashes,
except the bones which remained of an exceeding great measure, that in his head
there might be easily placed 5 quarters of corn, and by proportion it should
seem that his length was 200 cubits, or 300 foot: if he had said that he had
been 300 cubits in length, then he might have made us believe that Noah's Ark
was but great enough for his sepulcher.

Who can believe that any man ever had 20 cubits, or 30 foot in length for his
face, and a nose of 10 foot long? but it is very certain that there have been
men of very great stature, as the holy Scriptures before witness, and many
Authors worthy of belief relate: Josephus Acosta in his first book of the
Indian History, Chap. 19. a late writer, reports, that at Peru was found the
bones of a Giant, which was 3 times greater than these of ours are, that is 18
foot, for it is usually attributed to the tallest ordinary man in these our
times but 6 foot of length; and Histories are full of the description of other
Giants of 9, 10, and 12 foot of height, and it has been seen in our times some
which have had such heights as these.

PROBLEM. LXXI. Of the game at the Palm, at Trap, at Bowls, Paile-maile, and
others.
THe Mathematickes often finds place in sundry Games to aid and assist the
Gamesters, though not unknown unto them, hence by Mathematical principles,
the games at Tennis may be assisted, for all the moving in it is by right lines
and reflections. From whence comes it, that from the appearances of flat or
unequal Glasses, the production and reflection of the species are explained; is
it not by right lines? in the same proportion one might sufficiently deliver
the motion of a Ball or Bowl by Geometrical lines and angles.

But the exercise, experience, and dexterity (...) the player seems more in
this action than an^ other precepts: notwithstanding I will deliver here some
maxims, which being reduced to practice, and joined to experience, will give a
great advantage to those which would make use of them in such gamings.

And the first maxim is thus: When a Bowl touches another Bowl* or when a
trapstick strikes the Ball, the moving of the Ball is made in a right line,
which is drawn from the Center of the Bowl by the point of contingencie.

Secondly, in all kind of such motion; when a Ball or Bowl rebounds, be it
either against wood, a wall, upon a Drum, a pavement, or upon a Racket; the
incident Angle is always equal to the Angle of reflection.

Now following these maxims, it is easy to canclude, first, in what part of
the wood or wall, one may make the Bowl or Ball go to reflect or rebound, to
such a place as one would. Secondly, how one may cast a Bowl upon another, in
such sort that the first or the second shall go and meet with the third,
keeping the reflection or Angle of incidence equal.

Thirly, how one may touch a Bowl to send it to what part one pleases: such
and many other practices may be done. At the exercises at Keyls there must be
taken heed that the motion slack or diminish by little and little, and may be
noted that the Maxims of reflections cannot be exactly observed by local
motion, as in the beams of light and of other quallities, whereof it is
necessary to supply it by industry or by strength, otherwise one may be
frustrated in that respect.

PROBLEM. LXXII. Of the Game of square forms.
NVmbers have an admirable secrecy, diversely applied, as before in part is
showed, and here I will say something by way of transmutation of numbers.

It is reported that at a certain passage of a square form, there were 4
gates opposite one to another, that is, one in the middle of each side, and
that there were appointed 9 men to defend each front thereof, some at the
gates, and the other at each corner or Angle, so that each Angle served to
assist two faces of the square, if need required: Now this square passage being
thus manned to have each side 9, it happened that 4 Soldiers coming by, desired
of the Governor of the passage, that they might be entertained into service,
who told them he could not admit of more then 9, upon each side of the square:
then one of the Soldiers being versed in the Art of numbers, said, that if he
would take them into pay, they would easily place themselves amongst the rest,
and yet keep still the order of 9, for each face of the square to defend the
Angles and Gates, to which the Governors agreed, and these Soldiers being
there some few weeks liked not their service but endeavored to remove
themselves, and so labored with some of the the rest; that each of these four
Soldiers took away his cumrade with him, and so departed; yet left to defend
each side of the passage, and how may this be?

It Is answered thus, in the first form the men were as the figure A, then each
of these 4 Soldiers placed themselves at each Gate, and removing one man from
each Angle to each Gate, then would they be also 9 in each side according to
the figure B. Lastly, these 4 Soldiers at the Gates take away each one his
Cumrade, and placing two of these men which are at each Gate to each Angle,
there will be still 9 for each side of the square, according to the figure C.
In like manner if there were 12 men, how might they be placed about a square
that the first side shall have 3 every way, then disordered, so that they might
be 4 every way; and lastly, being transported might make 5 every way? and this
is according to the figures, F.G.H

PROBLEM. LXXIII. How to make the string of a Viole sensibly shake, without any
one touching it?
THis is a miracle in music, yet easy to be experimented. Take a Viole or
other Instrument, and choose two strings, so that there be one between them;
make these two strings, agree in one and the same tune: then move the
Viole-bowe upon the greater string, and you shall see a wonder: for in the same
time that that shakes which you play upon, the other will likewise sensibly
shake without any one touching it; and it is more admirable that the string
which is between them will not shake at all: and if you put the first string to
another tune or note, and loosing the pin of the string, or stopping it with
your finger in any fret, the other string will not shake: and the same will
happen if you take two Violes, and strike upon a string of the one, the string
of the other will sensibly shake.

Now it may be demanded, how comes this shaking, is it in the occult sympathy,
or is it in the strings being wound up to like notes or tunes, that so easily
the other may receive the impression of the air, which is agitated or moved by
the shaking or the trembling of the other? and whence is it that the Viole-bowe
moved upon the first string, does instantly in the same time move the third
string, and not the second? if the cause be not either in the first or second?
I leave to others to descant on.

EXAMINATION.
IN this Examination we have something else to imagine, than the bare sympathy
of the Cords one to another: for first there ought to be considered the
different effect that it produces by extention upon one and the same Cord in
capacity: then what might be produced upon different Cords of length and
bigness to make them accord in a unisone or octavo, or some consort
intermediate: this being naturally examined, it will be facill to lay open a
way to the knowledge of the true and immediate cause of this noble and
admirable Phaenomeny. Now this will sensibly appear when the Cords are of
equal length and greatness, and set to an unisone; but when the Cords differ
from their equality, it will be less sensible: hence in one and the same
Instrument, Cords at a unisone shall excite or shake more than that which is at
an octavo, and more than those which are of an intermediate proportional
consort: as for the other consorts they are not exempted, though the effect be
not so sensible, yet more in one than in another: and the experiment will seem
more admirable in taking 2 Lutes, Viols, etc. and in setting them to one tune:
for then in touching the Cord of the one, it will give a sensible motion to the
Cord of the other: and not only so but also a harmony.

PROBLEM. LXXIIII. Of a vessel which contains three several kinds of
liquor, all put in at one bung-hole, and drawn out at one tap severally without
mixture.
THe vessel is thus made, it must be divided into three Cells for to contain
the three liquors, which admit to be Sack, Claret, and White Wind: Now in the
bung-hole there is an Engine with three pipes, each extending to his proper
Cell, into which there is put a broach or funnell pierced in three places, in
such sort, that placing one of the holes right against the pipe which answers
unto him, the other two pipes are stopped; then when it is full, turn the
funnel, and then the former hole will be stopped, and another open, to cast in
other wine without mixing it with the other.

Now to dravv out also without mixture, at the bottom of the vessel there
must be placed a pipe or broach, which may have three pipes; and a cock
piersed with three holes so artificially done, that turning the cock, the
whole which answers to such of the pipes that is placed at the bottom, may
issue forth such wine as belongs to that pipe, and turning the Cock to
another pipe, the former hole vvil be stopped; and so there will issue forth
another kind of wine without any mixtures; but the Cock may be so ordered
that there may come out by it two wines together, or all three kinds at once:
but it seems best when that in one vessel and at one Cock, a man may draw
several kinds of wine, and which he pleases to drink.

PROBLEM. LXXV. Of burning-Glasses.
IN this ensuing discourse I will show the invention of Prom^theus, how to
steal fire from Heaven, and bring it down to the Earth; this is done by a
little round Glass, or made of steel, by which one may light a Candle, and
make it flame, kindle Firebrarnds to wake them burn, melt Lead, ^inne, Gold,
and Silver, in a little time* with as great ease as though it had been put into
a Cruzet over a great fire.

Have you not read of Archimedes of Syracu^^, who when he could not come to the
Ships of Ma^cellus* which besieged that place, to hinder and impeach their
aproach, he flung huge stones by his Ingines to sink them into the Sea, and
transformed himself into Jupiter, thundering down from the highest Towers of
the Town, his thunderbolts of lightning into the Ships causing a terrible
burning, in despite of Neptune and his watery region: Z^naras witnesses that
Proclus a brave Mathematician, burned in the same manner the Ships of Vitalian,
which were come to besiege Constantinople; and daily experience may let you see
great effects of burning: for a Bowl of Crystal polished, or a Glass thicker
in the middle than at the edges, will burn exceedingly, nay a bottle full of
water exposed to the Sun will burn when the Sun shines hot, and children
use with a Glass to burn Flies which are against the walls, and their
fellows clothes.

But this is nothing to the burning of those Glasses which are hollow, namely
those which are of steel well polished, according to a par^bolicall or ovall
section. A sphericall Glass, or that which is according to the segment of a
Sphere, burns very effectually about the fourth part of the Diameter;
notwithstanding the Parabolie and Ecliptic sections have a great effect: by
which Glasses there are also diverse figures represented forth to the eye.

The cause of this burning is the uniting of the beams of the Sun, which
heat mightily in the point of concourse or inflammation, which is either by
transmissi^n or reflection* Now it is pleasant to behold when one breaths in
the point of concourse, or throws small dust there, or sprinkles vapors of
hot water in that place; by which the Pyramidall point, or point of
inflammation is known. Now some Authors promise to make Glasses which shall
burn a great distance off, but yet not seen vulgarly produced, of which if
they were made, the Parabolie makes the greatest effect, and is g^nerally held
to be the invention of Archimedes or Pro^^us.

Maginus in the 5 Chap. of his Treatise of sphericall Glasses, shows how one
may serve himself with a concave Glass, to light fire in the shadow, or near
such a place where the Sun shines not, which is by help of a flat Glass, by
which may be made a percussion of the beams of the Sun into the concave
Glass, adding unto it that it serves to good use to put fi^e to a Mine,
provided that the combustible matter be well applied before the concave Glass;
in which he says true: but because all the effect of the practice depends upon
the placing of the Glass and the Powder which he speaks not of: I will deliver
here a rule more general.

How one may place a Burning-glasse with his combust^ble matter in such sort,
that at a convenient hour of the day, the Sun shining, it shall take fire and
burn: Now it is certain that the point of inflammation or burning, is changed
as the Sun changes place, and no more nor less, than the shadow turns about
the style of a Dyall; therefore have regard to the Suns motion, and ^is height
and place: a Bowl of Crystal in the same place that the top of the style is,
and the Powder or other combustible matter under the Meridian, or hour of 12,
1, 2, 3, etc. or any other hour, and under the Suns arch for that day: now the
Sun coming to the hour of 12, to ^, 2, ^, etc. the Sun casting his beams
through the Crystal Bowl, will fire the material or combustible thing, which
meets in the point of burning: the like may be observed of other
Burning-glasses.

EXAMINATION.
IT is certain in the first part of this Problem that Conicall, ^oncave and
sphericall Glasses, of what matter soever, being placed to receive the beams
of the Sun will excite heat, and that heat is so much the greater, by how much
it is near the point of conc^rse or inflamatio^. But that Archimedes or
Proclus d^d fire or burn Ships with such Glasses, the ancient Histories are
silent, yea the selves say nothing: besides the great difficulty that does
oppose it in remoteness, and the matter that the effect is to work upon: Now
by a common Glass we fire things near at hand, from which it seems very facil
to such which are less read, to do it at a far greater distance, and so by
re^ation some deliver to the World by supposition that which never was done in
action: this we say the rather, not to take away the most excellent and
admirable effects which are in Burning-glasses, but to show the variety of
Antiquity, and truth of History: and as touching to burn at a great distance,
as is said of some, it is absolutely impossible; and that the Parabolicall and
Ovall Glasses were of Archimedes and ^roclus invention is much uncertain: for
besides the construction of such Glasses, they are more difficult than the
obtuse concave ones are; and further, they cast not a great heat but near at
hand; for if it be cast far off, the effect is little, and the heat weak, or
otherwise such Glasses must be greatly extended to contract many beams to
amasse a sufficient quantity of beams in Parabolicall and Conicall Glasses,
the point of inflammation ought to concur in a point, which is very difficult
to be done in a due proportion. Moreover if the place be far remote, as is
supposed before, such a Glass cannot be used but at a great inclination of the
Sun* by which the effect of ^urning is d^min^shed, by reason of the weakness
of the Sunne-beames.

And here may be noted in the last part of this Problem, that by r^ason of
obstacles if one plain Glass be not sufficient, a second Glass may be
applied to help it: that so if by one simple reflection it cannot be done, yet
by a double reflection the Sunbeams may be ^ast into the said Caverne or
Mine, and though the reflected beams in this case be weak* yet upon a (...)
c^mbustible matter it will not fail to do the effect.

PROBLEM. LXXVI. Containing many ple^sant Questions by way of Arithmetick^.
J Will not in^ert i^ this Problem that which is drawn from the ^reek
Epigrams, but proposing the Question immediately will give the an^wer also,
without ^^aying to show the manner how they are answered; in this J will (...)
be tied to the ^reek terms, w^^ch J account no^ proper to this place, nei^^er
to my purpose: ^et t^o^e ^ead that will Di^phanta S^^^^biliu^ upon Eu^li^^ and
others, and they may be satisf^ed

Of the (...) the Mule.
IT (...) that ^he Mule and the Ass upon a day (...) a voyage each of them
carried a Barrel full of Wine: now the las^e Ass f^lt her self over-loaden,
complained and bowed under her burden; which the Mule seeing said unto her
being angry, (for it was in the time when beasts spoke) Thou great Ass,
wherefore complainest thou? if I had but only one measure of that which thou
carriest, I should be laden twice as much as thou art, and if J should give a
measure of my loading to thee, yet my burden would be as much as thine.

Now how many measures did each of them carry? Answer, the Mule did carry 7
measures, and the Ass 5 measures: for if the Mule had one of the measures of
the Asses loading, then the Mule would have 8 measures, which is double to 4,
and giving one to the Ass, each of them would have equal burdens: to wit, 6
measures apiece.

Of the number of Soldiers that fought before old Troy.
HOmer being asked by He^iodus how many Grecian Soldiers came against Troy?
who answered him thus; The Grecians, said Homer, made 7 fires, or had 7
Kitchins, and before every fire, or in every Kitchen there were 50 broaches
turning to roast a great quantity of flesh, and each broach had meat enough to
satisfy 900 men: now judge how many men there might be. Answer, 315000. that
is, three hundred and fifteen thousand men, which is clear by multiplying 7 by
50, and the product by 900 makes the said 315000.

Of the number of Crowns that two men had.
JOhn and Peter had certain number of crowns: John said to Peter, If you give
me 10 of your crowns, I shall have three times as much as you have: but Peter
said to J^hn, If you give me 10 of your crowns I shall have 5 times as much as
you have: how much had each of them? Answer, John had 15 crowns and 5
sevenths of a crown, and Peter had 18 crowns, and 4 sevenths of a crown. For
if you add 10 of Peter's crowns to those of John's, then should John have 25
crowns and 5 sevenths of a crown, which is triple to that of Peter's, viz. 8*
and 4 sevenths: and John giving 10 to Peter, Peter should have then 28 crowns,
and 4 sevenths of a crown, which is Quintupla, or 5 times as much as John had
left, viz. 5 crowns and 5 sevenths.

In like manner two Gamesters playing together, A and B* after play A said to
B, Give me 2 crowns of thy money, and I shall have twice as much as thou have:
and B said to A, Give me 2 crowns of thy money, and I shall have 4 times as
much as thou have: now how much had each? Answer, A had 3 and 5 seventhes, and
B had 4 and 6 seventhes.

About the hour of the day.
SOme one asked a Mathemacian what a clock it was; who answered that the rest
of the day is four thirds of that which is past: now judge what a clock it is.
Answer, if the day were according to the Jews and ancient Romans, which ma^e
it always to be 12 hours, it was then the ^ hour, and one seventh of an
hou^e, so there remained of the whole day 6, that is, 6 hours, and 6 sevenths
of an hour. Now if you take the 1/^ of 5 ^/7 it is ^2/7 or ^ and ^ 7, which
multipled by 4 makes 6 and 6/7, which is the remainder of the day, as before:
but if the day had been 24 hours, then the hour had been 10 of the clock* and
two seventhes of an hour, which is found* out by dividing 12, or 24 by ^.

There might have been added many curious propositions in this kind, but they
would be too difficult for the most part of people* therefore I have omi^ted
them*

Of Pythagoras his Scholars.
PYthagoras being asked what number of Scholars he had, ansvvered, that half
of them studied Mathematickes, the fourth part Physic, the seventh part
Rethorick, and besides he had 3 women: now judge you says he, how many
Scholars I have. Answer, he had in all 28, the half of which is 14, the
quarter of which is 7, and the seventh part of which is which 14, 7, and 4,
makes 25, and the other 3 to make up the 28, were the 3 women.

Of the number of Apples given amongst the Graces and the Muses.
THe three Graces carrying Apples upon a day, the one as many as the other, met
with the 9 Muses, who asked of them some of their Apples; so each of the Graces
gave to each of the Muses alike, and the distribution being made, they found
that the Graces and the Muses had one as many as the other: The question is how
many Apples each Grace had, and how many they gave to each Muse? ^o answer the
qeustion, join the number of Graces and Muses together which makes 12, and so
many Apples had each Grace: Now may you take the double, triple, etc. of 12
that is 24, 36, etc. conditionally, that if each Grace had but 12, then may
there be allotted to each Muse but one only; if 24, then to each 2 Apples, if
^6, then to each Muse 3 Apples, and so the distribution being made, they have a
like number, that is one as many as the other.

Of the Testament or last Will of a dying Father.
A Dying Father left a thousand Crowns amongst his two children; the one
being legitimate, and the other a Bastard, conditionally that the fifth part
which his legittimate Son should have, should exceed by 10, the fourth part
of that which the Bastard should have: what was each (...) part? Answer, the
legitimate Son had 577 crowns and 7/^, and the Bastard 42^ crowns and 2/9
now the fifth part of 577 and 7 ninthes is 1^5, and 5/9, and the fourth part of
422 and ^ is 105 and ^ which is less then ^15 ^ by 10, according to the Will
of the Testator.

Of the Cups of Croesus.
CRoesus gave to the Temple of the ^ods six Cups of Gold* which weighed
together ^00 Drammes, but each cup was heavier one than another by one Dram:
how much did each of them therefore weigh? Answer, the first weighed 102
Drammes and a half; the second 101 Drammes and a half, the third 100 Drammes
and ^, the fourth 99 a and half, the fifth 98 and a half; and the sixth Cup
weighed 97 Drammes and a half* which together makes 600 Drams as before.

Of Cupids Apples.
Cupid complained to his mother that the Muses had taken away his Apples, Clio,
said he, took from me the fifth part, Euterp the twelfth part, Thalia the
eighth part, M^lp^meno the twentieth part, Erates the seventh part* Terpomene
the fourth part, Polyhymnia took away 30, Urania 220, and Calliope 300. so
there were left me but 5 Appls, how many had he in all at the first? I
answer 3^60.

There are an infinite of such like questions amongst the Greek Epigrams: but
it would be unpleasant to express them all: I will only add one more, and
show a general rule for all the rest.

Of a Man's Age.
A Man was said to pass the sixth part of his life in childe-hood, the fourth
part in his youth, the ^hird part in Manhood, and 18 years besides in old age:
what might his Age be? the answer is, 72 years: which and all others is thus
resolved: multiply 1/^* and * together, that is, 6 by 4 makes 24, and that
again by 3 makes 72, then take the third part of 72, which is 24, the fourth
part of it, which is 18, and the sixth part of it which is 12, these added
together make 54, which taken from 72, rests 18 this divided by 18 (spoken in
the Question) gives 1, which multiplied by the sum of the parts, viz. 72,
makes 72, the Answer as before.

Of the Lion of Bronze placed upon a Fountain with this Epigramme.
OVt of my right eye if I let water pass, I can fill the Cisterne in 2 days:
if I let it pass out of the left eye, it will be filled in 3 days: if it
pass out of my feet, the Cistern will be 4 days a^filling; but if I let the
water pass out of my mouth, I can fill the Cistern then in 6 hours: in what
time should I fill it, if I pour forth the water at all the passages at once?

The Greeks (the greatest talkers in the world) variously apply this question
to diverse statues, and pipes of Fountains: and the solution is by the Rule of
^, by a general Rule, or by ^lgebra. They have also in their Anthologie many
other questions, but because they are more proper to exercise, than to recreate
the spirit, I pass them over (as before) with silence.

PROBLEM. LXXVII. Diverse excellent and admirable experiments upon Glasses.
THere is nothing in the world so beautiful as light: and nothing more
recreative to the sight, than Glasses which reflect: therefore I will now
produce some experiments upon them, not that will dive into their depth (that
were to lay open a mysterious thing) but that which may delight and recreate
the spirits: Let us suppose therefore these principles, upon which is built the
demonstration of the appar^nces which are made ^n all sort of Glasses.

First, that the rays or beams, which reflect upon a Glass, make the Angle
of incident equal to the Angle of Reflection, by the first Theo. of the
Catoptick of Euc.

Secondly, that in all plain Glasses, the Images are seen in the perpendicular
line to the Glass, as far within the glass as the object is without it.

Thirdly, in Concave, or Unequal Glasses, the Images are seen in the right line
which passes from the object and through the Center in the Glass. Theo. 17.
and 18.

And here you are to understand, that there is not meant only those which are
simple Glasses or Glasses of steel, but all other bodies, which may represent
the visible Image of things by reason of their reflection, as Water, Marble,
Metal, or such like. Now take a Glass in your hand and make experiment upon
that which follows.

Experiment upon flat and plain Glasses.
FIrst, a man cannot see any thing in these Glasses, if he be not directly and
in a perpendicular line before it, neither can he see an object in these
Glasses, if it be not in such a place, that makes the Angle of incidence equal
to the Angle of reflection: therefore when a Glass stands upright, that is,
perpendicular to the Horizon, you cannot see that which is above, except the
Glass be placed down flat: and to see that on the right hand, you must be on
the left hand, etc.

Secondly, an image cannot be seen in a Glass if it be not raised above the
surface of it; or place a Glass upon a wall, you shall see nothing which is
upon the plain of the wall, and place it upon a Table or Horizontal Plain,
you shall see nothing of that which is upon the Table.

Thirdly, in a plain Glass all that is seen appears or seems to sink
behind the Glass, as much as the image is before the Glass, as before is
said.

Fourthly, (as in water) a Glass lying down flat, or Horizontall, Towers,
Trees, Men, or any height does appear, inversed or upside down; and a Glass
placed upright, the right hand of the Jmage seems to be the left, and the left
seems to be the right. Fifthly, will you see in a Chamber that which is done in
the street, without being seen* then a Glass must be disposed, that the line
upon which the Jmages come on the Glass, make the Angle of incidence equal to
that Angle of reflection.

Sixthly, an height as suppose DE.) may be measured by a plain Glass, as let
the Glass be G. placed down upon the ground, and let the eye be at C. so
far removed from the Glass, that the eye at C. may see the top of the
Tower E in the Angle or edge of the Glass at A, but in the line of reflection
CA, then measure the distance between your foot B, and the point A, and also
the distance between the Glass A* and the foot of the Tower D, viz. AD. Now
as often as AB is found in AD, so often does the height of there Tower ED
contain the distance from your eye to the foot, viz. CB for the Triangles A, B,
C, and A, D, E, are equal Triangles: therefore as BA. to AD, so CB, to ED, or
alternately as BA. to BC, so AD. to D^.

Seventhly, present a Candle upon a plain Glass, and look flaunting upon it,
so that the Candle and the Glass be near in a right line, you shall see 3, 4,
5, etc. images, from one and the same Candle.

Eighthly, take two plain Glasses, and hold them one against the other, you
shall alternately see them oftentimes one within the other, yea within
themselves, again and again.

Ninthly, if you hold a plain Glass behind your head, and another before
your face, you may see the h^nder part of your head, in that Glass which you
hold before your face.

Tenthly, you may have a fine experiment if you place two Glasses together,
that they make an acute angle, and so the lesser the angle is, the more
apparances you shall see, the one direct, the other inversed, the one
approaching, and the other retiring.

Eleventhly, it is a vvonder and astonishment to some, to see within a Glass
an Image without knovving from whence it came, and it may be done many
vvayes: as place a Glass higher than the eye of the beholder, and right against
it is some Image; so it rests not upon the beholder, but does cast the Image
upvvards. Then place another object, so that it reflect, or cast the Image
downward to the eye of the spectator* without perceiving it being hid behind
something, for then the Glass will represent a quite contrary thing, either
that which is before the Glass, or that which is about it, to wit, the other
hidden object.

Twelfthly, if there be ingraved behind the backside of a Glass, or drawn
any Image upon it, it will appear before as an Image, without any appearance:
o^ portraicture to be perceived.

EXAMINATION.
THis 12 Article of ingraving an Image behind the Glass, will be of no great
consequence* because the lineaments will seem so obscure, but if there were
painted some Image, and then that covered according to the usual covering of
Glasses behind, and so made up like an ordinary Looking-glass having an Image
in the middle, in this respect it would be sufficiently pleasant: and that
which would admire the ignorant, and able to exercise the most subtillest, and
that principally if the Glass be in an obscure place, and the light which is
given to it be somewhat far off.

PLace a Glass near the floor of a Chamber, and make a hole through the place
under the Glass, so that those which are below may not perceive it, and
dispose a bright Image under the hole so that it may cast his species upon the
Glass, and it will cause admiration to those which are below that know not the
cause; The same may be done by placing the Image in a Chamber adjoining, and so
make it to be seen upon the side of the Wall.

14 In these Channel-Images which show one side a deaths head, and another side
a fair face: and right before some other thing: it is a thing evident, that
setting a plain Glass sidewise to this Image you shall see it in a contrary
thing, then that which was presented before sidewise.

15 Lastly, it is a fine secret to present unto a plain Glass writing with
such industry, that one may read it in the Glass, and yet out of the Glass
there is nothing to be known, which will thus happen, if the writing be writ
backward: but that which is more strange, to show a kind of writing to a
plain Glass, it shall appear another kind of writing both against sense and
form, as if there were presented to the Glass WELL it would show it MET; if it
were written thus MIV, and presented to the Glass, it would appear thus VIM;
for in the first, if the Glass ly flat, then the things are inversed that are
perpendicular to the Glass, if the Glass and the object be upright, then that
on the right hand, is turned to the left, as in the latter.

And here I cease to speak further of these plain Glasses, either of the
Admirable multiplications, or appearances, which is made in a great number of
them; for to content the sight in this particular, one must have recourse to
the Cabinets of great Personages who enrich themselves with most beautiful
ones.

Experiments upon Gibbous, or unequal Sphericall Glasses.
IF they be in the form of a Bowl, or part of a great Globe of Glass, there
is singular contentment to contemplate on them.

First, because they present the objects less and more gracious, and by how
much more the Images are separated from the Glass, by so much the more they
diminish in Magnitude.

Secondly, they that show the Images plaiting, or foulding, which is very
pleasant, especially when the Glass is placed down, and behold in it some
Blanching, feeling, etc. The upper part of a Gallerie, the porch of a Hall,
etc. for they will be represented as a great vessel having more belly in the
middle then at the two ends, and Posts, and Joists of Timber will seem as
Circles.

Thirdly, that which ravisheth the spirits, by the eye, and which shames the
best perspective Painting that a Painter can make, is the beautiful
contraction of the Images, that appear within the sphericity of these small
Glasses: for present the Glass to the lower end of a Gallarie, or at the
Corner of a great Court full of People, or toward a great street, Church,
fortification, an Army of men, to a whole City; all the fair Architecture,
and appearances will be seen contracted within the circuit of the Glass with
such variety of Colors, and distinctions in the lesser parts, that I know not
in the world what is more agreeable to the sight, and pleasant to behold, in
which you will not have an exact proportion, but it will be variable, according
to the distance of the Object from the Glass.

Exptriments upon hollow, or Concave sphericall Glasses.
I Have heretofore spoken how they may burn, being made of Glass, or Metal,
it remains now that I deliver some pleasant uses of them, which they represent
unto our sight, and so much the more notable it will be, by how much the
greater the Glass is, and the Globe from whence it is extracted for it must in
proportion as a segment of some be made circle or orb.

EXAMINATION.
IN this we may observe that a section of 2.3. or 4. Inches in diameter, may be
segments of spheres of 2.3. or 4. foot ^ nay of so many fadome, for it is
certain that amongst those which comprehend a great portion of a lesser
sphere, and those which comprehend a little segment of a great spheere, whether
they be equal or not in section, there will happen an evident difference in
one and the same experiment, in the number, situation, quantity, and figure of
the Images of one or many different objects, and in burning there is a great
difference.

MAginus, in a little Tractate that he had upon these Glasses, witnesses of
himself that he has caused many to be polished for sundry great Lords of
Italy, and Germany, which were segments of Globes of 2.3. and 4. foot
diameter; and I wish you had some such like to see the experiments of that
which follows; it is not difficult to have such made, or bought here in Town,
the contentment herein would bear with the cost.

EXAMINATION.
TOuching Maginus he has nothing aided us to the knowledge of the truth by his
extract out of Vitellius, but left it: expecting it from others, rather than to
be plunged in the search of it himself, affecting rather the forging of the
matter, and composition of the Glasses, than Geometrically to establish their
effects.

FIrst therefore in concave Glasses, the Images are seen sometimes upon the
surface of the Glasses, sometimes as though they were within it and behind it,
deeply sunk into it, sometimes they are seen before, and without the Glass,
sometimes between the object and the Glass; sometimes in the place of the Eye,
sometimes farther from the Glass then the object is: which comes to pass by
reason of the diverse concourse of the beams, and change of the place of the
Images in the line of reflection.

EXAMINATION.
THe relation of these appearances pass current amongst most men, but because
the curious may not receive prejudice in their experiments, something ought to
be said thereof to give it a more lively touch: in the true causes of these
appearances, in the first place it is impossible that the Image can be upon the
surface of the Glass, and it is a principal point to declare truly in which
place the Image is seen in the Glass those that are more learned in Opticall
knowledge affirm the contrary, and nature it self gives it a certain place
according to its position being always seen in the line of reflection which
Alhazen, Vitellius, and others full of great knowledge, have confirmed by their
writings: but in their particular they were too much occupied by the authority
of the Ancients who were not s^fficiently ci^cumspect in experience upon which
the principles of this subject ought to be built, an^ searched not fully into
the true cause of these appearances, seeing they leave unto posterities many
(...) in their writings, and those that followed them for the most part fell
into the like errors.

As for the Jmages to bid^ in the eye* it cannot be but is imp^rtinent and
absurd; but it follows that, by how much nearer the ob^ect appro^cheth to the
Glass, by so much the more the appearances seem to come to the eye: and if the
eye be without the point of concourse, and the object also; as long as the
object approaches thereto, the representation of the Image comes near the
eye, but passing the point of concourse it goes back again: these appearances
thus approaching do not a little astonish those which are ignorant of the
cause: they are inversed, if the eye be without the point of concourse until
the object be within, but contrarily if the eye be between the point of
concourse and the Glass, then the Jmages are direct: and if the eye or the
object be in the point of concourse, the Glass will be enlightened and the
Jmages confused, and if there were but a spark of fire in the said point of
concourse, all the Glass would seem a burning firebrand, and we dare say it
would occur without chance, and in the night be the most certain and
subtilest light that can be, if a candle were placed there. And whosoever shall
enter into the search of the truth of new experiments in this subject without
doubt he will confirm what we here speak of: and will find new lights with a
conveniable position to the Glass, he will have reflection of quantities, of
truth, and fine secrets in nature, yet not known, which he may easily
comprehend if he have but an indifferent sight, and may assure himself that
the Images cannot exceed the fight, nor trouble it, a thing too much absurd to
nature.

And it is an absolute verity in this science, that the eye being once placed
in the line of reflection of any object, and moved in the same line: the obect
is seen in one and the same place immutable; or if the Image and the eye move
in their own lines, the representation in the Glass seems to invest it self
continually with a different figure.

NOw the Image coming thus to the eye, those which know not the secret, draw
their sword when they see an Image thus to issue out of the Glass, or a
Pistol which some one holds behind: and some Glasses will show a sword wholly
drawn out, sepa^ated from the Glass, as though it were in the air: and it is
daily exercised, that a man may touch the Image of his hand or his face out of
the Glass, which comes out the farther, by how much the Glass is great and
the Center remote.

EXAMINATION.
NOw that a Pistol being presented to a Glass behind a man, should come out
of the Glass, and make him afraid that stands before, seeming to shoot at him,
this cannot be: for no object whatsoever presented to a concave Glass, if it
be not nearer to the G^asse then the eye is it comes not out to the sight of
the party; therefore he needs not fear that which is said to be behind his
back, and comes out of the Glass; for if it does come out, it must then
necessarily be before his face, so in a concave Glass whose Center is far
remote of a sword, stick, or such like be presented to the Glass, it shall
totally be seen to come forth of the Glass and all the hand that holds it. And
here generally note that if an Image be seen to issue out of the Glass to come
toward the face of any one that stands by, the object shall be likewise seen
to thrust toward that face in the Glass and may easily be known to all the
standers by: so many persons standing before a Glass, if one of the company
take a sword, and would make it issue forth toward any other that stands
there: let him choose his Image in the Gl^sse and carry the sword right toward
it and the effect will follow. In like manner ones hand being presented to the
Gloss as it is thrust toward the Center, s^ the representation of it comes
toward it, and so the hands will seem to be united, or to touch one another.

FRom which may be concluded, if such a Glass be placed at the seeling or
planching of a Hall, so that the face be Horizontall and look downward; one may
see under it as it were a man hanging by the feet, and if there were many
placed so, one could not enter into that place without great fear or scaring:
for one should see many men in the air as if they were hanging by the feet.

EXAMINATION.
TOuching a Glass tied at a seeling or planching, that one may see a man hang
by the feet in the air, and so many Glasses, many men may be seen: without
caution this is very absurd for if the Glass or Glasses be not so great that
the Center of the sphere upon which it was made, extend not near to the head
of him that is under it, it will not pleasantly appear, and though the Glass
should be of that capacity that the Center did extend so far, yet will not
the Images be seen to them which are from the Glass but on^y to those which
are under it, or near unto it: and to them it will not ably appear, and it
would be most admirable to have a Gallerie vaulted over with such Glasses which
would wonderfully astonish any one that enters into it: for a^l the things in
the Gallery would be seen to hang in the air, and you could not walk without
incountering airie apparitions.

SEcondly, in flat or plain Glasses the Image is seen equal to his object,
and to represent a whole man, there ought to be a Glass as great as the Image
is: In unequal Glasses the Images are seen always less, in concave Glasses
they may be seen greater or lesser, but not truly proportionable, by reason the
diverse reflections which contracts or inlargeth the Species: when the eye is
between the Center and the surface of the Glass; the Image appears sometimes
very great and deformed, and those which have but the appearance of the
beginning of a beard on their chinne, may cheer up themselves to see they have
a great beard; those that seem to be fair will thrust away the Glass with
despite, because it will transform their beauty: those that put their hand to
the Glass will seem to have the hand of a Giant, and if one puts his finger
to the Glass it will be seen as a great Pyramide of flesh, inversed against
his finger.

Thirdly, it is a thing admirable that the eye being approached to the point of
concourse of the Glass, there will be seen nothing but an intermixture or
confusion: but retiring back a little from that point, (because the rays do
there meet*) he shall see his Image inversed, having his head below and his
feet above.

Fourthly, the diverse appearances caused by the motion of objects, either
retiring or approaching: whether they turn to the right hand or to the left
hand, whether the Glass be hung against a wall, or whether it be placed upon a
Pavement, as also what may be represented by the mutual aspect of concave
Glasses with plain and unequal Glasses but I will with silence pass them over,
only say something of two rare experiments more as follows.

The first is to represent by help of the Sun, such letters as one would upon
the front of a house: so that one may read them: Maginus does deliver the way
thus. Write the Letters, says he, sufficiently big, but inversed upon the
surface of the Glass, with some kind of color, or these letters may be
written with wax, (the easier to be taken out again:) for then placing the
Glass to the Sun, the letters which are written there will be reverberated
or reflected upon the Wall: hence it was perhaps that Pythagoras did promise
with this invention to write upon the Moon.

In the second place, how a man may sundry ways help himself with such a
Glass, with a lighted Torch or Candle, placed in the point of concourse or
inflammation, which is near the fourth part of the Diameter: for by this
means the light of the Candle will be reverberated into the Glass, and will
be cast back again very far by parrallel lines, making so great a light that
one may clearly see that which is done far off, yea in the camp of an
Enemy: and those which shall see the Glass a far off, will think they see a
Silver Basin enlightened, or a fire more resplendent then the Torch. It is this
way that there are made certain Lanthorns which dazell the eyes of those which
come against them; yet it serves singular well to enlighten those which carry
them, accommodating a Candle with a little hollow Glass, so that it may
successively be applied to the point of inflammation.

In like manner by this reflected light, one may read far off, provided that
the letters be indifferent great, as an Epitaph placed high, or in a place
obscure; or the letter of a friend which dares not approach without peril or
suspicion.

EXAMINATION.
THis will be scarce sensible upon a wall remote from the Glass, and but
indifferently seen upon a wall which is near the Glass, and withal it must
be in obscurity or shadowed, or else it will not be seen. To cast light in the
night to a place remote, with a Candle placed in the point of concourse or
inflammation, is one of the most notablest properties which can be shown in a
concave Glass: for if in the point of inflammation of a parabolicall section,
a Candle be placed, the light will be reflected by parallel lines, as a column
or Cylinder; but in the sphericall section it is defective in part, the beams
being not united in one point, but somewhat scattering: notwithstanding it
casts a very great beautiful light.

Lastly, those which fear to hurt their sight by the approach of Lamps or
Candles, may by this artifice place at some corher of a Chamber, a Lamp with a
hollow Glass behind it, which will commodiously reflect the light upon a
Table, or to a place assigned: so that the Glass be somewhat raised to make
the light to streeke upon the Table with sharp Angles, as the Sun does when
it is but a little elevated above the Horizon, for this light shall exceed the
light of many Candles placed in the Room, and be more pleasant to the sight of
him that uses it.

Of other Glasses of pleasure.
FIrst, the Columnary and Pyramidall Glasses that are contained under right
lines, do represent the Images as plain Glasses do; and if they be bowing,
then they represent the Image, as the concave and unequal Glasses do.

Secondly, those Glasses which are plain, but have ascents of Angels in the
middle, will show one to have four Eyes, two Mouths, two Noses, etc.

EXAMINATION.
TH^se experiments will be found different according to the diverse meeting of
the Glasses, which commonly are made scuing-wise at the end, (...) which there
will be two diverse superficies in the Glass, making the exterior Angle
somewhat raised, at the interior only one superficies, which may be covered
according to ordinary Glasses to c^use a reflection, and so it will be but one
Glass, which by refraction according to the different thickness of the
Glass, and different Angles of the scuing form, do differently present the
Images to the eye, as four eyes, two mouths, two noses; sometimes three eyes
one mouth, and one nose, the one large and the other long, sometimes two eyes
only: with the mouth and the nose deformed, which the Glass (impenetrable)
will not show. And if there be an interior solid Angle, according to the
difference of it (as if it be more sharp) there will be represented two
distinct double Images, that is, two entire visages and as the Angle is open,
by so much the more the double Images will reunite and enter one within
another, which will present sometimes a whole visage extended at large, to have
four eyes, two noses, and two mouths: and by moving the Glass the Angle will
vanish, and so the two superficies will be turned into one, and the duplicity
of Images will also vanish and appear but one only: and this is easily
experimented with two little Glasses of steel, or such like so united, that
they make diverse Angles and inclinations.

THirdly, there are Glasses which make men seem pale, red, and colored in
diverse manners, which is caused by the dye of the Glass, or the diverse
refraction of the Species: and those which are made of Silver, Latin, Steel,
etc. do give the Images a diverse color also. In which one may see that the
appearances by some are made fairer, younger or older than they are; and
contrarily others will make them foul and deformed: and give them a contrary
visage: for if a Glass be cut as it may be, or if many pieces of Glass be
placed together to make a conveniable reflection: there might be made of a Mole
(as it were) a mountain, of one Hair a Tree, a Fly to be as an Elephant, but
I should be too long if I should say all that which might be said upon the
property of Glasses. I will therefore conclude this discourse of the properties
of these Glasses with these four recreative Problemes following.

PROBLEM. LXXVIII. 1 How to show to one that is suspicious, what is done in
another Chamber or Room: notwithstanding the interposition of the wall.
FOr the performance of this, there must be placed three Glasses in the two
Chambers, of which one of them shall be tied to the planching or seeling, that
it may be common to communicate the Species to each Glass by reflection, there
being left some hole at the top of the Wall against the Glass to this end: the
two other Glasses must be placed against the two Walls at right Angles, as the
figure here shows at B. and C.

Then the sight at E by the line of incidence FE, shall fall upon the Glass
BA, and reflect upon the superficies of the Glass BC, in the point G; so that
if the eye be at G, it should see E, and E would reflect upon the third Glass
in the point H, and the eye that is at L, will see the Image that is at E. in
the point of the Cath^r^: which Image shall come to the eye of the suspicious,
viz. at L. by help of the third Glass, upon which is made the second
reflection, and so brings unto the eye the object, though a wall be between it.

Corolarie. 1.
BY this invention of reflections the besiegers of a Town may be seen upon
the Rampart: notwithstanding the Parapet, which the besieged may do by placing
a Glass in the hollow of the Ditch, and placing another upon the top of the
wall, so that the line of incidence coming to the bottom of the Ditch, make an
Angle equal to the Angle of reflection, then by this situation and reflection,
the Image of the besiege^ (...) will be seen to him is upon the Rampart

Corolarie 2.
BY which also may be inferred, that the same reflections may be seen in a
Regular Polygon, and placing as many Glasses as there are sides, counting two
for one; for then the object being set to one of the Glasses, and the eye in
the other, the Jmage will be seen easily.

Corolarie 3.
FArther, notwithstanding the interposition of many Walls, Chambers, or
Cabinets, one may see that which passes through the most remotest of them, by
placing of many Glasses as there are openings in the walls, making them to
receive the incident angles equal: that is, placing them in such sort by some
Geometrical assistant, that the incident points may meet in the middle of the
Glasses: but here all the defect will be, that the Jmages passing by so many
reflections, will be very weak and scarce observable.

PROBLEM. LXXIX. How with a Musket to strike a mark, not looking toward it, as
exact as one aiming at it.
AS let the eye be at O* and the mark C, place a plain Glass perpendicular as
AB. so the mark C shall be seen in Catheti CA, viz. in D, and the line of
reflection is D, now let the Musket FE, upon a rest* be moved to and fro until
it be seen in the line OD, which admit to be HG, so giving fire to the Musket,
it shall undoubtedly strike the mark.

Corolaries. From which may be gathered, that one may exactly shoot out of a
Musket to a place which is not seen, being hindered by some obstacle, or other
interposition.
AS let the eye be at M, the mark C, and the wall which keeps it from being
seen, admit to be QR, then set up a plain Glass as AB, and let the Musket by
GH, placed upon his rest PO. Now because the mark C is seen at D, move the
Musket to and fro, until it does agree with the line of reflection MB, which
suppose at LI, so shall it be truly placed, and giving fire to the Musket, it
shall not fail to strike the said mark at C.

PROBLEM. LXXX. How to make an Image to be seen hanging in the air, having his
head downward.
TAke two Glasses, and place them at right Angles one unto the other, as admit
AB, and CB, of which admit CB, Ho^izontall, and let the eye be at H, and the
object or image to be DE; so D will be reflected at F, so to N, so to HE: then
at G, so to ^ and then to H, and by a double reflection ED will seem in QR,
the highest point D in R, and the point L in Q inversed as was said, taking D
for the head, and E for the feet; so it will be a man inversed, which will seem
to be flying in the air, if the Jmage had wings unto it, and had secretly
(...) motion: and if the Glass were big enough to receive many reflections,
it would deceive the sight the more by admiring the changing of colors that
would be seen by that motion.

PROBLEM. LXXXI. How to make a company of representative Soldiers seem to be
a Regiment, or how few in number may be multiplied to seem to be many in number.
TO make the experiment upon men, there must be prepared two great Glasses; but
in stead of it we will suppose two lesser, as GH. and FI, one placed right
against another perpendicular to the Horizon, upon a plain level Table:
betvveene which Glasses let there be ranged in Battalia-vvise upon the same
Table a number of small men according to the square G, H, I, F, or in any other
form or posture: hen may you evidently see how the said battle will be
multiplied and seem far bigger in the appearance than it is in effect.

Corolarie.
BY this invention you may make a little Cabinet of four foot long, and two
foot large, (more or less) which being filled with Rocks or such like
things, or there being put into it Silver, Gold, Stones of luster, Jewels, etc.
and the walls of the said Cabinet being all covered, or hung with plain
glass; these visibles will appear manifoldly increased, by reason of the
multiplicitie of reflections, and at the opening of the said Cabinet, having set
something which might hide them from being seen, those that look into it will
be astonished to see so few in number which before seemed to be so many.

PROBLEM. LXXXII. Of fine and pleasant Dyal^.
COuld you choose a more ridiculous one than the natural Dyall written amongst
the Greek Epigrams, upon which some sound Poet made verses; showing that a man
carries about him always a Dyall in his face by means of the Nose and Teeth?
and is not this a jolly Dyall? for he need not but open the mouth, the lines
shall be all the teeth, and the nose shall serve for the style.

Of a Dyall of herbs.
CAn you have a finer thing in a Garden, or in the middle of a Compartemeet,
than to see the lines and the number of hours represented with little bushie
herbs, as of Hysope or such which is proper to be cut in the borders; and at
the top of the style to have a Fan to show which way the wind b^oweth? this
is very pleasant and useful.

Of the Dyall upon the fingers and the hand.
IS it nor a commodity very agreeable, when one is in the fie^d or in some
vil^age without any other Dyall, to see only by the hand what of the clock it
is? which gives it very near; and may be practiced by the left hand, in this
manner.

Take a straw or like thing of the length of the Index or the second finger,
hold this straw very right betvveen the thumb and the forefinger, then stretch
forth the hand* and turn your back, and the palm of your hand toward the
Sun; so that the shadovv of the muscle which is under the Thumb, touch the
line of life, which is betvveen the middle of the two other great lines,
which is seen in the palm of the hand, this done, the end of the shadovv
will show what of the clock it is: for at the end of the first finger it is
7 in the morning, or 5 in the evening, at the end of the Ring-finger it is 8 in
the morning, or 4 in the evening, at the end of the little finger or first
joint, it is 9 in the morning, or 3 in the afternoon, 10 and 2 at the second
joint, 11 and 1 at the third joint, and midday in the line follovving, which
comes from the end of the Index.

Of a Dyall which was about an Obeliske at Rome.
WAs not this a pretty fetch upon a pavement, to choose an Obeliske for a
Dyall, having 106 foot in height, without removing the Basis of it? Pliny
assures us in his 26 book and 8 Chap. that the Emperor Augustus having
accom^odated in the field of Mars an Obeliske of this height, he made about it
a pavement, and by the industry of Man^lius the Mathematician, there were
enchaced marks of Copper upon the Pavement, and placed also an Apple of Gold
upon the top of the said Obeliske, to know the hour and the course of the
Sun, with the increase and decrease of days by the same shadow: and in the
same manner do some by the shadow of their head or other style, make the like
experiments in Astronomy.

Of Dyals with Glasses.
PT^lomie w^ites, as Cardanus reports, that long ago there were Glasses which
served for Dyals, and presented the face of the beholder as many times as the
hour ought to be, twice if it were 2 of the clock, 9 if it were 9, etc. But
this was thought to be done by the help of water, and not by Glasses, which did
leake by little and little out of the vessel, discovering anon one Glass,
then anon two Glasses, then 3, 4, 5 Glasses, etc. to show so many faces as
there were hours, which was only by leaking of water.

Of a Dyall which has a Glass in the place of the Style.
WHat will you say of the invention of Mathematicians, which find out daily so
many fine and curious novelties? they have now a way to make Dyals upon the
wainscot or seeling of a Chamber, and there where the Sun can never shine, or
the beams of the Sun cannot directly strike: and this is done in placing of
a little Glass in the place of the style which reflecteth the light, with the
same condition that the shadow of the style shows the hour: and it is easy
to make experiment upon a common Dyall, changing only the disposition of the
Dyall, and tying to the end of the style a piece of plain Glass. The Almaines
use it much, who by this way have no greater trouble, but to put their Noses
out of their beds and see what a clock it is, which is reflected by a little
hole in the Window upon the wall or seeling of the Chamber.

EXAMINATION.
IN this there are two experiments considerable, the first is with a very
little Glass placed so that it may be open to the beams of the Sun, the
other has respect to a spacious or great Glass placed to a very little hole
so that the Sun may shine on it, for then the shadow which is cast upon the
Dyall is converted into beams of the Sun, and will reflect and becast upon a
plain opposite: and in the other it is a hole in the window or such like, by
which may pass the beams of the Sun, which represent the extremity of the
style, and the Glass represents the plain of the Dyall, upon which the
beams being in manner of shadows reflect cast upon a plain opposite: and it
is needful that in this second way the Glass may be spacious, as before, to
receive the delineaments of the Dyall.

Otherwise you may draw the lineaments of a Dyall upon any plain
looking-glass which reflecteth the Sunne-beames, for the applying a style or a
pearl at the extreamitie of it: and placed to the Sun, the reflection will be
answerable to the delineaments on the Glass: but here note, that the Glass
ought to be great, and so the delineaments thereon.

But that which is most noble, is to draw houre-lines upon the outside of the
Glass of a window, and placing a style thereto upon the outside, the shadow of
the style will be seen within, and so you have the hour, more certain without
any difficulty.

Of Dyals with water.
SVch kind of Dyals were made in ancient times, and also these of sand: before
they had skill to make Sun-dyals or Dyals with wheels; for they used to fill a
vessel with water, and having experience by trial thar it would run out all
in a day, they did mark within the vessel the hours noted by the running of
the water; and some did set a piece of light board in the vessel to swim
upon the top of the water, carrying a little statue, which with a small stick
did point out the hour upon a column or wall, figured with houre-notes, as
the vessel was figured within.

Vitruvius writes of another manner of water-Dyal more difficult; and B^ptista
a Porta amongst his natural secrets, delivers this invention following. Take a
vessel full of water like a caldron, and another vessel of glass like unto a
Bell, (with which some accustom to cover Melo^s:) and let this vessel of
Glass be almost as great as the Caldron, having a small hole at the bottom,
then when it is placed upon the water, it will sink by little and little: by
this one may mark the hours on the surface of the Glass to serve another
time. But if at the beginning one had drawn the water within the same vessel
of Glass in sucking by the little hole, the water would not fall out, but as
fast as the air would succeed it, entering slovvly at the little hole: for
contrarily the hours may be distinguished by diminution of water, or by
augmentation.

Now it seems a safer way that the water pass out by drop and drop, and
drop into a Cylindricall Glass by help of a Pipe: for having marked the
exterior part of the Cylinder in the hour notes, the water it self which
falls within it, will show what of the clock it is, far better than the
running of sand, for by this may you have the parts of the hours most
accurate, which commonly by sand is not had: and to which may be added the
hours of other Countries with greater ease. And here note, that as soon as
the water is out* of one of the Glasses, you may turn it over into the same
again out of the other, and so let it run anew.

PROBLEM. LXXXIII. Of Cannons or great Artillery. Soldiers, and others would
willingly see (...) Problems, which contain: three or four subtle questions:
The first is, how to charge a Cannon without powder?
THis may be done with air and water, only having thrown cold water into
the Cannon, which might be squirted forceably in by the closure of the mouth
of the Piece, that so by this pressure the air might more condense; then
having a round piece of vvood very just, and oiled well for the better to
slide, and thrust the Bullet when it shall be time: This piece of vvood may be
held fast with some Pole, for fear it be not thrust out before his time: then
let fire be made about the Trunion or hinder part of the Piece to heat the air
and water, and then when one would shoot it, let the pole be quickly
loosened, for then the air searching a greater place, and having way now
offered, will thrust out the vvood and the bullet very quick: the experiment
which we have in long trunkes shooting out pellats with air only, shows
the verity of this Problem.

2 In the second question it may be demanded, how much time does the Bull^^ of
a Cannon spend in the air before i^ falls to the ground?
THe resolution of this Question depends upon the goodness of the Piece and
charge thereof, seeing in each there is great difference. It is reported, that
Tich^ Bra^e, and the Landsgrave did make an experiment upon a Cannon in
Germany, which being charged and shot off; the Bullet spent two minutes of time
in the air before it fell: and the distance was a Germane mile, which distance
proportionated to an hours time, makes 120 Italian miles.

3. In the third question it may be asked, how it comes to pass, that a Cannon
shooting upwards, the Bullet flies with more violence than being shot
point-blanke, or shooting downward?
IF we regard the effect of a Cannon when it is to batter a wall, the Question
is false, seeing it is most evident that the blows which fall Perpendicular
upon a wall, are more violent than those which strike byas-wise or glaunsingly.

But considering the strength of the blow only, the Question is most true, and
often experimented to be found true: a Piece mounted at the best of the Randon,
which is near half of the right, conveyes her Bullet with a far greater
violence then that which is shot at point blanke, or mounted parallel to the
Horizon. The common reason is, that shooting high, the fire carries the bowl a
longer time in the air, and the air moves more ^acill upwards, than
dovvnevvards, because that the airy circles that the motion of the bullet
makes, are soonest broken. Howsoever this be the general tenet, it is curious
to find out the inequality of moving of the air; whether the Bullet fly
upvvard, dovvnevvard, or right forvvard, to produce a sensible dfference of
motion; and some think that the Cannon being mounted, the Bullet pressing the
powder makes a greater resistance, and so causes all the Powder to be
inflamed before the Bullet is thrown out, which makes it to be more violent
than otherwise it would be. When the Cannon is otherwise disposed, the
contrary arives, the fire leaves the Bullet, and the Bullet rolling from the
Powder resists less: and it is usually seen, that shooting out of a Musket
charged only with Powder, to shoot to a mark of Paper placed Point blanke,
that there are seen many small holes in the paper, which cannot be other than
the grains of Powder which did not take fire: but this latter accident may
happen from the over-charging of the Piece, or the length of it, or windy, or
dampenesse of the Powder.

From which some may think, that a Cannon pointed right to the Zenith, should
shoot with greater violence, then in any other mount or form whatsoever: and
by some it has been imagined, that a Bullet shot in this fashion has been
consumed, melted, and lost in the Air, by reason of the violence of the blow,
and the activity of the sire, and that sundry experiments have been made in
this nature, and the Bullet never found. But it is hard to believe this
assertion: it may rather be supposed that the Bullet falling far from the
Piece cannot be discerned where it falls: and so comes to be lost.

4. In the fourth place it may be asked, whether the discharge of a Cannon b^
so much the greater, by how much it is longer?
IT seems at the first to be most true, that the longer the Piece is, the
more violent it shoots: and to speak generally, that which is direction by a
Trunk, Pipe, or other concavitie, is conveyed so much the more violent, or
better, by how much it is longer, either in respect of the Sight, Hearing,
Water, Fire, etc. and the reason seems to hold in Cannons, because in those
that are long, the fire is retained a longer time in the concavitie of the
Piece, and so throws out the Bullet with more violence; and experience lets us
see that taking Cannons of the same boar, but of diversity of length from 8
foot to 12, that the Cannon of 9 foot long has more force than that of 8 foot
long, and 10 more than that of 9, and so unto 12 foot of length. Now the
usual Cannon carries 600 Paces, some more, some less, yea some but 200 Paces
from the Piece, and may shoot into soft earth 15 or 17 foot, into sand or earth
which is loose, 22 or 24 foot, and in firm ground, about 10 or 12 foot, etc.

It has been seen lately in Germany, where there were made Pieces from 8 foot
long to 17 foot of like boar, that shooting out of any piece which was longer
than 12 foot; the force was diminished, and the more in length the Piece
increases, the less his force was: therefore the length ought to be in a
mean measure, and it is often seen, the greater the Cannon is, by so much the
service is greater: but to have it too long or too short, is not convenient,
but a mean proportion of length to be taken, otherwise the flame of the fire
will be over-pressed with Air: whic hinders the motion in respect of
substance, and distance of getting out.



PROBLEM. LXXXIIII. Of predigious progression and multiplication, of Creatures,
Plants, Fruits, Numbers, Gold, Silver, etc. when they are always augmented by
certain proportion.
HEre we shall show things no less admirable, as recreative, and yet so
certain and easy to be demonstrated, that there needs not but Multiplication
only, to try each particular: and first,

Of grains of Mustard Seed.
FIrst, therefore it is certain that the increase of one grain of
Mustard Seed for 20 years space, cannot be contained within the visible world,
nay if it were a hundred times greater than it is: and holding nothing besides
from the Center of the earth even unto the firmament, but only small grains of
Mustard Seed: Now because this seems but words, it must be proved by Art, as
may be done in this wise, as suppose one Mustard Seed sown to bring forth a
tree or branch, in each extendure of which might be a thousand grains: but we
will suppose only a thousand in the whole tree, and let us proceed to ^0
years, every seed to bring forth yearly a thousand grains, now multiplying
always by a thousand, in less then 17 years you shall have to many grains
which will surpass the sands, which are able to fill the whole firmament: for
following the supposition of Archimedes, and the most probable opinion of the
greatness of the firmament which ^i^ho Brahe has left us; the number of
grains of sand will be sufficiently expressed with 49 Ciphers, but the number
of grains of Mustard Seed at the end of 17 years will have 52 Ciphers: and
moreover, grains of Mustard Seed, are far greater than these of the sands:
it is therefore evident that at the seventeenth year, all the grains of
Mustard Seed which shall successively spring from one grain only, cannot be
contained within the limits of the whole firmament; what should it be then, if
it should be multiplied again by a thousand for the ^8 year: and that again
by a thousand for every years increase until you come to the 20 year, it is a
thing as clear as the day, that such a heap of Mustard Seed would be a hundred
thousand times greater than the Earth: and bring only but the increase of one
grain in 20 years.

Of Pigges.
SEcondly, is it not a strange proposition, to say that the great Turk with
all his Revenues, is not able to maintain for one years time, all the Pigges
that a Sow may pigge with all her race, that is, the increase with the increase
unto 12 years: this seems impossible, yet it is most true, for let us suppose
and put, the case, that a Sow bring forth but 6, two Males, and 4 Females, and
that each Female shall bring forth as many every year, during the space of 12
years, at the end of the time there will be found above 3^ millions of Pigges:
now allowing a crown for the maintenance of each Pigge for a year, (which is
as little as may be, being but near a half of a farthing allowance for each
day;) there must be at the least so many crowns to maintain them, one a year,
viz. 33 millions, which exceeds the Turks revenue by much.

Of grains of Corn.
THirdly, it will make one astonished to think that a grain of Corn, with his
increase successively for the space of 12 years will produce in grains
24414062^000000000000, which is able to load almost all the creatures in the
World.

To open which, let it be supposed that the first year one grain being sowed
brings forth 50, (but sometimes there is seen 70, sometimes 100 fold) which
grains sown the next year, every one to produce 50, and so consequently the
whole and increase to be sown every year, until 12 years be expired, there
will be of increase the aforesaid prodigious sum of grains, viz.
244140625000000000000, which will make a cubical heap of 6258522 grains every
way, which is more than a cubicall body of 31 miles every way: for allowing 40
grains in length to each foot, the Cube would be 156463 foot every way: from
which it is evident that if there were two hundred thousand Cities as great as
London, allowing to each 3 miles square every way, and 100 foot in height,
there would not be sufficient room to contain the aforesaid quantity of
Corn: and suppose a bushel of Corn were equal unto two Cubicke feet, which
might contain twenty hundred thousand grains then would there be
122070462500000. bushells, and allowing 30 bushels to a Tun, it would be able
to load 81380^0833 vessels, which is more than eight thousand one hundred and
thirty eight millions, ship loadings of ^00 Tun to each ship a: quantity so
great that the Sea is scarce able to bear, or the universal world able to
find vessels to carry it. And if this Corn should be valued at half a crown
the bushel, it would amount unto 15258807812500 pounds sterling, which I think
exceeds all the Treasures of all the Princes, and of other particular men in
the whole world: and is not this good husbandry to sow one grain of Corn; and
to continue it in sowing, the increase only for 12 years to have so great a
profit?

Of the increase of Sheep.
FOurthly, those that have great flocks of Sheep may be quickly rich, if they
would preserve their Sheep without killing or selling of them: so that every
Sheep produce one each year, for at the end of 16 years, 100 Sheep will
multiply and increase unto 6553600, which is above 6 millions, 5 hundred 53
thousand Sheep: now supposing them worth but a crown a piece, it would amount
unto 1638400 pounds sterling, which is above 1 million 6 hundred 38 thousand
pounds, a fair increase of one Sheep: and a large portion for a Child if it
should be allotted.

Of the increase of Cod-fish, Carpes, etc.
FIfthly, if there be any creatures in the world that do abound with increase
or fertility, it may be rightly attributed to fish; for they in their kinds
produce such a great multitude of Eggs, and brings forth so many little ones,
that if a great part were not destroyed continually, within a ^ittle while
they would fill all the Sea, Ponds, and Rivers in the world; and it is easy
to show how it would come so to pass, only by supposing them to increase
without taking or destroying them for the space of 10 or 12 years: having
regard to the soliditie of the waters which are allotted for to lodge and
contain these creatures, as their bounds and place of rest to live in.

Of the increase and multiplication of men.
SIxthly, there are some that cannot conceive how it can be that from eight
persons (which were saved after the deluge or Noah's flood) should spring such a
world of people to begin a Monarchy under Nimrod, being but 200 years after
the flood, and that amongst them should be raised an army of two hundred
thousand fighting men: But it is easi^y proved if we take but one of the
Children of Noah, and suppose that a new generation of people begun at every
30 years, and that it be continued to the seventh generation which is 200
years; for then of one only family there would be produced one hundred and
eleven thousand souls, three hundred and five to begin the world: though in
that time men lived longer, and were more capable of multiplication and
increase: which number springing only from a simp^e production of one yearly,
would be far greater, if one man should have many wives, which in ancient
times they had: from which it is also that the Children of Israel, who came
into Egypt but only 70 souls, yet after 210 years captivity, they came forth
with their hosts, that there were told six hundred thousand fighting men,
besides old people, women and children; and he that shall separate but one of
the families of Joseph, it would be sufficient to make up that number: how much
more should it be then if we should adjoyne many families together?

Of the increase of numbers.
SEventhly, what sum of money shall the City of London be worth, if it should
be sold, and the money be paid in a year after this manner: the first week to
pay a pin, the second week 2 pinnes, the third week 4 pinnes, the fourth week
8 pinnes, the fifth week 16 pinnes. and so doubling until the 52 weeks, or the
year be expired.

Here one would think that the value of the pinnes would amount but to a small
matter, in comparison of the Treasures, or riches of the whole City: yet it is
most probable that the number of pinnes would amount unto the sum of
4519599628681215, and if we should allow unto a quarter a hundred thousand
pinnes, the whole would contain ninety eight millions, four hundred thousand
Tun: which is able to load 45930 Ships of a thousand Tun apiece: and if
we should allow a thousand pins for a penny, the sum of money would amount
unto above eighteen thousand, eight hundred and thirty millions of pounds
sterling, an high price to sell a City at, yet certain, according to that
first proposed. So if 40 Towns were sold upon condition to give for the first
a penny, for the second 2 pence, for the third 4 pence, etc. by doubling all
the rest unto the last, it would amount unto this number of pence,
109951^62^^76, which in pounds is 4581298444, that is four thousand five
hundred and fourscore millions of pounds and more.

Of a man that gathered up Apples, Stones, or such like upon a condition.
Eighthly, admit there were an hundred Apples, Stones, or such like things that
were placed in a straight line or right form, a Pace one from another, and a
basket being placed a Pace from the first: how many paces would there be made
to put all these Stones into the basket, by fetching one by one? this would
require near half a day to do it, for there would be made ten thousand and
ninety two paces before he should gather them all up.

Of Changes in Bells, in musical Instruments, transmutation of places, in
numbers, letters, men or such like.
NInethly, is it not an admirable thing to consider how the skill of numbers
does easily furnish us with the knowledge of mysterious and hidden things?
which simply looked into by others that are not versed in Arithmetic, do
present unto them a world of confusion and difficulty.

As in the first place, it is often debated amongst our common Ringers, what
number of Changes there might be made in 5, 6, 7, 8, or more Bells: who spend
much time to answer their own doubts, entering often into a Labyrinth in the
search thereof: or if there were 10 voices, how many several notes might there
be? These are propositions of such facility, that a child which can but
multiply one number by another, may easily resolve it, which is but only to
multiply every number from the unite successively in each others product, unto
the term assigned: so the 6 number that is against 6 in the Table, is 720, and
so many (hanges may be made upon 6 Bells, upon 5 there are 120, etc.

In like manner against 10 in the Table is 3618800, that is, three millions,
six hundred twenty eight thousand, eight hundred: which shows that 10 voices
may have so many consorts, each man keeping his own note, but only altering
his place; and so of stringed Instruments, and the Gamat may be varied
according to which, answerable to the number against X, viz.
1124001075070399680000 notes, from which may be drawn this, or the like
proposition. Suppose that 7 Scholars were taken out of a free School to be
sent to an University, there to be entertained in some College at commons for
a certain sum of money, so that each of them have two meals daily, and no
longer to continue there, then that sitting all together upon one bench or
form at every meal, there might be a diverse transmutation of place, of
account in some one of them, in comparison of another, and never the whole
company to be twice alike in situation: how long may the Steward entertain
them? (who being not skilled in this fetch may answer unadvisedly.) It is most
certain that there will be five thousand and forty several 1 a 1 2 b 2 6 c 3
24 d 4 120 e 5 7^0 f 6 5040 g 7 403^0 h 8 362880 i 9 3628800 k 10 39916800 l 11
479001600 m 12 6227020800 n 13 87178291200 o 14 1307674368000 p 15
20922789888000 q 16 355687537996000 r 17 6402375683928000 s 18
121645137994632000 t 19 2432902759892640000 u 20 51090957957745440000 w 21
1124001075070399680000 x 22 25852024726619192640000 y 23
6^0448593438860623360000 z 24 positions or changings in the seatings, which
maks 14 years time wanting 10 weeks and 3 days. Hence from this mutability of
transmutation, it is no marvel tha^ by 24 letters there arises and is made
such variety of languages in the world, and such infinite number of words in
each language; seeing the diversity of syllables produces that effect, and
also by the interchanging and placing of letters amongst the vowels, and
amongst themselves makes these syllables: which Alphabet of 24 letters may be
varied so many times, viz. 620448593438860623360000 which is six hundred
twenty thousand, four hundred forty eight millions of millions of millions
five hundred ninety three thousand, four hundred thirty eight milions of
milions, and more.

Now allowing that a man may read or speak one hundred thousand words in an
hour which is twice more words than there are contained in the Psalms of
David, (a task too great for any man to do in so short a time) and if there
were four thousand six hundred and fifty thousand millions of men, they could
not speak these words (according to the hourly proportion aforesaid) in
threescore and ten thousand years; which variation and transmutation of
letters, if they should be written in books, allowing to each leaf 28000
words, (which is as many as possibly could be inserted,) and to each book a
reame or 20 quire of the largest and thinnest printing paper, so that each book
being about 15 inches long, 12 broad, and 6 thick: the books that would be made
of the transmutation of the 24 letters aforesaid, would be at least
38778037089928788: and if a Library of a mile square every way, of 50 foot
high, were made to contain 250 Galleries of 20 foot broad apiece, it would
contain four hundred mill^ons of the said books: so there must be to contain
the rest no less than 9^945092 such Libraries; and if the books were extended
over the surface of the Globe of the Earth, it would be a decuple covering unto
it: a thing seeming most incredible that 24 letters in their transmutation
should produce such a prodigious number, yet most certain and infallible in
computation.

Of a Servant hired upon certain conditions.
A Servant said unto his Master, that he would dvvell with him all his
lifetime, if he would but only lend him land to sow one grain of Corn with
all his increase for 8 years time; how think you of this bargain? for if he
had but a quarter of an inch of ground for each grain, and each grain to
bring forth yearly of increase 40 grains, the whole sum would amount unto, at
the term aforesaid, 6553600000000 grains: and seeing that three thousand and
six hundred millions of inches do but make one mile square in the superficies,
it shall be able to receive fourteen thousand and four hundred millions of
grains, which is 14400000000. thus dividing the aforesaid 6553600000000, the
Quotient will be 455, and so many square miles of land must there be to sow
the increase of one grain of Corn for 8 years, which makes at the least
four hundred and twenty thousand Acres of land, which rated but at five
shillings the Acre per Annum, amounts unto one hundred thousand pound; which is
twelve thousand and five hundred pound a year, to be continued for 8 years; a
pretty pay for a Masters Servant 8 years service.

PROBLEM. LXXXV. Of Fountains, Hydriatiques, Machinecke, and other experiments
upon water, or other liquor.
1. First how to make water at the foot of a mountain to ascend to the top of
it, and so to descend on the other side?
TO do this there must be a Pipe of lead, which may come from the fountain A,
to the top of the Mountain B; and so to descend on the other side a little
lower then the Fountain, as at C. then make a hole in the Pipe at the top of
the Mountain, as at B, and stop the end of the Pipe at A and C; and fill this
Pipe at B with water: and close it very carefully again at B, that no air get
in: then unstop the end at A, and at C; then will the water perpetually run
up the hill, and descend on the other side, which is an invention of great
consequence to furnish Villages that want water.

2. Secondly, how to know what wine or other liquor there is in a vessel
without opening the bung-hole, and without making any other hole, than that by
which it runs out at the top?
IN this problem there is nothing but to take a bowed pipe of Glass, and put
it into the faucets hole, and stopping it close about: for then you shall see
the wine or liquor to ascend in this Pipe, until it be just even with the
liquor in the vessel; by which a man may fill the vessel, or put more into it:
and so if need were, one may empty one vessel into another without opening the
bung-hole.

3. Thirdly, how is it that it is said that a vessel holds more water being
placed at the foot of a Mountain, than standing upon the top of it?
THis is a thing most certain, because that water and all other liquor
disposes it self sphericaliy about the Center of the earth; and by how much
the vessel is nearer the Center, by so much the more the surface of the water
makes a lesser sphere, and therefore every part more gibbous or swelling, than
the like part in a greater sphere: and therefore when the same vessel is
farther from the Center of the earth, the surface of the water makes a greater
sphere, and therefore less gibbous, or swelling over the vessel: from whence
it is evident that a vessel near the Center of the Earth holds more water than
that which is farther remote from it; and so consequently a vessel placed at
the bottom of the Mountain holds more water, than being placed on the top of
the Mountain. First, therefore one may conclude, that one and the same vessel
will always hold more: by how much it is nearer the Center of the earth.
Secondly, if a vessel be very near the Center of the earth, there will be
more water above the brims of it, than there is within the vessel. Thirdly, a
vessel full of water coming to the Center will spherically increase, and by
little and little leave the vessel; and passing the Center, the vessel will be
all emptied. Fourthly, one cannot carry a Paile of water from a low place to a
higher, but it will more and more run out and over, because that in ascending
it lies more level, but descending it swells and becomes more gibbous.

4. Fourthly, to conduct water from the top of one Mountain, to the top of
another.
AS admit on the top of a Mountain there is a spring, and at the top of the
other Mountain there are Inhabitants which want water: now to make a bridge
from one Mountain to another, were difficult and too great a charge; by way of
Pipes it is easy and of no great price: for if at the spring on the top of the
Mountain be placed a Pipe, to descend into the valley, and ascend to the other
Mountlaine, the water will run naturally, and continually, provided that the
spring be somewhat higher than the passage of the water at the Inhabitants.

5. Fifthly, of a fine Fountain which spouts water very high, and with great
violence by turning of a Cock.
LEt there be a vessel as AB, made close in all his parts, in the middle of
which let CD be a Pipe open at D near the bottom, and then with a Squirt
squirt in the water at C, stopped above by the cock or faucet C, with as great
violence as possible you can; and turn the cock immediately. Now there being
an indifferent quantity of water and air in the vessel, the water keeps it
self in the bottom, and the air which was greatly pressed, seeks for more
place, that turning the Cock the water issues forth at the Pipe, and flies
very high, and that especially if the vessel be a little heated: some make use
of this for an Ewer to wash hands withal, and therefore putting a moveable
Pipe above C, such as the figure shows: which the water will cause to turn
very quick, pleasurable to behold.

6. Sixthly, of Archimedes screw, which makes water ascend by descending.
THis is nothing else but a Cylinder, about the which is a Pipe in form of a
screw, and when one turns it, the water descends always in respect of the
Pipe: for it passes from one part which is higher to that which is lower, and
at the end of the Engine the water is found higher than it was at the spring.
This great Enginer admirable in all Mathematical Arts invented this Instrument
to wash King Hieroies great vessels, as some Authors say, also to water the
fields of Egypt, as Diodorus witnesses: and Cardanus reports that a Citizen
of Milan having made the like Engine, thinking himself to be the first
inventer, conceived such exceeding joy, that he be came mad, foll. 2.

Again a thing may ascend by descending, if a spiral line be made having many
circulations or revolutions; the last being always lesser than the first, yet
higher than the Plain supposed it is most certain that then putting a ball
into it, and turning the spirall line so, that the first circulation may be
perpendicular, or touch always the supposed Plain: the ball shall in
descending continually ascend, until at last it come to the highest part of
the spirall line, and so fall out. And here especially may be noted, that a
moving body as water, or a Bullet, or such like, will never ascend if the
Helicall revolution of the screw be not inclining to the Horizon: so that
according to this inclination the ball or liquor, may descend always by a
continual motion and revolution. And this experiment may be more useful,
naturally made with a thread of ^ron, or Latin turned or bowed Helically about
a Cylinder, with some distinction of distances between the Heli^es, for then
having drawn out the Cylinder, or having hung or tied some weight at it in such
sort, that the water may easily drop if one lift up the said thread: these
Helices or revolutions, notwithstanding will remain inclining to the Horizon,
and then turning it about forward, the said weight will ascend, but backward it
will descend. Now if the revolutions be alike, and of equallity amongst
themselves, and the whirling or turning motion be quick, the sight will be so
deceived, that producing the action it will seem to the ignorant no less
than a Miracle.

7. Seventhly, of another fine Fountain of pleasure.
THis is an Engine that has two wheels with Cogges, or teeth as AB, which are
placed within an Ovall CD, in such sort, that the teeth of the one, may enter
into the notches of the other; but so just that neither air nor water may
enter into the Ovall coffer, either by the middle or by the sides, for the
wheel must join so near to the sides of the coffer, that there be no
vacuitie: to this there is an axeltree with a handle to each wheel, so that
they may be turned, and A being turned, that turns the other wheel that is
opposite: by which motion the air that is in E, and the water that is carried
by the hollow of the wheels of each side, by continual motion, is constrained
to mount and fly out by the funnell F: now to make the water run what way
one would have it, there may be applied upon the top of the Pipe F, two other
moveable Pipes inserted one within another; as the figure shows. But here
note, that there may acrue some inconveniency in this Machine seeing that by
quick turning the Cogges or teeth of the wheels running one against another,
may near break them, and so give way to the air to enter in, which being
violently enclosed will escape to occupy the place of the water, whose
weight makes it so quick: howsoever, if this Machine be curiously made as an
able vvorkeman may easily do, it is a most sovereigne Engine, to cast water
high and far off for to quench fires. And to have it to rain to a place
assigned, accommodate a socket having a Pipe at the middle, which may point
toward the place being set at the top thereof, and so having great discretion
in turning the Axis of the wheel, it may work exceeding well, and continue
long.

8. Eighthly, of a fine watering pot for gardens.
THis may be made in form of a Bottle according to the last figure or such
like, having at the bottom many small holes, and at the neck of it another
hole somevvhat greater than those at the bottom, which hole at the top you
must unstop when you would fill this watering pot, for then it is nothing
but putting the lovver end into a paile of water, for so it will fill it
self by degrees: and being full, put your thumb on the hole at the neck to
stop it, for then may you carry it from place to place, and it will not
sensibly run out, som^thing it will, and all in time (if it were never so
close stopped) contrary to the ancient tenet in Philosophy, that air will not
penetrate.

9. Ninthly, how easily to take wine out of a vessel at the bu^g-hole, without
piercing of a hole in the vessel?
IN this there is no need but to have a Cane or Pipe of Glass or such like,
one of the ends of which may be closed up almost, leaving some small hole at
the end; for then if that end be set into the vessel at the bung-hole, the
whole Cane or Pipe will be filled by little and little; and once being full,
stop the other end which is without and then pull out the Cane or Pipe, so will
it be full of wine, then opening a little the top above, you may fill a Glass
or other Pot with it, for as the Wine issues out, the air comes into the
Cane or Pipe to supply vacuity.

10. Tenthly, how to measure irregular bodies by help of water?
SOme throw in the body or magnitude into a vessel, and keep that which
flows out over, saying it is always equal to the thing cast into the water:
let i^ is more nea^er this way to pour into a vessel such a quantity of
water, which may be thought sufficient to cover the body or magnitude, and make
a mark how high the water is in the vessel, then pour out all this water
into another vessel, and let the body or magnitude be placed into the first
vessel; then pour in water from the second vessel, until it ascend unto the
former mark made in the first vessel, so the water which remains in the
second vessel is equal to the body or magnitude put into the water: but here
note that this is not exact or free from error, yet nearer the truth than any
Geometrician can otherwise possibly measure, and these bodies that are not so
full of pores are more truly measured this way, than others are.

11. To find the weight of water.
SEeing that 574/1000 part of an ounce weight, makes a cubicall inch of water:
and every pound weight Haverdepoize makes 27 cubicall inches, and 1 9/^; fere,
and that ^ Gallons and a half wine measure makes a foot cubicall, it is easy
by inversion, that knowing the quantity of a vessel in Gallons, to find his
content in cubicall feet or weight: and that late famous Geometrician Master
Brigs found a cubical foot of water to weigh near 62 pound weight
Haverdepoize But the late learned Simon Stevin found a cubicall foot of water
to weigh 65 pound, which difference may arise from the inequality of water;
for some waters are more ponderous than others, and some difference may be
from the weight of a pound, and the measure of a foot: thus the weight and
quantity of a solid foot settled, it is easy for Arithmeticians to give the
contents of vessels or bodies which contain liquids.

12. To find the charge that a vessel may carry as Ships, Boats, or such
like.
THis is generally conceived, that a vessel may carry as much weight as that
water weighs, which is equal unto the vessel in bigness, in abating only
the weight of the vessel: we see that a barrel of wine or water cast into the
water, will not sink to the bottom, but swim easily, and if a ship had not
Iron and other ponderosities in it, it might swim full of water without
sinking: in the same manner if the vessel were laden with lead, so much
should the watter weigh: hence it is that Mariners call Ships of 50 thousand
Tons, because they may contain one or two thousand Tun, and so
consequently carry as much.

13. How comes it that a Ship having safely sailed in the vast Ocean, and
being come into the Port or harbor, without any tempest will sink down right?
THe cause of this is that a vessel may carry more upon some kind of water
than upon other; now the water of the Sea is thicker and heavier than that of
Rivers, Wels, or Fountains; therefore the loading of a vessel which is
accounted sufficient in the Sea, becomes too great in the hurbour or sweet
water. Now some think that it is the depth of the water that makes vessels
more easy to swim, but it is an abuse; for if the loading of a Ship be no
heavier than the water that would occupy that place, the Ship should as easily
swim upon that water, as if it did swim upon a thousand fathom deep of water,
and if the water be no thicker than a leaf of paper, and weighs but an
ounce under a heavy body, it will support it, as well as if the water under
it weighed ten thousand pound weight: hence it is if there be a vessel
capable of a little more than a thousand pound weight of water, you may put
into this vessel a piece of vvood, which shall weigh a thousand pound
weight; (but lighter in his kind than the like of magnitude of water:) for
then pouring in but a quart of water or a very little quantity of water, the
vvood will swim on the top of it, (provided that the vvood touch not the
sides of the vessel:) which is a fine experiment, and seems admirable in the
performance.

14. How a gross body of mettle may swim upon the water?
THis is done by extending the mettle into a thin Plate, to make it hollovv in
form of a vessel; so that the greatness of the vessel which the air with
it contains, be equal to the magnitude of the water, which vveighes as much
as it, for all bodies may swim without sinking, if they occupy the place of
water equal in weight unto them, as if it weighed 12 pound it must have the
place of 12 pound of water: hence it is that we see floating upon the water
great vessels of Copper or Brass, when they are hollovv in form of a
Caldron. And how can it be otherwise conceived of Islands in the Sea that swim
and float? is it not that they are hollow and some part like unto a Boat, or
that their earth is very light and spongeous, or having many concavities in the
body of it, or much wood within it?

And it would be a pretty proposition to show how much every kind of metal
should be enlarged, to make it swim upon the water: which does depend upon the
proportion that is between the weight of the water and each metal. Now the
proportion that is betvveene metalls and water of equal magnitude, according
to some Authors, is as follows.

A magnitude of 10 pound weight of water will require for the like magnitude of
Gold. 187 Lead. 116 Silver. 104 Copper. 91 Iron. 81 Tin. 75


From which is inferred, that to make a piece of Copper of ^0 pound weight to
swim, it must be so made hollow, that it may hold 9 times that weight of
water and somewhat more, that is to say, 91 pound: seeing that Copper and water
of like magnitudes in their ponderosities, are as before, as ^0 to 91.

15. How to weigh the lightness of the air?
PLace a Balance of wood turned upside down into the water, that so it may
swim, then let water be enclosed within some body, as within a Bladder or such
like, and suppose that such a quantity of air should weigh one pound, place
it under one of the Balances, and place under the other as much weight of
lightness as may counter-ballance and keep the other Balance that it rise not
out of the water: by which you shall see how much the lightness is.

But without any Balance do this; take a Cubicall hollow vessel, or that
which is Cylindricall, which may swim on the water, and as it sinketh by
placing of weights upon it, mark how much, for then if you would examine the
weight of any body, you have nothing to do but to put it into this vessel,
and mark how deep it sinkes, for so many pound it vveighes as the weights
put in do make it so to sink.



16. Being given a body, to mark it about, and show how much of it will sink
in the water, or swim above the water.
THis is done by knovving the weight of the body which is given, and the
quantity of water, which vveighes as much as that body; for then certainly it
will sink so deep, until it occupies the place of that quantity of water.

17. To find how much several mettle or other bodies do weigh less in the
water than in the air:
TAke a Balance, and weigh (as for example) 9 pound of Gold, Silver, Lead, or
Stone in the air, so it hang in aequilibrio; then coming to the water, take
the same quantity of Gold Silver, Lead, or Stone, and let it softly down into
it, and you shall see that you shall need a less counterpoise in the other
Balance to counter-ballance it: wherefore all solids or bodies weigh less
in the water than in the air, and so much the less it will be, by how much
the water is gross and thick, because the weight finds a greater
resistance, and therefore the water supports more than air; and further,
because the water by the ponderositie is displeased, and so strives to be
there again, pressing to it, by reason of the other waters that are about it,
according to the proportion of his weight. Archimedes demonstrateth, that all
bodies weigh less in the water (or in like liquor) by how much they occupy
place: and if the water weigh a pound weight, the magnitude in the water shall
weigh a pound less than in the air.

Now by knowing the proportion of water and mettles, it is found that Gold
loses in the water the 19 part of his weight, Copper the 9 part, Quicksilver
the 15 part, Lead the 12 part, Silver the 10 part, Iron the 8 part, Tin the 7
part and a little more: wherefore in material and absolute weight, Gold in
respect of the water that it occupies weighs 18, and times heavier than the
like quantity of water, that is, as 18 to the Quicksilver 15 times, Lead 11
and, Silver 10 and, Copper 9 and 1/10, Iron 8 and, and Tin 8 and 1/^.
Contrarily in respect of greatness, if the water be as heavy as the Gold, then
is the water almost 19 times greater than the magnitude of the Gold, and so may
you judge of the rest.

18. How is it that a balance having like weight in each scale, and hanging in
aequilibrio in the air, being placed in another place, (without removing any
weight) it shall cease to hang in aequilibrio sensibly: yea by a great
difference of weight?
THis is easy to be resolved by considering different mettles, which though
they weigh equal in the air, yet in the water there will be an apparent
difference; as suppose so that in the scale of each Balance be placed 18 pound
weight of several metalls, the one Gold, and the other Copper, which being
in aequilibrio in the air, placed in the water, will not hang so, because
that the Gold los^eth near the 18 part of his weight, which is about 1
pound, and the Copper loses but his 9 part, which is 2 pound: wherefore the
Gold in the water vveigheth but 17 pound, and the Copper 16 pound, which is a
difference most sensible to confirm that point.

19. To show what waters are heavier one than another, and how much.
PHysicians have an especial respect unto this, judging that water which is
lightest is most healthful and medicinal for the body, and Seamen know that
the heaviest waters do bear most, and it is known which water is heaviest
thus. Take a piece of wax, and fasten Lead unto it, or some such like thing
that it may but precisely swim, for then it is equal to the like magnitude of
water, then put it into another vessel which has contrary water, and if it
sink, then is that water lighter than the other: but if it sink not so deep,
then it argues the water to be heavier or more grosser than the first water,
or one may take a piece of vvood, and mark the quantity of sinking of it into
several waters, by which you may judge which is lightest or heaviest, for in
that which it sinkes most, that is infallibly the lightest, and so contrarily.

20. How to make a Pound of water weigh as much as 10, 2^, ^0, or a hundred
pound of Lead; nay as much as a thousand, or ten thousand and pound weight?
THis proposition seems very impossible, yet water enclosed in a vessel, being
constrained to dilate it self, does weigh so much as though there were in the
concavitie of it a solid body of water.

There are many ways to experiment this proposition, but to verify it, it may
be sufficient to produce two excellent ones only: which had they not been
really acted, little credit might have been given unto it.

The first way is thus. Take a Magnitude which takes up as much place as a
hundred or a thousand pound of water, and suppose that it were tied to some
thing that it may hang in the air; then make a Balance that one of the scales
may inviron it, yet so that it touch not the sides of it: but leave space
enough for one pound of water: then having placed 100 pound weight in the other
scale, throw in the water about the Magnitude, so that one pound of water shall
weigh down the hundred pound in the other Balance.

The second way is yet more admirable: take a common Balance that is capable
to receive 10 or 20 pound of water, then put into it a magnitude which may take
up the place of 9 or 19 pound of water, which must be hung at some Iron or
beam which is placed in a wall; so that it hang quiet: (now it is not
material whether the magnitude be hollow or massy) so that it touch not the
Balance in which it is put, for then having put the Lead or weight into the
other Balance, pour in a pound of water into the Balance where the magnitude
is, and you shall see that this one pound of water shall counterpoise the 10 or
20 pound of Lead which is set in the other Balance.

PROBLEM. LXXXVI. Of sundry Questions of Arithmetic, and first of the number
of sands.
IT may be said incontinent, that to undertake this were impossible, either to
number the Sands of Lybia, or the Sands of the Sea; and it was this that the
Poets sung, and that which the vulgar believes; nay, that which long ago
certain Philosophers to Gelon King of Sicily reported, that the grains of
sand were innumerable: But I answer with Archimedes, that not only one may
number those which are at the border and about the Sea; but those which are
able to fill the whole world, if there were nothing else but sand; and the
grains of sands admitted to be so small, that 10 may make but one grain of
Poppy: for at the end of the account there need not to express them, but this
number 30840979456, and 35 Ciphers at the end of it. Clavius and Archimedes
make it somevvhat more; because they make a greater firmament than Ticho Brahe
does; and if they augment the Universe, it is easy for us to augment the
number, and declare assuredly how many grains of sand there are requisite to
fill another world, in comparison that our visible world were but as one
grain of sand, an atome or a point; for there is nothing to do but to multiply
the number by it self, which will amount to ninety places, whereof twenty
are these, 95143798134910955936, and 70 Ciphers at the end of it: which
amounts to a most prodigious number, and is easily supputated: for supposing
that a grain of Poppy does contain 10 grains of sand, there is nothing but
to compare that little bovvle of a grain of Poppy, with a bovvle of an inch
or of a foot, and that to be compared with that of the earth, and then that of
the earth with that o the firmament; and so of the rest.

2. Diverse metalls being melted together in one body, to find the mixture of
them.
THis wat a notable invention of Archimedes, related by Vitrivius in his
Architecture, where he reports that the Goldsmiths which King Hiero employed
for the making of the Golden Crown, which was to be dedicated to the gods, had
stolen part of it, and mixed Silver in the place of it: the King suspicious of
the work proposed it to Archimedes, if by Art he could discover without
breaking of the Crown, if there had been made mixture of any other metal with
the Gold. The way which he found out was by bathing himself; for as he entered
into the vessel of water, (in which he bathed himself) so the water ascended
or flew out over it, and as he pulled out his body the water descended: from
which he gathered that if a Bowl of pure Gold, Silver, or other metal were
cast into a vessel of water, the water proportionally according to the thing
cast in would ascend; and so by way of Arithmetic the question lay open to be
resolved: who being so intensively taken with the invention, leapes out of the
Bath all naked, crying as a man transported, I have found, I have found, and so
discovered it.

Now some say that he took two Masses, the one of pure Gold, and the other of
pure Silver; each equal to the weight of the Crown, and therefore unequal in
magnitude or greatness; and then knowing the several quantities of water
which was answerable to the Crown, and the several Masses, he subtly
collected, that if the Crown occupied more place within the water than the
Mass of Gold did: it appeared that there was Silver or other metal melted
with it. Now by the rule of position, suppose that each of the three Masses
weighed 18 pound a piece, and that the Mass of Gold did occupy the place of
one pound of water, that of Silver a pound and a half* and the Crown one pound
and a quarter only: then thus he might operate the Mass of Silver which
weighed 18 pounds, cast into the water, did cast out half a pound of water
more then the Mass of Gold, which weighed 18 pound, and the Crown which
weighed also 18 pound, being put into a vessel full of water, threw out more
water than the Mass of Gold by a quarter of a pound, (because of mixed metal
which was in it:) therefore by the rule of proportion, if half a pound of
water (the excess) be answerable to 18 pound of Silver, one quarter of a pound
of excess shall be answerable to 9 pound of Silver, and so much was mixed in
the Crown.

Some judge the way to be more facill by weighing the Crown first in the air,
then in the water; in the air it weighed 18 pound, and if it were pure Gold,
in the water it would weigh but 17 pound; if it were Copper it would weigh but
16 pound; but because we will suppose that Gold and Copper is mixed together,
it will weigh less then 17 pound, yet more than 16 pound, and that according
to the proportion mixed: let it then be supposed that it weighed in the water
16 pound and 3 quarters, then might one say by proportion, if the difference of
one pound of loss, which is betvveen 16 and 17) be answerable to 18 pound,
to what shall one quarter of difference be answerable to, which is betvveen
17 and 16, and it will be 4 pound and a half; and so much Copper was mixed
with the Gold.

Many men have delivered sundry vvayes to resolve this proposition since
Archimedes invention, and it were tedious to relate the diversities.

Baptista Benedictus amongst his Arithmeticall Theoremes, delivers his way
thus: if a Mass of Gold of equal bigness to the Crown did weigh 20 pound,
and another of Silver at a capacity or bigness at pleasure, as suppose did
weigh 12 pound, the Crown or the mixed body would weigh more than the
Silver, and lesser than the Gold, suppose it weighed 16 pound which is 4
pound less than the Gold by 8 pound, then may one say, if 8 pound of
difference come from 12 pound of Silver, from whence comes 4 pound which
will be 6 pound and so much Silver was mixed in it, etc.

3. Three men bought a quantity of wine, each paid alike, and each was to have
alike; it happened at the last partition that there were 21 Barrells, of which
7 were full, 7 half full, and 7 empty, how must they share the wine and
vessels, that each have as many vessels one as another, and as much wine one
as another?
THis may be answered two ways as follows, and these numbers 2, 2, 3, or 3,
3, 1, may serve for direction, and signifies that the first person ought to
have 3 Barrells full, and as many empty ones, and one which is half full; so
he shall have 7 vessels and 3 Barrels, and a half of liquor; and one of the
other shall in like manner have as much, so there will remain for the third
man 1 Barrel full, 5 which are half full, and 1 empty, and so every one shall
have alike both in vessels and wine. And generally to answer such questions,
divide the number of vessels by the number of persons, and if the Quotient be
not an entire number, the question is impossible; but when it is an entire
number, there must be made as many parts as there are 3 persons, seeing that
each part is less than the half of the said Quotient: as dividing 21 by 3
there comes 7 for the Quotient, which may be parted in these three parts, 2, 2,
3, or 3, 3, 1, each of which being less than ha^fe of 7.

4. There is a Ladder which stands upright against a wall of 10 foot high, the
foot of it is pulled out 6 foot from the wall upon the pavement: how much has
the top of the Ladder descended?
THe answer is, 2 foot: for by Pythagoras rule the square of DB, the
Hypothenusal is equal to the square of DA 6, and AB 10. Now if DA be 6 foot,
and AB 10 foot, the squares are 36 and 100, which 36 taken from 100 rests 64,
whose Roote-quadrate is 8 so the foot of the Ladder being now at D, the top
will be at C, 2 foot lovver than it was when it was at B.

PROBLEM. LXXXVII. Witty suits or debates between Caius and Sempronius, upon
the form of f^gures, which Geometricians call Isoperimeter, or equal in
circuit or compass.
Marvel ^ot at it if I make the Mathematics take place at the Ba^^e, and if I
set forth here B^rtoleus, who witnesses of himself, that being then an
ancient Doctor in the Law, he himself took upon him to learn the elements and
principles of Geometry, by which he might set forth certain Laws touching the
divisions of Fields, Waters, Islands, and other incident places: now this shall
be to show in passing by, that these sciences are profitable and behovefull for
Judges, Counselors, or such, to explain many things which fall out in Laws,
to avoid ambiguities, contentions, and suits often.

1. Incident.
Caius had a field which was directly square, having 24 measures in Circuit,
that was 6 on each side: Sempronius desiring to fit himself, prayed Caius to
change with him for a field which should be equivalent unto his, and the
bargain being concluded, he gave him for counterchange a piece of ground which
had just as much in circuit as his had, but it was not square, yet Quadrangular
and Rectangled, having 9 measures in length for each of the two longest sides,
and 3 in breadth for each shorter side: Now Caius which was not the most
subtillest nor wisest in the world accepted his bargain at the first, but
afterward^ having conferred with a Land-measures and Mathematician, found that
he was overreached in his bargain, and that his field contained 36 square
measures, and the other field had but 27 measures, (a thing easy to be known
by multiplying the length by the breadth:) Sempronius contested with him in
suite of Law, and argued that figures which have equal Perimeter or circuit,
are equal amongst themselves: my field, says he, has equal circuit with
yours, therefore it is equal unto it in quantity. Now this was sufficient to
delude a Judge which was ignorant in Geometrical proportions, but a
Mathematician will easily declare the deceit, being assured that figures which
are Isoperemiter, or equal in circuit, have not always equal capacity or
quantity: seeing that with the same circuit, there may be infinite figures
made which shall be more and more capable, by how much they have more Angles,
equal sides, and approach nearer unto a circle, (which is the most capablest
figure of all,) because that all his parts are extended one from anothes, and
from the middle or Center as much as may be: so we see by an infa^lible rule of
experience, that a square is more capable of quantity than a Triangle of the
same circuit, and a Pentagone more than a square, and so of others, so that
they be regular figures that have their sides equal, otherwise there might be
that a regular Triangle, having 24 measures in circuit might have more
capacity than a rectangled Parallelogram, which had also 24 measures of
circuit, as if it were 11 in length, and 1 inbreadth, the circuit is still 24,
yet the quantity is but 11. and if it had 6 every way, it gives the same
Perimeter, viz. 24. but a quantity of 36 as before.

2. Incident.
SEmpronius having borrowed of Caius a sack of Corn, which was 6 foot high and
2 foot broad, and when there was question made to repay it, Sempronius gave
Caius back two sacks full of Corn, which had each of them 6 foot high and 1
foot broad: who believed that if the sackes were full he was repaid, and it
seems to have an appearance of truth barely looked on. But it is most evident
in demonstration, that the 2 sacks of Corn paid by Sempronius to Caius, is but
half of that one sack which he lent him: for a Cylinder or sack having one
foot of diameter, and 6 foot of length, is but the 4 part of another Cylinder,
whose length is 6 foot, and his diameter is 2 foot: therefore two of the lesser
Cylinders or sackes, is but half of the greater; and so Caius was deceived in
half his Corn.

3. Incident.
SOme one from a common Fountain of a City has a Pipe of water of an inch
diameter; to have it more commodious, he has leave to take as much more water,
whereupon he gives order that a Pipe be made of two inches diameter. Now you
will say presently that it is reason to be so big, to have just twice as
(...) before: but if the Magistrate of the City understood Geometrical
proportions, he would soon cause it to be amended, and show that he has not
only taken twice as much water as he had before, but four times as much: for a
Circular hole which is two inches diameter is four times greater than that of
one inch, and therefore will cast out four times as much water as that of one
inch, and so the deceit is double also in this.

Moreover, if there were a heap of Corn of 20 foot every way, which was
borrowed to be paid next year* the party having his Corn in heaps of 12
foot every way, and of 10 foot every way, proffers him 4 heaps of the
greater or 7 heaps of the lesser, for his own heap of 20 every way, which
was lent: here it seems that the proffer is fair, nay with advantage, yet
the loss would be near 1000 foot. Infinite of such causes do arise from
Geometrical figures, which are able to deceive a Judge or Magistrate, which
is not somevvhat seen in Mathematical Documents.

PROBLEM. LXXXVIII. Containing sundry Questions in matter of Cosmography.
FIrst, it may be demanded, where is the middle of the world? I speak not
here Mathematically, but as the vulgar people, who ask, where is the middle
of the world? in this sense to speak absolutely there is no point which may
be said to be the middle of the surface, for the middle of a Globe is every
where: notvvithstanding the Holy Scriptures speak respectively, and make
mention of the middle of the earth, and the interpreters apply it to the City
of Jerusalem placed in the middle of Palestina, and the habitable world, that
in effect taking a map of the world, and placing one foot of the Compasses
upon Jerusalem, and extending the other foot to the extremity of Europe, Asia,
and Afric^, you shall see that the City of Jerusalem is as a Center to that
Circle.

2. Secondly, how much is the depth of the earth, the height of the heavens,
and the compass of the world?
FRom the surface of the earth unto the Center according to ancient traditions,
is 3436. miles, so the whole thickness is 6872 miles, of which the whole
compass or circuit of the earth is 21600 miles.

From the Center of the earth to the Moon there is near 56 Semidiameters of
the earth, which is about 192416 miles. unto the Sun there is 1142
Semidiameters of the earth, that is in miles 3924912; from the starry firmament
to the Center of the earth there is 14000 Semidiameters, that is, 48184000
miles, according to the opinion and observation of that learned Ticho Brahe.

From these measures one may collect by Arithmeticall supputations, many
pleasant propositions in this manner.

First, if you imagine there were a hole through the earth, and that a Millstone
should be let fall down into this hole, and to move a mile in each minute of
time, it would be more than two days and a half before it would come to the
Center, and being there it would hang in the air.

Secondly, if a man should go every day 20 miles, it would be three years
wanting but a fortnight, before he could go once about the earth; and if a Bird
should fly round about it in two days, then must the motion be 450 miles in an
hour.

Thirdly, the Moon runs a greater compass each hour, than if in the same
time she should run twice the Circumference of the whole earth.

Fourthly, admit it be supposed that one should go 20 miles in ascending
toward the heavens every day, he should be above 15 years before he could
attain to the Orb of the Moon.

Fifthly, the Sun makes a greater way in one day than the Moon does in 20
days, because that the Orb of the Suns circumference is at the least 20
times greater than the Orb of the Moon.

Sixthly, if a Millstone should descend from the p^ace of the Sun a thousand
miles every hour, (which is above 15 miles in a minute, far beyond the
proportion of motion) it would be above 163 days before it would fall down
to the earth.

Seventhly, the Sun in his proper sphere moves more than seven thousand five
hundred and seventy miles in one minute of time: now there is no Bullet of a
Cannon, Arrow, Thunderbolt, or tempest of vvinde that moves with such
quickness.

Eighthly, it is of a far higher nature to consider the exceeding and
unmovable quickness of the starry firmament, for a star being in the
Equator, (which is just between the Poles of the world) makes 12598666 miles
in one hour which is two hundred nine thousand nine hundred and seventy four
miles in one minute of time: and if a Horseman should ride every day 40 miles,
he could not ride such a compass in a thousand years as the starry firmament
moves in one hour, which is more than if one should move about the earth a
thousand times in one hour, and quicker than possible thought can be imagined:
and if a star should fly in the air about the earth with such a prodigious
quickness, it would burn and consume all the world here below. Behold
therefore how time passes, and death hastes on: this made Copernicus, not
unadvisedly to attribute this motion of Primum mobile to the earth, and not to
the starry firmament; for it is beyond humane sense to apprehend or conceive
the rapture and violence of that motion being quicker than thought; and the
word of God testifies that the Lord made all things in number, measure,
weight, and time.

PROBLEM. XCII. To find the Bissextile year, the Dominicall letter, and the
letters of the month.
LEt 123, or 124, or 125, or 26, or 27, (which is the remainder of 1500, or
1600) be divided by 4, which is the number of the Leape-yeare, and that which
remains of the division shows the leap-yeare, as if one remain, it shows
that it is the first year since the Bissextile or Leap-year, if two, it is the
second year etc. and if nothing remain, then it is the Bissextile or
Leap-yeare, and the Quotient shows you how many Bissextiles or Leap-yeares
there are contained in so many years.

To find the Circle of the Sun by the fingers.
LEt 123, 24, 25, 26, or 27, be divided by 28, (which is the Circle of the
Sun or whole revolution of the Dominicall letters) and that which remains is
the number of joints, which is to be accounted upon the fingers by Filius esto
Dei, coelum bonus accipe gratis: and where the number ends, that finger it
shows the year which is present, and the words of the verse show the
Dominicall letter.

Example.

DIvide 123 by 28 for the year (and so of other years) and the Quotient is 4,
and there remains 11, for which you must account 11 words: Filius esto Dei,
etc. upon the joints beginning from the first joint of the Index, and you shall
have the answer.

For the present to know the Dominicall letter for each month, account from
January unto the month required, including January, and if there be 8, 9, 7,
or 5, you must begin upon the end of the finger from the thumb and account,
Adam degebat, etc. as many words as there are months, for then one shall have
the letter which begins the month; then to know what day of the month it is,
see how many times 7 is comprehended in the number of days, and take the rest,
suppose 4, account upon the first finger within and without by the joints, unto
the number of 4, which ends at the end of the finger: from whence it may be
inferred that the day required was Wednesday, Sunday being attributed to the
first joint of the first finger or Index: and so you have the present year,
the Dominicall letter, the letter which begins the Month, and all the days of
the Month.

PROBLEM. XCIII. To find the New and Full Moon in each Month.
Add to the Epact for the year, the Month from March, then subtract that
surplus from 30, and the rest is the day of the Month that it will be New
Moon, and adding unto it 14, you shall have that Full Moon.

Note
THat the Epact is made always by adding 11 unto 30, and if it pass 30,
subtract 30, and add 11 to the remainder, and so ad infinitum: as if the Epact
were 12, add 11 to it makes 23 for the Epact next year, to which add 11
makes 34, subtract 30, rests 4 the Epact for the year after, and 15 for the
year follovving that, and 26 for the next, and 7 for the next, etc.

PROBLEM. XCIV. To find the Latitude of ^ Country.
THose that dwell between the North Pole and the Tropicke of Cancer, have their
Spring and Summer between the 10 of March, and the 13 of September: and
therefore in any day between that time, get the suns distance by
isntrumental observation from the zenith at noone, and add the declination of
the sun for that day to it: so the Aggragate shows such is the Latitude, or
Poles height of that Country. Now the declination of the sun for any day is
found out by Tables calculated to that end: or Mechanically by the Globe, or by
Instrument it may be indifferently had: and here note that if the day be
between the 13 of September and the 10 of March, then the suns declination
for that day must be taken out of the distance of the sun from the zenith at
noone: so shall you have the Latitude, as before.

PRBOLEM XCV. Of the Climates of countries, and to find in what C^imate any
country is under.
CLimates as they are taken Geographically signify nothing else but when the
l^ngt^ of the longest day of any place, is half an hour longer, or shorter
than it is in another place (and so of the sh^rtest day) and this account to
begin from the Equinoctia^l Circle, seeing all Countries under it have the
shortest and longest day that can be but 12 hours; But all other Countries
that are from the Equinoctial Circle either toward the North or South of it
unto the Poles themselves, are said to be in some one Climate or other, from
the Equinoctial to either of the Poles Circles, (which are in the Latitude of
66 degr. 30 m.) between each of which Polar Circles and the Equinoctial Circle
there is accounted 24 Climates, which differ one from another by half an hours
time: then from each Polar Circle, to each Pole there are reckoned 6. other
Climates which differ one from another by a months time: so the whole earth is
divided into 60 Climates, 30 being allotted to the Northern Hemisphere, and
30^ to the Southern Hemispheare. And here note, that though these Climats
which are between the Equinoctial and the Polar Circles are equal one unto
the other in respect of time, to wit, by half an hour; yet the Latitude,
breadth, or internal, contained between Climate and Climate, is not equal:
and by how much any Climate is farther from the Equinoctial than another
Climate, by so much the lesser is the intervall between that Climate and the
next: so those that are nearest the Equinoctial are largest, and those which
are farthest off most contracted: and to find what Climate any Country is
under: subtract the length of an Equinoctial day, to wit, 12 hours from the
length of the longest day of that Country; the remainder being doubled shows
the Climate: So at London the longest day is near 16 hours and a half; 12
taken from it there remains 4 hours and a half, which doubled makes 9 half
hours, that is, 9 Climates; so London is in the 9 climate.

PROBLEM. XCVI. Of Longitude and Latitude of the Earth and of the Stars.
LOngitude of a Country, or place, is an arcke of the Equator contained
between the Meridian of the Azores, and the Meridian of the place, and the
greatest Longitude that can be is 360 degrees.

Note.
That the first Meridian may be taken at pleasure upon the Terrestrial Globe
or Map, for that some of the ancient Astronomers would have it at Hercules
Pillars, which is at the straights at Gibraltar: Ptolomy placed it at the
Canary Isl^nds, but now in these latter times it is held to be near the
Azores. But why it was first placed by Ptolomy at the Canary Islands, were
because that in his time these Islands were the farthest western parts of the
world that was then discovered. And why it reteines his place now at Saint
Michaels near the Azores, is that because of many accurate observations made
of late by many expert Navigators and Mathematicians, they have found the
Needle there to have no variation, but to point North and South: that, is to
each Pole of the world: and why the Longitude from thence is accounted
Eastwards, is from the motion of the Sun Eastward, or that Ptolomy and others
did hold it more convenient to begin from the Western part of the world and so
account the Longitude Eastward from Country to Country that was then known;
till they came to the Eastern part of Asia, rather than to make a beginning
upon that which was unknown: and having made up their account of reckoning the
Longitude from the Western part to the Eastern part of the world known, they
supposed the rest to be all sea, which since their deaths has been found
almost to be another habitable world.

To find the Longitude of a Country.
IF it be upon the Globe, bring the Country to the Brazen Meridian, and
whatsoever degree that Meridian cuts in the Equinoctial, that degree is the
Longitude of that Place: if it be in a Map, then mark what Meridian passes
over it, so have you the Longitude thereof, if no Meridian pass over it, then
take a pair of Compasses, and measure the distance between the Place and the
next Meridian, and apply it to the divided parallel or Equator, so have you
the Longitude required.

Of the Latitude of Countries.
LAtitude of a Country is the distance of a Country from the Equinoctial, or
it is an Arc of the Meridian contained between the Zenith of the place and the
Equator; which is twofold, viz. either North-Latitude or South-Latitude,
either of which extends from the Equinoctial to either Pole, so the greatest
Latitude that can be is but 90 degrees: If any Northern Country have the
Artick Circle vertical, which is in the Latitude of 66. gr. 30. m. the Sun
will touch the Horizon in the North part thereof, and the longest day will be
there then 24 hours, if the Country have less Latitude than 66. degrees 30.
m. the Sun will rise and set, but if it have more Latitude than 66. gr. 30 m.
it will be visible for many days, and if the Country be under the Pole, the
Sun will make a Circular motion above the Earth, and be visible for a half
year: so under the Pole there will be but one day, and one night in the whole
year.



To find the latitude of Countries.
IF it be upon a Globe, bring the place to the Brazen Meridian, and the number
of degrees which it meets therewith, is the Latitude of the place. Or with a
pair of Compasses take the distance between the Country and the Equinoctial,
which applied unto the Equinoctial will show the Latitude of that Country;
which is equal to the Poles height; if it be upon a Map. Then mark what
parallel passes over the Country and where it crosses the Meridian, that
shall be the Latitude: but if ^o parallel passes over it, then take the
distance between the place and the next parallel, which applied to the divided
Meridian from that parallel will show the Latitude of that place.

To find the distance of places.
IF it be upon a Globe: then with a pair of Compasses take the distance
between the two Places, and apply it to the divided Meridian or Equator, and
the number of degrees shall show ^e distance; each degree being 60. miles. ^f
it be in a Map (according to Wrights pro^ection) take the distance with a
pair of Com^asses between the two places, and apply this distance to the
divided Meridian on the Map right against the two places; so as many degrees
as is contained between the feet of the Compasses so much is the distance
between the two places. If the distance of two places be required in a
particular Map then with the Compasses take the distance between the two
places, and apply it to the scale of Miles, so have you the distance, if the
scale be too short, take the scale between the Compasses, and apply that to the
two places as often as you can, so have you the distance required.

Of the Longitude, Latitude, Declination, and distance of the Stars.
THe Declination of a star is the nearest distance of a Star from the
Equator; the Latitude of a Star is the nearest distance of a Sarre from the
Ecliptic: the Longitude of a Star is an Ark of the Ecliptic contained
between the beginning of Aries, and the Circle of the Stars Latitude, which
is a circle drawn from the Pole of the Ecliptic unto the star, and so to
the Ecliptic. The distance between two Sarres in Heaven is taken by a
Crosse-staffe or other Instrument, and upon a Globe it is done by taking
between the feet of the Compasses the two Stars, and applying it to the
Equator, so have you the distance between those two starre^.

How is it that two Horses or other creatures being foaled or brought forth
into the world at one and the same time, that after certain days travel the
one lived more days than the other, notwithstanding they dyed together in one
and the sam^ moment also?
THis is easy to be answered: let one of them travel toward the West and the
other toward the East: then that which goes toward the West follows the
Sun: and therefore shall have the day somewhat longer than if there had been
no travel made, and that which goes East by going against the Sun, shall
have the day shorter, and so in respect of travel though they dye at one and
the self same hour and moment of time, the one shall be older than the other.

From which consideration may be inferred that a Christian, a Jew, and a
Saracen, may have their Sabbaths all upon one and the same day though
notwithstanding the Saracen holds his Sabath upon the Friday, the Jew upon the
Saturday, and the Christian upon the Sunday: For being all three resident in
one place, if the Saracen and the Christian begin their travel upon the
Saturday, the Christian going West, and the Saracen Eastwards, shall compass
the Globe of the earth, thus the Christian at the conclusion shall gain a day,
and the Saracen shall lose a day, and so meet with the Jew every one upon his
own Sabbath.

Certain fine observations.
1 UNder the Equinoctial the Needle hangs in equilibrio, but in these parts it
inclines under the Horizon, and being under the Pole it is thought it will hang
vertical.

2 In these Countries which are without the Tropicall Circles, the Sun comes
East and West every day for a half year, but being under the Equinoctial the
Sun is never East, nor West* but twice in the year, to wit, the 10. of March
and the 13 of September.

3 If a ship be in the Latitude of 23 gr. 30 m. that is, if it have either of
the Tropicks vertical: then at what time the Suns Altitude is equal to his
distan^e from any of the Equinoctial points, then the Sun is due East or
West.

4 If a ship be between the Equinoctial and either of the Tropicks, the Sun
will come twice to one point of the compass in the forenoone, that is, in one
and the same position.

5 Under the Equinoctial near Guinea there is but two sorts of winds all the
year, 6 months a Northerly wind, and 6 months a Southerly wind, and the
flux of the Sea is accordingly.

6 If two ships under the Equinoctial be 100. leagues asunder, and should
sail Northerly until they were come under the Articke circle, they should
then be but 50 leagues asunder.

7 Those which have the Artick circle, vertical: when the Sun is in the
Tropic of Cancer, the Sun sets not, but touches the western part of the
Horizon.

8 If the complement of the Suns height at noon be found equal to the Suns
Declination for that day, then the ^quinoctiall is vertical: or a ship
making such an observation, the Equinoctial is in the Zenith, or direct over
them, by which Navigators know when they cross the line, in their travels to
the Indies, or other parts.

9 The Sun being in the Equinoctial, the extremity of the style in any
Sunne-dyall upon a plain, makes a right line, otherwise it is Eclipticall,
Hyperbolicall, etc.

10 When the shadow of a man, or other thing upon a Horizontall (...) is equal
unto it in length, then is the Sun in the middle point between the Horizon
and the Zenith, that is, 45 degrees high.

PROBLEM. XCVII. To make a Triangle that shall have three right Angles.
OPen the C^passes at p^easure: and upon A, describe an Arc BC. then at the
same opening, place one of the feet in B, and describe the Ark AC. Lastly,
place one of the feet of the Compasses in C. and describe the Arc AB^ so shall
you have the sphericall Aequilaterall Triangle ABC, right angled at A, at B,
and at C. that is, each angle comprehended 9^. degrees: which can never be in
any plain Triangle, whether it be Equilaterall, Isocelse, scaleve,
Orthogonall, or Opigonall.

PROBLEM. XCVIII. To divide a line in as many equal parts as one will, without
compasses, or without seeing of it.
THis Proposition has a fallacy in it, and cannot be practiced but upon a
Maincordion: for the Mathematical line which proceeds from the flux of a
point, cannot be divided in that wise: One may have therefore an Instrument
which is called Maincordion, because there is but one cord: and if you desire
to divide your line into 3 parts, run your finger upon the frets until you
sound a third in music: if you would have the fourth part of the line, then
find the fourth sound, a fifth, etc. so shall you have the answer.

PROBLEM. XCIX. To draw a line which shall incline to another line, yet never
meet: against the Axiom of Parallels.
THis is done by help of a Conoeide line, produced by a right line upon one and
the same plain, held in great account amongst the Ancients, and it is drawn
after this manner.

Draw a right line infinitely, and upon some end of it, as at I, draw a
perpendicular line I A. augment it to H. then from A. draw lines at pleasure to
intersect the line I. M. in each of which lines from the right line, IM.
transfer IH. viz. KB.LC.OD.PE.QF.MG. then from those points draw the line
H.B.C.D.E.F.G. which will not meet with the line IM. and yet incline nearer and
nearer unto it.

PROBLEM. C. To observe the variation of the compasses, or needle in any places.
FIrst describe a Circle upon a plain, so that the Sun may shine on it both
before noone and afternoon: in the center of which Circle place a Gn^^on or
wire perpendicular as AB, and an hour before noone mark the extremity of the
shadow of AB, which suppose it be at C. describe a Circle at that semidiamiter
CDF. then after noone mark when the top of the shadow of AB. touches the
Circle, which admit in D; divide the distance CD into two equal parts, which
suppose at E. draw the line EAF. which is the Meridian line, or line of North
and South: now if the Arc of the Circle CD. be divided into degrees. place a
Needle GH, upon a plain set up in the Center, and mark how many degrees the
point of the Needle G, is from E. so much does the Needle vary from the North
in that place.

PROBLEM. CI. How to find at any time which way the wind is in ones Chamber,
without going abroad?
Upon the Plancking or floor of a Chamber, Parlor, or Hall, that you intend to
have this device, let there come down from the top of the house a hollow post,
in which place an Iron rod that it ascend above the house 10, or 6 foot with a
vane or a scouchen at it to show the winds without: and at the lower end of
this rod of Iron, place a Dart which may by the moving of the vane with the
wind without, turn this Dart which is within: about which upon the plaster
must be described a Circle divided into the 32 points of the Mariners Compass
pointed and distinguished to that end, then may it be marked by placi^ to
Compass by it; for having noted the North point, the East, etc* it is easy to
note all the rest of the points: and so at any time coming into this Room,
you have nothing to do but to look up to the Dart, which will point you out
what way the wind blows at that instant.

PROBLEM. CII. How to draw a parallel sphericall line with great ease?
FIrst draw an obscure line GF. in the middle of it make two points AB, (which
serves for Centres then place one foot of the Compasses in B, and extend the
other foot to A, and describe the semicircle AC. then place one foot of the
Compasses in A, and extend the other foot to C, and describe the semicircle CD.
Now place the Compasses in B, and extend the other foot unto D, and describe
the semicircle DF, and so ad infinitum; which being done neatly, that there be
no right line seen nor where the Compasses were placed, will seem very
strange how possibly it could be drawn with such exactnes, to such which are
ignorant of that way.

PROBLEM. CIII. To measure an in accessible distance, as the breadth of a River
with the help of ones hat only.
THe way of this is easy: for having ones hat upon his head, come near to the
bank of the River, and holding your head upright (which may be by putting a
small stick to some one of your buttons to prop up the chin) pluck down the
brim or edge of your hat until you may but see the other side of the water,
then turn about the body in the same posture that it was before toward some
plain, and mark where the sight by the brimme of the hat glaunceth on the
ground* for the distance from that place to your standing, is the breadth of
the River required.

PROBLEM. CIIII. How to measure a height with two strawes or two small sticks.
TAke two strawes or two sticks which are one as long as another, and place
them at right Angles one to the other, as AB. and AC. then holding AB. parallel
to the ground, place the end A to the eye at A. and looking to the other top
BC. at C. by going backward or forward until you may see the top of the Tower
or tree, which suppose at E. So the distance from your standing to the Tower or
Tree, is equal to the height thereof above the level of the eye: to which if
you add your own height you have the whole height.

Otherwise.
TAke an ordinary square which Carpenters or other workmen use, as HKL. and
placing H. to the eye so that HK. be level, go back or come nearer until that
by it you may see the top M. for then the distance from you to the height is
equal to the height.

PROBLEM. CV. How to make statues, letters, bowls, or other things which are
placed in the side of a high building, to be seen below of an equal bigness.
LEt BC. be a Pillar 7 yards high, and let it be required that three yards
above the level of the eye A, viz. at B. be placed a Globe, and 9 yards above
B. be placed another, and 22. yards above that be placed another Globe: how
much shall the Diameter of these Globes be, that at the eye, at A, they may all
appear to be of one and the same Magnitude: It is thus done, first draw a line
as AK. and upon K. erect a perpendicular KX. divide this line into 27 parts*
and according to AK. describe an Arc KY. then from K* in the perpendicular KX,
account^* par^s, viz at L. which shall represent the former three yardes, and
draw the line LA. from L, in the said perpendicular reckon the diameter of the
lesser Globe of what Magnitude it is intended to be: suppose SL, and draw the
line SA. cutting the Arc VK. in N. then from K. in the perpendicular account 9
yards, which admit at T. draw TA, cutting YK. in O transfer the Arc MN, from
A to P. and draw AP. which will cut the perpendicular in V. so a line drawn
from the middle of VF. unto the visuall lines AI, and AV, shall be the diameter
of the next Globe: Lastly, account from K. in the perpendicular XK. 22 parts,
and draw the line WA. cutting YK in Q. then take the Arc MN, and transfer it
from Q to R and draw AR* which will cut the perpendicular in X so the line
which passes by the meddle of XW. perpendicular to the visuall line AW, and
AX. be the Diameter of the third Globe, to wit 5, 6. which measures transferred
in the Pillar BC. which shows the true Magnitude of the Globes 1, 2, 3. from
this an Architect or does proportion his Images, and the foulding of the Robes
which are most deformed at the eye below in the making, yet most perfect when
it is set in his true height above the eye.

PROBLEM. CVI. How to disg^is^ or disfigure an Image, as a head, an arm, a
whole body, etc. so that it has no proportion the ears to become long: the
nose as that of a swan, the mouth as a coaches entrance, etc yet the eye placed
at a certain point will be seen in a direct and exact proportion.
I Will not strive to set a Geometrical figure here, for fear it may seem
too difficult to understand, but I will endeavor by discourse how Mechanically
with a Candle you may perceive it sensible: first there must be made a figure
upon Paper, such as you please, according to his just proportion, and paint it
as a Picture (which painters know well enough to do) afterward put a Candle
upon the Table, and interpose this figure obliquely, between the said Candle
and the Books of Paper, where you desire to have the figure disguised in such
sort that the height pass athwart the hole of the Picture: then will it carry
all the form of the Picture upon the Paper, but with deformity; follow these
tracts and mark out the light with a Coals black head or Ink: and you have
your desire.

To find now the point where the eye must see it in his natural form: it is
accustomed according to the order of Perspective, to place this point in the
line drawn in height, equal to the largeness of the narrowest side of the
deformed square, and it is by this way that it is performed.

PROBLEM. CVII. How a Cannon after that it has shot, may be covered from the
battery of the enemy.
LEt the mouth of a Cannon be I, the Cannon M. his charge NO, the wheel L, the
axletree PB. upon which the Cannon is placed, at which end toward B, is placed
a pillar AE^ supported with props D, C, E, F, G* about which the Axeltree
turns: now the Cannon being to shoot, it retires to H, which cannot be
directly because of the Axletree, but it make a segment of a circle* and hides
himself behind the wall QR, and so preserves it self from the Enemies battery,
by which means one may avoid many inconveniences which might arise: and
moreover, one man may more easily replace it again for another shot by help of
poles tied to the wall, or other help which may multiply the strength.

PROBLEM. CVIII. How to make a Lever, by which one man may alone place a Cannon
upon his carriage, or raise what other weight he would.
FIrst place two thick boards upright, as the figure shows, pierced with
holes, alike opposite one unto another as CD, and OF: and let L, and M, be the
two bars of Iron which passes through the holes GH, and F, K, the two
supports, or props, AB. the Cannon, OP, the Lever, RS, the two notches in the
Lever, and Q, the hook where the burden or Cannon is tied to. The rest of the
operation is ^cill, that the youngest scholars or learners cannot fail to
perform it: to teach Minerva were in vain, and it were to Mathematicians
injury in the succeeding Ages.

PROBLEM. CIX. How to make a Clock with one only wheel.
MAke the body of an ordinary Dyall, and divide the hour in the Circle into
12. parts: make a great wheel in height above the Axletree, to the which you
shall place the cord of your counterpoize* so that it may descend, that in 1^
hours of time your Index or Needle may make one revolution, which may be
known by a watch which you may have by you: then put a balance which may stop
the course of the Wheel, and give it a regular motion, and you shall see an
effect as just from this as from a Clock with many wheels.

PROBLEM. CX. How by help of two wheels to make a Child to draw up alone a
hogshead of water at a time: and being drawn up shall cast out it self into
another vessel as one would have it.
LEt R be the Pit from whence water is to be drawn, P the hook to throw out
the water when it is brought up (this hook must be moveable) let AB be the Axis
of the wheel SF, which wheel has diverse forkes of Iron made at G, equally
fastened at the wheel; let I, be a Card, which is drawn by K, to make the
wheel S, to turn, which wheel S, bears proportion to the wheel T, as 8
to ^. let N be a Chain of Iron to which is tied the vessel O, and the other
which is in the Pit: E^ is a piece of vvood which has a mortes in 1, and ^,
by which the Cord I, passes, tied at the wall, as KH, and the other piece of
timber of the little wheel as M, mortified in likewise for the chain to
pass through: draw the Cord I, by K, and the wheel will turn, and so
consequently the wheel T, which will cause the vessel O to raise; which being
empty, draw the cord again by Y, and the other vessel which is in the pit
^ill come out by the same reason. This is an invention which will save labor
if practiced; but here is to be noted that the pit must be large enough, to the
end that it contain two great vessels to pass up and down one by another*

PROBLEM. CXI. To make a Ladder of Cords, which may be carried in ones pocket:
by which one may easily mount up a Wall, or Tree alone.
TAke two Pullies A, and D, unto that of A, let there be fastened a Cramp of
Iron as B; and at D, let there be fastened a staff of a foot and a half long
as F, then the Pully A: place a hand of Iron, as E, to which tie a cord of an
half inch thick (which may be of silk because it is for the pocket:) then
strive to make fast the Pully A, by the help of the Crampe of Iron B, to the
place that you intend to scale; and the staff F, being tied at the Pully D,
put it betvveen your legs as though you would sit upon it: then holding the
Cord C in your hand, you may guide your self to the place required* which may
be made more facill by the multiplying of Pullies. This secret is most
excellent in War, and for lovers, its supportablenesse avoids suspicion.

PROBLEM. CXII. How to make a Pumpe whose strength is marvelous by reason of
the great weight of water that it is able to bring up at once, and so by
continuance.
LEt (...), be the height of the case about two or three foot high, and broader
according to discretion: the rest of the Case or concavity let be O: let the
sucker of the Pumpe which is made, be just for the Case or Pumpes head (...),
and may be made of vvood or brass of 4 inches thick, having a hole at E,
which descending raises up the cover P, by which issues forth the water, and
ascending or raising up it shuts it or makes it close: RS, is the handle of the
sucker tied to the handle TX, which works in the post VZ. Let A, B, C, D, be a
piece of Brass, G the piece which enters into the hole to F, to keep out the
Air. H, I, K, L, the piece tied at the funnell or pipe: in which plays the
Iron rod or axis G, so that it pass through the other piece MN, which is tied
with the end of the pipe of Brass.

Note, that the lower end of the Cisterne ought to be rested upon a Gridiron or
Iron Grate* which may be tied in the pit, by which means lifting up and putting
down the handle, you may draw ten times more water than otherwise you could.

PROBLEM. CXIII. How by means of a Cisterne, to make water of a Pit
continually to ascend without strength, or the assistance of any other Pumpe.
LEt IL, be the Pit where one would cause water to ascend continually to ^^ach
office of a house or the places which are separated from it: let there be made
a receive^ as A, well closed up with lead or other matter that air enter not
in, to which fasten a pipe of lead as at E, which may have vent at pleasure,
then let there be made a Cisterne as B, which may be communicative to A, by
help of the pipe G, from which Cistern B, may issue the water of pipe D,
which may descend to H, which is a little below the level of the water of
the pit as much as is GH. to the end of which shall be soldered close a Cock
which shall cast out the water by KH. Now to make use of it, let B be filled
full of water, and when you would have it run turn the Cock, for then the
water in B, will descend by K. and for fear that there should be vacuity,
nature which abhors it, will labor to furnish and supply that emptiness out
of the spring F, and that the Pit dry not, the Pipe ought to be small of an
indifferent capacity according to the greatness or smalnesse of the spring.

PROBLEM. CXIIII. How out of a fountain to cast the water very high: different
from a Problem formerly delivered.
LEt the fountain be BD, of a round form (seeing it is the most capable and
most perfect figure) place into it two pipes conjoined as EA, and HC, so that
no Air may enter in at the place of joining: let each of the Pipes have a cock
G, and L: the cock at G, being closed, open that at I* and so with a squirt
force the water through the hole at H, then close the Cock at A, and draw out
the squirt, and open the cock at G. the Air being before rarefied will extend
his dimensions, and force the water with such violence, that it will amount
above the height of one or two Pipes: and so much the more by how much the
Machine is great: this violence will last but a little while if the Pipe have
too great an opening, for as the Air approaches to his natural place, so the
force will diminish.

PROBLEM. CXV. How to empty the water of a Cisterne by a Pipe which shall have
a motion of it self.
LEt AB, be the vessel; CDE, the Pipe: HG, a little vessel under the greater,
in which one end of the Pipe is, viz. C, and let the other end of the Pipe E.
passing through the bottom of the vessel at F, then as the vessel fills so
will the Pipe, and when the vessel, shall be full as far as PO, the Pipe
will begin to run at E, of his own accord, and never cease until the
vessel be wholly empty.

PROBLEM CXVI. How to squirt or spout out a great height, so that one pot of
water shall last a long time.
LEt there be prepared two vessels of Brass, Lead, or of other matter of equal
substance as are the two vessels AB, and BD, and let them be joined together by
the two Pillars MN, and OF: then let there be a pipe HG. which may pass
through the cover of the vessel CD, and pass through AB, into G, making a
little bunch or rising in the cover of the vessel AB, so that the pipe touch
it not at the bottom: then let there be soldered fast another Pipe IL, which
may be separated from the bottom of the vessel, and may have his bunchie
swelling as the former without touching the bottom: as is represented in L,
and passing through the bottom of AB, may be continued unto I, that is to say,
to make an opening to the cover of the vessel AB, and let it have a little
mouth as a Trumpet: to that end to receive the water. Then there must further
be added a very small Pipe which may pass through the bottom of the vessel
AB, as let it be OP, and let there be a bunch; or swelling over it as at P, so
that it touch not also the bottom: let there be further made to this lesser
vessel an edge in form of a Basin to receive the water, which being done
pour water into the Pipe IL, until the vessel CD, be full, then turn the
whole Machine upside down that the vessel CD, may be uppermost, and AB,
undermost; so by help of the pipe GH, the water of the vessel CD, will run
into the vessel AB, to have passage by the pipe PO. This motion is pleasant at
a feast in filling the said vessel with wine, which will spout it out as though
it were from a boiling fountain, in the form of a thread very pleasant to
behold.

PROBLEM. CXVIII. How to practice excellently the reanimation of simples, in
case the plants may not be transported to be replanted by reason of distance of
places.
TAke what simple you please, burn it and take the ashes of it, and let it be
calcinated two hours between two Creusets well luted, and extract the salt:
that is, to put water into it in moving of it; then let it settle: and do it
two or three times, afterward evaporate it, that is, let the water be boiled
in some vessel, until it be all consumed: then there will remain a salt at
the bottom, which you shall afterward sow in good Ground well prepared: such
as the Theater of husbandry shows, and you shall have your desire.

PROBLEM. CVIII. How to make an infalliable perpetual motion.
M^xe 5. or 6. ounces of with is equal weight of, grind it together with 10.
or 12 ounces of sublimate dissolved in a celler upon a Marble the space of
four days, and it will become like Oil, Olive, which distill with fire of
chafe or driving fire, and it will sublime dry substance, then put water upon
the earth (in form of Lie) which will be at the bottom of the Limbeck, and
dissolve that which you can; filter it, then distill it, and there will be
produced very subtle Antomes, which put into a bottle close stopped, and keep
it dry, and you shall have your desire, with astonishment to all the world, and
especially to those which have traveled herein without fruit.

PROBLEM. CXIX. Of the admirable invention of making the Philosophers Tree,
which one may see with his eye to grow by little and little.
TAke two ounces of Aqua fortis, and dissolve in it half an ounce of fine
silver refined in a Cappell: then take an ounce of Aqua fortis, and two drams
of Quicksilver: which put in it, and mix these two dissolved things together,
then cast it into a Vial of half a pound of water, which may be well stopped;
for then every day you may see it grow both in the Tree and in the branch. This
liquid serves to black hair which is red, or white, without fading until they
fall, but here is to be noted that great care ought to be had in anointing the
hair, for fear of touching the flesh: for this composition is very Corrosive
or searching, that as soon as it touches the flesh it raises blisters, and
bladders very painful.

PROBLEM. CXX. How to make the representation of the great world?
DRaw salt Niter out of salt Earth* which is found along the Rivers side, and
at the foot of Mountains, where especially are Minerals of Gold and Silver:
mix that Niter well cleansed with, then calcinate it hermetically* then put it
in a Limbeck and let the receiver be of Glass, well luted, and always in
which let there be placed leaves of Gold at the bottom, then put fire under
the Limbeck until vapors arise which will cleave unto the Gold; augment your
fire until there ascend no more, then take away your receiver, and close it
hermetically, and make a Lamp fire under it until you may see presented in it
that which nature affords us: as Flowers, Trees, Fruits, Fountains, Sun,
Moon, Stars, etc. Behold here the form of the Limbeck, and the receiver: A
represents the Limbeck, B stands for the receiver.

PROBLEM. CXXI. How to make a Cone, or a Pyramidall body move upon a Table
without springs or other Artificial means: so that it shall move by the edge
of the Table without falling?
THis proposition is not so thornie and subtle as it seems to be, for putting
under a Cone of paper a Beetle or such like creature, you shall have pleasure
with astonishment and admiration to those which are ignorant in the cause: for
this animal will strive always to free herself from the captivity in which
she is in by the imprisonment of the Cone: for coming near the edge of the
Table she will return to the other side for fear of falling.

PROBLEM CXXII. To cleave an Anvill with the blow of a Pistol.
THis is proper to a Warrier, and to perform it, let the Anvill be heated red
hot as one can possible, in such sort that all the solidity of the body be
softened by the fire: then charge the Pistol with a bullet of silver, and so
have you infallibly the experiment.

PROBLEM. CXXIII. How to r^st a Capon carried in a Budget at a Saddle-bowe, in
the space of riding 5 or 6 miles?
HAving made it ready and larded it, stuff ^t with Butter; then heat a piece
of steel which may be formed round according to the length of the Capon, and
big enough to fill the Belly of it, and then stop it with Butter; then wrap it
up well and enclose it in a Box in the Budget, and you shall have your desire:
it is said that Count Mansfield served himse^fe with no others, but such as
were made ready in this kind, for that it loses none of its substance, and it
is dressed very equally.

PROBLEM. CXXIV. How to make a Candle burn and continue three times as long as
otherwise it would?
Unto the end of a Candle half^burned stick a farthing less or more, to make
it hang perpendicular in a vessel of water, so that it swim above the water;
then light it, and it will sustain it self and float in this manner; and being
placed into a fountain, pond, or lake that runs slowly, where many people
assemble, it will cause an extreme fear to those which come therein in the
night, knowing not what it is.

PROBLEM. CXXV. How out of a quantity of wine to extract that which is most
windy, and evil, that it hurt not a sick Person?
TAke two vials in such sort that they be of like greatness both in the belly
and the neck; fill one of them of wine, and the other of water: let the mouth
of that which has the water be placed into the mouth of that which has the
wine, so the water shall be uppermost, now because the water is heavier than
the wine, it will descend into the other Vial, and the wine which is lowest,
because it is highest will ascend above to supply the place of the water, and
so there will be a mutual interchange of liquids, and by this penetration the
wine will lose her vapors in passing through the water.

PROBLEM CXXVI. How to make two Marmouzets, one of which shall light a Candle,
and the other put it out?
Upon the side of a wall make the figure of a Marmouzet or other animal or
form, and right against it on the other wall make another; in the mouth of
each put a pipe or quill so artificially that it be not perceived; in one of
which place salt peter very fine, and dry and pulverised; and at the end set a
little match of paper, in the other place sulphur beaten small, then holding a
Candle lighted in your hand, say to one of these Images by way of command, Blow
out the Candle; then lighting the paper with the candle, the saltpeter will
blow out the Candle immediately, and going to the other Image (before the match
of the Candle be out) touch the sulphur with it and say, Light the Candle, and
it will immediately be lighted, which will cause an admiration to those which
see the action, if it be well done with a secret dexterity.

PROBLEM. XXVII. How to keep wine fresh as if it were in a celler though it
were in the heat of Summer, and without Ice or snow, yea though it were carried
at a saddles bow, and exposed to the Sun all the day?
SEt your wine in a vial of Glass; and place it in a Box made of wood,
Leather, or such like: about which vial place Salt-peeter, and it will preserve
it and keep it very fresh: this experiment is not a little commodious for those
which are not near fresh waters, and whose dwellings are much exposed to the
Sun.

PUOBLEM. CXXVIII. To make a Cement which indureth or lasts as marble, which
resists air and water without ever disjoyning or uncementing?
TAke a quantity of strong and gluing Mortar well beaten, mix with this as
much new slaked Lime, and upon it cast Oil of Olive or Linseed-Oile, and it
will become hard as Marble being applied in time.

PROBLEM. CXXIX. How to melt metal very quickly, yea in a shell upon a little
fire.
MAke a bed upon a bed of metal with powder of Sulphur, of Salt-peeter, and
saw-dust alike; then put fire to the said powder with a burning Charcole, and
you shall see that the metal will dissolve incontinent and be in a Mass. This
secret is most excellent, and has been practiced by the reverend father
Mercen^^ of the order of the Minims.

PROBLEM. CXXX. How to make Iron or steel exceeding hard?
QVench your Blade or other Instrument seven times in the blood of a male Hog
mixed with Goose-grease, and at each time dry it at the fire before you wet it:
and it will become exceeding hard, and not brittle, which is not ordinary
according to other temperings and quenchings of Iron: an experiment of small
cost, often proved, and of great consequence for Armorie in warlike
negotiations.

PRBOLEM CXXXI. To preserve fire as long as you will, imitating the
inextinguible fire of Vestales.
AFter that you have extracted the burning spirit of the salt of, by the
degrees of fire, as is required according to the Art of Chymistrie, the fire
being kindled of it self, break the Limbeck, and the Irons which are found at
the bottom will flame and appear as burning Coals as soon as they feel the
air; which if you promptly enclose in a vial of Glass, and that you stop it
exactly with some good Lute: or to be more assured it may be closed up with
Hermes wax for fear that the Air get not in. Then will it keep more than a
thousand years (as a man may say) yea at the bottom of the Sea; and opening
it at the end of the time, as soon as it feels the Air (...) takes fi^e*
with which you may light a Match. This secret merits to be traveled after and
put in practice, for that it is not common, and full of astonishment, seeing
that all kind of fire lasts but as long as his matter lasts, and that
there is no matter to be found that will so long in^^^e.

Artificial fire-Workes: Or the manner of making of Rockets and Balls of fire,
as well for the Water, as for the Air; with the composition of Stars,
Golden-rain, Serpen^s, Lances, Whee^s of fire and such like, pleasant and
Recreative.
Of the composition for Rockets.
IN the making of Rockets, the chiefest thing to be regarded is the composition
that they ought to be filled with; forasmuch as that which is proper to Rockets
which are of a less sort is very improper to those which are of a more greater
form; for the fire being lighted in a great concave, which is filled with a
quick composition, burns with great violence; contrarily, a weak composition
being in a small concave, makes no effect: therefore we shall here deliver in
the first place rules and directions, which may serve for the true composition,
or matter with which you may charge any Rocket, from Rockets which are charged
but with one ounce of Powder unto great Rockets which requires for their
charge 10 pound of Powder, as follows.

For Rockets of one ounce.
Unto each pound of good musket Powder small beaten, put two ounces of small Cole
dust, and with this composition charge the Rocket.

For Rockets of 2 or 3 ounces.
Unto every four ounces and a half of powder dust, add an ounce of
Saltpeter, or to every 4 ounces of powder dust, add an ounce of Cole dust.

For Rockets of 4 ounces.
Unto every pound of Powder dust add 4 ounces of Salt peter and one ounce of
Cole dust: but to have it more slow, unto every 10. ounces of good dust powder
add 3 ounces of Saltpeter, and 3 ounces of Cole dust.

For Rockets of 5 or 6 ounces.
Unto every pound of Powder dust, add 3 ounces and a half of Salt peter, and
2 ounces and a half of Coledust, as also an ounce of Sulphur, and an ounce of
fyle dust.

For Rockets of 7 or 8 ounces.
Unto every pound of Powder dust add 4 ounces of Salt peter, and 3 ounces of
Sulphur.

Of Rockets of 10 or 12 ounces.
Unto the precedent composition add half an ounce of Sulphur, and it will be
sufficient.

For Rockets of 14 or 15 ounces.
Unto every pound of Powder dust add 4 ounces of Salt peter, or Cole dust 2
ounces of Sulphur and file dust of 1 ounce.

For Rockets of 1, pound.
Unto every pound of Powder dust add 3 ounces of Cole dust, and one ounce of
Sulphur.

Of Rockets of 2, pound.
Unto every pound of Powder dust add 9 ounces of Salt peter, of Cole dust 2
1/^ ounces, filedust 1 ^/2 ounce, and of Sulphur of ounce.

For Rockets of 3, pound.
Unto every pound of Salt peter add 6 ounces of Cole dust, and of Sulpher 4,
ounces.

For Rockets of 4, 5, 6, or 7, pound.
Unto every pound of Salt peter add 5 ounces of Cole dust, and 2 ounces of
Sulphur.

For Rockets of 8, 9, or 10 pound.
Unto every pound of Salt peter, add 5 ounces of Cole dust, and of Sulphur 2
ounces.

Here note that in all great Rockets, there is no Powder put, because of the
greatness of the fire which is lighted at once, which causes too great a
violence, therefore ought to be filled with a more weaker composition.

Of the making of Rockets and other Fireworkes.
FOr the making of Rockets of sundry kinds, diverse moulds are to be made, with
their Rolling pins, Breaths, Chargers, etc. as may be seen here in the figure.
And having rolled a Case of paper upon the Rolling pin for your mould, fill it
with the composition belonging to that mould as before is delivered: now may
you load it on the top, with Serpents, Reports, Stars, or Golden Rain: the
Serpents are made about the bigness of ones little finger, by rolling a little
paper upon a small stick, and then tying one end of it, and filling it with the
mixed composition somewhat close, and then tying the other end. The reports are
made in their paper-Cases as the Serpents, but the Paper somewhat thicker to
give the greater report. These are filled with graine-Powder or half Powder
and half composition, and tying both ends close, they are finished. The best
kind of stars are made with this mixture following; unto every 4 ounces of
Saltpeter, add 2 ounces of Sulphur, and to it put 1. ounce of Powder-dust,
and of this composition make your stars, by putting a little of it within a
small quantity of towe; and then tying it up in the form of a ball as great as
an Hasel-Nut or a little Wal-nut, through which there must be drawn a little
Primer to make it take fire. Touching the making of the Golden Rain, that is
nothing but filling of Quilles with the composition of your Rockets somewhat
hard. Now if the head of a Rocket be loaded with a thousand of those Quilles,
its a goodly sight to see how pleasantly they ^pread themselves in the Air,
and come down like streams of Gold much like the falling down of Snow being
agitated by some turbulent wind.

Of recreative fires.
1 PHil^strates says, that if wine in a platter be placed upon a receiver of
burning Coals, to exhale the spirit of it, and be enclosed within a Cupboard or
such like place, so that the Air may not go in, nor out, and so being shut up
for 30 years, he that shall open it, having a wax Candle lighted, and shall
put it into the Cubboard there will appear unto him the figure of many clear
stars.

2 If Aquavitae have Camphire dissolved in it; and be evaporated in a close
Chamber, where there is but a Charcole fire, the first that enters into the
Chamber with a Candle lighted, will be extremely astonished, for all the
Chamber will seem to be full of fire very subtle, but it will be of little
continuance.

3 Candles which are deceitful are made of half powder, covered over with
Tallow, and the other half is made of clean Tallow, or Wax, with an ordinary
week; this Candle being lighted, and the upper half consumed, the powder will
take fire, not without great noise and astonishment to those which are ignorant
of the cause.

4 A dozen or twenty small Serpents placed secretly under a Candlestick that is
indifferent big, which may have a hole pass through the socket of it to the
Candle, through which a piece of primer may be placed, and setting a small
C^ndle in the socket to burn according to a time limited: which Candlestick
may be set on a side Table without suspicion to any; then when the Candle is
burned, that it fires the primer, that immediately will fire all the Serpents,
which overthrowing the Candlestick will fly here and there, intermixing
themselves, sometimes in the Air, sometimes in the Planching, one amongst
another, like the crawling of Serpents, continuing for a pretty while in this
posture, and in extinguishing every one will give his report like a Pistol;
This will not a little astonish some, thinking the house will be fired, though
the whole powder together makes not an ounce, and has no strength to do such
an effect.

How to make fire run up and down, forward and backward
TAke small Rockets, and place the tail of one to the head of the other upon a
Cord according to your fancy, as admit the Cord to be ABCDEFG. give fire to
the Rocket at A, which will fly to B, which will come back again to A, and
fire another at C, that will fly at D, which will fire another there, and fl^e
to E, and that to F, and so from F, to G, and at G, may be placed a pot of
fire, viz. GH. which fired will make good sport* bec^u^e the Serpents which are
in it will variously ^ntermix themselves in the Air, and upon the ground, and
every one will extinguish with a report: and here may you note that upon the
Rockets may be placed fiery Dragons, Combatants, or such like to meet one
another, having lights placed in the Concavity of their bodies which will give
great grace to the action.

How to make Wheels of fire.
TAke a Hoop, and place two Lath^ acrosse one the other; upon the crossing of
which make a hole, so that it may be placed upon a pin to turn easily, as the
figure Q. shows upon the sides of which hoope or round Circle place your
Rockets, to which you may place Lances of fire between each Rocket: let this
wheel be placed upon a standard as here is represented, and place a piece of
Primer from one Lance to another, then give fire at G, which will fire F, that
B, that will fire D, that C, and that will fire the Rocket at A* then
immediately the wheel will begin to move, and represent unto the spectators a
Circle of changeable fire, and if pots of fire be tied to it, you will have
fine sport in the turning of the wheel and casting out of the Serpents.

Of night-Combatants.
CLubbes, Targets, Faulchons, and Maces charged with several fires, do make
your night-Combatants, or are used to make place amongst a throng of people.
The Clubbes at the ends are made like a round Panier with small sticks, filled
with little Rockets in a spirall form glu^d and so placed that they fire but
one after another; the Ma^es are of diverse fashions, some made oblong at the
end, some made of a sp^rall form, but all made hollow to put in several
composition, and are boared in diverse places, which are for sundry Rockets, and
Lances of weak composition to be fired at pleasure: The Faulchons are made of
wood in a bowing form like the figure A, having their backs large to receive
many Rockets, the head of one near the neck of another, glued and fastened well
together, so that one being spent another may be fired. (...) Targets are made
of wooden thin boards, which are channeled in spiral lines to contain primer
to fire the Rockets one after another, which is all covered with thin
covering of wood, or Pastboard, boared with holes spirally also; which Rockets
must be glued and made fast to the place of the Channels: Now if two men, the
one having a Target in his hand, and the other a Falchon, or Mace of fire,
shall begin to fight, it will appear very pleasant to the Spectators: for by
the motion of fighting, the place will seem to be full of streams of fire: and
there may be adjoined to each Target a Sun or a burning Comet with Lances of
fire, which will make them more beautiful and resplendent in that acti^n.

Of standing Fires.
SVch as are used for recreation, are Collossus, Statues, Arches, Pyramides,
Chariots, Chaires of triumph and such like, which may be accommodated with
Rockets of fire, and beautified with sundry other artificial fires, as pots of
fire for the Air which may cast forth several figures, Scutchions, Rockets of
diverse sorts, Stars, Crowns, Leaters, and such like, the borders of which
may be armed with sundry Lances of fire, of small flying Rockets with reports,
flames, of small birds of Cypres, Lan^hornes of fire, Candles of diverse uses,
and colors in burning: and whatsoever the fancy of an ingenious head may
allude unto.

Of Pots of fire for the Air, which are thrown out of one Case one after
another of a long continuance.
MAke a long Trunk as AG, and by the side AH, let there be a Channel which may
be fiered with slow primer or composition; then having charged the Trunk AG,
with the Pots of fire for the Air at IGEC, and make the Trunk AG, very fast
unto a Post as IK, give fire at the top as at A, which burning downwards will
give fire to C, and so throw out that Pot in the Air, which being spent, in
the mean time the fire vvil-burne from B to D, and so fire E, and throvv it
out also into the Air, and so all the rest one after another will be thrown
out: and if the Pots of fire for the Air which are cast out, be filled with
diverse Fire-vvorkes, they will be so much the more pleasant to the beholders.
These Trunks of fire do greatly adorn a Firevvorke, and may conveniently be
placed at each angle of the whole work.

Of Pots of fire for the ground.
MAny Pots of fire being fired together do give a fine representation, and
recreation to the spectators, and cause a vvonderfull shout amongst the common
people vvch are standers by; for those Pots being filled with Balls of fire
and flying Serpents for the Air, they will so intermix one within another,
in flying here and there a little above the ground, and giving such a volley of
reports that the Air will rebound with their noise, and the whole place be
filled with sundry streams of pleasant fire; which serpents will much occupy
these about the place to defend themselves in their upper parts, when they will
no less be busied by the balls of fire, which seem to annoy their feet.

Of Balls of f^re.
THese are very various according to a man's fancy; some of which are made with
very small Rockets, the head of one tied to the neck of another: the ball being
made may be covered over with pitch except the hole to give fire to it; this
Ball will make fine sport amongst the standers by, which will take all a fire,
and roll sometimes this way, sometimes that way, between the legs of those
that are standers by* if they take not heed, for the motion will be very
irregular, and in the motion will cast forth several fires with reports. In
the second kind there may be a channel of Iron placed in diverse places in
spirall manner, against which may be placed as many small petards of paper as
possible may be, the Channel must be full of slow comp^sition, and may be
covered a^ the former, and made fit with his Rockets in the middle: this Ball
may be shot out of a mortar Piece, or charged on the top of a Roc^et: for in
its motion it will fly here and there, and give many reports in the Air:
because of the discharge of the petards.

Of fire upon the Water.
Places which are (...) upon Rivers or great Ponds, are proper to make
Recreative fres on: and if it be required to make some of consequence, such may
conveniently be made upon two Bo^ts, upon which may be built two Beasts,
Turrets, Pagins, Castles, or such like, to receive or hold the diversity of
Fire works that may be made within it, in which may play (...) fires, Petards,
etc. and cast out many simple Grenades, Balls of fire to burn in the
water-Serpents and other things, and often times these boats in their
incounters may hang one in another, that so the Combatants with the Targets,
and Maces may fight; which will give great* content to the eyes of those which
are lookers on, and in the conclusion fire one another, (for which end they
were made:) by which the dexterity of the one may be known in respect of the
other, and the triumph and victory of the fight gotten.

Of Balls of fire which move upon the water.
THese may be made in form of a Ball stuffed with other little Balls, glued
round about and filled with composition for the water, which fiered, will
produce mavelous and admirable effects, for which there must be had little
Cannons of white Iron, as the ends of small funnels; these Iron Cannons may be
pierced in sundry places, to which holes, may be set small Balls full of
composition for the water which small Balls must be peirced deep and large, and
covered with Pitch, except the hole: in which hole must be first placed a
little quantity of grain-Powder; and the rest of the hole filled up with
composition; and note further that these Iron Cannons, must be filled with a
slow composition; but such which is proper to burn in the water: then must
these Cannons with their small Balls be put so together that it may make a
Globe, and the holes in the Cannons be answerable to the hollow Balls, and all
covered over with Pitch and Tallow; afterward pierce this Ball against the
greatest Cannon (to which all the lesser should answer) unto the composition,
then fire it, and when it begins to blow, throw it into the water, so the fire
coming to the holes will fire the grain Powder, the which will cause the
Balls to separate and fly here and there, sometimes two at a time, sometimes
three, sometimes more, which will burn within the water with great
astonishment and content to those which see it.

Of Lances of fire.
STanding Lances of fire, are made commonly with hollow wood, to contain
sundry Petards, or Rockets, as the figure here shows, by which is easy to
invent others occording to ones fancy. These Lances have wooden handles, that
so they may be fastened at some Post, so that they be not overthrown in the
flying out of the Rockets or Petards: there are lesser sorts of Lances whose
cases are of three or four fouldings of Paper of a foot long, and about the
bigness of ones finger, which are filled with a composition for Lances. But if
these Lances be filled with a composition, then (unto every 4 ouncs of powder
add^ 2 ounces of Saltpeter, and unto that add 1 ounce of Sulphur) it will
make a brick fire red before it be half spent, if the Lance be fiered and held
to it: and if 20 such Lances were placed about a great Rocket and shot to a
house or ship, it would produce a mischievous effect.

How to shoot a Rocket Horizontall, or otherwise.
Unto the end of the Rocket place an Arrow which may not be too heavy, but in
stead of the feathers let that be of thin white tin plate, and place it
upon a rest, as here you may see by the Figure, then give fire unto it, and you
may see how serviceable it may be. To the head of such Rockets, may be placed
Petards, Balls of fire, Grenades, etc. and so may be applied to warlike
affairs.

How a Rocket burning in the water for a certain time, at last shall fly up in
the Air with an exceeding quickness.
TO do this, take two Rockets, the one equal to the other, and join them one
unto another in the middle at C. in such sort that the fire may easily pass
from one to another: it being thus done, tie the two Rockets at a stick in D,
and let it be so long and great that it may make the Rockets in the water hang,
or lie upright: then take a pack-thread and tie it at G. and let it come double
about the stick DM. at (...) and at that point hang a Bullet of some weight as
K. for then giving fire at A. it will burn to B. by a small serpent filled
there and tied at the end, and covered so that the water injure it hot, which
will fire the Rocket BD, and so mounting quick out of the water by the loose
tying at C. and the Bullet at the pack-thread, will leave the other Rocket in
the water: and so ascend like a Rocket in the Air, to the admiration of such
as know not the secrecy.

Of the framing of the parts of a Fire-Worke, together, that the several
works may fire one after another.
CAuse a frame to be made as ABCD. of two foot square every way, or
thereabouts (according to the quantity of your several works) then may you
at each angle have a great Lance of fire to stand, which may cast out Pots of
fire as they consume: upon the ledges AB.BC. and CD. may be placed small Lances
of fire about the number of 30 or 60, some sidevvise, and others upright,
betvveen these Lances may be placed Pots of fire sloping outvvards, but made
very fast, and covered very close, that they chance not to fire before they
should; then upon the ledges RE.FG.HI. and AD may be placed your soucisons, and
behind all the work may be set your Boxes of Rockets, in each of which you
may place 6, 9, ^2. or 20 small Rockets: Now give fire at A. (by help of a
piece of primer going from one Lance to another) all the Lances will instantly
at once be lighted, and as soon as the Lance at A is consumed, it will fire
the Channel which is made in the ledge of the frame which runs under the
Pots of fire, and as the fire goes along burning, the Pots will be cast forth,
and so the rank of Pots upon the sides of the frame AB.BC. and CD. being spent,
the soucisons will begin to play being fiered also by a Channel which runs
under them, upon the ledges AD, HI^G, and RE. then when the Soucisons are spent
upon the last ledge RE. there may be a secret Channel in the ledge CD which may
fire the Box of Rockets at K. and may fire all the rest one after another,
which Boxes may be all charged with several Fire-Workes: for the Rockets of
the first Box may be laden with Serpents, the second with Stars, the third
with Reports, the fourth with Golden rain, and the fifth with small flying
Serpents; these mounting one after another and flying to and fro will much
inlighten the Air in their ascending, but when these Rockets discharge
themselves above, then will there be a most pleasant representation, for these
fires will dilate themselves in diverse beautiful forms, some like the
branching of Trees, others like fountains of water gliding in the Air, others
like flashes of lightning, others like the glittering of stars, giving great
contentment, and delight to those which behold them; But if the work be
furnished also with Balons (which is the chiefest in recreative Fireworks)
then shall you see ascending in the Air but as it were only a quill of fire,
but once the Balon taking fire, the Air will seem more than 100. foot square
full of crawling, and flying Serpents, which will extinguish with a volley of
more than 500 reports: and so fill the Air and Firmament with their rebounding
clamor.

The making of which with many other rare and excellent Fire-workes, and other
practices, not only for recreation, but also for service: you may find in a
book entitled Artificial Fire-workes, made by Mr. Malthas (a master of his
knowledge) and are to be sold by William Leake, at the Crown in Fleet Street,
between the two Temple-Gates.

Conclusion.
In this Book we have nothing omitted what was material in the original, but
have abundantly augmented it in sundry experiments: And though the examinations
are not so full, and manifold; yet (by way of brevitie) we have expressed fully
their substance, to avoid prolixitie, and so past by things reiterated.

FINIS.
Printed or sold by William Leak, at the Crown in Fleetstreet near the
Temple, these Books following.
YOrk's Heraldry, Folio A Bible of a very fair large Roman letter, 4^ Orlando
F^rios^ Folio. Callu learned Readings on the Scat. 21. Hen. 80. Cap 5 of Sewer^
Perkins on the Laws of England. Wi^kinsons Office of She^^^fs. Vade Mecum, of a
Justice of Peace. The book of Fees. Peasons Law. Mirror of Just^ce. Topics in
the Laws of England. Sken de significatione Verborum. Delaman's use of the
Horizontal Quadrant. Wilby's 2d set of Music, 345 and 6 Parts. Corderius in
English. D^ctor Fulk's Meteors. Malthus Fire-workes. Nyes Gunnery and
Fire-workes C^to Ma^or with Annotations, by Will. Austin Esquire. Mel
Helliconium, by Alex. Ross^ Nosce teipsum, by Sr John Davis Animadversions on
Lil^i^s Grammar. The History of Vienna, and Paris Lazarillo de Tormes. Hero and
L^ander, by G. Chapman and Christoph. Marlow. Al^ilia or Philotas loving folly.
Bishop Andrews Sermons. Adams on ^eter. Posing of the Accidence. Am^dis de
Gaul. Guillieliam's Heraldry. Herberts Travels. Bacc^s Tales. Man become
guilty, by John Francis Sen^^t, and Englished by Henry Earl of Monmouth. The
Idiot in 4 books; the first and second of Wisdom; the third of the Mind, the
fourth of S^^tick Experiments of the Balance. The life and Reign of Hen. the
Eighth, written by the L. Herbet Cornwallis Essays, and Paradoxes. Clenards
greek G^ammar 80 A^laluci^, or the house of light: A discourse written in the
year 1651, by SN. a modern Speculator. A Tragedy written by the most learned
Hugo Grotius called, Christus Patience, and translated into Engl. by George
Sand* The Mount of Olives: or Sollitary Devotions, by Henry Vaughan Silurist
With an excellent discourse of Man in glory, written by the Reverend Anselm
Arch Bishop of Canterbury. The Fort Royal of Holy Scriptures by I. H.
PLAYS.
Hen. the Fourth. Philaster. The wedding. The Hollander. Maids Tragedy. King
and no K. The grateful Servant. The strange Discovery. Othello; the Moor of
Venice. The Merchant of Venice.
THE DESCRIPTION AND USE OF THE DOUBLE Horizontall Dyall. WHEREBY NOT ONLY THE
Hour of the Day is shown; but also the Meridian Line is found: And most
ASTRONOMICALL Questions, which may be done by the GLOBE: are resolved.

INVENTED AND WRITTEN BY W. O.

Whereunto is added, The Description of the general HOROLOGICALL RING.

LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM LEAKE, and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign
of the Crown in Fleetstreet, between the two Temple Gates. 1652.

The description, and use of the double Horizontall Dial.
THere are upon the Plate two several Dyals. That which is outermost, is an
ordinary dial, divided into hours and quarters, and every quarter into three
parts which are five minutes a piece: so that the whole hour is understood to
contein 60 minutes. And for this dyall the shadow of the upper oblique, or
slanting edge of the style, or cock, does serve.

The other dial, which is within, is the projection of the upper Hemisphaere,
upon the plain of the Horizon: the Horizon it self is understood to be the
innermost circle of the limb: and is divided on both sides from the points of
East and West into degrees, noted with 10.20.30, etc. As far as need requires:
And the center of the Instrument is the Zenith, or Vertical point.

Within the Horizon the middle straight line pointing North and South upon
which the style stands, is the Meridian or twelve a clock line: and the other
short arching lines on both sides of it, are the hour lines, distinguished
accordingly by their figures: and are divided into quarters by the smaller
lines drawn between them: every quarter containing 15 minutes.

The two arches which cross the hour lines, meeting on both sides in the
points of intersection of the six a clock lines with the Horizon, are the two
semicircles of the Ecliptic or annual circle of the sun: the upper of which
arches serves for the Summer half year; and the lower for the Winter half
year: and therefore divided into 365 days: which are also distinguished into
twelve months with longer lines, having their names set down: and into tenths
and fifts with shorter lines: and the rest of the days with pricks as may
plainly be seen in the dial.

And this is for the ready finding out of the place of the Sun every day: and
also for the showing of the Suns yearly motion, because by this motion the Sun
goes round about the heavens in the compass of a year, making the four parts,
or seasons thereof* namely, the Spring in that quarter of the Ecliptic which
begins at the intersection on the East side of the dial* and is therefore
called the Vernall intersection. Then the Summer in that quarter of the
Ecliptic which begin at the intersection with the Meridian in the highest
point next the Zenith. After that, Autumn in that quarter of the Ecliptic
which begins at the intersection on the West side of the dial, and is
therefore called the Au^umna^l intersection and lastly, the Winter in that
quarter of the Ecliptic^, which begins at the intersection, with the
Meridian i^ the lowest point next the Horizon.

But desides this yearly motte^, the Sun has a diurnall, or daily motion,
whereby it makes day and night, with all the diversities and inaequalities
thereof: which is expressed by those other circles drawn cross the hour
lines; the middlemost whereof, being grosser then the rest, meeting with the
Ec^iptick in the points of the Vernall, and Autumnall intersections* is the
Equinoctial: and the rest on both sides of it are called the parallels, or
diurnall arch of the Sun, the two outermost whereof are the Tropicks, because
in them the sun has his furthe^t digression or Declination from the
Aequinoctiall, which is degrees 23 1/^* and thence begins again to return
toward the Equinoctial. The upper of the two Tropicks in this nor Northern
Hemisphere is the Trop^ck of Cancer, and the sun being in it, is highest into
the North, making the longest day of Summer: And the lower next the Horizon is
the Tropic of Capricorn; and the sun being in it, is lowest into the South,
making the shortest day of winter.

Between the two Tropicks and the Aequinoctiall, infinite such parallel circles
are understood to be contained: for the sun, in what point soever of the
Ecliptic it is carried* describes by his Lation a circle parallel to the
Aequinoctiall: yet those parallels which are in the instrument, though drawn
but to every second degree of Declination, may be sufficient to direct the eye
in imagining and tracing out through every day of the whole year in the
Ecliptic, a proper circle which may be the diurnall arch of the sun for that
day. For upon the right estimation of that imaginary parallel does the manifold
use of this instument especially rely: because the true place of the sun all
that day is in some part or point of that circle. Wherefore for the better
conceiving and bearing in mind thereof, every fifth parallel is herein made a
little g^osser then the rest.

For this inner dial serves the shadow of the upright edge of the style;
which I therefore call the upright shadow.

And thus by the eye and view only to behold and comprehend the course of the
sun* throughout the whole year both for his annual and diurnall motion, may
be the first use of this instrument.

II Use. To find the declination of the sun every day.

Look the day of the month proposed in the Ecliptic, and mark how many
degrees the prick showing that day, is distant from the Equinoctial, either on
the Summer or Winter side, viz. North or South.

Example 1. What will the Declination of the sun be upon the eleven^h day of
August? look the eleventh day of August and you shall find it in the sixth
circle above the ^quinoctiall: Now because each parallel stands (as has been
said before) for two degrees, the sun shall that day decline Northwards 12.
degrees.

Example 2. What declination has the sun upon the 24 day of March? look the 24
day of March, and you shall find it between the second and third northern
parallels, as it were an half and one fifth part of that di^tance from the
second: Reckon therefore four degrees for the two circles, and one de^ree for
the half space: So shall the Suns declination be five degrees, and about one
fifth part of a degree Northward that same day.

Example 3. What declination has the sun upon the 13 day of November? look the
13 day of November, and you shall find it below the Equinoctial ten
parallels, and about one quarter which is 20 degrees and an half southward. So
much is the declination. And according to these examples judge of all the rest.

III. Use. To find the diurnall arch, or circle of the suns course every day.

The sun every day by his motion (as has been said) describes a circle
parallel to the ^quinoctiall, which is either one of the circles in the dial,
or some-where ^etween two of them. First, theref^re se^k the day of the month;
and if it fall upon one of those parallels; that is the circle of the suns
course that same day: But if it fall between any two of the parallels, imagine
in your mind^, and estimate with your eye, another parallel through that point
between those two parallels keeping still the same distance from each of them.

As in the first of the three former examples, The circle of the Suns course
upon 11 of August* shall be the very sixth circle above the Equinoctial toward
the cente^.

In ^xample 2. The circle of the suns course upon the 24 of March shall be an
imaginary circle between the second and third parallels still keeping an half
of that space, and one fifth part more of the rest, from the second.

In example 3. The circle of the suns course upon the 13 of November: shall be
an imaginary circle between the tenth and eleventh parallels below the
Equinoctial, still keeping one quarter of that space from the tenth.

IIII Use. To find the r^sing and setting of the sun eve^yday.

(...) (as was last showed) the imaginary circle or parallel of the suns course
for that day, and mark the point where it meets with the horizon, both on
the East and W^st sides, for that is the very point of the suns r^sing, and
setting that same day, and the hour lines which are on both sides of it, by
proportioning the distance reasonably, according to 15 minutes for the quarter
of the hour, will show the hour of the suns rising on the East side, and the
suns setting on the West side.

V Use. To know the reason and manner of the Increasing and decreasing of the
days and nights ^hroughout the whole year.

When the Sun is in the Equinoctial, it rises and sets at 6 a clock, for
in the instrument the intersection of the Equinoctial, and the Ecliptic with
the Horizon is in the six a clock circle on both sides. But if the sun be out
of the Equinoctial, declining toward the North, the intersections of the
parallel of the sun with the Horizon is before 6 in the morning, and after 6 in
the evening: and the Diurnall arch greater then 12 hours; and so much more
great, the greater the Northern Declination is. Again, if the sun be
declining toward the South, the intersections of the parallel of the sun, with
the Horizon is after 6 in the morning, and before 6 in the evening: and the
Diurnall arch lesser then 12 hours; and by so much lesser, the greater the
Southern Declination is.

And in those places of the Ecliptic in which the sun most speedily changes
his declination, the length also of the day is most a^tered: and where the
Ecliptic goes most parallel to the Equinoctial changing the declination, but
little altered. As for example, when the sun is near unto the Equinoctial on
both sides, the days increase and also decrease suddenly and apace; because in
those places the Ecliptic inclines to the Equinoctial in a manner like a
straight line, making sensible declination. Again, when the sun is near his
greatest declination, as in the height of Summer, and the depth of Winter, the
days keep for a good time, as it were, at one stay, because in these places
the Ecliptic is in a manner parallel to the Equinoctial, the length o^ the
day also is but little, scarce altering the declination: And because in those
two times of the year, the sun stands as it were still at one declination,
they are called the summer solstice, and winter solstice. And in the mean space
the nearer every place is to the Equinoctial, the greater is the diversity of
days.

Wherefore, we may hereby plainly see that the common received opinion, that in
every month the days do equally increase, is erroneous.

Also we may see that in parallels equally distant from the Equinoctial, the
day on the one side is equal to the night on the other side.

VI. Use. To find how far the sun rises, and sets from the true east and
west points, which is called the suns Amp^itude ortive, and occasive.

Seek out (as was showed in III Use) the imaginary circle, or parallel of the
suns course, and the points of that circle in the horizon, on the East and West
sides cutteth the degree of the Amplitude ortive, and occasive.

VII Use. To find the length of every day and night.

Double the hour of the suns setting, and you shall have the length of the
day; and double the hour of the suns rising, and you shall have the length of
the right.

VIII Use. To find the true place of the sun upon the dyall, that is, the
point of the instrument which answers to the place of the sun in the heavens
at any time, which is the very ground of all the questions following.

If the dyall be fixed upon a post: Look what a clock it is by the outward
dyall, that is, look what hour and part of hour the shadow of the slanting
edge of the style shows in the outward limb. Then behold the shadow of the
upright edge, and mark what point thereof is upon that very hour and part in
the inner dyall among the parallels, that point is the true place of the Sun
at the same instant.

If the dyal be not fixed, and you have a Meridian line no^ed in any window
where the Sun shines: place the Meridian of your dyal upon the Meridian line
given, so that the top of the style may point into the north: and so the dyal
is as it were fixed, wherefore by the former rule you may find the place of
the Sun upon it.

If the dyal be not fixed, neither you have a Meridian line, but you know the
true hour of the day exactly: hold the dyal even and parallel to the Horizon,
moving it till the slanting edge of the style cast his shadow justly upon the
time or hour given; for then the dyal is truly placed, as upon a post. Seek
therefore what point of the upright shadow falls upon that very hour, and
there is the place of the Sun.

But if your dyal be loose, and you know neither the Meridian nor the time of
the day. First, by the day of the month in the Ecliptique, find the su^s
parallel, or d^urnall arch for that day* then holding the dyal level to the
horizon, move it every way until the slanting shadow of the style in the
outward limb, and the upright shadow in the Suns diurnal arch, both show the
very same hour and minute, for that very point of the Suns parallel, which
the upright shadow cutteth, is the true place of the Sun on the dyal at that
present.

But note that by reason of the thicknes of the style, and the bluntness of
the angle of the upright edge, the Sun cannot come unto that edge for some
space before and after noone. And so during the time that the Sun shines not
on that upright edge, the place of the Sun in the dyal cannot be found.
Wherefore they that make this kind of double dyal, are to be careful to file
the upright edge of the style as thin and sharp as possible may be.

That which has here bin taught concerning the finding out the Suns true place
in the dyal, ought perfectly to be understood, that it may be readily, and
dexteriously practiced, for upon the true performance thereof depends all
that follows.

IX Use. To find the hour of the day.

If the dyal be fastened upon a post, the hour by the outward dyal, or limb,
is known of every one, and the upri^ht shadow in the Suns parallel, or diurnal
arch will also show the very same hour.

But if the dyall be loose, either hold it or set it parallel to the Horizon,
with the style pointing into the north and move it gently every way until the
hour showed in both dialls exactly agrees, or which is all one, find out the
true place of the Sun upon the dyall, as was taught in the former question, for
that point among the hour lines shows the hour of the day.

X Use. To find out the Meridian, and other points of the Compass.

First, you must seek the tru^ hour of the day (by the last question) for in
that situation the Meridian of the dyall stands direct^y north and south: and
the east points into the east, and the west into the west, and the rest of
the points may be given by allowing degrees 11. 1/^ unto every point of the
compass.

XI Use. To find out the Azumith of the sun, that is, the distance of the
Vertical circle, in which the sun is at that present, from the Meridian.

Set your dial upon any plain or flat which is parallel to the horizon, with
the Meridian pointing directly north or south, as was last showed: then follow
with your eye the upright shadow in a straight line, till it cutteth the
horizon: for the degree in which the point of intersection is, shall show how
far the suns Azumith is distant from the east and west points, and the
complement thereof unto 90; shall give the distance thereof from the meridian.

XII Use. To find out the Declination of any Wall upon which the sun shines,
that is, how far that wall swerveth from the north or south, either eastward or
westward.

Take aboard having one straight edg* and a line stricken perpendicular upon
it; apply the straight edg unto the wall at what time the sun shines upon it,
holding the board parallel to the horizon: Set the dyal thereon, and move it
gently every way, until the same hour and minute be showed in both dyals: and
so let it stand: then if the dyal have one of the sides parallel to the
Meridian strike a line along that side upon the board, crossing the
perpendicular, or else with a bodkin make a point upon the board, at each end
of the meridian, and taking away the instrument from the board, and the board
from the wall, lay a ruler to those two points, and draw a line crossing the
perpendicular: for the angle which that line makes with the perpendicular, is
the angle of the decli^nation of the wall. And if it be a right angle, the wall
is exactly east or west: but if that line be parallel to the perpendicular, the
wall is direct north or south without any declination at all.

You may also find out the declination of a wall, if the dial be fixed on a
post not very far from that wall; in this manner. Your board being applied to
the wall, as was showed, hang up a thread with a plummet, so that the shadow of
the thread may upon the board cross the perpendicular line: make two pricks in
the shadow and run instantly to the dyal and look the horizontal distance of
the suns Azumith, or upright shadow from the meridian. Then through the two
pricks draw a line crossing the perpendicular: and upon the point of the
intersection, make a circle equal to the horizon of your Instrument, in which
Circle you shall from the line through the two pricks measure the Horizontal
distance of the upright shadow, or Azumith from the meridian, that way toward
which the Meridian is: draw a line out of the center, to the end of that arch
measured: and the angle which this last line makes with the perpendicular,
shall be equal to the declination of the wall.

XIII Use. How to place the dyall upon a post without any other direction but
it self.

Set the dial upon the post, with the style into the North, as near as you
can guess: then move it this way and that way, till the same hour and minute
be showed, both in the outward and inward dials by the several shadows, as
has been already taught, for then the dial stands in its truest situation;
wherefore let it be nailed down in that very place.

XIIII Use. To find the height of the sun at high noon everyday.

Seek out the diurnall Arch or parallel of the suns course for that day, (by
Use III.) and with a pair of Compasses, setting one foot in the center, and
the other in the point of intersection of that parallel with the Meridian,
apply that same distance unto the Semidiameter divided: for that measure shall
therein show the degree of of the Suns altitude above the the Horizon that day
at high noon.

XV Use. To find the height of the sun at any hour or time of the day.

Seek out the diurnal Arch, or parallel of the suns course for that day: and
mark what point of it is in the very hour and minute proposed. And with a
pair of Compasses, setting one foot in the Center, and the other in that point
of the parallel, apply the same distance upon the Semidiameter divided: for
that measure shall show the degree of the suns altitude above the Horizon at
that time.

And by this means you may find the height of the Sun above the Horizon at
every hour throughout the whole year, for the making of rings and cylinders
and other instruments which are used to show the hour of the day.

XVI Use. The height of the sun being given, to find out the hour, or what it
is a clock.

This is the converse of the former: Seek therefore in the Semidiameter
divided, the height of the sun given. And with a pair of Compasses, setting
one foot in the center, and the other at that height, apply the same distance
unto the diurnall arch, or parallel of the Sun for that day: for that point of
the diurnall arch, upon which that same distance lights, is the true place of
the sun upon the dial; and shows among the hour lines, the true time of the
day.

XVII Use. Considerations for the use of the instrument in the night.

In such questions as concern the night* or the time before sun rising, and
after sun setting, the instrument represents the lower Hemisphaere wherein
the Southern pole is elevated. And therefore the parallels which are above the
Aequinoctiall toward the center shall be for the Southern, or winter
parallels: and those beneath the Aequinoctiall, for the Northern or Summer
paral^els; and the East shall be accounted for West, and the West for East;
altogether contrary to that which was before, when the Instrument represented
the upper Hemisphaere.

XVIII Use. To find how many degrees the sun is under the Horizon at any time
of the night.

Seek the Declination of the sun for the day proposed (by Use II.) And at the
same declination the contrary side imagine a parallel for the sun that night*
and mark what point of it is in the very hour and minute proposed: And with a
pair of compasses, setting one foot in the center, and the other in that point
of the parallel, apply that same distance unto the semidiameter divided: for
that measure shall show the degree of the suns depression below the Horizon at
that time.

XIX Use. To find out the length of the C^epusculum, or twylight, every day.

Seek the declination of the sun for the day proposed (by Use II.) And at the
same declination on the contrary side imagine a parallel for the sun that
night. And with a pair of compasses setting one foot in the center, and the
other at 72 degrees upon the semidiameter divided, apply that same distance,
unto the suns nocturnall parallel: for that point of the parallel, upon which
that same distance shall light, shows among the hour lines, the beginning of
the twilight in the morning, or the end of the twilight in the evening.

XX Use. If the day of the month be not known, to find it out by the dyall.

For the working of this question, either the dial must be fixed rightly on a
post, or else you must have a true Meridian line drawn in some window where the
sun shines, wherefore supposing the dial to be justly set either upon the
post, or upon the Meridian. Look what a clock it is by the outward dial, and
observe what point of the upright shadow falls upon the very same minute in
the inner dial, and through that same point imagine a parallel circle for the
suns course; that imaginary circle in the Ecliptic shall cut the day of the
month.

I The description of it.
THis Instrument serves as a Dial to find the hour of the day, not in one
place only (as the most part of Dials do) but generally in all Countries lying
North of the Aequinoctiall: and therefore I call it the general H^rologicall
^ing.

It consists of two br^zen circles: a Diameter, and a little Ring to hang it
by.

The two circles are so made, that though they are to be set at right angles,
when you use the Instrument: yet for more convenient carrying, they may be one
folded into the other.

The lesser of the two circles is for the Aequinoctiall, having in the midst of
the inner side or thickness, a line round it, which is the true Aequinoctiall
circle, divided into twice twelve hours, from the two opposite points in which
it is fastened within the greater.

The greater and outer of the two circles is the Meridian: One quarter whereof,
beginning at one of the points in which the Aequin^cti^ll is hung, is divided
into ninety degrees.

The Diameter is fastened to the Meridian in two opposite points or poles, o^e
of them being the very end of the Quadrant, and is the North Pole. Wherefore it
is perpendicular to the ^quinoctiall, having his due position. The diameter is
broad, and slit in the middle: and about the slit on both sides are the months
and days of the year. And within this slit is a litt^e sliding plate pierced
through with a small hole: which hole in the motion of it, while it is applied
to the days of the year, represents the Axis of the world.

The little Ring whereby the Instrument hangs, is made to slip up and down
along the Quadrant: that so by help of a little tooth annexed, the Instrument
may be rectified to any elevation of the Pole.

II. The use of it.
IN using this Instrument, First, the tooth of the little Ring must carefully
be set to the height of the Pole in the Quadrant, for the place wherein you are.

Secondly, the hole of the sliding plate within the slit, must be brought
exactly unto the day of the month.

Thirdly, the Aeqinoctiall is to be drawn out, and by means of the two studs in
the Meridian staying it, it is to be set perpendicular thereto.

Fourthly, Guess as near as you can at the hour, and turn the hole of the
little plate toward it.

Lastly, Hold the Instrument up by the little Ring, that it may hang freely
with the North Pole thereof toward the North: and move it gently this way and
that way, till the beams of the Sun-shining through that hole, fall upon that
middle line within the Aequinoctiall: for there shall be the hour of the day:
And the Meridan of the Instrument shall hang directly North and South.

These Instrument all Dials are made in brass by Elias Allen dwelling over
against St. Clements Church without Temple Bar, at the sign of the
Horseshooe near Essex Gate.

FINIS

