Erastus Senior.

Scholastically Demonstrating this Conclusion, that (admitting their Lambeth
Records for true) those called BISHOPS here in England, are no Bishops, either
in Order, or Jurisdiction, or so much as Legal.

Wherein is answered to all that has been said, in Vindication of them, by Mr.
MASON, in his Vindiciae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, Doctor HEYLIN, in his Ecclesia
Restaurata, or Doctor BRAMHALL, (then called Bishop of DERRY, now Primate of
ARMAGH,) in his last Book, Entitled, The Consecration and Succession of
Protestant Bishops Justified.

With an Appendix, containing Extracts out of ancient Rituals, Greek and
Latin, for the Form of Ordaining Bishops: And Copies of the Acts of
Parliament, quoted in the third Part.

Printed in the Year, 1662.

To the Reader.
THe intent of this Treatise, is only, of my Charity to my Friends and
Countrymen of the Protestant Profession, to show them this great Defect in
their Church, the want of Bishops, thereby to invite them into ours, which
(even by the confession of her adversaries) wants them not.

And the intent of this Preface, is only to note to them the greatness of this
defect in their Church, from the hideous Consequences of it. For if theirs be
no Bishops, either in Order or Jurisdiction (as this discourse undertakes to
demonstrate,) this will follow:

First, that theirs being no Bishops Ordine, they cannot validly Ordain, either
Bishop, Priest, or Deacon: and so they have none of these Orders in their
Church, nor have had since the death of those that were Ordained by our Bishops.

Secondly, that theirs being no Bishops Jurisdictione, (or Pastors of Cathedral
Churches) they cannot validly Institute a Pastor to any Parochial Church (for
none but a Pastor can Institute a Pastor:) and so they have no Pastors in their
Church, nor have had, since the outing of the Catholic Bishops, Parsons, and
Vicars, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign.

Thirdly, that theirs is no true Church (or Member of the Catholic,) for want
of Pastors, it being an essential part of the Catholic Church.

Fourthly, that Salvation cannot be had in their Church; because no Member of
the Catholic, out of which no Salvation.

Fifthly, that the belief they have of the Scriptures, Trinity, Incarnation,
Death, and Merits of Christ, and other Mysteries of Christian Religion, is no
Divine, (or Supernatural,) but Moral (or Humane) Faith only, (which cannot
avail to eternal Salvation:) because they believe them finally (or in the last
resolution of their Faith into the witness or proponent of Gods Word to them)
upon the testimony of preachers having no mission from God.

Sixthly, that the hope they have, of remission of Sins, of obtaining Eternal
Beatitude by the merits of Christ, and of other Evangelical promises, is no
Divine, but Moral (or Natural) Hope only, (which has no efficacy to an
eternal recompense:) because it cannot be Diviner then the Faith is upon which
it is and must be grounded; and theirs is but Humane Faith.

Seventhly, that their Ministers having no power (because no Priests) to remit
Sins; every time they receive the Communion (since they committed Mortal Sin,)
they eat and drink it unworthily (and consequently, 1 Cor. 11.29.
to their own Damnation;) because they presume to eat and drink of that which
they believe to be the Body and Blood of Christ, Catechism in the Book of
Common Prayer.
which is verily and truly received of the faithful, with a Soul foul, and
abominable to God, with Mortal Sin; as it must needs be, because since Christ
Instituted the Word of Priestly Absolution, for the ordinary means of giving
that grace, ( viz. when he said to his Apostles, S. John 20.22.
whose Sins you remit, they are remitted:) no Mortal Sin, committed after
Baptism, can be remitted but by that means (at least, in voto; which cannot be
supposed in a wilful Protestant:) which means (theirs being no Priests,) they
cannot have in their Church. And for the same reason, at their Death, they go
away with all the Sins upon their Soul, that ever they committed.

Eighthly, that their Ministers having no power, (because no Priests) to
Consecrate Christ's Body and Blood; they live, and dye, without ever once
offering to God that Sacrifice, which is the principal and most necessary Act
of Divine Worship under the New Testament (the oblation of the Body and Blood
of Christ in remembrance of his death) and without ever once partaking of that
Flesh and Blood of his, S. John 6.54.
of which he said, [Except ye eat and drink of it, ye shall have no life in
you.]

Lastly, that every time any of their Bishops presume to Ordain, Confirm,
Excommunicate, Institute a Parson, or Vicar, or exercise other Act of the
Episcopal Office; or any of their Ministers, to Preach, Baptize, Celebrate
public Divine Service, Consecrate the Eucharist, take Confessions, give
Absolution, or exercise other Act of Priestly Function; so often do they commit
the heinous Sin of Sacrilege: in which the people are involved with them, so
often as they do communicate with them in, or cooperate to, those Sacrilegious
Presumptions.

The Contents.
Chap. 1. PRoving the first part of the Conclusion, the Protestant Bishops are
no Bishops ORDINE: and urging the first Reason, the invalidity of the Form.
whereby they were Ordained. page 1 Chap. 2. Replying to Doctor Bramhall's
Answer. 5 Chap. 3. Answering Doctor Bramhall's Allegations for their Form; and
in this Chapter, his first Allegation, from Christ's example. 9 Chap. 4.
Answering his second Argument, from the Roman Form. 10 Chap. 5. Answering his
third Argument, from Cardinal Pool's Dispensation. 13 Chap. 6. Urging the
second Reason, invalidity of the Minister. 21 Chap. 7. Replying to Doctor
Bramhall's Answers. 24 Chap. 8. Proving the second part of the Conclusion, that
they are no Bishops OFFICIO, viz. For want of Jurisdiction in the Consecrators;
and urging the first Reason, want of the Patriarch's consent. 30 Chap. 9.
Urging the second reason, their having no Jurisdicton but from the King: and
bringing the first proof of it, from their own acts and confessions. 34 Chap.
10. Bringing the second Proof, from other public Acts. 38 Chap. 11. Bringing
the third Proof from the Consecration of Matthew Parker. 39 Chap. 12. Replying
to Doctor Heylins Answer. 45 Chap. 13. Proving the third part of the
Conclusion, that they are no legal Bishops: and urging the first Reason,
because the Act of H. 8. for the Roman Form, is still in force. 49 Chap. 14.
Urging the second Reason, because the Act of Edw. 6. for the Book of
Ordination, being repealed by Queen Mary, is not yet revived; and proving the
first part of the reason, that it was not revived before 8. Eliz. 50 Chap. 15.
Replying to Doctor Bramhall's Answer. 52 Chap. 16. Noting Doctor Heylin's
varying from himself, and falsifying the Act of 8. Eliz. 58 Chap. 17.
Confirming the Argument, by the proceedings in Bonners Case; and urging the
first inference, for the opinion of the Judges. 60 Chap. 18. Refuting the
shifts used by Mr. Mason, and Doctor Heylin to evade this inference. 63 Chap.
19. Urging the second inference, for the opinion of the Parliament. 67 Chap.
20. Refuting the shifts devised to evade this inference. 72 Chap. 21. Proving
the second part of the reason, that it was not revived then. 76
The first Chapter. Proving the first part of the Conclusion, the Protestant
Bishops are no Bishops ORDINE: and urging the first Reason, the invalidity of
the form whereby they were Ordained.
THere is a Bishop Ordine, and there is a Bishop Officio (Jurisdictione, or
simpliciter.) A Bishop Ordine, I call him whose Ordination was essentially
valid, and so imprinted the Episcopal Character. As ex. gr. if one should be
Ordained, in due matter and form, by one or more Bishops having no
Jurisdiction, or should be Ordained without a Title: or should be Consecrated
Bishop of some See, and afterward resign it, or be deprived of it, or degraded.
And Bishops in this sense, are necessary to the Ordaining of Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons; and consequently to the interior essential form of the Church, as
it consists in a Hierarchy of Order. A Bishop Officio, I call him who was
validly Confirmed, and Consecrated Bishop, or Archbishop, and Pastor, of that
See (or flock of Clergy and people) whereof he is styled: as ex. gr.
Canterbury, London, etc. and continues actual Bishop of it, or of some other.
And Bishops in this sense, are necessary to the Consecrating of Archishops and
Bishops of Cathedral or Metropoliticall Sees, and to the Instituting of
Pastors to Parochial Churches; and consequently to the exterior essential form
of the Church, as it consists in a Hierarchy of Jurisdiction.

The first part then of my Conclusion is, that Protestant Bishops are no
Bishops Ordine. My reasons are two.

The first is, because the Protestant form for Ordaining Bishops is essentially
invalid. For the essential form of Ordination, is some fit words, that is,
words fignifying the Order given. Mr. Mason, l. 2. c. 16. n. 6.
So Protestants themselves. [ Non verba quaelibet huic instituto (for making a
Priest, and there is the same reason of a Bishop) inservire poterunt, sed quae
ad Ordinis conferendi potestatem exprimendam sunt accomodata. Dum per Apostolum
(Tit. 1.5.) mandavit Christus ut crearentur Ministri, mandavit implicit, ut
inter Ordinandum verba adhiberentur idonea, id est, quae dati tum Ordinis
potestatem complecterentur, Istiusmodi autem verba, quatenus datam potestatem
denotant, sunt illius ordinis forma essentialis.] And the reason is evident,
because Ordination being a Sacrament, (as Protestants themselves do, Id. l. ^.
n. 8. and D. Bramb. p. 96.
and must confess, for else it is no argument of the parties having any
authority from God more then another has who is not Ordained) that is, a
visible sign of an invisible grace or power given by it; there must be some
visible sign in it to signify the power given, for it cannot be a sign of what
it signifies not; and else, the same Rite as ordains a man a Deacon, would
ordain him Priest and Bishop. The essential matter then of Episcopal Ordination
(which is imposition of hands) being a dumb sign, and common to diverse Orders,
(as Bishops, Priests, Deacons) and to diverse other graces, as Confirming,
curing the sick, etc. of necessity there must be some words joined with it as
its form, to interpret it, and determine it to the grace of Episcopal Order,
which no words can possibly do, but such as signify that Order, either in the
natural sense of the words, as ex gr. Be thou a Bishop, or I ordain thee a
Bishop, etc. or by the Institution of Christ, as these words [I baptize thee,
etc.] signify the grace of regeneration, because instituted by Christ to that
end.

Now in the Protestant form, there is no word signifying Episcopal Order in the
natural sense of the words. For this is their whole form, [Take the Holy Ghost,
and remember that thou stir up the grace of God which is in thee by Imposition
of hands; for God has not given us the Spirit of fear, but of power, and love,
and soberness.] In which is nothing but what may be said to any Priest or
Deacon at his Ordaining, nay or to any child at Confirming. Nor is there any
color of ground to say that these words signify it ex instituto Christi;
being there is no testimony in Scripture of such his institution, nor did he
ever use these words but once to his Apostles, when he gave them power of
remitting sins, which is a power of Priestly Order only; nor do we find that
any of the Apostles ever used them; De ordinat. Sacr. par. 2.
and it appears by all the Rituals now extant, (set forth by Morinus) that no
Church, Greek, or Latin, ever used these words for so much as any part of the
Ceremony for ordaining a Bishop, for 1200. years, nor any of the Greek Churches
yet to this day; nor therefore does the Roman Church (which introduced them
within these 400. years) use them as essential form, as shall be seen more anon.

The second Chapter. Replying to Dr Bramhall's Answer.
TO the foregoing Objection he makes this Answer. Page 222


Ans. If these words be considered singly in a divided sense from the rest of
the Office, there is nothing in our form, which does distinctly and
reciprocally express Episcopal power. But if these words be considered
conjoyntly in a compounded sense, there is enough to express it distinctly. 1.
The party is presented to be made a Bishop. 2. The Kings Letters Pattents are
read, requiring them to Consecrate him Bishop. 3. He takes his Oath of
Canonical Obedience, as Bishop elect. 4. The Assembly is exhorted to pray for
him, before he be admitted to that Office, (that is, of a Bishop.) 5. In the
Letany, he is prayed for as Bishop elect, that he may have grace to discharge
that Office (of a Bishop.) 6. After the Letany, he is prayed for, as called to
the Office of a Bishop. 7. The Archbishop tells him he must examine him before
he admit him to that administration whereunto he is called, and after
examination prays for grace for him to use the authority committed to him, as
a prudent and faithful Steward; this Authority can be no other then Episcopal
Authority, nor this Stewardship any other thing then Episcopacy. 8. Lastly,
after imposition of hands, with those words, Receive the Holy Ghost, etc.
follows the tradition of the Bible into his hands, with an exhortation to
behave himself toward the flock as a Pastor. All which implies Episcopal
Authority.

Repl. This answer, is either false, or impertinent, or a granting of the
Argument. For if his meaning be, that there are no words in their essential
form, that express it, this is a granting of the argument; which proceeded
only upon their essential form; the other expressions of it in the rest of the
office, signifying nothing to the purpose, because not sacramental. For the
conjunction of these words with those other, being not formal (which is
impossible betwixt words sacramental, as these are, and not sacramental, as
all the other are,) but only material, or local, (because contained within
the same Office,) their signifying of it can contribute or cooperate nothing to
make these signify it one whit the more then they would do taken singly by
themselves. And so if these, taken singly by themselves, do not signify it,
(as he confesses they do not) then taken singly by themselves they give it not
(because they give no more then they signify:) and if taken singly by
themselves they give it not, then none is given, because none of the other can
give any. To make this more plain. Suppose all the other expressions had been
as they are, and the words of their essential form had been only these [Be
thou an Officer in the Church; or take authority to some administration; or God
make thee an honest man,] or some such like, mentioning no power of Order in
certain: will he say, they would be valid to make a Bishop, by reason of their
conjunction with the other expressions? I suppose he will not, because these
signify no power given of a Bishop. And if those would not, no more will
these, for the same reason.

If his meaning be, that there are other words in the Office, which express it
as intended, desired, prayed for, or supposed to be given, by imposition of
hands, and those words, Receive the Holy Ghost, etc. this is impertinent;
because the argument proceeded only upon the not expressing it as given.

If his meaning be, that though these words do not, yet they are joined with
other words, which express it as given; this is false: because none of those
other expressions by him named, do express it as given, or intended to be given
by any of themselves, but only by the imposition of hands, and the words
joined with it. For in the seventh, which immediately precedes Imposition of
hands, the Archbishop tells the party, he must examine him before he admit him
to that administration: and after that, only prayer is made for grace that he
may discharge the Office (meaning, after it should be committed to him) as he
ought. And in the eighth which immediately follows the words of Ordination, he
is only exhorted to behave him self as a good Pastor.

If his meaning be, that these words do in some part express it as given, and
the other in some other part, so as betwixt them they make up an expression of
it as given; this is also false: because these express it not at all, and none
of the other express it as given.

So take his answer in what sense you will, it is no answer to the Objection.

The third Chapter. Answering Dr. Bramhalls Allegations for their Form; and in
this Chapter, his first Allegation, from Christ's example.
TO prop up his Answer (which he saw needed it) he adds to it three Arguments
for the validity of their Form; but very weak ones all, as will appear by the
Answers.

1. Arg. You may except against Christ's own form of Ordaining his Apostles, if
you will: but if that be a sufficient form, ours is.

Ans. This supposes that he ordained them Bishops, by these words; Receive the
Holy Ghost: which is a false supposition. For he ordained them not Bishops, by
these or any other Sacramental words: nay, it is most probable he made not one
of them a Bishop, but Saint Peter, and him he made by those words [Pasce oves
meas.]

The fourth Chapter. Answering his second Argument, from the Roman Form.
2. Arg. THe Form used at the same time when hands are imposed, is the same
both in our Form and yours. [Receive the Holy Ghost.] And so as much in our
Form to express Episcopal power as in yours; and if yours be valid ours is.

Ans. If by, the same time, he mean the same time Physical, (or Physice
loquendo) I deny his Consequence [therefore as much in our Form as yours:]
because their entire essential Form is used at the same time when hands are
imposed, which ours is not, as we shall see anon. If by, the same time, he mean
the same time Moral (or Moraliter loquendo, that is, continued without any
moral interruption:) his Antecedent is a mistake. For our Form is not those
words alone [Accipe Spiritum Sanctum] nay, perhaps they are no part of our
essential Form (for the reason given supra, Cap. 1.
) but those that are immediately joined with them, to wit, the Prayer,
Propitiare Domine, etc anciently called, the Benediction; Conc. Car. 4. and
Ordo Roman.
which has been our Form ever since Saint Peter's time, and (for the substance
of it) is the same with that which is used over all the Eastern Churches, and
which anciently (until within these four hundred years) our Church used at the
same (Physical) time when hands were imposed; only in latter ages, for the
greater solemnity of the Ceremony, and fuller signification of the grace of
this Sacrament, (the giving of the Holy Ghost) she has interposed those words
[Accipe Spiritum Sanctum] and perhaps by way of Prayer only, and appointed
them, and them alone, to be pronounced at the same time when hands are imposed,
and to be pronounced by all the Bishops assisting; and then, one of the Bishops
only (as the ancient Law and Custom was) to pronounce the words of Ordination,
viz. [Propitiare Domine supplicationibus nostris, Vno super cum fundente
Benedictionem. Conc. Carth. 4.
and inclinato super hunc famulum tuum cornu gratiae Sacerdotalis, been
dictionis tuae in eum infunde virtutem. Per, etc.] Anon after which follows the
other Prayer, anciently called, Consecratio Episcopi; to wit, [ Deus honorum
omnium, etc. tribuas ei Cathedram Episcopalem ad regendam Ecclesiam, etc.] and
after that, the anointing his head with holy Chrisme, with these words [
Vngatur and Consecretur Caput tuum Benedictione coelesti, in Ordine
Pontificali, In nomine Patris, etc.] After which he is called Episcopus, and
Consecratus; till then, not, but Electus, or Consecrandus only. So all these
pertain to the integrity of our Form, and are morally (which is sufficient to
the unity of a moral compositum, as a Sacrament is) joined with the Imposition
of hands: and in these you see is expressed, Sacerdotal, Episcopal, and
Pontifical grace (or Order.) And so there is more in our Form to express
Episcopal power, then in theirs.

The fifth Chapter. Answering his third Argument, from Cardinal Pool's
Dispensation.
3. Arg. KIng Edward the sixth his Form of Ordination, was judged valid in
Queen Mary's days, by all the Catholic Bishops in Parliament, 1. and 2.
Phil. and Mar. 8. by Cardinal Pool ( then Apostolic Legate in England) and by
the Pope himself, Paul the fourth. This he proves by three Mediums.

The first Medium. The Parliament proposed to the Cardinal, this Article, that
all Institutions to Benefices might be confirmed. And the Cardinal did confirm
them, and the Pope ratified it. Now Institutions could not be confirmed except
Ordinations were, nor they, unless they were essentially valid. Ergo they
supposed them valid.

Ans. Either he argues upon the Institutions of such as had been Ordained by
the new Form, and were returned to Catholic unity, and so had been
re-ordained; or of such as had not been re-ordained. If the former, I deny, his
Consequence; for their Institutions might be confirmed, without confirming
their Ordinations. If of the latter, I deny his Antecedent; for the Parliament
proposed not, nor did the Cardinal promise to confirm their Institutions; there
being no Beneficed men then in the land, that had been Ordained by the new
form, but what were re-ordained in Queen Mary's time. And though it be
sufficient for me, being the Respondent, to say it only, till he prove what he
boldly faith, that none of those Ordained by King Edwards form, were in Queen
Mary's time compelled to be re-ordained: yet for more satisfaction to the
Reader, I shall give some Reasons of my saying, viz. because

1. In the first Parliament of Queen Mary, (which began on the 5. of October.
1553. and ended on the 6. of December. following, which was a twelve month before
this Act) all Consecrations which had been made according to the Ordinal of
Edward the sixth were declared (says Doctor Heylin) to be null and void.
Eccles. Restaur. par. 2. fol. 38.
And if Consecrations, surely much more, Ordinations; their Form for Ordaining
Priests, being much more questionable then that for Bishops.

2. In the beginning of March following, the Bishops procured from the Queen an
Injunction to all the Ordinaries in the Realm, to execute certain Articles
recommended, whereof the fifteenth was this [Touching such persons as were
heretofore promoted to any Orders after the new sort and fashion of Orders, Mr.
Fox, Act. and Mon. par. 2. fol. 1464.
considering they were not Ordained in very deed, the Bishop of the Diocese
finding otherwise sufficiency and ability in those men, may supply that thing
which they wanted, and then according to his discretion, admit them to
Minister.] Upon which Master Fox makes this note, In Indice.
[Ministers revolting to Popery, must with their new Religion have new Orders.]
And these Articles we may be sure were quickly and strictly put in execution by
the Bishops; and so Master Fox says, Par. 2. fol. 1289.
[all such Beneficed men, which either were married, or would constantly adhere
to their profession, were removed, Hist. of Q. Mary.
and others placed in their rooms:] and Doctor Goodwin, [Omnes cujuscunque
conditionis Ecclesiastici, qui vel uxores repudiare nollent, vel Pontificiam
doctrinam postea tueri and defendere non promitterent, sacerdotiis hujusmodi
unde ob. Pontificiam doctrinam pertinaciter defensam exturbatus quisquam
fuisset, indiscriminatim universi exacti sunt.] And Doctor Heylin, [For want of
Canonical Ordination on the one side, and under color of uncanonical marriage
on the other, we shall find such a general remove amongst the Bishops and
Clergy, as is not any where to be paralleled in so short a time.]

The second Medium. The Parliament, in that Article, propounded to the
Cardinal, that all Ecclesiastical promotions might be confirmed. Now under
promotions Ecclesiastical, were comprehended holy Orders.

Ans. Under Ecclesiastical promotions, were not comprehended holy Orders, but
only promotions of like nature as Institutions to Benefices; for so runs the
Article [Institutions to Benefices, and other promotions Ecclesiastical:] that
is, promotions giving Jurisdiction, Office, or Dignity in the Church, as Deans,
Prebends, Chancellours, Archdeacons, etc.

The third Medium. The Cardinal promised to receive in their Orders all who had
obtained Orders; without any other exception or condition but this, that they
were returned to Catholic Unity. Neither was there ever any one of them who
were then returned, compelled to be re-ordained. This does clearly destroy all
the pretensions of the Romanists against the validity of our Orders.

Ans. This is triumphing before the victory. For first, that any of them that
were returned to Catholic unity, would presume to exercise any function of a
Priest or Deacon, by virtue of Order received by the new Form, is not
imaginable, considering how all the Catholic Bishops at that time counted
those Ordinations null; so as there was no need to compel any of them to
reordination. Secondly, the Cardinal did not promise to receive in their
Orders, all who had obtained Orders (simpliciter, as he alleges it.) but only
all who had obtained Orders, essentially valid (for else they were no Orders,)
but Canonically invalid, because received from them who had no authority to
Ordain, but what they pretended from the King as Supreme head of the Church of
England: for so are the Cardinals words, [Omnes personas, quae aliquas
impetratioones, dispensationes; gratias and indulta, tam Ordines, quam
Beneficia Ecclesiastica, seu alias spirituales materias, praetensa authoritate
Supremitatis Ecclesiae Anglicanae, licet nulliter, and de facto, obtinuerint.]
And that this was his meaning, and the utmost of it, is manifest from diverse
other clauses in the Dispensation. As

1. That in the preamble, he describes the things, he was desired, and did
intend to dispense with, to be things done, perniciosissimo schismate vigente,
per authoritatem Parliamenti; and quae licet ex sacrorum Canonum institutis
irrita declarari possent; yet he might de Apostolica benignitate, eorum
firmitati providere.

2. That for his motive to dispense with those things, he names the necessity
of it to the public peace and quiet of the whole Realm, [Quae si ad alium
statum quam in quo nunc sunt revocarentur, publica pax and quies universi Regni
turbaretur, and maxima confusio oriretur.] which was true of Ordinations
Canonically null, because all, or well nigh all in the land were so; but not of
Ordinations made by the new Form, for that had been legally established by
Parliament (and the Parliament took care for no other; Institutions of
Benefices, and other promotions Ecclesiastical, and dispensations, made
according to the Form of the Act of Parliament,) but in the last year of Edward
the sixth, in which there had not been many Ordinations; and those few as had
been Ordained by it, and were become Catholics (as the Parliament and
Cardinal provided for no other,) had been, before this, re-ordained; so as no
disturbance of the Realm could be feared from the not confirming those
Ordinations.

3. That he promised to receive them in their Orders, though obtained,
nulliter, and de facto: which could not be possibly meant of Orders essentially
null, because he well knew no power upon earth could confirm them; but only of
Canonical nullity.

4. That he put this condition or qualification upon them as should have
benefit by the Dispensation, [modo ad cor reversae, Ecclesiae Catholicae
unitati restitutae fuerint:] which may have place in Ordinations Canonically
null, but not in other, because they are eternally valid or invalid in all
alike, as well Heretics or Schismatics, as Catholics.

5. That he promises to receive them, prout multi jam recepti fuerunt; meaning
those who had sued out their Dispensations, as many had. But not one can be
named who had been Ordained Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, by the new Form, and
upon his return to Catholic Religion, was received in that Order. And I am
the more confident of it, because (besides the reasons given supra) after this
Parliament, heretical Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, if they had been Ordained
ritu Romano, were degraded as such: but if by the new Form, not, but only in
that Order which they had received ritu Romano. As namely, John Bradford, Mr.
Fox. par. 2. fol. 1464.
Ordained a Minister by the new Form, was not degraded at all, but proceeded
with as a mere layman. And Doctor Hooper, Id. ib. fol. 1289.
made Priest, by the Roman Form, Bishop, by the new, was degraded as a Priest
only. And by this time I hope the Reader sees how little cause Doctor Bramhal
had to vaunt as he did of this Argument as unanswerable. And this shall serve
for my first Reason.

The sixth Chapter. Urging the second Reason, invalidity of the Minister.
BUt grant their Form were valid, yet they would be no Bishops Ordine, for
another reason; invalidity of the Minister. For the essential Minister of this
Sacrament (the Consecrating of a Bishop) is at least (according to their own
doctrine) one Bishop Ordine. Now none of them are Bishops Ordine, because no
Priests, (as Priest, is the proper name of a holy Order, betwixt Bishop, and
Deacon.)

That none can be a Bishop but he that is a Priest, is a received axiom
amongst all Divines, and granted by themselves. Mr. Mason, Ep. ded. ad Episc.
Paris.
[Cum Episcopus esse nequeat qui non fuerit Presbyter, si nos Presbyteros non
esse probatum dederit, actum erit de Ministerio Anglicano.]

And that their Ministers are no Priests, is manifest: because this word Priest
(as it is the name of a holy Order) signifies one set apart, or empowered, to
offer to God the Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Christ. This is evident
from all the Forms (now extant) of Ordaining Priests, Vid. ap. Morin. de Ordin.
sacr. par. 2.
either ancient or modern, either of the Greek or Latin Church; and from the
use of this word in all approved Christian Authors from the Apostles times to
this day. Now themselves disclaim to Priesthood in this sense, and claim to it
only as it signifies (in a new sense of their own devising) a Minister of the
Gospel, having power to dispense the Word and Sacraments. [Sacrificium proprie
dictum ad Ministros Evangelicos spectare non agnoscimus. Mr. Mason. page 545.
Si Sacerdotis vocabulo nihil aliud significasses quam Ministrum Evangelii cui
verbi and Sacramentorum commissa est dispensatio, nos Sacerdotes esse id. l. 5.
c. 1. n. 3.
profiteremur.]

If they will say (as otherwhiles they do, and even the same Author) l. 5. c.
1. n. 3. etc. 5. n. 11.
that the Eucharist is a mystical Sacrifice, offered to God, in commemoration
or representation of Christ's death (which is as much as we believe of it,) and
that they have power to offer it as such: this is manifestly false, because in
all their essential Form, there is not this word Priest, nor any word
equivalent, nor any word signifying, or necessarily including, power to offer
any Sacrifice.

Nay, should we admit this word Priest, in their own sense, for one set apart
to Consecrate the Body and Blood. of Christ in way of Sacrament only, yet they
would be no Priests; because the words of their Form signify no such power.
For these are the words of it [Take the Holy Ghost: whose sins thou forgivest
they are forgiven, whose sins thou retainest they are retained: and be thou a
faithful dispenser of the word of God, and of his holy Sacraments.] In which
you see is no power given, as to this or any other Sacrament, but only to
dispense them. Now to dispense this Sacrament, is not to Consecrate it; for it
must first be Consecrated, before it can be dispensed; and (in some cases, as if
one at point of death, should desire his viaticum, and no Priest or Deacon
could be had to give it him,) it may be dispensed by a Deacon, yea by a
Layman, but cannot be Consecrated but by a Priest: and in a Priest, the
Consecrating it belongs to his power of Order, the Dispensing it, to power of
Jurisdiction only.

The seventh Chapter. Replying to Doctor Bramhall's Answers.
page 226.
1. Ans. I Deny that in all Forms of Priestly Ordination, the word Priest is set
down either expressly or equivalently. It is set down expressly in the Eastern
Church, in the Western not.

Reply. In the Western Church, 1. it is set down equivalently. For these words,
at the delivery of the paten with an host, and of the chalice with wine in it
[ Accipe potestatem offerre Sacrificium Deo, etc.] are equivalent to these [
Take the power of Priesthood, or be thou a Priest.] But 2. it is also set down
expressly, viz. in the prayer (joined with the Imposition of hands) anciently
called Benedictio Presbyteri, and which alone (as I noted before) was the
ancient Form for Ordaining a Priest [Exaudi nos Domine Deus noster, and super
kos famulos tuos Been dictionem Sancti Spiritus, and gratiae SACERDOTALIS
infunde virtutem.] And in the Prayer anciently called Consecratio Presbyteri,
which follows soon after the other [ Dain hos famulos tuos PRESBYTERII
dignitatem, etc. ut panem and vinum in corpus and sanguinem filii tui
immaculata benedictione transforment, etc.] both which Prayers still are used
in our Form.

2. Ans. If the words of our Form be as determinate and express, as the example
and prescription of Christ, it is sufficient. The form of Baptism is, I BAPTIZE
THEE IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, etc. Not, I BAPTIZE THEE TO REGENERATION OR
REMISSION OF SINS. There are many other kinds of Baptisms or washings besides
this Sacramental Baptism, yet this form is as large as the Institution of
Christ; and these general words are efficacious both to regeneration and
remission of sins, as well as if they had been expressly mentioned. In this form
of Baptism there is enough antecedent to direct and regulate both the actions
and intention of the Minister, So there is likewise in our Form of Ordination.

Rep. Had Christ instituted those words of their Form [ Take the Holy Ghost,
etc.] for giving the grace of Priestly Order, as he did those [ I Baptize thee,
etc.] for giving the grace of regeneration, we neither could nor should have
excepted against it; because then it would have signified it, as the Form of
Baptism does regeneration, ex instituto Christi. But till they can show their
form so Instituted, which they can never do, the case is nothing like; and so
this is no answer.

3. Ans. In our Form, Priestly power is sufficiently expressed. First, RECEIVE
THE HOLY GHOST, that is, the grace of the Holy Ghost, to exercise and discharge
the Office of Priesthood, to which thou have been now presented and accepted,
etc.

Rep. Had all these been the words of their Form, we should never have
questioned the validity of it. But none of them belongs to it but those first,
Receive the Holy Ghost: the rest are but his Gloss; which I doubt not but the
Ordainer meant; but the intention of the Minister, is not sufficient to give
this grace, without words signifying it; which these do not.

Ans. Secondly, in these words [WHOSE SINS THOU REMITTEST, etc.] that is, not
only by Priestly absolution, but by preaching, baptizing, administering the
holy Eucharist, which is a means to apply the all-sufficient sacrifice of
Christ for the remission of sins. He who authorizes a man to accomplish a work,
does authorize him to use all means which tend to the accomplishment thereof.

Rep. This answer has the same fault with the former (that it quotes his own
Gloss, for the Text,) and a much worse: for, in that, it is like the Gloss was
meant by the Ordainer, but in this, not; it being a sense exploded by
Protestants themselves as Puritanical. Nor is it congruous to the words: for
the remitting sins here spoken of, must be the act of the Priest himself [whose
sins THOU remittest,] whereas the remitting sins by preaching, or any other of
those ways by him named (except Absolution) is not the act of the Priest, but
of God alone, and the Priest does only apply the means whereby God does it.
And for that Rule [ he who authorizes, etc.] it holds only in means necessary
to the end: which the administering of the Eucharist is not to the remitting of
sins: for (regularly) they are and ought to be remitted before, by the Sacrament
of Penance: and if Christ had pleased, he might have given that power of
remitting sins, to a Deacon, or Layman.

Ans. Thirdly this Priestly power to Consecrate, is contained in those words
[BE THOU A FAITHFVL DISPENSER OF THE WORD AND SACRAMENTS.] And afterward when
the Bishop delivers the Bible into his hands, [Have thou authority to preach
the Word and administer the Sacraments.]

Rep. It is contained in neither of them. For

1. The former [ Be thou a faithful dispenser, etc.] give no power, but only
admonish, and exhort, to a faithful discharge of the Office. And the latter [
Have thou authority, etc.] give no power of Order, but Jurisdiction only: as
their own men interpret them [In superioribus data est potestas Ordinis, Mr.
Mason l. 5. c. 14. n. 14.
in his, Jurisdictio, vel facultas, per quam potestas Ordinis ad usum
reducitur, seu loci duntaxat, in quo potestas illa exercenda est, designatio:]
and as would have been evident by the words themselves, had he set them down
entirely, and not by halves [ Have thou authority to preach, etc. in this
Congregation where thou shall be so appointed.]

2. Had they been absolute, and imperative, [Have thou authority to preach, and
dispense Sacraments] they would not have signified power of Order, but
Jurisdiction only;; nor any greater Jurisdiction then a Deacon is capable of.
And his answer to this, [that the Priest does dispense this Sacrament by way of
Office, a Deacon only as his Minister,] is 1. false, for if a Deacon be
Beneficed, and have a faculty from the Bishop, in the interim till be a Priest,
to preach and dispense Sacraments, he has authority to dispense this Sacrament
ex Officio, and not as Minister to any Priest. 2. Impertinent, for the
dispensing it ex Officio, does not formally signify, or necessarily include
power to Consecrate it, at least, not as given by those words which give the
power to dispense it; for (regularly) he must first be made a Priest, and
afterward a dispenser of it (or Pastor.)

If he say, that under this word, dispense, the Ordainer meant power, not only
to administer the Eucharist, but to Consecrate it; I believe he did; but (as I
have often said) the intention of the Minister is not sufficient to give power
of Order, and the highest power of Order (as this is, to Consecrate the
Eucharist,) without words signifying it.

And this shall serve for the first part of my Conclusion, that they are no
Bishops Ordine (or valid Bishops.)

The eighth Chapter. Proving the second part of the Conclusion, that they are
no Bishops OFFICIO, viz. For want of Jurisdiction in the Consecrators; and
urging the first reason, want of the Patriarch's consent.
THe second part of my Conclusion is, that they are no Bishops Officio
(Jurisdictione, or simpliciter.) My reason is, because they that Confirmed, or
Consecrated them, had no Jurisdiction to either of those acts.

The Consequence ( they had no Jurisdiction, therefore could not validly
Confirm, etc.) is good: because the Confirming of one elected to a Bishopric
(that is, the ratifying of his election to it; which if the party were
Consecrated before, is that which makes him instantly Bishop of it; and if he
were not, is that which makes him instantly Bishop (or Lord) elect of it, and
puts him in proxima potentia to be Consecrated Bishop of it,) is plainly an act
of Jurisdiction: and therefore cannot be exercised validly, but by one having
Jurisdiction to it. 2. The Consecrating of a Bishop, as it has two effects in
the party Consecrated, one the creating him a Bishop Ordine, another the
creating him Bishop of such a See (as ex. gr. Canterbury, London, etc.) so it
requires in the Consecraters two powers; one, to create him a Bishop Ordine,
and so it is an act purely of the Key of Order; another, to create him Bishop
of that See, (that is, governing Pastor to that Flock of Clergy and People,
with authority to Institute Pastors, hold Courts, make Decrees, determine
Causes, inflict or release Censures Ecclesiastical, over, or among them,) and
so it is plainly an act of the Key of Jurisdiction, because giving Jurisdiction
only: and so cannot be validly exercised but by one having authority to
exercise it.

The Antecedent, (they had no Jurisdiction,) is proved by two Mediums.

The first is, because they had no authority from the Pope, who alone could
give it them. For none can give Pastoral Jurisdiction, but a Pastor; nor
Jurisdiction over such a flock; but the Pastor to that flock; because none can
give a Jurisdiction which he has not. And hence, even among themselves, no
Bishop in the land can validly Institute a Pastor to any Parochial Church, but
the Bishop of the Diocese, or by Commission from him, or his Superior. Nor can
any number of Bishops validly Confirm or Consecrate the Bishop of any Diocese,
but the Metropolitan of the Province (or some person authorized by him or his
Superior) must be one: nor the Metropolitan of a Province, but the Primate of
the Nation, (or some person authorized by him or his Superior) must be one.
And consequently, by (parity of reason) nor the Primate of any Nation, but the
Patriarch of that part of the world (or some person having faculty from him)
must be one. This was long ago defined (or declared) by the first Council of
Nice, [(...), Mos antiquus obtitineat, in Egypto, Lybia, and Pentapoli, ut
Episcopus Alexandrinus horum omnium habeat potestatem, etc. Vniversim autem
illud manifestum est, quod si quis absque consensu Metropolitani fiat
Episcopus, hunc magna Synodus definivit non debere esse Episcopum. Can. 6.
(...), (that is, particularly, and principally, the Consecrating of their
Primates,) etc. (...), (the Ecclesiastical Superior to that See) (...).] And
before that, by the Canons called the Apostles; Can. 35.
and since that, has been confirmed, by the great Council of Chalcedon, Can.
27.
and diverse other Councils, and received by the practice and consent of the
Universal Church from that time to this day. Consequently, the Patriark of the
West, (the Bishop of Rome) being the unquestionable rightful Metropolitan to
the Primate of this Nation, (the Archbishop of Canterbury,) and the Founder of
that See; no number of Bishops in this land, can validly Confirm, or Consecrate
him, but the Bishop of Rome, or by Faculty or Commission from him; or at least,
not without his consent implicit, or reasonably presumed. And so there having
been no rightful Primate of this Nation since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, for want of the Popes consent to his Consecration; there has been no
Bishop validly Confirmed or Consecrated in it, since that time, not can be,
till the Popes consent can be had.

The ninth Chapter. Urging the second reason, their having no Jurisdiction but
from the King: and bringing the first proof of it, from their own acts and
confessions.
MY second Medium shall be, because they have no Jurisdiction to these acts,
but what they have originally from the King, who can give them none. And

First, that he can give them none to these acts, I suppose will be granted;
because to Institute or create a Pastor to a flock of Clergy and people, is
plainly a power of the Keys, which themselves acknowledge no temporal Prince
(as such) has. And they give a good reason for it, Dr. Bram. page 63.
because the power of the Keys was evidently given by Christ in Scripture to
his Apostles and their Successors, not to Sovereign Princes. Hence, Queen
Elizabeth in her Commission to them as were to Confirm and Consecrate Matthew
Parker to the Sea of Canterbury, would not use the words, assign, constitute,
or authorize, (as is used in all other Commissions) but only required them to
Confirm and Consecrate him, and do all other things which in this behalf
belonged to their Pastoral Office: thereby acknowledging, that these were acts
of the Pastoral Office, which she could not authorize, but only command, them
to perform.

Secondly, that they have no Jurisdion to these acts, but what they have
(originally) from the King, may be showed many ways. I shall make use of three.

The first shall be from their own acts and confessions, As

1. Eccl. Rest. in pref.
That Doctor Heylin notes of Q. Elizabeth (as commendable in Her,) that she
looked upon Her self as the sole fountain of both Jurisdictions (temporal, and
spiritual.) For if she the sole fountain of both; then they that Confirmed and
Consecrated Matthew Parker, and Her other first Bishops, had no Jurisdiction
for it, but what they derived from Her.

2. That before their Consecration, they take, 1. the Oath of Supremacy, whereby
they acknowledge the King to be the only Supreme Governor, as well in all
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal. For if so, they
cannot exercise any Spiritual Jurisdiction in foro exteriori (as this is, to
Confirm and Consecrate a Pastor) but what must be derived from him. Nor can
they say, that by the Supreme Governor, in that Oath, is meant only the
Supreme political Governor: 1. Eliz. 1.
for the Act that established that Oath, declares it to belong to the Kings
Supremacy, to use and exercise all such Jurisdictions Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual and Ecclesiastical power or authority, has
heretofore been, or may lawfully be used, over the Ecclesiastical State of this
Realm, and consequently, to authorize any Bishops in the land (as the Pope
before did) to Confirm and Consecrate Archbishops and Bishops, and so that none
might Confirm or Consecrate any, but by authority from the King, as before they
might not but by authority from the Pope: nay, it gives to the King more
authority, and in this very kind, then the Pope can exercise, or ever
pretended to, viz. to assign and authorize any persons as he shall think meet
(Bishops, or not Bishops, Clerks, or Laymen, so they be his natural born
Subjects) to exercise under him all manner of Jurisdictions and Authorities, in
any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual Jurisdiction within this Realm:
and consequently, to Confirm, or Consecrate Archbishops or Bishops, of any
Sees; for this is a spiritual Jurisdiction. 2. Besides this, they take a
particular Oath, of Homage, whereby they acknowledge to hold their
Archbishopric (or Bishopric) with all authority, jurisdiction, privileges,
revenues, and all else thereunto belonging, solely and only from his Majesty.
If all their Jurisdiction from him solely, they can have no authority to
constitute a Pastor of a Cathedral or Metropolitical Church, but what they
must have from him.

The tenth Chapter. Bringing the second Proof, from other public Acts.
THe second way of proof shall be, from other public Acts and proceedings,
approved by them; by which it appears that the King can and sometimes does at
his pleasure, limit, control, suspend, or utterly deprive the Bishops of their
Jurisdiction; which he could not do, if they had it from any other then
himself. Of this, I shall name two Instances.

One, shall be the sequestring of Doctor Abbot by the late King, from his
Office of Archbishop of Canterbury, upon a displeasure taken against him, for
refusing to license a Sermon as the King desired, and committing that Office
(he living) unto other Bishops of his own appointing; See the Commission at
large, in Mr. Rush. Hist. Collect. p. 435.
authorizing them, to do all, or any acts pertaining to the power or authority
of the Archbishop of Canterbury in causes or matters Ecclesiastical, as amply,
fully, and effectually to all intents and purposes, as the said Archbishop
might have done. And so by virtue of this Commission, those persons had
authority to Consecrate or Confirm the Archbishop of York (if it should
happen,) or any Bishop within the Province of Canterbury; which without it they
had not.

Another, shall be the Declaration of his Majesty, (whom God grant long to
Reign over us) touching affairs of Religion: in which he deprives all the
Bishops and Archbishops in the land of their power of sole Ordaining and
Censuring their Presbyters, and joins their Presbyters in Commission with them,
as to those acts of Ordaining and Censuring.

The eleventh Chapter. Bringing the third Proof from the Consecration of
Matthew Parker.
MY third proof, shall be from the Consecration of Matthew Parker, the first
Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, from whom all the Archbishops and Bishops
that have been since, descend; and so if he had no authority to Confirm or
Consecrate a Bishop, but what he had from the Queen, none since him can have;
because they can have none but must be derived to them from and by him.

Now that he had none but from the Queen, is proved.

They who Confirmed and Consecrated him, had no authority for it, but from the
Queen.

Therefore he had none but from the Queen.

The Consequence, I suppose will not be denied; because he had all his
Spiritual Jurisdiction, by his Confirmation and Consecration to that See: if
then they who Confirmed and Consecrated him, did it by no authority but of the
Queen; he could have none but what he had from Her.

The Antecedent is easily proved. For if they had any, it must be, either as
Bishops Ordine, or as Bishops Officio: but neither of these ways had they any.

1. Not as Bishops Ordine: because to Confirm or Consecrate a Pastor, is an
act of Jurisdiction: which a Bishop Ordine only, has none.

2. Not as Bishops Officio: because

First, not one of them was so, as appears by the style given them in the
Queens Letters Pattents to them for this business [ Regina etc. Antonio
Landavensi Episcopo, Wilelmo Barlow quondam Bathoniensi Episcopo, nunc
Cicestrensi Electo, Joanni Scory quondam Cicestrensi Episcopo, nunc Electo
Herefordiensi, Miloni Coverdale quondam Exoniensi Episcopo, Richardo
Bedfordensi, Joanni Thedfordensi, Episcopis Suffraganeis, and Joanni Bale
Ossoriensio Episcopo.] Where you see, those four that Confirmed and Consecrated
him, (admitting their Lambeth Records for true,) to wit, Barlow, Scory,
Coverdale, and Hodgskins (Suffragan of Bedford,) are not styled Bishops of any
See, as two of the other are, (he of Landaff, and he of Ossory,) but either
quondam Bishops only, as Coverdale; or quondam Bishops and Lords Elect only,
as Barlow and Scory; or Suffragan Bishops only (as John Hodgskins,) that is,
who had indeed the Episcopal Character, but were Pastors of Parochial Churches
only, erected into Suffragan Sees, by the Act of 26. H. 8. 14. who by the Act
could not exercise any least act of Jurisdiction, no not within their own
parish, without license of the Bishop of the Diocese.

Secondly, because had they been all of them actual Bishops of Cathedral
Churches, yet, they could not validly Confirm or Consecrate any lowest Bishop
in the land, and much less their Metropolitan, without a Faculty or Commission
from some Superior to that See. And the reason is evident: Because

1. They could not (by their own authority) validly exercise any Jurisdiction
out of their own Diocesses, as London where they were to Confirm, and Lambeth,
where they were to Consecrate him, was out of all their Diocesses.

2. Nor within his own Diocese could any one of them give Jurisdiction to be
exercised in another Diocese, as Canterbury was.

3. Much less could they (being but simple Bishops) give a Jurisdiction
Metropolitical, and create a Superior to themselves, and to all the Bishops of
the Province, yea and to the Archbishop of another Province, namely him of
York: for they could not give a Jurisdiction which they had not.

These two grand defects therefore, in the condition, state, and faculty of the
Confirmers and Consecraters of Matthew Parker, the one against the Canons of
the Church, that they had no consent of the Metropolitan to the Sea of
Canterbury, the other against both the Canons of the Church, and the laws of
the land, that not one of those who were like to execute the Commission, was a
Bishop ( simpliciter, or in the sense wherein all laws, both of the Church and
of the Land, mean, when they speak of a Bishop,) rendering them incapable to
Confirm or Consecrate him, till those defects were supplied; the party that
supplied those defects, was the party that gave them their authority to those
acts. Now it is manifest by the Queens Commission to them, that she, by virtue
of her Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, did supply to them those defects:
for these are the words of the Commission. [Regina, etc. Reverendissimis in
Christo Patribus, Antonio, etc. (ut supra) Cum Decanus and Capitulum Ecclesiae
nostrae Cathredalis and Metropoliticae Christi Cantuariensis dilectum nobis in
Christo Magistrum Mattheum Parker, sibi and Ecclesiae praedictae elegerunt in
Archiepiscopum and Pastorem: nos eidem electioni Regium nostrum assensum
adhibuimus pariter and favorem, and hoc vobis tenore praesentium significamus,
rogantes, ac in fide and dilectione quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter
praecipiendo, Mandantes, quatenus vos aut quatuor vestrum eundem in
Archiepiscopum and Pastorem Ecclesiae praedictae sicut praefertur electum,
electionemque praedictam, Confirmare, and eundem in Archiepiscopum and Pastorem
Ecclesiae praedictae Consecrare, caeteraque omnia and singula peragere, quae
vestro in hac part incumbunt Officio Pastorali, juxta formam Statutorum in ea
part editorum and provisorum, velitis cum effectu. Supplentes nihilominus
Suprema authoritate nostra Regia, si quid, aut in his quae juxta mandatum
nostrum praedictum per vos fient, aut in vobis aut vestrum aliquo, condition,
statu, aut facultate vestris, ad praemissa perficienda desit aut deerit eorum
quae per Statuta hujus Regni nostri, aut per Leges Ecclesiasticas, in hac part
requiruntur aut necessaria sunt, temporis ratione and rerum necessitate id
postulante, viz.] because neither the consent of the Metropolitan (the Bishop
of Rome,) nor four Bishops, as the Law of the Realm, nor three, as the Canons
of the Church required, no nor any one Bishop could be then had to his
Confirmation and Consecration. Now though really she could give them no such
authority, because she had no power of the Keys, to which it pertained to
dispense with the Canons of the Church: yet this suffices to prove my intent,
that they had no authority to either of those acts, but what they had from Her.

The twelfth Chapter. Replying to Doctor Heylins Answer.
DOctor Heylin undertakes to answer all our Objections against the
Canonicalness of Matthew Parkers Consecration: Eccl. Rest. p 2. f. 122.
but he neither sets them down all, nor solves those he does; as will appear by
the Reply.

1. Ans. Though Barlow and Scory were deprived of their Episcopal Sees; yet,
first, the justice and legality of their Deprivation was not clear in Law.

Rep. 1. And why then did the Queen in her Letters Pattents not style them
Bishops, but only quondam Bishops of those Sees? And why did she not in all
that time (being above thirteen months after her coming to the Crown) restore
them to those Sees? And why did she, or how could she, they living, place
others in those Sees, without their resignation. 2. Grant the deprivation had
been unjust, yet till it was avoided, and they restored by sentence, they were
no Bishops of those Sees, in the eye of the Law. 3. Had they been actual
Bishops of those Sees, yet they would have had no authority to Confirm or
Consecrate him, for the defects showed supra.

2. Ans. Secondly, they neither were nor could be deprived of their Episcopal
Character: and whilst that remained, they were in a capacity for performing all
Episcopal Offices to which they should be called by their Metropolitan, or any
higher power directing and commanding in all such matters as concerned the
Church.

Rep. If by, higher power, etc. he mean Ecclesiastical; it is true, he says,
but impertinent; because they were not called to Confirm or Consecrate Matthew
Parker, by any such higher power, but only by the Queen. But if he mean, that
their Episcopal Character rendered them capable to perform all Episcopal
Offices, to which they should be called by a Lay-Prince only, having no other
authority in matters as concern the Church, but only to direct or command
Bishops to perform their Offices, it is notorious false doctrine.

3. Ans. As for Suffragans (by which title Hodgskins is Commissionated for the
Consecration) they were no other then the Chorepiscopi of the Primitive times,
ordained for easing the Diocesan, etc.

Rep. They were in some things more then the Chorepiscopi, for they (the
Chorepiscopi) were no Bishops Ordine, which these were: but in other things
they were less, for the Chorepiscopi had Jurisdiction Episcopal from some
lawful Bishop of the Sea; which these had not, but were only established by an
Act of Parliament of Hen. 8. nor had any of the Bishops then in the Realm
Episcopal Jurisdiction, being manifest Heretics and Schismatics, and so could
not constitute a Suffragan. But grant they were no less then the Chorepiscopi,
he cannot show that ever any Chorepiscopus was used for the Confirming or
Consecrating of a Bishop. And this shall serve for the second part of my
Conclusion, that they are no Bishops Officio, (or Canonical Bishops.)

The thirteenth Chapter. Proving the third part of the Conclusion, that they
are no legal Bishops: and urging the first Reason, because the Act of H. 8. for
the Roman Form, is still in force.
THough it matter not much to my purpose, whether they be Legal Bishops, or
not: Dr. Stapl. Counterbl. ag. Horn.
yet because our writers have objected this also against them, [Is it not
notorious, that you were not Ordained according to the prescript, I will not
say, of the Church, but even of the very Statutes,] and their late Champions
have undertaken to defend it, and the discussing of it will give much light
into the whole Controversy, and more abundantly discover the nullity of their
Consecrations, this shall be the third part of my Conclusion, that they are no
legal Bishops. My reasons are two.

The first is, because the Act of 25. Hen 8.20. which authorizes the Roman Form
for Consecrating Bishops (by giving Pall, and using Benedictions, Unctions, and
all other Ceremonies requisite at that time, viz. by the Roman Pontifical,
which was then in use, in this Nation,) being repealed by Q. Mary, was revived
1. Eliz. and never since repealed, and so is still in force.

Nor will it serve to say, that that Act of Hen. 8. was repealed (as to that
part of it) virtually, (or interpretatively,) by the Act of 8. Eliz. which
established another Form; for in the judgment of Law, an Act of Parliament is
not repealed but by express words.

The fourteenth Chapter. Urging the second Reason, because the Act of Edw. 6.
for the Book of Ordination, being repealed by Queen Mary, is not yet revived;
and proving the first part of the reason, that it was not revived before 8. Eliz.
THe second reason is, because granting that the Act of Hen. 8. was virtually
repealed, by 8. Elizabethae, and that such virtual repeal is sufficient in Law,
yet the Form of Edw. 6. (by which they are Ordained) cannot be legal, because
that part of the Act of Edward 6. which established the Book of Ordination, and
was repealed by Queen Mary, was not revived before 8. Eliz. nor then neither.

The first part of this reason, ( that it was not revived before 8. Eliz.) is
easily proved. For whereas that Act of 5. and 6. Edw. 6.1. consisted of two
parts; one, which authorized the Book of Common Prayer (established 2. and 3.
Edw, 6.) as it was then newly explained and perfected; another which
established the Form of Consecrating Bishops, etc. and added it to the Book of
Common Prayer: this Act, as to both these parts, was repealed 1. Mar. and this
repeal was reversed 1. Eliz. 1. as to that part which concerned the Book of
Common Prayer only: for so runs the Act [ The said Statute of Repeal, and
every thing therein contained, ONLY concerning the said Book (viz. of
Common Prayer, authorized by Edw. 6.) shall be void and of none effect.] And
afterward, 8. Eliz. 1. was revived that other part of it which concerned the
Form of Ordination, viz. in these words [ Such Order and Form for the
Consecrating of Archbishops, Bishops, etc. as was set forth in the time of Edw.
6. and added to the said Book of Common Prayer, and authorized 5. and 6. Edw.
6. shall stand and be in full force, and shall from henceforth be used and
observed.]

The fifteenth Chapter. Replying to Doctor Bramhall's Answer.
page 95.
FIrst, he sets down our Objection wrong. [ The Book of Ordination was expressly
established by name, by Edw. 6. and that Act was expressly repealed by Queen
Mary: but the Book of Ordination was not expressly restored by Queen Eliz. but
only in general terms, under the name and notion of the Book of
Common Prayer.] For this is not our objection, but this: it was not restored at
all, but rather formally excluded, by 1. Eliz. For that Act of Edw. 6.
consisting of nothing else, but the authorizing of the Book of Common Prayer,
and establishing, and adding to it, the Book of Ordination; and the Act of
Queen Mary having repealed that whole Act: that Act of 1. Eliz. reversing that
repeal, as to the Book of Common Prayer only, did plainly and directly exclude
the repealing of it as to the Book of Ordination, there being nothing else to
be excluded by that only, but that Book. And I am confident, it was the full
intent of the Queen and Parliament at that time, to retain still, as the Order
of Bishops, so the Catholic Form of Consecrating them, authorized by Act of
Parliament, 25. Hen. 8. 20. after his revolt from Rome, and used all his time
till his death, and for some years of Edw. 6. For that Queen loved state and
solemnity in the Rites of the Church where it justled not with her interest,
and loathed the slovinly way of Ordaining, used by Lutherans and Calvinists;
until she was overborn in it, at the Consecration of Matthew Parker, when no
Catholic Bishops could be got to Consecrate him, and the Protestant, would not
Consecrate him ritu Romano. And one good reason of my confidence is, because
that Act of 1. Eliz, did expressly revive that Act of 25. Hen. 8. 20. which was
inconsistent with the reviving of that part of the Act of Edw. 6. which
concerned the Book of Ordination; that Form authorized by the Act of Hen. 8.
being the Roman Form, with Pall, Unction, Benedictions, Miter, Ring, etc. and
that of Edw. 6. a bald thing, without any of that dress.

Secondly, the answers he gives to the Objection are false, or frivolous: as
will appear by the Replies.

Ans. Queen Mary's Statute was repealed sufficiently even as to the Book of
Ordination, as appears by the very words of that Statute which repealed it.
[And that the said Book, with the order of Service and administration of
Sacraments, Rites, and Ceremonies, shall be in full force and effect, any thing
in Queen Mary's Statute of repeal to the contrary notwithstanding.]

Rep. By these words appears it was not repealed as to the Book of Ordination,
because the words preceding, repealed it expressly as to the Book of
Common Prayer only; and these words revive the Statute of Edw. 6. as to that
Book only.

Ans. That the Book of Ordination was a part of the Book of Common Prayer, and
printed in this Book in King Edwards days, beside the express testimony of the
Statute of 8. Eliz. we have the authority of the Canons of the Church of
England, which call it singularly, the Book of Common Prayer and of Ordering
Bishops.

Rep. The Statute of 8. Eliz. testifies no such thing, much less expressly. And
the Canon by him cited is against himself, implying it was no part of the Book
of Common Prayer, (for then it had been vain to say, the Book of Common Prayer
and of Ordering Bishops) but a distinct Book by it self, though bound up in one
volume, or under one cover, with the Book of Common Prayer; and thence, called
singularly, the Book of Common Prayer, and of Ordering Bishops; i. e. the Book
containing both those Books.

Ans. It is our Form of Prayer upon that occasion, as much as our Form of
Baptizing or administering the Holy Eucharist, or our Form of Confirming,
Marrying, or visiting the Sick.

Rep. True, but not contained in the Book of Common Prayer, (but in a distinct
Book,) and therefore not revived with it necessarily, or in virtue of that
name, the Book of Common Prayer.

Ans. It is also a part of our Form of administration of the Sacraments. We
deny not Ordination to be a Sacrament.

Rep. But it is not a Sacrament contained in the Book of Common Prayer; and
therefore not revived with that Book.

Ans. No man can deny that it is a part of our Ecclesiastical Rites and
Ceremonies, and under that notion, sufficiently authorized.

Rep. Any man can, and I do deny it to be any Rite or Ceremony pertaining to
the Book of Common Prayer: and therefore under that notion it could not be
authorized by an Act authorizing the Book of Common Prayer.

Ans. Lastly, Ejus est Legem interpretari cujus est condere. Q. Eliz. and her
Parliament made the Law, and expounded it by the same authority that made it;
declaring, that under the Book of Common Prayer, the Form of Ordination was
comprehended, and ought to be understood.

Rep. He should have quoted the words so declaring, and no doubt would have
done it, had there been any: but there are no such. Nay diverse passages of that
Act, do rather declare the contrary. As

1. When speaking of the Act of 1. Marie, they say, it repealed the Act of Edw.
6. for allowing the Book of Common Prayer, and other the premises (that is, the
Book of Ordination, spoken of before, as added, by that Act, to the Book of
Common Prayer:) but speaking of the Act of 1. Eliz. they do not say, it
established the said Book of Common Prayer, and other the premises; but only,
the said Book of Common Prayer, and of the administration of Sacraments, and
other the said Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies before mentioned (that is,
contained in the said Book of Common Prayer; for no other were before
mentioned.)

2. When for the Book of Common Prayer, the mention the Act of 1. Eliz. that
had authorized it, and only confirm that Act [The said Act (of 1. Eliz.)
whereby the said Book of Common Prayer is authorized, shall stand and remain
good.] But for the Book of Ordination; they mention not the Act of 1. Eliz. but
revive the Act of Edw. 6. for it. [ Such Order and Form for the Consecrating of
Archbishops, etc. as was authorized by 5. and 6. Edw. 6. shall stand and be in
full force;] which had been vain, if it had been revived before, by 1. Eliz. as
it would have been, if it had been a part of the Book of Common Prayer.

The sixteenth Chapter. Noting Doctor Heylin's varying from himself, and
falsifying the Act of 8. Eliz.
DOctor Heylin relating this matter as an Historian, first, varies from
himself, and then notoriously falsifies the Act of 8. Eliz.

1. He varies from himself; for one while, he delivers it (as the truth was)
that the Liturgy was confirmed 1. Eliz. and the Book of Ordination not before 8.
Ecc. Rest. in Ep. to Reader.
Eliz: [In the first year of Her Reign, the Liturgy was confirmed by
Parliament. In her fifth, the Articles of Religion were agreed upon in the
Convocation. And in the eighth, the Government of the Church by Archbishops and
Bishops, received as strong a Confirmation as the Laws could give it. And for
this last, we are beholden unto Bonner, etc.] And elsewhere [ In the six and
thirtieth Article is declared that whosoever were Consecrated according to the
Rites of the Ordinal of Edw. 6. p. 1. f. 83.
should be reputed lawfully Consecrated; which Declaration of the Church was
afterward made good by Act of Parliament in the eighth year of that Queen, in
which the said Ordinal is confirmed, and ratified.] And yet another while he
says, Ibid.
it was approved of and confirmed as a part of the Liturgy. For if so, then it
was confirmed with the Liturgy, 1. Eliz.

2. Then he notoriously falsifies the Act of 8. p. 2. f. 174.
Eliz. [The business (says he) came under consideration in the following
Parliament (8. Eliz.) where all particulars being fully and considerately
discoursed upon, it was first declared, (setting down these that follow as the
words of the Act.) That their (the Parliament 1. Eliz.) not restoring of that
Book to the former power, in terms significant and express, was but Casus
omissus; and secondly, that by the Statute of 5. and 6. Edw. 6. it had been
added to the Book of Common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, as a
member of it, or at least an appendant to it; and therefore by 1. Eliz. was
restored again together with the said Book of Common Prayer, intentionally at
the least, if not in terminis. But being the words in the said Statute were not
clear enough to remove all doubts, they did therefore revive it now, and did
accordingly enact, etc.] when there is not any one of these sentences in the
Act, I do not say in words, but not so much as in sense; nay, when the Act
supposed the contrary, as is shown supra.

The seventeenth Chapter. Confirming the Argument, by the proceedings in
Bonners Case; and urging the first inference for the opinion of the Judges.
THis that I have urged, (that that part of the Act of Edw. 6. for the Book of
Ordination, was not revived before 8. Eliz. and consequently they no legal
Bishops, before that Act) is so true, as that it was the opinion of even the
Protestant Judges at that time, and of the Parliament that made that Act; as
may be manifestly inferred from the proceedings of the Judges and Parliament in
the Case of Bonner and Horn; which was this.

By the first Session of that Parliament, 5. Eliz. 1. power was given to any
Bishop in the Realm, to tender the Oath of Supremacy, (enacted 1. Eliz.) to any
Ecclesiastical person within his Diocese, and the refuser was to incur a
Praemunire. Mr. Horn (the new Bishop of Winchester,) tenders (by virtue of this
Statute,) the Oath unto Doctor Bonner (Bishop of London, but deprived by Q.
Eliz. and then a Prisoner in the Marshalsea, which was within the Diocese of
Winchester.) Bonner refuses to take it. Horn certifies his refusal, into the
Kings Bench, whereupon Bonner was indicted upon the Statute. He prays
judgment, Dyar. fol. 234.
whether he might not give in evidence upon this Issue, Quod ipse non est inde
culpabilis, eo quod dictus Episcopus de Winchester non fuit Episcopus tempore
oblationis Sacramenti. And it was resolved by all the Judges at Sergeants Inn,
that if the verity and matter be so indeed, he should well be received to give
in evidence upon this Issue, and the Jury should try it. After which we hear no
more of the Indictment. And at the next Session of that Parliament (which was
8. Eliz) was revived the Act of Edw. 6. for the Book of Ordination, and
enacted, That all that have been, or shall be made, Ordered, or Consecrated
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. after that Form of Edw. 6. be in very deed, and by
authority hereof, declared, and enacted to be, and shall be Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. and rightly made, Ordered, and Consecrated, any Statute, Law,
Canon, or other thing to the contrary notwithstanding. But with this Proviso,
that no person shall be impeached by occasion or mean of any Certificate, by
any Archbishop, or Bishop, heretofore made, or before the last day of this
Session, to be made, by virtue of any Act made in the first Session of this
Parliament, touching the refusal of the Oath, enacted 1. Eliz. And that all
tenders of the said Oath, and all refusals of it so tendered, or before the
last day of this Session, to be tendered, by any Archbishop, or Bishop, shall
be void.

Now from this Story, I make two inferences to my purpose.

The first, that in the opinion of the Judges at that time, the Act of Edw. 6.
for the Book of Ordination, was not revived by 1. Eliz. and so Horn was no
Legal Bishop. For otherwise, there is no reason imaginable, why Horn would not
join issue with Bonner upon that point, non fuit Episcopus tempore oblationis
Sacramenti; and so come to a trial of it.

The eighteenth Chapter. Refusing the shifts used by Mr. Mason, and Doctor
Heylin to evade this inference.
MAster Mason puts this for our Question, l. 3. c. 11. n. 6.
Quae ratio dilatae Sententiae? (whereas that, is not our question, but this,
Why did not Horn join issue? etc.) and, to avoid the true one, gives other
reasons for it; but very frivolous ones, as will appear by the Answers.

1. Reas. Bonner's Counsel, though they pleaded Horn was no Bishop; yet (for
ought appears by Dyar) they gave no reason for it. It seems therefore that the
Judges allowed them longer time, to produce their reasons, that so the dignity
of the Bishops might shine more clear.

Ans. Doctor Heylin says, Bonners Council did give their reason, p. 2. f. 173.
viz. that the Form of Edw. 6. had been repealed by Q. Mary, and so remained at
Horn 's pretended Consecration. But I suppose it a mistake of his, for it is
not the use, in the entering of a Plea, to give a reason of it, for that is to
be shown and pleaded at the hearing; which this cause never came to. And
therefore that could be no reason of the delay of sentence.

2. Reas. Other Jurors were to be warned out of Surrey, before sentence could be
given.

Ans. It was not time to warn Jurors, before Issue joined, which this never was.
And when they were to be warned, it was but out of Southwark; which might have
been against the next term: and so could be no reason, why sentence was
delayed, two years, or near upon, as it was betwixt this pleading at Sergeants
Inn, and the Session of 8. Eliz.

3. Reas. Whilst the Suit was depending, which began 7. Eliz. a Parliament was
held, 8. Eliz. in which all suits depending for refusal of the Oath of
Supremacy, were dissolved.

Ans. He is out in his reckoning. For Horn (thirsting after Bonners ruin, who
it is thought was the man chiefly aimed at in that Act) began the Suit soon
after that Act of 5. Eliz. and procured him to be Indicted, and Bonner demurred
to it; which (as Doctor Heylin says) being put off from Term to Term, came at
last to be debated among the Judges at Sergeants Inn; which was in Michaelmas
Term, which began in 6. Eliz.: betwixt which and the Parliament, was two years
or near upon. So that Act could be no reason why it was delayed all that time,
after the Judges had made that Rule for the Issue and trial of it.

Doctor Heylin therefore gives another reason for it, and I believe the true
one, p. 2. f. 173.
viz. that it was advised (which he must mean,) by the Judges, to Horn, for it
was not in the power of Bonner, being Defendant, to refer it,) that the
decision of the point should rather be referred to the following Parliament.
And of this advice, he gives this reason, for fear such a weighty matter might
miscarry by a contrary Jury.

Ans. But this could be no reason: because the Decision of the point in Law,
upon which rested the whole difficulty, and which alone could be referred to
the decision of the Parliament, ( viz. whether the Form of Edw. 6. were Legal;
or, whether one Consecrated by that Form, were a Bishop,) was not to be put to
the Jury, but to be determined by the Judges, and the Jury to try only the
matter of fact, whether he were so Consecrated. If therefore the Judges had
delivered it for Law, that Horn, if so Consecrated, was a Bishop, and he could
have proved he was so Consecrated (as was easy, for him to do, if the Records
be true,) the Jury must have found him a Bishop, or incurred an attaint, which
there was no reason to fear they would do, in such a cause as that, where the
Queen was Plaintiff, a Protestant Bishop (and their neighbor, and Landlord to
most of them, being Southwark men) the Prosecutour, all the Bishops and Clergy
in the land, (made by the new Form,) extremely interested in the verdict, and
only a Papist, generally hated, and deprived of all Office and power in the
State, and then a prisoner, the Defendant. And that which he adds to color
his reason, [ That there had been some proof made before, of the partiallity or
insufficiency of a Jury, touching grants made by King Edwards Bishops:] if
meant of Juries in Queen Mary's time, was no reason in Queen Elizabeth's: and if
meant in Her time, helps to confirm what I say, that before 8. Eliz. neither
Judges, nor Juries, could find King Edwards Bishops were legal Bishops. The
true reason therefore why the Judges advised Horn to refer his Cause to the
Parliament, can be no other then this, as I say, that they found an Act of
Parliament was necessary to make him a Bishop.

The nineteenth Chapter. Urging the second inference, for the opinion of the
Parliament.
MY second inference is, that the Parliament 8. Eliz. were not of opinion that
Horn was a legal Bishop. For if they had:

1. They would not have revived the Act of Edw. 6. for the Form of Ordination:
for that implied, it was not revived before: and if not, they could be no legal
Bishops.

2. They would have made no Law in the Case, but left it to a judgment of the
Court, or only given a Sentence in it themselves.

3. If they would make a Law for it: yet 1. They would not have enacted them to
be Bishops, but only declared that they were so. 2. Nor would they have said
as they do [Be it declared and enacted, that all things heretofore done, in or
about the Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, be, and shall be, by
Authority of this Parliament, at, and from every of the several times of doing
thereof, good and perfect, any matter or thing that can or may be objected to
the contrary notwithstanding;] which, except meant of the making them so to be,
by virtue of that Act, would be mere nonsense and contradiction: but thus, [
All things heretofore done, etc. were in very deed, at and from every of the
several times of doing thereof, good, without authority of this Act, and any
matter or thing to be objected to the contrary.] 3. Nor would they have said as
they do, [ All that have been Consecrated Archbishops, etc. since her Majesty's
Reign, be in very deed, and also by authority hereof, declared, and enacted to
be, and shall be, Archbishops, and Bishops, and rightly Consecrated, any Law,
Canon, or other thing to the contrary notwithstanding;] which, except as before,
would be another strange medley of nonsense and contradictions, (which
ambiguous language they were driven to, out of a desire to use some words for
the honor of the Bishops, as if Bishops before, and of a necessity to use
other, for the creating them such then:) but they would have said, in plain and
good English, which would have put the matter out of question [All that have
been Consecrated, were in very deed, at and from every of the several times of
their Consecrations, Archbishops, and Bishops, and rightly Consecrated,
according to Law.]

4. Nor would they have recited (as they do) at large, the Supreme Authority
given to the Queen, by 1. Eliz. To assign and authorize such persons as she
should think meet, to exercise under Her all manner of Spiritual Jurisdiction,
and thereupon inferred. [ So that to all that will well consider of the effect
and true intent of the said Statutes, and of the Supreme and absolute authority
of the Queen (to make Bishops, by Her Commission only, with, or without any
Legal Form of Consecration, or with, or without any Bishops for the
Consecraters,) and which she by her said Letters Pattents has used, in, and
about their Consecration, (by supplying to them all defects, either in the Form
they should use, or in the faculty, state, or condition of the Consecraters,
whether Bishops or not Bishops) it is and may be evident that no cause of
scruple can or may be objected against their Consecrations; for this grounds
the Legality, both of the Form, and of the Consecraters, not upon the things in
their own nature, but upon the authority of the Queens Commission, which
supplied to them all defects in Law: but they would have said plainly, and
without praying any such aid from the Queens Supremacy, [ They were Consecrated
by Legal Bishops, and by a Legal Form; or the Form of Edw. 6. was a Legal Form,
or was revived by 1. Eliz. etc.] seeing that was the only exception against
the Form of their Consecrations.

5. Nor, least of all, after Bonner had put in a plea so insolent, and
reproachful to the Queen, Her Bishops, and their whole Clergy and Church, and
(if Horn had been a Bishop) had incurred a Praemunire for refusing the Oath of
Supremacy; and when the acquittal of him, and of all other refractory refusers
of the Oath, before the last day of that Session, (when there was no other
exception to the Certificates, but this, that they that made them were no
Bishops,) and this, without, and before any petition exhibited, or submission
promised, on the Delinquents part, would, in the interpretation of all
indifferent men, redound notably to the justifying of Bonner's plea, and
consequently, to the infamy of their whole Clergy, and Church: I say, all this
considered, they would never have made such Proviso's, for the indemnity of
Bonner and the other Delinquents, if they could have found Horn a Legal Bishop.

The twentieth Chapter. Refuting the shifts devised to evade this inference.
l. 3. c. 11. n. 7.
MAster Mason, says, This annulling of Horn 's Certificate, does not argue
Bonner 's innocence, or any Defect in Horn 's being a Bishop, but only the
great favor and indulgence of the Parliament. For (says he) first they
cleared our Bishops from the calumny of their adversaries, and then graciously
pardoned Bonner and his fellows, that had so impudently flown upon the Bishops,
for offering the Oath to them. For they hoped it would come to pass, that they
who out of ignorance, or malice, had always before that been snarling at their
Consecrations, would at length be wise.

Refut. 1. They did not first clear their Bishops (as is showed before.) 2. Nor
did they pardon Bonner and his fellows, but annul the process. 3. That Act was
so far from showing the Catholics their error touching the nullity of their
Bishops, as it served rather to confirm them in it. 4. I cannot think Master
Mason was so simple, as either to believe it himself, or hope to persuade it to
any reasonable man, either that the Parliament had any such hope of Bonner and
his fellows, or if they had, that that hope should move them to show such
favor to men that had so impudently flown upon their Bishops, only for
offering an Oath to them, which the Law authorized them to do: or if they did,
that they would not have intimated that to have been the reason of their
favor, (thereby to prevent the adversaries misconstruction of it,) nor have
limited that favor to such who should at length be wise, and not snarl any
more at their Consecrations; nor have appointed sentence to be first given for
their being Bishops, and then the Delinquents to have their pardons upon suing
out, but wholly annul the Indictments, and all Certificates of their Bishops.

Doctor Heylin, says, par. 2. fol. 174.
This favor was indulged, to them of the Laiety, in hope of gaining them by
fair means, to a sense of their duty; to Bonner, and the rest of the Bishops,
as men that had sufficiently suffered upon that account, by the loss of their
Bishoprics.

Refut. But 1. no favor could be intended to them of the Laiety, because the
Act (of 5. Eliz.) authorized not the tendering of the Oath to any but
Ecclesiastical persons.

2. The favor was indulged, not to deprived Bishops only, but to all Deans,
Archdeacons, Prebends, Parsons, Vicars, etc. and to them that had yet perhaps
lost nothing, as well as to them that had.

3. As soon as their Bishops should be Legal (that is, presently after that
Session,) the penalty of that Law was to be inflicted on all alike, as well the
deprived Bishops, as any other.

Doctor Bramhal therefore gives a more likely reason of those Proviso's, viz.
the ambiguity of the Act of 1: Eliz. whether it had revived the Book of
Ordination, page 99.
or not. [ Although (says he) the Case was so evident, and was so judged by
the Parliament, that the Form of Consecration was comprehended under the name
and notion of the Book of Common Prayer: yet in the Indictment against Bonner,
I commend the discretion of our Judges, and much more the moderation of the
Parliament. Criminal Laws should be written with a beam of the Sun, without all
ambiguity.]

Refut. But neither will this reason hold water. For 1. the Case was not
evident, that the Book of Ordination was revived with the Liturgy as a part of
it, but rather evident it was not (for the reasons given supra.] 2. The Case
was not so judged by the Parliament, but rather the contrary (as is showed
supra.) 3. How could the Case be evident, and yet Ambiguous? (as he says
both.) 4. Had it been mere moderation of the Parliament, by reason of the
ambiguity of the Law; they might, and no doubt would have intimated as much and
(considering the conjuncture of things) have found out some other way of
showing that moderation (as by pardoning the Delinquents, etc.) then by
annulling the Indictment, after such a plea entered by Bonner, that Horn was no
Bishop: for this could signify no less then an acknowledging of the Plea.

The one and twentieth Chapter. Proving the second part of the reasor, that it
was not revived then.
THe second part of my reason, that the Act of Edw. 6. for the Book of
Ordination was not revived by 8. Eliz. is proved: because the Act of Queen Mary
for repeal of it, was never yet repealed: and so being then in force, was an
obstacle to the Legal reviving of King Edwards Act: because two repugnant Laws,
(as those were) cannot be both in force: and the Act of Q. Eliz. being the
latter, could not be in force, till the other were repealed.

If it be said, Queen Mary's Form was repealed virtually, and in the intention
of the Lawmakers, by authorizing another. 1. This is not sufficient, because an
Act of Parliament is not legally repealed but by express words. 2. Grant it
were sufficient: yet Queen Mary's Form was not repealed, so much as virtually;
because a Law cannot be abrogated, but by as great an authority as made it;
which this was not: because Queen Mary's Act was made by a full Parliament, or
by all the three Estates, ( Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons,) whereas
the repeal was but by two thirds of the Parliament, or by two Estates only,
(the Lords Temporal and Commons;) those that then sat upon the Bishops Bench
in the Lords House, being no Bishops (as is proved supra,) and all the
Catholic Bishops then living, (which were the rightful Bishops) being, by
unjust force, hindered from being present, and dissenting to what was done. I
say, by unjust force: because neither were they deprived by any judicial
sentence, (whence it was found needful afterward to make their deprivations
good, by a Law, 39. Eliz. 1.) nor was that Act of 1. Eliz. which enacted the
Oath of Supremacy, and involved the refusers of it in a Praemunire, by virtue
whereof they were by force put out of their Bishoprics, and kept in prison, a
Legal Act, for reasons given infra.

If it be said, the authority of the two Estates (if they were no more) was as
great formally, as of all the three; because the Bishops are no essential part
of the Parliament. 1. This is said gratis, for they are, and (when no violence
has been on foot against them) ever have been counted, an essential part. And
this Parliament now in being, seems to acknowledge as much, when speaking of
the Act of the Long Parliament for abolishing the Bishops Jurisdiction, 13.
Car. 2.2.
they say, it contained diverse alterations prejudicial to the constitution, and
ancient rights of Parliament, and contrary to the Laws of the Land: meaning
principally the excluding them from their Votes in Parliament; and so thereby
implying, that they were a constitutive part of the Parliament, by ancient
Right, and the Law of the Land. 2. Granting (as it may be true, in case of
necessity, as now, when there are no Bishops in the Land) that they were no
necessary part absolutely or as to all affairs, namely, not as to the making of
Civil Laws, or which should concern the Subjects in common: yet certainly in
Acts that purely concern Religion, and the Clergy in particular, it must be
said in reason, they are an essential part: because they alone are to be
supposed knowing in Gods Law; and they being so considerable a part of the
Nation, cannot be concluded by the Laws there made, unless they have some to
represent them, and interpose in their behalf; which they have none there but
the Bishops. And so for this reason, this act of 8. Eliz. for authorizing the
Form of Consecrating Bishops, and the first and second Acts of 1. Eliz. for
enacting the Oath of Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, making it treasonable
to take Orders from the Sea of Rome, establishing the Form of public Divine
Service and Sacraments, etc. and all other that have been made since, in
matters of Religion, are no valid Acts in Law; because made without consent of
the Lords Spiritual; the rightful Bishops at that time, (whilst there were any
living) being unjustly excluded from the Parliament; and none of those that
have been made since the beginning of Queen Eliz. Reign, being Legal Bishops.

Epilogue.
ANd now the Reader may judge how little reason Doctor Heylin had to boast, (as
he does) of his Church, as it was settled by Q Eliz. and to bestow so much
pains in writing that Book to describe that settlement. And now we may behold
(says he) the face of the Church of England, as it was first settled and
established under Q. Eliz. The Government of the Church, by Archbishops, and
Bishops, etc. These Bishops nominated and elected according to the Statute of
20. Hen. 8. and Consecrated by the Ordinal confirmed by Parliament, 5 and 6.
Edw. 6, etc. the Doctrine of the Church, reduced into its ancient purity,
according to the Articles agreed upon in Convocation, in the Year 1562. and
ratified in due form of Law, by the Queens authority. The Liturgy, confirmed in
Parliament And a little after. "[By this last Act (of 8. Eliz.) the Church (of
England) is strongly settled on Her natural Pillars of Doctrine, Government,
and Worship, not otherwise to have been shaken but by the blind zeal of such
furious Sampsons as were resolved to pull it on their own heads, rather then to
suffer it to stand in so much glory.] Eccl. Restau. p. 2. f. 122. and 173.

For, what was this glorious Church of his, but a natural Fabric, reared upon
(as he calls them) natural Pillars, and the foundations of those Pillars,
natural foundations, the Queen, and Parliament; and that Parliament without any
Bishops, or so much as one Clergyman in it? Whence this glorious Church, as it
has been once already overturned to the ground, and (as he acknowledges, and
complains) the very foundations of it dug up, by those furious Sampsons; so
it may be at any time again, when a Presbyterian or Fanatic Parliament or
Army, shall get (which God avert) the Sword again into their hands.

FINIS.
Appendix.
For the better understanding of the former Discourse, I have here set down
some Extracts out of the ancient forms of Ordaining Bishops, in the Greek and
Latin Church: and out of the Acts of Parliament quoted in the third Part; and
the Act of 8. Eliz. at large.

Forms of the Greek Church.
UNus ex primis Episcopis, S. Clem. Constable.
una cum duobus aliis stans prope Altar, reliquis Episcopis and Presbyteris
tacit precationem facientibus, and Diaconis aperta Evangelia super caput ejus
qui Ordinatur tenentibus, in hunc modum precetur. Here Domine Deus omnipotens,
etc. Da huic famulo tuo quem ad Episcopatum elegisti, ut pascat sanctum gregem
tuum, atque ut Pontificatu tibi sancte fungatur, etc. Da ei participationem
Sancti Spiritus, ut habeat potestatem remittendi peccata secundum mandatum
tuum; item dandi cleros, ut tu jussisti, ac solvendi omne vinculum secundum
potestatem quam Apostolis dedisti, and offerendi tibi sacrificium mundum and
incruentum quod per Christum instituisti, etc.

S. Dionys. Areop. de Eccl. Hier. c. 5.
Pontifex qui ad Consecrationem in Pontificem adducitur, utroque genu flexo ante
Altar, supra caput habet Evangelia, manumque Pontificis: atque hoc modo ab eo
Pontifice qui eum Consecrat, sanctissimis precationibus Consecratur.

MS. antitiquus in Bibl. Card. Barberini.
Aperiens Episcopus Evangelium, imponit illud super caput and collum ipsius
Ordinandi, astantibus aliis Episcopis, and tangentibus ipsum S. Evangelium,
Archiepiscopus autem imponens illi manum, sic precatur. Here, Domine Deus
noster, confirma hunc electum, ut per manum mei peccatoris, and assistentium
Ministrorum and Coepiscoporum, Sanctique Spiritus adventu, virtute, and
gratia., subeat Evangelicum jugum, and dignitatem Episcopalem, etc.

Eucholog. Constantinopolit. Ecclesiae.
Evangelium accipit Praesul, and imponit illud super dorsum illius qui
Ordinatur, and omnes Episcopi qui illic sunt, imponunt manus super illum ex
utroque latere, donec omnes preces absolutae fuerint. Repetit Praesul, Domine
Deus, elige in Ecclesia tua N. hunc N. Presbyterum, in opus magnum Episcopatus.
Precemur omnes pro eo, ut veniat donum tuum Domine, and eum virtute perficiat,
and consummet in ministerio Episcopali. Indue eum Domine virtute ex alto, ut
liget and solvat in coelis and in terra, and creet in virtute doni tui
Presbyteros and Diaconos, etc.

Forms of the Latin Church.
Episcopus cum Ordinatur, MS. Paris. scriptus ante annum, 560.
duo Episcopi manus eorum super caput ejus ponant, and teneant Evangeliorum
codicem supra cervicem ejus. Et unum super eum fundentem benedictionem, reliqui
omnes Episcopi qui adsunt, manibus suis supra caput ejus teneant.

Oration, and precis de Episcopis Ordinandis.
Oremus, dilectissimi nobis, ut his viris ad utilitatem Ecclesiae providendis,
benignitas omnipotentis Dei gratiae suae tribuat largitatem. Per, etc.

Exaudi, Domine, supplicum preces, ut quod nostrum gerendum est ministerium,
tua potius virtute firmetur. Per, etc.

Propitiare Domine supplicationibus nostris, and inclinatus super hos famulos
tuos cornu gratiae Sacerdotalis, benedictionis tuae in eos effunde virtutem.
Per, etc.

Consecratio.

Deus honorum omnium, etc. qui Moysen famulum tuum, inter caetera coelestis
documenta culturae, de habitu quoque indumenti Sacerdotalis instituens, electum
Aaron mystico amictu vestire inter sacra jussisti, ut intelligentiae sensum de
exemplis priorum caperet secutura posteritas, etc. Et id circo, famulis tuis,
quaesumus, quos ad Summi Sacerdotii Sacerdotium elegisti, hanc quaesumus Domine
gratiam largiaris, ut quicquid illa velamina, in fulgore auri, in nitore
gemmarum, and multimodi operis varietate signabant, hoc in horum moribus
clarescat. Comple, Domine, in Sacerdotibus tuis mysterii tui summam, and
ornamentis totius glorificationis instructum, coelestis unguenti rore
sanctifica. Hoc Domine copiose in eorum caput influat, hoc in oris subjecta
decurrat, hoc in totius corporis extrema descendat, etc. Da eis Domine claves
regni coelorum: quodcunque ligaverint super terram, sit ligatum and in
coelis;..... Tribuas eis Domine Cathedram Episcopalem ad regendam Ecclesiam
tuam, and plebem universam. Sis eis authoritas, sis eis potestas, etc.

Benedictiones super eos qui sacris Ordinationibus benedicendi sunt.
Sacramentarium Gelasianum. MS. post priorom antiquissimus.


Oration ad Ordinandos Episcopos Oremus dilectissimi, etc. ut supra. Benedictio
Episcoporum. Adesto supplicationibus nostris, omnipotens Deus, and quod
humilitatis nostrae gerendum est ministerio, virtutis tuae impleatur effectu.
Alia. Propitiare Domine supplicationibus nostris, and inclinato super hunc
famulum tuum cornu gratiae Sacerdotalis, etc. Consecratio. Deus honorum omnium,
etc. ut supra...... coelestis unguenti flore sanctifica. (Hic mittatur Chrisma
super Caput ejus) Hoc Domine copiose, etc. ut supra.

Incipit Ordinatio Episcopi. MS. Ecclesiae Rotomagensis, scriptus circa ann
900. in, and pro Anglia.
Episcopum qui Ordinandus est duo Episcopi per manus de Secretario, antequam
Evangelium legatur, deducant ante Altar, and eo inibi prosternato, ab
Archiepiscopo inchoetur Letania: qua finita, and eo erecto, ponatur Evangelium
super scapulas ejus, and has dicant Episcopi super eum orationes. Oremus
dilectissimi, etc. ut supra. Alia. Adesto Domine, etc. ut supra. Alia.
Propitiare Domine, etc. ut supra. Solus vero Archiepiscopus hanc dicat
Consecrationem, caeteris astantibus, and duobus Episcopis Evangelium super
ipsum qui Ordinandus est tenentibus. Deus honorum omnium, etc. ut supra, rore
sanctifica. (Hic mittatur Chrisma) etc. Item alia super Episcopum. Pater
sancte, etc. ut per te, in summum ad quod assumitur Sacerdotium Consecretur,
etc......Consecratio manuum Episcopi oleo sancto and Chrismate. Hic mittatur
Oleum super caput ejus. [ Vngatur and Consecretur caput tuum in coelesti
benedictione, in Ordinem Pontificalem. In nomine Patris, etc.]

MS. in Monast. S. Germani, in Suburb. Paris. scrip. ante ann. 950.
Finita Letania, duo Episcopi tenentes librum Evangelii super scapulas;
Archiepiscopus benedicat eum. Adesto Domine, etc. ut sup. Alia. Propitiare
Domino, etc. ut sup. Consecratio, ab Archiepiscopo solo dicenda. Deus honorum
omnium, etc.

MS. in Bibliotheca Canonic. Regular. S. Victoris in Suburb. Paris. circa ann.
1100.
Duo Episcopi ponant and teneant textum Evangelii apertum super caput ejus: and
D. Metropolitanus infundens Benedictionem super eum, dicat, lenta voce, Oremus
dilectissimi, etc. Sequitur Benedictio. Propitiare Domine, etc. Prefatio. Deus
honorum omnium, etc. ut supra.

Acts of Parliament. 25. H. 8.20.
IF the person be elected to the office of an Archbishop, the King shall by his
Letters Patents signify the said election to one Archbishop and two other
Bishops, or else to four Bishops to be assigned by the King, requiring and
commanding him or them, to confirm the said election, and to invest and
Consecrate the said person so elected, to the office and dignity that he is
elected unto, and to give and use to him such Pall, and all other Benedictions,
and Ceremonies, and things requisite for the same. And every person being
hereafter elected, invested, and Consecrated to the dignity or office of any
Archbishop or Bishop, according to the tenor of this Act, shall and may be
authorized and installed, etc. and shall and may do and execute in every thing
and things touching the same, as any Archbishop or Bishop of this Realm
(without offending the prerogative Royal of the Crown, and the Laws and Customs
of this Realm) might at any time heretofore do.

5. and 6. Edw. 6. 1. An Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, and
Administration of the Sacraments.
WHereas there has been a godly order set forth by authority of Parliament,
for Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, etc. the King has by
the authority of the Lords and Commons in this Parliament assembled, caused the
aforesaid order of Common Service, entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, to be
explained and made perfect; and by the aforesaid authority, has annexed and
joined it so explained and perfected, to this present Statute, adding also a
form and manner of making and Consecrating of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons, to be of like force, authority, and value, as the same like
foresaid Book of Common Prayer was before, etc. If any shall wittingly hear and
be present at any other manner or form of Common Prayer, of administration of
Sacraments, of making Ministers in the Churches, or of any other Rites
contained in the Book annexed to this Act, then is mentioned and set forth in
the said Book, etc.

1. Eliz. 2. That there shall be Uniformity of Prayer, and Administration of
Sacraments.
WHereas at the death of our late Sovereign Lord King Edw. 6. there remained
one uniform order of Common Service and Prayer, and of the administration of
Sacraments, Rites, and Ceremonies in the Church of England, which was set forth
in one Book, entitled, The Book of Common Prayer and Administration of
Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England, authorized
by Act of Parliament, holden in the 5. and 6. years of our said late
Sovereigne, entitled, An Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, and
Administration of the Sacraments, the which was repealed by Act of Parliament
in the first year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Queen Mary, to the great
decay of the due honor of God, and discomfort to the Professors of the truth
of Christ's Religion: Be it therefore enacted, etc. that the said Estatute of
Repeal, and every thing therein contained, only concerning the said Book, and
the Service, Administration of the Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies contained
or appointed in or by the said Book, shall be void and of none effect. And that
the said Book, with the order of Service, and of the Administration of
Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies, with the alterations and additions therein
added and appointed by the Estatute, shall stand and be in full force, etc.

8. Eliz. 1. All Acts made by any person since 1. Eliz. for the Consecrating,
Investing etc. of any Archbishop or Bishop, shall be good.
FOrasmuch as diverse questions by overmuch boldness of speech and talk amongst
many of the common sort of people, has lately grown upon the making and
Consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops within this Realm, whether the same
were and be duly and orderly done according to the Law or not, which is much
tending to the slander of all the state of the Clergy, being one of the
greatest States of this Realm: Therefore for the avoiding of such slanderous
speech, and to the end that every man that is willing to know the truth, may
plainly understand that the same evil speech and talk is not grounded upon any
just matter or cause, It is thought convenient hereby, partly to touch such
authorities as do allow and approve the making and Consecrating of the same
Archbishops and Bishops, to be duly and orderly done, according to the Laws of
this Realm; and thereupon further to provide for the more surety thereof, as
hereafter shall be expressed.

First, it is very well known to all degrees of this Realm, that the late King,
of most famous memory, K. Henry 8. as well by all the Clergy then of this
Realm, in their several Convocations, as also by all the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons, in diverse of his Parliaments, was justly and rightfully
recognized and knowledged to have the supreme Power, Jurisdiction, Order, Rule
and Authority over all the State Ecclesiastical of the same; and the same
power, jurisdiction and authority did use accordingly. And that also the said
late King, in the Five and twentieth year of his Reign, did by authority of
Parliament, amongst other things, set forth a certain Order of the manner and
form how Archbishops and Bishops should be elected and made, as by the same
more plainly appears. And that also the late King of worthy memory King Edward
the Sixth, did lawfully succeed his Father in the Imperial Crown of this Realm,
and did justly possess and enjoy all the same power, jurisdiction, and
authority before mentioned, as a thing to him descended with the said Imperial
Crown, and so used the same during his life. And that also the said King Edw.
6. in his time, by authority of Parliament caused a godly Book, entitled, The
Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and
Ceremonies in the Church of England, to be made and set forth, not only for
one Uniform Order of Service, Common Prayer, and Administration of the
Sacraments to be used within this Realm, and other his Dominions, but also did
add and put to the same Book a very good and godly Order of the manner and
form how Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Ministers should from time
to time be Consecrated, made, and Ordered, within this Realm, and other his
Dominions, as by the same Book more plainly may and will appear.

And although in the time of the said late Queen Mary, as well the said Act and
Statute, made in the five and twentieth year of the Reign of the said late King
Hen. 8. as also the several Acts and Statutes made in the 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6.
years of the Reign of the said late King Edward, for the authorizing and
allowing the said Book of Common Prayer, and other the premises, amongst diverse
other Acts and Statutes touching the said supreme authority, were repealed; yet
nevertheless at the Parliament holden at Westminster in the first year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty that now is, by one other Act
and Statute there made, all such Jurisdictions, Privileges, Superiorities, and
Preeminences Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical power or authority has heretofore been, or may lawfully be used
over the Ecclesiastical State of this Realm, and the Order, Reformaxion, and
Correction of the same, is fully and absolutely by the authority of the same
Parliament, united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; and by the
same Act and Statute, there is also given to the Queens Highness, her heirs and
successors Kings and Queens of this Realm, full power and authority, by Letters
Patents under the Great Seal of England, from time to time, to assign, name,
and authorize such person or persons as she or they shall think meet and
convenient, to exercise, use, occupy, and execute, under her Highness, all
manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminences, and Authorities, in any
wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or
Jurisdiction within this Realm or any other her Dominions or Countries.

And also by the same Act and Statute, the said Act made in the Five and
twentieth year of the said late King Hen. 8. for the order and form of the
electing and making of the said Archbishops and Bishops, together with diverse
other Statutes touching the Jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical, is
revived, and made in full force and effect, as by the same Act and Statute
plainly appears.

And that also by another Act and Statute made in the said Parliament in the
first year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Queen, entitled, An Act for the
Uniformity of Common Prayer and Service in the Church; the said Book of Common
Prayer, and the Administration of Sacraments, and other the said Orders, Rites,
and Ceremonies before mentioned, and all things therein contained, with certain
Additions therein newly added and appointed by the said Statute, is fully
stablished and authorized, to be used in all places within this Realm, and all
other the Queens Majesty's Dominions and Countries, as by the same Act among
other things more plainly appears.

Whereupon our said Sovereign Lady the Queens most excellent Majesty, being
most justly and lawfully invested, and having in her Majesty's order and
disposition, all the said Jurisdictions, Power, and Authorities, over the State
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, as well in cases Ecclesiastical as Temporal,
within this Realm and other her Majesty's Dominions and Countries, has by her
Supreme Authority, at diverse times sithence the beginning of her Majesty's
Reign, caused diverse grave and well learned men to be duly Elected, Made, and
Consecrated Archbishops and Bishops of diverse Archbishopricks and Bishoprics
within this Realm, and other her Majesty's Dominions and Countries, according
to such Order and Form, and with such Ceremonies in and about their
Consecration as were allowed and set forth by the said Acts, Statutes, and
Orders annexed to the said Book of Common Prayer before mentioned. And further
for the avoiding of all ambiguities and questions that might be objected
against the lawful Confirmations, Investing, and Consecrating of the said
Archbishops and Bishops, her Highness in her Letters Patents under the great
Seal of England, directed to any Archbishop, Bishop, or others for the
Confirming, Investing, and Consecrating of any person elected to the Office or
Dignity of any Archbishop or Bishop, has not only used such words and
sentences as were accustomed to be used by the said late King Henry and K. Edw.
her Majesty's Father and Brother, in their like Letters Patents made for such
causes: but also has used and put in her Majesty's said Letters Patents diverse
other general words and sentences whereby her Highness by her Supreme Power and
Authority, has dispensed with all causes or doubts of any imperfection or
disability that can or may in any wise be objected against the same, as by her
Majesty's said Letters Patents remaining of Record, more plainly will appear.
So that to all those that will well consider of the effect and true intent of
the said Laws and Statutes, and of the Supreme and absolute authority of the
Queens Highness, and which she by her Majesty's said Letters Patents, has used
and put in ure in and about the making and Consecrating of the said Archbishops
and Bishops, it is and may be very evident, that no cause of scruple,
ambiguity, or doubt, can or may justly be objected against the said Elections,
Confirmations, or Consecrations, or any other material thing meet to be used or
had in or about the same; but that every thing requisite and material for that
purpose has been made and done, as precisely, and with as great a care and
diligence, or rather more, as ever the like was done before her Majesty's time,
as the Records of her Majesty's said Fathers and Brothers time, and also of her
own time, will more plainly testify and declare.

Wherefore for the more plain Declaration of all the premises, and to the
intent that the same may be better known to every of the Queens Majesty's
Subjects, whereby such evil speech as heretofore has been used against the
high State of Prelac^, may hereafter cease: Be it now declared, and enacted,
that the said Act and Statute made in the first Year of the Reign of our said
Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, whereby the said Book of Common Prayer, and
the Administration of Sacraments, with other Rites and Ceremonies, is
authorized and allowed to be used, shall stand and remain good and perfect to
all respects and purposes.

And that such Order and Form for the Consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops,
and for the making of Priests, Deacons, and Ministers, as was set forth in the
time of the said late King Edw. 6. and added to the said Book of Common Prayer,
and authorized by Parliament in the 5. and 6. Year of the said late King, shall
stand and be in full force and effect, and shall from henceforth be used and
observed, in all places within this Realm, and other the Queens Majesty's
Dominions and Countries.

And that all Acts and things heretofore had, made, or done, by any person or
persons, in or about any Consecration, Confirmation, or Investing of any person
or persons elected to the Office or Dignity of any Archbishop or Bishop within
this Realm, or within any other her Majesty's Dominions or Countries, by virtue
of the Queens Majesty's Letters Patents or Commission, sithence the beginning
of her Reign, be, and shall be, by authority of this present Parliament,
declared, judged, and deemed, at and from every of the several times of the
doing thereof, good and perfect to all respects and purposes, any matter or
thing that can or may be objected to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

And that all persons that have been or shall be made, Ordered, or Consecrated,
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Ministers of Gods holy Word and Sacraments, or
Deacons, after the Form and Order prescribed in the said Order and Form how
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, add Ministers, should be Consecrated,
Made, and Ordered be in very deed, and also by authority hereof, declared, and
enacted to be, and shall be Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and
Ministers, and rightly Made, Ordered, and Consecrated, any Statute, Law, Canon,
or other thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and nevertheless be it enacted hy the authority aforesaid,
that no person or persons shall at any time hereafter be impeached, or
molested, in body, lands, lives, or goods, by occasion, or mean of any
Certificate, by any Archbishop, or Bishop, heretofore made, or before the last
day of this Session of Parliament, to be made, by virtue of any Act made in the
first Session of this present Parliament, touching or concerning the refusal of
the Oath, declared and set forth by Act of Parliament in the first Year of the
Reign of our said Sovereign Lady Q. Elizabeth, any thing in this Act, or any
other Act or Statute heretofore made, to the contrary notwithstanding.

And that all tenders of the said Oath, made by any Archbishop, or Bishop
aforesaid, or before the last day of this present Session, to be made, by
authority of any Act established in the first Session of this present
Parliament, and all refusals of the same Oath so tendered, or before the last
day of this Session, to be tendered, by any Archbishop or Bishop, by authority
of any Act established in the first Session of this present Parliament, shall
be void and of none effect or validity in the Law.

FINIS.
Since the Printing of this, they have acknowledged the justness of our
Exception to their Forms, by amending them in their New Book, authorized by the
late Act for Uniformity: the Form of Ordaining a Bishop, thus, [Receive the
Holy Ghost, for the Office and Work of a Bishop, etc. In the name of the
Father, etc.] the Form of Ordaining a Priest, thus, [Receive the Holy Ghost,
for the Office of a Priest, etc.] But this comes too late for the past
Ordinations, and consequently also for the future; because being no Bishops
now, they cannot Ordain validly by (...) Form whatsoever.

Page 79. line 8. etc. dele these words, making it treasonable to take Orders
from the Sea of Rome.

Page ead. lin. 15. after the word, Spiritual, insert these words, all the
Bishops then present in Parliament, dissenting to those two Acts of 1. Eliz.
and in the ensuing Parliaments.

Page 80. lin. 5. for 20. read 25.

Page 87. lin. 22. for, authorized, read inthronized.

Page 90. lin. 26. for, the, read, this.


