A LETTER TO A MEMBER Of this Present PARLIAMENT, FOR LIBERTY OF Conscience.

London, Printed in the Year 1668.

A LETTER For Liberty of CONSCIENCE.
SIR,
I Could heartily wish, that our Condition at present were such, that we might
study and debate how to advance the Glory, Riches and Power of this Nation,
rather then with so much Distraction, labor, how to preserve its Being. But
since the general ill Conduct of our Affairs under the late Chancellor and
others, (for whom we ought to retain all due resentments, since they have
reduced us to this necessitous posture.) Let us consider what our present
Exigencies call for from us; and while therein we find a justification for the
most extravagant debates and resolutions, let us continue sensible of their
baseness who created the necessity, with which it is our prudence and
unhappiness to comply.

There have been sundry Overtures and Projects in order to the Uniting of the
minds of the Protestants here in this dangerous juncture of Affairs: I confess
I am apprehensive of the dangers that any great change subjects a Government
unto; I am sensible of the Reputation of the House, which may suffer by
rescinding its own Acts: I have made some reflections upon the parties that may
endanger the Kingdom by their factiousness: I have all just respect for the
National Church of England in its present Constitution; and I shall so order my
Councels, that I deviat not from the Scripture, and the Constitution of God in
the Mosaical Law, the Judgment and Practice of the primitive Fathers, and the
Acts and Constitutions of those Emperors who first modelled Christianity, and
accommodated it to Government, and who reduced the Empire (in circumstances not
much different from ours) to as flourishing a condition, and as peaceable as
ever it enjoyed. As is clear from the Emperor Theodosius surnamed the Great;
and insisted on by Bodin de repub. who recommends the practice as prudential,
and gave the Counsel to Queen Elizab.


In the Kingdom of Israel (that great President for Monarchy, as far as it is
established by the Word of God) where God himself was Lawgiver, and the
Constitution is as unquestionable as his Authority that made it, and the
wisdom of Solomon and some others (no Fools, nor Fanatics) that complied with
it. The Settlement was thus as to Religion. The Jews, and such as were total
Converts or Proselites of Justice, did observe all the Levitical Law, as it is
made up of Ceremonies, and all the Decalogue or Ten Commandments. What the
ceremonial conformity was you all know: and how much of it was performed in the
Temple, in the several places or stations for the Priests, and Laity, Men and
Women? But did this constitution oblige all? Could no man, or number of men
live, and live openly there exempted from this Conformity, and exact Uniformity
to every punctilio? It is undeniable that it was quite otherwise. There were
among the Jews a great number of persons, called prosyliti domicilii, or
strangers not proselytes of justice, that dwelt constantly among them, that
were so far from being concluded by the Mosaical Law, that it was death for
them to observe it. Of this number were many Egyptians that came up with them
into the Holy Land: Such were the Gibeonites, of whose number we may guess by
the bigness of their City: Such were the Canaanites that dwelt in the land,
whose power was such, that they could not be exterminated by the Israelites.
All these strangers (yet constant inhabitants of the Land) were only obliged
to the seven Commandments of Noah, and not to the Ceremonial Law at all. They
worshipped in the same Temple, in a particular apartment, but with different
Ceremonies: the Jews had a Liturgy, these no Form: they had Priests, these
none: the Jews offered variety of Sacrifices and Oblations, these none but
burnt offerings: the one observed the Sabbath, and diverse Holy days, on the
which the other might work, nay, the one worshipped God under several
attributes, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; the other was not obliged
actually to any worship, but negatively not to deny a Deity, or to speak
irreverently or contumeliously of him: and when they did pray, it was only the
owning and worshipping a Creator and Ruler of the world. This is avowed by the
greatest of the Rabbines from the time of Moses, to the time of his writing,
and that is Maimonides: Gentilis qui legem Mosaicam observaret, reus erat
mortis; quippe cui tantum observanda erant septem praecepta Noachidarum seu
omnium hominum communia.
and is at large proved by Mr. Seldom, Jus natural Hebraeorum.
and granted in the whole extent, as I have proposed it, by the learned
Grotius, De Jur. Bell, cap. 1. lib. 1 par. 16.
a man of good credit with all Sons of the Church of England: Of the same mind
are all that write of the Commonwealth of the Jews. As to the observation of
the Sabbath, Proselytos domicilii s^ve eos qui Judaisino nomina nondum dedera
innt, qualecunque vitae commercium intra ditionem Israeliticam admissi, non
modo observatione Sabbati omnino solutes habnere, sed poems gravissimis
obnoxios, si observarent.
(were it not for fear of being prolix) I would particularly illustrate that
point, because it is a Dispensation with a Conformity with one of the Ten
Commandments; which is at large proved too by Mr. Seldom. De Jur. Not. l. 3. c.
12. and the Talmudists say, Israelitae non prohibent abopere Gentile^ in
Sabbato.


It is easy to compare this Liberty of Religion, with ours in England, as it
is contended for, or opposed: and according to judge of the extent of a
Tolleration, how far it may go, how public it may be, how possible, and how
practicable the thing is in it self (for they had no standing Army; and it was
under a Monarchy, and that no despicable one, under Solomon and David) and how
it had God himself for its establisher. I pass by the times under Herod and his
immediate predecessors from Zerobabel down wards, in which, beside the
aforesaid strangers, there were the several Sects of Scribes, Pharisees,
Sadduces, and Herodians, whose Tenets if any shall enquire into, he shall find
them to differ as much as our subdivided Christians and Protestants do: As
Scaliger, Drusus, and Serrarius evidence.
As to the Essenes, it is peculiarly observable that they declined the
Temple-worship, and were the separatists of that age: and yet I must tell you,
this condition of the Jews was not altogether unhappy, and our Savior never
told the Magistrates that it was unlawful, or that it would be the ruin of
the state; which cannot be otherwise then by accident imputed thereunto.

As to the first Christians, while those unerring Guides of the Church
instructed and ruled in the Church, and were as well the foundation of our
Doctrine, as of our Hierarchy: let us take a view of their Establishment. There
were Converts of the Jews, and Converts of the Gentiles, and of the Gentiles
some were Proselytes of the Mosaical Law, others of the profession only of the
Seven Commandments of Noah. The Jews, and such as did Judaise, observed all the
Mosaical Law, as strictly as the Pharisees did; they did circumcise, and pay
their vows and worship in the Temple, and offer Sacrifice, and kept the
Sabbath, and the like: So Origin Judae iqui in Jesum Christum crediderunt, non
desciverunt a patri is legibus; vivunt enim ju^^ta eas contra celsum.
says of those in his days. Nor was this only at Jerusalem, where Judaism
was National, but at Alexandria, and elsewhere, where it was not so: For St.
Jerome About Ecclesiastical Writers.
says, that Philo the Jew observed this at Alexandria: Yet did the other
converted Gentiles, not Judaising, live according to a Christianity superadded
to the Seven Commandments, and consequently differing in form of worship
vastly. It is true, some went about to reduce them all to Uniformity; but who
were they? Some of the Jews (mark that) which believed (in Christ, Some Bibles
only say they were Hharisees.
and yet strictly observed the Mosaical Law,) of the Sect of the Pharisees, (a
Sect so much decry'd by Christ) not the Apostles, and persons spirited by the
Holy Ghost; Paul and Barnabas opposed it. And what character does the Scripture
bestow upon this design of Uniformity? In truth, that they troubled the Church,
Acts 15. And behold the issue of these troubles. The Synod of the Apostles and
others guided by the Holy Ghost, thus decide the Controversy. They do not like
this Uniformity of Worship and Liturgies; for the Jews had a Liturgy. This is
no part of the Visum est spiritui sancto and nobis. No, they oblige them to a
few, and those such as were only necessary. For the Text, however vulgarly
corrupted, and represented to establish Ecclesiastical Decisions as necessary:
yet in our Biblia Polyglotta It is not in the manuscript of our Kings Library,
(...). Beside these subsequent necessary things.
(a candid work of the Bishops of our Church) in a Lection stands corrected
thus: It seems meet to the Holy Ghost and us, not to lay upon you any further
burden, (...), beside what is absolutely necessary: that is (say very learned
Writers) the Seven Precepts of Noah: for who will believe the Holy Ghost
thought it necessary to Salvation, that we neither eat black Puddings, or
Rabbets? That which follows is an illustration, not restriction; forbidding
bloodshed, See Seldom de jure Not. lib. 7. cap. 12. You must note that the
text speaks of things strangled, and blood; but by blood is meant bloodshed;
and things strangled is an addition to the text, as the Fathers observe, and
the Biblia Polyglotta: and the other clause of avoiding that which they would
not have done to them, is in old Copies, and so repeated by Irenaeus and
others; as you may see in the place above in Seldom.
as well as Idolatry, and Fornication: (parts of the Law of Noah) And further
that Holy Synod adds, And whatsoever you would not have done to your selves, do
not that to others; which is a Decision I recommend to you in the like case,
the debate being there as well as here, about Liberty of Conscience. That
Liberty which you would not be deprived of, do not go about to deprive others
of For the precedent words include things necessary: the following therefore
must refer to the point of Ceremonial Conformity.


As to the tolleration under Christian Emperors, I cannot but observe unto you
Sir, That it was the judgment of those primitive times, and every where
discovers it self in the Edicts of the first Christian Emperors, and Fathers,
that Religion is not to be enforced, but that every one should abound in his
own sense, and that all variety not only of Opinions, but diversity of
Religions should be tolerated in the State, if they were not destructive to
Government. In this point Tertullian In his Discourse to Scapula.
is peremptory, and Lactantius; In his Book de Justitia, speaking of supporting
Religion by Cruelty, Oppression and bloodshed, jam non defendetur illa, sed
polluetur et violabitur: Nihil enim est tam voluntarium quam religio.
and agreeable to this is the Speech of Constantine Related by Baronius in his
Annals of the year 324. Inter divina et humana servitia hoc interest, quod
humana servitia coacta sint, divina outem voluntaria comprobentur.
to the Roman Senate; the particular passages I would willingly recite, were
there not, beside protracting this Discourse, a great deal of pedantry in
quoting Latin: And I should be too tedious, should I relate unto you all the
Edicts made to this purpose by the subsequent Emperors, which are Recorded in
the Theodosian Code. No learned Son of the Church of England can deny it; And
Chrysostom is positive, that no Godly Emperor did Enact against the Pagans
any such Laws, as they did against the Christians. No man versed in Antiquity
can deny but that all the Sects of the Christians, the Pagans, and the Jews,
had a full Liberty of Conscience and Religion, without being excluded from
public offices of Trust and Profit in the Senate, Army and Court. So that
these times which our Episcopal Divines so much recommend unto our imitation,
when their Hierachy is concerned, and their Ceremonies, these times do clearly
assert the lawfulness of a General Liberty of Conscience, without subjecting
the several dissenters to any penalties. The Heathen had their Priests, their
Pon^ifices, Augures, Quindecim viros sacris faciundis, Salios, etc. until the
time of Theodosius. Onuphrius descr. arb. tom. lib. 2.
The Arrians had their Bishops; the Novatians their Bishops, and Churches (not
to mention other Sects) in the same Diocesses in which the more orthodox
Bishops had also their jurisdiction, and made up the national religion of the
Roman Empire. The Jews also had their Academies and Patriarchs. From all which
I do conclude, that it is lawful to enact for Liberty of Conscience; and that
such Acts are not inconsistent with Government, nor subject to those
inconveniences many suggest; since such Monarchies have flourished
notwithstanding them: All those conjectures are refuted by the aforesaid
instances. Nor need they trouble themselves to object, that the Roman Empire
had a standing Army to preserve the Peace and Authority of the Empire; seeing
that those of that Army were diversified by their several Religions: and it is
all one not to have any Army at all, or to have one composed indifferently of
the several parties that were to be kept under.

Having thus laid before you the judgment and practice of the best times; it
will not be amiss to reflect upon the several ways and endeavors have been
used toward the uniting the minds of men about Religion.

As to the Popish way of enforcing a general Uniformity, it is so barbarous, so
unchristian, and so generally rejected by Protestants, that I believe you
cannot endure an harangue in the behalf of the inquisition: and to extol the
practices of Queen Mary's days were as absurd, as to write an Encomium for
Phalaris, or Busiris, or Nere.

Another way of Uniting them has been by contriving general forms and ways,
(not much unlike the Device of Comprehension, if I understand it aright) to
which each party might subscribe: but this way God never blessed, but it proved
like the firebrarnds, which (with the cords) united the tails of Sampsons
foxes, while their heads were at distance; and being put into the corn, they
burnt it; as this method has set all Kingdoms on fire. Nor is it Policy; for
instead of abrogating all, it gives a countenance to all opinions it would
extinguish. How little are the controversies ceased between the Dominicans and
Jesuits, since the equivocal Council of Trent, to which they subscribe; and
which both parties allege? So among Protestants, how little are controversies
extinguished by the dubious or general texts of Scripture? nay, are they not
eternised by them? how little does the dubious Creed of the Apostles conduce to
the deciding among Protestants or Socinians?

As to the uniting therefore of men's minds into one Religion, it is impossible;
it is as impossible to make all men's consciences of the same extent and
latitude, as to make all men's shoes of the same size. Different gifts make
different professions: since none is accountable for more then he has
received. The weak are not to condemn the strong; and the strong are to
tolerate, not destroy the weak. This is Gospel. and I hope you will make this
to be Law. Take away the condemning of the one, and the oppression of the
other, and you will establish the Church, rather then destroy it, or the peace
of this Nation. Besides,

I desire you would observe that there is no president of any Liberty of
Conscience granted on penalties: for that unavoidably establishes a faction:
for it is natural for mankind to desire to be at ease, and to wish, and (upon
occasion) to endeavor its redress and relief from any grievance; and it is as
natural for such as reap benefit from the depression of others, to strive to
continue them in that oppressed condition: from hence arises anger, hatred,
malice, and all uncharitableness, and such contention as destroys a State. If a
Kingdom be divided, how can it stand? as all things different are not opposite:
no more is all distinction a factious division, and destructive to the being of
a Government. All you make up one Parliament: personal quarrels may ruin you,
but personal distinctions will not. Contrarieties mutually expel each other out
of the same subject by course of nature, things disparat do not.

Since therefore a Popish Inquisition is barbarous and odious; subscribing to
general forms and opinions dangerous, and ineffectual; uniting men's minds into
one religion impossible; and no liberty granted upon penalties: What other way
is left us to unite, but to allow each Church its several way of worship? which
kind usage with moderate endeavors, and not imposing general opinions, may in
time (as it was of old) so far prevail with them to reconcile the differences
among themselves, that at last they may arrive to a mutual communion, though
not an exact Uniformity. Thus the Millenaries of old, and Fifth Monarchy men
communicated with the other Christians: and so it was with Mr. Mead and the
Church of England: Thus the baptized Christians and the Anabaptists As
Tertullion Nazianzen, the Emperors Constantine and Valentinian.
made up one Church: Thus the Judaising Christians and Gentiles communicated
together; So did the Arrians V. Eusebius.
and Trinitarians. And methinks it is odd, that the Church of England should
suffer our tutelar Saint to be St. George, As Calvin says.
that Arrian Bishop, and yet not allow the communion of any favor to an
Anabaptist, or fifth Monarchist. Such a communion I say, were to be wished, and
the only way we can hope for at present to unite us, is to allow Constantine
and the subsequent Emperors maintained at their charge, the variety of
Religions, Priests and Sacrifices: As there had been at Antioch one Antioch,
one Apostle for the Jews, and another for the Gentiles; so there were
afterward in the same Cities, besides the different Heathen Priests, Bishops
to the Novatians, Arrians, Donatists, and Catholics.
each Church its several way of worship, they maintaining their Ministers: all
reproachful language, and odious consequences imposed upon each party, as well
as odious names, being prohibited: as were the names of Heretic and Scismatick
by Qu. Eliz. This course has succeeded well; for under it Religion grew: and
whilst Religion was no man's Interest, it was scarce any man's Hypocrisy: when
truth had no other recommendations but its naked self, such as embraced it did
it cordially. Nor was it ever demonstrated, or can be, that the use of this
Liberty did directly and necessarily introduce such factions as are
inconsistent with any Government or Monarchy. And if it were only the abuse of
it; let us look to that: since the Church of England so often inculcates to us,
that propter abusum non est tollendus usus: for that were like the forbidding
Aristotle condemns that Paralogism of Anacharsis.
the Scythians to plant wine, because wine might make them drunk. To conclude
all therefore, Let us in our Law be as tender of Men's Consciences, as our
Common Law is of their lives; which takes care rather that a thousand Criminals
should escape, then one innocent be destroyed.

FINIS.

