LICENSED, March 7. 1677/8.

R. L'Estrange.

THE MILITARY DUTIES OF THE Officers of Cavalry, Containing the way of
exercising the HORSE, According to the practice of this present time. The
Motions of Horse, the Functions of the several Officers, from the chief
Captain, to the Brigadeer.

Written Originally in French, by the Sieur De la Fontain, Ingineer in Ordinary
to the most Christian King.

And Translated for the use of those who are desirous to be informed of the Art
of War, as it is practiced in France.

By A. L.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Harford, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhil near
the Royal Exchange, 1678.

To the Right Honorable James Earl of Northampton, Baron Compton of Compton,
Constable of the Tower of London, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
My Lord,
WHen I was told that this Book, as being useful to the public, deserved to
come abroad under such Auspices as might not only render it more acceptable,
but likewise of greater credit and reputation; I found my self directed by the
voice of fame, the only means by which I have the honor to know your Lordship,
to beg your Honors countenance and approbation to this Translation.

No man can be so young, my Lord, or so great a stranger to late Transactions,
as not to know, that the Loyal Family of Northampton, has had as great skill in
the Conduct, as faithfulness and authority in the direction of the affairs of
War; and that your Lordship in particular, though you could claim no advantage
by the right of Inheritance and succession, yet by the experience of your own
industrious labors might justly challenge a Prerogative to instruct, and
outdo the original in the subject that is handled in this Treatise, and by as
good (if not much better) rules of this kind, make it Nefas ab host doceri,
did the assiduities of your great employments give your Lordship the leisure:
yet seeing the design of this Book is to inform the curious of the French
Nation, of the method of War that is at present observed amongst them,
especially in relation to the Horse; and that it cannot be unprofitable for the
English to know more than perhaps as yet they know, of the difference that is
to be found between both Nations; I am bold to believe, your Honor will favor
these few Sheets with a perusal, that by the Character they may receive from
your Lordships Test, as by an infallible Touchstone, they may carry that
signature which ought to decide their public fate, and render them either
fortunate or unhappy with the Reader.

I have no less confidence, my Lord, that the Book cannot be thought guilty of
the presumption of the Translator, seeing it presents your Lordship with a
subject suited to your dignity, and grateful to your genius; and that he can
plead no other excuse for his boldness, but the fame of your goodness and
heroical Virtues: Nevertheless, as all who have had the honor to appear before
your Lordship, depart with no less satisfaction, than those who had the
happiness to stand before that great Emperor who was reputed the delight of
mankind, and who is Celebrated by that Princely Elogy (nemo ex conspectu ejus
tristis discessit;) so he flatters himself with hopes that though he dares not
presume to any worth that may make him known to your Lordship, yet your honor
will pardon his ambition in making himself known to the World by the title of

Right Honorable, Your Lordships Most humble, and obedient Servant, A. LOVELL.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
OF the division of the Troops of Horse. page 1. Of the Officers of the
Gend'arms. p. 2. Of the Officers of the light Horse of Ordinance. p. 3. Of
particular Officers. Ib. How many sorts of Horsemen are in the Cavalry. p. 4.
Of the exercise of Horse. Ib. How a Squadron is to be formed. Ib. How to close
the Files. p. 6. To close the ranks. Ib. To double the ranks and reduce them.
p. 7. Of Counter-marches. p. 9. How conversion is to be performed. Ib. Of
wheeling by Caracol. Ib. Of the Volte-face, or facing about. p. 10. How Horse
are to fire. p. 13. How to fight in a retreat. p. 14.
CHAP. II.
How Horse are to fight against Horse. p. 16. How Horse are to fight against
Foot. p. 17. How Foot are to fight against Foot. p. 19. How Squadrons are to be
detached and formed at the same time. p. 20. How Squadrons are to be formed.
Ib. A regulation made by the late King Lewis XIII. concerning the disputes that
arose among the Officers of the Army in the year 1633. p. 22. How Foot are to
fight against Horse. p. 27.
CHAP. III.
Of the duties of the Officers of Horse; and in the first place of the Captain.
p. 30. Of the principal duties of a Lieutenant. p. 31. Of a march. p. 32. Of
the guard of a Camp. p. 34. Of the duties of the Cornet. Ib. Of the
Quartermaster. p. 36. Of the duty of Brigadeers. p. 43.
CHAP. IV.
Of the guard of a Camp, or Quarter. p. 44. Cautions that are to be taken in
forceing of a Quarter. p. 55. Of the duties of the Horse in a frontier place.
p. 64. Of the duty of a Captain, being in Garrison in a Frontier Town, during
the Campagn. p. 67.
CHAP. V.
Of the Charge of a Sergeant Major. p. 79.
CHAP. VI.
Of the March of an Army. p. 99. Of a Council of War. p. 107. Of cautions to be
taken before an Army be drawn into the Fields. p. 112. Of the march of an Army
in a close and covered Country. p. 119. How an Army made up of Horse and Foot,
is to be encamped. p. 123. Of the continuance of a Siege. p. 128. Of the ravage
that is made about places which are intended to be Besieged. p. 129. Of the
encamping of Horse. p. 135. Of the way of making the lines of Circumvallation
and Contravallation. p. 137. How Attacks and Trenches are to be determined and
ordered. p. 139. Of the carrying on of Trenches. p. 141.
THE Military Duties OF The Officers of HORSE.
CHAP. I. The Division of the Troops of HORSE.
THere are two sorts of Cavalrie, (viz.) la Cavalerie d'Ordonance, the Cavalrie
of Ordinance, and the Light Horse; there are besides, the Troops of the
Gen'd'armes, and the Light Horse of Ordinance, which two make a Body apart, and
are independent of the Colonel of the Cavalrie, and of all other Commanders,
except the Generals: They march in the body of the Army, and Encamp always in
the Kings Quarters, whom they have for Captain and are exempted from the Guards
of Fatigue. The Cavalrie are again divided into two kinds, (viz.) into the
French Light Horse, and the light horse, who are, or pass for strangers. There
are five kinds of Officers in the French Cavalrie, (viz.) the Colonel of the
Cavalrie, the Master de Camp of the Cavalrie, the Commissary General, in their
absence the Commander of the Horse, and the Marshal of Horse.

The Officers of the Light Horse, who are, or pass for strangers, are Colonels,
Lieutenant-Colonels, the first Captains, who are commonly Majors, Lieutenants,
Cornets, and Quarter Masters.

The Officers of the Gend'armes
Are Lieutenants of the Gend'armes, and Sub-lieutenants in the Kings
Gend'armes, Ensigns, Guidons, Quartermasters, first and second Brigadeer. They
never fight but with the General, and are not sent out on parties; I mean they
are not employed to beat the rode.

The Officers of the Light Horse of Ordinance
Are Lieutenants, Cornets, Quartermasters, first and second Brigadeer.

The particular Officers
Are the Master de Camp, the first Captain commanding the Regiment, the
Captains, the Master de Camp's Lieutenant, Major, the Lieutenant, Cornets, the
Aid-major, Quarter Masters, first and second Cavalier or Trooper.

We have besides in our Cavalrie the Kings Musketeers, who attend his Majesty
when they are commanded.

In the Cavalrie then we may observe six sorts of Horsemen.

1. To wit, the Kings Gend'armes. 2. The Guards du Corpse. 3. The Light Horse of
the Kings Guard. 4. The Kings Musketeers. 5. The Cuirasseers. 6. The Dragoons.
When two, three, or more Troopers (as necessities require) are sent out to
scout on the avenues, or to any place to discover the Enemy, they are called
the Vedette, as in Foot the Sentinel.

Of the Exercise of Horse.
It is certain the Horse may perform the same motions as the Foot do, whether
it be by Caracols, or by facing about, and other words of Command, which shall
be showed hereafter.

How a Squadron is to be formed.
Double the Cavalrie on the left Wing by three Ranks successively, which is the
usual depth of Squadrons; and when they draw off to march, they are to file off
by files, beginning at the right Wing; or otherwise the Squadron being formed,
they are to begin to march by one of the wings without breaking the Squadron,
and by Caracol the Squadron will be formed.

The Horse fight in a large Front, three, and sometimes four in depth,
according as the Army is strong in Cavalrie, and sometime five or six deep,
etc. and that is it which we call a Squadron.

The Horse march commonly Troop by Troop, according to their Regiment, and
every Troop marches in two files; if they march in body of a squadron they make
a large Front, and have their depth as is beforesaid.

Two Troops are sometimes squadroned together, the one marching on the rear of
the other, and sometimes both a breast; they are each of them to march in one
file, and the first has the right, and the other the left hand; but before the
Command be given, they must dress their files and ranks, (that is, straighten
their files and even their ranks) as has been showed in the Exercise of the
Foot.

To close the Files.
The right wing file stand.

Close your files to the right.

To the left as ye were.

The left wing file stand.

To the left by files close the squadron.

To the right as ye were.

The right and left-wing file stand.

By half ranks close your files to the right and ^^ft.

The Command may be given thus,

Cleave the Squadron by closing your files.

All these Motions are performed in Marching.

To close the Ranks.
File leaders stand.

By ranks close the squadron to the front.

On the front as ye were.

Or thus,

Open your ranks on the front to your first distances.

To double the Ranks.
By half files to the right double your ranks to the front.

File-leaders advance your ranks.

Half files take your ground.

The same Command is made to the left.

The first half-file stand.

By half-file leader on the left wing double your ranks to the front.

To reduce them again, the Command must be given.
Right-wing half-rank advance your ranks.

Half file-leaders take your ground.

The first half-file stand.

By half file-leaders on the right and left wings, double your ranks to the
front caracolling to the right and left

The last half-file stand.

The first half file by Caracol to the right and left on the wings, double your
ranks to the rear.

By half-file leader in the center double your ranks to the front.

At this word of Command the first half file must open the half rank to the
right and left.

The first half file by caracol to the right and left double your ranks to the
rear.

To the front as ye were.

For obeying of this word of Command, the last half file must open the half
rank to the right and left.

It is to be observed, that the Horse turn neither to the right nor left about,
to reduce themselves as they were, nor to close their ranks to the rear.

The Cavalrie might likewise double in the spaces and intervalls, but that is
not to be practiced by reason of the disorders that may be occasioned battle
scene with two infantries A Fight of Foot against Foot.
^ned by the Horses; but they ought ^o double to the front on the wings, and
afterward by caracol or wheel^ng put themselves as they were, as we have showed
before.

Of Counter-marches.
Here the Command is to be given, is it is done to the Foot, but it is most
necessary for Cavalrie, to gain ground on the front.

How Conversion is to be performed.
Before we speak of Conversions, we must distinguish between wheeling by
conversion, and wheeling by ^aracol; wheeling by conversion is performed by the
front of the squadron, so that it is the rank and not the file which makes the
motion.

Of wheeling by Caracol.
Wheeling by Caracol is made by ^he depth of the squadron, and it is the file
that makes the motion by Passades, which is a serpentine moving on a ground
some this, and some tha^ way.

Of the volte-face, or facing about.
To face about, one must turn to the right or left about, as shall appear by
the following words of Command.

The motions of Conversion and Caracol are performed by wheeling, making a
circle, or part of one; so that the only difference between them is that
wheeling by Conversion is made by the front of the squadron, and the Caracol by
the depth or flank of it, as may be seen by the following Commands.

The words of Command.
Mind me; to the right by conversion.

At this word of command the right leg is to be closed to the Horse, and the
knee to touch the right hand man's.

The same command is made to the ^ft; thus,

Close the left wing.
Close the left leg.
Words of Command.
By half ranks and by conversion divide the squadron into two Troops.

And to reduce the squadron, this word of command is to be given.

Mind me; by Conversion the squadron into one Troop.

Or otherwise thus:

Mind me; the left wing advance by conversion.

The words of Command for wheeling by Caracol.
Mind me; the right wing to the left by Caracol, face about to the rear.

The Caracol may be performed by half ranks; but it is to be observed, that
they who command the half rank, make use of the word of command abovementioned.

The word of Command.
By quarter-ranks and by Caracol, divide the squadron into four Troops.

To reduce them again.
Quarter Ranks mind me; the squadron into one Troop.

To Command the Volte-face, or to face about.
To the right about is taken for facing about, as in the subsequent words of
Command.

The words of Command.
Face about to the right.

Face to the right.

By conversion face about to the right.

By caracol face about to the right.

By half file face about to the right and left.

To draw up in Hay.
By half ranks to the right and left, draw up in hay to the front.

To reduce them again.
By Caracol to the right and left as ye were.

By half rank and by Caracol to the right and left draw up in hay to the rear.

To the front as we were.

By half rank to the right and left, draw up in hay.

By Caracol to the right and left, as ye were.

By Caracol to the right, draw up in hay.

By Caracol to the left, as we were.

How Horse are to fire.
Horse must fire by ranks and by files, and are to detach by Caracol, gaining
the hand if possibly they can; that is to say, using their endeavors to have
the enemy on the right hand.

They should detach at a trot, then put on to a gallop, and having discharged
return to their bringers up.

It is to be observed likewise, that they should detach by the right wing,
wheeling by Caracol to the left, and by that means they will have the Enemy on
the right hand. The rank may fire by the front, and draw off by caracolling to
the right and left. They may be made to fire by ranks by conversion, and
always fall back to the bringers up of the squadron.

Horse may fire by files, but in that case, the squadron ought to be six or
eight in depth, making the right wing-file detach by caracolling to the left,
and having discharged, fall back again by the same order to the place from
whence they advanced: So that Horse may fire in the same manner as Foot.

How to fight in a retreat.
To fight in a retreat, some small parties backed by greater bodies are sent
off; and if it be thought convenient that they should discharge, then these
small parties shall make use of the orders of drawing up in Hay, each party
firing at the same time, and retreating by the help and assistance of the other
small parties who ought to second them, till afterward obeying the same orders
again, they come to the assistance of those that seconded them.

How to make Horse file off.
On the right wing file off by ranks.
On the left wing form the squadron.
File off by ranks on the left wing.
Form the squadron on the right.
File off by three files.
On the left wing form the squadron.
I think it more convenient to file off by files than by ranks, since that
three files make a squadron, which one rank does not.

CHAP. II. How Horse are to fight against Horse.
HE that commands the Squadron must know who they are he is to fight, to wit,
if they be Gend'arms Light Horse, Dragoons or Musketeers because the two former
of these are to be attacked by the left wing, and the others by the right.

That being observed, when one squadron is to fight against another, so soon as
the Enemy does advance he that commands the squadron must from a foot-pace to a
trot, and from trot to gallop, take the left wing thereof, and by Caracol cast
himself to the right, and discharge as the Enemy passes; and ending the Caraco^
at a gallop charge them on the rea^ with sword in hand, break their squadron
(if it be possible) and hinder them from rallying again, as is to be battle
scene with two cavalries H. A Fight of Horse against Horse.
seen in the figure marked with H.

We have told you that in fighting against Dragoons and other Musketeers, they
must be Attacked on the ^^ght wing, which is a considerable ^dvantage being
taken seasonably, ^or it is getting the hand of those against whom we fight.

How Horse are to fight against Foot.
When Cavalrie has a design to At^ack a Battallion of Foot, before ^hey come
within Musket Shot, the Cavalrie must have received their Orders, sending off
some out-riders, who ought to advance straight against ^he Plotons or small
Skirmishing bo^ies, receiving their fire, and vigour^usly to force them in
disorder to re^reat toward the Pikes, o;r toward ^he Center of the
Battallion, and at that time the Squadron should ad^ance by depth, Caracolling
and En^aging the Battallion by one of the Angles, charging the Pikes, and
^assing sidewayes by them and not advancing straight toward them* otherwise
out of every Troop there may be three or four detached in a File, which ought
to advance at a gallop, and so soon as they come within Musket Shot, charge the
Plotons, and afterward by Caracol pass by the Front and wings, obliging the
Battallion to charge to the Horse* at the same time the Squadron ought to
follow, Charging on the angle o^ the Battallion, setting on the Pikes by the
flank, and in that manner the Battallion is to be broken. It is to be observed
that Horse should always have their files closed, and not their ranks.

Foot may likewise be fought in the following order; making a double Squadron;
and when they approach within Musket Shot, the squadron i^ to be divided by
half ranks into fou^ Troops, and by Caracol to the right and left the two first
should pass o^ the front and on one of the wings* the third ought to Charge
straight on the angle, or according as occasion requires Attack the Pikes
side-wayes, whether it be on the front, or flank, and then the fourth Troop
should make good what the third could not. It is to be observed that so soon as
the Horse are within ten paces of the Battallion, they ought to fire, and at
the same time draw their swords.

How Foot are to fight against Foot.
If a Regiment of Foot marching in an Enemies Country, find a Regiment of the
Enemies in an advantageous Post, which hinders their march; the Regiment that
is to pass, must use endeavors to draw the Enemy to an Engagement, making as
if they intended to retreat, that they may allure them out of their Post; and
having drawn them out into a convenient ground, they are to face about to the
right, and march toward the Enemy in order of Battle, and advancing two steps
shall let fly their Pistols, and return to their ranks; then all the
Musketeers shall fire, three ranks together, at the same time drawing their
Swords and presenting the Pikes; and all the Companies being engaged pell-mell,
should fight til^ the one be overcome and ask Quarters. The figure A clearly
represents the way of fighting.

How Squadrons are to be detached and formed at the same time.
The Horse are to Caracol to the right and left, and open the half rank, then
form the Squadron fifty in Front.

By Caracols to the right and left, open your half Ranks, and form the Squadron
fifty a breast fronting about to the Rear.

How Squadrons are to be formed.
They are to double on the left Wing by three Ranks, and on the same Front with
the first. There are two things to be observed when the Squadron is formed, and
that the Front is to be changed into any other place whatsoever; to do it by
Caracols, or to do it by Conversion; by half-ranks, or Quarter-ranks, if by
Conversion; but if by Caracol, it is done in a whole body.

Two Troops that can Squadron themselves together, to form their Squadrons in
the order of a march; if they march in the same Front, the first should take
the right and the other the left hand, and in that order march. If they desire
to form the Squadron, the Troop on the right hand should advance about twenty
paces, and reduce themselves to three in depth. That which holds the left in
its place shall do the same, and then ought to double on the left of the Troop
which has advanced, and in the same Front, that the Squadron may be formed by
two Troops: but if the one march in the Rear of the other, by the same orders
the Captains severally shall reduce their Troops into three in depth; and
thereafter the last ought to double to the left and in the same Front with the
first, that the Squadron may be composed of two Troops.

A Regulation made by the late King Lewis XIII. concerning the disputes that
arose among the Officers of the Army in the year 1635.
We shall in the first place, declare what is to be done betwixt the French
Officers and the strangers. It is a thing past all doubt, that a Master de^
Camp of Horse ought to Command a stranger Colonel, provided the Colonel and
Master de Camp be one and the same thing. The Colonel shall command all the
French Captains, and the French Captains shall command the Lieutenant-Colonels
of strangers, as likewise all the French Captains who Command not a body of
men; and if a stranger Lieutenant be with a French Corner, the Lieurenant shall
command him; but a stranger Cornet shall command a French Quartermaster: and
wheresoever French and strangers are together the French have the right hand;
but if the Captain be a stranger, he shall take the right hand of the French
Lieutenant, though his Troop be on the left Wing of the Squadron.

As to the disputes that happen between the Horse and Foot, for the Command in
the Field, and in Quarters that are not walled, which are called places of
Approach, the Horse ought to Command there: but in all places that are enclosed
with walls, having Gates that lock, and draw-bridges, and are environed with
Ditches, in such places it belongs to the Foot to Command. The Master de Camp
of Cavalrie in places that are open, shall Command the Colonels of Foot; but
the Colonel of Foot ought to Command the Master de Camp of Horse in Towns and
Walled places. Now the Charge of Master de Camp of Horse being above that of a
Captain, if he be in a walled place, where the Foot have no Officers above
Captains, the Master de Camp of Horse should Command the Captains; and in all
open Quarters the Captain of Horse should Command Lieutenant Colonels and
Captains of Foot; and the Captains of Foot should Command the Lieutenants of
Horse; and in close places where there are none but Lieutenants of Foot, and a
Captain of Horse, the Captain must Command, because the Captains have their
Commissions from the King, and not the Lieutenants; and in open places the
Lieutenant should Command the Cornets of Horse; and in walled places, the
Lieutenant is to Command the Ensign, and the Cornet the Sergeants: so that the
one has no advantage of the other, it is but only ambition; for the persons who
discharge these Offices are rather to be considered, than any difference that
is between the Charges; and therefore they ought to make a right choice.

There is also a regulation between the Sergeants of Battle, and the Masters de
Camp of Cavalrie and Colonels of Foot, who pretend not to be obliged to obey
the Sergeant of Battle; but seeing it is true that he Commands in absence of
the Mareschals de Camp, his Charge is above the other Officers.

There happen many times some contests between the Captains of the Gend'arms,
and the Master de Camp of Horse. The Captains of the Gend'arms, and the Master
de Camp of Horse, meeting together, the Captain of the Gend'arms is to Command
the Master de Camp, the Master de Camp the Lieutenant of the Gend'arms, the
Lieutenant of the Gend'arms the Captain of the Light Horse, the Captain the
Ensign of the Gend'arms, the Ensign the Lieutenant of the Light Horse, the
Lieutenant of the Light Horse the Guidon of the Gend'arms, the Guidon of the
Gend'arms the Cornet of the Light Horse, the Cornet of the Light Horse the
Quarter Masters of the Gend'arms, and the Quartermaster of the Gend'arms the
Quartermaster of the Light Horse.

There has been heretofore great dispute between the Masters de Camp of Foot,
and the Captains of the Guards; which dispute was thus decided by the King.

That the Masters de Camp of Picardie, Piedmont, Champagne, Navarre, and
Normandy should command the Captains of the Guards, and the Captains of the
Guards all other Masters de Camp; and that the other Masters de Camp should
Command all Lieutenant Colonels, and the Captains of the old Regiments should
Command the Lieutenant Colonels of other Regiments, and that the Lieutenants of
the Guards should obey the Captains of the old Regiments.

All these regulations were made to prevent the disorders that might happen
amongst Officers: the King has very well provided against them, and by his
sage conduct obliges the Officers to discharge their duties, and to have no
other passion but of doing good service; and for that end his Majesty gives
them an example, making the Troops of his Household do their exercises
frequently, he has made injunctions to all the Officers of his Armies, to see
his forces well exercised, and made dextrous in handling of their Arms; to wit
the Pikes, to manage their Pikes aright whether by themselves or in
Battallions; the Musketeers to use their Muskets skillfully by giving quick
fire. It is a thing very necessary that a Musketeer know to hit a mark, to the
end that on occasion he may be able to fire to purpose. Musketteers may be
taught to shoot well in Garrisons especially, the Officers giving some reward to
those that shoot best at a mark; that encourages, and obliges them to shoot
well, which makes a Musketeer very considerable on several occasions, and
especially in fighting against Horse.

How Foot are to Fight against Horse.
If Foot march in Battallia in an Enemies Country, and some Body of the Enemies
Horse be discovered, then shall the Foot make a Batrallion with four strong
Plotons or parties for skirmish, and double ranks of Pikes to resist the Horse,
whilst three ranks of Musketeers shall prepare to give their Vollee at the
first Pistolshot, which is ten or twelve paces from the Foot; then if the Pikes
with swords in hand, pursue them vigorously, without doubt the Squadron will be
put into great disorder, and all by the means of good Musketeers who have had
the right art of pitching on their men, and have made as many fall as they have
fired shot, being thereto taught by their good discipline: so ought all the
Officers study to be capable of their Charges, and by that means the Commanders
may make good use of their Troops in what place soever the Army be, and
especially when the Enemies are in a condition to fight. Horse are very
necessary in an Army; on them depends the good success of all enterprises; by
them an Army becomes master of the field, if it be stronger in Cavalrie than
the Enemy: by them the Forces and all Garison-places have daily their
Provisions by means of Convoyes and Forrages, which cannot be securely brought
without Guards of Horse: they reduce the Enemy to great streights, by
intercepting their Convoys and Foragers, ravaging their Country by continual
Parties, beating up their Quarters, and making frequent courses and inrodes
amongst them.

In so much that there is hardly any Enterprise wherein Horse are not with
great profit employed. Now seeing the Cavalrie is composed of several
Regiments, and the Regiments of several Troops, that they may render the
service and advantage that is expected from them either in general or
particular; it is necessary that the Troops be made up of good riders, and that
they be led and Commanded by Officers of note, and expert in the Art of War.

It is most important for the service of the King, that the Troops which make
up the Forces of his Majesty's Cavalrie, be not only complete, and furnished
with men well mounted, well armed, and in good Equipage; but that they be also
led and commanded by Officers of experience and merit, that so they may be
better obeyed by their Troopers, who will have a far greater esteem for them,
when they know their valor and good conduct.

CHAP. III. Of the duties of the Officers of Horse; and in the first place of
the Captain.
THE Captain ought to choose Officers, who understand aright the Art and Duty of
their Charges, as being the chief members which he is to use in making the Body
act whereof he is the head.

Especially a Lieutenant, and Quartermaster, as being the most important, as
shall be showed hereafter.

Now to fill the charge of a Lieutenant well, he ought to seek out for a
discreet man, experienced in the profession of Cavalrie, and who has for
several Campagnes served with care and assiduity. That being known, the Captain
may be assured that the Lieutenant in his absence may very well take the care
and conduct of his Troop, and discharge the same duty that himself is obliged
to perform.

Of the principal duties of a Lieutenant.
The Lieutenant ought to know all the men of the Troop by name: he ought to
punish the swearers, quarrellers, drunkards, and the otherwise debauched,
conniving at no vice in them: he ought to be kind to those that have merit, and
upbraid such as fail in their duty, punishing them rigourously if they continue
to be negligent: that is the way to become both beloved and feared of the
Troopers. He should procure himself esteem by his conduct, having the qualities
of a man of honor, wise and discreet, sober in his diet, prudent in his
discourse, and above all valiant and stout, which makes the brave Soldiers in
imitation of him, emulous to be men of worth, and to serve their King well.

He ought sometimes to visit their Horses and Arms, recommending to them the
care of them, publicly and smartly rebuking those that are negligent of
either, and severely punishing them if they abuse his goodness and patience.

Of a March.
In a March the Lieutenant ought to march at the Rear of the Troop or Squadron,
to make the Troopers keep close, taking heed that none stay behind, obliging
them to follow their File-leaders, suffering none to quit their ranks, nor
leave the Standard without permission.

When there is an opportunity of fighting the Enemies, the Lieutenant ought to
be at the rear of the Squadron with his Sword in hand, obliging the Troopers to
do their duty, making the last rank, well closed, and in good order, follow the
other two; punishing him that would fly and turn his back, and by that example
oblige the rest to do their duties.

When the Captain on such an occasion is absent, as at any other time, the
Lieutenant is to take the Captains Post, and march at the head of the Squadron,
placing at the rear, and in his own Post, the Quartermaster; and in the Post
of the Quartermaster on the Wings, the first Brigadeer, filling up all the
places of the Officers, that no disorder may happen by the Captains absence.

Of the Guard of a Camp.
When the Captain is Commanded out for the guard of the Camp, or of a Quarter,
or to relieve it, and is come to his Post, the Lieutenant is to put the Troop
into Battallia, keeping at the head of the Squadron, expecting till the Captain
be informed of what he has to do, and that he go with the Quartermaster to
place the Vedettes, instructing them in the mean time what they are to do,
until the Captain return and give the other necessary Orders for the security
of his Guard.

Of the duties of the Cornet.
The Captain ought to choose a man for Cornet to his Troop, who is of the same
integrity and has the like qualities as we have assigned to the Lieutenant,
because he is often obliged to mount the Guard, and perform the other duties in
absence of him. A young Gentleman who has seen and served in a Campagn, and
sometimes by favor, is commonly placed in that charge: his Function is to
carry the Standard on a day of entry or muster, that he may salute the King, or
in his absence, the General of the Army. His Post is at the Captains left hand,
the length of his Horse, or about seven foot more backward toward the
Squadron. In day of Battle he ought to carry the Standard, and preserve it with
the danger of his life.

Moreover, the Cornet ought to have a great respect for his Captain. He should
likewise behave himself toward his Lieutenant with marks of esteem and
submission, whereby he will gain the good will and esteem of his Superior
Officers. He should have a regard to the Quartermaster, and be civil to the
Brigadeers; in a word, he should strive to procure the love and esteem of the
Troopers, and interpose amongst them to take up their quarrels, and make them
friends; but if he find difficulty in the matter, and that the authority of
the Captain or Lieutenant be requisite, he shall inform them of the business,
representing to them the ground of the quarrel, and the reasons of either
party, that they may do Justice, and by their authority kill the resentments,
which either may entertain against other, that so the troublesome accidents may
be avoided which contests produce in a Troop, when the Officers prevent them
not.

Of the Quartermaster.
The Captain should choose for his Quartermaster, an active and experienced
man, who is wise and well affected to the service; for the management of the
subsistence and service of the Troop, is performed by his order. He ought to
know to read, write, and cast account, as far as the rule of Society, for he
ought to keep the Roll and Catalogue of all the Troopers, with their Names,
Sirnames, places where they were born, and their Country, as also of their
casual goods, booties and prizes gained from their Enemies. It is his duty
likewise to go daily and receive the word. He ought to be exact, when he has
received it, to write it down with the Counter-word, that he may remember them,
and according to the duty of his place, carry it to his Officers where they
are. He ought to have a care to learn the manners of every private Trooper,
that on occasions he may know who are fit to be commanded, having considered
their Horses, and from thence being able to judge of those who are most proper
to execute the intended service. It is his part to be careful frequently to
visit the Troopers Horses, obliging them to feed, dress, and shoe them well, to
keep their Equipage in good condition, and severely to punish those that
neglect that duty. He is also to take notice of their Arms, and oblige them to
keep them always clean, and cause them to be refitted when they want any the
least thing. It belongs to him to entertain friendship amongst the Troopers,
making them live orderly, punishing the quarrelsome and those that love tumult;
as also Swearers, Drunkards, and such as lead a life of bad example; and if he
cannot reclaim them by reproofs, he is to complain of them to the Captain, that
he may order them, either by Prison, or dismounting and shamefully casheering
them, as men unworthy to carry a Sword, far less the name of Trooper; and on
the other hand, he is to show kindness to such as are of merit, doing them all
the good Offices he can, either of himself or with the Officers, yea, and in
their Quarters, and that so long as they shall not abuse them, and shall do
their duties.

In Marches, the Quartermaster should daily receive Orders from the Captain to
go to the Quarters, and take occasion to go before, that he may arrive in time.
So that the Captain when he comes with his Troop may find his Quarters, and the
provisions if any be to be given out, ready, that the Troop may not be obliged
to remain long on Horseback in the Streets; which wearies and spoils the
Horses, particularly after a long march, and especially in the heat of Summer,
or otherways in bad weather, when the days are short, and they come late to
their Quarters, a thing that may prove very prejudicial to the service of the
King, and of the Captain himself. And therefore the Quartermaster, when he
goes to take up Quarters, should with his Captains consent, take with him two
or three Troopers whom he may judge fit to assist him in preparing the Quarters
with greater diligence; and he should not fail so soon as he is come to the
place, and has showed his Orders to the Magistrates, and those that have
authority, to inform them of the number of servants that the Captain
entertains, and of the condition of his Equipage, and of the Equipages of the
other Officers, that the Magistrates or others in authority, may commodiously
quarter them. He shall therefore with all expedition cause the Officers Billets
be made, or else shall inform himself of their Quarters, and go view them, that
he may see that their Lodgings be convenient, and that they may not have
afterward cause to complain of his negligence; and when he knows that the
Troop draws near, he is to go meet them, that he may conduct the Captain and
Troop to their Quarters; provided, he be entrusted to deliver them their
Billets. But if the Magistrates or others in authority have a mind to reck on
the number of effective Quarterings, he is to conduct the Captain with his
Troop to the Townhouse, causing the effective Quarterings to be reckoned; and
their Billets being delivered, he is to conduct the Captain to his Quarters,
where he is to draw up the Troop in Hay before the Gate or Door, to whom he is
to distribute the Billets, making them in order draw them out of a Hat,
desiring all the Troopers to be civil to their Landlords, and to have a care
not to give them any cause of complaint.

If they be to stay there any time, in distributing the Billets, he ought to
take in writing the names of the Troopers, and their Landlords, and to make a
list of them, then next day go and visit the Horses, to see if any be hurt, and
if any Landlord complain, to the end he may remedy every thing by bringing
necessary orders for that effect.

When the Trumpet sounds to Horse, and that they must be gone, the
Quartermaster ought to be the first on Horseback, to hasten the Troopers, and
make them in diligence repair to the Captains Quarters, chiding those that come
last; and if he observe that any of them be accustomed so to do, whether it be
for laziness, or out of design to stay behind to steal and pilfer from their
Landlords, he shall severely punish them for an example to the rest.

When he comes into Winter Quarters, he ought to visit all the Troopers
Quarters, and know the conveniences of them and the condition of the Landlords,
and acquaint the Captain therewith, to the end that he may order the
distribution of a part of the Billets, that he may accommodate those who have
most need, and then cause the rest to be drawn by Lot.

On a march of importance, he is to march on the Wings of the Troop or
Squadron, and from time to time go from the Front to the Rear, and from the
Rear to the Front, to make them keep their distances, and march in good order,
hindering the Troopers to break out without permission. If there be an occasion
of fighting, he should march on the Wings of the Squadron, with his Sword in
his hand, making them close their ranks, observe their distances, and hinder
them from breaking.

Of the duty of Brigadeers.
The Brigadeers ought to be men of experience, old Troopers, and as capable as
the Q^arter-Master, and endowed with the same qualities, because in his absence
one of them must always discharge his Functions, and besides they must read and
write, and each of them keep a Roll of their Brigade; that they may make the
Troopers do duty by turns. The Troop being so divided into Brigades, the duties
will be far better performed, and the detachments made in order and without
confusion, whether by Brigadeer, with his whole Brigade, and successively the
one after the other, or by Troopers detached from each Brigade, with one of the
Brigadeers at their head, and by that means the Quarters will be given out with
less confusion, when the Troop is to be separated that it may be the more
easily quartered and lodged in scattered Houses, dividing these Precincts by
Brigades.

CHAP. IV. Of the Guard of a Camp, or Quarter.
THE most important thing for the Guard of a Camp, is to place aright the
Courts of Guard, and the Vedettes, and it is usually a Marshall de Camp, or
the Quartermaster General of the Horse who chooses these Posts, and appoints
them to the Captains who are to mount the Guard.

The Captain being come to the Court of Guard, ought to cause his Troop and
those that he has for the Guard, to halt: he is to go and view the Posts of the
Vedettes, having the Quartermaster and the Vedettes that he is to place with
him, and causing the Quartermaster observe their Posts, to the end he may go
relieve, and visit them during the night.

The Captain shall inform himself by the other Captain who is to dismount the
Guard, of the Orders which he must observe, and of what he is to do, inquiring
exactly into all things; and whilst he goes to Post the Vedettes, the
Lieutenant of the Guard ought to remain on Horseback at the head of the
Squadron which is drawn up in Battallia, expecting the return of the Captain
and Quartermaster.

The Captain when he places the Vedettes, should inform them how they ought to
carry themselves, that they should never leave their Posts, nor alight from
Horseback; to have always the Carabin or Pistol in hand; to let none whosoever
come near them, either from the Quarters or from without; and in a word, to let
none pass without making them stand, and giving notice to the Court of Guard.
The Captain should place two Vedettes in one important Post, to the end that
the one may with diligence come and give notice to the Court of Guard when they
have made any to stand, or have seen or heard men; and that the other in the
mean time keep close to his Post; and for that effect the Captain ought to
command the Vedettes, that in case they hear or see men at a distance, the one
should draw off from the other some twenty or thirty paces toward the Court of
Guard, to the end that if the Vedette that shall abide at his Post, should not
stop these men, and that on the contrary, he should be by them beaten from his
Post, the other may have time to come at full speed and give notice to the
Court of Guard, discharging his Carabin or Pistol by the way, to make himself
be heard, and to give the Alarm.

The Captain should not only recommend all these things to the Vedettes, but
likewise that they should take heed if in the night time they discover any
fire, or by day, smoke or dust raised by the marching of Horse; if they hear
Dogs bark more than usually, and if they hear the report of Firearms, and give
notice of it to the Court of Guard, to the end the Commander may send out
Scouts to that side to learn intelligence of what the Vedettes have seen or
heard. If the Vedettes be far separated, that they may possess the avenues,
there must be a small Court of Guard consisting of twenty or twenty five
Troopers, less or more, placed according to the strength of the Forces, betwixt
the Vedettes and the great Court of Guard, nearer or farther according as the
Vedettes are posted at distance; as it happens frequently they are, that they
may possess, the avenues of several cross ways, or the pass of some River,
Bridge, or narrow passage, or else of some eminence or height, at the foot of
which the Vedette is usually placed; and that little Court of Guard is to be
commanded by the Quartermaster, who should relieve the Vedettes at the end of
every two hours, and now and then visit them. He is likewise to go with his men
or part of them, and examine those whom the Vedettes have made to stand, making
only him to advance who has the word, and to tell it him in his ear, holding
the point of his Sword to his Breast, who has advanced to give the word, and
from whom he is to take it, that he may know if they be Friends or Foes, and so
stop or let them pass.

When the Vedettes shall give notice to the Quartermaster, he shall instantly
send off a Trooper to acquaint the Captain that the Vedettes have made some to
stand, and that he is going to examine them, to the end that the Captain may
have time to cause his men Horse, and to put themselves in condition not to be
surprised by their Enemies. He should send out Scouts to a great distance, to
beat the Country on all hands, and the ways by which the Enemies may come. He
is to take so great a care, because all the Quarter, or the whole Army confides
in him: and therefore he should trust no body but himself, seeing there is so
great a confidence reposed on him and his Guard, that obliges him to all
imaginable care in the discharge of his duty; for the Enemies coming in great
number, might beat back the Vedettes, surprife and overthrow the little Court
of Guard, and enter the Quarter or Camp, if it happened that the avenues of it
were not cut or barricado'd, and guarded by some considerable Guard of Foot;
for if the Enemies met with no other Forces, than the Vedettes, the little and
great Guard of Horse, they might make themselves Masters of the Quarter or
Camp, surprised or afleep, for want of timely Alarm given, and leisure to take
Arms, that they might make head against the Enemies. As to the manner of
sending out these Scouts, The Captain is to detach the best mounted and boldest
Troopers of his Guard, to go out a scouting; giving them a word or fignal, by
which they may know one another when they chance to meet, and he is to command
them to divide themselves one by one, or two by two, according to the diverse
ways and avenues, some to the right and some to the left, marching always with
great silence, and stopping and making halt now and then, that they may hearken
if they can hear the marching of men; and to advance a league more or less,
(according as it may be expedient for the security of the Guard) by all the
avenues by which the Enemies may approach; and he is to order them, that if any
of them find or hear the Enemies, that if it be possible, they should without
being discovered, know their number as near as they can, and without losing of
time, return at full speed to give notice to the Court of Guard and Captain;
that he may with all diligence cause his men to mount, and being in readiness
in his Court of Guard, send immediately notice of the matter to the Generals.
He is moreover to order his Scouts, that if they be at so great distance when
they discover the Enemies, that they cannot in a long time return to the Court
of Guard, or that the Enemies march with so much diligence that they may come
in as soon as themselves, or a little after, they should draw aside out of the
Enemies way, and with all expedition set fire to some House, from whence the
Vedettes and Court of Guard might see the Fire, and even the Enemies; (for they
would not fail to make a halt that they might send and know the reason of that
fire;) and that if they can find no opportunity to make fire soon enough, they
should propose to themselves to come to some place where their firing and
clashing of arms may be seen or heard by the Vedettes, or Court of Guard, who
hearing the signal, may instantly give notice to the Captain and Court of
Guard, that the Enemies are at hand, and by that means he may have time to put
himself and men in posture, acquaint the Generals with the matter, and give the
Alarm to the Quarter or the whole Army, expecting more certain news: In the
mean time, he shall Command the Quartermaster with his little Court of Guard
to advance to the Posts of the Vedettes, or farther if need be, that he may
view the Enemies and make head against them, keeping them in play in some
narrow pass, to the end all may get on Horseback and put themselves in Arms in
the Camp or Quarter. The Captain in the mean time, shall be with the rest of
his Guard on Horseback and in good order, not quitting his Post upon any
account, without the Generals Orders: he should stay there until he be attacked
by the Enemy, against whom he is to make head, to stop them, and if he can, to
beat back their charge, with the danger of his life, and the loss of all his
men.

When a Captain Commands the Cavalrie in a Quarter, then he is exempted from
mounting the Guard, though his Troop be to mount it in turn, because many
inconveniences might happen, if the Captain should be upon the Guard, when
Orders came from the Generals, and that he who was to execute them should not
be in the Quarters; for the Captain that is on the Guard cannot quit his Post;
and the Enemy might attack the Quarter upon another side than that of the Court
of Guard; so that if the Captain who Commanded the Cavalrie were upon the
Guard, he could not give the necessary Orders in an Alarm of that nature, nor
in any other accident that might happen; but except on that occasion, he ought
without pretext or excuse, mount the Guard as often as his Standard is
commanded for that effect.

If the Captain Command the Cavalrie in a Quarter, and have notice of the march
of the Enemy, and that the quarter be in danger of being attacked, he ought to
Command all the Horse to mount, and draw them up in Battallia without the
quarter, in some advantageous Post, according to the Orders of the Officer
General, who Commands in the quarter, ordering the Troopers to carry with them
Forage for their Horses during the time that they are to be in Arms. If that
Alarm happen in rainy and tempestuous weather, so that the Horse cannot go out
and lie in the Fields, without great damage, and that the necessity be not so
extreme as that they should expose themselves in that manner; then the Captain
by Orders from the General needs do no more, but having caused sound to Boots
and Saddle, go through all the quarter, and send where he cannot go himself;
Commanding all the Bodies of Horse to keep together in as few Houses and
Coverts as they can, to the end they may be the more conveniently joined to
march out in good order against the Enemy in case of necessity; and in the
mean time he shall go the round, and send about Officers to keep the men awake.
He shall send out men toward the Courts of Guard that are without the
quarters, that he may have exact intelligence of all that happens. These are
cautions very necessary in a quarter to prevent a surprise.

Cautions that are to be taken in forceing of a Quarter.
In all the service of Horse, there is no occasion wherein the Captain ought to
be so circumspect, as in the enterprise of forcing an Enemies Quarter; for
there is not any from which he can reap greater advantages, either for his
honor or profit; and on the other hand, there is no occasion wherein he runs
greater risk of ruining his reputation, by losing himself and his men: and
therefore he ought to be a man of much experience, good judgment, and high
resolution; otherways he can never well succeed in such enterprises; for in War
there are none more difficult, nor harder to be achieved. And that is the
reason that few Captains run the hazard of such undertakings.

Experience has made always appear that it is more easy to force the Enemies
Quarters, when they are at a good distance, than when they are near, because
the more the danger is remote, the less vigilant are men to avoid it. And
therefore, I say, that the most usual cause of a surprise, is too much
confidence; for men are never sooner defeated than when they least apprehend it.

When a Captain has a design to force a Quarter, he ought to be assured of the
nature of the Enemies Post, with all its circumstances; if the avenues be
barricado'd, or not; if the flanks be better barricado'd than the avenues, and
if there be marshes or other things that hinder an approach, in what place is
their field of Battle, or place of Arms; if any River or Brook run through the
Quarter, or any thing else that divides it; but above all things he should be
informed by his spies of the number and quality of the Forces that are in the
Quarter, and of the temper of the Commander; if he be a man of experience,
vigilant and resolute, or if he have any contrary qualities, to the end that
the Captain according to the instructions that he has of these things may take
the best measures for accomplishing his design.

Being well informed of all, and having laid down his measures, he is to march
with all his men in great diligence, that he may come up with the Enemies, and
surprise them a little before day: on his march he is to observe the cautions
that we have hinted at before, that is to say, that he is to make sure of good
guides, and send Out-riders before him until he come near the Quarter; he is
also to avoid marching by inhabited places, or from which he may be discovered;
or in the night time on the great Rodes, but cross the Country, because some
body may discover him, or his tract, and give speedy notice of it to the Enemy;
for it often happens that the Enemy having intelligence of the design and march
of the contrary party, do take so good measures, that the Commander of the
party with all his men become a prey to those against whom they were marching.
And therefore the Captain ought to make use of his prudence, and consider the
inconveniences that may befall him; and as he ought to march resolutely and
without fear, so likewise should he neglect no care and circumspection, and
therefore he should take the best measures he can to facilitate his retreat, by
Posting some Horse and Foot Commanded by an Officer, in the middle or some part
of the way, to guard some passage, or some advantageous Post.

When the Captain has laid his design, and has all his men mounted; if, for
instance, he intend with four hundred Horse, to go and attack eight hundred of
the Enemies Cavalry, and beat up their Quarters, he is to dispose his men in
this manner. Being come near the Quarter he shall divide them into six
Squadrons, of sixty Troopers a piece, and shall divide the forty remaining
into two Plotons or small parties of twenty a piece, under good Commanders, and
shall give to each of them one or two Trumpeters, to the end that when he shall
set upon the place by which he has proposed to himself to enter the Quarter,
these little bodies, with their Trumpets, may give the Alarm on all hands, some
on the right, and some on the left, and at the places which are strongest and
best guarded, by that great noise to persuade the Enemies that the Assailants
are very numerous and stronger than they, and by that means to put them into
confusion, and hinder them from escapeing or drawing out, that they may rally
and put themselves in defense. And therefore he shall prohibit these little
Bodies to enter the Quarter, commanding the one to keep on the avenues, the
others to ride always round the Quarter, with prohibition to make Prisoners of
any that would come out to save themselves, or to rally, but on the contrary,
they are to be ordered to kill all without quarters, until they receive new
Orders. The Captain having so disposed his men an hour before day in the order
that we have said, and having Commanded them all to put white Paper in their
Hats, that they may know one another, he shall order the little bodies to march
without making of noise toward the flanks of the quarters, and in the mean
time he shall march with the six other Squadrons, each according to their
ranks, in good order, with great silence, and without Out-riders, that he may
not be so soon perceived nor heard by the Vedettes; and so soon as he is
discovered, he ought instantly, without the least hesitation or pause, make the
first Squadron fall in and beat back the Vedettes with great diligence, the
other five following close behind, and in good order, and all (if it be
possible) should be in with the Court of Guard as soon as the Vedettes, that
they may desperately fall on, surprise and force the Court of Guard, and enter
all together into the quarter; and when the Captain is entered with his six
Squadrons, he shall cause one of them seize the place of arms, and in the mean
while without losing of time, shall cause the other five to advance as far as
the extremities of the quarter, and to all the sides of it, with order to kill
and destroy all they meet with, and prohibition to make any other Prisoners but
the Commander of the quarter if they find him, that the Enemies may not mount
on Horseback and rally to put themselves in defense; and that is to be
continued so long till the Captain be absolutely Master of the quarter, and
that he shall find the Enemies no more in a condition to draw out, nor to
gather together to make resistance; and then he shall make as many of his men
as he thinks convenient to alight, that they may enter into the Houses, make
Prisoners, take Horses, set on fire, and force the Houses that are refused to
be opened, and where the Enemy would make resistance; and in the mean, he shall
keep a body of men moving up and down through the quarter, because part of the
Enemy may perhaps rally together in some places; and all this while the other
little bodies shall keep still without the quarter, exactly obeying their
orders; and by this means the Captain may render himself Master of the quarter,
force the Enemies and bring off a considerable booty.

When the Army leaves the Field to go into Winter Quarters, the King sends as
many of the Cavalry as is requisite into the frontier places, there to lie in
Garrison during the Winter, by reason of the great advantages that arise
therefrom; for by that means the Country about is preserved, the Enemies not
daring to make courses and inroads to waste and pillage it, without running
great risk of being lost. By that means the Cavalry have occasion to keep
themselves in exercise, having daily opportunity of seeing the Enemy, making
frequent Courses into their Country, and subsisting at their cost: so that the
places are in far greater security against the Enemies attempts, than if there
were no Horse in them. There is nothing truer, than that the General of the
Army during the next Campagn, finds a great deal of difference betwixt the
Horse that have had their Winter Quarters on the Frontiers, and who have kept
themselves in Warlike exercise, and those that have spent the Winter in
idleness and in Quarters remote from an Enemies Country. When a Captain of
Horse is in Garrison in a frontier place, and that there are other Troops in
Garrison with his own, all which he commands, yet he cannot go out with the
Cavalrie, nor part of them, without giving notice to the Governor of the
place, and receiving his approbation; as likewise the Governor cannot dispose
of them without acquainting the Captain who Commands them, and without his
permission. But if the Captain be in Garrison in any Frontier Town, where there
is no Governor, but that the Magistrates keep the Keys and give the word
(which happens but seldom, though it may happen;) Then may the Captain dispose
absolutely of the Horse, without acquainting the Magistrates of the Town, or
asking their consent and approbation.

Of the duties of the Horse in a frontier place.
A Captain being in Garrison in a Frontier place, ought to keep continually two
Troopers in the Governors Court of Guard, or in the Court of Guard of the
place of Arms, who are to be relieved from time to time; that these Troopers
may be always ready to give him notice so soon as they have any news of the
Enemy, and of the least Alarm, and to bring to him also the Governors Orders
with all expedition. Moreover, the Captain shall appoint daily twenty or five
and twenty Troopers for a guard in the place of Arms, or near the Gate that
looks to the avenues of the Enemies, to the end that being always ready to
mount on Horseback, they may sally out in diligence, in case the Enemy does
appear, or that they send a small body as far as the Gates of the place, to
make Prisoners, or to carry away booty, or cattle; which the Enemies do
commonly to oblige all the Horse to sally out upon them, and to engage them to
pursue them, in hopes of great booty or rewards from the Prisoners whom they
might retake, and by that means to draw them into some ambush. But if these
Troopers of the Guard sally out in time and with diligence, they will be
sufficient to hinder the Enemies design, though they should even come in great
number, because these twenty five sallying out upon them with diligence under a
good Leader, may amuse and keep them in play, and give leisure to all the Horse
that are in the place, to mount and come out; that will give time also to all
that are abroad to retire and carry off their Cattle: And if the place may be
surprised by Scalade or otherways, the Captain shall appoint the same Court of
Guard, or part of them, to keep all night long without the Gate that looks to
the Enemy, yet so, as they be posted under covert of the half Moon, or barrier,
which covers the Gate, commanding them to Scout all night to the right and
left, two and two, or four and four, according as it shall be necessary, and
successively one after another, by all the avenues by which the Enemy may come
to surprise the place; which will be hard to be done if these Troopers do their
duty. It will be also requisite that these Troopers, before any come out of the
place, go and view the neighborhood about the place, to a quarter of a Leagues
distance or more, and see if there be no ambush of the Enemy, and they be not
posted in some place, to carry away all that is to come out or enter into the
place: by such care and diligence, the Horse will secure the place from all
kinds of surprise.

Of the duty of a Captain being in Garrison in a Frontier Town, during the
Campagn.
When it is time to begin the Campagn, and when the King sends Orders for the
marching of the Troops to their Rendezvous, to make up the body of an Army,
there is always left in the Frontier places, a sufficient number of Horse, to
guard the Gonvoys, and those that are to go and come daily from the Army, and
likewise to be a curb to the Enemies that are in the neighboring Frontier
Garrisons.

If the Captain who remains in Garrison in a Frontier place during the Campagn,
perceive that the Enemy has a neighboring Frontier Garrison stronger in Horse
than his own, he is to make use of ambushes and courses, and to keep the Enemy
in fear. If in the first courses that he shall make, he cause assemble the
Troops of the Auxiliary Cavalry of other neighboring Garrisons, that are of his
party, to such a competent number as may fight the Enemies Garrison, in case
they come out upon him, and for that end, if he shall assign to these Auxiliary
Troops, a place of rendezvous on the rode with such requisite circumstances, as
may prevent the mistaking of the place, and shall join them with his men, at
the hour prefixed, that so he may effectuate his design without inconvenience;
If I say, he come out two or three times in that manner, there is great
probability that afterward he may hazard out with his Garrison alone; for the
Enemy's being terrified by his first courses, will not easily come out against
him, believing that he may have the same Forces with him still. And if the
Captain remain in Garrison, and have notice given him by faithful spies, that
the Enemies are to lay an ambush on some great rode, to fall upon the Convoys,
or those of his party that are going to join the Army, or are coming from
thence, and that he be not commanded out for a Guard, in that case he may go
out in the night time and lay himself in ambush on the way by which the Enemies
are to go to put themselves in their usual place of ambush. The Captain knowing
the Map of the Country, may choose an advantageous Post on the way, if he have
good guides that know it; for in all Rodes there are places which must of
necessity be passed over, as some narrow passages, or between two woods distant
from one another two hundred paces, or otherways between a Wood and a Village,
and other such like.

The Captain should set forth seasonably, that he may come in good time to the
Post, where he is resolved to expect the Enemy, and enjoin his Guides not to
lead him by places inhabited, for the reasons mentioned before; and being come
to the Post that he intends to possess, expecting until the Enemy pass, if it
be near a Wood, he is to have it viewed before he draw near; and being assured
that there is no body there, then he is to approach with his men, and shall
place his Squadrons at a just distance from one another, along the side of the
Wood, without entering into it, facing to the way that the Enemy is to take. He
shall always keep his men on Horseback in good order, and in the mean time
place some Out-Vedettes, with order, that if they see or hear the Enemy coming,
to retire without being discovered and without noise, to their Squadrons,
having first given him an account of what they have heard or seen; and with
orders also on the other hand, that if they be surprised by the Enemies Scouts,
they advance some steps toward them to view them, and having fired upon them,
fly with all speed, and in their flight to pass beyond, and fourscore or a
hundred paces wide of the Ambuscade, that the Enemies Scouts may pursue them,
who will not fail to follow their Scouts close, without perceiving the
Ambuscade, by reason of the darkness of the night.

Then the Captain may charge them in the flank as they pass by him, or in the
rear when they are passed, according as he shall judge convenient.

It is not enough to place Out-Vedettes, he must be careful likewise to send
off Scouts well mounted, with order to halt now and then, and even sometimes to
alight and lay their ear to the ground, to hearken if they hear the march of
men, giving them also the same order that he gave to the Vedettes, if they meet
with the Enemies Out-riders, and to fly as the Vedettes, having made a show of
viewing them, and having fired upon them, and to pass by the Ambuscade at the
forementioned distance, that so they may draw the Enemy after them on the same
rode: and if the Scouts can view the Enemy without being discovered, they are
to be ordered to return with all speed, and without noise, that they may give
the Captain an account of what they have seen and heard; and to the end there
happen no inconvenience, when the Scouts are upon their return, and pass by the
Vedettes, the Captain shall give both a night-signal, whereby the Vedettes may
at a distance know that they are the Scouts who are returning back. If the
Captain Post himself at the entry or coming out of some narrow passage, he may
use the same circumspection in a manner: it is of importance also, that if the
Captain upon his march, or when he is come to his Post, hear an extraordinary
noise in some Village, he detach four or six Troopers, whom he knows to be
discreet, ordering them without noise to go round the Village if it be small,
to see if they can find any tract of the Enemy, and to hearken if they can hear
them; and when they shall have gone round the Village, without knowing the
cause of the noise that has been heard, two or three of them to alight, giving
the rest their Horses to hold, and enter softly into the Village, that they may
hearken if the Enemies by chance or otherways be there to refresh themselves,
and in all haste bring him back news of what they have seen or heard; if the
Village be great, it will be enough to send some Troopers to the entry of it,
ordering them to go in with the circumspection abovesaid.

As to spies, the Captain ought to know if they be persons of wit, good
judgment, and faithful, for otherways he ought not to trust in them.

There is nothing of greater importance in an Army, than to be able to dive
into the designs of the Enemy, and to know their Posts, their goings and
comings, for by that means many troublesome rancounters are avoided, many
surprises both made and prevented, and likewise many ways found to do them
prejudice. For that effect, it is necessary to have good and faithful spies,
whom the Captain should gain by money and rewards, that by interest he may
engage and win them to expose themselves to all kind of dangers, and do what
seems even impossible, to learn the enterprises of the Enemies, and without
delay to come and give notice of all. The Captain ought to choose the most
dextrous of those whom he knows to have the best conduct and most of fidelity
and judgment to employ them as good and faithful spies, who dexterously
pretending to be weary of his service, should go to the Enemy, and so order
matters, that they might be listed amongst the Horse, because, that being made
Troopers, they may have better opportunities of giving intelligence, whether
they be in the Field or Garrison: But it is likewise necessary to have some in
diverse Regiments, and in diverse of the Enemies Garrisons, who are not acquainted
together, with whom the Captain should be in terms, and condescend on the place
whither they should carry their Letters of intelligence, as to leave them at
the root of some tree, or at a certain cross, or under some great stone, or
other places that are remarkable and easy to be found. These Spies should be
obliged themselves to bring the intelligence of great consequence, as the
Enemies designs of surprising some place, or forcing a Quarter, and other like
enterprises. The Captain may likewise make use of some Soldier disguised into
the habit of a Peasant, or into some other fashion, who speaking the language
of the Country or of the Enemies, may under some pretext go to their Camp, or
Quarter, to view their Posts, with all the circumstances, and to get
information of the actions of the Enemy, that he may be able to give notice of
the same. He may likewise employ Peasants, because they are free to go every
where, being but little suspected, and less observed by the Enemies, especially
in conquered Countries, where they have the liberty to enter into the Enemies
Camp, and all their places, and to travel by night; so that they may easily
bring news, and give good intelligence; but above all things he ought to have
Spies, who insinuate themselves, or have access into the quarters of general
persons, and of the Governors of places, that he may more easily have thereby
knowledge of the Enemies designs. He may also make use of double Spies, but
they must be such as are very affectionate and faithful to him, who that they
may gain credit, and obtain access to the Quarters of general persons, may give
them sometimes true intelligence of the marches of those of the contrary party,
but only in matters of small consequence, and at such a time as the Enemy can
make no advantage of them. The Captain ought also to be upon his Guard against
the double Spies of the Enemy: And therefore, if he intend to march out against
his Enemies, upon the report that has been made to him, and upon the
intelligence that some Spies, of whom he is not assured, has brought him, he
ought to detain the Spies under pretense of showing them kindness and
recompensing them; and in the mean time he shall give order to his servants to
treat these Spies kindly, but withal to have a care that they make not their
escape, nevertheless the Spies must not have occasion given them to think they
are distrusted, to the end that if their intelligence be true, he may largely
recompense them at his return, and so oblige them to persist in giving him
faithful advices: and these Spies being well rewarded, will not only rest
satisfied, but will also for the future expose themselves to every thing; being
allured by the profit, which may likewise draw in others upon hopes of the like
rewards. If the Captain be advertised by Spies, of whose fidelity he is not
fully assured, that the Enemies are abroad, or that he has some fair
opportunity offered him, He will do well before he march out of his Garrison or
Quarter, to send out three or four Pietons or Footmen toward the quarter and
place designed to him by the Spies, who knowing the Country, shall go an hour
before him, to some narrow pass, or some certain place that he shall tell them,
wherein he may suspect that the Enemies wait for him in ambush; lest that the
Spies may have given him false intelligence. This circumspection is especially
to be taken in a close and covered Country, wherein he may be surprised before
he can discover the Enemies at a distance, and in such places also where the
ways are narrow, and where his men cannot march but by Files, because in such a
case if the Pietons have wit they cannot be lost, nor be taken by the Enemy;
and the Captain shall appoint them a place where they may meet him, to inform
him of what they have learnt. When he is upon a march against the Enemy, he
ought likewise to Command his Troops to have a care of their Arms, and to keep
them in a condition of doing service.

These are the principal Maxims that a gallant Captain ought to observe in his
charge of Horse; let us now proceed to the duties of the Sergeant Major.

CHAP. V. Of the charge of a Sergeant Major.
THE charge of Serjeant-Major ought to be possessed by an old Officer of Foot,
a man of middle age, of virtue and good example, and most affectionate to the
service of the King: consummated in the experience of War, and especially in
the conduct of infantry. The Major is a Demi-Governour; and though of himself
he has no Command over the Troops, yet it is his duty to watch over all that
concerns his Majesty's Interests. He carries about the Governors Orders, and
all the Officers are obliged to receive and obey them, as if they had been
given by the Governor himself; for he is as it were the Kings Proctor General
in the matter of War; and in that, his Office is gentile and of importance, but
of great fatigue. If he be Major of a Town or Citadel, he ought every Morning
to go to the Governors House at the hour appointed for opening of the Gates.

The Aid-Major if any be, and the Captain of the Gates, should likewise go at
the same hour to the Governors House; and the hour for opening the Gates being
come, if the Governor call not the Major to speak with him, the Major should
let him know that he waits for the Keys that he may go open the Gates. The
Governor, or in his absence the Commander, do commonly call the Major into
their Chamber, where they discourse of the matters which the Major has observed
the night before upon his round, which he ought to relate truly to the
Governor, without adding or diminishing any thing. Having made his report, he
is to give the Governor the Roll, containing the number of Officers,
Escouades, and Soldiers of each Escouade, who the day before mounted the Guard
on the place of Arms; underneath that Roll the Major ought to write down the
extract of the same Escouades, the number of Soldiers of each Escouade, and if
he found the Officers at their Posts and Courts of Guard, when he went his
round; which extract and Roll, the Major ought to give to the Governor, to the
end that he may know if the same number of Officers and Soldiers who mounted
the Guard, have continued on the Rampart, and in the Court of Guard that fell
to them by lot. Having given the extract of the Rampart and Parade, he is to
ask the Governor if there be any new Commands to be given at the Gates,
besides the usual. If he say there are none, the Major is to take the Keys, and
deliver them to the Captain of the Gates, who gives them to his servant;
afterward they go to the Gate, where being arrived, the Major asks the Officer
of the Guards if there be any news. If the Officer tell him that there is
nothing that may hinder the opening of the Gate, he shall bid the Officer draw
down the next Escouades that are upon the Rampart, and those of the Court of
Guard who come commonly to the opening of it; and whilst the Sergeants or
Corporals come down from the Rampart, and that they draw up their men in Hay,
on the right and left, in the street, as far as the Gate, the Major ought to go
upon the Rampart, to see if any Country people be come to the Gate. If there
be any, he ought to ask them from whence they come, and what Villages they
belong to, and endeavor to find out if they speak truth. In a word, if the
Major see nothing that may justly delay the opening of the Gate, he is to come
down from the Rampart, and seeing all the Soldiers in Arms, with lighted
matches, and the Officer at their head, he is to Command the Porter to open the
Gates, which he is instantly to open; and as the leaves of the Gate are
opening, he is to make the Guard draw out in File as far as the furthermost
Drawbridge, presenting their Arms. If the Officer of the Guard be not at the
Court of Guard, the Major is to cause him to be sought for, for to open the
Gate without him, is as great a fault in the Major, as in the Officer for not
being on his duty. This being done before the Guard lay down their Arms, he is
to make all the people and Cattle that are in the street march out, and when
all are gone out, he shall cause those that are without come in one after
another; and if there be any Carts or Wagons laden with Forage, he is to
Command them to be searched, though he have but little or no suspicion of them.
When the Governor, with the Keys, gives the Major any new Order, and it be
something extraordinary, and not put in practice the day before, the Major is
to acquaint the Officer of the Guard with it; but if he have received no order,
he is to bid the Officer Command his Soldiers to lay down their Arms, and tell
him that he has no new Orders, and that there is no more to be done but what is
usual, which he is not obliged to inform him of; because that the Officer when
he enters into his Post, and relieves the Officer that comes off the Guard,
ought to ask him, and make him tell him plainly all things that have been told
him by the Officer whom he last relieved, that he may punctually obey them. The
Major being returned with the Captain of the Gates, who causes the Keys to be
carried to the Governors House, he is to acquaint the Governor with all that
is done, and with what he has learnt at the opening of the Gate.

When in one place there are several Gates which are opened the same day, the
Major shall send his Aid to open the other, or the Captain of the Gates if
there be no Aid-Major, and give him the same Orders that he has received from
the Governor: all the Gates being opened, the Major has the rest of the day
for himself; until that the Escouades and all the Companies who are to mount
the Guard, be come together on the place of Arms, whither the Major with his
Aids should go; and being come there, he is to draw aside on the place of Arms,
and being sat down there with a Drum before him, and having his Roll of the
Guards which mount day by day, and his Counters or lots in a purse, he is to
send his Aid to the head of the Guard, to bid the Sergeants and Corporals come
and draw their Posts. He should have already written down in his Register of
Guards, the day of the week, and month, and underneath he should have placed
the names of all the Courts of Guard, and the number of the Escouades that he
uses to send to every one of them; and at the same time that the Sergeants and
Corporals draw, the Major writes the name of the Company to which the Escouade
belongs; for instance, if it has been the custom to send six Escouades to the
Gate of Paris, and eight to the Gate of St. Anthony, he puts six Counters or
Lots into a Hat, on which he writes, Gate of Paris; and eight more on which he
writes, Gate of St. Anthony; and so for other Gates and Posts, observing to put
in neither fewer nor more Lots, than there are Posts to be supplied, and
Escouades to be sent, because otherways it would breed confusion. The Post
being drawn, and all the Guards in Arms, the Files and Ranks are to be put in
good order, each according to their rank, to which the Aid-Majors should take
heed, as likewise the Majors of the Regiments. This being done the Major comes
to the head of the Batallion to meet the Officers that are to mount the Guard;
and if there be two Captains-Posts, he presents to them two Lots whereon are
written the names of the two Posts without being seen by them, or otherways he
puts them into a Hat, and prays them to draw. He does the same in respect of
Lieutenants, and of all Posts whither equal Officers are to go. But if they be
different Posts as that of a Lieutenant and an Enseign, or of a Sergeant and
Corporal, he is not to make them draw, because the Superior goes always to the
same Post to which his equals are accustomed to go. When the Major has taken a
turn or two about the Batallion, gone in amongst them, considered the
Companies, and if the Musketeers have their Bandeliers provided of Powder,
Bullets and Match, (for it is their duty to have the match lighted, and Powder
for twelve or fifteen times firing) then he makes the Guard File off, and sends
every one to his Post, to relieve the Guards that mounted there the day before;
but as the Officer, Sergeant or Corporal, with their Escouades pass by him, he
gives to each of them the Lots of the rounds which they are to go, and
recommends to them the care of going the said rounds at the hours marked on the
aforesaid Lots or Tickets.

If the Governor be upon the place of Arms to see the Guard File off, as he
ought not to fail to be, and where his time is not ill employed, the Major
addresses himself to the Governor when all are drawn off, and softly and with
respect asks him the watchword. If the Governor carry himself diffidently and
prudently, the Major has no cause to complain; for indeed the Majors ask it
not, if they know it not to be his will.

When it is time to shut the Gates, the Major goes to the Governors House for
the Keys, whither the Aid-Majors and Captains of the Gates should come; and if
there be Guards on the Outworks, as happens often, especially on the
Half-Moons which are before the Gates to cover them, the Major is to have the
Field-word, that he may give it to the Commander of the half Moon, before he
shut the Gate, recommending him to keep good Guard, and to send out in the
Morning some to search and make discovery in the ruined Houses and hollow ways,
and in the Houses of the Suburbs if there be any near the Gate. Afterward he
puts all the Guard in Arms; and when the Drum has beaten the Tattoe, he causes
the Barriers to be shut, and then the leaves of the Gates, causes the Bridges
to be drawn, and at the same makes the Soldiers face about to the right, and
causes the Guard to file up in the street that leads to the Gate; and as the
Porter turns the Key in the lock, the Major bids the Corporals who are the
File-leaders feel the bolt, to see if it be fast: the same he bids the
Sergeants do; and the Captain of the Gates touches it likewise, after him the
Major, and last of all the Captain of the Guard, who is more concerned to do it
than any, because he must answer for the Post.

The Gates and Barriers being shut, the Major goes to the Governors House, and
tells him in presence of all, that the Gate is shut, to the end it may be known
that he has done his duty, and has observed the usual hour, and no
unseasonable time. The Major ought to be exact in opening and shutting the
Gates at the usual hours; for on these two occasions, which are the chief of
his duty, the greatest danger is to be run. The rest of the night he has two
things to do; the one is to be at the Circle, and give the word to the
Sergeants, which is to be done when the Gate is shut; the other, to go at what
hour he pleases, and make his Round-Major on the Rampart, and visit all the
Courts of Guard, not only on the Rampart, but also all those of the Town. When
he goes his Round-Major, he ought to have a Lantern carried before him, and
demand the word from all the Courts of Guard, and entering them, cause the Arms
to be viewed. He ought to reckon the Escouades and the men, to see if all that
mounted the Guard be there, setting it down in his Table Book; and when he is
come back to his lodgings, or next day, he is to compare his Table Book, with
the extract that he made on the place, when the Guard drew off, and thereby he
knows what Escouades have dismissed their Soldiers, that is to say, who have
mounted the Parade, and have not lain in the Court of Guard. He is to acquaint
the Governor with that, it being a matter of importance to the service; and it
is to be seen by the extract of his round, whereof he should give the Governor
a Copy written with his own hand: and in so much that these kinds of rounds are
a kind of muster, the Major makes them not every night with the same exactness;
he passes only before the Court of Guard, to see if the word be right. If on
his round he has learnt any thing of importance, he ought to go and acquaint
the Governor with it at what hour of the night soever: and if the Governor
Command the Major to go open the Gate, and tell him the reason wherefore, he
ought to take special notice of the number of Horse or Foot that he tells him
are to go out or come in. When the Major has known the Governors Orders, he is
to take the Keys and give them to the Captain of the Gates who has been
advertised, and both together are to go to the Gate, where being come, the
Major is to speak to the Captain of the Guard, show him the Keys, and tell him
that the Gate is to be opened, and that he should bring down his Escouades, in
the same manner as we have described for opening them in the Morning; and if it
be a Convoy that is to come in, nothing is to be opened till all be come to the
Gate, or that all those that are to go out be come near the Gate on the inside,
because the Gate of a Garrison must not stand open in the night time, but as
short time as possibly may be.

If there be a Guard on the half Moon, the Major ought to make the Commander
draw near on the Pont dormant, or sleeping Bridge, of whom he shall inquire who
they are that are come, if they be Horse or Foot, and if there be any Carriages
with them, and having received answer of the Commander of the half Moon, the
Major is to tell him, to bid him that Commands the Convoy draw near, whom he is
to ask what Troops he belongs to, if all his men be come up, and what number of
Horse or Foot he has with him. If the Commander of the Convoy should tell him
matters far wide of what the Governor told him when he gave him the Keys,
either as to the quantity or quality of the Convoy; The Major is not to open
without sending to inform the Governor of the difference of the matters.
Afterward, if the Governor send him word to open, he is first to mount with
the Captain of the Gates, to view the Orgues and Herses which are hung and
fastened over the Gates, to hinder surprises; and finding them to be in good
condition, he shall cause open the Barrier which is within the Town, and the
first leaves.

If they open to let out some private person, the Barrier is to be shut, so
soon as he that is to go out is got within, and come to the Drawbridge, which
is not hastily to be let down; for the Gate of a Town cannot be too slowly
opened in the night time, nor too quickly shut: when there are two
Draw-bridges; this is to be drawn up, so soon as he who is to go out, is passed
over it; and the Major or Captain of the Gates is to go and cause the other to
be let down, which is to be drawn up presently after. If it be a party of
Horse, the Tape cut is not to be drawn up, but they are to march out or come
in, by the little Gate, at the side of the Tape-cut. If it be to let any Convoy
come in; all the Bridges must be let down, and all the Gates and Barriers
opened, and all the Escouades that are in the Court of Guard, and on the
Rampart, are to be drawn out to the Gate, except those who are remotest from
the Gate which is to be opened. The Major, Captain of the Gates, and the
Porters, on such occasions ought each of them to have great Lanterns, for they
cannot in such rancounters see too clearly. When all things are well disposed,
and all security taken for the entry of the Convoy, the Major and his Aids
shall stand by the Bridges, and hinder any stop to be made thereon, making the
Convoy file up into two files, if they be Foot, and if they be Horse, singly
one after another; if they be Carriages, in the same manner; and as fast as
they enter, the Major, his Aids, and even the Captain of the Gates, ought to
count the Troopers, and Foot, and the number of Wagons that enter; and so soon
as the Convoy is entered, the Gate is to be shut, though there may be some
Trooper or Foot Soldier behind; and immediately after the Gate is shut, the
Major should send back the Escouades to their several Courts of Guard, and he
himself at the same time with his Aids, and the Captain of the Gates, should
carry the Keys to the Governor, and give him an account of all. If the Major
or his Aids, cause the Gates be opened by day or night, they should never
suffer the Keys to be carried into any private House. The Major ought to have
an exact account of the Posts of honor, and the Posts of fatigue, though all
of them ought to be taken for Posts of honor.

If the Major allow some Mornings in fair weather to the younger Brothers who
are in the Garrison, that they may be trained in their exercises, he will
procure friends, and be esteemed by these young Gentlemen. The Regiment-Majors
who are in Garrison commonly take that care upon them; yet they ought not to do
it, without acquainting the Major of the place; because no body should take
Arms without his knowledge; and besides, the functions of Majors cease when
they enter into Garrison. They may very well act severally in their Regiments,
but they must receive the Orders which they execute in their Regiments from the
Major of the place, otherways the order of War would be perverted; and
therefore there are never more than one Governor, one Kings-Lieutenant, and
one single Major in a place. And that I may continue to describe his function,
I shall tell you, that a Major must be most affectionate to the service of the
King, faithful, vigilant and laborious, a man of great Courage, and clear and
sound Judgment; he ought to be very impartial in the distribution of service
without any compliance, he is to be the Organ of the Governor, as he of a
Regiment, is of the Colonel; he alone, or his Aid, ought to carry the Orders,
cause all Proclamations to be made, and establish all that concerns Military
Discipline for the Authority of his Prince or Governor; take an account of the
Posts that are to be guarded, proportion Guards to them according to the
strength of the Garrison, show them to the Governor, and take his Orders
concerning the manner how he ought to make the distribution of them, and having
received them, cause them to be punctually obeyed. In time of War, if the place
may be attacked, and that there is ground of fear that the Garrison is not
strong enough for defense, or that the Fortifications, Artillery, Ammunition
and Provisions, are not in condition to resist the Enemies Forces, he is to
acquaint the Governor therewith, and at the same time write to a Secretary of
State, who has the concerns of War for his charge, that he may acquaint the
King with the same. If the place be besieged, he ought to take measures for its
defense proportionably to the strength of the Garrison and Inhabitants, knowing
within a little the number of Soldiers that may defend it; and endeavor by
all means to ease the Governor of some part of the cares wherewith he is
over-burdened at such a time; and if they be approved by him, he is to take his
Orders to cause his will be executed therein. This is the whole duty of a well
accomplished Major: so also should all Officers upon the account of honor and
duty, acquit themselves strenuously of their charges, that the King may be the
better served. There is nothing of greater Glory to a man, than to command men;
and therefore Officers ought to know their functions well, and command their
inferiors to do their duty; that being so, his Majesty will be far better
served, and take pleasure to see so many brave Officers, and so many Soldiers,
submitted to his power, and ready to die for his service, the glory of God, and
the welfare of the State.

CHAP. VI. Of the March of an Army.
SQuadrons of Horse as we have said in our first part, are commonly composed of
eighty, an hundred, or an hundred and twenty Troopers; it is very rare when
they exceed two hundred.

Batallions are made as strong as may be. The Pikes are always placed in the
middle, and the Musketeers on the Wings. The Army is divided into three bodies,
which are ranked in three lines; the first is called the Vanguard; the second
the main body; and the third if it be of almost equal force, is called the
Rear-guard; but when weaker it is called the body of reserve. The middle of
these three lines consists of Foot; the Cavalrie is on the Wings of each of the
same lines; and sometimes the Squadrons are placed in the intervals betwixt the
Batallions (as we have elsewhere discoursed) to the end that when the Foot have
fired, and begin to put the Enemy in disorder, the Horse may more easily
advance and charge through these intervals, to break entirely those who already
begin to be in disorder; yea, and by that interlining, if the infantry who have
fired have suffered any check, the Cavalrie which is at hand may maintain them,
and give them time to rally.

The most honorable Post of all is the Vanguard; next the main body claims
the honor, but we must except the Regiment of Guards, and the Kings Gend'arms,
because both are in service, and are always put in the second line.

There is in every line also the honorable Post: the old Bodies, according to
the Order of their Seniority, have always the right Wing, and the second in
seniority is placed on the left, and so from rank to rank, so that the middle
of the line is the lowest Post in honor. If we consider the number of men, who
(as we have said) compose the Batallions which at most consist of a thousand
men apiece; and the number of Troopers that make up a Squadron, which is at
most of two hundred; it is evident, that though there be but very few Cavalrie
in an Army, yet the number of Squadrons is double, yea and triple the number of
Batallions: so that for every Batallion, in the middle of each of the three
lines, there will be two or three Squadrons in the Wings of the same line.

When an Army is drawn up in Batallia, they observe five foot of interval
interval between each Trooper, and three foot between each foot man, which is
for the front or distance of one file from another; but when they come to the
shock, the files close, and the front is lessened almost one half. There are
left about an hundred paces between the first line and the second, and two
hundred between the second and third; that the Troops if they be broken may
have ground to rally on; and if less ground were allotted them, it would happen
that the Troops of one line giving ground would break the Troops of the second,
as being too near them. In every line, the Batallions are distant from
Batallions, and the Squadrons from Squadrons to a distance almost equal to
their front: so that the front of a Squadron extending about two or three
hundred foot, the interval between two Squadrons shall be two or three hundred
foot more or less; and the front of a Batallion being between an hundred and
seventy, or a hundred and eighty foot, the interval between two Batallions
shall be within a little equal to their front. These intervals are left,
because the Squadrons and Batallions of the second line are placed just behind
the intervals of the first, and in the same manner the Bodies of the Rear-guard
are placed just behind the intervals that are between the bodies of the main
Battle, to the end that by these intervals both may more easily advance against
the Enemy; and that if the first line be broken, instead of falling back upon
the Troops of the second, (as must needs happen if the bodies of all the lines
made but files) it might rally behind its own ground, and leave the intervals
free for the second line, to advance and maintain the other that gave ground.

If the Army on a march, have the Enemy on head, and that they march in an open
and razed Country, they keep together in a posture of fighting. The Cavalrie
are placed upon the Wings; but the Gend'arms come behind the second line; the
Cannon march at the head of the first line: next comes the second backed by the
Gend'arms; on the same front march the provisions, baggage, and equipage of
Artillery; and for the security of these equipages the Rear-guard comes after:
but if they must come to a fight, the Rear-guard advances on head of them, and
leaves only two or three Squadrons on the rear of the baggage and provisions.
When the Enemy is on head of an Army in a close Country that is divided by
cross ways, by Lanes, and Ditches covered with wood, or beset with Hedges, the
front of each of the three lines must of necessity be contracted, and one body
must file off after another. In such a Country, the Horse and great Cannon are
but of little use, the Cavalrie being unable to fight there, and having
frequently need of succor. Commonly the march begins by one or two Squadrons a
Front, then a Batallion or two a Front, and so successively according as the
passages are more or less open. The Cannon, Provisions and Baggage march only
after the Troops of the second line; for the Cannon would be so far from doing
any good effect if it were on the Front, that it would hinder the march of the
Troops, in case the Enemy were on head, and would attack the first line. In
such kind of marches there are many skirmishing parties mingled amongst the
Baggage, to secure them against the Enemy, who might cut them off by the
advantage of the Woods. The infantry has a particular order for the march of
the Baggages; for the Baggage of the oldest Regiments march first, though these
old Regiments were even in the third line. When there are two or three narrow
Passes, the Army marches in two or three Pillars; to march in Pillars is, when
the lines instead of making a large Front, make a long File: so to march in
three Pillars, is to march in three long Files.

If an Army march by Pillars, one half of the Cannon is placed in the intervals
of the Troops of the Vanguard, and the other half in the intervals of the main
body. There are but very few put in the Pillar of the Rear-guard, because it is
supposed to be weaker than the other Pillars, and less able to defend the
Artillery. When the Enemy is on the flank, in a large and open Country, the
Army marches likewise in three Pillars: the first Pillar that sides to the
Enemy, shall be composed of the Regiments of the Vanguard; the Cannon shall
march between that first Pillar and the Enemy: the second Pillar shall be made
up of the Troops of the main Battle; and the third of the body of the
Rear-guard: so that when the Enemy appears, making the three Pillars turn to
the right or left, according as the Enemy shall appear to the right or left,
all the Army by that motion will be in order of Battallia, and the Cannon on
the Front.

Of a Council of War.
It is to be supposed that he who Commands an Army, is a man endowed with all
the good qualities that are necessary to the General of an Army. The first
thing that a General should do when he has received his Orders from the King,
written and countersigned by his Secretary of War, is to endeavor to follow
punctually the same orders, that he may the better succeed in them, and give no
advantage to his Enemies who are jealous of his glory. He ought have a Journal
Book, wherein he shall cause to be inserted by his chief Secretary, all the
Orders, Letters, and Answers, which he shall have received or given, that he
may be thereby always in a condition to give his Sovereign an account of his
duty and actions.

The General knowing into what place he is to carry the War, and if it be only
to enter into an Enemies Country, or to give a diversion to their Forces; or if
it be in effect to besiege a place, force some Posts, or to search the Enemy to
give him Battle; he is to hold a Council upon these several occurrences, and
shall call to it the chief Officers of Horse, Foot, and Artillery, with the
Commissary General of the Provisions, to the end that amongst themselves they
may determine the several days marches, and the places for provision on the way.

In that council, where they treat of the security of the Army, in going to
the place proposed, they shall inquire into the nature of the Country, to wit
if it be commodious for the march of the Cavalrie, or more favorable for
infantry; or if these two bodies may march both together: In fine, they must
there treat of Carriages; and the General of the Artillery, and Commissary of
Provisions, shall declare the advantage or inconvenience of the Country, for
the conduct of the Provisions and Baggage of the Army.

When the General has received orders from his Sovereign to depart on a day
prefixed, or having resolved it in his Council, he ought to write to the chief
Officers who were not at the Council General. Now seeing it is usual that the
Enemy entertains always Spies in the Capital Towns, and in the place where the
General has his abode; he is to send his Letters by secret and extraordinary
ways, so that they who pry into his actions may be deceived. He may pretend
some indisposition that he may have time to write his Letters. He shall begin
to send to those who are most remote from him, and the place whither he intends
to go; which will give them occasion to arrive at the place of Rendezvous as
soon as they who are very near, to whom the General is not to make known his
thoughts but when the time is at hand. Four or five days before the General is
to depart, he should cause a report to be spread that he intends to go to a
match of Hunting in a place at some considerable distance from the way his Army
is to march. This or some such like pretext, puzles the Spies, especially when
they see that there is some probability in it. The Evening before he is to
depart, he shall cause notice be given at the receiving of the word, that the
Forces that are with him shall repair next day to their colors, that they may
be ready to march according to Orders. The Generals of Artillery and the
Commissaries of Provision receive the first Orders, to the end they may have
time to make provisions without hurry or noise, and furnish the stores from
whence the Army is to receive refreshment: and that obliges them to keep their
order very secret. The Rendezvous of an Army, is a certain place which the
General has chosen, or is appointed him by Orders from his Prince, whither all
the Regiments that are to compose his Army, ought to be present at the day
prefixed to them, notwithstanding of the badness of weather. The Rendezvous
ought to be commodious, not only for lodging the Army, but also for furnishing
it with provisions, and all other things necessary: and therefore it should
always be near some places situated on Rivers, that both Horse and Foot may be
furnished with sufficiency of water. When the Rendezvous of an Army is made in
some Town, and that the Army is to stay there but for one night, the most
commodious way both for the inhabitants, and for the Soldiers, is to encamp
without the Walls of the Town, giving permission only to some Horse and Foot,
to come and buy provisions for themselves and Comrades.

If the Army be to lie some time at their Rendezvous, and that the place is
capable to receive them, then they may be freely quartered in the Town,
provided there be water enough both for the inhabitants and Army, for otherways
they must go quarter elsewhere.

It is to be observed that when the Army lies in the Field, the Quarters are to
be placed as near one another as possibly they can, that it may not be
weakened; and though the Rendevous of the Army be distant from the Enemies
Country, and that there seem to be no fear of danger, nevertheless as fast as
the Regiments shall arrive at the Rendezvous, and enter into their Posts or
Lodgings, they shall be careful to place their Courts of Guard, and advance
Sentinels for security of the Camp.

Of cautions to be taken before an Army be drawn into the Field.
The General before he draws out into the Field, is to agree with the Mareshal
de Camp, and the Mareshal of Battle, about the order of his march. That that
may be done in the most convenient manner, the General should know the force of
the Army that he is to Command, and likewise of the Enemies. It will be no hard
matter to know the state of his own; for by making a Roll of the number of
Regiments of Horse and Foot, that compose it, and having set down in it the
number of the men that are in them, and the number of Squadrons and Batallions
that they may form, he shall know how many men he has to Command, and according
to that number may proportion the Van guard, main Body, and the Rear-guard; but
he ought first by his Spies and Scouts be informed, of the convenience or
inconvenience of the ways; if they be solid and plain, that he may carry with
him his Artillery; if the Country be Mountainous, close, or open Champian; if
there be many Woods and Rivers to pass; if the ways be cut by Marshes, Ditches,
Canals, or other incommodious places; if there be many narrow passes; if the
Enemy may have advantage to attack or surprise by Ambuscades in the narrow
passages. Finally, being well informed of all that may be advantageous to him,
he shall frame the order of his march, that he may depart when he shall think
fit. Before he draw out into the Fields, he ought above all things give orders
for raising recruits, making Convoys, which are two things absolutely necessary
for the preservation of an Army that has a design to march in an Enemies
Country.

The General having caused notice to be given at receiving of the word the
Evening before he designs his Army should march, that every one should be in
readiness to march next day by the break of day; the Horse and Foot early in
the Morning shall repair to their Standards and Colors, which is the place of
the gathering together of the several Troops and Companies. All the Troops
being formed there, they shall put themselves upon the march, and rank
themselves into Squadrons and Batallions, that they may afterward draw up in
Batallia in the place appointed them by the Mareshal de Camp, or his Aids.
Above all things the Mareshal de Camp ought to be well informed of the
condition of the Country through which the Army is to march, instructing
himself by the general and particular Maps of the Country, and also by the
relation of Peasants.

He shall then draw up his Troops in Batallia, according as he shall judge
convenient, or as the General has ordered him. If it be to march in a plain
and open Country, convenient for the Cavalrie, Artillery, and the Carriages,
then he may extend the Wings of his Army, and march in this manner.

He shall divide the whole Army into three bodies: that in the middle shall be
two thirds of all the Foot, tanked in gross, and by Batallions of two Regiments
a piece: upon the flanks of that infanterie the greater pieces of Artillery
shall be placed, accompanied by some Batallion of Foot.

At the right and left Wing of that middle-line, shall be the Cavalrie disposed
into Squadrons, each Squadron consisting of two Cornets; The rest of the
infantery marching in little bodies, shall close in, between them and the
Horse, the Baggage and Ammunition of the Army, with some Field pieces, as we
have said in the proper place. When an Army marches in a straight Country on a
rode way, no accidents give it greater umbrage, than to be obliged to march
through long and narrow passes. When the ways lie between Hills, the General is
to send out Riders to post themselves on the way, that they may discover even
to the lowest places, if the Enemy be not entrenched there, observing the
nature of the plains, and always asking news of the Enemies march. If the way
be covered with Trees, two or three days before the Army come there, Carpenters
and Pioneers must be sent before, with a Guard of Horse to defend them whilst
they are cutting down the Trees, and enlarging the ways, that they make space
for the Army to march by Pillars. At first there must advance a Squadron of
Horse, and then a gross body, which is to be backed by Foot, then the Artillery
shall follow, mingled with some Batallion of Foot, and afterward the rest of
the Army, which is to be brought up by the rest of the Cavalrie: but if the
Country be incommodious, and that neither Wagons nor Artillery can be brought
through it, the ways stretching along Mountains, little Hills, Valleys,
navigable and un navigable Rivers, and other difficult places, and that
nevertheless there is a necessity of Cannon, in such a case the General drawing
a little aside out of the way, shall cause the Fords and ways to be sounded and
tried; he shall always send out some to get intelligence of the Enemies; and
when he is well informed of the ways, and that he has made some of them fit
for the passage of Cannon, he is to divide his Army into two Bodies; and shall
make one of them march in file, and afterward the Artillery which is to be
followed by the second body or Rear-guard. If the War be to be carried into the
Enemies Country, and that there be a necessity of passing through some one of
his Provinces, whether it be to lay down a Siege, or to bring relief to some
place that is to be protected; then, either the Enemy has been already defeated
in open Battle, or keeps the Field to bring succors into the place besieged,
or to hinder relief from being brought to the Camp of the Besiegers. On all
these various occasions, whether the Army Camp in the Field, or in a Village,
the General is to have special care that the Commissary General of Provisions,
and the Treasurers of War, behave themselves with the fidelity that their
charge requires, especially as to the matter of Provisions which ought
incessantly be provided either by Victuallers or Convoys. If the Enemy has
been beaten, and that they are not in condition to make a body of an Army, then
the General may order his march, as has been said before, either in an open and
plain, or in a close and covered Country; but if they have rallied again after
their rout, and of the wrack of their Forces have made up an Army considerable
enough to cross the designs of the victorious Army, then must he march in a
close body; and to the end that the Army may be in freedom to pass into all
sorts of places; being disposed into Pillars, the Cavalrie shall march on the
flanks, on the Front and at the rear of the Pillars; the Infantery shall be in
the middle and in gross Batallions, the Artillery and Baggage on one side; all
attended by some old Regiments, to cover and hinder them from being cut off.

Of the march of an Army in a close and covered Country.
An Army passing through a close and covered Country, suffers many
inconveniences, especially if it be engaged in an Enemies Country, for it
cannot march in Batallia, far less bring up the Artillery, the ways being often
broken by Woods, Rivers, and other incommodious places and passages. If the
Army be obliged to pass through such kind of places, the General, or Marshall
de Camp, is to send before, some Ingineers with a party of Horse, and some
Companies of Foot and Pioneers to fill up the Ditches, make Bridges, build
Boats, and in a word, to do all that the Ingeniers shall Command them, who are
to take the best measures they can for facilitating the march of the Army; and
during the time that these things are a doing, the General is to take special
care to send out some parties of Horse a scouting, that they may learn
intelligence of the Enemy, and know, if they be in the Fields, what way they
march, and in a word, all that may conduce to the avoiding of ambushes and
surprises. That is the time when the General should set his Spies at work to
discover the Enemies designs, which is an extraordinary advantage in such an
enterprise.

The General by his Scouts shall inform himself of the Enemies Countenance; to
which he is not slightly to give credit, unless confirmed by many; and if he
know that the Enemies wait not for him at some place or pass, he shall advance
his Army, and go in search of them if his orders be so: but if he be informed
that the Enemy has a mind to surprise him in some narrow passage, or in
crossing a River, he is to use all circumspection in passing such places, that
he may preserve his Troops from the surprises of the Enemies. In all these
various occurrences, whether he encamp in the Field, or in some Village, He is
to take most special care that the Commissary General of Provisions, and the
Treasurers of War act with all the faithfulness that their offices require, and
particularly as to the matter of Provisions which must be daily supplied, as
well by Convoys as Victuallers.

The Commissary General ought to be very careful in the choice of the Corn,
which he is to gather together into Granaries and Stores by his under Officers,
who ought to be skilful and faithful, that they may have a care not to buy
rotten and spoiled Corn, which might be destructive to the Soldiers; as also
in the entertaining of honest and faithful Bakers, such as can resist the
temptations which might be made to them by the Enemies money.

The Commissary ought to know the weight that a Bushel of good Wheat should
weigh, and by consequent all the other measures that are in use. In the first
place he ought to know what weight of bread so much Wheat will yield, and how
many men that Bread is sufficient to feed in a day, and then how much Wine or
Water, according to the usual proportion, is sufficient for the same number of
men, and what weight it weighs. These things should be known to the Commissary
General, and his Clarks, that they may take their measures to prepare the
necessary Provisions for the Body of an Army during a Campagn.

How an Army made up of Horse and Foot, is to be Encamped.
To Camp an Army aright, it must be always put into two lines, with a Body of
reserve, provided the ground be fit for it; so disposing them, that between the
two lines there be two hundred paces distance. All the Squadrons of Horse of
each line are to possess thirty five paces of ground a piece, and there must be
as much void betwixt them, that a Squadron may march by the intervals, when
there is occasion of fighting.

The Batallions of Foot who Camp commonly in Batallia six men deep, have about
eighty paces of ground allotted to them, more or less, according to the
situation of the place.

Between the Squadrons of Horse and Batallions of Foot of the same line, there
is usually left a distance of forty or fifty paces.

As to the Artillery, the Cannons are placed in the first line of the Foot, at
such places as shall be thought most advantageous.

The Wagons and Ammunition are to be Camped between the second line and the
body of reserve, on the right hand; and the Provisions on the left, or near the
Tent of the Commissary General.

The Officers as well of Horse as Foot, Camp at the head of their Squadrons and
Batallions.

The place of Arms and chief Court of Guard, are always at the head of the
Camp, where the Arms, Standards, and Colors are lodged.

A General marching in an Enemies Country, and having on his march met with a
Post, which we suppose to be a Bridge, before which there are some Courtins,
Bastions, and demy-Bastions, flanked by some heights or little Castles, he is
to take care to view it, or to send some Ingeneers to observe if the Bridge be
for resistance, divided by little draw Bridges, or united and entire; and at
the same time shall detach a small party to try if the River be fordable, for
in such a case the General may make some Horse pass over carrying Foot behind
them, and by that means attack the Bridge at both ends. But if the Bridge be
defended by some eminence, whereon Cannon is planted, a cross Battery is
quickly to be raised, in such a manner that the pieces may be out of aim, and
that those of the height cannot bear against them, from which they cannot fire
but out of the openings or Gun-holes, which look against and defend only that
which is opposite to them on the Front: from the Battery they must fire
constantly, until the Embrasures, or Gun-holes be broken down, and the Enemies
Cannon dismounted. If the entry of the Bridge be fortified with some Bastions;
without spending time to attack it by Trenches, some Cavalier must in haste be
raised to make a breach, which must be assaulted with Sword and Pistol, that so
the Bastion may be carried in a trice. That is a vigourous way of attack; the
truth is, the Soldiers are much exposed thereby, but it is the surest way for
such Posts, which by a long delay might consume more men, and occasion the loss
of opportunity of effectuating the design, if it were set upon by Trenches.

When an Army on a march meets with Villages, heights, or other like Posts,
which the Peasants have fortified to defend themselves, and to secure their
goods in; The General shall observe, if the Post deserve that the Army should
halt, or that if proceeding in his march a detachment will be sufficient to
reduce these Mutineers to reason. If he find it convenient to make a halt, the
Mareshal de Camp, attended by the Ingeneers, is to search for the most
convenient ground for encamping the Army, such as places where are Rivers,
Waters, or Fountains. The Quarter Masters of Horse, and the Brigadeers of Foot
of the Army, shall distribute the ground for the Camping of their Forces,
according to the Orders of the Quarter-Master-General. The Law of War forbids
Peasants upon pain of death, to shut themselves up within bare Walls without
Cannon, to give thereby stop to a Royal Army. If the General causes them to be
summoned to render, it is an extraordinary favor showed them; but if he
resolve to force them, he is to name the Officers who should begin the attack,
that with their men and those that are to back them, they may warmly ply them
with fire, some furnished with short Arms, others with Petards, Grenades,
Bosses, fire Pots; and some others shall carry Ladders: the first by the help
of Mantelets or portable defenses, shall approach the Gates, and apply the
Petard, whilst others scale the Walls, every one making use of Fireworks, and
continuing the action with vigor, until the Post be gained. The success is
fatal to the Commanders of the Post, who are rigourously to be punished for so
insolent a piece of rashness.

In the attacking of places, so many different accidents and subjects do occur
wherein the General of an Army ought to employ the best of his Judgment, and
make use of his experience and conduct in War, that as we have said in our
first part, and as may be with good reason averred, the most part of the
actions of War are no more but continual consequences of occurrences that many
times depend more on chance, than on the Conduct of a Commander.

Of the continuance of a Siege.
It is very difficult to find two Towns of the same situation and force; it is
likewise a hard matter to make two Sieges of a like disposition, and much more
still to determine the continuance thereof; for if there be some Towns, to
which the Besiegers without opening or carrying on of Trenches, may the first
day of the Siege approach, and lodge themselves on the Counterscarps of their
Fosse, by means of a Rideau, or some hollow way; sometimes of a River, or some
ill fortified Suburbs. There are likewise other Towns where the ground about is
so well ordered, that within Cannon shot of their Ramparts, or at greater
distance from their Outworks, there is neither any ruinous place, nor hollow
way, that may facilitate an approach to them. To such kind of places there is
no coming but by Trenches, or by gaining ground piece and piece; and that is
the reason that such Sieges are commonly very dangerous, because of the many
accidents which happen daily in the attacks, sallies, mines, and other actions
of War, practiced by both parties, the one to defend themselves with more
resolution, and the other to attack with greater vigor.

Of the ravage that is made about places which are intended to be Besieged.
It is usually made by parties of Horse and Foot joined together, to the end
they may be in better condition of Foraging, and burning all the Corn and other
Commodities that are about a place, whereof they who are to be assieged might
make any advantage. In this action as well as in the rest of the whole Siege,
the General should act with great prudence, for from the beginnings there is
good conjecture to be made of the progress of a Siege: and the parties whom he
shall send out ought to be Commanded by men skilful in War, such as Masters de
Camp, Majors, and other Officers, who have the prudence to shun the Ambushes of
the Enemy, to abide their sallies, and to make head against their parties,
beating them back to their defenses. They who are Commanded out to make the
ravage, ought to draw off from the Army about two Leagues, or at least a League
from the Town which is to be besieged: they shall put all to fire wheresoever
they pass, with discretion, though, to preserve such things as they may judge
useful to cover their Camp, as Woods, private Houses, Churches, and other
sacred places, provided the besieged might not make use of them to favor their
sallies, and dispute the ground; for in such a case the sacred stones of
Altars, the holy Relics, and the rest of what is useless may be carried away;
and the materials may serve to build more considerable places of that nature
after the Siege.

Whilst this ravage is making, the Marshall de Camp, with his Ingeneers, goes
to view the place, as near the Outworks as possibly he can, that with more
distinct knowledge he may judge of the strength or weakness of the place that
is to be besieged. A General engaging himself in an Enemies Country, should
leave nothing behind him, that is to say, no place whereof he is not Master, to
the end he may facilitate the march of his Recruits, and of the Convoys that
are to come to him; otherways he would take very bad measures, should he
besiege a place in the usual way whilst the Enemy continues Master of the
Castles and other places which might hinder him from the liberty of the Field.
When a place to be besieged stands in the middle of a State, such as are
commonly those of a people that have revolted against their Prince; and that a
General is Commanded out to reduce them to their duty, he is to consider if it
be convenient to attack their places by force and storm, or by long Sieges, if
they cannot be succored by their Allies, or if they trust only to the strength
and situation of their places and Ramparts. The General being well informed of
the condition of those of the place, and knowing that they cannot be relieved
from any part, that all their force consists in their obstinacy, in the depth
of their Ditches, and height of their Walls, then it shall be enough for him to
overcome them by Famine, by blocking them up, which is nothing else than a way
of distributing his Troops amongst the Castles, Villages and other places which
lie on the avenues of the place, prohibiting all and every one to communicate
with those of the Town, and to carry them provisions, upon pain of death,
imprisoning those that shall come out of the place, that they may be punished
according to their deservings.

If a Siege is to be formed, the ravage being made by order of the Mareshal de
Camp of the Army, The General is to make his Troops march to begin the Siege.
On that occasion the General should make his Forces double their march, to the
end he may deprive the Enemies of occasion of fortifying the place with
provisions and men, if they had neglected to do it before.

When the General is within half a League of the place, he is to send some
intelligent person to the Mareshal de Camp, that the Mareshal may inform him of
the most advantageous Posts that are about the place.

The General being thus informed of the advantage and disadvantage of the
ground where he is to lay down his Camp, shall go a little before, that he
himself may take a view of all the Posts, being accompanied by the Mareshal de
Camp and Ingeneers, who may show him the advantage of the places whereof he has
had a relation, that there he may draw off his Troops, distributing the Cavalry
into the plains and places near Rivers, and the Infantry upon the little Hills
and Mountains, within Cannon shot of the place. At that first comeing it is
very difficult to give to every Regiment the just measure of ground that is
necessary to them, or to determine precisely the extent which the Parks of
Artillery, and the Quarters of Provisions should possess: Nevertheless, that
the matter may be made more easy, we shall deduce it into particulars. It is to
be observed, that when the Army is composed of several Troops of Strangers, it
is better to put all the Regiments of one Nation together, than to separate
them, that the quarrels may be avoided which happen but too frequently amongst
men of different Nations.

Of the Encamping of the Horse.
Though we have in our first part spoken of the Cavalry, we must still tell you
that a Horseman is called a Trooper. He ought commonly to have a servant and
two Horses; or at least two Troopers ought to have betwixt them a servant and
three Horses, that the third Horse may go out a forageing.

To lodge a Troop of Horse of a hundred men, which go by the name of Troopers
(in French they are called Masters or Cavaliers) there is assigned them for the
whole Troop seventy foot in front, and two hundred in depth.

To two Troopers that lodge together, is assigned eight foot in breadth, and
twelve in length, to make their Huts, or Baraques on. As to the Baraques, or
Huts of the Horses, there is allowed to each four foot in breadth, and ten in
length. The men and Horses are both lodged in two ranks. The Captains lodging
is at the head of the Baraques of his Troop, the whole front of which he
possesses; and the breadth of it is forty foot. Between the Huts and Stables,
there is a lane eight foot broad. The Horses Heads stand toward the Huts or
Baraques of their Masters. The Lane between the Stables is ten foot broad, that
the Horses may have room to come forth.

Between the lodging of the Captain and the Troop, there is a Lane twenty foot
broad. Behind the Troop are posted the Sutlers, divided from the Troop by a
Lane twenty foot broad.

If many Troops encamp together near to one another, the space betwixt them is
commonly twenty foot broad.

I shall not in this place speak of the quartering of the Infantry, when upon a
march they come to a Village, nor of the Quarters of those that are in Garrison
in a place; because the first Quarter in the Peasants Houses by Billets, and
the others with the Towns people by Chamberfulls, or singly; I speak of the
Infantry that are obliged to Encamp and to build Huts. That manner of Lodging
is called Encamping.

We have in our first Part, given all the measures for Lodging a Company of
Foot, and of an entire Regiment.

Of the way of making the Lines of Circumvallation and Contravallation.
If the General find that he cannot by storm carry the place which he intends
to attack, and that besides, he may be in apprehension that the Enemy will
relieve the place, then shall he cause a Line of Circumvallation to be made
round his Camp; and if he know the Town to be strong in men, and that the
Governor may make frequent sallies, to incommode his Camp, and make Prisoners:
to oppose these attempts, he must make a line of Contravallation on the side of
the Town. The Forces being encamped, the Ingeneers shall go round the place,
that they may observe the ground by which they are to draw the line of
Circumvallation, taking a Plan or draught of the ground circumjacent to the
place, observing in it all the heights, little Hills, Valleys, Rivers,
Churches, and generally all that may serve for Lodgings, as well for Horse as
Foot, as Vineyards, Hedges, ruined Houses, and other places of covert. The
Ingeneers having presented that draught to the General, and with him
condescended on the way by which the line of Circumvallation is to be carried,
they are to mark it out with pegs and cords, of the breadth of two fathoms,
making the basis of its Parapet eight foot broad, the interior height of the
Parapet six foot, and the exterior five, with a Banquette three foot broad,
and a foot and a half high; the Line of Circumvallation on the side of the
Country, and the Earth cast up on that of the Camp. The Line of Contravallation
is made by the same measures, having its Ditch toward the Town, and the Earth
on the side of the Camp, to cover the Soldiers that are behind it.

How the Attacks and Trenches are to be determined, and ordered.
The Circumvallation being finished, and the Parks fortified by some
Star-works, or half Bulwarks, the Mareshal de Camp, attended by the Ingeneers,
and guarded by some Horse, is to approach as near as possibly he can to the
Outworks or Counterscarps of the place, that he may discover the strength or
weakness of the Fortifications of the Town, the force whereof consists in the
goodness of its Outworks, when they are well flanked by the defenses of the
place, and not commanded by adjacent places, its Ditches being large and very
deep, the Bastions solid, big, and well defended by Casemates and Cavaliers,
with Parapets Cannon proof. We shall tell ye likewise, that the weakness of a
place is to have great Outworks commanded by the adjoining heights, and ill
flanked by the place, with narrow Ditches, and half filled up, decayed
Ramparts, ruined Parapets, small Bastions, and ill filled with Earth, that, and
the nature of the ground being observed, the Ingeneers are to make their report
to the General, that the number of attacks may be adjusted, which are to be but
two or three at most, if he have no Army strong enough to make four or five at
a time, and to furnish them all that is necessary. The number of the Trenches
being determined, the Ingeneers are to mark them out on the very place with
pegs and cords, and the way by which they must be carried on; taking their
advantage of the ground, as of little Valleys, hollow ways, dry Brooks, low
Bottoms, Ditches, Hedges, little Hillocks, and in a word, of every thing that
may put the Soldiers under Covert.

Of the carrying on of Trenches.
Many who have written of Lines of approach, especially such as have never been
present at them, have spoken of the working, and of the advancing and
conducting of a Trench, as of a matter so easy, that they have boldly
undertaken to limit the time that should be employed in carrying it forwards to
the Counterscarp of a place besieged, and to measure how many paces and fathoms
the Pioneers should carry on their work in a day, in a night, and in an hour.
For my own part who have conducted some, I found the matter far more difficult
in the execution, than it is in imagination and theory in a study: In effect,
the advancement of a Trench depends on so many accidents, that I wonder at
those that would limit the time for it. That I may speak to the matter with
some exactness, I do say, that the Ingeneer, or in his place, he that has the
ordering of the work, ought first of all consider the quality of the ground
through which he is to carry his Trench, that he may observe if it be of plain
Earth, or if it be sandy, stony, or altogether Rocky, or if it be cut by
Ditches, or boggy and marish. When he has well considered that, if the ground
be good, he is to make provision of Mattocks, Spades, Pick-Axes and Shovels,
that he may make use of them to open, dig, and enlarge the Trench, according to
the measures we shall give hereafter: but if the ground be rocky and too hard
to be cast up, (which is to be learnt by the relation of the Country people
about) the Ingeneer is to make provision of a great quantity of Sacks full of
Earth, Faggots and Gabions that he may make use of them to defend himself
against the works of the place, and to cover his Trenches, as we are about to
tell you. The difference that we make betwixt the opening and carrying on of
the Trenches, is this, that under the word of opening, is expressed, the
beginning of the working of the Trench, the tail whereof looks always toward
the Besiegers; and that by the word carrying on, the advancement of the work is
signified, the end of which looks always to the place that is besieged, and is
called the head of the Trench. The place of opening them should be marked out
by the Mareshal de Camp, or General. The true place to begin the opening in,
should be without Musket shot of the nearest of the Outworks, yea, and without
Cannon shot, when it is judged that the Laborers may be incommoded thereby.
When in the Neighborhood of the place there is some House that interposes
betwixt the Musket and Cannon of the Besieged, and that to go thither there is
but very little ground which lies open to the place, in that case it is to be
made use of for the opening of the Trenches, sending thither Pioneers under
shelter of some Mantelets, followed by those who are to back them, who are
usually Horse, and seldom Foot, the Horse having the advantage of riding and
scouring the Field, which the Foot cannot easily do.

It is to be observed, that in opening the Trenches, the first Pioneers kneel,
and work not but by night, wherein they do five or six times more work in three
hours time, than they can do in ten by day. At first they make but a little
Ditch, which they that follow enlarge and dig by little and little, until it be
about two fathoms wide, and three or four foot deep, especially when they draw
near the place, that by the earth which they cast up before themselves, and
those that are in the Trench, they may be covered from the defenses of the Town.

There is nothing that heartens the Laborers in the Trenches more, than to see
themselves backed by those of their party; for there is hardly ever any
approach made, but that the besieged make sallies out, to incommode the
Pioneers, fill up their works, and set upon those that defend them. This ought
to oblige the Besiegers to make places of Arms, and some Redouts and Bastions,
with half Bulwarks at competent distances.

The most commodious Posts for places of Arms, as well for the Horse as Foot,
are such as may easily assist one another, and are secure from the works of the
Town, as hollow ways, and especially when these ways are cross, for their depth
serves for a Parapet to the Foot; but for want of a natural depth these places
of Arms are to be defended with Gabions, Sacks full of Earth, or other ways
with Trunks of Trees, and all that can be found, to hinder those of the place
to annoy them: sometimes there is a Ditch made round them, and the place of
Arms is fortified like a Field Fort.

When the men work at the approaches, and find hollow ways, they are to make
use of them for opening of the Trenches, raising there at first some Redout, to
clear them all along, in case that the Besieged would make use of them, as of
Counter approaches. To prevent laying open and along to the place, the Boyau or
Trench must of necessity turn side-ways: on the right or left flank, and
sometimes about the middle of the Trenches there is a Redout to be raised
containing eight or ten fathoms in Front, with a Ditch a fathom and a half
wide, or thereabout, and as deep as possibly it can be made.

In these little Forts most part of the Soldiers who are Commanded to guard
the Trenches, are to be lodged, as we have showed elsewhere in our Royal
Fortifications.

FINIS.

