THE ONLY WAY TO Rest of Soul, IN RELIGION HERE, IN HEAVEN HEREAFTER: SHOWED
Plainly and succinctly by pure SCRIPTURE, IN THREE TREATISES: DEMONSTRATING, 1.
That the Church was left by Christ, as the means to teach us his Gospel. 2.
Which is she that was left in that office. 3. What it is, she teaches for
Gospel.


By L. L. Bach of Div. Licensed by the University of Oxford, to preach
throughout England, and late Rector of L. in the County of S. now a Catholic.

1 Timothy 3.15. The Church is the pillar and ground of the truth. Printed for the
Author, 1657.

ADVERTISEMENTS Of the Author to the Reader.
I Suppose you to be a pious and sober-minded Protestant; having a love to the
truth; not much further learned than the English Bible; regarding it as Gods
word, and no authority but its in matters of religion.

2. You are not to think we use this way, of proving our grounds by Scripture,
either as necessary, or as wanting other (for we are able to prove them,
independently of it, and praecedently to it, to any rational man, by the same
means as Moses ( Exodus 4.1.) and the other Prophets (1 Kin^ 17.24.) did theirs,
before any word of the Old, and Christ ( John 5.35.) and his Apostles (2 Cor.
12.12.) theirs, before any word of the New Testament was written; to wit,
Miracles, such as no other does, (Ioh. 15.24.) joined with eminent Sanctity; as
shall be shown in next Treatise:) but only because in it you think to have
eternal life (Ioh. 5.39.)

3. Out of my great desire of brevity, I have often omitted to quote the texts
at large. And therefore I could wish you would take the pains to read them in
your Bible; for there is not one of them put for show only (as is too much
used on your side); but is pertinent to confirm or illustrate what it is quoted
for.

4. Out of the same desire, I have many times omitted diverse proofs on our
side, and sometimes some on yours. If therefore you miss any, do not think it
was either of craft, or for any dread of it (for I hope by that time you have
read it over, you will not say I have pleaded your cause partially): but either
because it escaped me, or was contemned by me, or I thought the answer given to
some other, would serve it.

5. Above all things, I am to beseech your charity, before you censure our
opinion, or drift of the book, as tending to derogate from the honor, office,
or authority of H. Scripture, you will read over the 5th. in the Praeface. And
if any expression used afterward in the book seem to have any sense varying
from what is there set down, not to understand it in any such sense.

THE PRAEFACE To the first Treatise: Stating the quaestion, explicating the
terms, etc.
1. Grounds agreed upon, leading to the Quaestion.
1 Ground.

WIthout faith, it is not possible to please God ( Heb. 11.6.); and without
holiness no man shall see him ( Heb. 12.14.)

2. Ground.

2. What faith and holiness it is as he requires, and will accept from his
creature, to this pleasing and seeing of him, cannot enter into the heart of
man (yea, or Angel) by any light possible in nature; but it is necessary he
reveal it to us by his holy Spirt (1 Cor. 2.9).

3. Ground.

This revelation he makes not immediately to every one; but to some one
(person, or company) at first; and so makes use of that one, (divinely
authorized, and assisted by him to that end) as his instrument to teach it to
others in an ordinary way, by word of mouth, or writing (because this way is
sufficient, the other miraculous; which therefore he uses not without some
necessity.) See examples hereof, if you please (Genesis 18.19. Exodus 18.16. S.
Mat. 28.20. Act. 9.6. and 10.6.)

What is meant by [teaching].
By [teaching] I mean [instructing in religion, in such manner as the Scholar
may, and until he do (without it be his own fault) understand it aright, and
perfectly, so far as is needful to his Souls health]. And when it is spoken
of, as the act of a reasonable creature; I mean by it [instructing (as before)
by word of mouth, in way of public office.] And it includes diverse acts, as
principal and most necessary. The first is, to give the first instruction,
called by a proper name, Catechizing. The other, which is to give the
perfecting instruction, has two acts; 1. In quality of a Judge, to decide all
emerging controversies. 2. In quality of a Guide, or Councellor, to direct in,
and resolve all cases of conscience. And all the same I understand by
[preaching.]

When I say [by word of mouth, or writing] I mean, either of that first, or of
others, from, or under him, in the same manner divinely authorized and
assisted; for else no man may, much less can be obliged to believe it, by
divine faith, no more then they could the teaching of the first.

What is meant by [divinely authorized.]
[Divinely authorised] includes three properties, 1. free from all error, in
its teaching. 2. obliging all creatures under penalty of aeternal torments, to
believe and obey it. 3. securing all that do, of an aeternall recompense.

4. Ground.

In this immediate way; in sundry manners, and at sundry times, he spoke of old
to the Fathers, by the Prophets (Adam, Abraham, Moses, etc.) (Heb. 1.1.). Some
of whom, by him moved (2 Pet. 1.20.) committed their revelations unto writing,
now called the [Old Testament].

5 Ground.

The rule delivered by these his servants (Heb. 3.5.) being (when at best) but
imperfect (Heb. 7.19.) and (for the greatest part of it) but temporary (Gal.
3.19.) at length, himself, in the visible person of Jesus Christ, vouchsafing
to become a Teacher of it; he (as became him the Lord) taught it perfectly, and
as it was to endure to worlds end. Whence he is styled [ our one Master (Mat.
23.8.); the author and finisher of our faith Heb. 12.2.]

What is meant by [Religion] and [the Gospel]
And this form, doctrine, law, or rule of faith and holiness, thus by God
Almighty revealed, is called by a proper name [Religion:] and as by Jesus
Christ revealed, or promulgated, is called [ the Christian Religion; or (in
Scripture Phrase) the Gospel] (Mar. 16.15.)

6 Ground.

Tbis Gospel, he taught to his Apostles: and so left them as the first, and
temporary means, to teach it to others.

Consequently, at their death, all teaching of it by or from him immediate,
ceased (at least, regularly speaking). Whence, (as one reason, at least) those
days of his and their teaching in the flesh, are called [ the last days,
(Esa. 2.2. Heb. 1.1.) the fullness, of time, (Gal. 4.4.) and the ends of the
world.] ( 1. Cor. 10.11.) And so, he that will know any thing touching it, must
go to the Gospel by them taught and left, as [ the fountain of all both
saveing truth and discipline of manners (so our late H. Council of Trent calls
it) (Sess. 4.) to all succeeding generations].

7 Ground.

They (in their persons) being to die soon after him, he left (or, at least,
designed they should leave) something to remain as the (ordinary, or
perpetual) means to teach it to others.

What is meant by [the means.]
Where, by [the means of teaching it] I mean not any sort of means; humanely
authorized only, or fallible, in its teaching, or isntrumental only to some
other creature, or profitable only, or necessary in some respects only, or
sufficient to teach some part of it only, or to some creatures only: but [the
proper, principal, necessary, and sufficient, to teach every creature, every
particular of it, and divinely authorized and assisted to that end:] and so
deserving to be styled in absolute and simple sense [the Angel of the Lord (or,
interpreter of his will to humane creatures); the guide of mankind in the way
to heaven; the light of the world; the Pillar, or ground of the truth; the
Judge of the Christian Law; the Chair of Christ; the School of the Gospel;
the steward, depositary, or dispenser of the mysteries of faith; the
storehouse or treasury of divine knowledge, wisdom, or truth; the power (or
powerful instrument) of God unto salvation of all that believe, or use it]:
and its voice, doctrine, or teaching [the word, law, oracles, doctrine, or
Gospel, of God, Christ, truth, grace, life, or salvation, etc. the faith; the
truth; the seed (of grace); the faithful word; the sword of the spirit; the
form of sound words, or doctrine; the depositum, or treasure, of heavenly
truth, left by Christ, or his Apostles; the whole revealed will, or counsel of
God; the guide of faith; the rule of religion etc.] Or, of which it is, or may
be said, [it shall teach you religion; if there arise a matter too hard for
thee, thou shall go to it to enquire; ask, or seek the Law of God, at it, or
its mouth; in controversy it shall stand in judgment; it shall preserve
knowledge; it shall show thee what thou ought to do; follow it; make it
your rule, or guide; prove all things by it; by it we know the spirit of truth,
and spirit of error; it is able to make you wise to salvation, or, to save your
souls, or to show you the way to eternal life; he that believes, or follows
it, shall be saved]: or, unto which, God Almighty ever said [Teach people; or,
teach the Gospel.]

To whatsoever creature, these attributes, offices, properties, phrases,
speeches, or any one of them, or any other to the same sense, is rightfully
given, or appertains, that is [the meanes] I speak of.

8. Ground.

This means (what ever it be), is somewhere or other in H. Scripture, set
forth, and named to us, in most plain, and express manner, as being the
fundamental of all fundamentals (as to us) within the Christian religion;
without which first known and certain, it is in vain for any man to talk of
religion, or to presume to judge of what is true or false, pious or
superstitious, necessary or not necessary, in any matter pertaining to it: and
which when it is known and certain, no more remains for any man to do (that
desires to know what he is to believe, do, or avoid to obteining eternal
salvation), but only to find it out, and hear, believe, and practice, what it
teaches, comands, or forbids, as Gospel.

. 2. The Question to he handled, proposed.
Hither to you and we agree in our principles, as rational men, and Christians.

But then the Question is, What is that means?

And it lies betwixt two, The Church, and H. Scripture. For, either he left
them in quality of a Society, or Community (such as our Lawyers call, a body
corporate) to have a permanency by succession; and then the Church will be it;
or they were to leave some writing, to teach in their stead, or office, at
their death; and then the Scripture will be it: or he left them in quality of a
Society, as to some part of the office, and they were to leave the Scripture in
the other part; and then both will be it.

By [the Church] then throughout this treatise, What is meant by the [Church].
I mean nothing else, but [a company, or some company of men]. For, this is
description sufficient for the intent of this Treatise, which is only to
distinguish her from the Scripture, and the persons of the Apostles. Nor do I
mean by her, the whole society so called; nor any part of her, as to any effect
of justifying grace or salvation; but (properly, and immediately) that part by
which she teaches; as I speak, by my mouth; and a University teaches by her
Professors. In which sense, our B. Savior used the name, when he said [Tell
the Church] (Mat. 18.17.) and S. Paul [the Church is the pillar of truth]. ( 1 Timothy 3.15.)

And so, in fine, the quaestion is, [Whether the Church, or the Scripture, or
both, be the means left by Christ (or his order), for teaching his Gospell]?

. 3. The importance of it.
And it is (as appears sufficiently, by what is said already) the most
transcendently-fundamental one possible to be within the Christian religion:
seeing by this means, it is to be taught; and all questions in it to be
resolved. And consequently, it is of most transcendent importance, what we
hold in it; as you will quickly see, if you but reflect on the consequences of
it. For,

1. If H. Scripture be it; 1. All reading of other books; consulting Ministers,
or Divines; going to Church to hear their Catechizing, or Sermons; conferring,
or arguing one with another; or any other acts, or means whatsoever, to this
end, to instruct, or direct our selves in religion, will be vain and
superfluous, yea, improper: but every one is to go to the Bible, and it alone,
and by it self alone. For (supposing it left in this office) there will be no
denying, but it is as plain and intelligible by it self alone, to any child, or
other novice, having the use of reason, as to the learned Divine in the
world. 2. No creature using it for his guide, can offend God by any heresy,
superstition, or profaneness; unless he believe or practice contrary to what
it teaches him, according to his understanding of it. 3. It will be out of the
power of the Church, to hinder or restrain any creature from reading, and
using it, at his pleasure, in any language.

2. On the other side, if the Church be it; 1. all reading of Scripture, by the
people, unto this end, will be vain and superfluous, yea, improper; but every
one is to seek the Gospel at her mouth, and hers only. 2. It will be in the
power of the Church to permit or restrain the use of the Bible unto the people;
more or less, thereafter, as she in her prudence (all things considered, and
not some only,) and in her charity to their souls, shall judge it most
expedient for them to their salvation. 3. No man, though baptized in Christ's
faith, though believing never so humbly and firmly, and practicing never so
fervently all that he finds in Scripture, may hope to see the face of God, if
he pertinaciously refuse to believe, do, approve, or avoid any one least thing
taught or commanded by the Church, as necessary to salvation to be believed
done, approved, or avoided, (although in Scripture not mentioned); and die in
that state of soul.

3. If both be it; the part, or share of each in the office, is to be set out,
and certainly known by every creature, that they may have recourse to each for
that which pertaines to its office: to the Scripture, for its; to the Church,
for its.

. 4. The Protestants Tenet in it.
In the answer to this Question, you and we (as near as some imagine the two
religions to be one to the other) differ extremely. For albeit you grant, that
Christ left a Church to continue for ever in some office of teaching religion,
and that office of hers proper, and in some respects sufficient, and necessary:
yet you will not allow it to be, either simply necessary, or sufficient, or any
other then a mere ministry to the Scripture; or so much as that, with divine
authority. Consequently, your Tenet is, [Christ left, or appointed, the
Scripture, for the means to teach us his Gospel.]

This is the prime and maine principle of your religion, (in proper, or as it
is distinguished against ours, by the name of Protestant, or Reformed): upon
the truth therefore and certainty whereof, depends in fine the whole truth and
certainty of your religion (and consequently, of your hope of salvation, in, or
by it), as the firmness of any whole building does, upon the firmness of its
foundation.

5. What, Catholics acknowledge to H. Scripture.
We are as forward as any of you can be, to give unto H. Scripture, what is
its. Namely,

1. That some of the Apostles wrote the New Testament; which, and the Old, make
up that holy book called [the Scripture, or Bible.]

2. That it is ( all, and every word of it) given by inspiration of God, and
therefore the very word of God, of truth most infalible, of authority most
supreme, as to all creatures (even the Church her self; yea, in quality and
degree of the authority, superior to that of the Church;); and the only divine
written rule, now being, or ever to be.

3. That they left it unto, or with the Church, as a sacred depositum, in the
nature following. Viz.

1. A rule, which she is bound to have an eye unto, in all her doctrines, and
laws; and not only that they be not repugnant to it, in more or less either
by adding to, or taking from, either the words, sense, or law of it, any one
least tittle (for, supposing that possible, and her, a Church all of Apostles
or heavenly Angels, she were instantly, to be detested by all, as a Synagogue
of Satan; and all such her doctrines and laws to be abhorred as will worship,
and traditions of men), but that they be consonant to it, as near as she may
judge of the sense or intent of the H. Ghost (as we find the Apostles had such
an eye to it in theirs. Acts 1.20. and 15.15.) And in acknowledgement hereof,
in all her General Councels, she places it in the most sumptuous throne; at
the uppermost end of the assembly (above Pope, and all), as that which is to
have the chiefest regard, and swaying vote, in all her debates, and resolutions.

2. A means, excellent proper, yea the incomparably principal (in the sort,
and order of inanimate instruments, as it is) unto the ends for which it was
ordained. Namely, 1. To corroborate by its concurring testimony, the authority,
and doctrine of the Church; and our faith to it. 2. To preserve, in way of a
record, a world of most admirable truths, rules, examples, admonitions,
exhortations, motives, histories, genealogies, prophecies, forms of prayer,
etc. perteining to faith, and holiness. In respect whereof, it is a means
profitable (superlatively, beyond all that can be said of it by tongues of men
or Angels) to furnish the man of God (or Divine), perfectly, for doctrine,
(yea, of faith), for reproof (of the adversaries), for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, and for every other good work (proper, or
perteining to his function). (2. Tim. 3.16.) And therefore not only do our
Divines, give diligent attendance to the reading and study of it, and make use
of it, (incomparably for above any other means) to all these ends; yea, and to
the instructing, and guiding themselves, for and in the knowledge of truth, and
resolving cases of conscience; and our Bishops, in and for the making laws, or
determining causes Ecclesiastical; but the Church her self, in all General
Counsels, makes her first, and chief repair to it, for light and direction;
nay, all her debate, and search into former Counsels, Fathers, Schoolmen,
tradition, practice, and sense of the Church, is to no other end, (generally
speaking), then the better to find out, and determine, its true sense, or
intent.

3. A means, not only as in the hand of the man of God, but as in the hand of
every Christian (rightly principled, firm in faith, (2. Pet. 3.16.) and
reading it in obedience to them that are over him in the Lord, (Heb. 13.7.)
with the humble spirit of the Eunuch, (Acts 8.31.) unto the ends for which it
was ordained (if ordained) as to him; to wit, to confirm, advance, and perfect
himself in faith, (Joh. 20.31.) saving wisdom, (2. Tim. 3.15.) hope, (Romans
15.4.) charity, (1. Th. 4.9.) and other Christian virtues), singularly proper
unto those ends: as having from its divine author, special force and virtue,
beyond all possible enditings of humane brain, to inlighten the eyes, and
convert the heart of the simple. And therefore (speaking of it, per se, or as
in the hands of such a one), blessed is he that reads and meditates in it, day
and night, (Ps. 1.1.) and makes it a lantern to his feet, and a light unto
his paths. (Ps. 119.105.)

4. A means (since its writing) necessary unto the Church, as by which God
will guide her into the truths there recorded; without it (when it may be had),
not.

5. A means perfectly sufficient unto the ends for which it was ordained;
which is all the perfection of an instrument.

6. A record, containing all that man is to believe, do, or avoid, to the
obteining eternal salvation; and expressly, all the principal.

In regard of which many and admirable properties and uses of it, it is the
same (in a manner) to us, as the pillar of cloud by day, and fire by night was
to the Israelites; guiding Moses in the way to Canaan, and by him, them. In a
word, it deserves to be called, by way of excellency [the Word Law, doctrine,
oracles, or Gospel of God, Christ, salvation, etc. the guide of faith; the
rule of religion, the light of the world, etc.].

. 6. The Catholic tenett.
But then we deny it to be, either a proper, principal, necessary, or
sufficient means, to teach religion. And so, to give unto the Church also what
is hers; our tenett is, that [The Church was left by Christ, for the means of
teaching his Gospel.]

Conclusion of the praeface.

YOu see the true state of the quaestion, the tenetts of each side, and the
importance of what you hold in it. That which remains for this Praeface, is to
admonish you, that your principle is notoriously false, repugnant to holy
writ, and mother of all the sects in these parts of Christendom; and
therefore to beseech you (dear Christian brother) as you desire to please God
here, and see his blessed face hereafter, to search the Scriptures, (with the
noble Bereans,) whether those things be so or no, as your Ministers have taught
you out of it, touching the Scriptures being left for your rule and guide.

To help you in it (if God shall put it in your heart), that you may not be
gulled, as now you are, with the mere sound or superficies of words, but dive
to the depth of the sense of it (for, that is properly to search it) is all the
business of this ensuing treatise. Wherein I shall first prove our tenet;
then, defend it against your objections; in the third place, examine what may
be said for yours; and in the last, refell it. And when you have thus the whole
matter laid before you; you will be able to judge righteous judgment; which now
you give, upon hearing one tale told; or, at least, the other, but by halves,
and for the greatest part, falsely.

Be the event of it what it will, it cannot but be worth so small a pains;
either by confirming you in following (for your guide, and rule) that which you
do; or, by its own mouth, showing you to that which you should.

And I shall be bold to add thus much for a further encouragement: that if you
can find any one text for your Tenet, and not a multitude most plainly and
expressly against it; if any one against ours, and not a multitude most
plainly and expressly against it; if any one against ours, and not a multitude
most plainly and expressly for it; I will advise you to keep your own still,
and take all your peril upon my head: hoping, if you do not, you will think
it reason to forsake it, and embrace ours. And I suppose you cannot say, but as
the Israelites did to Elijah, in somewhat a like proposal [Thou have well
spoken] 1 Kin: 18.24.

THE First Treatise: SHOWING, That Christ left the Church for the means to
teach us his GOSPEL, THE FIRST PART Proving it.
CHAP. I. Proving it, from the Law.
We say [Christ left the Church for the means to teach us his Gospel]. And
are able to prove it; from the Law, the Prophets, the Gospels, the Acts, and
the Epistles. To begin with the Law.

1. It is certain, all things happened to the old people in figure of
something, but more excellent, to correspond to it in the new (1 Cor. 10.11.).
So, their means of teaching, a figure of ours; and figures require fulfilling,
as well as Prophecies. (S. Ioh. 3.14. and 19.36).

2. Presumption of reason is, that what sort of means the divine vvisdome saw
most proper, and therefore made choice of, and used as the means of teaching
Religion, from the beginning of the world, until Christ's time; the same he
would afterward, unto the worlds end (until he that denies it, show reason
to the contrary).

Now I am sure you will grant me, that before the vvriting of the Law, some
company of men, was the means to that end. And if before, after it. Because

1. You will not find that that Law made any alteration in the office more
then this: 1. That it determined it to the family of Aaron, (whereas till then
it had been one of the rights of Primo geniture) Genesis 25.31). 2. and added; 1.
To the matter to be taught. 2. To the Teachers, the help of a Record.

2. That Law expressly settles it in Aaron, and his posterity. [That ye may
teach my Statutes, etc. (Lev. 10.11.) Thou shall go to the Priests to enquire,
and they shall show thee (Deu. 17.8.) They shall teach thy Law, etc. Deu.
33.10.]

3. Hereunto accord the sayings of the Prophets ( Ezekiel. 44.23. Mal. 2.5.) and
the practice of that Nation, noted afterward upon diverse occasions. [ The
Priests taught the people. (2 Chr. 17.9.) They caused the people to understand
the Law (Neh. 8.8.) See more, if you please, to the same purpose, Eccl. 12.9.
Agg. 2.11.

4. Both Law and practice, continued the same, as well after the old Canon
was finished, as before. See S. Mat. 2.4. and 19.26. S. Mar. 10.17. and 12.14.
S. Lu. 4.20. Act. 15.22. and 22.3.

And appears particularly by our B. Saviors own, both practice (when he
went into the Temple, to hear the Doctors, and ask them questions (S. Lu.
2.46.) and rule given by him to the people [ They sit in Moses Chair, all
things therefore, etc. S. Mat. 23.2.] wherein I pray note well:

1. That Moses Law had settled in the Priests and others by them authorized, a
Chair for teaching Religion, until Christ should erect his in place of it.

2. That the authority of that Chair was divine, and consequently equal (in
the substance of the authority) unto that of Moses Law, it being his Chair, as
much as the other his Law.

3. That the people therefore were bound to obey its reaching, absolutely and
universally [all things whatsoever.]

4. And not for its consonancy with the Scripture, but sufficiently, for the
mere authority of the Chair [All things therefore.]

CHAP. II. Proving it from the Prophets.
THe Law has testified well to our Tenent. But we have a more sure word of
Prophecy. To instance in a fevv of the plainest.

First proof. Esa. 2.2. Micah 4.1.

Esaias and Micah thus. [ In the last days shall the Mountain of the Lords house
be established, in the top of the Mountains, and all Nations shall flow unto
it, saying, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house
of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his vvayes, etc. for out of Zyon
shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.]

Where 1. by [the last days,] it cannot be doubted, but he meant the days of
the Gospel (Heb. 1.1. 1 Cor. 10.11.)

2. Nor, but that by [the Lords house] he meant [the Church] so called (1 Timothy
3.15.) which he calls [ the Mountain of Gods house, and namely, Mount Zion;]
because she was to be born (or completely severed from her mothet, the
Synagogue) on that Mount ( Psa. 87.1, 5.) as she was on the day of Pentecost,
Act. 2.1. when the H. Ghost (as her ultimate soul) was infused into her: it
being certain by consent of all Writers Christian, that upon that hill was
situate the house in which the Apostles, the B. Virgin, and other firstborn
in Christ (Heb. 12.22.) after his Ascension assembled to holy duties; In regard
whereof, as the Synagogue (Mother of the Jews) by reason she began (as to
her last and complete state) at the publishing of the Law on that Mount, was
called [Mount Sinai:] So she (Mother of us Christians) was called ( Mount
Zion, Gal. 4.26.) And this must of necessity be granted, to the truth of this,
and diverse other places, which all agree in this, that the Church, and public
preaching of the Gospel by her, was to begin on that Mount ( Psa. 2.6. and 48.
per totum. and 110.3. etc.)

So, this for certain is one of those Prophecies of which our Savior said
[Thus it is written, and thus it behooves that the Gospel be preached in all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem.) Lu. 24.43.

The sense of the place thus opened, it yields four points, most plainly and
fully to my purpose, viz.

1. That the Church was to be the ordinary means for teaching mankind the
Gospel. [ They shall say, Come let us go up to the house of God; and he (in,
or by that house) will teach us his ways, etc.]

2. That her teaching was to be Gods teaching; he, to be the principal teacher
(though invisible); she, but his mouth [He, shall teach us]. According to what
is elsewhere assured to all her children, or scholars [ they shall be al taught
of God. Esa. 54.13].

3. That the word by her taught, is here called, 1. Gods word, and Law
(therefore it of divine authority, and she a teacher divinely authorized). 2.
In simple sense [the Law, and the word of the Lord].

4. That she is to continue in all the same office and authority of teaching,
wherein she began at Mount Zyon, until she have taught the Gospel to all
nations: which will not be till near the worlds end. (Mat. 24.14).

Second proof. Esaias 59.20.

Again, Esaias [The Redeemer shall come to Zion. And this is my covenant with them
(of Zion) says the Lord, My Spirit which is upon thee, and my words which I
have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed (says the Lord) from
henceforth, and for ever.] Not possible to be understood of any (person, or
company) but the Church. Consequently, assuring unto Gods Elect, under the
Gospel, that he will teach them unto the worlds end, all the same word of his,
by the mouth of the same Church, with all the same divine authority and
assistance, as he did the primitive Saints at Mount Zion, on Whitsonday, when
he first put his Spirit upon her, and his words into her mouth, Act. 2.5.

Third Proof. Ezekiel. 44.23.

To the same effect, Ezekiel, [Sadoc, and his sons, shall teach my people, etc.
in controversy they shall stand in judgment, etc.] This Sadoc was he upon
whom the High Priesthood was transferred from Eleazars line (1 Kin. 2.27.) And
so here the typical name of the Apostles, upon whom it was transferred from
Aarons line. Consequently, this place assures unto Gods people under the
Gospel, a race of faithful Pastors (therefore teaching no errors) in the office
of teaching Religion, unto the worlds end, according to that [ I will raise me
up a faithful Priest, and will build him a sure house, and he shall walk before
my Christ for ever, 1 Samuel 2.35.]

Fourth Proof. Mal. 2.4.

Most plainly, Malachy [Ye shall know (by the wonderful performance of it)
that I have sent this Commandment unto you, that my Covenant (of teaching)
might be with Levi (the Apostles, and their Successors.) The Law of truth was
in his mouth, the Priests lips should (it is their office) preserve knowledge,
and they shall seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the Angel (or as yours,
profanely, the Messenger) of the Lord of Hoasts.]

See more, if you please, to the same purpose, Psa, 19.1. unto v. 7. (compared
with Rom, 10.18. and Mat. 5.14.) and Psalm 68.11, 16, 18. (compared with Ephesians.
4.11.) Esa. 30.20. and 60.11. and 62.6. Ier. 3.14. and 33.15. to the end, and
50.5. Ezekiel, 37.21. all, assuring unto the Church, a race of Teachers divinely
authorized, unto worlds end.

Nor can you say these places meant the Church, as preaching Scripture, or her
doctrine, as consonant to it, when you cannot show that any of the Prophets
foresaw that any one tittle of the Gospel was ever to be written.

CHAP III. Proving it from the Gospels.
ACcording to the exigence of these types and Prophecies, as our Savior
himself says, (S. Lu. 24.44.) he instituted the office of teaching the Gospel,
in his Church, as is manifest.

First Proof. S. Mat. 5.14.

First, from that attribute given by him to his Apostles, as Pastors, and
consequently to his Pastors for the time being for ever [Ye are the light of
the world.] as much as to say [ the Sun, or fountain of spiritual light unto
mankind] which therefore if it should once lose its light (by teaching any
error in faith) the whole world must necessarily remain in darkness (and oh
how great darkness, Mat. 6.23.) ever after. For, wherewith should the Sun be
enlightened?

Second Proof. S. Mat. 7.24. and 13.19. and 24, 14. and 26.13. S. Lu. 8.11.
and 11.28, S. Ioh. 8.47. and 10.16. and 12.47.

Secondly, from those titles ordinarily given by him to his word, as preached,
calling it, in simple sense, [the word, his word, his voice, the word of God,
the Gospel, the seed] of all grace in the soul, whereof faith the first: and
constantly naming preaching, as the ordinary means on his part, of teaching it;
and hearing, on the peoples part, of coming to the knowledge of it.

Nor can you say, by these titles, he meant [the Scripture preached;] or the
Churches doctrine, as consonant to Scripture; when you cannot find, he ever
intended, or (as man) foresaw that any one tittle of his Gospel should ever be
written.

Third Proof. S. Mat. 18.17.

Thirdly, from that rule of his, to all his, for ever [Tell the Church, etc.]
plainly implying, he meant to leave her, as the ordinary Supreme Judge, in all
causes pertaining to his Court, and a Judge divinely authorized; for else none
could be bound absolutely to hear her, under pain of eternal damnation, which
is here implicitly threatened to such as neglect to hear her: for, no less is
due to heathen: and he would not have such refractory persons worse to us, then
they are to himself: nay, he says, [ it shall be more tolerable, in the day
of Judgment, for Heathen, then for them, S. Mat. 10.14.]

Fourth Proof. S. Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.15.

Fourthly, most plainly and fully, from the Charter it self, for the founding
of this office, recorded by two of the Evangelists. [ Jesus said to them (his
Apostles:) Go ye into all the world, teach all Nations, preach the Gospel to
every creature, baptizing them: teach them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you. He that believes (you, or your teaching, or the Gospel by
you taught), and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not, shall
be damned.].

In which words, I am sure, your self will not say, but he left them as the
first, and temporary means, of teaching his Gospel, and baptizing. And if for
the first; for the ordinary (or perpetual), by virtue of those incorporating
words [you, to worlds end].

Consequently, as the present Church, baptises with all the same office and
authority as the Apostles did; so she teaches also with all the same, as they
did, in virtue of this Commission. For, whatsoever other powers or privileges
they had, (of infallibility, in more then one; the gift of miracles, authority
of writing Canonical Scripture, etc. in any one); was not in virtue of this
Commission.

A more plain, and full proof, H. Scripture has not, for any point of
Christian faith: nor am I able to devise, what other answer you can give to it
then this [what need any more witnesses?] But for more abundant confirmation,
let us hear more.

CHAP. IV. Proving it from the Acts.
THe best interpreter of figures, and prophesies, is their fulfilling: and the
best comment upon Christ's commission is the practice and proceeding in the
execution of it, registered in the History of the Primitive Church. In which as
there is no doubt but the H. Ghost recorded the things of most importance for
the knowledge, and direction; so nor but that he recorded those he did, for the
pattern and imitation of future ages. Consequently, what it sets forth to have
been then the means for teaching the Gospel; is to be supposed to have been
left by them in that office.

Now that the Church was that means: is manifest from abundance of passages in
it: whereof I shall name some.

1 Proof. Act. 2.3, 5.

The gift conferred from heaven on the Apostles, on the day of Pentecost, as
necessary and sufficient to enable them to their office of teaching the
Gospel, was not penns (though none of them were any great Scribes, and the
greater part of them (for ought appears) not able to write a word), but
tongues. A sign, they were to teach religion, not by their writing, but their
speech, or utterance.

2 Proof. Act: 2.14. etc.

1. The first, and all the means (taken notice of in this History) used by
them, in their own persons, for bringing Infidells to faith, was preaching.
[Peter with the eleven, standing up, etc.] v. 14.

2. Such as were moved by it to embrace the Christian Law, sought it at their
mouth [Men and brethren, what shall we do?] v. 37.

3. Peter taught them their Catechism [ Repent and be baptized, etc.] v. 38.
without bringing any Scripture proof; as he did before, when he taught them as
Infidels (v. 16, 25, 34.)

4. The rule afterward of faith, worship, discipline, etc. unto the believing
people, was the doctrine and institutes of their Pastors [They continued
steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread,
and in prayer] v. 41.

Lo here, the Church settled and completed in all her form of doctrine,
Worship, Sacraments, etc. before any syllable of the Gospel was written, or
(for ought appears) intended to be.

Lo here, in the Mother Church (Mount Zyon. Gal. 4.26. the assembly of the
firstborn, Heb. 12.22.) the pattern according to which all Churches afterward
were to be gathered, settled, and governed, to worlds end.

3 Proof. Act. 6.6, 7. and 8.4. etc.

All the means taken notice of in this History, besides their own persons,
provided, used, settled, declared, and left by them, for teaching the Gospel;
was the preaching of others, whom they took into their body, to that end; and
sent them abroad over the world; ( Act. 11.19. and 13.4.); and placed some one
or more of them, in every City and Town where the Gospel took root ( Act.
9.10. and 13.1. and 14.22.) to instruct and guide the people of those Towns,
in all things pertaining to religion, in the same manner, as a sheapheard does
his flock (Act. 20.28.)

4 Proof. Act. 8.4, 14, 25. and 13.4. and 20.28.

These others, were Teachers, divinely authorized, as well as the Apostles:
they being sent to preach, and set over the flock to feed it, by the same H.
Ghost the Apostles were; and their teaching, Gods word (in the substance of it)
no less then that of the Apostles: only with this difference accidental; that
in the Apostles mouth it was so, originally, supreamly, absolutely, and
infallibly; in the others, subordinately, fallibly, and no longer or further
then they taught what they received from the Church. ( Act. 15.24).

Nor therefore can you say, that the teaching of these other, was called, [the
word of God], because they preached Scripture, or consonantly to it: being here
called so ( Act. 8.14.), many years before a word of the new Testament was
written, and they could not ground Evangelicall doctrine [ Christ is come.
Jesus is he, is risen, etc,.] upon the Old Testament.

5 Proof. Act. 8.29. and 9.6. and 10.6. and 16.9. and 18.9.

When God Almighty would have any taught the Gospel, he either sent them to
the Church, or the Church to them. Nor was there any difference in the means,
whether Apostles or other Pastors; Saul being sent in all the same manner to
Ananias, as Cornelius to S. Peter: and S. Philip to the Eunuch, as S. Paul to
the Macedonians.

6 Proof. Act. 11.14.

The word thus preached by the Church, (in which it was by accident, if any
Scripture were cited to believers) was sufficient to save the souls of the
people.

7 Proof. Act. 15.2, etc. and 16.4, 5.

1. In case the Teachers differed; the peoples remedy was, to have recourse
(not to the Scripture then being, albeit it contained rules proper to have
decided the question, viz. Whether circumcision was necessary to all that were
to be within the covenant of grace made with Abraham; and one party of the
Teachers founded their doctrine upon the express words of it (viz. that it was
a law given to him for all generations for ever (Genesis 17.13. Psalm. 105.9.); and
the other party, were no less then Apostles, in extraordinary; but) to the
Church (or eminent body of the Pastors in ordinary,) then by accident, residing
at Jerusalem.

2. These coming together to consider of, and decide it, founded the decision,
not upon scripture (though in a very fundamental point of faith), but merely
upon their own illumination, and guidance by the H. Ghost [It seemed good to
the H. Ghost and to us] v. 28. So, their decree, his decree; theirs, as his
mouth; his, as the principal Lawgiver; and consequently, to resist it, no
less sin then to resist the H. Ghost.

Nor can you say they entitled it to him, because part of the assembly were
Apostles. For as it were purposely to preclude you from this evasion, the H.
Ghost took care to note; 1. That the Apostles sat and voted there, in quality
of Presbyters, as it was a name common then to Priests and Bishops, only they
the chief, therefore named first, and singularly. 2. That there was much
disputing upon the point ( v. 7.). Consequently, the Apostles, proceeded not to
the sentence, as Apostles, or taught by inspiration; but as Pastors, or by the
ordinary authority of the Church, as it was to continue in their successors.

3. S. Paul, and Barnabas, though Apostles, thought it an honor to themselves,
to be officers to the Church in publishing and dispersing her decrees; and to
their doctrine, that it was by her approved. (16.4.)

4. As they went through the Churches, they delivered them the decrees of the
Council for to keep (Act. 16.4.) which was more then we find they did, any
book of Scripture.

5. When the good Christians heard what the Council had decreed, they rejoiced
for the consolation, of being certain now what was true doctrine in that point
(15.31.)

6. And thus were the Churches established in the says (16.5.)

8 Proof. Act. 20.20, 27, 32.

1. The Apostles, by word of mouth, committed unto the Church, all things
needful, nay but profitable only, for them to know for the full discharge of
their office, unto salvation of themselves and their flock. And so made her the
depositary of what Christ had committed to them.

2. That which they thus committed by word of mouth to the Church, was in
simple sense [the word of grace]: nay expressly [the whole counsel of God].

3. This form of doctrine thus taught by tradition, was left and expressly
recommended by the Apostles, unto the Church for her sufficient rule, and
guide; [ And now brethren I commend you to the word of Gods grace, which is
able to establish you, etc.] v. 32.

4. And this, at their death, or as good as their death, when they were never
like to see one another faces more in this world. [ I know that after my
departure, etc.]

5. So at their deaths they left the Church to continue for ever, in all the
same office and authority for feeding and ruling the flock of Christ, wherein
they then were, or had been at any time before; and namely, before the writing of
the New Testament. [ Take heed to your selves, and to the flock over the which
the H. Ghost has made you Bishops (or, as yours, profanely, overseers) to
feed the Church, etc.

CHAP. V. Proving it from the Epistles.

TO the practice and proceedings of the Apostles in their History; accord the
rules, instructions, exhortations, and admonitions in their Epistles; all
setting forth, and recommending unto us the Church for our guide, and her
teaching for our rule, in such manner, as if there were no such book as
Scripture, nor to be. To name a few of the principal, for instance.

1 Proof. Romans 1.1. Gal. 6.6. Ephesians. 1.13. Heb. 5.12. Jude, 3.2 Io. 9.

1. It is their ordinary language to call the Church's doctrine [ the word,
doctrine, oracles, Gospel, etc. of God, Christ, life, salvation, etc. the
faith, the truth, etc.] in simple sense.

2. And not that preached by the Apostles only, but by the Pastors; (among whom
it was by accident if any were an Apostle). Romans 10.8, 17. Heb. 13.7. Iam. 1.21.

3. Nay, that, which was preached by Pastors; of whom the Apostles none, for
certain ( Col. 1.5. and 3.16.)

Nor can you say it was so called, because it was the Scripture preached, or in
regard of its consonancy to it. For

1. The Old Testament, could give neither the matter, nor rule, for
Evangelicall doctrine: and very little of the New, was written when S. Paul
called it so, in the first Epistle by him written (1 Th. 2.13.) and S. Peter,
in the first that was written (1 Pet. 1.12, 25. and 2.2.)

2. Many Evangelicall doctrines then revealed, were not written then: to wit,
those mentioned in S. John's Gospells, and Epistles, more then are in the
other: namely the institution of the Sacrament of Priestly absolution (Ioh.
20.21.); Christ's committing his flock to S. Peter Ioh. 21.15.).

3. The Epistles themselves expressly require all Traditions to be held,
unwritten as well as written; and not those only taught by the Apostles, but
by their Pastors ( Timothy, Silvanus, etc. among whom it was by accident that
S. Paul was one) [Hold the traditions which you have been taught, whether by
word, or our Epistle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15.]

2. Proof, To. 1.16. and 12.6. Ephesians. 6.16. 1 Timothy 3.9. and 6.20. 2 Timothy 1.13.
and 2.2. Tit. 1.9. Iam. 1.21. Jude 23.

The Churches teaching, or doctrine by her taught, is called also, in simple
sense, [ the power (i.e. powerful instrument) of God unto salvation of all that
believe it; the rule (or as you call it, proportion) of faith; the sword of the
Spirit; the mystery of faith; the good thing, depositum, or treasure of
heavenly truth; the form of sound words or doctrine, committed by the Apostles
to the Church; the faith once delivered to the Saints; the faithful word, able
to save the souls of all that follow it.]

3. Proof, Romans 10.14, 17.

The Apostle expressly averrs, he knows no means whereby men may come to faith,
but the word preached; and thereupon concludes absolutely [Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God.] As much as to say [the ordinary means
of faith is hearing the word preached.

4. Proof, Romans 12.6. 1 Timothy 1.3. and 3.9. 2 Timothy 1.13. and 3.14. Tit. 1.7, 9.

The rule of teaching, to the Pastors, was [the doctrine they had received.]
And it was the rule even to Prophets to, [If any man prophecy, according to the
analogy, rule, or (as you render it) proportion of faith, Romans 12.6.] that is,
the known doctrine of the Church: For, that it could not mean the Scripture,
see the reasons given, sup. page 59.

5. Proof, To. 16.17. 2 Th. 3.6. Heb. 13.7, 17. Iud. 3.1 Ioh. 2.24. and 4.2, 6.
2 Ioh. 6, 9.

The rule of belief and holy practice to the people, was the doctrine wherein
they had been, Catechized, called by S. John [the unction of the H. Ghost, 1
Ioh. 2.20.] and generally, the doctrine or institutes of the Church. [Hereby
know we the spirit of truth and the spirit of error. He that knows God, hears
us; he that is not of God, hears not us (1 Ioh. 4.6.).

This doctrine of our Catechism, is given unto all Christians (supposed
catechized by a lawful Pastor, as the Galatians were) as a rule of that
supreme authority, and infallible certainty, as by it we are to try the spirits
of Prophets (1 These. 5.21.) yea even of Apostles, or heavenly Angels (Gal.
1.8.), if possible for them to teach repugnant to it.

And if a rule whereby to judge of the Apostles preaching, of their writing
also: it being as impossible for them to write, as to preach repugnantly to it;
and their writing being of no greater authority then their preaching.

Consequently this text ( Gal. 1.8.) which your men use to urge against
Traditions, gives so great authority to them, as it implicitly warnes us, on
peril of our soul, not to believe or receive any text of H. Scripture it self;
in any sense repugnant (if possible for it to have any, as it is not) to the
doctrine of our Catechism (suppose it given by a lawful Pastor).

Nor can you say, that this subsists not with what we teach, that any
particular Pastor, yea Pope and all as such, may teach false doctrine; for we
will not say, that any lawful Pastor can do it (which who is, we shall see in
next Treatise).

6 Proof. 1 Cor. 4.1. 2 Cor. 5.20. Phil. 2.25. Tit. 1.7.

The Pastors in common (among whom it was by accident if any one were an
Apostle) are styled in simple sense [ the ministers of Christ, his ambassadors,
the stewards (depositaries, and dispensers) of the mysteries of God] whereof
those of faith, the first.

7 Proof. Gal. 2.1.

So supreme at that time was, (and consequently, to worlds end was to be; for
else wherefore read we the Scriptures now?) the authority of the Church; as God
Almighty seeing how S, Paul's teaching was with less fruit, because opposed by
other Teachers (who called themselves Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13.) yea,
pretended to teach the doctrine of the Church, Act. 15.1.): willed him by
revelation to go up to the chief Pastors, residing then (by accident) at
Jerusalem, to confer his doctrine with them, and procure their approbation to
it.

Nay, S. John himself (though an Apostle in ordinary) for the greater credit
and fruit of his Gospel, as to the people, in regard of the great opposition
was like to be made against it by the heretics that denied Christ's Divinity,
and were very malapert against him for asserting it (3 Ioh. 9.) was moved by
the H. Ghost, to procure and insert in the close of it, the testimony of some
Pastors [ we know that his testimony is true, Ioh. 21.24.] A singular instance,
to show in what high esteem and authority the testimony of the Church (even to
the truth of H. Scripture it self, as to us, and much more to the sense of it)
then was, and was left by the Apostles at their death, for ever to be, amongst
all good Christians.

8. Proof, Ephesians. 4.11.

The Apostle delivers our tenet, in almost express words; plainly and fully, in
sense [VVhen Christ ascended, he gave some, Apostles, etc. for the perfecting
of the Saints, etc. (that is, as the ordinary means to that end) until we all
come in unity of faith (which will not be till the second coming of Christ)
etc. that we henceforth be no more as children tossed to and fro, etc.] which
end is not possibly attainable, if those Pastors may be supposed liable to
teach an errout in faith.

9. Proof, 1 Timothy 3.15.

The Church is called in simple sense:

1. The House of God (meaning without doubt, that School house for teaching
Religion, of which Esaias foretold, Esaias 2.2.)

2. The pillar of truth, not of the written truth only; but of the truth,
absolutely; that is, of all truth (revealed). And not a pillar upon which
Scripture is promulged or notified only to the people, as Princes edicts upon
some post: but such a pillar as is also the foundation to the whole frame of
truth. Therefore he says in the next word,

3. [The ground of the truth]. Which in simple sense absolutely, is the
incommunicable attribute of God Almighty (the first truth): in sense wherein it
may be given to any created means (that is, as to us, or our attaining to the
knowledge or certainty of truth) is here given to the Church. And so it
comprises our Tenet, in the fullest, highest, sense possible; and particularly,
the infallibility of the Church, in her teaching. For

1. If she the ground of all truth; then of this, [there was a Jesus of
Nazareth;] of this [there is a Scripture;] of this [there is a H. Ghost;] nay,
of this [there is a God.]

2. If these and other revealed points be infallible truths; she, the ground of
them, must be infallible. So as if possible for her ever once to totter in the
truth of her testimony touching any one point (by either affirming something to
be Gospel, which is not; or denying something to be, which is): the whole
frame of the truth and certainty of Christian Religion (as to us) must
necessarily totter with it; as any building must, whose foundation does: and as
we could not believe the Scripture in any thing, if we found it false in any
one thing.

Nor can you evade this place, by saying, he gives this attribute here to a
particular Church (namely that of Ephesus, in which Timothy was to behave
himself); which we will not say was infallible. For, that Church, being then a
part of the Catholic; though it were not infallible, yet he being
(immediately) Pastor of it, was (mediately) a Pastor of the Catholic, whose
attribute that was. As he that came into any gate, lane, or house of Jerusalem,
came into the Holy City, (Mat. 27.53.) though that gate, lane or house, were
not so.

10. Proof, 2 Timothy 1.13. and 2.2. Tit. 1.9. 1 Pet. 1.12.

The means, prescribed and named by the Apostle, for preserving to worlds end
the knowledge or doctrine of the Gospel, was, Tradition of the Pastors from
hand to hand: [The things thou have heard of me, commit thou to faithful men,
who shall be able to teach others also.]

A means, subject indeed to corruption, in tract of time, if the depositaries
be considered as men; but not, if as men assisted to the pure and incorrupt
keeping of it, by the H. Ghost, to that end sent down from heaven upon them (
Act. 2.3.) with such admirable graces, as even the Angels desire, and are
delighted, to behold.

11. Proof, Apoc, 2.1.

The Pastor of a particular Church, is called [the Angel of it.] Consequently,
by the rule of proportion, the whole company of them, is [the Angel of the
Church universal:] that is, the ordinary means under God, to illuminate and
guide them, and interpret Gods will to them in spiritual things.

12. Proof, Apoc. 21.23.

Finally, the teaching of the New Jerusalem (which in the first sense, means
without doubt the Catholic Militant Church of Christ, in opposition to the
Synagogue, the old earthly Jerusalem) is called [ the light, in which shall
walk the nations of them that are saved (Acts 2.47. and 13.48.) whose light is
not the Sun or Moon (any created, corruptible means) but God himself and the
Lamb (Mat. 28.20.) so as, there shall never be any night (of error) in that
City, because its Sun shall never set, etc. Esa. 60.20.] You see how expressly,
how abundantly H. Scripture (from first to last) sets forth our principle. It
had been easy to have quoted ten times more texts to the same purpose: but to
whom this is not enough, nothing would: Now let us see what you have to object
against it.

THE SECOND PART: Defending the Catholic Tenet.
CHAP. I. Solving Objections against the Church's authority.
THe true reason wherefore your Ministers deny unto H. Church this office of
teaching Religion, is because they are conscious, both of their having no title
to the church; and of being sure to be condemned, if they should submit to any
judge but a mute one. And yet under color of interpreting Scripture by it
self, they find a way to exercise all the same office themselves, as they deny
to her, and with much greater arrogance.

The pretended reason is, because (forsooth) she is liable to error in her
teaching, except when she teaches Scripture, and therefore is limited to it,
as to a bar-rule, beside or beyond which she may not teach or command any thing
as Gospel: and the people lawfully may, nay, and at their peril are to examine
by it their Pastors teaching; and if not there, reject it.

Any of which allegations, if true, would indeed quite overthrow our tenet. But
they are egregious false ones, as will appear by our answers to the best proofs
for them.

1. Object. Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 5.32.

[Thou shall not add to this word, etc.] As much as to say [not teach, do, or
believe any thing in Religion, but what is written.]

Solution.

No such thing: For, 1. He spoke not of the written Law; but the words
commanded by him. 2. Grant he meant the written Law, he neither says, nor
meant as you gloss him. Because, then

1. None could have believed, or taught [the creation of the Angels; fall, and
punishment of the Devils; the spiritual taint of humane nature by Adams sin;
the immortality of the soul; resurrection of the body; eternal punishments of
the wicked, rewards of the just.]

2. Then, Iosuah had transgressed this Precept, when he added to the Law, his
Book: (Ios. 24.26.) Ezra, or whoever else it was, that added to it, the Book of
Job, and the rest of the Old Testament: much more they, that to things
expressly ordained by it, added other; namely, David, Psalms and Music;
Solomon, a Temple; Hezekiah, 14 days to the Passover (2 Chr. 30.22.) he that
first appointed the Law to be read to the people every Sabbath day; and
permitted them to have it in their own hands to read, etc.

3. Then, when the High Priest had given sentence in any cause, no man might
have believed, or done, but what was in that sentence; for of it, it is said [
Thou shall not decline from it, etc. Deuteronomy. 17.11.] 4. Then Iosuah declined from
the ways of David, when he read the Law in the Temple; (2 Chro. 34., 30.) which
David never did.

Those phrases then [ thou shall not add, etc.] meant no more but this that
follows presently, as it were to explicate them [ thou shall observe to do all,
etc.]

2. Object. Esa 8.20.

[To the Law, and to the testimony. If they speak not according to this word,
etc.] Plainly, authorizing and directing people, to examine their Pastors
doctrine, by the Scripture, and if not there, reject it.

Solution.

As wide as the former. For

1. He names not the Scripture, nor meant it, necessarily (much less solely.)
2. Grant, he meant it; yet 1. not as in the people's hand; but as read, and
interpreted, to them by their Pastors (Exodus 24.12. 2 Chr. 17.9. Neh. 8.7.) 2.
Nor therefore by [they,] did he mean their Pastors; but Sorcerers, Idolaters,
or such like impious wretches, spoken of in the words next before. 3. Nor, by
[not according to it,] did he mean, beside, or beyond it; but evidently
repugnant to it; as that counsel [Seek unto wizards] was, of which he there
particularly spoke.

3. Object. Eze, 44.24.

[They shall judge it, according to my judgment;] meaning, according to Moses
Law.

Solution.

1. Perhaps not, 2. Grant, he meant it, he meant it as guide-rule only, not a
bar-rule: according to it, not according to it alone.

4. Object. S. Mat. 15.9.

[Teaching for doctrines, the commandments of men;] that is, unwritten
traditions.

Solution.

No such matter; but commandments repugnant to God's Law (whether written, or
unwriten.] Such as that, in which he there instanced [ God said, etc. But you
say, etc. v. 4, 5.]

5. Object. S. Mat. 15.14. and 16, 6, 12.

[ Take heed of the doctrine of the Pharisees (which yet sat then in Moses
Chair:) they are blind guides; and if the blind lead the blind, etc.]
Plainly intimating, that people, at their own peril, are to use their eyes, in
judging of the truth of what is taught them, be the Teacher never so lawfully
authorized: seeing they may be blind guides.

Solution.

The Scribes and Pharisees (speaking generally, and per se) sat in Moses
Chair, that is, taught what they had authority for from the Synagogue. And in
consideration thereof, our Saviors rule was [ All things therefore whatsover,
etc. Mat. 23.2.] Sometimes they sat in their own Chair; that is, taught their
private opinions, or traditions of their Sect. Whence, sometimes the people
might have reason to doubt of their teaching: which when they had; they were,
at their own peril, to examine, and judge of it; but not by the Scripture, but
the doctrine of Moses Chair; or if by the Scripture, not but as interpreted by
that chair.

6. Object. Acts 17.11.

The Bereans are commended for searching in Scripture, even Paul's doctrine.
Much more, may people their Pastors.

Solution.

Neither the one, nor the other. For

1. Perhaps not commended for searching; but only for [receiving the word with
all greediness:] that is, listening to it very greedily, whereas the
Thessalonians stopped theirs at it. Nay, perhaps not for that neither; but only
noted for a more noble people, without particularizing, wherein. For, those
words [in that] implying a reason given, are only of your Translators
inserting, and confessed for such, by a smaller Character, in most of your
editions: the text rightly rendered, being a mere relation of what passed
consequenter, [These were more noble; receiving the word, etc. and searching.]

2. Grant, commended for it; it will not therefore follow, that so may people
examine their Pastors doctrine; Because, 1. They were then no Christians (as I
think) and so consequently, he, none of their Pastor. And my reason is, 1.
Because they searched [ whether Christ ought to have suffered, etc.] in order
to judging, whether Jesus were the Christ, (v. 3.) which no Christian could
doubt of. 2. Because upon, and after the search, it is said [therefore many of
them believed.] So, some, not then: till then, none. And consequently, that
might be commendable in them, which would have been a mortal sin in them, if
Christians. 2. Because (granting they were Christians.) 1. They did not search
for any doctrine of his, delivering Christian faith (viz. Christ is come, Jesus
is the Christ, is risen, etc.) which was not possible to be found in the
Scripture they searched; but only for a proof he brought toward it [viz.
Christ ought to have suffered, etc. risen again;] which he affirmed to be in
Scripture, and desired his hearers not to believe it, or him, unless it were (
v. 3. and 26.22.) 2. Nor did they search with doubt, or intent to judge of the
truth of his doctrine; but only to satisfy their curiosity, or to confirm and
comfort their yet tender faith, by reading in their own Bible, with their own
eyes, what they little dreamt to be in it; having been always taught out of it
to the contrary; and having read perhaps the places quoted, a hundred times
over, and never observed any such thing in them.

7. Object. 1 Thessalonians. 5.27.

[Prove all things.] If all; the doctrine of our Pastors.

Solution.

I might as well infer [ all things are lawful for me, 1 Cor. 10.23.] If all;
lying, and theft. we are therefore to understand him as in that, so in this, of
all things of the sort there spoken of, viz. Prophecyings (the word next before.)

8. Object. 1 Cor. 10.15.

[Iudge ye what I say]. Leaving his doctrine to be judged of by the people.

Solution.

By a judgment of pure approbation. For else you must say (which I think you
will not presume) that people are judges even of Scripture it self; for so was
that, which he then bad them judge.

Object. 1 Cor. 4.6.

[Not to think of men above what is written.]

Solution.

That is, whereas he had named no man, but under the borrowed names of himself
and Apollos; they should not think (or guess) who he meant, by him, or him.

10, Object. 1 Pet. 4.11.

[If any man speak; as the oracles of God.]

Solution.

That is, if any man have the gift of utterance, or eloquent speech, let him
use it, as Gods words, speech, or gift, that he may be glorified.

11. Object. Apoc. 22.18.

[If any man shall add unto the words etc.]

Solution.

Either by corrupting them, or holding any thing contrary to them; for example,
that Antichrist shall be a Christian; or reign 1000. years; or honor Gods
Tabernacle, or them that dwell in heaven (Apoc. 13.6.) etc.

CHAP. II. Solving Objections against her Infallibility.
1. Object. Exodus 32.4.

[THey said, These are thy Gods, O Israel.] Idolatry taught by the Priests,
High Priest and all.

Solution.

No such matter. For 1. Perhaps that was not the Priests saying, but the
Peoples. 2. If the Priests; not Aarons 3. If his also; enticing to Idolatry,
migh be without teaching it. 4. If he taught it; he was not then the Supreme
Pastor, but Moses.

2. Object. Ier. 50.6.

[Their shepherds have caused them to go astray.]

Solution.

But he does not say, [ by their teaching.]

3. Object. Mal. 2.8.

[You have caused many to stumble at the Law.]

Solution.

But he says not [by your teaching.]

4. Object. Mat. 7.15. and 24.5, 24.

[Take heed of false Prophets. Many shall arise, and deceive many, etc.]

Solution.

But he never said [Take heed of your Pastors; they shall seduce you.]

5. Object. Mat. 13.25.

The Church is compared to a field, sown at first with good seed, afterward
over run with tares of errors.

Solution.

1. Perhaps not the Church; but particular Churches, or souls. 2. Grant, the
Church: those tares meant not errors in doctrine, but in life, or practice. 3.
Grant erronous doctrines; yet 1. Not sown by her, or any of hers, but the
enemy. 2. Nor springing up within her doctrine; but only within the same field
(or country) where it was sown, or is growing.

6. Object. Mar. 14.64. Ioh. 9.22.

The very Chair of Moses taught false doctrine; viz. [that Jesus was not the
Christ.]

Solution.

But Moses Chair was not then in office, further then it was authorized by him:
who albeit he did authorize it as formerly, in all things, until his own should
be erected; yet it is manifest he excepted himself, who put all things under it,

7. Object. Luke 18.8.

When the Son of man comes shall he find faith in the earth?

Solution.

Little perfect faith, in the world; but he shall, true and perfect faith,
believed and professed by all (lively) members of his church (and consequently
taught by her Pastors;) that company of his Elect spoken of, Psalm. 89.4. Mat.
16.18. and 24.24.

8. Object. Acts 20.30.

Even [Pastors were to arise, speaking perverse things, and drawing away
disciples after them.]

Solution.

True: particular persons ( e.g. Luther, Cranmer, Calvin, etc.) Therefore he
said not [your selves,] but [of, or among your selves.] Nor did he give any
item, touching false Pastors to come; but unto Pastors only.

9. Object. Romans 11.21.

Even the Church of Rome her self is warned of her being in danger of falling
from grace, and not only by wickedness of life, but by Infidelity, as the
Synagogue had done.

Solution.

Not the Church of Rome (for, that includes the Pastor of it, which then was S.
Peter) but the generality of particular persons, among the Gentiles.

10. Object. Gal. 2.11.

Even Peter himself erred.

Solution.

But not in teaching false doctrine.

11. Object. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.

Before Antichrist's coming, there was to be a notable falling away.

Solution.

But he does not say [from faith;] much less, [of the Church.]

12. Object. 2 Pet. 2.1.

[There shall be false Teachers among you, etc.]

Solution.

But he does not say, [the Church shall become a false Teacher:] or speak, or
mean, of Teachers, coming in quality of her Pastors, but of Prophets.

13. Object. 1 Ioh. 4.1.

[Try the spirits whether they are of God, etc.]

Solution.

But he does not say, [Try every spirit; believe none;] nor does he mean, the
spirits of Teachers authorized by the Church; much less, her spirit: but the
spirits of such as come in quality of Prophets. Now that Christ and his
Apostles, should so often and so plainly warn people of false Teachers, to
come, in after ages; and always speak of them, under the name of Prophets; and
never once give any least intimation of danger possible by believing the
Church, or their Pastors, if any such danger were to be; but on the contrary,
advise and encourage them, (absolutely) to believe and obey them; is against
the very light of reason.

Conclusion of the second Part.

You see, how nothing is to be said against our Principle; now let us examine
yours.

THE THIRD PART: Examining Protestant Proofs.
CHAP. I. Examining Proofs for the Tenet.
YOu say [The Scripture was left for the means of teaching the Gospel.] See, if
you can find where it says any such thing of it self, in words or sense.

1. Argu. Deuteronomy. 30.10.

Moses Law, is called [the Law] in simple sense.

Answer.

Not in simple sense; but only [the Law by him written:] for else it would
exclude the Prophets (with which it is often joined ( Mat. 5.17.) nay, the Book
of Job, which was then written; and a multitude of Divine Precepts then not
written; namely, those commanding faith, hope, contrition for sin, etc.
forbidding drunkenness, fornication, etc.

2, Argu. Deuteronomy. 31.10.

[Thou shall read this law in their hearing, that they may learn to fear the
Lord.]

Answer.

But he does not say [that it may teach it them:] nor any of those things above
named that contain or imply the sense of your principle; compare it with them
one by one, and you will find it true as I say.

3. Argu. Mark 1.1.

S. Mark's is called [the Gospel of Christ] in simple sense.

Answer.

Not; but only [the Gospel by him written:] for else it would exclude the other
three.

4. Argu. John 5.39.

[Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think, to have eternal life; and they
are they which testify of me.]

Answer.

But he does not say [in them you may have eternal life; or, they will teach
you] or any other of the words you are to prove, or to the same sense.

5. Argu. Romans 3.2.

[To them were committed the oracles of God.] Meaning, the Scriptures.

Answer.

Not necessarily; much less, solely: there having been many oracles given to
them, more then were written; namely; 1. Diverse we meet withal in the New
Testament (2 Timothy 3.8. Heb. 9.19. and 11.37. Iud. 6, 9, 14.) 2. All those given
by the High Priest, viva voce (from Adam's time, until Christ's,) to them that
consulted him; he being a constant (or ordinary) oracle. (Genesis 25.22. Judge.
1.1. 1 Samuel 23. 2. Ioh. 11.51.)

6. Argu. Romans 15.4.

[The Scripture was written for our instruction.]

Answer.

No doubt of it, and it is an excellent means thereunto. But this is none of
the things you are to prove.

7. Argu. 2 Th. 2.15.

[VVhich you have been taught by our Epistle.]

Answer.

But he does not say, nor mean [which it has taught you:] but only [which you
have been taught by us, whether by word or epistle.]

8. Argu. 2 Timothy 3.15.

[VVhich are able to make thee wise to salvation, by faith, etc.]

Answer.

But he does not say [which are able to make you wise:] meaning, Christians in
general: nor [which are able to make thee wise to salvation] absolutely; but
[by faith in Christ.] That is, by bringing thee to faith, or confirming, or
perfecting thee in it.

Better proofs then these, I am sure you have not: and the best of these (as
you may see a little already; will more, anon) is very short of a proof. And
no wonder; when the Scripture cannot contradict it self (in sense;) as it
would, if in one place (as I have named an hundred) it should set forth the
Church for our Teacher, Guide, or Rule; and in another, it self.

CHAP. II. Examining the proofs of Scripture's having the four requisites to
the office. And first, in this Chapter [VVhether a proper means?]
TO show you more manifestly, the falseness of your Tenet, by giving you
larger scope of proof.

I named above; four requisites to the means we speak of, [ proper, principal,
necessary, sufficient. Whereof therefore if Scripture want but any one, it
cannot possibly be it. See, if you can prove, it has (I do not say, all; but
so much as) any one of them. And first, that it is [ proper (useful, or
intended) to give the first instruction.] Which as it is the first, so the
incomparably principal and most necessary act of the office of Teaching,

1. Argu. Deuteronomy. 31.11.

[Thou shall read this law before the children that have not known any thing,
that they may hear and learn to fear the Lord.] Therefore proper to give no
vices their first instruction.

Answer.

It follows not. 1. Because this place speaks not of novices, but of the
ignorant sort of people, young or old. For, those words [any thing] are not
Moses's, but an addition of your Translators (confessed, in some editions, by a
smaller character,) to help the sense, when they mar it (as they do in diverse
other places, and instead of the H. Ghost's, give their own sense for
Scripture, which is properly that adding to it, as is forbidden, and accursed (
Apoc. 21.22.) the text being no more then this [children, etc. that have not
known.] that is, are ignorant of the dreadful majesty, sanctity, power,
justice, and other perfections of God Almighty, and of the great awe and
obedience due to him from his creatute, set forth in that Book. 2. Nor
therefore, by [learning to fear God,] did he mean the first, but the perfecting
knowledge. And it is the more probable; because this reading of the Law was
appointed to be but once in seven years; whereas children were to be instructed
touching God Almighty, as soon as two or three year old.

2. Argu. Psalm. 19.7. and 119.30.

[The law of God gives light to the simple, and little ones.]

Answer.

True; but impertinent. For, 1. He does not name the Scripture, nor (I think)
mean it, but the Gospel, as preached by the Church, among the Gentiles, to the
conversion of Nations; spoken of from the first ver. of this Psalm; S. Paul
himself being the interpreter ( Romans 10.18.)

2. Nor, had he meant it, do those simple, or little ones, mean novices: but
humble, upright souls; such as himself was, Psalm. 131.11. Jacob, (Genesis 25.27.)
Job, Job 1.1. the Apostles, Mat. 11.25.) and as all Christians, yea the
greatest Divines in the world, must be, ere God reveal his mysteries to them,
either by Scripture, or any other means ( Mat. 18.3. 1 Pet. 2.1.)

3. Argu. S. Ioh. 20.31.

[These are written, that ye may believe, that Jesus is the Christ.] Implying,
his Gospel was proper to give instruction in that point, the first principle of
Christian faith.

Answer.

Short still. For he spoke not that, either 1. to novices; but to Christians
catechized. 2. or touching any doctrines, in his Gospel; but the miracles of
Christ, related in it [ Many other signs he did, which are not written; but
these (i.e. signs) are, etc.] 3. or of instructing in that point, but
confirming in the belief of it, [ these are written that ye may believe, etc.]

4. Argu. 2 Timothy 3.14.

[Timothy knew the Scriptures of a childe] Sure then, profitable to instruct
him in his childehood.

Answer.

No doubt, singularly profitable; but not to give him his first instruction.

5. Argu. 5. 1 Ioh. 2.13.

S. John wrote to little children.

Answer.

Such children as knew the Father; nay, needed no man to teach them the
doctrine of the Catechism, (ver. 20, 27.)

CHAP. III. Examining the proofs for Scripture's being a principal means.
SEcondly, that which is called [the meanes] to any end, must be the principal
means to it (as principal, opposes instrumental.) Now H. Scripture, we say, is
a most superlatively excellent proper means, and (in its kind) the principal to
give the perfecting instruction: but we will not say, it is at all proper to
it, as principal; that is of or by it self, or as in the hand of any one (the
profoundest Divine); but only as an instrument in the hand of the Church, or
one of her Scholars. As a pen is proper to write; but not as a principal
means, but as an instrument only, in the hand of one that has strength and
skill to use and guide it to its end. You say, (or must renounce your
principle) it is self-proper to this end, as in the hand of any (or every)
understanding Christian. See, if you can prove it.

1. Argu. Deuteronomy. 17.19.

[He shall read therein, that he may learn to fear the Lord:] that is, that by
it, he may instruct and direct himself in his duty to God.

Answer.

True, if you understand it of the King in the discharge of his civil office.
But if you will understand it of him as one of the faithful, in the discharge
of his duty to God, in matters of faith, and holiness; it was not meant of
every, or any one, but one trained up in the true Religion, by or under
Orthodox Pastors.

2. Argu. Deuteronomy. 30.11.

[This commandment is not hidden from thee, etc.] Implying, the Scripture is
not dark to any one, in matters necessary.

Answer.

It implies no such thing. For 1. It speaks not of Scripture; but of the words
by him commanded viva voce. And so was a figure of the Gospel to be preached
(Romans 10.8.) which indeed is hid to none but the Reprobates (2 Cor. 4.3.) 2.
Grant, he had spoken of Scripture; and by name, of that book of Deuteronomy
(the plainest in the Bible, and consisting of nothing else in a manner but moral
precepts (written in our hearts by the light of nature) exhortations,
admonitions, motives, etc. to piety and obedience:) yet it was so unprofitable,
yea dangerous, for ignorant people, as it was neither intended for their
reading, ( Deu. 31.9.) nor to be so much as read to them, without an
interpreter authorized. ( Neh. 8.7. 2 Chronicles. 17.9. Acts 15.22.

3. Argu. Deuteronomy. 31.11.

[ Thou shall read this law before the people that have not known any thing;
that they may learn to fear God, etc.] Implying, it was so self-plain, as the
sole hearing it read, was sufficient to instruct ignorant people, in the
knowledge and fear of God.

Answer.

No such thing, as appears from what is said in the answer last before. And now
I shall illustrate and confirm it to you, by giving some of the reasons of it
in an instance. In that Book (of Deuteronomie) are sundry passages, most
admirably setting forth the great perfections of God, for which we ought to
fear him; proposing effectual motives to it, etc. and so, most excellent
proper, to inform and perfect the reader or hearer, in that duty. But then
withal, there are intermixed such expressions; sometimes, so descending to the
vulgar capacity (of God's eyes, hands, anger, glittering sword, etc. (Chap.
32.40, 41, etc.) sometimes so dark (e.g. Iesurun waxed fat; I lift up my hand
to heaven, etc. (Chap. 32.15, 40. etc.) sometimes so repugnant in words: (for
example, calling God sometimes by a name of the singular number, Jehovah, as if
but one person; generally, of the plural, Elohim, which your Translators ought
to have rendered, Gods, or the Gods;) sometimes, setting him forth, as an
infinitely dreadful, otherwhiles as an infinitely gentle power, etc.) as they
would be apt to beget, or confirm, in ignorant people, erroneous apprehensions
of him, and either too little, or too great a dread of him, unless heard or
read by one, that had been taught some rules for the right understanding of
them; which rules cannot be given with certainty, but by the Church.

4. Argu. Psalm. 19.8. and 119.105.

[The law of the Lord is a light, enlightening the eyes of the simple.] Now, a
light, is a self-sufficient ( or principal) means, to guide a man in his way.

Answer.

1. Most certain, the Law of God, is (in its kind) a most excellent light, yea
the principal in this world, to guide us (even Church and all) in the way to
heaven. But David speaks not here of the Scripture; nor does he mean it,
necessarily; much less solely.

2. Grant he meant it; light is not a self-sufficient means to direct a
traveler in his way; no, not the Sun it self, to one that has a filme over his
eyes, or is ignorant of his way, or is drunk, or mad; but shall light him as
well out of his way, as into it; yea, instead of his way, shall light him into
a pit to break his neck. Now such men, with a filme over their eyes, are all
not instructed in Religion by the Church; and such drunk or mad men, are all
pertinacious Sectaries.

5. Argu. Psalm. 199.99.

I have more understanding then all my Teachers; for thy Testimonies are my
meditation.] Implying, that a man, by studying the Scripture, may come to more
knowledge in divine things, then is in his Teachers; and consequently, to
understand Scripture better then they, and therefore without their help.

Answer.

It implies no such thing. For 1. He spoke not of the Scripture; nor perhaps
meant it. 2. Nor did he perhaps speak this of himself, in quality of a
Believer; but of a Prophet (taught by inspiration.) 3. Nor did he prefer his
understanding, to all Teachers, but to all his. 4. Nor did he perhaps speak of
wisdom speculative, but practical or experimental only: wherein many times,
simple people, by devout meditation, and ferverous practice of what is taught
them by the Church, or read by them in Scripture, come to exceed their Teachers.

6. Argu. S. Luke 10.26.

When one demanded of our Savior the way to heaven, he sent him to the
Scripture [How is it written? How read thou?] Implying; that it by it self
alone, is enough to show any reader of it, the way to heaven.

Answer.

Still wide. For, that one, did not demand the way, absolutely (whereof himself
was a Teacher;) but that particular, new, perfecter way, as Christ professed to
teach: which favor he not thinking him worthy of, sent him to Moses, whose
disciple he was (Ioh. 9.28.) And in the same manner, he did at first with the
other Pharisee, that came to him with the same question ( Mar. 10.19.) but when
by his answer he saw cause to love him, he taught him the perfect way to
happiness, as he did Nicodemus (at first asking) the necessary (Ioh. 3.3.) by
his new Law: and without sending either of them to the Scripture for either
way; where indeed it was not to be found.

7. Argu. S. Luke 16.29.

When the glutton in hell begged of Abraham a Teacher from the dead, for his
brethren on earth, the answer was [They have Moses and the Prophets; let them
hear them.] Implying, Scripture alone, was a means proper to teach them piety
sufficient to escape hell.

Answer.

Not a tittle to any such sense. For

1. He begged not a Teacher, but only a witness to the doctrine of the
Synagogue touching the grievousness of hell torments, etc. nor therefore did
Abraham remit them to Moses and the Prophets, as Teachers; but only as
witnesses, more competent, then he who was desired (a Ghost from the dead.)

2. Nor, by [Moses and the Prophets] did he perhaps mean their writings, but
the Teachers then living upon earth: those in ordinary (sitting in his Chair)
by Moses; those in extraordinary (which that Nation was seldom without) by the
Prophets. And it is the more probable; 1. Because it were more proper, where a
living witness was desired, to send them to a living witness, more credible
then the other. 2. Because it is improper to say of writings [Let them hear
them.]

3. Grant, he meant the Scripture, and as a means of instruction; yet not as
read, much less, interpreted, by the people; but as read, and interpreted to
them, by their Pastors. Therefore he said [Let them hear them.]

8. Argu. S. Ioh. 5.39.

[Search the Scriptures: they are they that testify of me.] As who should say
[They are the proper, principal, sufficient means to teach people Religion.]

Answer.

Far from any such sense. For 1. He spoke not this to the people; but the
Teachers (as you will see anon, cap. 6.. 1. argu. 6.) 2. Nor perhaps did he say
to them [Search,] but [you do search;] the Greek word, being indifferent to
either; and the later as agreeable to the scope and coherence of the Text, as
the former, 3. Nor did he send any to it, as a Teacher of any thing, but only
as a witness to his person. 4. Nor as the proper, principal, necessary, or
sufficient witness (for, those he had newly before urged, ver. 35, etc.) but as
a witness, he was compelled to, by their obstinacy to the other, and esteem of
it. [Him whom the Father has sent, ye believe not. Search the Scriptures; for
in them ye think, etc.] 5. Nor did he send them to it, by it self alone; but
(as his manner was, Luke 24.27, 32, 45,) alleged the texts, and opened them. 6,
Nay nor then neither, were they a testimony sufficient to weigh against those,
brought by his adversaries, out of the same Scripture, to the contrary; without
putting into the scale, the authority of his person the interpreter (as you
will see anon, par. 4. c. 4.. 5.

9. Argu. Acts 18.28.

[Apollos mightily convinced the Jews; showing by the Scriptures, that Jesus
was Christ.] He, a layman, by scripture alone, convinced, showed, or made
clear, even to infidels, the first, and one of the highest mysteries of
Christian faith: much more could he show it to himself; and if that point, any
other.

Answer.

An argument somewhat specious indeed, but wanting soliditie. For 1. Though a
layman; yet he had been taught by the Church, how to allege, and open the
Scripture to that point. 3. His convincing, or showing, meant no more, then
bringing proofs, or arguments for it; for we do not read he converted any: and
it is certain, not all that he disputed with. 3. It was not possible for him to
prove by the Scripture (there spoken of) more then one of his propositions.
For, his argument from the old Scripture could be no other, but this [ Christ,
was to suffer death, and rise again, etc. Jesus has suffered death, is risen
again, etc. Therefore he is Christ.] The former proposition, he was able to
convince by Scripture; the later not.

10. Argu. Romans 15.4.

[VVhat things were written, were written for our learning] or instruction.

Answer.

Most certain, and are singularly proper to that end in the hand of an Orthodox
Teacher, alleging and interpreting them (in their right sense) unto the
people, as he did then to them.

11. Argu. 2 Cor. 4.3.

[If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish.] As much as to say
[Scripture is plain to all but reprobates.]

Answer.

1. He spoke not, nor dreamt of Scripture, but of the Gospel preached by the
Church. 2. Grant, he spoke of Scripture; he meant it as preached by himself,
Silvanus, and Timothy, their Pastors. Consequently, no wilful Protestant, or
other Sectary whatever, to whom the Scripture as preached to him by his present
lawful Pastors, is hid; may hope of himself, that he is one of the
predestinate, if he dye in that state of soul.

12. Argu. 2 Timothy 3.15.

[The Scriptures are able to make thee wise to salvation.] Spoken to Timothy,
as a Christian, to encourage him to be diligent in reading them, as a means
proper by it self alone, to instruct him in Religion, sufficiently to his
salvation.

Answer.

Not a syllable in it to any such purpose. For 1. He spoke not to him as a mere
Christian; but as a Catholic, trained up in the Church under himself ( v. 14.)
2. Nor perhaps did he here encourage him to reading the Scripture, but only to
continue firm in the things himself had taught him out of it; not so much for
the evidence of their consonancy with it, as for the authority of his person,
the interpreter [ knowing of whom thou have learned them, v. 14.] 3. Nor
therefore did he recommend it to him, as an instructor in Christian faith, but
as a witness to it. 4. Nor therefore did he say [wise to salvation] absolutely;
as if salvation were attainable by the knowledge and belief of the Scriptures
there spoken of; but [wise to salvation by faith in Christ:] that is, by
confirming and perfecting you, in Christ's faith. And so [wise to salvation,]
means no more then [wise, in saving wisdom.] Consequently, the uttermost sense
of this place is no more then this [The old Scriptures are able to make a
Catholic, wise in saving wisdom, by confirming, or improving him in faith:]
which is nothing to what you are to prove.

13. Argu. 2. Tim. 3.16.

[All Scripture is profitable for doctrine, etc.]

Answer.

Superlatively, beyond all that can be said of it, by tongues of men or Angels;
(being given, to that end, by inspiration from an infinite Wisdom.)

But it makes nothing to your purpose. For

1. He does not say [sufficient.]

2. No, nor [self-profitable.]

3. No [ nor profitable in the hand of every Christian, no nor of every
Christian Divine, suppose him the profoundest ever lived:] but of [the man of
God;] that is, the Orthodox or Catholic Divine, or Teacher. For 1. That by
[the man of God] he meant not a mere Christian, or believer; is manifest 1.
Because that name is never found in Scripture, used of any but in whom there
was some higher excellency then ordinary. 2. Because it was a proper name, in
that Nation, of Prophets (1 Samuel 2.27. and 9, 6, etc.) 3. Because Timothy to
whom he then wrote this, was a Pastor; and called by him, by this name [ thou,
O man of God, 1 Timothy 6.11.] 4. Because all these works, here named, as to which
it is profitable [doctrine, reproof, correction, and instruction] are the
proper works of a Divine, or Preacher. 2. That he meant a Catholic Divine, is
as certain. For, a Heretic, he would never call [a man of God] but a limb,
instrument, or factor of the Devil ( Gal. 5.20. Tit. 3.10, Apoc. 2.9, 15.)

4. Grant, by that name, he meant a lay-Christian; yet not any other but a
Catholic one; for the Scripture would be far from calling a heretic, a man of
God; which alone is enough to render this place of no use to you.

13. Argu. 2 Pet. 1.19.

[To which you do well to take heed as to a light, etc.]

Answer.

In the hand of your Pastors, alleging, and expounding it to you [ we have a
light, to which you do well to take heed.]

14. Argu. Apoc. 1.3.

[Blessed is he that reads this Book.] Sure then profitable, in the hand of any
Christian reader, to instruct and guide him, to his souls health.

Answer.

No such thing. For

1. I do not think he spoke here of lay-Christians, but the Pastor of the
several Churches to whom that Epistle was directed ( Chap.. 2.1, etc.) and
immediately delivered, for him to read it himself, and preach it to the people.
My reason is; 1. Because it was fit, he should have his encouragement as well
as the people. 2. Because the people, in quality of hearers, are spoken of in
the very next words, in the plural number [He that reads; and they that hear.]
Now let him that says, in both places he meant the people; give a reason, why
he should so suddenly change the number. 3. Because when none of the writers,
nor he himself, encouraged the people, to the reading of any Book of Scripture
(as we shall see anon) rather discouraged (and namely from S. Paul's Epistles) by
reason of some things in it hard to be understood (2 Pet. 3.16.) I cannot think
it likely he would encourage them to the reading of this, of least use, and
more abounding with things hard to be understood, and easy to be wrested by
them to their damnation, then any one of S. Paul's Epistles; or any other Book
in Scripture.

2. Grant he meant lay-Christians; yet not any (or every) one; not a Nicolaitan
(Apoc. 2.6.) not one of Diotrephes Congregation (3 Io. 9.) for certainly such a
one would read it but to his greater damnation: but such a one as was under his
Angel (or Catholic Pastor) whose hearer he was, as well as its reader. Blessed
are such readers of it: woe to others.

CHAP. IV. Examining the proofs for the necessity of Scripture.
THirdly, nothing can be called [the means] to any end, to which it is not
(simply) necessary. See then if you can prove, that H. Scripture is simply
necessary to the teaching of Religion: viz. either that there was any necessity
for its writing (more then necessity of command, for some few pieces of the Old
Testament, and the Apocalipse, in the New, Apoc. 1.10.) or that since its
writing, Religion cannot be taught, or subsist, without it.

1. Argu. 2 Pet. 1.20.

Holy men of old, wrote as they were moved, etc.]

Answer.

True: but moving, is not commanding.

2. Argu. S. Jude 3.

[It was needful for me to write.]

Answer.

But 1. Needful is short of necessary. 2. Nor did he mean needful absolutely;
but only that, resolving to write, he saw it needful to write to them, to that
end, or of that subject [to exhort them to contend earnestly, etc.]

CHAP. V. Examining the proofs for Scripture's being sufficient.
FInally, nothing can be called [the means] to any end, but it must be
sufficient to it. Which, Scripture cannot possibly be, to the teaching of the
Gospel, unless it contain expressly every particular of it. I think it vain to
say [importing to salvation,] because, the Gospel can consist of none but do
so, in some kind or other.

I say [expresly:] because else, there will need some other means with authority
(for as good none at all, as not with authority) to deduce the inferences, and
apply the general rules or examples of it to particular doubts or cases (which
is the main part of the office of teaching;) and so it could not deserve to be
called [the means.]

If then you think H. Scripture does not contain every particular of the Gospel
expressly; renounce your principle. If you think it do; see, if you can prove
it.

1. Argu. S. Luke 1.3. Acts 1.1.

S. Luke calls his Gospel [a Treatise of all things, that Jesus taught, or were
believed among Christians.] And the Gospel cannot consist of more.

Answer.

1. Yes, it may; namely, of those as are in S. John's Gospel, or Epistles
(revealed long after S. Lukes death.) 2. Grant it did not; he did not mean
[all] in proper, or logical sense, for all absolutely: but in vulgar sense
only, for, the generality, greater, or notable part (usual in Scripture, and
particularly in him, Luke 24.14, 27. Acts 1.19. and 2. 12. and 3.11, etc.) it
being evident, he wants diverse particulars, that are in the other Evangelists,
and some of them of the most fundamental in Christian Religion; namely [ the
divinity of Christ, the number and names of the persons in the Godhead; the
institution of the two Sacraments of Baptism, and Penance.]

2 Argu. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.

[Scripture is profitable, for doctrine, etc. that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work.] Therefore it contains
expressly every particular of the Gospel.

Answer.

A very weak inference: there being a great distance; 1. betwixt every
particular of the Gospel, and every good work (which are but a part of the
particulars.) 2. betwixt every good work absolutely; and every good work, of
the sorts there spoken of, pertaining to a Divine, viz doctrine, correction,
etc. 3. Betwixt profitable to furnish for them; and containing them expressly.

CHAP. VI. Examining the proof of things less yet.
What do I speak of proving such things as these? See, if you can prove but so
much as any of these that follow: namely.

. 1. From Old or New Testament.
n. 1.

That God Almighty ever ordained, or expressed any intent, the lay people
should read the Bible, or have it to read in, if they pleased, to instruct
themselves in Religion.

1. Argu. Deuteronomy. 6.7.

[Thou shall write these words upon thy walls, teach them thy children, etc.]

Answer.

Nothing to the purpose. For 1. He does not speak of (or mean perhaps) words
written, but commanded by him. 2. Grant, words written; he does not say [thou
shall read them.] If you say, he meant it; give a reason, why then he should
not name it, as well as he named the other [teaching, meditating, writing:] and
as well as he named it with the other, when he spoke of the Law, as to be used
by the chief Ruler (Deuteronomy. 17.19. Ios. 1.8.) Nor can you say, he necessarily
employed it in those commands, of writing, teaching, and meditating on it: for
they might be performed (sufficiently to their intent) as now they are, by
pious Catholics, without reading it; namely, by being taught the commandments,
and other the principal parts of Gods Law, most useful for them, by the Priests
( Exodus 24.12. Deuteronomy. 31.9, 19.21.)

2. Argu. Deuteronomy. 27.3.

[Thou shall set up great stones, and write upon them all the words of this
law, plainly.] Sure, to the end people should read them.

Answer.

It may be so. But it expresses no such intent. It does this, and that's all it
expresses, that it should there remain as a witness. Nor is it likely that he
meant the whole book of Deuteronomy (much less; Genesis, and the rest of the
Pentateuch;) for, what a wall would that ask? sure, longer then that hill Ebal,
could contain: but only the ten Commandments, with perhaps some other moral
precepts, admonitions, and exhortations, most useful for the people, and
needing no interpreter; and the blessings on the obedient, curses on the
transgressors ( Ios. 8.34.) Now such a writing, in that manner set forth, is a
different thing from the Bible: H. Church at this day, permitting people the
one, in Primars, etc. when she will not the other.

3. Argu. Deuteronomy. 31.9.

Moses delivered the Law into the hand of the Elders, as well as the Priests.
Sure, with intent they should read it.

Answer.

Very likely: but not as to instruct themselves in Religion, but to guide
themselves by it in judicature, as it contained the Civil Law of that Nation.

4. Argu. Esa. 24.16.

[Seek ye out of the Book of the Lord, and read, etc.] Spoken to the people.

Answer.

1. It may be, not. 2. Grant it; it names not, nor perhaps meant, the Bible;
nor any Book, as to instruction in Religion; but only some Prophecy then
written, touching the Captivity, or some other future temporal calamity;
(proper to that Nation, and age.)

5. Argu. S. Mat 12.3.

[Have ye not read, etc.] Spoken by our Savior to the people; there, and else
where often.

Answer.

1. Never once; but to Teachers only, and as such. And one reason I have for
saying so, is because when a lay Pharisee demanded of him the way to heaven, he
sent him not to the Scripture, (as he did the Lawyer, Luke 10.26.) but to his
Catechism [Thou know the Commandments, Mar. 10.19.]

2. Grant, spoken to the people; it supposes they did, expresses no intent they
should read it.

Argu. 6. S. Ioh. 5.39.

[Search the Scriptures.] Plainly expressing intent the people should read them.

Answer.

No such thing. For 1. It is not certain be spoke to the people: nay, it is
probable that not to them, but to the Rulers. My reason is, because he spoke it
to those ( v. 10.) who had (perhaps) convented before them (for certain)
publicly rebuked the man for carrying his bed on the Sabbath day, and examined
him touching his author or counselor; to whom he submissively gave the best
account he then could of who it was; and as soon as he knew, went to give them
a better; who thereupon prosecuted our Savior for his life. All which look
like proceedings of men fitting in Moses Chair: nor is it to the contrary, that
they are there called bare [the Jews:] for, by that name, this Evangelist often
without question meant them in authority (Ioh. 4.19. and 9.21, and 18.12.) 2.
Grant, spoken to the people; perhaps he said not to them, as your Translators
render it, [Search;] but only [you do search.] For the Original is indifferent
to either sense; and the later as agreeable to the scope and coherence of the
Text, as the former. 3. Grant the speech as you render it [search:] it does not
necessarily infer their reading it: because they might search by their Priests,
in their copy. And it is the more possible, because the Bible was then a Book
of too costly a price for the ordinary peoples purse to purchase.

7. Argu. Acts 8.28.

The Enuch reading Scripture, is set forth for an example.

Answer.

Perhaps not, no more then his sudden embracing a new Religion, upon no more
prudencial motives then are set down; especially when (supposing it true as you
hold) he had no ground in Gods word, for his reading it.

8. Argu. Acts 17.11.

The Bereans (at least) are expressly commended for it.

Answer.

1. It may be, not ( vid. supra par. 2. c. 1. ob. 6.) 2. Grant they were; it
implies, other people, in such a case as that was, lawfully may do the same;
expresses no intent they should, no more then the commending of Solomon for
building such a magnificent Temple; David, for intending it. 3. Grant that
also; their searching it, does not nenecessarilie include their reading it, no
more then the King's writing a copy of it, does the writing it himself (Deu.
17.19.) See, what is said in the answer above to the 6. Arg. 3.

9. Argu. Romans 15.4.

[Scripture was written for our instruction.]

Answer.

Most certain. But strange, if written for the peoples reading, it should never
tell them so.

10. Argu. 2 Cor. 1.13. Ephesians. 3.4.

[VVhereby when ye read, etc.] Spoken to the people.

Answer.

1. Perhaps not; no more then diverse other things in the Epistles are (1 Cor.
5.4. 1 These. 5.27.) but to the Pastors (properly.) And as is ordinary, in
writing to a community, to say [when you read this] when none is meant
properly, or in his own person, but the Clerk, or, other, Officer, to the
Company. 2. Grant, to the people; it implies a supposal they did, or would;
expresses no intent, they should read it.

Argu. 11. Col. 4.16.

[Read the Epistle from Laodicea.]

Answer.

Spoken to the Pastor, to cause it to be read among the people, or, in the
Church; as he said in the words before.

12. Argu. 2 Ioh. 1.

At least, the Lady Elect, was to read the Epistle to her written.

Answer.

No doubt, it was so intended. But little to your purpose. For 1. She was but
one person, and a person to whom in particular it was written; nor is there any
intimation of intent she should give a copy of it, or impart it to any other.
2. Nor was it then, a part of the Bible. 3. Nor did it contain any doctrinal
instruction, further then by way of admonition or motive to beware of Heretics.

n. 2.

That God Almighty ordained, or expressed any intent, there should be any copy
(or transcript) of any one sacred book (more then, that the King of the Jews,
when there should be one, should have a copy of Moses Law, Deuteronomy. 17.18.)

n. 3.

That God Almighty ordained, or expressed any intent, H. Scripture, or any part
of it, should be so much as read to the people; more then the book of
Deuteronomy, once in 7 years (namely, in the year of Iubilee, Deuteronomy. 31.9.) once
a piece of Jeremy, exhorting to repentance, and denouncing miseries else to
come upon them ( Ier. 36.6.) once the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, to
them (1 Thessalonians. 5.27.) that, to the Colosians, to them, and the Laodiceans; and
that from Laodicea, to the Colosians (Col. 4.16.)

. 2. From the Old Testament.
n. 1.

That in 700. years together ( viz. from Iosuah's reading it ( Ios. 8.34.)
until Iosiah's (2 Chronicles. 34.30.) any part of the Scripture (more then once, the
piece of Jeremy abovementioned) was ever read to the people; or the Priests
ever blamed for neglecting it.

Argu. 2 Chronicles. 17.9.

It was read to them in Iehosaphat's time.

Answer.

Like enough. But the text faith not so: and our trial now is by express Text.

n. 2.

That there was in that Nation, any copy (more then the original one, in the
Temple) of any one Sacred Book.

Argu. 2 Chro. 17.9.

Was not that a copy, as the Priests in Iehosaphat's time carried about with
them?

Answer.

It may be so: but perhaps not.

. 3. From the Prophets.
That any one of them foresaw, that any one title of the Gospel should be
written.

Argu. Ezekiel. 1.5.

Your self will say, Ezekiels four Beasts, presignifying the four Evangelists.

Answer.

I will not say, it is certain. And though I would; our trial is now by express
Text.

4. From the New Testament.
n. 1.

That any lay-Christian, ever read a word in the Bible.

Argu. 1. Acts 17.11.

The Bereans did.

Answer.

But they were (then) no Christians.

2. Argu. 1 Cor. 1.13.

The Corinthians did.

Answer.

It may be not (See sup. ans. to 10. arg.

3. Argu. 2 Pet. 3.16.

Those did, that wrested it to their damnation.

Answer.

1. Perhaps, those were Teachers. 2. If people; they might do that, without
reading it.

n. 2.

That our B. Savior, or any Apostle, took any care or order, for the means
necessary to the reading of Scripture by the people; namely, preserving the
Original, or some Authentical Copy of it; transcribing, and dispersing copies
of it throughout the world, translating it into vulgar languages, compiling the
pieces of the New Testament (written straglinglie, some in one Country, some
in another, 500 miles asunder) into some one volume, etc.

5. From the Gospels.
n. 1.

That our B. Lord, ever spoke word touching H. Scripture, unto any Christian
(more then to bring proofs out of it to his incredulous Disciples, Luke 24.27,
44.) or as to any use wherein it was to be, after his ascension.

Argu. S. Ioh. 5.39.

[Search the Scripture,] Was not that spoken to Christians?

Answer.

No, but to Infidel-Iews, and as such; as appears by the words immediately
before, and after [you believe not in me, you will not come to me;] and by the
end, for which he sent them to Scripture, namely, to bring them to faith.
Consequently, neither spoken, nor meant to any properly, or necessarily, but
infidel Jews.

n. 2.

That he ever intended, or foresaw (otherwise then as he was God) that, any one
tittle of his Gospel should ever be written. (And pray note this well.)

. 6. From the Acts.
That any Apostle wrote, or intended, or knew of, or foresaw the writing of,
any one syllable of the Gospel.

. 7. From the Epistles.
n. 1.

That any Apostle, at his death, knew there was any tittle of the Gospel then
written, more then by himself (except that S. Peter knew of some of S. Paul's
Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.15.) or to be written.

Argu. 2 Cor. 8.18.

S. Paul speaks of S. Luke, as famous then for his Gospel, throughout
Christendom.

Answer.

It is certain he spoke not of, and perhaps meant not, either S. Luke, or his
Gospel, or any written Gospel: but some companion of his ( Silas, Barnabas, or
some other) famous for his zeal and painfulness in preaching.

n. 2.

That he that dyed last of them (S. John) left, at his death, any such volume,
as is now called [ the Bible, or New Testament:] or any two Books of the New
Testament in one volume, yea, or in one Country (except where two Eptstles
were written to one Church or person:) or any original, yea, or (perfectly)
authentical copy, of any one book, of Old, or New Testament. If you can prove
none of these; you cannot but see how far you are, from any hope or likelihood,
of proving any such thing as your principle.

THE FOVRTH PART: Confuting the Protestant Tenet.
CHAP. I. Urging the first argument, [The silence of Scripture.]
I Hope you see, how far the Scripture is from affirming your tenet. Which you
will not wonder at, when you shall see how much may be said out of it, against
it: which is my next, and last work.

I say then, it is against reason, to think, Scripture was left for [the means
of teaching the Gospel.] My reasons are six.

The first; because (as appears by the former part) it affirms no such thing
touching it self. For though a negative argument from it (not in Scripture,
therefore not true) be not always good; its always good against you (who use
it as good against us;) and in such a tenet as this of yours (condemned by the
Church;) and in such a point as this (the most fundamental in Religion.)

This silence, if it be well considered, will appear so strange to any rational
man, as he cannot imagine it possible, had your tenet been true.

Considerations aggravating the silence
. 1. Of the Prophets.
First, the silence of the Prophets is very strange. For

1. There is not any eminent particular pertaining to the exterior form of the
Church, but we may find it foretold, in some one or other of them: and some,
very plainly, and in diverse of them; this, touching the means of teaching the
Gospel (according to our opinion) in almost every one of them; and to some
minute circumstances ( when it was to begin, in what City, in what part of the
City, in what manner, and by what means to spread over the world, how long to
continue, etc.) strange, if Scripture were to be it, it should never be so much
as mentioned.

2. And yet how many, how just occasions were there for mentioning it, if to be
as you say? namely, when, they name the School, the master, the word, or Law of
God, yea, the Gospel (though by your Translators, rendered profanely, good
tidings:) Esa. 40.9. compared with Romans 10.15. when Jeremy came so near the
Scripture, as to promise the writing of the new Law; and to name, by whom,
with, and in what it was to be written. But then indeed he says, it was not to
be, by any creature, or with ink, or in any material tables (much less, stony
ones) as the old was; but in a more excellent way (befitting a more excellent
Law) by God himself, with grace, in the hearts, of the Pastors, teaching it
from hand to hand, of the people, believing it, Ier. 31.31.

3. Again, Ezekiel in his eight last Chapters, describing at large the beauty,
and perfection of the Church (whose glory was to exceed that of the Synagogue,
Agg. 2.9.) names all the eminent particulars wherein it was to consist, under
the name of their types in the Temple of Solomon: and among the rest, her
Pastors, very largely, and particularly, under the name of Sadoc, and his sons,
Ezekiel. 44.15, etc. But upon all the list, we find not the tables of Moses Law:
albeit that was one of the preciousest jewels of the Temple (1 King. 8.9.) and
the proper type of the New Testament.

. 2. Of the Gospels.
More strange is the silence of our B. Savior, in the Gospels.

1. When the Law was to be written, good God! what care taken? 1. For its
writing. The principal part of it, written by an Angel representing God's
person, Exo. 24.12. The residue, by his special command, by Moses. 2. For its
custody. Laid up in the Ark (the sacredst Cabinet the world ever saw;) there
kept under the wings of the same Cherubins as kept Paradise, Deuteronomy. 10.5. 3. For
the giving copies of it, and to whom, etc. Deuteronomy. 17.28. 4. For the reading of
it to the people; and at what times necessarily, Deuteronomy. 31.9. And all these
thought fit to be recorded, and within the book it self.

And yet that, was to be the law but of that one Nation; to endure but a short
while; to be but a small part of their Scripture; was neither necessary, nor
available to justify the observers ( Romans 3.20.) and beside it, they were to
have not only a constant race of Teachers divinely authorized, but Prophets
all along until the Messiah's coming ( Mat. 11.13.)

Christ's Law, was to oblige every creature, to endure to world's end; to be
necessary, and sufficient to justification. And can it then be thought in
reason, he would go hence, and leave it to be committed to writing, and that
writing to be, after the Apostles death, the only means (as you say) of
teaching it with authority, and never speak any syllable concerning it?

2. Nor can his silence touching it, be imputed to accident, or incogitancy:
for he could well remember to take care for the preaching of it, who were to
preach it, to whom, what was to be taught, etc.

3. And how many, how tempting occasions, had he to have mentioned the
Scripture (if to be as you say) at least, in some kind or other. If not as the
means of reaching, or the matter to be taught, or the rule or condition of it;
yet as a part of the means, matter, or rule, at least, as a Record, helpful to
the office, namely; when, giving the Commission, and Instructions to his
Church, for the teaching of his Gospel; when naming the matter to be taught;
and the means by which he intended for ever to guide her into all truth. ( Ioh.
14.16. and 16.13.) when charging all creatures, absolutely, to believe and obey
her teaching; denouncing hell to them that should not, assuring heaven to them
that thould ( Mat. 16.16.)

4. And how easily, how soon, had a word been spoken of it, in some one or
other of these occasions: For example to have said [ write the Gospel; or,
Teach Scripture; or, it shall guide you into truth; or, he that believes you
(or the Church) teaching out of, or according to it, etc.]

Nor can you say, he did, or might mean, that condition, though he named it
not. For, besides that this is properly, that [ adding to, and taking from
Gods word written, which S. John denounces that heavy curse to ( Apoc. 22.18.)
by this, no greater authority is given to the Church (that City, or House of
God, of which such glorious things are spoken in Scripture;) then must be given
to any Tinker, Woman, Child, Heretic, nay to the very Devil himself; for we
ought to believe him, teaching according to Scripture.

And certainly, any man considering the multiplicitie of Sects in these parts
of Christendom, and all grounding themselves in Scripture, when he ( the author
and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2.) never so much as mentioned it, in order
to Christians, or his Law; may well ascribe it to his singular wisdom, and
goodness, that he waved all mention of it: for, what would have been, had he
ever referrd us to it, in any kind whatsoever? Surely, had he ever mentioned
it in any of those kinds abovenamed; and the New Testament, in the form
wherein it is; and the people, judges of the sense of it: he had left his
Church, in a more defective, and miserable condition, then ever any Prince, or
Lawgiver, left Commonwealth.

. 3. Of the Acts.
No less strange is the silence of the History of the Primitive Church.

1. It was written purposely for a record of what the Apostles did, in order to
the good of religion, most importing posterity to be recorded. Among which
certainly nothing can import us more then what they did, in planting, settling,
and declaring the means for teaching it, after their decease, throughout all
future ages.

2. Nor could any thing, more, or more early, deserve and require their
industry, and solicitude, then the providing, and settling the means;
considering (among other reasons) their own mortality. It cannot be therefore,
but if a VVriting, or Book were to be it; one of their first cares and
diligences would have been employed, in procuring it to be written (the old
Scripture being improper to this purpose;) declaring, and recommending it for
such, to Pastors, and people; causing copies of it to be transcribed, and
dispersed over the world; securing some original of it, in Jerusalem, Antioch,
Rome, or other safest City; translating it into vulgar Languages, for the use
of the common people; delivering it to Presbyters at their Ordination, as the
Matter, and Rule of their teaching: finally, causing record to be made of what
they did in it, either within the book it self, or in the history of their Acts
(nothing possibly to be written of them, being of the thousand part of that
concernment for the knowledge of future ages, as this.)

3. If they neglected, or deferred the doing any thing in it, for some years at
first, whiles together in health, at liberty, and the Teachers all of one
mind; yet afterward, when they saw S. James beheaded, and S. Peter (without a
miraculous rescue) like to have been so too ( Acts 22.1.) when they saw Sects
springing up apace, so as there was need of holding a Council, to decide the
controversy ( Act. 15.2.) when, that, was like to be the last time of their
ever meeting together in the world; when admonished by that example, how
seasonable and necessary it then was, for them to settle and declare the judge
and guide of faith (if to be any other then the Church:) how could they delay
any longer to do something in it? or if they did, the Historian not thinking it
worth the writing.

4. He could note the great zeal and pains of Peter, and Paul, in visiting the
Churches; confirming them; leaving among them the decrees of the Church to
keep; ordaining Pastors to feed, and guide them; instructing those Pastors, for
the discharge of their office after their death; recommending and naming to
them the proper and sufficient means to that end ( Acts 8.32. and 14.21, 23.
and 15.36. and 16.4. and 20, 20, 28.32.) what occasions were these, for him to
have said something of what they did in writing Scripture, or distributing it
to the Churches for to keep, or recommending it to the Pastors for to teach?
especially, when they came so near to it, as to recommend them the word of
God's grace? Acts 20.32.

5. And yet before the finishing of this History, there were written (beside S.
Luke's own) two of the Gospels (S. Mathew's and S. Mark's) most of S. Paul's
Epistles; and some of them written in that very City, and at that very time,
when he was with S. Paul (Col. 4.14. 2 Timothy 4.11.) and (as is likely) writing
this History; yet he takes no notice at all of them.

. 4. Of the Epistles.
Most strange of all, is the Apostles own silence, in their Epistles.

1. They were written, some to the Pastors, some to the people, to give them
the best advices and instructions they could, either for them in present, or to
be left upon record, for all Pastors, and people in future ages. Among which
none could be more important, then to declare and recommend to them, the Guide
and Rule of Religion after their own decease.

2. And how frequent, how proper occasions had they to have named the Scripture
for it, if it were to be? Namely; when, advising the Pastors to teach the Word,
naming the matter they were to teach; the rule they were to teach by; and
coming so near the Scripture, as to call it [the word of truth, etc.] 1 Timothy
1.3. 2 Timothy 1.13. and 2.15. and. 4. 2. Tit. 2.1, etc. when, describing, and
enumerating the qualifications of the Teachers (1 Timothy 2.2. Tit. 1.7.) and what
was to be committed to them, in their Ordination, to teach (2 Timothy 2.2.) when
monishing the people touching false Teachers, and giving the marks whereby to
know them ( Romans 16.17. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. 1 Ioh. 4.2.6.) when charging them
absolutely [to obey their Pastors, follow their faith, receive their teaching
as God's word, with the meekness of new born babes, Heb. 13.7. Iam. 1.21. 1
Pet. 2.2.) when, naming the rule of faith (Romans 12.6.) the ground of truth (1 Timothy 3.15.) the means left by Christ for the perfecting of the Saints (Ephesians.
4.11.) finally, when naming the end wherefore Scripture was given by God, and
to which it is profitable, 2 Timoth. 3.16.

3. And how easily, how soon, had it been named, in one or other of these
occasions? For example; to have said, to Timothy, or Titus [Teach Scripture;
or, according to it, etc.] or to the people, [Prove all things by Scripture;
or, Make it your rule, or guide; or, Obey your Pastors, teaching out of, or,
according to it; or, it was given, or, is profitable that the Christian man may
be perfect, etc.]

4. At least, they might have given the people some advice or encouragement (in
plain words) to read to sometimes; or the Pastors, some charge to read it
sometimes to them.

5. Nor was it of forgetfulness, that they balked the giving these
instructions. For in their Epistles to the Pastors, they could well remember to
advise and encourage them to give diligence to the reading it: (1 Timothy 4.13. 2 Timothy 3.16.) and in some Epistles, to some Churches, to charge the reading of
some particular Epistles, in some particular Congregations, once (1 Thessalonians.
5.27. Col. 4.16.) and S. Peter could once take occasion to speak of his brother
Paul's Epistles, and by that occasion, of Scripture in general; but what he
says of it, is so far from encouraging people to read it (much less, to make
it their guide or rule) as it is enough to scare any one (either people, or
Divines) from meddling with it, without a good interpreter. (2 Pet. 3.16.)

6. Some of these Epistles were written by them, when now ready to be offered
(2 Timothy 4.6. 2 Pet. 1.14.) by S. John, when now 100. year old, and all the
other Apostles dead, and (perhaps) rotten long before, and he saw the Churches
round about him swarming with Sects, and wrote to that end chiefly, to confirm.
Catholics in faith, and nourish them against Sects, and show them the best
means and way to discern and avoid them. Nor could he but know in what a sad
condition, the sacred writings were like to be left by him. Some, corrupted by
Heretics ( Apoc. 22.18.) some, counterfeit (2 Thessalonians. 2.1.) some, uncertain
(Luke 1.1.) some, lost (vid. infr. c. 5. arg. 9.. 4.) some in one Country,
some in another (perhaps 500. miles asunder;) not so much as a Catalogue of
their names, or number, etc. yet he left the world, as the rest had done before
him, without any least mention of the New Testament (or any part of it, more
then what he wrote himself; or that, as to any office of teaching Religion.)

CHAP. II. Urging the second Argument, [ Scripture, not for the people.]
MY second reason is; because [ it was never ordained, or meant, so much as for
the peoples reading (further then the Church should see expedient to permit it)
but given into the hand of the Church, for her to teach it to them; and to be
an instrument helpful to her in her office of teaching. As is manifest. For,

1. When God Almighty had written the ten Commandments (the first piece of
Scripture that was written;) though it were the plainest, both for style, and
matter, and most proper and useful for the people, and to be the principal part
of their Catecism; yet he delivered it not to them, but to Moses, with these
words, expressly declaring the whole intent of it as to the people, [ I give
thee the Law which I have written, that thou may teach it to them, Exodus
24.12.]

2. In like manner, when Moses had written the Law, he delivered it not to the
people, (though the whole Nation were then present before him in Assembly,) but
( finally, or supremely) unto Iosuah, or Eleazar (the one, chief Ruler or
Pastor, in ordinary; the other, in extraordinary,) with these words, expressly
declaring the whole intent of it; as to the people, and the right they were to
have to it. At the end of every seven years, thou shall read this, etc.] Deuteronomy.
31.9.

3. This copy, delivered by Moses into the Highpriests hand, was there to
remain, without any one to have a copy of (for ought appears) until there
should be a King (who was to share the supreme office with the High Priest) who
was not to be in 500. years after; and he was to write him a copy of it, out of
that which was before the Priests, (Deuteronomy. 87.19.)

4. In their custody it remained (2 Chronicles. 17.9. Neh. 8.1.) without any copy of
it, for certain, in all the land of Israel, after Ieroboam's schism (2 Chr.
15.3.) and if not after, most likely nor before; for we do not find that he
meddled at all with the Bible: and but one, in the Church of Judah, until after
the Captivity; to wit, that in the Priests custody in the Temple; as should
seem by the great matter was made of the finding it, when it had been lost some
years, and by Iosiah's proceeding thereupon to a Reformation by it, which before
it seems he could not, for want of it, 2 Chronicles. 34.14, etc.

The same may be said for the New Testament. For

1. S. John's Apocalypse (the only book of it written by command) was
expressly written to the Angel (or Pastor) of the Churches to which it was to
be sent; and to him alone, immediately, Apoc. 2.1, etc.

2. His Gospel was likewise without all question delivered by him to some
Pastors, to be by them taught and published, as appears by their testimony to
it, ( Ioh. 21.24.)

3. Three of S. Paul's Epistles for certain were written to Pastors alone, (the
first and second to Timothy, and that to Titus:) and very probably, a fourth,
to Philemon, whom he calls his fellow labourer, (Phil. 1.)

4. So were also, probably, S. Lukes Gospel, and Acts: Theophilus to whom they
were dedicated, being by some ancient Writers said to have been a Bishop.

5. Two other of S. Paul's Epistles, though dedicated to Churches, yet were
delivered immediately into the hand of the Pastor, to be by him read to the
people; or else that charge of reading them to them, had been superfluous, Col.
4.16. 1 Thessalonians. 5.27. So, in his hand, they remained also after the reading, and
at his discretion, whether he would read them the second time; and much more,
whether permit any of the people copies of them. And by parity of reason, the
same is to be presumed of the other Gospels, and Epistles, dedicated to
Churches, or without dedication.

But what need I prove it thus, by inferences, and presumptions? When the text
affirms it expressly, that the Scripture was written purposely for the Church,
and (immediately.) for her alone; to be an instrument in her hand for teaching
the people, and furthering and helpful to her, for the better discharge of her
office.

6. So says S. Paul touching his Epistle to Timothy [These things write I unto
thee, that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the Church
which is the ground of truth. 1 Timothy 3.15.

7. Nay touching the whole Scripture, universally [All Scripture is given by
God, and is profitable, for doctrine, etc. that the man of God, etc.] that is,
[The whole Scripture, is given by God, unto the Pastor, and is profitable, to
this end, to furnish him perfectly, for doctrine, reproof, correction,
instruction of the people in righteousness (as you call it,) and for every
other good work, proper or pertaining to his function.] 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.

CHAP. III. Urging the third Argument. [Scripture not proper, etc.]
MY third Reason is; Because [ it is not proper to give the first instruction
(which is the first, incomparably principal, and most necessary act of
Teaching.) As appears;

1. From that of S. Paul, [How shall (any one) believe in him of whom they have
not heard? or hear, without a Preacher? Romans 10.14.]

2. From that of S. Peter, [The unlearned wrist the Scripture to their
destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16.] Therefore, to a profitable and safe use of it, it
requires and supposes a reader somewhat pre-instructed in Religion.

3. From the form of it; because not Catechistical; but Historical, etc.

4. From the dedication of all the books in it which have any; which is not
to any, but either Pastors, or Catholic Churches (the Romans, Corinthians,
etc.) or at least, Catholic persons, walking in the truth, (2 Ioh. 4.) and 3.3.

5. From the style of it, vid. inf. c. 4.. 2.

6. From diverse passages in it, expressly supposing the reader, one needing no
catechizing (1 Ioh. 2.20, 27.) Insomuch as they check some in the Churches they
vvrote to, for needing it. ( Heb. 5.12.) nay, they suppose him one not needing
necessarily any instruction (Luke 1.4. Romans 15.14. 1 Cor. 1.5. Col. 3.16, etc.)
And therefore declare, the end of their vvriting (those that declare any) to
be, not to teach Catechistical, or Fundamental doctrines, but the higher
perfecting, mysteries, (1 Cor. 3.1. Heb. 6.1.) to exhort, admonish, stir up to
remembrance, encourage, comfort, establish, rectify some errors, and abuses
crept in among them; to give the Pastors some advices, and such like ends,
pertaining to doctrine Concionatory, or perfecting, (Luke 1.4. Ioh. 20.31. 1
Cor. 11.23. and 15.2. 1 Thessalonians. 4.1, 9. and 2.15. 1 Timothy 3.15. Heb. 13.22. 2
Pet. 1.12. and 3.1. Jude 3. Apoc. 3.2. and 3.3, etc.

Consequently, it is so far from being useful, or intended to teach us (
Doctrinally, or Catechistically) the articles of our Creed, the form of
Church Government, Worship, Sacraments, etc. as it is but incidently, and (as
it were) by accident, that it mentions any thing of them.

CHAP. IV. Urging the fourth argument. [Scripture not the principal.]
A Fourth Reason is; Because [it is not the principal, as to the effect of
teaching, but only an instrument, in the hand of the Church, and one of her
Scholars. And consequently improper, but as in their hand, to give any
Christian, yea or Divine, so much as his perfecting instruction. And I shall
give four proofs for it.

. 1. Scripture for the Church.
The first shall be; Because [the Church was not ordained for it; but it for
her, as it is end, to be helpful, and furthering to her, in, and for the better
discharge of her office.] As is proved supra. cap. 2.

. 2. Not proper to Catechize.
The second; because (as appears by the former Chapter) it is not proper to
give the first instruction. Consequently, nor the second, but to him the first
right. For, the first instruction, gives us our first, and transcendent rule,
notion, or instrument, by which we measure, and judge of all things we read or
hear of afterward (generally speaking) in Religion. Consequently, one false
principled, is in as bad, (nay, many times worse) a condition, for
understanding Scripture, then a novice: as the eye is more deceived using a
false spectacle, then none at all; and one that has a wrong direction given
him, is (many times) worse, for finding the way, then he that has none at all.
Now, for giving men their first instruction right; no means ( precedent to
Scripture) is imaginable, but the Church.

Or briefer, thus, Because it supposes its reader, a Catholic. And therefore
cannot be proper for any one's use, but a Catholics.

. 3. [VVants sense and reason.]
The third (and which, though, I name it here only, is of as much, or more,
force, in giving the first instruction;) because it wants understanding, and
sense; faculties, absolutely necessary to discharge the office of teaching.
Because,

1. Every one is of a several capacity, rank, or form (as I may call it) in
knowledge; so as what is plain to one, is dark to another. And we are all,
by nature (1 Cor. 2.11.) dull of hearing, in spiritual things ( Heb. 5, 11.)
and very apt to understand them in carnal sense (as we see in Nicodemus, (Ioh.
3.4.) the woman of Samaria (Ioh. 4.15.) the Capernaltes; ( Ioh. 6.52.) yea,
after we have been a good while in Christ's School, to think we understand
them as we ought, when (God knovvs) many times very sorrily and erroneously
(as we see in the Apostles themselves. Mat. 13.36. Luke 24.45. Act. 1.6.) And
therefore that which is to teach, must be able to consider the scholars need,
capacity, and apprehensions, and accordingly to fit his instruction to every
one severally; to one thus, to another thus; to babes milk, to men stronger
meat. (1 Cor. 3.1. Heb. 5.11.) And to that end, must be able to be interrogated
by the scholar ( Mat. 13.36. Lu. 2.46. Acts 2.37. and 8.34.) yea, if need be,
again and again, until he understand the instruction aright and fully as he
ought: yea, and to interrogate him too, to see if he do.

2. Again, every one is of a several calling, quality, humor, state of soul, or
conscience, degree in virtue, etc. So, that, which is useful counsel, or
doctrine to one, is impertinent to another; nay, what is one man's meat, is
often another poison. For, many vices, are like virtues, and contrarily
virtues like vices, so as it is very apt for men, without good judgment and
experience in such matters ( Heb. 5.14.) to mistake one for the other. And H.
Scripture relates many things done ill, by Saints; well, by wicked men, without
giving judgment which was well, which ill done; so as it will be very easy to
err in making it a rule by it self. Besides, the extremes come very near
another, that which parts them, many times no broader then the edge of a rasor,
nay, virtue must be many times composed of somewhat of each extreme duty
tempered ( Mat. 10.16.) Besides, cases are altered by circumstances; so as what
is sound doctrine in one case, may in another, by the alteration of some one
circumstance (imperceptible to an ordinary or unexperienced judgment) be false
and pernicious. And these circumstances, varying cases, are of that infinite
variety, as they are incomprehensible within any written rule, although it
should consist of more volumes then the world contain. And therefore that which
is to guide or direct us in matters of practice or conscience, must be able to
consider, and judge of the person, and case, in all its circumstances, and
apply his counsel and resolution to every one severally (which S. Paul calls [
rightly dividing the word, 2 Timothy 2.25.] To Soldiers one counsel, to Merchants
another. (S. Lu. 3.10.) To new vessels, one sort of wine; to old, another. (
Mat. 19.17.) To tender souls, one sort of doctrine [ the Lord is sweet to all
etc. Psalm. 145.9.] to presumptuous ones another [ It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God. Heb. 10.31.] In one case to say [thou may
not bow down, to, or before any Idol,] in another, thou may, 2 King. 5.18.] In
one case, to say [thou may not do any work on the Sabbath,] in another, [
thou may. Mat. 12.5.] And to this end, must be able to be interrogated by his
consulter (Mat. 19.3. and 22.17. 1 Cor. 7.1.) yea again and again, if need be (
Mat. 19.7.) For, many times the resolution to one question begets more and new
doubts: yea, and to interrogate him too, to see if he understand the resolution
aright; and to proceed with him till he do. For we are apt, through passion,
interest, self-love, etc. to mistake, not only the cases, but their resolution
too.

3. Again, every one has different principles, or notions in his
understanding, whereby he judges of things differently from another, and is apt
to interpret the Scripture, or doctrine of the Church; to be for his opinion,
or sense; and hence arise Sects. When therefore any controversy is on foot,
needing decision, the judge must of necessity be able to hear and weigh what is
alleged and proved on both sides, and thereupon to give sentence in such
manner, as the parties litigant, and all other concerned, may, and until they
do (without their own pervicacy be in fault) know and understand for which side
it is given, and so cease further strife touching it. Nay, many times the very
sentence it self, will beget new controversies touching its sense, requiring
another sentence, and that another, etc. and so, the judge must be able, (from
time to time, as there is occasion) to explicate even his own sentence.

Other teaching then this, is a mere Chymaera, devised by the Devil, and his
instruments, to delude souls.

Now this therefore the Scripture is no way proper of, or by it self alone:
because it is void of these faculties; for it says nothing (in speech properly
so called:) and what it says (in its kind of speech, Romans 4.3.) or God, in,
or by it; is no more then mute letter, or word; and so, one, and the same, to
every reader. And so the reader (without some one to interpret that mute word)
may easily think it speaks to him, or his case, when it is to another; or says
such a thing (in sense) when it does the contrary.

. 4. Not Plain. Proved first, from 2 Pet. 3.16.
The fourth reason; because it is not plain, no not in fundamentals (as you
call them) without the Church for its interpreter.

And for this, needs no other proof, but to show you the Sects now before your
eyes in England, and betwixt Divines, even your learned, and in points
fundamental (if any may be called so, but these, that there is a God, a Christ,
a Scripture.)

But I shall give you three proofs for it, out of Scripture it self.

The first, shall be that speech of S. Peter, [The unlearned wrest Paul's
epistles, as they do other Scriptures also, unto their own destruction, 2 Pet.
3.16.]

Spoken, no doubt, of Christians, and (at least) past their Catechism; nay,
(its very probable) of Divines, and them alone. My reason is, because it is not
like, he would have called them whose duty, or calling it is not, to be learned
[the unlearned,] but rather [the simple, or ignorant].

And it is in charity and reason, to be supposed, they (whoever he spoke of, if
Christians) read it with a love of the truth, and desire to find it there, and
of a godly intent to promote themselves in knowledge, and piety; and not
without humble and hearty prayer to God, to give them his H. Spirit to
illuminate them to the understanding of it. Yet, presuming to expound it to
themselves (without the means apponted by God for its interpteter,) their
prayer, and diligence, was abominable to him, and therefore they left by him to
strong illusions of the Devil, in misunderstanding of it; and that, in points
fundamental; for in no other, can damnable error be committed.

Nor will it help to say, he speaks not of all things in Scripture; but some
only. For, there being no Catalogue given of those some; nor rule, or mark for
discerning them from the other; and all people being apt to think those things
true, and plain in Scripture, which they have been bred up in the belief of:
his speech is in effect, as if he had said indefinitely, [The things in
Scripture are hard to be understood, but by the learned.] As if a Physician,
should say, of a book of pills, [In this are some pills, which the unskilful
mistake to the poisoning themselves;] it would be, in effect, as to say, [The
pills in it, are dangerous to be used, but by the skilful.]

. 5. Causes in the style.
The second, shall be a demonstration from the causes (not all, but a few of
the principal, and most common and obvious:) which are partly, in the style,
partly in the form.

Those I shall name in the style; are,

1. That the sense of it, is sometimes proper, sometimes figurative, and often
(without an interpreter) unevident whether, in fundamental points (or,
importing to salvation;) for I shall be careful not to instance in any other.
For instance; in these speeches, [This is my body.] Whose sins ye for give.

2. It has oftentimes diverse proper senses, to wit, literal, and mystical: and
sometimes unevident whether, e.g. in this speech [ Esau have I hated, Romans
9.13.]

3. It has oftentimes diverse literal senses; to wit, profane (or grammatical)
and Ecclesiasticial. And sometimes unevident whether; e.g. in this speech [ Not
as Lords over cleron, 1 Pet. 5.3.] whether cleron signify Clergy, or Heritage.

4. It has oftentimes diverse grammatical senses; and sometimes unevident
whether be it; e.g. in this speech [ Thou art Petros, Mat. 16.18.] whether
Petros, signify Peter, or a rock. And in this [Esau have I hated:] whether
[hated] mean a positive aversion, or only, a not, or less loving (as it
sometimes means ( Deuteronomy. 21.15.)

5. It abounds with phrases proper to the H. Ghost, and terms of Art in
Theology; which therefore without some Master in that science to interpret
them to us, are no better then so much Greek, or Gibrish: especially, because
the writers, supposing the reader a Catholic (understanding the language of
the Church, took no care to explicate them, or annex a Dictonary.

Nor can you say, their sense may be found out in time, by it alone and an
understanding reader, by considering the occasion, scope, coherence of the
place, comparing it with the other, etc. Because,

1. In some there is neither occasion, scope, nor coherence visible; e.g. in
these [ Shall he find faith? Luke 18.8. Quench not the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.20.

2. Some, are never used but once, e.g. these [ He shall be in danger of a
Council, Mat. 5.22. The sin against the Son of man, and the H. Ghost, Mat.
12.31. The word was made flesh, Ioh. 1.14. Retaining sins, Ioh. 20.23. Saving
by fire, 1 Cor. 3.15.] etc.

3. Some, are alike dark in all places; e.g. Binding, and losing, Mat. 16.19.
and 18.18. Delivering to Satan, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 2.20.]

4. Few of them, but in diverse places, have diverse senses; and many times
unevident whether or no; and if; whether be it: e.g. Faith, in these, Mat.
17.19. Lu. 18.8. Act. 19.9. Romans 14.23. 1 Cor. 13.2. Baptism, Mat. 3.6, 11,
Mar. 10.38. Acts 1.5. 1 Cor. 15.29. Imposition of hands, Mat. 19.15. Act. 8.17.
and 9.17. and 13.3. 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5.22. Heb. 6 1. Bishop. Act. 20.28. Phi.
1.1. Tit. 1.7. Presbyter, Act. 11.30. and 15.2. and 20.20. 1 Timothy 4.14. and
5.1, 22. 1 Pet. 5.1. Election or elect. Mat. 20.16. and 24.24. 1 Pet. 1.1. Sin,
Romans 5.12. and 7.17. 1 Ioh. 1.8. and 3.8. Justification, Romans 2.13. and 8.33.
Works, Romans 4.2. Iam. 2.21.

5. Some of them, seem to some Divines to have diverse senses in diverse places;
to others, but one in all: e.g. this name [the Church:] upon the true sense
whereof, depends (in fine) all faith and religion, and consequently the
salvation of all mankind; and yet there among your learned Teachers, as many
differing definitions of it almost as there are Teachers; to speak sadly, as
many as are deviseable by the wit of man; and all pretending to Scripture.

6. Finally (and which is of greatest difficulty, to the Interpreter, and
danger to the (not Catholic) reader;) the words of it, in their proper, and
Grammatical sense, are often times repugnant to themselves: so as it is
necessary, in the one place, to forsake it for another improper, to the end to
reconcile it with other; and many times unevident; whether of them is to give
the law of sense to the other; and what that sense is which is to reconcile
them. Instances hereof you will see diverse anon: mean time these may serve [
God hardened Pharaoh's heart, Genesis 7.3. God tempts no man, Iam. 1.13. Again, The
sin against the H. Ghost shall never be forgiven, Mat. 12.31. Come unto me all
that are heavy laden, and I will refresh you, Mat. 11.28.]

. 6. The first cause in the form's [Stragling.]
Those I shall name in the form, shall be but two.

The one; that often times it delivers the rule, incompleatly, and straglingly:
part in one place, part in another; and so, one must be made up, by, or with
the other. And sometimes unevident, even to the learned Divines (without the
Church's showing,) which, and how many texts, appertain to the completing of
it. For instance.

One place relates how Abraham was justified by faith, (Genesis 15.6.) another,
how by offering his son, (Genesis 22.16.) now supply (as S. James says; you,
render it, fulfill) the one Scripture with the other, as he there shows you the
art of it, Iam. 2.23.) and they give you the true doctrine of justification;
otherwise, taken apart, but a part of it.

Again; in one place, our sweet Savior promises, he will refresh all penitent
sinners that come to him, Mat. 11.28. In another, he institutes and declares
the means, by which he will refresh them: to wit, the word of Priestly
absolution, Ioh. 20.21. Now supply the former place with the latter, and they
will give you the true ground of hope of remission of sins upon your going to
Christ, with sorrovv and confession of them: otherwise, in stead of hope,
delude you into damnable presumption.

. 7. The scond cause [repugnancy.]
The other (and mainest of all;) is, that ordinarily, what it says in one
place, it gain-saith in another, in words, taken in their proper Grammar sense,
and in all sense imaginable, so seemingly, as the best Divines have many times
their hands full to reconcile them; and the comparing places, considering the
scope, coherence, etc. is often times so unserviceable to that end, as it
rather inflames the difficulty. Nay, it creates works enough sometimes for the
Church her self to do it; and in one age she gets one step tovvard it, perhaps
three or four ages more, ere she get another; so as she has not yet done it in
all, in that perfect manner, as perhaps she may hereafter, when God shall give
her more light. And in those she has reconciled; the certainty (as to us) of
the truth of the reconcilement, comes not from any evidence of the thing, but
only from the authority of the Interpreter. Nor is it always possible to be
done, no not by her, by any means, rule, or help of interpretation, to be found
in Scripture; but she must pray in aid from her own sense, or practice. To name
a few instance among many.

1. In one place, [The Lord he is God; one Lord; no Lord beside him, Deuteronomy.
4.45. and 6.4.] In other [The Gods (Elohim) said, Let us make man, Genesis 1.27.
The Lord rained from the Lord, etc. Genesis 19.24. Thee the only God, and whom
thou have sent, Jesus Christ, Ioh. 17.3. But one God, the Father, and one Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 8.6. In the name of the Father, the Son, and the H. Ghost.
Mat. 28.19.]

2. In one place [My Father, and I are one, Ioh. 10.30.] In another, [My Father
is greater then I, Ioh. 14.28. you will say, that was meant, in respect of his
diverse natures. True: but where is that, said in Scripture?

3. In one, [If we say, we have no sin, we lie, 1 Ioh. 1.8.] In other, [They
were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments of the Lord,
blameless, Luke 1.6. I know nothing by my self, 1 Cor. 4.4. The child of God
sins not, 1 Ioh. 3.9.]

4. In one, [He that is not with me, is against me, Mat. 12.30.] In another,
[He that is not against us, is for us, Luke 9.50.]

5. In one, [If I bear record of my self, my record is not true, Ioh. 5.31.] In
another, [It is, Ioh. 8.14.]

6, In one, [Paul took Timothy, and circumcised him, Acts 16.3.] In another,
[He that is circumcised, Christ shall profit him nothing, Gal. 5.2.]

7. In one, [If Abraham was justified by works, etc. Romans 4.2.] In another,
[VVas not Abraham justified by works? Iam. 2.21.]

8. In one, [My loving kindeness will I not utterly take from him, my covenant
will I not break for any wickedness of his children, etc. Psalm. 89.33.] In the
very next verse, [Thou have cast off, and abhorred thine Anointed, thou have
made void thy covenant with him, thou have profaned his crown. etc.]

9. In one, [There was given him a kingdom, that all nations should serve him,
his dominion is an everlasting dominion, etc. Dan. 2.44. and 7.14.] In another.
[VVhen the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? Lu. 18.8. All
the world worshipped the Dragon, etc. Apoc. 13.4, 8.

10. In some [Call upon me, in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee,
Psalm. 50.15. Every one that asks receives; knock, and it shall be opened unto
you, Mat. 7.7, 8. Come unto me all, etc. and I will refresh you, Mat. 11.28.]
Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved, Romans 10.13.] In
other, [In the day of trouble they shall call upon me, and I will laugh at
them, Pro. 1.28. They came knocking, saying, Lord, open unto us. But he said,
Away from me, I know you not, Mat. 25.11. Ye know how that afterward when Esau
would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected, finding no place of
repentance (in his father) though he sought it carefully with tears, Heb. 12.17.

12. In some, [Come unto me, all, etc. Mat. 11.28. The blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all sin, 1 Ioh. 7.9.] In other, [All manner of sin shall be
forgiven unto men, (upon their repentance;) but the blasphemy against the H.
Ghost, never, Mat. 12.31. It is impossible for those who were enlightened, etc.
if they shall full away, to renew them again unto repentance, Heb. 6.4. To them
that sin wilfully after knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice
for sin, etc. Heb. 10.26.]

13. In some [To you, it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven, but to them it is not given, Mat. 13.11. Many are called, but few
chosen, Mat. 20.16. The Lord added daily to the Church, such as should be
saved, Act. 2.47. As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed, Act.
13.48. Whom he did predestinate, them he called, etc. Romans 8.30. Before the
children had done, either good or evil, etc. Romans 9.11.] In other, Preach the
Gospel to every creature, he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved,
Mar. 16.15. God will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the
truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. Give diligence to make your calling, and election sure: for
if, etc. 2 Pet. 1.8.

. 8. Third proof, from instances.
The third, and last proof, shall be from instances.

1. The old Testament was not so plain, for that which we (by reason we were
taught it in our childehood) think it to be most plain for; that there are
Angels and Spirits, and a Resurrection to be:] but that the Sadduces (great
Divines then) denied them all [ Acts 23.8.) and had objections out of Scripture
against them, [ Master, Moses said, etc.] Mat. 22.24.

2. It was not so plain (with S. Mathews Gospel, added to it,) for a
resurrection to be, at the end of the world; but that some, (and no doubt,
Divines; for at that time, few others were broachers of heresies, Acts 15.24.
and 20.32. Apoc. 2, 2, 6.) said; it was past already, 2 Timothy 2.18. An opinion
so monstrously absurd, as were it not in Scripture affirmed, one would think it
incredible any should be so stupid. And we may be sure they fetched their
proofs for it, out of Scripture. For else, neither could they have had any
color for such a wild opinion, nor the impudence to broach it among
Christians, much less the success, to overthrow the faith of any, as they did
of some. Which example, no doubt God Almighty put there on purpose to show unto
us, how that there is no conceit possible to enter into man's brain so absurd,
or non-sensical, but Sectaries will be able to allege Scripture for it; yea,
and with success too. Whereof we have an instance at present in another almost
as non-sensical a fancy as that was; viz. that Antichrist is come already, and
is a Christian, nay, sits in S. Peter's Chair.

3. The 53. Chapter of Esaias was not so plain that Christ ought to suffer for
our sins; but that the Eunuch reading it, and no doubt with a very humble and
pious heart lifted up to God to enlighten him, was glad to ask one who seemed
to him an authorized interpreter of Scripture, [I pray thee of whom speaks the
Prophet this, etc.] And being before asked by him, in the general, if he
understood what he read; readily answered, [How can I, except some man should
guide me?] Act. 8.31, 34. wherein the H. Ghost would, in that first, and only
(express) example of a layman reading the Bible, insumate unto all lay-readers
of it; with what disposition of soul they ought to read it, to attain the true
sense of it.

4. It was not so plain (notwithstanding all S. Paul could urge out of it) for
the abolitition of the Mosaical Law; but that diverse of the primitive Divines;
yea (as is probable) of them upon whom the H. Ghost came down at Penticost)
found it, as seemed to them, plain to the contrary, Act. 15.1. And for certain,
so it was in express words (vid. inf. some of the texts named in. 9. n. 2.) nor
were the Christians of Antioch, after they had heard all that could be alleged
from S. Paul for it, out of Scripture, able to know what to believe in it,
without sending to the supreme Interpreter, the Church, Act. 15.2.

. 9. Instance, in the question touching Christ.
I shall conclude with one notable instance, which I shall set forth a little
more particularly and at large, because it shows most lively, not only how
improper H. Scripture is, to determine any, the most fundamental, points of
faith, in the hand of any but a Catholic Teacher: but how pernicious an
instrument it is in the hand of others (too much addicted to it, with neglect
of the Church) to lead them into, and confirm them in most damnable errors.

The grand Controversy of faith, at the time of our Saviors being upon earth,
was, Whether he were the Christ? He sent them who doubted of it, and were
obstinate against all other testimonies, to search the Scriptures (which they
believed) as testifying of him (Ioh. 5.39.) His adversaries, the Rulers, in
like manner, sent people to them, as testifying against him [ They said to him
(Nicodemus, when they perceived him hang that way;) Art thou also of Galilee?
Search (the Scripture) etc. Ioh. 7.52.] Nay, they were not able to bring any
other arguments against him, but what they brought out of Scripture. Insomuch
as it is certain, there was no one thing, whereby they more steeled their own
and the peoples hearts against believing in him, then Scripture (as they
understood it.) For instance;

[ Some said; This is the Christ. Others said; Has not the Scripture said,
etc. Ioh. 7.41.]

Again, said they to the Officers when they saw them staggered with the
devineness of his doctrine, [Have any of the Rulers, or Pharisees believed on
him?] Why, not they? O forsooth, because they knew the Law (the Scripture.)
[But this people that know not the Law, are accursed; that is, miserably
deceived by believing in him to their eternal perdition, Ioh. 7.49.] Just the
same as you say now of our people, for their ignorance in Scripture.

Again, the man that was cured of his blindness, by Jesus, said to them, [ VVil
ye also be his disciples? they reviled him, and said, Thou art, (or be thou)
his disciple.] Why, not they? O forsooth [ we are Moses disciples, we know (by
Scripture) that God spoke unto Moses, etc.] Ioh. 9.27. See the veil (of Moses
Law) that lay upon, and blinded their hearts, against believing in him (2 Cor.
3.15.) and so does, to, and at, this day.

Will you see the causes of it.

One was, because they saw him teach, command, and practice, some things
evidently repugnant to the express words of Scripture. For instance:

1. It said [ Thou shall do no manner of work upon the Sabbath. Particularly,
Thou shall not bear any burden through the city, Ier. 17.21.] He, commanded one
whom he cured, to carry no less a burden then the bed he lay upon, through the
City, on that day, Ioh. 5.9. When therefore they saw him afterward work a
manifest miracle in proof that he was the Christ: what had they to choke the
mouth of that evidence with, but this [ This man is not of God (for all his
miracles,) because he keeps not the Sabbath day.] Just the same as your men say
sometimes of our Church; She cannot be of God, notwithstanding all her
miracles, because the worships images, prays to Saints, etc.

2. Again; it said, Thou shall keep these ordinances, as everlasting statutes,
through all generations for ever, Genesis 17.7. Exo. 17.10. and 31.17. Deuteronomy. 12.5,
etc.] He said, He was Lord of the Sabbath, Mat. 12.8. and discovered an intent
to change it, and all the ordinances of Moses, and introduce others in their
place; viz. in stead of worshipping God, by a carnal and figurative sacrifice,
in the Temple of Jerusalem only; the spiritual, true, pure, worship, that God
longed for, to be celebrated all the world over (Ioh. 4.2. Mal. 1.11.) in stead
of the Passover, the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, Ioh. 6.32, 53. instead of
Circumcision, Baptism. Ioh. 3.3. Now how abominable a design they apprehended
this in him, may be guessed at from their charge against one of his disciples,
[ This man ceases not, to speak blasphemous words, against this holy place, and
the Law. For we have heard him say, that this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy
this place, and change the customs which Moses delivered us, etc. Acts 6.13.]

3. Again; it said, [ There is but one God, and he a pure simple Being,
Eternal, Infinite, Omnipotent, etc:] and appointed, that if any one, yea though
a Prophet giving a sign of his Mission or Doctrine, should entice them to the
worship of any thing visible, or created; they should stone him to death, as a
false Prophet, and Blasphemer, Deuteronomy. 13.1. He, a visible man, clothed with
flesh and blood, and all infirmities of humane nature, born but the other day,
of a Carpenter, etc. said, he was God, or his Son equal to him; and required to
be worshipped as such. And this they supposed to be evident blasphemy [Ioh.
10.33.] and that, according to the express words of Scripture, he ought, as
such, to be put to death, [ We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye,
because he made himself the Son of God, Ioh. 19.7.] And this seemed so evident
to them in Scripture: (as no doubt, for that cause principally (if not only)
they would rather attribute his miracles (as you do ours) unto the Devil; then
entertain a doubt of his being the Christ, Mat. 12.24.

Another cause was; because the prophecies touching the properties and signs of
the Messiah, were not only dark, (and in that respect, needing an Interpreter
to expound them ( Acts 8.34. and 17.3.) yea even to Christians, Lu. 24.27, 45.
2 Pet. 1.9.) but repugnant, in express words; and therefore needing an
Interpreter to reconcile them. And thence it was, that they were able to urge
it, as plainly, and abundantly (yea perhaps I should say true, if I said more]
against his being the Messiahs as he, for it. For instance:

1. In some; he was to be [ David's Lord, Psalm. 110.1.] yea [ God's Son, Psalm.
2.6.] yea [ the everlasting God, etc. Esa. 9.6.] In other, [ a visible, mortal
man, like unto Moses, Deuteronomy, 18.15. God's servant, Psalm. 78.70. David's son,
Psalm. 132.11.] now that one and the same person, should be all these, though it
be easy now to us that are taught it by the Church in our childehood, was such
a riddle then, to them, ( Mat. 22.46.) and still is to any creature, in state
of nature (Mat. 16.17. 1 Cor. 2.8, 14.) as is incomprehensible by any humane
brain, without special light, and by any light in Scripture's self, without an
interpreter, or any interpreter, of less authority then Divine.

2. In some; He was not to bruise a broken reed, etc. Esa. 42.3. In other; to
break in pieces the Potentates of the earth like a potsheard, and rule them
with a rod of iron, Psalm. 2.9.

3. In some; he was to be the contempt of the common sort, Psalm. 22.6. In
other, all Kings of the earth, to lick the dust of his feet, Psalm. 72.11.

4. In some; to have no form, nor comeliness in him, Esa. 53.3. In other, to
be the fairest among the children of men, Psalm. 45.2.

5. In some, to be slain for us, Dan. 9.27. In other, to live, and reign a
glorious King for ever, Psalm. 72.15. Dan. 7.14. And therefore when the people
heard him talk of his being lift up (meaning, upon a cross, or gibbet) they
were not able to reconcile that, with his being the Messiah; seeing they had
been always taught out of Scripture, that Christ abides for ever, Ioh. 12.34.

No doubt, but he answered their texts, and explicated his own so as to
reconcile them one with the other. But no doubt also they did the same with
his, and their own (as they verily thought.)

Nor can you say of all, that it was only pride, vainglory, malice, or
obstinacy of will, that hindered them from seeing the truth of his sense. For,
no question, but multitudes of them Act. 13.27. compared with 1 Cor. 2.8.
namely, S. Paul, Act. 26.9.) were purely ignorant, and sought the truth in
Scripture (according as it was alleged, and opened, on both sides) with a love
of the truth, and a desire to find it, and with many a prayer, and bitter tear
to God Almighty for light to see it. And yet were confirmed, and by Scripture
principally ( which they had known from children, 2 Timothy 3.15.) that they ought
to do things contrary to the name of Jesus; till God Almighty by some other
means then it, showed them the truth.

If you say; Wherefore did he then send them to Scripture for it? the answer
has been given already; that it was not as to a Teacher of that point, but a
VVitness only; nor a witness of his choice, but which they compelled him to,
by their obstinacy to the other; nor as a witness, proper or sufficient by it
self alone, but in company with the other, for corroboration, and as by him
alleged, and expounded; and his Exposition warranted evidently to sense and
reason, from God Almighty by the token of miracles, beyond all that appeared
then, in the Synagogue, Acts 2.22. and 10.38.) And without that sign, he
desired not any one, (much less would he oblige him) to believe him, or his
Interpretation of Scripture, ( John 5.31. and 15.24.)

Consequently, for all the same reasons; it is as improper at this day to
decide any controversy, or resolve any case of conscience, etc. but in the
hand of one credited for an Interpreter of it, by the same token from God
Almighty, either in his person (as he was,) if he pretend to mission
extraordinary (or Prophetical;) or in the Church that sends him; if he pretend
to ordinary mission. And I pray mark this well.

CHAP. V. Urging the fifth Argument, [Scripture not simply necessary.]
MY fifth Reason is, Because [neither was it written of any necessity; nor,
since its writing, is it necessary to the teaching of faith.] (where, by [not
written of any necessity.] I mean not to exclude the necessity of command, for
the writing some few pieces in the Old and the Apocalypse in the New
Testament.) For,

1. There were as great believers, and holy Saints, before Scripture was ( Heb.
11, 4, etc.) as any were after.

2. After Moses Law was written, we find not, it was read, either by, or so
much as to the people, in 700. years together. Nor was there, for the first
1000. years, any more then one copy of it: and that too, once lost (and God
knows, for how many years together) 2 Chronicles. 34.14. and yet the people were
taught the good knowledge of the Lord (2 Chro. 30.22.)

3. In the Church; there were as great believers, and holy Saints, before any
new Scripture was ( Acts 2.46. and 4.32. and 9.36, etc.) as any since.

4. After its writing, you cannot find it was ever read by, or so much as to
the people; or intended it should be (more then some epistles, once, to the
particular Church they were written to, and one neighbour-Church.) 1 Thessalonians.
5.27. Col. 4.16.

5. The Church was completely settled in all her form (essential) of doctrine,
worship, discipline, etc. and in the means for preserving that form, incorrupt,
unto world's end, diverse years before any tittle of the New Testament was
written; and near 70. before it was all written ( vid. sup. par. 1. c. 4, 5.)

6. The writers of it expressly say, they wrote what they did (not of any
command, but) of their own charity, prudence, or discretion [ because it seemed
good, or meet to them, Lu. 1.3. 2 Pet. 1.13.] upon particular occasions,
reasons, or motives, happening as it were by accident, (1 Timothy 3.15. 2 Pet. 3.1.
1 Ioh. 5.13. Iud. 3.) Nay S. John says plainly, [ He had many things to write,
which he would not, 2 Ioh. 12. and 3. Ioh. 13.] Sure then, both he wrote, at
his own discretion: and what he wrote, was not necessary to be written.

7. When S. Paul wrote to the Corinthians, there were two Gospels (of S. Matthew
and Mark) extant, and had been, twelve or thirteen years before: yet he being to
urge to them the words used by our Savior in the institution of the B.
Eucharist; would not urge them out of either of those Gospels, but only from
tradition, (1 Cor. 11.23.) By that example, giving all Christians for ever to
understand, how it suffices to their faith, and practice, in the highest
mysteries of Religion, if they hear from their Pastor, [I have received from
the Lord, what I deliver, or have delivered unto you.] Nor is the case
different (as to substance) because they cannot mean, receiving it from Christ
immediately. For 1. Perhaps, neither did he. For though he received some
doctrines by inspiration (Gal. 11.2.) yet not all perhaps; and namely, not
those of the Catechism, as this was; he being taught them by the ordinary means
(and as is like, by Ananias, before he was baptized Act. 9.6.) at least, before
he had any vision or revelation (2 Cor. 12.1.) 2. Grant he meant it, as
received immediately: as Pastors succeed to him, in the office of teaching with
divine authority; so, their receiving their doctrine from Christ, by the mouth
of his Church (which H. Scripture sometimes calls Christ, 1 Cor. 1.13. and
12.12.) succeeds to his receiving it by inspiration.

8. For ought appears; 1. Seven of the Apostles were not able to write. 2. If
they were; left nothing in writing, with the Churches of their planting (which
was a very considerable part of Christendom.) 3. Nor did any of those that
wrote, dedicate their writings unto the whole Church, but unto particular
persons, or Churches only, or at most, the faithful indefinitely; and without
any intimation of intent, or desire, to those they wrote to, to disperse, or
impart them to other Churches. So as at the Apostles death, the New Testament
was not extant, or perhaps heard of, but in a small part of Christendom (in
which the two chief Apostles labored;) viz. in the lesser Asia, from Jerusalem
westward; and in the South of Europe, from Rome eastward, (Romans 15.19. 1 Pet.
1.1.)

9. It has ever been, and now is, subject to all sorts of casualties as all
other books are (I mean, not the parts only, but the whole:) which could not
be, if it simply necessary, For, 1. The Book of the Law (and it is probable, all
the copy then was of it) was lost for diverse years, (2 Chronicles. 34.14.) 2. All
the copy that was, of a considerable part of Ieremie's Prophecy, was burnt by
Iehoiakim (Ier. 36.23.) 3. So were all the copies of the Old Testament, that
could be found by, Antiochus (1 Mac. 1.50.) 4. Diverse pieces of the Old Canon
are utterly lost, that we know of, (1 Samuel 10.25. 2 Chronicles. 9.29. and 26.22,
etc. and perhaps that Prophet quoted by S. Matthew, Mat. 2.23.) 5. So are diverse
of the New; namely, a former Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians, (1 Cor.
5.9.) Ephesians, (Ephesians. 3.3.) Philippians, (Phil. 3.1.) that from Laodicea,
(Col. 4.16.) and of S. John, to some Church in Asia, (3 Ioh. 9.) 6. There is
not (for ought I can hear) at this present, in the world, any original (yea or
perhaps perfectly authentical) copy of any one sacred Book.

10. Finally, it self assures us, that the new Jerusalem shall have no need of
Sun, or Moon, (any created means of light, though naturally incorruptible)
because the Lamb is to be her light, according to his promise, Mat. 28.20.
Apoc. 21.23. And that, to believe, and follow what is taught us by our Pastors,
is sufficient to any ones salvation, (Lu. 11.28. Act. 11.14. Romans 1.16. 1 Timothy
4.20. Iam. 1.21.)

CHAP. VI. Urging the last Argument, [Scripture not sufficient, etc.]
MY sixth and last Reason is, Because [it contains not expressly every
particular of the Gospel.] For

1. It contains not every particular, 1. Of the things commanded by our Savior
to his Apostles, to be taught all creatures, as his Gospel (Mat. 28.20. Mar.
16.15.) 2. Much less, of those he reserved the teaching of, unto the H. Ghost,
after his Ascension (Ioh. 16.12.)

2. It contains not every particular, of the form of Doctrine, Worship, etc.
taught and settled in the Primitive Church, by the Apostles, Act. 2.42.) and
committed by them viva voce to the Pastors to teach, and observe, and commit in
like manner, viva voce, to others (Acts 20.20, 27. 2 Timothy 1.13. and 2.2, etc.)

If you say, it does; it will lie upon you to show where; 1. By making a
Catalogue of all the particulars. 2. Proving it to be a perfect one. 3. Naming,
where every of them is contained.

I say, it will lie upon you; because presumption of reason is against it; for
two reasons, chiefly, 1. Because in those places, where it was most proper to
have named the particulars, if it had been intended, none are named (except one
or two of the chief) but all wrapped up in generals [Teach the Gospel, Mar.
16.15. Teach all things I have commanded you, Mat. 28.20. They continved in the
Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayer, Act.
2.42. Hold the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me, etc. 2 Timothy
1.13. Preach the word, etc. 2 Timothy 4.2.] 2. Because, in some places, they warn
the people to whom they wrote, to hold fast all they had taught them, whether
by word, or writing. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. And refer the ordering of some things
pertaining to the administration of discipline, until their coming (of which no
more is said afterward.) 1 Cor. 11.24. Nay, expressly left power with the
Church to set in order the things that were wanting, Tit. 1.5. Nay, S. John,
who wrote last, and (perhaps) in the last piece he wrote, had many things to
write, which he reserved to word of mouth, 2 Ioh. 12.

3. It contains not those writings that are lost (named sup. c. 5. arg. 9.. 4,
5.)

4. To put it beyond all gainsaying: it contains not any express rule, for
resolving these questions: viz.

1. What a Sacrament is?

2. How many Sacraments, Christ ordained in his Church?

3. What water, and action, is necessary, and sufficient, to the matter: what
person, to the Minister; and what words, to the form of Baptism?

4. Whether baptizing Infants, be pious; or necessary, or available, to their
salvation?

5. What, and which, is the Church?

6. Who is a lawful Pastor?

7. What is meant by these names, Presbyter, Bishop, Deacon?

8. Whether anointing the sick with oil (Iam. 5.14.) be an obsolete Law?

9. Whether abstaining from things strangled, and from blood (Acts 15.19.) be
an obsolete Law?

10. Whether, that speech, [This is my body] were proper, or figurative?

11. What proving (1 Cor. 11.28.) is necessary, and sufficient to worthy
receiving?

12. What is the sin against the H. Ghost? and whether it may be repented of?
and if so, whether remissible, or not, to the penitent?

13. What is justifying faith?

14. What is justification?

15. In case of contest, or doubt, who are to be judged, [the higher powers?]

16. Whether the Law of the Sabbath, (and namely, that part of it, as concerns
rest from servile work) was, by Christ abrogated, or transferred only to
another day? which soever it were; whether in whole, or in part only? and if
the later; in what part (at most, and least?)

It were easy to name a thousand more, of the like sort; and the least of
them, importing mankind to salvation. But these are enough for instance.

Conclusion of the First Treatise.
ANd now (dear Reader) think sadly with your self, what reason you have, any
longer to believe, as now you do, that the Scripture was left for your Guide
and Rule.

1. Is it because you have been ever taught so? That is no reason, unless your
Teachers have been sent, Romans 10.14. which there is not one of them
(Independents, Presbyterians, or Prelatical) has any more authority to teach
you, then you to teach them (as will be demonstrated in the next Treatise.

2. Is it, because you have read, or heard so much in Scripture it self? you
cannot but see (unless you shut your eyes,) it says no such thing; but the
direct contrary, in a hundred places.

3 Is it, because it speaks touching it self very great things? you will not
find any thing said of it; but the same, or something more excellent is said of
the Church, or her teaching. For instance.

1. Is it called [the Word, Law, Doctrine, Oracles, or Gospel, etc. of God,
Christ, Salvation? etc.] Her teaching is more: to wit; 1. The word of God, and
all other these attributes in simple sense; whereas it is only the written
Word, Law, etc. and so her doctrine includes the other, as a part of it. For
aamong other grounds of Religion, taught us in our catechizing, that is one
[There is a Book given by inspiration of God: this is it, etc.] And for that
reason alone (because she teaches it) we believe it at first. And for that
reason alone supremely, or finally,) we believe it ever after; for else, she
were not the ground of truth. 2. The word of God, in proper sense; because at
this present spoken by her, as his mouth, or Angel, unto our ears (Mal. 2.7.
Luke 1.70.) and spoken to me, and you, and every creature in several, or in his
particular person ( Mar. 16.16.) by an instrument endued with sense, and
reason, and thereby able to explicate, both her terms, and doctrine; and by
applying her instruction, and direction, to every one, according to his
capacity, need, state, etc. to set, and guide him, in such a plain highway, as
the way faring men, though fools, (or children of five years old) shall not,
err therein, Isa. 35.8. And so, hers is that word, elsewhere also promised by
Esaias to the elect under the Gospel ( The people shall dwell in Zion, etc. And
though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, etc. yet shall not thy
Teachers be removed into a corner any more (as you say the Church may be
sometime invisible to the eye of sense;) but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers,
and thine ears shall hear (from their lips) a word behind thee, (because, at
first, by nature, and afterward, by actual sin, we are all going in a wrong
path toward hell, with our backs toward God Almighty, and his holy habitation;
and so he is fain to follow after us with his good inspirations) saying, This
is the way, walk in it; or, that you are to walk in, Esa. 30.19.] A word
therefore far more useful, and beneficial to us then the other; seeing there
are multitudes of people, yea, Nations in the world, who cannot read; and of
them that can, none able to understand Scripture, without some other
interpreter then it self. And so it is but a mute word (properly speaking)
without her.

2. Is it, a light? She, is the light.

3. Was it written for our learning? She, was given for our Teacher.

4. Is it the Book of truth? She, is the ground of truth.

5. Is its teaching, of, or with divine authority? So is hers, Mar. 16.16.

6. Did Christ send some to search it, as a witness to his person? He sent all
to hear her, as the Teacher of his Gospel.

7. Is he blessed that reads it; So is he, that hears her word, Lu. 11.28. And
no reader of it, but he that is also her hearer, Apoc. 1, 3.

8. Is it able to make some Christians wise to salvation, by faith in Christ?
Her word, is able to save all creatures souls, by receiving it, Mar. 16.19. 1 Timothy 4.16. Iam. 1.21.

9. Is it profitable for doctrine, etc. that the man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished to every good work? She is necessary and sufficient, for
doctrine, etc. that every creature may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to every
thing pertaining to faith, or holiness.

10. In a word; is it profitable, in any kind, to any use whatsoever? It is
only as an instrument, in the hand of her, or her Scholars.

So, whatsoever can be said of it, the same, or more excellent, may be said of
her, or the word by her preached. But then there are abundance of glorious
things spoken of her (Psalm. 87.3.) none whereof can be said of it; namely, all
those, named supra, page 13, 14, 15. [The House of God, the Angel of the Lord,
the Light of the World, the Power of God unto Salvation, the Ground of Truth,
the Rule of Faith, etc.]

Which I say not, of any intent to extol her above it, absolutely: but to
beget in you a due esteem of her, as in some respects excelling it, as it does
her in many other.

4. Is it, because it vvarnes you of some danger possible in making her your
guide? not a syllable in it, to any such sense; it does, of danger in making it
so, 2 Pet. 3.16.

5. Is it, because it tells you, you need not believe or obey her, further then
she teaches out of, or consonantly to it? It tells you no such thing; but the
quite contrary, when it calls her the ground of truth. For, if she, the ground
of truth, we are not to judge of the truth of her doctrine by it, but
contrarily, of its true sense, by her doctrine. It being possible for it to
have diverse senses; but not possible for it to have any true one, repugnant to
her doctrine: as neither possible for her (being the ground of truth) to
misunderstand it, so as to teach any thing repugnant to it.

Would then any of your Ministers, undertake to prove to me, by it, that she
may, yea has at sometime or other since the Apostles death, yea, at this
present does err in her teaching? I would ask him, if he would prove it, by
the express words of it, or no. If, nay: would tell him, no implications, or
deductions, though never so evident to reason, were to be of force against such
express promises as are made to her; and those not conditional only (so much as
implicitly) but Prophetical, such as that [ Day and night, shall not cease,
while the earth remains, Genesis 8.22.] for so says it. [ If you can break my
Covenant of the day, and my Covenant of the night, and that there should not be
day and night in their season: then may also my Covenant be broken with David
my servant, that he should not have a Son to sit upon his throne (and you will
not, I hope, say, that Christ's throne was to judge errors) and with the
Levites the Priests my Ministers, etc. Ier. 33.20.] Nay, God Almighty for our
greater assurance in this point, expressly declares, that no default or
wickedness of the Pastors of the Church, should ever defease his Covenant with
her [ If his children forsake my law (in practice of life) etc. I will visit
their transgressions with the rod, etc.] But my loving kindeness will I not
utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail, etc. Psalm 89.30.]

Such express promises are made to her, for her immunity from all error in
doctrine, so long as the world endures: Namely, for instance, these [My spirit
which is upon thee, and my words which I have put into thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth
of thy seeds seed (says the Lord) from henceforth, and for ever, Esa. 59.21.]
Again [ The spirit of truth shall abide with you for ever (therefore he spoke
not to the Apostles, but the Church) Ioh. 16.3. and guide you into all truth,
Ioh. 14.16.] Now all truth, excludes any one (least) error. If he say, yea; and
should (which is impossible) bring a Text in express words against some
doctrine, or avowed practice of hers: I would ask him, if those words were to
be understood in their proper, literal, grammatical, or (ordinary)
Ecclesiastical sense. If he say, yea: before I admitted him for an Interpreter,
I would ask him for his token, without which not our Lord Christ himself
would desire any one to submit to his Interpretation of it against the
Synagogue, Ioh. 5.31. and 15.24. And if (which is also impossible) he should
show it (I mean not, a sign, Deuteronomy. 13.1. Mat. 24.24. but a true miracle, Psalm.
136. 4. Ioh. 3.2. and Ioh. 9.31.) I would answer him, that from thenceforward,
I would neither believe her, nor it. Not her; because teaching contrary to
that, which she told me was the word of God. Not it: because teaching contrary
to her, who it told me was the ground of truth, and her preaching, the word of
God.

Weigh then well (as I said,) with your self, dear Christian Brother, what
reason you have to make it your guide, Nay, what an absurd senseless thing it
will be in you (after this admonition, and demonstration to you) to leave the
fountain of living water, for a broken cistern; the ground of truth, for a
quick-sand of error, I mean, the Church, for the Scripture; (not in its due
nature, or use, God forbid any such thing, in the mouth, or thought, of a
Christian, but in its abuse, as interpreted to you, by your self, a man not
only subject to all kind of error, but false principled; or by Ministers, or
Synods, such as yours, as subject to error, and false principled, as your
self): to leave the Teacher, unto which our B. Savior said [Do you teach the
Gospel to every creature,] and of which he said, to you, and me, and every
creature [ He that believes (her, or her teaching) and is baptized, shall be
saved: that not believes (her, or her teaching) shall be damned, Mar. 16.16.]
for a book, of which he never spoke syllable unto Christians, or in order to
teaching his Law; nay of which it appears not, that (as Pastor of his Church,
or according to his humane nature] he ever intended, or so much as foresaw the
writing of one tittle of it: and of which, he, to whom he committed for ever
after, the feeding of his flock ( Ioh. 21.15.) speaking unto Christians
purposely, of some part of the New Testament then written, and by that
occasion, of the Scripture in general, as in the hand of the people, yea (it is
more like) Divines: all that he says of it is so far from encouraging, or
directing them unto it, as their guide, or rule; as it is rather to the
contrary (2 Pet. 3.16.): in a word, to leave that, of which it is certain, out
of Scripture's own mouth, that it is most proper, by it self alone; to teach
every creature, every thing pertaining to the Gospel; for that, which is not
proper by it self alone, to teach any creature, any thing.

Suppose God Almighty should do you the favor he did S. Stephen, to let you
see the heavens open, and Jesus sitting at his right hand, and teaching some
person standing by; and you should hear him say to that party [ Teach this man
(meaning you) what I have taught you. If he believe, he shall be saved; if not,
damned]: and anon after, you should see him deliver to him a book, saying to
him, I give thee this, that thou may teach it to him, Exodus 24.12.] and
afterward some one should snatch that book from him, and give it to you,
saying] Do not believe him, further then is here written; he will teach you
errors; read this your self, and guide your self, and judge of his doctrine by
it, etc.] would you not think, it a brainsick act, to follow such counsel?
Sure, you would, in reason. Such very same Counsel, is that of your Ministers;
[ Neglect the Church, follow the Scripture. Nay it is more certain to you, that
Christ spoke those words to her, concerning you, from that record of them [
Preach the Gospel to every creature, Mar. 16.15.] then if you should hear or
see it now in such a vision; by how much the word of Scriture, is a more sure
word, then any sensible vision can be, Lu. 16.31. 2 Pet. 1.19.

Nor therefore may you think, or hope God Alm. will (upon your prayer to him,
though never so humble, never so fervent) by his Spirit, direct or inlighten
you in the right understanding of Scripture, sufficiently to your salvation,
without the Church's ministry. For, he having placed that office in her, in
the same manner as the office of baptizing [Teach all, baptizing them Mat.
28.19.] he will no more give you the one grace, without her ministry, then he
will the other: and therefore to beg of him to teach you himself, would be an
act of as damnable presumption, as to beg of him, to baptize you himself. And
therefore when S. Paul not knowing then, who else he was to go to, begged it of
him; he sent him to the Church, for that grace. Act. 9.6. See the reason sup.
p. 8.

What needs any more to be said to such a good soul as I suppose you to be.
Let it suffice, you have hitherto embraced this false principle, out of
ignorance, and beguiling of heretical Teachers. After this admonition, you
have great cause to fear, God will not wink at your ignorance, any longer; but
expects from you exact obedience to this his commandment or ordinance, (Mal.
2.4.) of hearing and following the Church as your Guide in Religion.

This doing, you will soon find that Rest of soul, the Title of this Book
promised.

If you neglect it; neither this Book, nor the Church will have need to accuse
you to your Judge at the dreadful day: there are others to accuse you; Moses,
Matthew, Paul, etc. in whom you trust: for had you believed them (as you ought)
you would have believed her, for they write of her (and much more plainly then
any Prophet did of Christ.) Ioh. 5.45.

Nor may you flatter your self, with hope upon your faith, baptism, innocence,
or holiness, great and sensible particular favors of God to you (as may seem
to you) in interior lights, consolations, assurances of your being one of his,
etc. for unless you be an humble child, or scholar of his Church, no hope can
be built upon them. And two reasons (among many other might be given) are;

1. Because, without (divine) faith, it is not possible to please God, Heb.
11.6. Now your faith cannot be supposed divine, because not grounded (finally)
on the Church, the ground of all truth; and if of all truth, of all faith also.

2. Because not to hear, or believe, the Church's teaching, is a mortal sin, (
Mat. 18.17. Mar. 16.16.) and consequently, inconsistent with holiness, without
which no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. See more places, if you please, to the
same purpose, Mat. 10.14. Lu. 10.16. Acts 2.47. and 13.48. Gal. 5.20.
(Heresies) Apoc. 21.24. And therefore you may be certain, the spirit that guids
you to a neglect of her, and flatters and comforts in you in it, is not God's,
but the evil spirit, 2 Cor. 4.3.

What remains then, but (as you desire to see the blissful face of God, and
avoid eternal torments) you, in the first place, seriously search the
Scriptures, or otherwise enquire and resolve your self well, touching this
first Question; What Christ left for your Guide? That done; to enquire, Which
is she? That having found her, you may seek his Law at her mouth: that if you
find, they whom you learned your first principles from, was not she; you may
learn them anew of her that is. And then you will have some competent rule,
whereby to judge aright of doctrines and teachers, and of the true sense of
Scripture; which not only you now want, but in stead of it use a false one. God
Alm. of his goodness, open your eyes, to see, in this your day, this truth
which belongs so much unto your peace.

The next Treatise (by Gods help) shall follow, as soon as I am able.

ERRATA.
Page l. read. 122 12 barely 127 25 presignified 141 8 that 143 1 think 145 1
c. 1. 147 17 admonish 160 11 duly 166 8 box 171 1 form 179 19 insinuate. 140
12 left 143 27 some 150 4 it 157 7 that has 160 25 would 163 12 for 166 25 and
that, 170 1 are 183 15 Joh. 9.16.

Page 3.20. del. [1 King. 17, 24] page 32. lin. 26. del. unto these words, [if
any] etc.


