^^ME CONSIDERATIONS HUMBLY PROPOSED To the worthy Members of Parliament, BY
Thomas Levingston Esquire, and Anne his Wife, and William Powell, otherwise
Hinson Esquire; concerning a Petition and Complaint against them by John
Blount, and Mary Countess of Sterling his Wife, and Others, now under
consideration before the Honorable Committee for receiving Petitions.
FIrst, The matter in difference between the Plaintiffs, and these Defendants,
is, only the Title unto the Estate lately belonging unto the Lady Powell
deceased, the Defendant Anne's Mother's Sister.

Secondly, the Complaint against the Defendants, is, That they did wickedly
sorce the said Lady Powell, by several evil practices used upon her, to
settle her Estate upon her Niece (the Defendant Anne) and did cause a Fine to
be Antedated for the perfecting of the said Settlement: And therefore the
Plaintiffs desire the said Fine, and the Desendant Anne's Deeds to be produced
and vacated.

Whereas the Force complained of has been legally Examined and Tried. For the
Force complained of by the Plaintiffs is a pretended forcible Entry upon, and
also a forcible Detainer of the House of the said Lady Powell, and that was
legally tried by a Jury upon the place where the force is supposed to be
committed, and no Force found.

And the pretended Antedating of the Writs for the Fine complained of is no
more then the ancient usual Practice in levying Fines for many hundred years,
when any settlement is made of any Estate in the vacation time. For the Writs
must bear date in a Term, and cannot bear date in the succeeding Term, and
therefore must bear date in a preceding Term. And in most of the assurances and
settlements, made of any men's Estates in England by Fines acknowledged between
the Terms, the Writs must bear date and be returnable the Terms foregoing; and
if those be not good in Law, most men's Titles to their Estates are void: and if
this were not admitted, the people could not make any perfect Conveyances and
Assurances of their Estates by Fines in the vacation time.

And as well the said pretended sorce and antedating of the said Writs, as all
other the supposed evil practices that the Plaintiffs could then suggesd were
examined before the Judges (one of which took the faid Fine in a judicial way,
the said Lady acknowledging to him that she did the same freely and willingly,
and without constraint.) And upon the Plaintiffs first reproachful false
suggestions they gave rules to stop further proceedings upon the said Fine; But
upon full hearing of both Parties, with their Council, gave their Judgment
that the said Fine should be proceeded in, to be perfected, which was done
accordingly.

Therefore the said Complaint against the Defendants is irregular; For their
Complaint ought now to be against that Court of Justice, who have examined and
determined the Matters complained of, and caused the Settlement complained
against to be perfected, if they have done Injustice therein: and the parties
ought not to be further vexed or molested, when their Cause is Legally heard
and Judged.

But, if the supposed evil gaining a Title to the said Estate by the
Defendants be not fully examined, yet, it is both Examinable and Determinable
in the ordinary Courts of Law and Equity; And many Settlements of several
Estates by Fines and Deeds have been annulled and vacated upon sufficient Proof
made, that they have been unduely gained or procured by evil practices.

Yet the Honorable Committee for receiving of Petitions, only upon hearing the
said Complaint against the Defendants, without their Answers or Defense, have
required the Defendants Deeds and Evidences concerning the Defendants Annes
Title to the said Estate, to be produced, which may be of very evil
consequence, that their Adversary claiming the same Estate should peruse or be
advertised of their Title before any Trial be brought upon the same.

The Defendants in all humility and submission offer it to Consideration:

First, Whether the Legislative Power, as Legislative, can try the Matters in
question suggested against the Defendants.

For if the Defendants have evilly and wickedly gained a pretended title to the
said Estate, they have transgressed, either the Common Law, Romans 4.25. where
there is no Law, there is no Transgression

. Romans 3. 20. By the Law is the knowledge of Sin

, Romans 7. 7. I had not known sin but by the Law

.
or the Statute Law of the Land, or else they have done contrary to the Rules
of good conference, and equity.

If either of the first, the Defendants puishment for their Offenses, will be
known by the Laws, they have broken; and it is only the Jurisdictive power, as
Jurisdictive, that can try the Defendants for those offenses. The business
being no more then the application of the Laws in being to the offenses dose.

It the Defendants have done the latter (that is) done contrary to a good
conscience, and equity, in gaining the said Title, then that must be tried by
the known Rules or Equity, known and practiced in this Nation (For there cannot
be a particular Equity that concerned the Defendants only) And that cannot be
within the Limits of the Legislative power, as Legislative, When the work is
only to measure a Fact by the Rule already in being.

Secondly, It is humbly offered to be considered, Whether any Reasons be
offered by the Plaintiffs against the Defendants, why the Legislative power
should in an extraordinary way, take this particular Controverse out of the
hands of the ordinary Courts of Law, and Equity, whea others of the same nature
concerning Titles unduely gained have been, and are daily tried, judged, and
determined by them.

Thirdly, Whether any reasons be offered by the Plaintiffs, why they are not
relieveable by the ordinary proceedings of Law, and equity, if there be just
cause for the same.

Fourthly, If the Legislative power shall please in this Case to exercise the
Jurisdistive power(for otherwise they cannot take conusance of it) The wisdom
and cure of the Parliament in their Late constitution of the Committee for
Petitions, provided againsi confounding the Legislative pomer r, with the
jurisdicttive, and limited them to neuve such Petitions only for the
Parliament,, as are proper to the Legislative power, or not relieveable
elsewhere.
it is humbly offered to be considered, Whether it can concern them to examine
the Defendant Annes Title to the said. Estate by the said Fines and Deeds (as
is now required bythe said Committee) before they have tried the Defendants for
their supposed offenses in the undue gaining of the laid Fine and Deeds? For if
the Defendants be not guilty of anv such offenses, the Parliament cannot be
supposed to intermeddle with the Defendant Annes Deeds or Title.

Now the Defendants being clear in their own considences from any wicked
practice, plot, or combination, whereof they are falsely and maliciously accused
by the means, occasion, and procurement of one Crump, otherwise Crompton, who
was a mean menial servant unto the said Lady Powels husband, and had
endeavored wickedly to separate the said Lady from her husband to her
dishonor, and who striveth and hops to gain a great personal Estate to
himself by suggesting many falsehoods against us the Defendants, and inciting
others upon such grounds to contend for the said Lady Powels real Estate.

We the Defendants upon the Considerations aforegoing, humbly pray, Either a
dismission of the matters in question, to the ordinary course of justice tried
Equity. Or otherwise if the Parliament please to take the Trial of them unto
themselves, That the Defendants may be first legally tried in first manner as
the Parliament final direct, for the offenses whereof they are aceused, before
their Deeds, and Title to the Estate in question be called for out of their
hands.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc


