A LETTER TO FERGUSON, Or any other, the supposed Author of a late Scandalous
Libel, Entitled, An Elogie upon Sir Tho. Armstrong.
From one that heartily wishes them what they deserve.
WHEN first the noted Libel did appear,
The Hearts of all your Friends were struck with fear;
Finding, like a true Block-head, you had chose
Some Belgic Muse to rally Armstrong's Foes.
For all your dear Acquaintants in this Isle,
Though they extolled the Treason, damned the style,
And jointly owned that by Poetic Laws,
True Hanging you deserved, but no Applause.
Stories obscene may dully be expressed,
And with each wanton Humor pass for jest:
Misprisions too may crawl in humble strain,
And no Whigg cursed for his insipid vein.
But haughty Treason, dangerous and sublime,
Should have a Genius lofty as the Crime.
For who upon that Theme poor Dogrill writes,
Rather does damp Rebellion, than excites.
Curse on thy sottish Head, that was the cause
Of forming Monsters without Teeth or Claws:
Poison they have enough, and shape to fright,
But the poor Devils can neither scratch nor bite.
Scorned and thrown by, like a blunt edgless Tool,
And show thee much a Rogue, but more a Fool.
Ah! could Old Shaftsbury have leave to rise
From the dark noisome Charnel where he lies,
What Rage thy Rhimes would in his Soul beget,
To see such Loads of Treason, and no Wit!
The German Heresy he had suppressed,
And Anabaptist Cant by thee professed.
He would have Christened thee to hide that shame,
And thou Eternal Dunce had been thy Name.
Methinks I see the little Elder stand
Wielding his Fatal Spigot in his hand,
Which he had torn from out its tender place,
Ready to throw the Faucet in thy face.
If ere his Maxims were before thy Eyes,
Thou then would find a Rebel should be wise,
And with slye Logic gloss his fallacies.
But thy dull Brain makes all the Party droop;
Thy Soul was gorged with Treason's Poisoned Cup,
And here thy nasty Muse has spewed it up.
Burn then that Hand that held thy guilty Pen,
And so recover thy lost Fame again.
Atone for writing Nonsense, burn it straight,
And Cranmer, whom thou talk of, imitate.
Yet, in each Case, be this distinction taught,
He burnt for what his Conscience found a fault,
But thou for having proved thy self a Sot.
And when it comes, as sure 'twill be thy Fate,
That the same Truncheon shall adorn a Gate:
There flourish, since thou think it flourishing,
And stink in black defiance of the King.
Amongst all the Sciences in Kingdoms known,
To be a Villain, is the easiest one.
From English Soil in swarms such Insects rise,
Bred out of Excrement, like Drones and Flies.
But though a Dunce may serve in common Arts,
A Rebel still should be a Rogue of Parts.
Fools Ominously show our near Disgraces;
Thus Dick the Scepter lost, M -- th his Places.
Sir Martin marrs the Polititian's toil,
And Oats and Cummins two wise Plots did spoil.
'Twere wondrous well, if Fate would order't so:
That each man did his Sphere of Knowledge know,
Then thou thy Talent cautiously would see,
And School the Rabble, not write Elogie.
Instruction there might raise thy Fame again,
A Canting Saint, though Devil at thy Pen.
For when Hell's Synod would Rebellion Teach,
The dullest Rogue is still most fit to Preach.
Excuse me, that thy want of Brains I quote,
Affronts seem Raillery with Friends remote;
Besides, I merely do it to save thy Soul,
Lest thou should damn it by some other Scrowl.
Like one that squints, thou see not thy own ill,
But throw'st on others Atoms that can kill,
Envenomed like this Couplet of thy Quill;
To be concerned the STUARTS to restore, Libel.

Is a Reproach that hardly can be bore.
Did ever Hell-hound write the like before?
Such Malice, with such Nonsense, for 'twas all
Armstrong had left to save his certain fall.
His turn-coat Zeal was his best Policy,
For he long since had else been mounted high,
And his Preferment cursed of Pentioner and Spy.
Methinks I see thee Summon the Cabal,
And on that Distich ask their Counsels all:
G -- y, N -- p, Ire -- n, to the Theme advance,
And B -- don, that went ore in Complaisance.
Then Goodenough brings grizly T -- ner in,
And his fair Spouse, that lately sick had bin,
And escaped great danger her last Lying-in.
The Mighty lines were scanned and understood,
And all upon their Honors swore 'em good:
Methinks too at their words I see thee swell,
As Boys make Bubbles, or as Butchers Veal.
Thus rank Abuse, and Praise in Ridicule,
Never fail to please with your conceited Fool.
Show me a Traitorous Plot has been achieved,
Where Rogues were not at last by Rogues deceived:
Like Lobsters struck, they Naturally draw
The rest, and on each other fix a Claw.
Therefore to give thee cause to think me just,
I Will show thee why these are not fit for trust.
First, G -- y, that now is weary of one Wh --
Will 'peach, because he is Scandalously poor:
Besides, she is ugly grown; and it is our Natures,
When Beauty's gone, to think 'em nauseous Creatures:
She too enraged, because another Dame
Lately come over, Usurps her Place and Name,
Is wondrous thoughtful: And it is ten to one,
When such can think, some Mischief will be done.
Next, burly B -- don he so wide does gape,
Secrets, as well as Flies, must needs escape:
Treason can never lie safe in one, whose Skin
Is made too little to contain it in:
For whilst he cleanlily takes pains to stop
One end, another certainly is open;
And I should be in fear of the backdoor,
As much as of the Wicket that is before.
Then never trust, nor think him secret proof,
Whom Nature would not trust with Skin enough.
Ire -- n his parts for Armstrong lately played,
And spoke so well in Dutch to get him Aid;
The Shag-hair'd Ruffian well deserved the Grace
To have been Shipped, and gained the second Place.
His Name concealed, he durst appear in this;
For the Devil himself has not a worse than his:
But finding that he was observed, and known,
Quenched his hot Zeal, and sneaked into the Town.
Friends are forgot when Dangers are too near,
By such as tremble with a guilty fear.
Then since the least of Ills it is best to take,
Faith trust to thy own self for thy own sake:
It Is better to be hanged for what thou do,
Than by their tricks to dangle, as thou must.
Self-preservation is our chiefest care,
And thou thy Treason best can know and bear;
Besides, thy Folly makes thee safe enough,
Nothing holds Poison like an Asses hoof.
Your Quoting Scripture is as dull a thing,
As you should swear you are Loyal to the King;
Of equal worth and weight to all your Friends:
So once the Devil did it for his Ends;
But was, I think, more subtle than you are,
And sure the better Writer too by far.
Instead of matching Tom with Cato, he
Had wrote, Bold Bravo, Thou art fit for me:
But thou have washed him, and as spotless made,
As he had never Murdered nor Betrayed.
Some Counsel now, and then I Will give thee over,
Continue Rogue, but dare to write no more:
With Satyrs if thou would thy Foes disgrace,
Show 'em no more thy scribbling, but thy face:
There Is profit in it, five hundred pounds lie dead
For want of thy Satirical damned Head:
But touch no more on CHARLES his Sacred Line,
For all the Assembly of the Powers Divine,
In Miracles his God-like Virtues own,
Defending many Years his oft-attempted Crown.
Besides, broad Lies the Party will undo,
Satyrs should all be sharp, but yet be true:
Nor need'st thou thus thy self more Guilty make;
But now, if after all, I should mistake,
And that the Libel was not thine, pray tell
The Author, this will serve his turn as well.
From Pontack's Tavern, formerly known by the Noted Name of Shepherds, this
13th. of August, 1684.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, Bookseller to His ROYAL HIGHNESS, at the
Black Bull in Cornhill, 1684.


