A LETTER FROM General Leven, the Lord Fairfax, and the Earl of Manchester;
To the Committee of both Kingdoms: And by them communicated to the Parliament;
Concerning the great VICTORY It has pleased GOD to give them, over the Forces
under the command of Prince RUPERT and the Marquess of New Castle, at
Marston-Moor, near York, July the Second, 1644.

Signed thus: Leven. Lindsey. Tho: Hatcher. F. Fairfax. Manchester.


Expressing also what number of the Enemy are slain, what number taken
prisoners, and what Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition the Enemy lost.

Also an Order of the Commons assembled in Parliament, for Thursday the 18. of
this present July, for a day of public Thanksgiving throughout the whole
Kingdom.

Die Mercurii. 10. Julii* 1644.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith printed
and published.

H: Elsynge, Cl. P. D. Com.



Published by especial Command* AND Reprinted at Edinburgh by EVAN TYLER,
Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1644.

(...) the issue was the total Routing of the Enemies Army, the loss of all
their Ordnance, to the number of 20. their Ammunition and Baggage, about 100.
Colors, and ten thousand Arms: There were killed upon the place about 3000.
of them, whereof many are chief Officers, and 1500. prisoners taken, amongst
whom there are above 100. Officers, in which number is Sir Charles Lucas,
Lieutenant-Generall to the Marquess of Newcastles Horse, Porter
Major-Generall, and Major-Generall Tillier, besides diverse Colonells,
Lieutenant-Colonells, and Majors. Our loss, God be praised, is not very great,
being only of one Lieutenant Colonel, some few Captains, and about two or
three hundred common Soldiers. The Prince in a great distraction, with a few
Horsemen, and almost no Foot, marched the next morning from York Northwards.
We are now lying down again in our old Leaguer before York, which we are in
hopes in a few days to gain, and are resolved to send a great part of our
Cavalrie after Prince Rupert: We having nothing to add, but as the glory of
all the success belongs unto God, and the benefit we hope, shall redound to
the whole Kingdom. We have appointed this next Sabbath for a day of public
Thanksgiving thorowout the Armies: So your Lordships would appoint a day for
the same to be kept throughout the Kingdom, and notice sent to us thereof, that
we may altogether join in it, and we shall continue,

Your Lordships affectionate friends and servants, Leven. Lindsey. Tho.
Hatcher. F. Fairfax. Manchester.

From the Leaguer before York, 5. July, 1644.
A FULL RELATION Of the late VICTORY OBTAINED (Through GODS Providence) By the
Forces under the command of General Lesly, the Lord Fairfax, and the Earl of
Manchester: Being about twenty seven thousand Horse and Foot.

Against his Majesty's Forces under the command of Prince RUPERT and the Earl
of NEWCASTLE: Being much about the same number.

Fought on MARSTON-MOOR, within 5. miles of YORK, on the second of July, 1644.

With a Relation of Prince Ruperts march toward Lancashire, and of the Forces
sent in pursuit after him: as also of the Earl of Newcastles and General
Kings taking, Ship for Holland.

With the weak condition that YORK is now in having quit their great Fort,
there not being 500 Soldiers in the Town beside Citizens.

Together with a LIST of the Cornets and Ensigns taken, with their several
Mottoes.

Sent by the three GENERALS to the Parliament, by Captain STEWART.

Published by Authority.

SIR,
MY earnest desire to satisfy your expectation, and the fear which I have,
lest our affairs here should not be truly represented unto you, has moved me
to give you this short account of the late Fight.

Upon Monday last, understanding that Prince Rupert, with about Twenty thousand
Foot and Horse, did march toward us, our whole Army arose from the Siege, and
marched toward Longmarston Moor, about 4 or 5 mile from York, where we quartred
that night: But the Prince having notice of our march, passed with his Army by
the way of Burroughbridge, so that by reason of the interposing River, we could
not hinder his passage into York: Whereupon we marched to Todcaster, to prevent
his going southward; but before our Van was advanced, within a mile of
Todcaster, we were advertised that the Prince was upon our Rear, and was come
the length of Longmarston, where he drew up his Army in a place of great
advantage, having the addition of the Earl of Newcastles Forces, reported to
be about 6000. With as great expedition as could be, our Army was called back.

In the mean while, the Enemy perceiving that our Cavalry had possessed
themselves of a Corn Hill, and having discovered near unto that Hill a place of
great advantage, where they might have both Sun and Wind of us, advanced
thither with a Regiment of Red Coats, and a party of Horse: but we
understanding well their intentions, and how prejudicial it would be unto us,
if they should keep that ground, we sent out a party which beat them off, and
planted there our Left Wing of Horse: having gained this place, General Lesley
gave order for drawing up of the Battle: The Right Wing of Horse was entrusted
to Sir Thomas Fairfax, a man of known Valor and Resolution, it did consist of
his whole Cavalry, and three Regiments of the Scottish Horse, commanded by the
Earl of Dalhousie, Earl of Eglinton, and Lord Balgony: Next unto them was
drawn up the Right Wing of the Foot, consisting of the Lord Fairfax his Foot,
and two Brigades of the Scottish Foot for a Reserve. In the main Battle was
the Regiments of the Earl of Lindsey, Lord Maitland, Earl of Cassils, and
Kelheads, and two Brigades of the Earl of Manchesters: In the Reserve was the
Earl of Balcleugh his Regiment, the Earl of Lowdons, Earl of Dumfermlings,
Lord Coupers, General Hammiltouns General of the Artillery, Edinburgh
Regiment, and a Brigade of Manchesters. Upon the Left Wing of Horse, was the
Earl of Manchesters whole Cavalry, under command of Lieutenant General
Cromwell, and three Regiments of the Scottish Horse, commanded by General
Major Lesly: and upon their Left hand, near a cross Ditch, where the Enemy had
a Regiment of Foot, was placed the Scottish Dragoones, under the command of
Colonel Frizel. Orders being given to advance, the Battle was led on by
General Hammiltoun, Lieutenant General Baylie, and Major General Crawford: The
Reserve being committed to the trust of General Major Lumsden. There was a
great Ditch between the Enemy and us, which ran along the Front of the Battle,
only between the Earl of Manchesters Foot and the Enemy there was a Plain: in
this Ditch the Enemy had placed four Brigads of their best foot, which upon the
advance of our Battle were forced to give ground, being gallantly assaulted by
the E. of Lindsayes Regiment, the Lord Maitlands, Cassils, and Kelheads, Gen:
Major Crawford having overwinged the enemy, set upon their flank, and did very
good execution upon the enemy, which gave occasion to the Scottish Foot to
advance and pass the Ditch. The right wing of our Horse had several
misfortunes, for betwixt them and the enemy there was no passage but at a
narrow Lane, where they could not march above 3. or 4. in front: upon the one
side of the Lane was a Ditch, and on the other an Hedge, both whereof were lined
with Musketeers, notwithstanding sir Thomas Fairfax charged gallantly, but the
enemy keeping themselves in a body, and receiving them by threes and fours as
they marched out of the lane, and (by what mistake I know not) sir Tho. Fairfax
his new levied Regiments being in the Van, they wheeled about, and being hotly
pursued by the enemy, came back upon the L. Fairfax foot, and the reserve of
the Scottish Foot, broke them wholly, and trod the most part of them under
foot. Sir Tho. Fairfax, Col. Lambert and sir Tho. his brother with 5. or 6.
troops, charged through the enemy and went to the left-wing of horse, the two
Squadrons of Balgonies Regiment being divided by the Enemy each from the other,
one of them being Lanciers, charged a Regiment of the Enemies foot, and put
them wholly to the rout, and after joined with the left-wing of Horse, the
other by another way went also to the left-wing; The Earl of Eglintons
Regiment maintained their ground (most of the Enemies going on in the pursuit
of the Horse and Foot that fled) but with the loss of 4. Lieuts: The Lieut.
Col. the Major, and Eglintons son being deadly wounded, Sir Charles Lucas, and
Genesis Major Porter having thus divided all our Horse on that wing, assaulted the
Scottish Foot upon their Flanks, so that they have the Foot upon their front,
and the whole Cavalry of the enemies lest wing to fight with, whom they
encountered with so much courage and resolution, that having interlined their
Musketeers with Pike-men, they made the enemies Horse, notwithstanding for all
the assistance they had of their Foot, at two several assaults to give ground;
and in this hot dispute with both, they continued almost an hour, still
maintaining their ground; Lieutenant General Bailie, and General Major
Lumsden, (who both gave good evidence of their courage and skill) perceiving
the greatest weight of the battle to lie sore upon the Earl of Lindsayes, and
Lord Maitlands Regiment, sent up a Reserve for their assistance, after which
the enemies Horse having made a third assault upon them, had almost put them in
some disorder; but that the Earl of Lindsay, and Lieutenant Colonel Pitscotti,
Lieutenant Colonel to the Lord Maitlands Regiment behaved themselves so
gallantly, that they quickly made the enemies Horse to retreat, killed sir
Charles Lucas his Horse, took him Prisoner, and gained ground upon the Foot.

The Scottish Dragoons that were placed upon the left wing, by the good
managing of Colonel Frizell, acted their part so well, that at the first
assault they beat the Enemy from the ditch, and shortly after killed a great
many, and put the rest to the rout. Lord General Cromwell charged Prince
Ruperts horse with exceeding great resolution, and maintained his charge with
no less valor. Generall-Major Lesly charged the Earl of Newcastles Brigade
of White-coats, and cut them wholly off, some few excepted, who were taken
prisoners, and after them charged a Brigade of Green-coats, whereof they cut
off a great number, and put the rest to the rout: which service being
performed, he charged the Enemies Horse, (with whom Lord General Cromwell was
engaged) upon the flank, and in a very short space the Enemies whole Cavalry
was routed, on whom our fore-troops did execution to the very walls of York; but
our Body of Horse kept their ground. Lieutenant General Cromwell, and
Major-Generall Lesly being joined, and receiving advertisement, that our Foot
were engaged with the Enemies Horse and Foot, marched to their assistance, and
met with the Enemies Horse (being retreated upon the repulse they had from the
Scottish Foot) at the same place of dis-advantage where they had routed our
Horse formerly; and indeed their success was answerable, if not much worse,
for we routed them wholly, killed and took their chief Officers, and most part
of their Standards. After which we set upon the Rear of their Foot, and with
the assistance of our main Battle, which all this time stood firm, we put them
wholly to the rout, killed many, and took their Officers and Colors, and by
this time we had no Enemy in the Field. We took all their Ordnance being in
number 25. near 130. barrels of Powder, besides what was blown up by the common
soldiers, above an hundred Colors, and ten thousand Arms, besides two
Wagons of Carbines and Pistols of spare Arms. There were killed upon the
place 3000. whereof, upon a judicious view of the dead bodies, two parts
appeared to be Gentlemen and Officers. There were 1500, prisoners taken,
whereof Sir Charles Lucas Lieut. Genesis of the Earl of Newcastles Horse,
Major-Gen. Porter, and Major-Gen. Tillier, besides diverse Colonels, Lieut. Col.
and Majors. The loss upon our part, blessed be God, is not great, being only
of one Lieutenant-Col. some few Captains, and not 300. common Soldiers. Upon
Wednesday, the day after the fight, Prince Ruperts Sumpter-horse was found in
the Wood, with some of their provisions: Upon Thursday morning the Soldiers
being drawn to their Arms upon a false Alarm, occasion was taken to march
toward York to our old Leaguer: about seven of the clock the Town was summoned
to render upon mercy, whereunto answer was returned under Sir Thomas Gl^nhams,
and the Major of the Towns hands, that they could not give it up upon such
terms: And if they shall continue in their obstinate refusals, we are
resolved by Gods assistance to storm it once this week following, for our
Scaling-ladders and all other necessaries for a storm are in readiness, there
not being 500. fighting men in the Town, besides the Citizens; especially, the
Enemy having quitted their great Fort for want of men to maintain it.

We hear that there have been some differences between the Prince and the Earl
of Newcastle, which appear to be more real, that they have parted since: the
Earl of Newcastle, General King, and the Lord Widrington, are gone to
Scaresborough, and as we understand since, are shipped for Holland, and Prince
Rupert toward the North; his Rendezvous was twelve miles on the North side of
York, where appeared about fifteen or sixteen hundred horse, and eight hundred
foot. Upon Thursday at night he was at Richmond, so that it is yet doubtful
whether he intends for the Bishopric of Durham, or Lancashire: if he shall go
to Durham and those parts, we hope Calender (who for certain is before
Newcastle) will entertain him: however, we have sent after him all the Scottish
Cavalry, all the Lord Manchesters, one thousand of the Lord Fairfaxes, and one
thousand Dragoons, in all seven thousand. While I was about to close my Letter,
we received information, that the Lord Clavering with about 2000. Foot and
Horse, are joined with the Prince, and that he is gone to Lancashire: whereupon
Sir John Meldrum, with the Lancashire and Scottish Foot that were there
formerly, and Sir William Brereton with 1500. Horse, are returned the nearest
way to Lancashire, to stop the Prince his passage into the South, till our
Horse be able to overtake him. The three Generals have sent the bearer hereof
Captain William Stuart (a Scottish Officer that did good service in the late
Fight) to the Parliament with the Earl of Newcastles Commission for being
General, and his Commission for making of Knights, which were taken at the
Fight, together with some Letters of Sir John Hothams, whereby it is clearly
made known that he intended to betray Hull to the Enemy. There are likewise
sent by him all the Coronets, and Colors, which could be got from the
Soldiers, who esteem it a great glory to divide them in pieces and wear them:
And before Proclamation was made for delivery of them, they had disposed of the
most part of them. I have sent you here enclosed, a List of such as were
preserved, and now sent, with their several Mottoes: and so for the present I
take my leave, and rest,

At the Leaguer near York, July 6. at ten at night. Yours, etc.

A List of the enemies Coronets and Colors, sent by Cap. William Stuart.
1. A White Coronet of Dragoones with a blue and white fringe, in the midst
whereof is painted a Roundheads face, and on its top the letter P. (which is
conceived to signify a Puritan) with a Sword in a hand reached from a Cloud,
with this Motto, Fiat Justitia. 2. And Black Coronet with a black and yellow
fringe, and a Sword reached from a Cloud, with this Motto, Terribilis ut acies
ordinata. 3. A Blue, and on it a Crown toward the top, with a Myter beneath the
Crown, with the Parliament painted on the side, and this Motto, Nolite tangere
Christos meos, to wit, the Crown and the Myter. 4. A Black with a black
fringe, and in the middle three Crowns gilded, with this Motto, Quarta perennis
erit. 5. A Blue with a silver fringe. 6. A Willow Green, with the pourtraiture
of a man, holding in one hand a Sword, and in the other a Knot, with this
Motto, This shall untie it. 7. A Yellow, and in the middle a stooping Lion, at
whose breech lies snatching a Mastife Dog, with this word, as it were
proceeding from his mouth, Kimbolton, and at his feet little Beagles, and
before their mouths, Pym, Pym, Pym, with these words proceeding from his
mouth, Quousque tandem abutere patientia nostra? that is, How long will you
abuse our patience? 8. A Blue, with a Motto that cannot be read. 9. Another
colored, with a Face, and this Motto, Aut mors, aut vita decora. 10. A White,
with a Blue and White Fringe, and a Red Cross in the middle. 11. A Red, with a
White Cross, and this Motto, Pro Rege and Regno. 12. A Black, with a Black and
Yellow Fringe, and a Red and White Cross in the middle, and a Yellow Streamer
sloping down from the Cross. 13. A Red, with a Red Fringe. 14. A Red, with a
Silver Fringe. 15. A Blue, with a Blue Fringe. 16. Another of the same. 17. A
Red, with a Red and Gold Fringe. 18. A White, with a Red and White Fringe. 19.
A Red, with a Black Fringe. 20. A Black, with a Black and White Fringe. 21. A
Flesh-coloured Coronet.
Some torn.

Ensigns.
PRince Ruperts Standard, with the Ensigns of the Palatine, near five yards
long and broad, with a Red Cross in the middle. Three Green Ensigns, whereof
two with a Red Cross upon White, and four or five little White Crosses sloping
downward. Six Yellow Ensigns with Red Crosses, and one with a Red Cross, and
three Black Roses: The rest only Yellow. Four White, with Red Crosses, whereof
one with five Black Streamers. Eleven Red, with White Crosses. A Blue, with a
Red and White Cross.
Besides above 60. Cornets seized on by the common Soldiers, who
(notwithstanding his Excellencies Proclamation for bringing in all such Cornets
and Colors, promising for each one Forty shillings) refused, saying, They had
ventured their lives for them, and they would wear them about their necks.

FINIS.

