A LETTER Written to the French King, By the LORDS Spiritual The Archbishops
And the BISHOPS, Together with the other Ecclesiastics, appointed by the
Clergy of France, assembled at St. Germains en Lay.
About the last Breve of the POPE, upon the Subject of the Regale.
Sire,
WE have understood, to our great grief and sorrow, that our Holy Father the
POPE has written a Breve to your Majesty, by which he does not only exhort and
require you not to subject any of our Churches to the The Sovereign Patronage
of the Arch-Bishopricks, Bishopric Abbeys, and other Benefices of Royal
Foundation, due unto the King of France, and adherent unto his Person, in the
right of his Crown, and therefore not to be transferred, committed, or aliened
unto any other, and hereby he has the Profits of them during vacancy, and the
Provision, Collation and Presentation of Successors unto them.
Right of Regale, but likewise he declares, that he will make use of his
Authority, if your Majesty will not submit to the Paternal Remonstrances that
he has both made, and often repeated to you upon this point.

We have judged it, Sire, our Duty not to be silent upon such an important
Occasion as this is, where we shall suffer, with a most sensible and
extraordinary affliction, his Holiness to threaten the eldest Son, and the
Protector of the Church, as He has done at other times, and upon other
accounts, those Princes who have usurped his Rights. It Is not the least of our
design to enter with your Majesty into the bottom of an Affair: Wherein our
Predecessors of the like Assemblies have received upon diverse occasions very
considerable Marks of your Justice and your Piety; but this extraordinary
Procedure gives us a most wonderful trouble, for it is so far from maintaining
the honor of Religion, and the glory of the Holy-See, that in all likelihood
it is enough to lessen them, and to produce very ill effects. It is but too
plain and evident that he would not do this, but to favor the malice of some
turbulent and seditious Spirits, that, contrary to the Intentions of his
Holiness, which we look upon to be very good, would make use of his Name and
his Authority, as they do every day, in letting extravagant Roports fly abroad
in the World, against the honor of your Majesty, and the most qualified
Prelates of your Kingdom. They do also endeavor what they can to stir up a
misunderstanding between the Priesthood and the Royalty, and that at such a
time, when they have more reason than ever to preserve a perfect Union, by the
Protection you give to the Faith, to the Ecclesiastical Discipline, and to the
extirpation of Heresies and Novelties. It is very easic for us, Sire, being
supported by your Majesty, to prevent so pernicious and fatal an Evil, either
by making known our Sentiments to his Holiness, with observing that respect
that is due to him, or by taking up Resolutions commensurate to the Prudence
and the Zeal of the greatest Prelates of the Church. Our Predecessors very well
understood upon the like conjunctures how to maintain the Liberties of their
Churches, without departing from those Measures of respect which their Birth
and their Religion have inspired into them for KINGS: And as your Majesty,
Sire, surpasses by your Zeal and your Authority all those that have been before
you, we are so strictly engaged and fixed to it, that nothing is capable of
effecting any separation from it. This Protestation being sufficient to deceive
the vain enterprises and attempts of the Enemies of the Holy-See, and the
State, we desire to renew it to your Majesty with all the sincerity and the
affection as is possible for us, it being fit that all the world should be
informed, that we ^o right well understand, as we ought, how to make that ^^ve
we bear to the Discipline of the Church agree with the (...)ous quality which
we will study ever to preserve,

Sire, Of your most humble, most Obedient, most Faithful, and most Obliged
Servants and Subjects; the Archbishops, Bishops, and other the Ecclesiastics
appointed by the Clergy of your Kingdom. The Archbishop of Paris, Duke and
Peer of France, Commander of the Orders of the King; Provisor of Sorbonne,
President. De Grignan, Coadjutor of Arles. Phelippeaux, Patriarch Archbishop
of Bourges. Hyacinte, Archbishop of Alby. Francois, Bishop of Amiens. G.
Bishop of Perigueux. Charles Francois, Bishop of Constance. S. De Guemadeuc,
Bishop of S. Malo. L. M. Bishop, Duke of Langres. Jean Louis Bishop of Air. J.
B. M. Colbert, Bishop of Montaubon. Louis Aube, Bishop of Grace. The Bishop of
Cisteron. Poncet de la Riviere, Bishop and Earl of Vzez. Andre, Bishop of
Auxerre. Louis Alphonce, Bishop Dallet, Proctor. De Grance. De Tonnerre. De
Coetlogon. De Villars. De Broglio. Phelippeaux. De Marillat, Dean of S. John.
de Lion. De Fleury. De Viens. De Gouriues. Cheron. De Ventimille du luc. J. le
Gentil. De Moncassin. De S. Valier. Boucaut. Des Marests, Agent General of the
Clergy of France. De Besons, Agent General of the Clergy of France.

By our Lords of the General Assembly.
The Abbot de Grignan, nominated by the King to the Bishopric of Eureux,
Secretary.
From S. Germins en Lay, this 10th of July 1680.
FINIS.

