A MONITOR OF MORTALITY, In two SERMONS; By a consideration of the manifold
and uncertain surprizalls of Death, guiding the pace and passages of a
Temporal life, toward the obtainement of life eternal.

OCCASIONED By the death of that hopeful young Gentleman JOHN ARCHER Esquire,
Son and Heir to Sir Simon Archer Knight of Warwick-shiere.

AND By the death of Mistress Harpur, a Grave and Godly Matron, (Wife to Mr.
Henry Harpur of the City of Chester,) and of the death of their religious
Daughter Phaebe Harpur, a Child of about 12. Years of age.

By John Ley Minister of Great Budworth in Cheshiere.

DEUTERONOMY. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end. Ita fit, ut immortalitas exc^^sa in perpetuum, and
ad tempus recepta Mortalitas, hominem constituat in ea cond^^ione, ut sit in
qualibet aetate Mortalis. Lact. de opificio Dei cap 4. LONDON, Printed by G.M.
for Christopher Meredith at the Sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard,
M.DC.XLIII.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL And worthy Knight Sr. Simon Archer, and to the
virtuous Lady, the Lady Anne Archer his wife: I. L. wishes the most desirable
welfare of both worlds.
Right Worshipful,
BY these Papers which now I send you, your suspensive thoughts of my silence
(wherein I conceive your charity would not be forward to condemn me of
neglect) may receive satisfaction and assurance, that I have neither forgotten,
how much your goodness has engaged me to you and yours, nor am willing to
pretermit any fit opportunity, which may represent me as grateful to my
friends, as they are gracious to me. They had sooner appeared in your sight, if
duty to the public had not anticipated my time and endeavors for another
service.

And yet they are now so much more seasonable, as time has the more reduced
you, to that dispassionate temper, wherein you were, before your hopeful
Son, had made his happy change from Earth to Heaven. And surely a departure
hence to such a blessed place, must needs be then most happy, when remaining
here (as now if ever) is most perilous.

I shall not need then (I hope) for support of your patience to press upon you
(in particular) the consideration either of his high advancement, above the
state of Mortality and misery, or of GODS peculiar right, to do with his own
as he will, Matthew 20.15. Or man's common lot, which is always to be so
subject unto death, that the Hebreum nomen Methim per sceva: significat
mortales, per tzere: mortuos. Marian. Annot. in Deuteronomy. 2 34. and Lorinus in
eundem locum. Tom. 1. Com. in Deu. p. 106. col. 1.
word in the Hebrew (which in English is rendered men, Deutr. 2.34. with the
various situation of two little pricks) signifies as (some observe) both
mortal or liable to death, and dead indeed. And when it is the general
condition of all mankind, it is held by the wise an Argument of Quis tam
superbae impotentisque arrogantiae est, ut in hac naturae necessitate (omnia in
eundem finem revocantis) se unum ac suos se poni, velit. Sen. de consolat. ad
Polyb. c. 24.
impotence or arrogance for any to expect a particular exception of themselves
or theirs.

Nor because his death was (in respect of the ordinary course of man's life)
unexpected or sudden, will it be requisite to commend to your serious
meditation, the saying of Stultissim^ sunt, qui de morte immatura quaeruntur,
Lactant. de Opificio hominis. ca. 4.
Lactantius, censuring the folly of those, who complain of deaths immaturity,
or the opinion of Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. cap. 53.
Pliny, That sudden death is the greatest happiness that can befall man.

It will be enough, if with the piety and prudence, (wherewith you were wont
to read such serious and sad discourses) you please to entertain this, which I
here present to your attentive perusal. And although it be thus now proposed
to common view, it is yours, by peculiar interest, and that two fold.

The one Natural in his name, and by his occasion, who (in part) by Nature
once was yours, but now by grace and glory is wholly Gods.

The other Moral, as from my self, who have a power, and hold my self
obliged in Justice to do you right herein, and in Gratitude to give some
public Testimony (in this kind) how much I am, and desire to remain upon
record

From my lodging at the Bishops head in Pauls-Church-yard, May 10. 1643. In
most faithful and affectionate endeavors your devoted Servant, John Ley.

IT is ordered this nine and twentieth day of April, 1643. by the Commit of
the House of Commons in Parliament concerning Printing, that this Funeral
Sermon upon Iam. 4.14. be printed by Christopher Meredith.

John White.

On the Death of the Worthy Gent. John Archer Esquire.
IF to attend upon this sable Hearse
Grief could break forth the language of a Verse,
Or that ought might be spoke, save sighs, and tears,
(Which this has taught us more then public fears)
Sorrow should learn to number words, and try
The measured smoothness of an Elegy:
But Im'e a natural mourner, and can keep
In Grief no method, without form I weep;
My Quill is drencht in Tears, Yet shall it truth
By Parts relate, and show his full blown youth,
Whose Life was plucked, like the more forward Rose,
Cause in it Rareness and Perfection grows:
His Autumn Virtues flourisht in the Spring
Of Days, And Harvest did his green Years bring:
So pure and upright was his hallowed breast,
As sin was not an inmate, Ill, no Guest:
His Passions wore his Livery, and All
Themselves his Servants, not his Masters call,
As Nature gave them to him, so did he
By Reason keep them under Lock, and Key,
His mind was a Republique fraught with store
Of Graces, not comprisedith' Indian Shore,
He changed no Virtue, by the change of Air,
Nor was he less himself, because less Fair,
Rome might scorch off some beauty from his skin,
But not imprint deformity within:
His Soul in Penitence was cins't betimes,
Not in Arrerage of some former Crimes,
And we may guess, by this uncalmed State,
Death came not for to punish, but Translate;
So does the tender Father stretch his Arms,
To rid his Babe from near approaching Harms,
Confines it to it is home, and makes it know,
Safetyes with him, not in the street below,
Man's but a wandering Child, a Plant whose root
Is raised to Heaven, and still must upwards shoot;
His Head unlike to Earthly Grasses, not found
Or cherisht in the bosom of the Ground:
If then our Friend, or Father, snatch the Clay
Wherein like Babes we insecurely Play,
And pull us from the storm which Clouds portend,
Shall we not kiss that hand, and thank that Friend?
It Is true, if by Arithmetic we count
Thy Glass of time (Dear Sir) many surmount
Thy Years, sin longer, but we will to thy Praise
Recount thy Acts, whilst others count their days,
And let men know, thy Talents waxed great
Before they understood of the Receipt,
Whilst some, oth' narrow passage cast their Eyes,
Thou rannst before, and so obtaind'st the Prize.
Hail then (Rare Friend!) and give us leave a while
To part from Thee, and view thy Funeral Pile,
Let us entombe thy Relics, and Survay
What things they are, which thou have flung away:
Sure knowing these unmeete to Grace a Crown,
Thou, with Elisha, throws thy mantle down,
As proving to us, that it is unfit,
That we to Heaven, should Earthly things commit.
What matter ist' if this discouloured Clay
Be streakt with spotts, and Perish in one day?
The speckled Panther has his breath perfumed,
His Entrails sweet, his skin is only doomed.
The outside of our House Dirt may pollute,
The insides' clean, and purchases repute.
Then let us judge thy Earthly parts to be,
The Emblems of a blessed Hypocrisy.
W. Ley, Iohannis Filius.

A MONITOR OF MORTALITY, In two Sermons.
JAMES 4.14. -- What is your life? It is even a vapor that appears for a
little time, and then vanishes away.
IT was the fault of our first Parents, ambitiously to desire a Divinity of
knowledge, and their posterity (for the most part) are as base, as they were
proud, contenting themselves with much less then belongs to their humanity,
being ignorant, not only of their immortal state in the future, but of their
condition of mortality in the present world, such have need to be catechized
with this question of St. James, -- What is your life? and because the most of
them know not, what reply to return unto it, he makes the answer for them
himself, in these words, It is even a vapor.

If you ask again, what is a vapor? The answer further shows you, that it
is such a thing, as is next to nothing, rather there the appearance of a thing,
then any solid reality, and that not a permanent, but a passant appearance,
even as a vapor which appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.

First of the Question.

-- What is your life? Which is very considerable both in respect of the form
and of the matter of it. I forget not how Phylosophicall Heroalds assign them
their places, giving the precedence to matter (by order of nature) but that
must be taken in a right degree of Comparison, matching the next matter and
form together, for so the form is educed out of the power of the matter, and
by consequence comes after it; but a general and remote form (as this frame
of words, as they are interrogative) is before the particular matter, the life
of man enquired of in it. First then of the words, as they are formally a
Question not of any trifling or small matter, but of a matter of great moment
and importance.

For the former, we find it frequent and familiar in the Scripture, to minister
instruction, by way of interrogation or question: as in that excellent Sermon
of our Savior upon the Mount (whereof S. Matthew makes repetition in the
fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of his Gospel) teaching Christians what
confidence they ought to have in his providence, he demands, Is not the life
more then meat, the body then raiment? Math. 6.25. Behold the fowls of the
air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barnes, yet
your heavenly Father feeds them: Are you not much better then they? ver. 26.
Which of you (by taking thought) can add one Cubite to his stature, ver 27. If
God cloth the grass of the field (which to day is and to morrow is cast into
the Oven) shall he not much more cloth you? ver. 30. and (to the same
purpose) is the 7th Chapter. What man is there of you, who if his Son ask
bread will give him a stone? and if he ask Fish will give him a Serpent? ver.
10. I give you these few instances for many; and I shall give you two reasons
for all.

The one is to stirre-up your attention to a due consideration of that which is
put to the Question: for there is an Emphasis in such a form of words, more
then in a plain Proposition whether affirmative or negative.

The other is this, if the party (to whom the Question is proposed) be able to
make answer to it, it puts him to bethink himself of it, and to like it the
better (when he has made it) not only, because it is (as he conceives it)
true, but because (as he knows it) it is his own.

We shall not do any thing unbeseeming the gravity and sadness of this
Assembly, if we bring down the observation, Applic. 1.
to a use of Instruction of little children (by way of question and an answer)
commonly called by the name of Catechizing: and that, according to the
original Text, Gal. 6.6. which exactly rendered runs thus, Let him that is
(...)
Catechized, communicate to him that (...).
Catechiseth him in all good things. This excrcise (where it has been
conscionably and constantly practiced) has made such little ones, so great
Proficients in the knowledge of Religion, that therein their gray headed
grandfathers have been but children unto them, and were it more in use, both
privately and publicly, we should find more fruit of our public labors, then
now we do, for the heads of Catechism (as they are called) would make a body
of Divinity, by which as by a pattern of wholesome words, 1 Timothy 6.3. the
ordinary hearer might be the better enabled, to make trial of his teacher, and
might be so firmly established in the faith, that he should not be like those
children, of whom the Apostle says, They are tossed too and fro and carried
about with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait, to deceive. Ephesians. 4.14. They would be a
stock of holy treasure, whereby they might be readily furnished for religious
discourse, upon good occasion, and in fit company: (for all seasons and
societies are not convenient for it,) and the questioning of the younger sort
(before the ancient) would be a good means to teach them that, which they are
ashamed otherwise to learn, though any way of learning, were better then such
ignorance, as is in them, who (out of a thousand Sermons) cannot repeat so
much, as is contracted and brought together in a little Catechism, and the
reason may be, because what is committed to catechized Disciples, is but as
lent money, which must be repayed, or returned again, when they are questioned
about it, whereas what is delivered in a Sermon, is taken for the most part,
and by the most as free gift for which the receivers are not to be called to
any account, and of which no payment is expected from them.

Have we not then just ground of complaint, Use
against such, as have brought so profitable a practice (wereby our people
might be soundly grounded, in sacred knowledge) not only out of use, but out of
credit too, so as if it were some base and beggarly rudiment, and could not
(without indignity to the discipline of the Gospel) be continued? The cause of
this dislike and disdain (besides the inconsideration and negligence of many)
has been an over-high estimation of it in some, who have set it up above the
preaching of the Word, and that so far, as for it to put down the
afternoones Sermon, and some (to cry quittance with such contempt) would
excummunicate Catechizing out of the Church, and yet both pretend the
edification or building up of the people in Religion; strange builders they be,
(doubtless) who either refuse the foundation of Catechisticall grounds, or
admitting of the groundwork permit not the super-structure of preaching to be
placed upon it, but since authority has restored the Sabbath to its right of a
double service, from the Pulpit (so that the sacred seeds-men are allowed
(according to Solomon's counsel) In the morning to sow their seed, and in the
evening not to let their hand rest, because they know not whether shall prosper
this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good, Eccles. 11.6. It were
to be wished, that the other service were resumed to ordinary practice, and if
any have so far Idolized it, as, (in a blind zeal unto it) to blaspheme
preaching, Mr. Prin in the Epist: Dedicat: before his first part of the
Antipath: of the Prelacy. Ep. page 13.
saying that expounding of the Catechism is as bad as preaching, we must not
(for all that) revenge the wrong done to it, upon that exercise which is of so
good use to edification, as has been showed, but as we keep up the reputation
(both of prayer and preaching) though some have cried up the one, to put down
the other, so should we uphold the practice of preaching, and catechizing, as
useful assistants the one to the other, both being ordered (so as in pious
discretion they ought to be) so as may most promote the glory of God, and the
salvation of souls, and with this we may well conclude the form of this
Question, and so proceed to a consideration of the matter of it, and of that
first in General, then in Particular.

The latter will fitly fall into the handling of the answer; (to which I will
reserve it) and for the Former, it may minister unto us an Observation, for the
moving of grave and serious questions, such were those of our Savior before
cited, out of his Sermon in the Mount, to which we will add another of his, of
a matter of more weight and moment then the whole world: It is that in the
16th. of Mat. 26. What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world and
loose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? which
imports, that if there could be such a bargain made, that a man might have
the whole world for the sale of his soul, he should (for all that) be a looser
by it; for he might (notwithstanding) be a bankrupt, a beggar, begging (in
vain) though but for a drop of cold water, to cool his tongue, Luke 16.24.
for prevention of which loss and distress, the Apostle multiplies many
material questions, (in Emphaticall manner) concerning the means, viz. an
utter estrangement from communion with the wicked, which he presses in this
sort, What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? what communion
has light with darkness, what concord has Christ with Belial, what part has
he that believes with the Infidel? 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.

In such Questions as these is always somewhat presupposed, expressed, or
prepared, whereby the hearer may be bettered since they are good to the use of
edifying, Ephesians. 4.29. and (that they may be so to us) we will now make some
application of them, and therein we shall first address a direction and
admonition for material and profitable inquiries, and then a reproof to vain
curious and wicked Questions.

For the first, it will be matter of great advantage, Use 2.
for a prosperous passage to our Land of Promise, to have in readiness, a
catalogue of such Questions, as may most conduce to quicken, our consideration
and care both of our present and future state, and by them (every day) to
catechize our selves in some such manner as this.

What is my Constitution? whence mine Original? whither (by dissolution) shall
I be drawn or driven? am I not composed of a mortal body, and of an immortal
soul? was not that (at the first) from the dust? and shall it not at last be
resolved into dust again? and my soul immediately derived from God, infused
by creation, and created by infusion into my body? and of much more value not
only then it, but then the whole world besides? what is it that uniteth them
together, is it not the breath of life? and what is that either breath or life?
is it any better then a quick vanishing vapor, at least vanishable, every
moment? And when it is vanished, and my soul separated from my body, whither
goes it, what becomes of it? is it not put into a state (whether of woe or
welfare) immutable? and the lot of an happy or unhappy change, answerable to
the choice of an holy or unholy course? And though by death my body be not only
vile and loathsome (both to sight and sent) but far asunder from my soul,
whether it be in Heaven or Hell, (for though Hell and the grave have both one
Sheo^.
Name, the regions of darkness and of the first and second death are at a very
great distance) will it not become by concomitance perpetual partaker of the
same condition with my soul, whether it be carried by the Angels into
Abraham's bosom, or hurried by the Devils into the infernal pit.

Thence will fitly follow the question of the converted Keeper of the Prison (I
say keeper of the prison rather then of the prisoners, for they were
miraculously enlarged, their bands loosed, the doors opened by God for their
deliverance ( Act. 16.33.) What must I do to be saved? and must I not (as he
was presently taught) be saved by my Faith? by Faith in the precious blood of
the Son of God? And does not that Faith engage me, to love him above all
either things or persons, and that love oblige me, to keep his Commandments?
even to the denial of my desires, and delights, were they as dear unto me as
my right eye or right hand? to the laying down of my life for him, as he did
for me, and the renouncing of my nearest friends, Licet parvulus ex collo
pendeat nepos, licet (sparso crine and scissis vestibus) ube a (quibus te
nutrierat) matter ostendat, licet Pater in limine jaceat, percalcatum perge
Patrem, siccis oculis ad vexillum crucis evola Hieron. ad Heliodo^u^. Tom. 1 p.
2.
when they show themselves to me most affectionately friendly? to take up his
Cross, though I should be sure to sink under it, as low as the grave? and is
it not my duty and his due (having saved me from death) by dying for me, that I
should serve him in holiness and righteousness: all the days of my life?

And (besides my daily devotion to him) do I not owe him, the solemn service
of a weekly Sabbath, in his Sanctuary? and when I come to the place where his
honor dwells, should I honor him as hypocrites do with my lips, and keep
my heart far from him? does not he know the secrets of my soul, better then
any one knows, either my body or my raiment which is most in sight? and does
he not hate hypocritical eye-service as a mere mocking of him to his face?
And should not I make his Sabbath, such a delight unto my soul as not only
not to be weary of welldoing, in the duties of the day, but to long for the
return of it, in the revolution of the week? Is not his word more precious
then thousands of gold and silver, in taste more delicious then the honey and the
honey comb? and are not the dainties of his Table, his flesh for meat, his
blood for drink, a more refreshing and satisfying Feast (without cloying
satiety) then all the variety of Vitellius his Table, though furnished with no
fewer then Suet. in vita Vitel. Chap. 13.
9000. dishes at a Meal.

And after these Quaeries of Piety, that we may without halting, and with
uprightness and integrity, walk in the duties of both Tables, it will be
requisite, that (for the practife of Justice and Charity) we pose our selves
with such inquiries as these.

Ought I not to do unto all men as I would have all men do unto me? And is
not this the sum of the law and the Prophets? Math. 7.12. would not I be
pitied, comforted and succored, were I in any distress of mind, of body or
estate? Would I not (if I had offended another) rather have the wrong remitted,
then pursued to revenge? And (if another had offended me) would I not wish that
he should offer himself to reconciliation with me? Would I be spoiled or
defrauded of my right? reviled to my face, reproached, or rashly censured
behind my back? Such Questions as these (taken first and last, like a
physical receipt for the soul, to which you may add more of your selves, and
some more pertinent to your own particular condition) if by serious
consideration put close to our consciences, and pressed home to a full
resolution and conclusion, would make us better Christians in the Church,
better Subjects of the King and State, better neighbors in City and Country,
better members of the family (under any of the occonomicall Relations, of
husbands, wives, parents, children, masters or servants, hosts or guests) then
commonly are to be found in the societies of men. To these directions moral
reason gives her consent and suffrage, as we may observe in the saying of
Cicero to Si haec duotecum verbareputasses, quid ago? respirasset cupiditas,
and avaritia paululum. Cicer. Orat. pro Quintio.
Nevius. If thou had put this short Question to thy self, what do I? or
what am I about to do? thy concupiscence and covetousness, had not made such
post-haste, to the prejudice of another man's right.

Now from our direction (in putting interrogatories to our selves) we must
turn to correction, and reproof of those, who either make no enquiries at
all, or make them amiss, not of things material and useful; for the former
sort there are diverse who constantly forbear, that which the Apostle (but in
some cases) forbids, that is, asking of Questions for conscience sake, 1 Cor.
10.25. never communing with their own hearts, as the Psalmist counsels,
Psalm. 4.4. nor examining themselves, as the Apostle prescribes, 2 Cor. 13.5,
they will have the more to answer for one day, and the less to answer for
themselves, when their own consciences, which by their sensuality, and Satan's
subtilty are laid a sleep, shall be awakened, to witness against them at Gods
Tribunal, where when they shall be particularly questioned, as Cain was, Genesis
4.6, 7, 9. They will not be able to answer one of a thousand, Job 9.3.

Now for those who question amiss, some are impertinent, some trifling, some
curious and presumptuous, some distrustful, some blasphemous Questionists: for
the first sort, they are such as are busy and inquisitive into such matters as
most concern others, but themselves little or not at all, a spice of this
inquisitivenesse appeared in Peter, John 21. when he put the question
(concerning the beloved Disciple) what shall this man do? ver. 21. To which he
received a round reply (by way of reproof) If I will that he tarry till I
come, what is that to thee? follow thou me, ver. 22. In this fault Peter has
many followers; for what one of the worthiest of the ancient Fathers complained
of (in his time) is a part of many men's practice in every age. Curiosum genus
ad cognoscend^m vitam alienam, defidiosum, ad corrigendum uam. August. Confess.
lib 10. cap. 13.
There are a sort of men, says he, who are curious in their enquiry into other
men's lives, and careless in correction of their own; and I would to God there
were not many such almost in every place.

The second sort are such as the Apostle takes notice of, and gives warning to
beware of them, and their questions, calling them foolish and unlearned
questions, Tit. 3.9. 2 Timothy 2.23. though there be some who pretend (if not to a
Monopoly, yet) to a Prelation of learning and (in ostentation of it) show
themselves (such as Stapleton called Bodin) Bodinus magnus nugator Stapleton
orat. contra bujus te^poris politicos.
great triflers, such are many of the Schoolmen, who in their disputes, when
they should soberly propose, and discuss material and profitable Problems in
Divinity, move and solve many very foolish, and some very ridiculous questions,
whereof I could give you a Catalogue, but that you would look upon it, as a
list of too light a color, for the funeral habit I now wear. Luther (in
detestation of their vain jangling, and doting about questions, as S. Paul
phraseth it, 1 Timothy 6.4.) with some transportation of spirit (after his manner)
used an immoderate Meiosis of them, which was this, Prope est ut jurem. nullum
esse Theologum Scholasticum, qui unum caput Evangelij intelligat, praesertim
Lipsensem. Luther. Tom. 1 Oper. lat. Ep 47.
I had almost sworn (said he) that there is not one Schoole-Divine, especially
a Lipsian, who under stands one Chapter of the Gospel, or of the Bible, and if
his passion and opposition in Religion, made him an incompetent Judge of their
dictats, you may abate (in your belief) as much as you please of the severity
of his censure, yet those that read his works, and the chief Doctors of
their SchoolDivinity, may find cause perhaps to consent with Erasmus (a man of
a calmer spirit, and acknowledged by two Popes, Adrian the 6th and Leo the
10th) for a Son of the Roman Church, Lutherus ta^tusest ut plus erudtar, and
proficiam ex lectione unius pagellae Lutheranae quam ex tota Toma. Loc Com ex
Luther. operib. clas. 14 f. 50.
who professed that himself profited more, by one little page of Luthers
writings, then by all the School doctrine of Aquinas, whom Papists admire, if
not adore, as an Angelical Doctor.

The third sort are such as make presumptuous inquiries into, and encroachments
upon divine Counsels, prying into the Arc of Gods privacy, with such a busy
and curious inquisitivenesse, as if they would with a pick-locke rifle the
Cabinet of his most reserved secrets, and break open every Seal, to find out
that, which he would have concealed from all eyes. This is a branch of that
pernicious curiosity of our first Parents, where to they were tempted by the
Devil, and which first thrust them upon a breach of Gods prohibition of the
tree of Knowldge, and afterward, thrust them out of Paradise, and so from the
fruition of all other fruits, wherewith it was variously and abundantly
furnisehed; and hence also (for satisfaction to overcurious Inquisitours) are
those audacious determinations, concerning men's lives and fortunes, by the
calculation and casting of nativities, and it was doubtless from the Devil
that Saal consulted with the devil by the witch of Ender, 1 Samuel 28.8.

To these presumptions, questions must be sorted, such as that which (some say)
was proposed to S. Angastine, vi^* What did God before he made the world? To
which the answer was as sharp, as the question was saucy, viz. Proesul ad baes
Lybicue, fubricabat Tartara dixir, His, queis serutari talia, mente juvat.
Georg. Sabin. Poet.
That he made Hell for such curions questionists, as he that moved that
question.

The fourth sort of offensive and faulty inquisitiours, are those that show
more love to themselves, then faith in God, perplexedly and distrustfully
demanding, What shall we eat, and what shall we drink, or what shall we
put-on? Mat. 7.25. humane care and providence I confess is subordinate to
divine, and that so far, that he that sleights his part in obedience to God,
forfeits Gods part of beneficence to himself, and to his, whether person or
estate, and incurreth the severe censure of teh Apostle, He that provideth not
for his own, especially forthose of his own house, he has aenyed the Faith,
and is worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. Yet he provides ill for his soul,
who makes a mixture of diligence and difference in provision for the body.

The last and worst sort are thole blasphemous and Atheistical questionists,
who in a deriding manner ask, Where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3.4.
but especially such an one, who asked of a Christian in scorn of Christ.
Theod, l. 3. c. 18. Sozom l. 6. c. 2, Osiand. Epit. Cent. 4. l. 3. c 3 4
Paraeus et Cornel. alop. in Mat c. 13. v. 55
What is the Carpenters Son doing to day? who returned him an answer, as
witty as the question was wicked, He is making a Coffin, said he, for the
funeral of Julian, and his answer proved a Propheey, for (within a very little
while after) he was marked out for the Coffin by an Arrow from Heaven, which he
thought to be shot by Christ himself, whom he took for his Antagonist, and
confessed he was overcome and conquered by him.

Thus larre the question, now the Answer, It is even a vapor, etc. And this is
a kind of definition of it, but rather Rhetorical, then a Phylosophicall,
rather Metaphorical then proper; There is much ado among the Philosophers
(especially betwixt Cardan and Scaliger) how to define it, this vapor (as the
Apostle calls it) may be vanished away, before a man can relate and poyse the
several opinions upon it, and resolve which has most right to put the rest to
silence, for the present it may suffice, which is most received, and that is
this.

Life is the Act and Pigour of the soul, and of it is Organ or Instrument the
body, while they abide united together; Of this life, the principal proof and
preservative both, is breathing, therefore when God gave life to the first
humane body (formed of the earth,) he is said, to breath into his nostrits the
breath of life, Gen, 2.7. And when he takes away the breath, man dies. Psalm.
104.29. And this breath is called a vapor, and a vapor is called halitus a
breath, and as a vapout is soon vanished, first appearing, and after a while
disappearing (to speak answerably to the words in the (...)
original) so the breath is easily stopped, and then the living creature
lives no more.

If I keep to my Text (and it has given me no cause to forsake it) I must
present you with a very plain and well known observation upon it, which is,
That the life of man is very short, Doct.
and not more short then uncertain: If you tell me you know this already. I
shall readily confess it, and you cannot deny, that neither your work nor
ours is done, when we have taught and you have heard, what you ought to know:
for your knowledge must proceed to practice, and your practice commonly comes
so slowly on, in what you know, that many times the notions which are most
familiar to your understandings are the greatest strangers to your practice, to
which there is more ado to persuade you, then to instruct you; and yet for
matter of instruction, I doubt not, but we shall tell you, somewhat worth your
notice, which most of you know not, or if I should bring you no new thing for
the matter, I should hope (though treating on the old theme of death) to keep
life in your attentions: for (as Eadem quae didicisti ita doce, ut cum dicas
nove, non dicas nova. Vinc. Leren contra beres. cap. 27.
Vinc. Lerenensis notes) the difference betwixt new for the matter and new for
the manner, the latter may be both profitable and acceptable; without the
former, when known matter is set forth, in a new mould or manner of handling.

And yet again I know not, why ordinary things (especially of necessary use)
should loose their acceptance, because they are usual: for what is more
constant and continual then the vicissitude or alternate course of day and
night, of action and rest, of refreshing by diet and sleep? yet no man thinks
they return too often, and to keep close to our present Argument, it is both
often observed, and much commended in a great Philip the Father of Alexander.
King (the father of a greater) that he was well-pleased every morning to hear
in the same words a Monitory of Mortality, for his readiness for death, which
might either steale-in, or rush-in upon him every moment. And that a man may
do that wisely, which he can do but once, and which precludeth, all
retractation and remedy, if done amiss, a wise-mans life has been defined (by
a principal Plato apud Cel. Rhodigin. lib. 19. cap. 8.
Philosopher) to be a meditation of death, if so, it will be no prejudice (I am
sure) to your prudence, to attend with patience, while I deliver you, not in
any very long speech, some necessary notions of that, which after a short
appearance passes away.

The shortness of life (Vapour-like) has various expressions in the
Scripture, It is compared by David to a fading flower, Psalm. 103.15. to a
fleeting shadow, Psalm. 144.4. and by Job, to the passage of a Weavers shuttle,
Job 7.6. and here, (you see) to a vanishing vapor, which we must (for reasons)
refer.

First to the prime and most predominant cause of all things.

Secondly to inferior and secundary causes subservient to his purpose, and
providence.

For the first, as God is the Author and giver of life, Genesis 2.7. 1 Samuel, 2.6.
so gives he the measure of it in what proportion best pleases himself, unto
Methuselah he made a very large measure as taken out of the whole piece of
secular duration, and to some he allows but a snip of time, as to David's Child
who lived not to receive the Seal of Circumcision set upon him, as under the
Gospel many by the Ministry of the Midwife are borne once, but tarry not to be
borne again by our administration of the Sacrament of Baptism, though it
require no adjournement to the 8th. day, as Circumcision did, and of himself,
says the Psalmist, thou have shortened my days, Psalm. 89.45. even to the
narrow measure of an hand-bredth, Psalm. 39. v, 15. and this he does by his
Power as a Creator, and by his Office as a Judge, rewarding sin with death,
Romans 6.23.

2. For secundary causes, (besides sin, deserving death, and provoking Gods
Justice to hasten it upon sinners (though to some death be sent in have, as an
invitant to a feast, not as a Sergeant to arrest) they are within us or without
us.

Within us, Diseases and distempers in the humors and Passions.

Without us, Poisonous Malignities, wrathful hostilities, and casual mishaps.

The gate of life is but one, the posternes or trap-dores of death are many, I
may call them so, for a man is taken (by death) as by a trap, and that such a
one as catches suddenly, kills certainly, and holds fast what it takes
hold of.

1. First for the causes within us, to begin with diseases: It is above 2000.
years ago, that (as Ante bis mill firm annos, 300. morborum, etc. Erasm.
Chiliad, Proverb. dulce Bellum inexpert. p. 298.
Erasmus said in his Chiliads) there have been reckoned up, 300. Names of them,
and there be many under one Name, many Namelesse, which pose the Physicians,
not only how to cure them, but how to call them, and then they give it their
pass under the name of the New disease, and pass it will for they cannot stop
it.

Of these though many feed upon nature by degrees and sometimes also without
noise, as a moth eats into a garment, some suddenly destroy it, as a fire
does a faggot of dried Thorns, for diverse dye with very short sickness, and
some without any sickness at all, we have daily experience of various
descants, made (by death) upon this narrow ground of an handbredth, as David
measures the life of man, Psalm. 39.5. We see some grownd with the Stone, some
smitten down with the Epilepsy, or an Aposteme (or as the Vulgar miscall it,
Impostume) which secretly and insensibly gathered to an head, may break in a
moment, and stop the breath of man's bosom, or stifle the spirits of his
brain, some blown up with the Colic, or Iliaca passio, some eaten up by a
Consumption, some by a multiplication of Pherecides of the Island of Syros dyed
of a great quantity of Lice. Aelian var. Hist. li. 5. c. 28.
Creeping vermin, and some drowned with the Dropsy, some burnt with a Fever:
And some of them are such Epidemicall malignities, against the health and life
of man, that the Chambers of death are enlarged, and great and wide caves to be
dug (for more room) where the dead are piled up (as Sampson said of the
slaughtered Philistines) by heaps upon heaps, Judge. 15.16. while fair and
spacious rooms, above ground are empty, for want of living guests, to lodge in
them; yea such desolations have been made among men by devouring Postilence,
(as Thucidides and many other Authors have left upon Record.) that the living
have been scarce left enough to bury the dead.

2. And for the affections and passions of the mind, the distempers of them are
no less deadly to some, then the diseases of the body, we will instance in
Love and the contraries to it Envy and Wrath, in Hope and Fear, in Sorrow and
Joy.

1. For Love, we find the Church sick of Love to Christ, Cant. 2.4. and we are
sure that Christ dyed for Love of his Church, Ephesians. 5.25. and that Love which is
moerely humane, has (by experience) proved mortal to many, what David wished
to have suffered for Absalom, saying in (the pangs of his excessive Love unto
him) would God I had dyed for thee; 2 Samuel 18.23. to the same have diverse
actually exposed themselves, sometimes by deadly adventures, for their friends,
sometimes with their friends, to which danger, nothing induced them, but mere
Love unto them, but it is more ordinary for men, and women both to dye of the
excess of this passion, upon defect of enjoyment, so might Ammon have done
when he fell sick of longing for Thamar, if Jonadab his carnal friend, but
spiritual enemy, had not (for the recovery of his body) advised the ruin of
his soul, 2 Samuel 3. v. 2, 3, 4. And what was but fabled in the Ovid in his
Fable of Iphis hanging hunselfe, for love to Anaxarets. Cumforibus laquei
religaret vincula, summis Inscruitque caput. Metamorp. lib. 14.
Poet of Iphis, laying violent hands on himself, (to the taking away of his
life) through impatience of his Love, has been often tragically acted, by
diverse, whose love to others (for want of reciprocation of affection from them,
and of grace and reason to rule it) has turned to a deadly hate against
themselves. And where that affection is answered, it has proved as deadly in
excess, as in defect of fruition, especially when degenerated from Love to
lust, which is too familiar in the familiarity of different sexes; as is
observed by Philosophers in Birds, Beasts and Men, for Birds they note in
Sparrowes, that they are very short lived by their frequent coition, especially
the male kind, which Plin. Hist. not. lib. 10. cap. 36.
they say commonly lives not above a year, and for the same reason, do Mules
(which are barren and engender not) much outlive Asses and Horses, for they
sometimes lived to the Idem; lib. 8. cap. 44.
80 h. year, but these seldom attained to half that age, the ordinary
measure of their lives Arist. Hist. Animalium, 11.6. cap. 22.
being 30. years, and what effects this affection works in the flesh, (when
it is too fleshly) Solomon partly shows, Prove. 5.11. where he forewarneth the
wanton, of the consumption of the flesh, by that means, whereby though death
approach, with a slow pace, yet it breeds a disease, more painful then death,
more shameful then hanging, and sometimes kills as suddenly as the sharpest
Sword when it is thrust to the heart; whereof the Plin. Hist. cat. lib. 7. cap.
53.
Natural Historian gives (for instance) the example of Cornelius Gallus, (who
had been Lord Praetor) and of T. Aetherius (a Roman Knight) both dying in the
very act of unchastity.

Contrary to Love are Envy and Wrath, yet as if they were reconciled for man's
ruin, they both concurte with it to impair his health, and to hasten his
death.

Envy is a disease in the inward parts, fretting asunder the heart strings,
and eating into the very bones, Prove. 14.30. which how unjustly soever set
against another good, (for the dislike of that whether it be in deed or in
appearance sets it on work) has in this respect some affinity with justice,
since it joyneth the -- Carpitque and carpitur una suppliciumque suumest. Ov Met
punishment and sin together, for while an envious man repines at others, he
pines away himself, and so is Eliphas his saying made good, upon him to his
hurt, Envy slays the Idiot, Job 5.2.

Of Anger he gives the same deadly sentence, in the same place, which is
sometimes executed on the sudden, not only by a transient violence upon
another, but by an immanent vehemence, upon the person of the Angry, as a
Magirus against Galen, Phi. 1.6. c. 16.
late learned Philosopher shows, confuting the opinion of an ancient and
famous Physician, and wondering that he holds otherwise, and the reason he
gives of this deadliness of Wrath, is because (says he) it forces the
vital spirits out of the heart, without which a man cannot live.

Hope is another passion under which man is many times passive, for hope
deferred makes the heart sick (says Solomon, Prove. 13.12.) and if utterly
disappointed, it turns that sickness to death, for as the Proverb has it,
but for hope the heart would break, so the hope being quite lost, the heart is
not likely long to hold out, especially if the object of hope were a matter of
moment.

Fear has likewise a deadly force upon feeble spirits, for Causa multis
moriendi, suit morbum suum nosse Senec de brevit. vitae. ca. 18. pa 180.
some have dyed for fear they should dye, as a Gentleman at the siedge of S.
Paul in France, Bishop Hall of Chistian moderation. li 1. Sect 14. p. 158.
fell down stark dead, in the breach without any stroke or touch, save what
his heart gave him, by a fearful apprehension of danger near hand.

For sorrow, how killing a passion that is, we may learn by the plea of Judah
with Joseph, for the reducing of his Brother Benjamin back to Jacob; It shall
come to pass (says he) when he sees that the Lad is not with us, that he
will dye, and thy servants shall bring the gray hairs of thy servant, our
Father, with sorrow to the grave, Genesis 44.31. which though it usually kill by
degrees, inward grief wearing the heart as tears do the cheeks without, yet
sometimes it is such as slays outright upon the sudden as Charron of
wisdom, lib. 1 cap. 31. page 103. 1 Samuel 4.18.
some have observed, and this appears by the holy story; for that was it
which smote old Eli to the heart, before he fell down, and brake his neck: for
when a Messenger from the Wars, brought sad tidings (of the victory of the
Philistimes, against the Israelites) he fell backward and broke his neck, upon
the mention of the taking of the Arc, which is particularly noted in the Text,
1 Samuel 4.18. (as the worst part of that ill news) and which set such a sad
weight of sorrow upon his heart as bore him down to the ground, from whence he
was never able to rise again.

If any passion or affection be a friend to nature it is Joy, yet that may
prodigally dissipate the vital spirits, as the story of the Queen of Sheba
shows, 1 King. 10.5. and what enemy more deadly then that, when (as Plin.
Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 53.
Pliny notes) a Woman that thought her Son dead at the Battle of Canna, dyed
with an excess of Joy at the sight of him, could she have sped worse in the
midst of the Battle? Ibid.
so did Sophocles and Denis of Cicely, being overjoyed, upon tidings brought
unto them that they had won the best prize among the Tragical Poets.

Besides the diseases of the body and passions of the mind within a man, which
in their excess do violently chase and force the soul out of its rightful
possession, there come upon him many killing mishaps from without, for very
small matters, may be of great moment to hasten the dispatch of death. There is
an In Nubia quae est Ethiopia, sub Egypto venenum est cuj^^ grani unius decima
pars, hominem, vel unu^ granum december homines, etc. Dan. Senect. Hypomnem. Phys.
Hypom. 2. cap. 2 page 47.
Ethiopian poison, whereof one grain will kill a man in a moment, and being
divided into ten parts will kill ten men in a quarter of an hour, and as man's
life is a vapor, so he whose breath (if he would have formed it into a doom
of condemnation) might have been deadly to many had his breath stopped, his
life taken from him by the vapor or sent of a new white-limed Chamber.

It was Hier. Epist. Tom. 1. page 40.
Jovianus the Emperor and the Bucholz. Ind. Chronol. Iud. Chronol. ad An.
1574. p. 638.
Cardinal of Loraine was lighted to his lodging, and to his long-home both at
once, by a poisoned Torch, and a less thing then a Torch, a Candle, less then
a Candle, the sent of the Snuff of it, may put a Woman into Plin. not. hist.
lib 7. cap. 7.
an untimely travail, and put her to pangs of Childbirth, and of death both
together.

The second general cause of man's short and uncertain life, is bloody
hostility, for there are many men of blood and Belial, and some are so mad upon
desperate adventures, that as the Wise man says, they lay wait for their own
blood, they lurk privily for their own lives, Prove. 1.18. but more for the
blood and lives of others, who say unto their associates, Come with us let us
lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause. ver.
11. We shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with
spoil. v. 12. who (out of greediness of gain) take the life of the owners
thereof. v. 19. and as out of greediness of gain, so out of envy, as in the
Apology for Herodotus, the Author tells of a little Child who killed his
Brother, because the Mother of them both proferred him (as Joseph did Benjamin
before the rest of his Brethren) giving him a better, or greater refection of
m^ate, then to himself: which we may the rather believe, by that we read in
Quintil. Instit Orat. lib. 5. cap. 9.
Quintilian of a Boy, who was naturally so cruel, as to make it a pastime,
with a sharp instrument to pluck out the eyes of Quails, for which he was
condemned by the Aecopagite Judges: And by the observation of Aug. confess. l.
1. c. 7.
Augustine of a little sucking Infant, growing pale with envy to see another
(such an one as himself) to be his partner, in the milk of his Nurses breast.
Jealousy of the Wife of the bosom, has the like operation for kind, but for
degree of indignation, it goes far beyond it, and for danger it as much
exceeds it, as a man in wit and strength overmatcheth a child; so much is
signified by Solomon, Jealousy (says he) is the rage of a man, therefore he
will not spare in the day of vengeance, he will not regard any ransom, neither
will he rest content, though thou give him many gifts. Prove. 6.34, 35. and
the Devil who was a murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8.44. and as anciently
a deceiver, as a murderer, (for his first murder had as much of the subtilty
of the Serpent in it, as of the sting,) so blindes the minds of men, sometimes
as to make not only the passions of men, the motives to these bloody
mischiefs, but to engage their consciences unto it, so far as to make them
conceive it a service acceptable to God, (and so as bound in conscience to
perform it) to kill his best servants, so much our Savior himself has
foretold, Joh. 16.2. and his saving by the powerful imposture of the destroyer
has been often fulfilled Cent. 16. Ofiand. Epit. cent. l^ 2 ca. 2. part. 1.
page 115.
from that time to this.

In the last precedent Centurie we have a prodigious example, of his
fanguinarie seducement, in an Anabaptisticall Enthusiast, killing his own
Brother, in the presence of his Parents, as an imitation of Abraham's offering
to sacrifice his Son. Isaac, Genesis 22.10. God was pleased with the offer only,
and forbad the act, v, 11, 12. but the Devil that red Dragon, as he is called,
Rev. 12.3. delighting in the effusion of man's blood, drove on the delusion of
his fancy, through his conscience, affections and will to the execution of his
hand.

All this while I have said nothing of the mortality of the Sword, in the
prodigal effusion of blood by war, which to that of single slaughters, is
like the flowing of the Sea, to the running of the channels, whereof heretofore
we have taken notice, only by hearsay or reading, and I wish I were put to it
to make you apprehensive of it, only by memorandums out of ancient and foreign
wars, as of the Carthaginians and Romans, or the Turks and Scythians, or of
the Frenchmen and Spaniards, the Spaniards and Hollanders, the Swedes and
Imperialists, or if we must have our part in that more then brutish malignity,
(For the rage of beasts never bestrewed either Land or Sea with so many dead
carcases as humane hostility has done, nor was it ever so permanent in time as
either to muse much upon mischief before they do it, or to retain a long
remembrance of it after it is done?) that it were betwixt English and Irish,
Protestant and Papist, but we have lived to be so unhappy, as to see death
riding furiously upon his red Horse, with his great Sword in his hand, as he
is described in the Rovel. 6.4. and under his Colors, (who is the most
Catholic General swaying in all Armies in the World) English against English,
Protestant against Protestant, killing one another, first in a set Battle
Kinton where the Battle was, is in the veil of the Red-horse, of the shape of
a red-Horse cut out of a red Hill by the Country people, Cambd: of
Warwickshire in his Britan: p. 561.
in the vale of the Red-horse, and since in several places of the Kingdom,
and yet, (like unconverted Saul's) we breath out threatenings and slaughter
against one another at home, as if we had no enemies abroad, and that with such
deadly bate and spite, and in such sort, that if the God of peace be not
pleased, to take up the quarrel, the issue of English and Protestant blood,
may swell up to the Horses bridles, for 1600. furlongs, as the measure is
observed, Revel. 14.20. come to pass which cannot be without many instances
pertinent to my Text, for how soon do many men's lives (in a Battle) vanish
like a vapor, their last breath mingling with the vapor and smoke, and their
dying groans stifled, in the hideous noise, of roaring Artillery.

And if we hold on in the practice of these mutual massacres of one another,
we may become so hardened against both Christian charity, and common humanity,
as to make but a sport or play of thrusting Swords into out fellows sides, as
we read of Abners and Joabs Soldiers. 2 Samuel 2. v. 14, 15, 16.

The third general cause of contraction of man's life is casual mishaps; which
are so many, as we may well say of them, as Plin. not hist. lib 7. cap. 57.
some do of diseases, that they are innumerable: I will give a touch of some
few particulars, to which your own consideration [and it may be experience
also] may add many more, if a man do but offer to stir out of doors, where
sin lies (as was said to Cain, Genesis 4.) there death will be, as if there
were such an inseparable society betwixt them, as Ruth professed unto Naomi,
Ruth 1.16. (and indeed the league betwixt sin and death is much more firm
then that) Idem, lib 7. cap 53.
Emilius Lepidus did but hit his toe upon the doore-sill, and though the hurt
were so far from his heart, he died upon it. If a man get safely out of
doors, it may be he shall not live to come in again: a beast chased and chafed
by the driver may gore him to death, and there are diverse instances of this
kind; or a drunkard worse then a beast, mocked by wine, and enraged by strong
drink, as Solomon says, Prove. 20.1. (for it deludeth the fancy and raises
the passions to fury) may fall upon him, as if he meant to sacrifice him to
Bacchus, or in the streets a tile from an house, as a piece of a Millstone
thrown from a Tower (which broke the skull of Abimelech, Judge. 9.53.) may
smite him suddenly dead. The like deadly blow light upon the head of a
Scholar, by the Purchase. Microcosm. p. 190.191, 192.
falling of a letter of stone from the battlements of the house of the Earl of
Northampton near Charing-crosse, while he was a spectatour of the funeral
solemnities of Queen Anne, Mother to his Majesty that now is.

If he travel, a stumble, whether on horseback or on foot, may so lay him
along on the earth, as if he were to take measure of his grave, whither, after
one remove, follows a commitment to close prison, there to remain, until the
great Judge of quick and dead release him.

If a man stay within doors, as conceiving (according to the ancient saying)
his house is his Castle, his life may (there) many ways be betrayed to death;
for a violent wind may blow down the house upon his head, and overwhelme him
as it did Jobs children, Job 1. and as in the reign of Stows Chro. continued by
How p. 130.
K. William. 2d. 606. houses were blown down by a Tempest in London. At his
Table death may be in his diet, for a Reyson stone stoned Plin. Not hist. cap.
53.
Anacreon to death, a millstone could have done no more; and an hair in a mess
of milk suddenly strangled Idem. Ibid.
Fabius, could death have made more haste or done him more hurt with an halter?
There may be death in the Cup, for there may be a Fly in it, and a Fly has
been the death of ( Fox Martyr. vol. 1. page 265.
him, who takes upon him much more then belongs to man) the Caiphas of Rome
Pope Adrian the 4th. Is there not then good cause (to give but a passant
advertisement by the way) that we should not fall to our meat, as an horse to
the manger, or a Swine to the trough, before we have begged the blessing of God
upon what we are to eat, and that we take mannerly leave of God, when we have
done, giving thanks to his goodness, not only for his allowance of the good
creatures (for out nourishment) but for a comfortable use of them, that they
have not become unto us, as the Quails to the Israelites accompanied with
deadly wrath, when the meat was in their mouths, Psalm. 78.30, 31.

To draw toward a summary Conclusion of this great Arithmetician, who brings
in the final account and number of all our days, and makes such an exact
reckoning of them, as no man can control, we cannot but (by experience of all
times, persons and places) acknowledge, that as a great Plin. Not. hist. l. 7.
c. 57.
Philosopher losopher and Historian observes, though there be an infinite
number of signs that presage death, there is not one known, that can assure a
man of certainty of life and health.

Nor is there any Prescription of time to be pleaded against this King of
terrors, as death is called, Job 18.14. no time unseasonable for his
surprizall, no night so dark, but he can hit the mark, no day so bright that
we can discover his coming toward us, if he will steal in upon us at
unawares, we shall neither hear his feet of wool, nor see his arms of steel,
but shall feel him happily, when we do not fear him, and receive a wound from
him, for which no cure can be had of any.

No business so serious, that can cause him to adjourne his arrest, until
another day, nor is there any more hope of escape from him by art or flight,
then there is of conquest of him by contending by fight: This is the only King
against whom there is no rising up (as Agur phraseth the most absolute
predominance, Prove. 30.31.) to make resistance against whose absolute Monarchy,
by no humane power or prevalence may be pretended.

If any, it must be either the Prerogative of Kings, or the vigorous and
cordial Antidotes of Physicians; but not the former, for the mortal sy the is
master of the royal Scepter, and it mowes down the Lillies of the Crown, as
well as the grass of the field. Nor can the Physicians (though called in as
Advocates or Champions in the cause of nature, to aid and protect it, against
this great warrior) prevail any thing at all, to preserve it from death:
their strongest Cordialls are against him, but as stubble to the great
Leviathan, Job 41.28. Nor can they so much as save themselves, though by their
art they profess the saving of others. Nay (as it were in scorn and contempt
of medicines) death suddenly snatcheth them away, when they are applying their
preservatives, or restoratives to others; as is storied of Plin Not. Hist l. 7.
c. 53.
Cajus Julius a Surgeon, who dressing a sore eye, as he drew the instrument
over it, was struck with an instrument of death, in the act and place where he
did it.

I have hitherto showed you the causes of man's mortal mutability, and
exemplified the shortness and uncertainty of his life, in so many instances,
not meaning here to take up, and set up my rest: for though man's life be a
vapor that soon vanishes away, I would have the observations of this vanity,
to be like the distilled Rose Water, which comes down from a vapor, and drops
into the bottle, and is there preserved for especial use, and my desire and
prayer now is that (as it is in the 32. of Deutronomy) My doctrine may dropps
as the rain, and my speech distill into your hearts as the dew, as the small
rain upon the tender herb and as the showers upon the grass, Deuteronomy. 32.2. in
a present application.

And I shall apply it many ways, for it may serve,

1. As a spur to our dsligence.

2. As a whip or scourge for our negligence.

3. As a check to vain confidence.

4. As a curb to concupiscence.

5. As a prop unto our patience, so far my devotion to this service would
proceed, if my discretion told me I might expect your patience so long, it
growing now so late.

For the first, Applic. 1.
if our time and state in this life be as short and uncertain as a vapor, and
that vapor be but an appearance of a thing, rather then a thing indeed, and
that appearance after a while soon vanishes away, how diligent and watchful
should we be while it is present (which is all the time of action allowed unto
us) to employ it and improve it to our best advantage for the future? Humane
prudence will prompt us (while we do enjoy it) to make as good use of it; as
possibly we can, and religious policy will stir us up, to present expedition,
and not to put off (until to morrow) the performance of any good thing, which
we may do to day (for at the next puff of breath, we may blow away our life)
but to use all diligence, in doing of good, while we have time, as the Apostle
admonishes, Gal 6.10.

We have some examples (of moment) though most contrary in themselves, yet
tending to this very end, viz. to show where the time is but short, the
endeavor must be great, to make it serviceable to most defirable ends. Our
Savior of himself, for our instruction and imitation has said, I must work
the work of him that sent me, while it is day, the night comes when no man
works, Joh. 9.4. By day is meant the time of life, while the vapor appears
(like a bright cloud, Mat. 17.5.) and by night the time of it is vanishing away
by death, wherein all things (that had life, and have it not) are be-nighted and
wrapped-up in darkness, yet there is betwixt the literal and figurative day
and night, this difference to be observed; that the days and nights have
usually their turn in a proportionable measure of In some places there is six
months day together and six months night together. Plin Not. Hist. l 2 c. 75.
length and shortness, which mutually and interchangeably succeed one another:
so in our ordinary Clymats, and in the extraordinary too, where the day So in
places of 50 degrees of latitude.
lasts from the 10. of March, till the 13. of September, that is the space of
187. days (of our account) the night is as long and no longer: but our day of
life, may be but the length of a few hours, or which is much less minutes; our
night of death, when we cannot work may be an age of many hundred years, and to
some it has bin some thousands already, besides there is no night natural but
is succeeded by another day, so that if any thing be left undone, there may be
opportunity to redeem the time, and to make amends for precedent neglects, but
when the night of death is come, there is not another day to follow it, and to
make supply for former failings.

It behooves us then (while it is day with us) to be so much more intentively
bent upon the business that belongs unto us (which is to work out our
Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. wherein we work the work of
him that sent us, as our Savior did) as we have the less time for it, such
was his diligence, and therein his example should be our rule, and upon the
same ground, he that is most opposite to our Savior (even the great destroyer)
uses double diligence, and makes all the have he can to out-work the children
of light, in a quick dispatch of deeds of darkness, His wrath is great,
because his time is but short, Revel. 12.12. he is enraged so much the more, as
by the shortness of time, he is the more restrained, for that he cannot do so
much mischief as he would do, and if he had more time, he might do.

We should (out of love) desire to be like our good Lord and Master Christ, and
out of duty do as he (for our imitation) has done before us, and we should
not (for shame) sit down in sloth, while Satan goes about (with all the haste
and speed he can possibly make) to devour whom he may, yea our diligence
should be much more then his, since our business is a great deal better (I
mean not that which most do, but that which all should do) and our time much
shorter, both for that which is past, and that which is to come.

For the time past he has bin busy at his work for some thousands of years
already, and yet may be for some hundreds more to come, he may have time to
bestirre himself in his trade of temptation.

But for our time, for what is past, it has bin but short, and that which is
to come may be nothing at all, to us, the next hour (for ought we know) may be
none of ours.

Secondly, as this consideration of our transient life may serve for a spur
to make diligent, so it may be in stead of a rod for the negligent, who
endeavor not to make any good use of their time, while they have it, to whom
may well be applied the saying of Non exiguum tempus babemus, sed multum
perdimus, non accepimus vitam brevem, sed fecimus, nec inopes ejus, sed prodigi
jumus. Senec. de brevit vitae, c. 1. page 165.
Seneca, which is, That they have not received so short a portion of life
(though it be very short, even like a vapor) as themselves do make it, by
their prodigal and careless expense of it.

Whereof one great part is cast away in doing nothing, as in our sleep and
infancy; another we trifle out in mere childish vanities; a third is partly
misspent in youthful luxury; and a good part of the fourth is called a
Reformation, if the humor be changed, from dissolute excess, to covetous
desires, and worldly cares for riches and honors; and when either sickness or
age, makes men unserviceable for themselves, to such ends, that little which
remains is poorly employed on that, for which the whole measure (if it had
gone all one way) had bin little enough.

For what time or pains can be too much, to save our souls from hell to estate
them in Heaven (when we die) and to unite them and our bodies both, in fruition
of perfect grace and glory for ever, which must be procured while this vapor
appears or not at all; who that thinks of the excellency of that jewel,
which our Savior advances in value, above the price of the whole world, of
the ineffable felicity, which God has prepared for those that sincerely love,
and diligently seek him, can conceive that the whole life of Methuselah, would
make too long an apprentiseship (though under many such hard masters, as Laban
was) to obtain an eternal freedom, in the City of Jerusalem which is above?
For my part I cannot sufficiently admire the beneficence of Almighty God, who
sets so great happiness, at so low a rate, that in that little time, while a
vapor appears, a man may purchase the obtainment of a most solid and ever
during felicity: Nor the folly of most men, who of this short and uncertain
measure, employ the least part of it, to so excellent an end.

If a man having his lands divided into four parts (answerable to the four
fingers of David's hand-breadth of life, Psa. 39.5.) should leave one part of it
wholly untilled, to bring forth nettles, or other wild weeds, as the field of
the sluggard does, Prove. 24.31. and should sow in one of the other three parts
Darnell, in another wild Oats, and allot but a fourth for pasture and tillage,
when the whole (if well husbanded) would be little enough, for necessary
provision to support himself and his Family, what would his neighbors think
or say of him? Would they not note him for such an one, as either yet had not
proceeded to the age of discretion, or were gone beyond it to years of dotage?
or relapsed back to a second childhood.

Or if a man who (has a charge of wife, and children, and servants) and but a
competent portion for them all, did carelessly cast away one part of his means,
at dice, puff away another in smoke, swallow down another in superfluous
draughts, and leave but a fourth part of all (for all other charges that
concern himself and those that are committed to his keeping) would wisemen
judge any otherwise of him, then as a man of an empty skull, or ill-tempered
brains, and unfit to have an estate committed to his trust? though but for
himself, much more unfit that others should be put to depend upon his care or
forecast.

Doubtless (beloved) it is much more foolish to mis-spend (as most do) the
greatest part of this short and uncertain scantling of time, then so to
mis-imploy either lands or goods, and yet their folly is more faulty, then
these examples do imply: for the fourth part of the ground is a permanent
thing, and the fourth part of the estate, may be put into a sure hand, and so
be better employed by others, then by the owner it would be: but he that has
wilfully and wickedly wasted, three fingers of his hand-breadth of time, as we
have noted the measure of it (out of the Psalmist) cannot be sure that either
himself or any one for him, shall be trusted with the fourth for better use.

Of such foolish men as these, there are so many, that if the outside on their
backs, were suited to the lyning of their heads, they would make as great a show
in public Assemblies, as yellow weeds do in Corne-fields, but they go in
habits like other men, and some of them so far beguile the world, and
themselves both, as to be thought much wiser, then they that bestow the most of
their waking hours, to better purpose. Thus I have bestowed the Rod, according
to the sentence of the Wiseman upon the back of fools, Prove. 26.3. and Chap.
19.29.

3. The third Use of this short uncertainty of our State of mortality is, to
give a check to the vain confidence of many men, who (as if they were sure of
time enough) to pursue their pleasures and purposes, with as full scope and
compass as they desire, project many things, which they mind to do, and
promise and sometimes threaten, what they will do, when they know not whether
their measure of time will reach home to such resolutions.

It is too great boldness to presume upon one day, for (as Solomon says) A
man knows not what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27.1. The drunkard takes upon
him (when he invites his vicious associats to excess) to promise at their next
meeting, their cheer will mend upon them, and they shall have more store, of
that they most desire, Come (says he) I will fetch wine, and we will fill our
selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as to day, and much more
abundant, Esa. 56. ult. What er'e be to morrow it may be to morrow thou shall
not be, or not as to day not pouring in superfluous draughts, but vainly
begging (perhaps) for necessory dropps, with the rich-man in flames, Luke
16.24. for of all lives none more uncertain, then a drunkards, since he stores
up a stock of corrupt humors, which are matter and mother and nurse to many
deadly diseases within, and from without he meets (many times) with an untimely
death, either by his own or another wrath, for strong drink is raging (as we
observed before out of the Proverbs of Solomon) and that rage may be bloody to
him happily from that hand, which led him to excess, as many examples show, or
by the unsteadinesse of head on horseback, or staggering of his feet on
ground, he may be dashed upon some deadly danger, and who has not heard of
many, who have some of these ways unexpectly perished, and come to a fearful
end, before they thought they had proceeded to the midway of their walk.

But there is a confidence, (so much more vain then this (though this I
confess be more vile then it) as it reaches further in extent, as of those
whom S. James notes, in the next words before my Text, reproving them saying,
To day and to morrow we will go to such a City, and will tarry there a year,
and buy and sell and get gain, whereas you know not (says he) what shall be
to morrow. Jam. 4.13, 14. To day or to morrow (say they) we will go, if God
say no, neither to day nor to morrow shall they be able to make good their
word, for so short a time, a dark night of death may, (if God will) put an end
to their days, before Noone, or (the next night) their souls may be taken
from them, as was said to the fool in the Gospel, who flattered himself,
with the hope of enjoyment of much goods, laid up for many years, Luke 12.19.
And when they project a journey (if they dye not so soon) they may be disabled
for travail, and either by sickness or lamenesse, be under so imperious and
peremptory arrest, that they may not be able to move either a foot or finger
toward it; they say they will continue there a year. But

The farther they reach out their resolution (of themselves) without reckoning
with God, the worse: and it may be in a moment they may be removed, they know
not yet, whether to Heaven or Hell, they will buy and sell the while (say they)
but say God give them leave to live, it may be he will not enable them to
traffic, they may be cast into such condition, as they may have either no
mind, or no means to exercise commerce: but they promise that and more too,
they will not only buy and sell, but they will get gain, how know they that?
they may buy and sell and (as the Proverb has it) may live by the loss,
finding nothing but damage, where they looked for advantage, and it may be a
damage unvaluable, unrecoverable, the loss of their souls, and of Heaven,
which the gain of a million of such worlds as this cannot countervaile, nor
once lost can ever recover.

Beyond both these vain, and vile boastings (for the time to come,) was that
bold and bloody speech of Esau, wherein threatening his brother Jacob, he
promised himself a pleasing revenge, The days of mourning for my Father, are
at hand, then I will slay my brother Jacob, Genesis 27.41. an insolent as well as
a violent resolution, for Isaacks and Jacobs life and his own likewise were
all at Gods disposal, as a vapor, to vanish or hold out as long as he
pleased, and it was at his choice which should dye first; and though he were so
hard-hearted, as to purpose his brother should wait upon his Fathers funeral,
in blood, which he would not follow with a tear, it was in Gods power to keep
his hands from being as blood-guilty as his heart, and to cut him short of his
hand-breadth, and to lengthen their measure as long as he listed.

There is a Proverb, (which oftentimes proves a truth,) That threatened men
live long, for even Isaac who dyed soonest lived about 50. years beyond this,
and it is as true without a Proverb, that threatening men may dye soon; that
others may live, not only the more safely without hurt, but the more securely
without fear: of such the Prophet David has fore-faid, that they shall not
live out half their days, Psalm. 55.23. nay it may be not half a day: (for
how soon is this vapor of life vanished away) or if they be suffered to run
their race to the utmost length, it is but as the Amorites were suffered to
make up the measure of their offenses to the full.

If then such wicked thoughts, for sinful plots (in time to come) arise in our
hearts, let us give them the check, in some such words as these; What do I
mean to project, and forecast for sin afar off, and to fore-speake an
evil purpose, and (as it were) to threaten God before hand (for every sin is
an actual affront of his Majesty, and every fore-purposed commission against
him is in effect a commination of him) when my life is but a vapor, and so
much in Gods disposal, so little in mine own, that I should promise to do
nothing, but with the Lords premised leave, as the Apostle taught in the Verse
next beyond my Text, You ought to say, if the Lord will we shall live, and do
this, or that, Jam. 5.15. The like limitation to this precept, you may observe
in S. Paul's practice, Act. 18. 1 Cor. 4. 1 Cor. 6.16. Heb 6. and Socrates (the
wisest of the Heathens) taught Alcibiades to be so mannerly in his language
toward God as to use the like (...) Socrates to Alcibiades.
reservation of his will and prelation of it before his own, if this phrase
were familiar in our mouths, it would not only give present repulse to any
evil purpose, for the time to come, but would be a powerful charm, against
the return of it, and indeed a man dares not say, of any future sin, I will
commit it, if the Lord will, for if he so far respect the only unerring rule,
the will of God, as to make respective mention of it, he cannot admit of any
notion against it.

The 4th. Application of this transient uncertainty of man's temporal life, may
be a curb to immoderate concupiscence, and doting delight in worldly things,
whether Riches, Honors or Pleasures, which are the three great I dolls of
carnallminded men: for why should any one much set his heart upon them, either
in longing for them or taking too much joy in them, when so small a matter as
the want of an empty complement, congey or gesture of reverence, may so
imbitter many temporal contentments, of the choicest kind, and of a very high
degree, as to make them vanish into nothing, even before the vapor of a man's
breath and life be vanished away, as the history of Haman shows, whose
temporal delights were but as a vapor, by his own confession, of shorter
continuance then his life, Esth. 5t. from the 10th. verse. to the 13. though
that were shortened by a penal execution, c. 7. v. 10.

And if they should hold out, as long as a man lives, they were not worthy of
that estimation, that many worldly men have set upon them; but when a man's life
vanishes as a vapor and they vanish before, how foolish a fondness is it, to
let loose our affections toward them? and to fix them upon them, when evil
days and years may come, wherein we shall take no pleasure in them, as
Solomon says, Eccles. 12.1. but so much pain (perhaps) as may make a man so
weary of life, that the passionate expostulation of Job may be applied to his
case, Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life to the bitter
in soul? which long for death but it comes not, and dig for it as for hid
treasure, which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad, when they find the grave,
Job 3. v. 20, 21, 22.

But to the particulars, first for Riches, If a man were so rich as he would
say he has enough (as few rich men will do, for most men's covetousness is
like a Dropsy, which makes a man though he drink never so much, to be ever
thirsty) yet to say nothing of the uncertainty of riches, noted by the Apostle,
1 Timothy 6.17. which (as Solomon says) make themselves wings, and fly away,
Prove. 23.5. without taking leave of the owner, and leaving nothing but the
print of talons in his heart, to torment him, they cannot avail to prolong the
continuance of this transient vapor, nor can they adjourne a man's removal, to
his long-home, whether to Heaven or Hell, for one day, no not for an hour; for
Death is such a rigid Sergeant, as will not be bribed, by the richest Mammonist
to put off his Arrest, witness that rich and wretched Cardinal and Bishop of
Winchester, and Chancellor of England, Henry Buford, (in the Reign of King
Henry the sixth) Fox Martyr. vol 1. page 925. Col. 1^
who perceiving he must dye, and that there was no remedy, murmured at death,
that his Riches could not reprieve him till a further time; for he asked,
Wherefore should I dye being so rich, if the whole Realm would save my life, I
am able either by policy to get it, or by Riches to buy it, fie (quoth he)
will not death be hired? will money do nothing? No, nothing at all on this
side the grave, for a rescue or reprieve from death, and beyond it, below it,
(as far as Hell) the money that would buy the whole Vintage of wine, throughout
the whole world, will not purchase a drop of water to cool an hell-scorch'd
tongue.

Secondly, for Honor, as the moral Philosopher says, it is not in the
honored, but in the honourer, and not in words of praise, and gestures of
reverence, which may be presented in hypocrisy, or with derision, but in the
opinion of the head, and affection of the heart: and who can certainly tell,
what men think of him, how their hearts are disposed toward him, and if he
know them (for the present) to be such toward him, as he desired, how fickle
are men's fancies and favors, how soon changed from reverence to contempt?

He has read but little, who has not met with many instances of this kind, in
sacred histories and profane, and observed little (if not very young) if he
have not noted some, in the experience of his own time; besides, who knows
not, that many men have been honored with eminent Titles and Offices, for
that, for which such as are truly worthy (in whose acceptance is the truest
and surest honor) have abhorred them; and if they have been conferred, as the
reward of virtuous persons, (and so they should be, or they are misplaced) how
much envy watches over them, to find some means to bring them under, and how
potent that quick-sighted, and sharp fanged Malignity is, we may guess by the
question of Solomon, Who is able to stand before Envy? Prove. 27.4.

If any man say, this may be the condition of subordinate Honor, as of the
Favorites of Kings, but that which is supreme is so excellent, that as some
have said (with as much cruelty as vanity) that for a Kingdom they would wade
up to the chin in blood, I answer.

First, That, were the Honor of a King as permanent as eminent, yet what we
have said before may be of use and force (as we propounded it) to us, for how
few Kings are there in the world? and who among many millions of men so mad, as
to hope he shall be a King?

Secondly, There is not that comfort in Kingly Honor which most conceive: for
many times their Crowns (as he said that was the most ancient and learned King
James.
King of that age wherein he lived) are lined with Thorns, (as allied to that
on our Saviors head) and some have said, that if the Ambitious did but know,
what stinging cares and fears accompany a Crown, they would not if it were
laid at their feet, stoop down to take it up.

And for those that account themselves most puissant and renowned of their
rank, who are Conquerours as well as Kings (though an hereditary or elective
right of Regality be better then a title by conquest, for that for the most
part it is no better then royal Robbery, and that is so much the worse, as
greatness of power is more obliged to the doing of Justice, and the defense of
the innocent from violent oppression) even they may have many times much less
honor then power, and may be ceremoniously reverenced, and heartily hated and
contemned.

And how great a contempt came upon that Alexander.
great Conqueror, when (his life vanished away like a vapor) after his death,
he fell short of the credit of a common beggat, which is to have the
deformities of his dead carcass covered and hid out of sight, by a decent
sepulture, for he lay unburied Aelian. var. hist. l 12. c. 64.
30. days together: his conquests (how far soever they prevailed above
ground) it seems they purchased him no title for habitation underground: And
our first William (surnamed the Conqueror) was in his last condition like unto
him, the vapor of his life, vanishing (like an unsavory snuff) in the
socket, left his body likely (for want of resting place among the dead) to be
an offensive spectacle to the living: for after diverse disappointments, it was
(not without much contestation mingled with reproach of his Royalty) interred.

And how might it humble the mightiest Monarchs, and take off their too
pleasing apprehensions of their own preeminence (if flatterers would give them
leave) to think, that their lives, (as they are men,) which are the basis to
bear up their Honors, (as they are Kings) are but vanishing vapors, for
though their Pardons be Antidotes against the killing letter of the Law, to
their delinquent Subjects, they are no less subject to death, (as we have
observed before) then the meanest peasant in all their dominions. And then must
their Honor be laid in the dust, and he that could reckon 127. Provinces under
his command (as Esth. c. 1. v. 1.
Ashuerus did) must have all that compass so shrunck up into such a
Senechdoche of a part for the whole (as to himself) that for many thousands of
miles in all manner of dimensions, he shall have but about 7. foot sepulture
for his part, and that not as a possession, but as a prison, and withal so
strait that he can neither stir in it, nor get out of it.

But that which most blemisheth and indeed blasteth the Honor of Royal
Majesty, is that the corruption of their nature is not kept down, either by
Laws or reproves, but rather cherished, and increased by flattery, which
makes Princes so much to mind their dignity, and authority as (many times) to
forget their humanity, yea so far to forget it as to lend a willing care, to
such out-lashing tongues, as lift them up above the Angels, whom God therefore
in just indignation and disdain of their pride, makes inferior to worms.

Was not that the condition of Herod's degradation, Act. 12. 22.23
Who (when he was arrayed in rich apparel, which by refraction of the Sun
beams lighting upon it, gave a most glorious splendor as Josephus observes,)
made an eloquent speech, and was cried up for it, above the skies, by popular
applause and acclamation, (as speaking with the voice of God and not of man)
and so became guilty of a sacrilegious thest of the divine honor, (as the
receiver is partaker of guilt with the Thief) because he did not restore God
his right, and give him the glory, wherefore he was suddenly smitten dead, by
the Angel of the Lord, and presently eaten up by worms, Act. 12.22, 23.

The Papists will tell us, there is an honor above all this, and that is that
of their High Priest, and Prelate of Rome, who is got so high above the heads
of Kings and Emperors, as to have their Crowns come under his feet, but they
cannot tell us, that their life is more certain then a vapor, which vanishes
so much the sooner, as they are commonly more stricken in years, before they
obtain the Papal Crown, and how frail a thing is that honor which is built
on a vapor, we have in part been taught already, in the Example of Pope Adrian
the fourth choked with a Fly, and another of that Name, (it was Hadrianus
sextus hic situs est, qui nihil sibi infaelicius in vita, quam quod imperaret
duxit, Onuphrius in vita Hadr. 6. page 360 col. 1.
Adrian the 6th.) was so far from finding a felicity in the honor and power
of the Papacy, that he professed (and it was made the Epitaph upon his Tomb)
That nothing had befallen him more unhappily in all his life, then that he had
worn the Triple Crown, and he might have very good cause to say so, and so
might all the rest of the purple Robe, since the papal condition is as Pope
Manu mensam percutiens, dixit non video quo nodo qui locum ^u^c altissi number
tenent, salv^r^ po^^^nt, Oaupnt to vita Macel. ^. page 398. col. 2.
Marcellus the second thought of it, uncapeable of salvation.

I may not now note the contempt of that Antichristian Caiphas, as he is that
man of sin and son of perdition, who (as such an one) is so odious to all
true believing religious Christians, that nothing is held more contemptible
then to hold communion with him, in that wherein he has departed from
communion with Christ, and his Apostles. The prosecution of that point is
fitter for another time then now, another Text then this.

Thirdly, for Pleasure, what voluptuous Epicure would so dote upon the delights
of this life, (as many do) who mind nothing else, or them so much, that it is
very evident they are of their number (whom the Apostle sets down as the last
and worst of that catalogue of wickedness in the last days,) viz. Lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3.4. and how could they be so fond
and foolish in their choice, and spend so much of that little, and uncertain
time they have, upon vain and many (doubtless) vile and base pleasures, with
such vehemence of affection, as to take it for a penance to them, to bestow one
day in sad, and sober consideration of the weightiest matters, that concern
their eternal welfare? how could they let loose the reins of their lusts, and
drive them on, in the furious pace of Jehu, and power them out, (as they do)
upon all objects of sensual satisfaction, if they did think, that they were as
uncertain as their lives, and their lives but like the vapor, which from the
pipe they puff out of their mouths and noses.

Alas how little room, and spare time is here, for so many meetings, for
feasting, for drinking, dancing, for gaming, and other prodigal expenses of
precious time? which if they knew what it were worth, they would rather rob
their eyes of sleep, that they might watch and pray in the night, then riot
and revell out their days, and sometimes their nights too, in sensual
pastimes, wherein their life may vanish like a vapor, and they (taken away in
the very act of some sensualty) A^ Gall^s and Ae^berius forementioned
may pass from transient pleasure, to permanent pain, which will be so much
more grievous to them, as they have been more addicted to carnal delights,
showing themselves lovers of pleasures more then of God; 2 Timothy 3.4. whereas if
they had loved God, more then their pleasures, they might have enjoyed God and
pleasures too, not while a vapor appears, which will quickly vanish away,
but for ever, for in his presence is the fullness of joy, and at his right hand
are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. v. 12.

The fifth Use of this vain and vapour-like life of ours, is to be a prop to
our patience, and so a cure of those unpleasing passions, of Anger, Envy and
sorrow, which (as I have showed before) do by their excesses much shorten man's
life.

To the two first, we may apply that of David, Fret not thy self because of
evil doers, nor be thou envious against the workers of iniquity, and the
reason is, because their time is but short, they shall be soon out down like
grass, and wither like the green herb, Psalm. 37. v. 72. And that though it
be green to day, may be dried up to morrow (as our Savior Christ makes the
comparison) Luke 12.38. and if their prosperity last somewhat longer, (as some
vapors vanish not so soon as others) what cause to be angry or envious for
that? when they cannot have assurance to hold out until the next hour.

If they think of the brevity and uncertainty of their time, they will not be
overjoyed in their own estate, if it were much better and longer then it is,
since their holding on from day to day, is but a daily reprieve from that,
which every day may come upon them. And if they think their death far off,
it will make nevertheless have, but much the worse speed, for none dies more
unhappily, then he that thinks himself happy while he is here, and thinks not
(how soon) by death he may be snatched away hence.

And for the third, it may much conduce to compose us to patience against
excessive sorrow under our crosses, whether they be such as affect us with pain
of sense or of loss. For the former sort, when they are sharp, we may the
better bear them, upon this consideration, that what is usually violent is
seldom permanent, and that while life it self is so short, as a vanishing
vapor, aggrievances cannot be long, for death is an end of them, as well as of
us, of us, as well as of our deceased friends, the loss of whom, (though the
greatest temporal loss that can be, for a true friend is as ones own soul,
Deuteronomy. 3.6. and a man's soul is more worth then a whole world, Mar. 8.36.) may
the better be born upon the consideration of our uncertain and vanishing
condition.

It may make much for the moderation of our grief, to think how little
distance there may be between our friends funeral and our own, if God have
taken them away, it may be we have lost but a little of our enjoyment of their
good company, for if they be dead to day we may follow them and over-take them
to morrow, and our vapor of life cannot sooner vanish away, then our souls
may finish their voyage, to the habitation of everlasting happiness, though
(as some make the measure) the distance from earth to the heaven be 500. years
journey (were it to be measured after the manner of ordinary travile) which is a
great way, on this side, the rest of the righteous.

We should not then think the loss so great, as if we had a long lease of our
own lives after theirs are expired, and a certain one too (as it was to
Hezekiah) for 15. years reprieve from death after the sentence of death had
passed upon him; and if we take off the conceit of our own continuance,
whereof the greatest part is happily passed already, we shall be disposed to more
patience at parting, with those who are most dear unto us, who when they are
dead, can receive no good by our sorrowful excesses, for as humane Moralists
can tell us (it is pity (by the way) that Christians should need to learn
moderation of Heathens) Parcamus lathrymis nihil proficientibus, facilius enim
illinos dolor iste adjiciet, quam illum nobis reducet. Sen. consolat ad Polyb.
c. 23. p. 18.
Immoderate grief will send the living to the dead and not restore the dead to
the living.

Now to draw to a Conclusion of that which will conclude us all in a narrow
room, and it may do it in a very short time, if our life (as S. James says)
and we have showed at large, be but as a Vapor which may evaporate, and vanish
in a moment, let us have the meditation of death so much in our minds, that we
may in our serious thoughts, anticipate the pace of it, though it be speedy,
and be prepared to meet with it at every step, whether within doors or
without, in all we do, whether we eat or drink, or work or rest, let us
still make account, we are upon our last minute, our lives being as uncertain,
as a candle carried in the wind without a lantern, which may be put out with
every blast: This consideration with the love of God, and fear of hell, will
keep us upright in our walk toward heaven, whither I would now by prayer
commend you and dismiss you, but that I suppose you expect some Comment upon
that dark and dumb Text before you, and if custom did not call for it (as a
matter of convenience) conscience and friendship would claim it (as a part of
duty) from me toward this worthy Gentleman deceased: I yoke them both
together, Conscience and Friendship, for friendship shall not engage me (if I
know it) to go one step beyond the limits, to which conscience does confine
me, though my words were of so much weight (with all that hear me) as not only
to redeem my friend (either living or dead) from an infamous report, but to
advance him to the high reputation of a Canonized Saint. If both the warrant of
Canonization of the Saint (as it is) and the honor were not Apocriphall, and
papally presumptuous, not idolatrous, as the Romanists make it.

And I think I may speak the more confidently of him, because I have known
him of a child, and his Progenitors both, before they were known to one
another.

In his minority, those that were conversant with him, saw fair buds,
hopefully promising ripe fruit of a good relish, when (by his years) it might
be seasonably looked for from him: and these hopes daily grew up to degrees of
further evidence; and assurance of his ingenuity, temperance, mildness,
modesty, humility, affability, and such a sweetness of temper, in his whole
behavior (adorning all he did) that he that knew him, and did not love him,
might be thought rather to bewray a disposition in himself, unworthy to be
believed, then any thing worthy to be disliked in him.

These virtues were but the groundwork, of those religious graces, for
obtainment whereof, his natural propension was happily seconded, by godly
education, and thereof a principal part was to fix and settle him in a firm
belief, of the true Protestant Religion, in opposition to Popery, prevailing
in those parts (and in the parts adjacent In Tanworth Parish in Warwick shiere.
where his much honored Parents dwell) who were most zealous and constant
Anti-papists, though living even among that crooked and perverse generation.

Being (by Gods blessing upon his godly breeding) habituated to a dislike of
that erroneous Religion, and of all manner of vicious conversation, especially
of vain swearing and superfluous drinking, from this goodness he digressed
not, no, not so much, as to let out a word of the one, or to let in a draught
of the other, though (when he was an Academicall Student) he sometimes
conversed with such of his age and rank, as were no Precisians in either, and
had both liberty and maintenance (as much as they) which had he not been very
well disposed in his affections, and well composed in his carriage, might have
induced him to some licentious exceedings.

When some further approaches of youth, toward manhood, and a fit opportunity
for travel into foreign parts, concurred, he might be the better trusted
abroad (yea even among those to whom least trust is to be committed, of whom
least truth to be expected (the Jesuits) and upon consultation with those,
who could give best advice for such a course, and by his Parents appointment
(to whose commands or minds (which way soever intimated to him) he was an
obsequious son) being sent beyond sea, he spent some years in foreign
parts, as far as Rome, making such observations of persons, things and
places, as might make him most sorviceable to his King and Country, so soon as
gravity of year as, had overtaken the maturity of his parts, to put them to
employment.

And herein surely himself first, and then his friends (who had most interest
in him) had very good cause to bless God for him, in that he left none of his
own goodness behind him where he sojourned, nor brought any of the dross of
other Nations home with him, as many, if not most young Gentlemen have
unhappily done, and this I could not but often observe, and always approve of
(as worthy of praise) that he well knew and observed the season and proportion
of speech, which he ordered so, as to keep it rather below his own knowledge
then to raise it above the belief of those that heard him: so far was he
from their opinion, who take it for the privilege of a traveller, to speak
rather that which is strange then true, because they that hear them speak
cannot prove they lie.

And in this as in many other graceful qualifications he much resembled, that
very accomplished Gentleman Sr. T. P. (his mothers Uncle) whom I much honored
in Person, while he was living (for his many good parts in himself, and his
favorable respect unto me) and (while I live) shall upon all good occasions,
revive his memory, by honorable mention, now he is dead: In whose death his
Country sustained a very great loss, which might have bin (if not wholly
recovered, yet) very much repaired in the sufficiency, and service of this
young Gentleman, if God had been pleased, to permit the bringing on of his
abilities, to their perfect accomplishment.

But he fixed a period there, where we made account but of a comma or colon at
the most, hoping half the sentence of his life at least, was yet behind, and
should not have been interrupted or broken off, in such have as it was, and we
grounded our hopes, on some precedent proofs of the divine providence, which
had conducted him safely through manifold dangers, both by land and sea, by
which thousands have perished, either in their progress from home, or their
home-ward return; and it may seem somewhat strange, that he that was so
charily preserved (among so many perils) should In London.
there miscarry, whither so many come (as to a City of refuge) for more
assurance of safety. It fell out much what so with Satyrus (the brother of S.
Ambrose de obitu fratris. Tom. 3. p. 16.
Ambrose) who returned from Affricke (by a very perilous passage (for he
suffered shipwreck and escaped drowning by swimming) within a while after his
arrival and return to his friends, fell sick and dyed among them.

And why was it thus good Lord? Why so as with this ingenuous and pious
Gentleman it has happened? Was it because thou ratest not age Non est quod
propter rugas, and canos putes diu vixisse. Seneca de vita beata, cap 1.
, by wrinckles and gray hairs, but by ripeness in virtue, and fitness for
Heaven? Or was it to show that thou can secure whom thou please in the
greatest peril, and that there is no security in recesse or retirement, but in
thy protection only?

Or did thou take him away, to take off humane confidence (especially of
young Gallants of his time, and state) and to abate of the pride of their fresh
and flourishing youth, showing them (in him) that their life and strength, and
beauty is but a vanishing vapor? Or knowing our Land is now more tempestuous
then the raging Sea (and perhaps the Tempest is not yet at the highest) Did
thou snatch him away, in thy favor to him, to set him in a safe harbor, in a
place of impregnable strength and security, where he might neither feel, nor
fear any danger, were the storm never so violent?

Whatsoever it was that has deprived us (who survive him) of such a sweet
associate of life, and so a fair pattern of virtue (the reason may be secret
to us, but unjust as from thee it cannot be) sure we are he is thine, and thou
may take thine own to thy self when thou will: And if thou would rather
put him into present possession of Co-heyreship, with thy Son, then reserve
him on earth to the expectation of the inheritance of his Father (though he
were none of those sons, who are sick of the Father) thy gracious dealing with
him, and his glory with thee, should make us rather rejoice for his gain, then
mourn for our loss, at least, meekly to submit to thy divine disposal, even
unto death, especially when it is the conclusion of a godly life, and the
introduction of a glorious state, which I doubt not to be the condition of his
departure from the society of men.

By what manner of death God was pleased to translate him to a better life, is
not (for the thing it self) much material to enquire, no more then in what
vessel, a man has bin wafted over the waves of the Sea, when he is safely
received into the Haven, or by what key (whether of gold or iron) he was let
into a place of most pleasant repose. Yet since it may be the desire of diverse,
to be informed in it, and all may, and some I assure my self will be the
better for it, I take it to be a part of my present service to give you thereof
and of some other remarkable matters, such an account, as though it be of
sickness, death, and distemper of body and mind, may be tempered into a saving
receipt, for the upholding of your spiritual health, and consequently for the
obtainment of eternal life, which may be this.

He was by his complexion (as I take it) naturally sanguine, accidentally
melancholy. In this Temperament he was taken with a disease, that has a name
of diminution, The Smallpox, which Spider-like has a venom more intensive in
degree, then extensive in measure, and which (as experience makes the
observation) is commonly a forerunner of a great plague.

Being in conflict with this disease, and nature partly suspended (by the
sadness and slownesse of Melancholy) it was not strong and quick enough, to
expel the poison to the outward parts, upon which (in the most hopeful
working of the disease) it should have been discharged: The same usurping
humor (for the right of predominance (in his constitution) was in that which
was natural) which slackned the pace, and operation of nature, was too active
of it is self in troubling the fancy.

Hence, and from some malicious and fubtle concurrence of Satan (taking the
advantage which the malady of his body and brain, then ministered unto him) his
tongue was wrought to bear false witness against Gods favor, and his own
welfare, so far as to utter some words favoring of distrust, if not of
despair of his own salvation.

Now that we may not mistake those words, as he did his State, and thence infer
some suspicion of his safety, it concerns us to take into serious consideration
these particulars, which may serve not only to right his reputation among the
communion of Saints, but to secure our own spiritual peace against the like
perturbations.

It has been usually a part of the Devils spite, and policy to assault those
most, in their sickness, whom he could least prevail with, in their health,
and to press upon them with most importunity, when he thinks he has but a
little time, to do a great deal of mischief. Therefore his malevolence being
the motive to his diligence, he has great wrath, because he knows he has
but a short time, Rev. 12.12.

And there is not only proof of it in divinity, but reason for it in
Philosophy from this maxim, Natural motion is more swift and violent toward
the end of it; now temptation is a transient motion, and since his change from
an Angel to a Devil, as natural to him as for heavy things to fall
downwards, therefore when it draws nearer the end, either his own end, or the
parties whom he desires for a prey, he will not creep like a Serpent to
deceive, but rush in like a Lion to devour, and thence it is, that the wicked
many times die quietly, like lambs, whereas the godly are put to many sharp
violent conflicts with him, both in life and death: for it is with the one
fort, according to the saying of our blessed Savior, Luke 11.21. The strong
man armed keeps the honse, and so all is at peace. But for the other he
stormeth out-ragiously to disturb his peace, because he is kept out of
possession, and the more happily, because he has little hope to possess so
glorious a prize: so that his fierceness is many times the effect of his
foil, as (in the 12. of the Revelation) when he was disappointed of his prey,
of the woman that brought forth a man child (she being carried by the wings of
an Eagle out of his reach, Rev. 12.14.) he cast out of his mouth a flood of
water after her, ver. 15. And when the Earth swallowed up the flood, whereby he
meant to have swallowed up both her and her child, he was wrath with the woman,
ver. 16, 17. because he could not satisfy his rage with their ruin.

Secondly, for further attestation of the godly's troubles, doubts and fears
of the favor of God, sometimes withholding his gracious countenance from them,
as if he did not mean to be merciful to them) we may produce as witnesses
unto it, the examples of two most renowned whether for Religion toward God, or
acceptance with God, Job and David.

First, for Job, how deplorable and desperate did his condition appear to be,
when he said, The Arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison thereof
drinks up my spirit, the terrors of God set themselves in array against me,
Job 6.4. and at the 16. Chapter, I was at ease (says he) but he broke me
asunder, he has also taken me by the neck, and shaken me in pieces, and set
me up for his mark, his Archers compass me round about, he cleaves my reins
asunder, and does not spare, he powers out my gall upon the ground, he
breaks me with breach upon breach, and runs upon me like a Giant, Cha. 16.
ver. 12, 13, 14.

What a tempest of temptation to distrust and despair, do these patheticall
speeches import, and his deeds evidenced a desperate distraction as well as his
words, when (as in a fit of spiritual frenzy) He took his flesh into his
teeth, Chap. 13.14.

Secondly, for David, how fearful was his distraction, how full of distrust
was he, when he thus complained, My heart is sore pained within me,
fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror has overwhelmed me,
Psalm. 55.4, 5. in the 77th. Psalm (whether it were a Psalm of Asaph, as the
composer of the Ditty, for he was a Seer or Prophet, and an inditer of Psalms,
2 Chronicles. 29.30. or a Psalm for Asaph, as a Musition to set it into Tune, or to
sing it, as the Title may be varied) The Psamist there shows, that himself
had been under a blackcloud, which ecclipsed the sight of Gods mercy from him,
when he passionately put forth such expostulations as these: Will the Lord cast
off for ever, and will he be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for
ever, and does his promise fail for evermore? has God forgotten to be
gracious, has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? verse. 7, 8, 9.

Of latter times, there are diverse instances of very religious Christians,
among whom have been some worthy Divines, who (for a time) have had their Faith
so fearfully shaken, as if it were ready to be plucked up by the roots, as
Luther that invincible Antagonist against the great Antichrist, who (after his
conversion) lay three days in desperation, as M. M. Perkins of spiritual
desertion, vol. 1. page 417.
Perkins remembers in his Book of Spiritual Desertion.

Where also he makes mention of one M. Chambers, who died in despair, saying
he was damned, Yet (says that judicious Divine) it is not for any to note him,
with the black mark of a Reprobate, for one thing (says he,) he spoke in
extremity, which must move all men to conceive well of him, which was, O that I
had but one drop of Faith; for by this it seems be had a heart to repent and
believe, and therefore a penitent and believing heart indeed, so far he, and
which may be an instance of much more moment, to fence our hearts against
final despair, and to suspend our censures of others salvation, when they
seem as lost, and forsaken by their heavenly Father; We have it upon
Evangelicall record, that our Savior on the Cross cried, O God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.46, Such words he uttered as man, when as God
(as agood Habes in conquerente reliclum se esse, quia homo est, habes eundem
profitentem Latroni, in Paradiso regnaturum, quia Deus est. Hilar. Can. 33. in
Math.
Father observes) he promised Paradise to the converted Thief, Luke 23.43.

Thirdly, Had this young Gentleman died, before he had been delivered from his
fearful distrust, I should have imputed those passionate words (which he
uttered) not to the disposition of his heart, but to the distemper of his head.

And in his head, rather to the lightness of his fancy (which is most easily
both moved, and misled, and which with memory and common sense, is familiar and
common to mankind with the beasts of the field) then to his understanding,
wherein man partaketh with the excellency of the Angels, and should have made
my conjecture of his death, by the antecedents of his life, (in the state of
health) which were such as if he had taken S. Paul's practice for his pattern,
which was so to exercise himself as to have always a conscience void of
offense, toward God and man, Act. 24.16. And such a life (as Non potest male
mori quibene vixerit, audeo dicere non potest male mori qui bone vixerit. Aug.
inoperib Tom. 9. de discipline. cap. 2.
Augustine or some other ancient Writer under his Name shows,) can never end
in a wretched death. He that lived well cannot dye ill, I dare say (says he
again) he that has lived well cannot dye ill.

Fourthly, But that we should make no more doubt, of his happy death then of
his holy life, God gave him a glorious victory over his violent enemy (as to
Luther in the place forementioned. M. John Glover Act. and Monum. vol 3. page
423. col. 2. Mistress Kath: Bretergh. See the Book: of her life and death. page
12, 13, etc. printed. 1617. M Peacock Fellow of Brazen-nose College Oxford,
page 25, etc. Printed, 1641.
diverse others of his dear children) for he gave him not only a just
apprehension of those wild words which (recalled to his remembrance when his
passion was becalmed) had escaped his lips, but withal such a detestation of
them, as to account them a rebellion against the promised mercies of Christ,
and such a resolution against them, that (in most emphaticall manner) he
professed, I will never rebel against thee my God any more, Never, Never,
Never, and being conscious to himself that this retractation of his was
cordially sincere, he said of it, with like affectionate expressions, Was there
ever such contrition? and so having recovered his comfort, and resolved for
death, (with assured hope of everlasting life) within a little while after he
gave up the ghost.

What now remains, but that his soul received by God his heavenly Father,
his body be committed to his earthly Mother, and the example of his life laid
up, as a Legacy for those that survive him, especially for young Gentlemen, and
great Heirs (as he was) that whether they live to possess, the Inheritance of
their Fathers below or not, they may (when they dye) inherit the Kingdom
prepared from the foundation of the world: for which Kingdom good Lord we pray
thee, daily to prepare us, and in thy good time bring us unto it, for thy dear
Son Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

FINIS.

