A DISCOURSE CONCERNING PURITANS. TENDING TO A VINDICATION of those who
unjustly suffer by the mistake, abuse, and misapplication of that NAME.

Vivere qui vultis sancte, discedite Roma,
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum.
MANTUAN. You who would guiltless be, depart from hence,
No guilt is here so black as Innocence.
The second Edition, much enlarged, augmented and corrected by the Author.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock, 1641.

To the Puritan Reader.
IF thou art such a one as do confess thy self a Puritan (as the name is
now unjustly used) thou will soon find in this short Tract, that my endeavor
has been to do thee right, but not to humor thee; to take off unjust aspersions
from thee, but not to insinuate by flattery into thee. An Ambidexter I would
not be in two contrary factions, by seeking to please both; neither would I be
a Neuter, if I could avoyde it: but in things where I dissent, I will depart
from both sides, rather then from that which I think the truth. I shall not use
the word Puritan factiously, as if all Puritans were alike to be embraced: but
cautiously, as if that difference and contrariety might happen amongst Puritans
in England, as did once amongst the Disciples in our Saviors own School.
Charity urges me not to censure any man in particular for an hypocrite, yet
wisdom teaches me not to free all men in general from being hypocrites: such
charity may well stand and agree together with such wisdom, and such wisdom
with such charity; but if I do not at all scruple any man's integrity, this
necessitates me not therefore to ascribe an infallibility: for if I can easily
yield to hope and think well of all Puritans, yet it ought not to be expected
that I should yield my consent to all Puritans in all things. I am free and
open in declaring my opinion as well against the rigorous and necessary urging
of Presbyteriall as Episcopal Government in all places, and at all times; but
I rely upon proof not mere fancy, and my proof being enervated by my
clearer judgment, it will be a pleasure to me to retract. Variety of opinion
and understanding (some say) has place amongst those glorious spirits in
Heaven, amongst whom no other kind of discord can have place: and even the
Apostles themselves though inspired by God, yet when they spoke not by
inspiration, they were not desirous to lead captive the beliefes of other
lesse-knowing men. Heat and acrimony amongst such as dissent in opinion has
done more mischief in the Church of God, then any thing that I can imagine
besides; and certainly it is not the mere love of truth, but some other
sinister respect that works thus violently in the minds of men so naturally
dim, as we all are. For why should I burn with indignation against another,
because he is less understanding then I am? or why should I so far presume
upon my self, if I think I am liable to error, as well as other men? can the
mere love of knowledge make me abhor ignorance more in another then in my
self? or make me arrogate more freedom from error to my self, then to other
men? Sure, truth has more affinity with charity then so, and charity with
humility. For my part, I do acknowledge my self not only subject to much
ignorance, but to much scandalous offense too; my greatest enemy shall not
charge me of more stains, then I will my self; I will confess my self the
chief of sinners, and that not only in regard of sins past, as perhaps Saint
Paul did, but also in regard of my present sinful condition; but certainly
since sin and ignorance are such things as cleave radically to all men, and
must be accounted sortis humanae; therefore to bear mutual reproves, and to
forbear all bitterness and censure, ought to be professed as virtues, and to
be accounted Sortis Christianae. And since I my self notwithstanding all my
other defects* do not glory in them, but confess them to my shame, and since I
do not malign the graces of God in rigid Puritans, but rather rejoice
thereat, I am persuaded, howsoever I appear to the eye of God, no man living
ought to despise me, much less to expunge me out of the book of life. If God
does not give me so much grace as he does thee, will thou say, He gives me not
that which he accounts sufficient? and if I am not in this or that so
unblameable as thou art, will thou say, my grace generally is not equal with
thine? if thou exceedest me in all other virtues, and yet art by me exceeded in
humility alone, will thou upon this proceed to censure me? Puritans have not
made themselves more inexcusable by any thing then by condemning other men: for
though they see not as God sees, yet they will often undertake to judge as God
ought to judge: and in this they have not been greater enemies to themselves,
then to the whole state of Piety and Religion. It does not appear to the
contrary, but that the Pharisee in the Gospel, of whom our Savior put his
case, might be a good man, and his cause might be good to praise God for not
leaving him to the scandalous excesses of some other men: but when he would
undertake to judge particular men, more righteous perhaps in Gods sight then
himself, we know what judgment he received himself. And if it be not lawful
to censure a Publican, much less will I censure a Pharisee, except alone in
that particular wherein he is himself censorious, and wherein our Savior
Christ condemns him: that doctrine therefore which I shall recommend to all
men both Pharisees and Publicans, is, to be Charitable, to be Humble: to be
Charitable, because they are Christians, to be humble, because they are men.
The Times have lately received a very great and wonderful change, almost
equal to that of Edw. the 6. and yet still there is the same use of Charity,
as was before. Lukewarmnesse that odious and nauseous bane of Religion was
hitherto decored and gilded over with the title of Moderation: but now we are
in danger to suffer in the other extreme, for Moderation that blessed
pacificall virtue is now likely to be as much debased, and defaced under the
title of Lukewarmnesse: Both ways Charity is violated, both ways Piety is
opposed: and what difference is it to Satan, if he prevail, by which extreme
he does prevail, whether he sinks us by a Tempest, or confound us by a calm?
For a remedy of all mischiefs then let us embrace Charity, and that Charity
may dwell amongst us, let us all learn to censure, despise, and abhor our
selves more, and other men less hereafter.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING PURITANS.
ITis a common Maxim amongst Politicians, that a State is maintained by
Accusations, but ruined by Calumnies: and therefore (says Marquess Malvezzi)
Happy shall the Subjects be of that wise Prince, which countenances
Accusations, and checks Calumnies: for the suffering of Accusations to go
less in repute, and Calumnies to get footing, has been the increase of
manslaughter, and the continuance of enmity in all ages. Many believe that
nothing which is done would be known, if this means of dispersing privy
calumnious speeches were not used, whereas little is known because it is used:
for falsehood constantly affirmed for truth, sometimes deceives, and when it
does not, but is known to be falsehood, yet it forces to some suspension of
judgment, and makes us yield some way even to that which we believe not. This
is most apparent at this day in this Kingdom in the Case of Puritans, for did
accusation and legal process take place, few crimes would be proved against
Puritans, and did not malicious calumny prevail, as few men would be proved
Puritans, whereas now nothing is so monstrous, which is not branded upon
Puritans, and no man is so innocent as to escape that brand. So great also is
the audacity of those which lacerate the fames of Puritans, and with so much
confidence do they vent their obloquies, that they which know the falsity
thereof, and easily perceive that the same aspersions are more truly due to
the Autors and raisers of them, yet they are dazeled, and driven to some
doubtful admittance thereof. Neither could this audacity be so prevalent
amongst the vulgar, but that Scholars, and the greatest of the Clergy are now
become the most injurious detesters and depravers of Puritans, having taken up
in Pulpits and presses, almost as vile and scurrilous a license of fiction and
detraction, as is usual in Play honses, Taverns, and Bordelloes. Some men
divide generally all Protestants into Puritans, and Antipuritans, but I shall
admit of subdivisions in both, for all men are not alike, which either affect
or disaffect, either Puritans or Antipuritans. Antipuritans I shall thus
divide. Some Antipuritans are so termed, because they are no Puritans, but
such I dislike not, for I my self am neither the one nor other, I neither merit
the name of Puritan, neither do I hate them so as to profess my self an
Antipuritan.

Others are accounted Antipuritans, because they are of the Romish Religion,
and so profess themselves, but their enmity is but a due antipathy, and as a
necessary consequence of their Religion, and such I take no notice of, I think
Puritans expect no other from them. Others again there are which are very
averse from some Puritanicall Tenets, and hold Puritans in very many things
erroneous, but yet they mean well themselves, and bear no hatred to the persons
of Puritans, they allow Puritans sound in the most and weightiest matters of
faith, they hold dissent in disputable things no ground of malice, and they
attribute no infallibility to themselves in those things wherein they dissent:
from these men I am but little removed. The worst sort of Antipuritans, and
they which ought only to be so called, are they which bitterly hate and
persecute many good men under the name of Puritans, and many goods things in
those which are Puritans, whose antipathy is to men's persons, as well as
opinions, and in opinions those which are sound, as well as those which are
erroneous. These are the Antipuritans which I shall now strive to detect, whom
I now hold to be of great number and power in the State at this day, whom we
may account the chiefest causers, and procurers of all those mischiefs and
plagues which now incumber both Church and Commonwealth, and to be guilty of
all those crimes, which falsely they charge upon Puritans, being therein like
Caesar's enemies which therefore only hated him, because they had deserved
hatred from him. By such Antipuritans is all love to goodness and zeal to the
Protestant Religion, and all hatred of vice, and dislike of Popish
Superstition, brought into contempt. For as they admit all true of Puritans
which Papists object against Protestants, so they account all Protestants
almost (besides their own faction) Puritans. By such is the Religion of the
Scots made ridiculous; by such is the amity of the two Nations, and therein
the Honor and safety of the King, his Crown, and Progeny endangered. By such
is Calvin, and the Reformers of our Religion for harkening therein to Calvin,
traduced, and another reformation attempted; by such is Antiquity preferred to
obscure Scripture, Uniformity in Ceremonies to the disadvantage of unity in
hearts; by such is the outside and walls of Religion trimmed and decored,
whilst the soul thereof is neglected and defaced; by such is the Kings heart
stolen from his Subjects, and the Subjects estranged from the King: by such is
the Name of Royalty pretended whilst a Papal Hierarchy only is intended; by
such is dissension nourished in the State, that they may fish in troubled
waters: by such is truth in other men styled faction, and faction in themselves
styled truth; by such are innovations preached and printed for necessary
points, whilst necessary doctrines in other men are prohibited. In the power of
such it now remains to teach and publish all things consonant to their own
ends, and to quash and silence all gainsayers, and either to promote or detrude
all Suitors for preferment at their discretion being absolutely possessed of
Presses, Pulpits, and the ears of great men; by such are many good men reviled
and oppressed for their constancy to the true Religion, whilst many factious,
semipopish Dunces are unduly preferred every where for neutrality in Religion,
or some worse innovation; by such are Puritans made as Sinks and Sewers to
unlode and discharge their own filth into, whilst their black railing tongues
expume nothing against Puritans, but what is true of themselves. These things
(if I am not deceived) will appear in this ensuing discourse.

In all ages true Religion has been odious amongst Heathens, and true devotion
amongst Sensualists, Judaisme appeared to Painims mere Superstition:
Christianity seemed to the Jews gross blasphemy: and now amongst Christians
Protestantisme is nothing else but Heresy: and amongst Protestants Zeal is
misnamed Puritanisme; But in this word Puritanisme is a greater mystery of
defamation then ever was before, it may well be called (...), it is a word of
depravation, fit only for these times, wherein the shine of the Gospel is at
the brightest, and the malice of Satan at the highest. This word sprung up
almost with the Reformation, no sooner had the woman brought forth, but the
Serpent pursued her to devour her issue, and she being fled into the
Wilderness, this stream of infamy was spued forth after her to overtake her.

The Bishop of Down in Ireland, in his Visitation speech 1638. endeavors to
make it credited, that Puritans have increased since the Reformation by
degrees, both in number and malice: but the contrary is most apparently true.

Dissent in Ecclesiastical Policy about Ceremonies and other smaller matters,
being not of the substance of Religion, first gave occasion to raise this
reproachful word Puritan in the Church: but since that time men's minds being
better satisfied, and peace being more firmly settled about those indifferent
things, the more few Puritans remained, and the more moderately those few
became inclined, the more furiously their enemies raged against them, Bastwick,
Prin, and Burton, the only men which Law can take hold of, are Names now as
horrid in the world, as Garnet, Faux, Ravilliack. Precisians have now won the
Scene from Jesuits: Poisoning of Emperors, massacring of Provinces, blowing
up of Parliaments are all now grown into oblivion, and drowned in the stories
of Ceremony-haters. Howsoever as amongst Antipuritans, so amongst Puritans (it
must be confessed) there, are some differences to be observed. Some Puritans
think all Puritans alike to be loved, and all Antipuritans alike to be hated,
but sure there is truer affinity in mind between some which are Puritans, and
some which are not, then between some Puritans and others, or some of the
contrary opinion and others. Paul unconverted equally opposes Peter as Simon
Magus does, and in regard of this joint opposition, both are unanimous, but
even in this opposition both have their opposite ends. Magus opposes
maliciously for ambition and lucres sake, but Paul ignorantly seeking thereby
the same Gods Honor whom Peter serves in a truer way. Therefore in regard of
the main end, there is more unity and consent betwixt Paul the persecuter, and
Peter the persecuted, then betwixt Paul and Magus, though both persecuters of
the same cause. The like is now visible in England, for every man which is an
Antipuritan is not so for the same Reasons, some have more of malice, others
are more ignorant, some are pestilent Engineers, and through the sides of
Puritans knowingly stab at purity it self, others are but Engines misimployed,
or by their own blind zeal misled, and these perhaps whilst they persecute
Gods children, imagine they do God a grateful service therein.

In Samaria, from an unkindly mixture of Israelites and Syrians, a strange
heterogeneous offspring different in Religion from both did arise; and the like
is now in England, nay, it may be said here (as it was in Constantines days)
There are almost as many Religions as Opinions, and as many Opinions as Men.
Papists have their differences, Protestants theirs, therefore needs must there
be many more differences where Papists and Protestants live so confusedly
blended together. For examples sake, how many differences have we even about
indifferent Ceremonies; and that merely amongst Protestants? Some men loath
Ceremonies out of Antipathy to Popery, which too superstitiously extols them;
others again admire them for Antiquities sake, which before Popery innocently
(yea, and perhaps profitably for those infant times of the Gospel) used them.
These two sorts of men, though different are not dangerous. Again, some men are
thought to disrelish Ceremonies out of stomach to that authority which commands
them; but if there be any such, I think they are very few, and scarce visible
to the eye of man. Others on the contrary give reverence to them for Poperies
sake, which depends so much upon them; and I fear there are many such amongst
us. Again, some men stand devoted to Ceremonies, as they are the lightest
things of the Law: like the Tythers of Mint and Annis in the Gospel, embracing
them instead of weightier matters, and none are more unmercifull then these to
scrupulous minded men. Others in the mean while account all things of the same
moment, both great and small, pretending to spy some faults, and some truths
on either side, and therefore they hold it indifferent to assent to either, or
dissent from either in any point whatever. But the wisest sort conceive there
may be errors on both sides, but not alike gross and pernicious, and
therefore such eschew the wrong, and apply themselves to the right in either
side, yet neither honor, nor despise either side alike. And these instances
show that all men do not profess, or condemn Puritanisme alike, or from the
same ends, and yet in the Chaos of this Country, as things now stand. Frigida
cum calidis pugnant, humentia siccis.
Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia ^ondus.


I could wish therefore that all well meaning men would take notice of these
things, and affect by reason, not passion; for since some good men are
Puritans, and not all, and since some ill men are Puritans, and not all, this
ought not to be a rule of love and hatred in all cases alike. That which is
most objected to Puritans, is fury, faction, and hypocrisy: if I see these in
a man reputed no Puritan, yet to me He is a Puritan: and if I see not these in
a man reputed a Puritan, as to me He is no Puritan.

If Gracchus be invective against Sedition, I censure him by his actions, not
by his words, and if Cato be accused of mutiny, I censure him by himself, not
by his accusers, I condemn none merely because condemned by others; for it is
usual for the Wolf to sit on the Bench and condemn the Lamb at Bar, for
that which is most proper to the Wolf most unnatural to the Lamb, and yet
this proves the Wolf the more a Wolf, and the Lamb the more a Lamb. I
cannot but profess it, there is nothing more scandalizes me at this time, then
to see Puritans being so few in number, so despicable in condition, so
harmless in example, so blameless in opinion, yet sentenced and condemned in
judgment, as if they were the greatest Incendaries, and the only Innovators in
the Christian World. Doctor Heylin a violent pamphleter against Puritans, calls
Burton the great Dictator of Puritans, and the Law has past upon him with
great severity, yet Burtons crime was that He wrote against Altar-worship, and
it was adjudged that his style was seditious. It is not manifest that his
intention was seditious therein, and if it was so, it is manifest that He was
most vain and absurd therein as our State is now established, and as our King
is generally revered, They which pretend great danger to the King likely to
ensue out of such paper machinations as these, may have three mischievous ends
therein. First, that they may be thought the only solicitous men of the Kings
safety. Secondly, that they may disparage the common peoples loyalty.
Thirdly, that they may crush their adverse Puritanicall party; but, it is
thought, they which pretend most danger hereby to the King: do least believe
themselves, and therefore they do spin that affection and division out of the
sufferings of Burton, etc. which his attempts could never have effected.

My Lord of Canterbury in all his invectives against Puritanisme, ever made
fury and turbulence the ground of all his hatred and enmity against it, and yet
let the whole world judge if the earth ever brought forth any thing more
furious and turbulent then himself. At the same time whilst he adjudges torture
to that incendiary Burton, etc. for writing a Pamphlet against Altars, etc. He
himself is busy in sowing the Dragons teeth (I may say the great red Dragons
teeth) all over England Scotland, and Ireland, and putting all the three
Kingdoms into a posture of war, that like earthen vessels they may be dashed
to pieces by conflicting one against the other. To whom can it be credible that
Burtons quill should blow the flame of war amongst Nations so combined in
spiritual, carnal and political consanguinity; under the protection of so
peaceful a Prince, in such Halcyonean days of tranquillity, when even my
Lord of Canterbury himself with all his ill accomplices at home, and Spanish,
Italian, French confederates abroad, ought for ever to be admired for his
prevalence in that vast stupendous dis-service? Howsoever, as the times lately
were, we beheld sedition grievously upbraided, and punished in Burton by my
Lord of Canterbury, and that old verse applied as a proverb: Quis tulerit
Gracchos de seditione loquentes?
But its no wonder that Burton should be an incendiary in that mouth, wherein
Calvin was a knave, Good God, could he think the Reformed Religion any thing
else but knavery, when he calls Gods most sanctified and best inspired
instrument of Reformation Knave? Because God does not now work by miracles, as
he did in the first plantation of the Gospel; are not therefore his works as
sacred, and his instruments as venerable? And since the Redemption, what work
has God ever performed more noble, and for ever to be exalted then the
Reformation? for what was that work, but a reviving of lost salvation, and a
new restoration of the buried Gospel amongst us? and in that glorious work
who was anointed by God for a more egregious charge then Calvin? Is it not
therefore the same sin in kind if not in degree so to conspurcate and defile
this blessed messenger of this blessed tidings with impure terms of obloquie,
as it was to ascribe the work of our Savior to Beelzebub? O the execrable
gall of that breast, and venom of that tongue, which through the sides of
Calvin did strive to defame the most gracious services of Calvin, nay that most
pure and fiery Spirit of God himself, which enabled Calvin for those services!
Needs must he hate and prosecute all Puritans whatsoever, and reject and
disrelish all things whatsoever in Puritans, which is so maliciously bent
against Calvin himself merely because Puritans have him in so high esteem,
for that holy Spirits sake which rested so abundantly upon him.

But let us a little further search into the mysterious abuse, and
misapplication of this word Puritan. Those whom we ordinarily call Puritans are
men of strict life, and precise opinions, which cannot be hated for any thing
but their singularity in zeal and piety, and certainly the number of such men
is too small, and their condition too low, and dejected: but they which are the
Devils chief Artificers in abusing this word when they please, can so stretch
and extend the same, that scarce any civil honest Protestant which is hearty
and true to his Religion can avoid the aspersion of it, and when they list
again, they can so shrink it into a narrow sense, that it shall seem to be
aimed at none but monstrous abominable Heretics and miscreants. Thus by its
latitude it strikes generally, by its contraction it pierces deeply, by its
confused application it deceives invisibly. Small scruples entitle me to the
name of Puritan, and then the name of Puritan intitles me further to all
mischief whatsoever.

The Scots rise up against Episcopacie, it is questioned by some, whether they
so rise up, for the good of Religion, or for the overthrow of wholesome
Discipline.

Answer is soon made, that Episcopacie cannot be unpleasing to any but
Puritans, there is no opinion can smell stronger of Puritanisme, then that of a
Church parity, and of Puritans what good can be expected? but the Scots also
desire redress in other grievances, and here their intention is again
questioned. Answer is as soon made again. That the Scots being declared open
Puritans, they must needs be enemies to Monarchical government, and that no
redress can ever satisfy them, but such as shall debase royal dignity, and
establish a popular rule among them. But some of the Scots in some actions do
very much misdemeane themselves, and here it is thought by some, that this ought
not to redound to the prejudice, or blame of the whole Nation: but strait the
Antipuritan steps in again with answer to the former purpose, that the same
faction which makes them all Puritans, makes them all mutiners, and that there
is no trust to be given, nor favor showed to any whose very religion is
disobedience. Other the like examples may be instanced in. Parliaments of late
in England have been jealous of religion, this laudable Zeal made them at
first come into contempt as Puritanicall, and then the imputation of
puritanisme made this laudable Zeal contemptible; and so by degrees, as any
thing else might be charged upon Puritans, as disobedience, and disaffection to
Monarchy, so nothing could be charged but proceeding from Puritanisme. Some
scrupulous opinions make Say, Brook, etc. Puritans, Puritanisme inferres them
mutiners, mutiny makes all that they can do or say, all that they forbear to
do, or say, it makes their very thoughts wicked and perverse. Thus we see
what a confused imposture there is in this infamous term of Puritan: but we
will yet further evidence by plain instance how broad the devils net is in the
vast application of this word, and how deep his pit is by its abominable sense,
and the nature of its importance, that we may the better discover that net
which intangles so many, and shun that pit which ingulphs so sure. Puritans (as
I said before) were at first Ecclesiastical only, so called because they did
not like a pompous or ceremonious kind of discipline in the Church like unto
the Romish: but now it is come about, that by a new enlargement of the name,
the world is full of nothing else but Puritans, for besides the Puritan in
Church policy, there are now added Puritans in Religion, Puritans in State,
and Puritans in morality. By this means whole Kingdoms are familiarly
upbraided with this sin of Puritanisme: As for example, All in Scotland which
wish well to the Covenant, though some Papists, some Courtiers, and almost all
the whole body without exception have now declared themselves for it, yet all
these are manifest Puritans. So also in England, all the Commons in Parliament,
and almost all the ancient impartial temporal Nobility, and all such as
favor and relish the late proceedings of both the houses, which is the maine
body of the Realm, Papists, Prelates and Courtiers excepted, nay, and its
likely all Scotland, and more then half Ireland, all these are Puritans. They
which deprave this great Council of the Kingdom, suggest to the King that the
major part is gulled and dorde by the Puritan Party; but this is only because
they are ashamed to speak it out openly in gross terms, that all the major
and better part in the Court of Parliament is Puritanicall. But this suggestion
is utterly false and impossible, for such as the major part in Parliament is,
such are those that chose them and sent them thither, and such are those that
now approve their actions there, and both in the elections of Parliament men,
and in the consultations of Parliament affairs, the Kings party is as wise,
cautious and vigilant (if not more) as the other party, and no subtilty could
circumvent or cheat them out of their votes, if the Puritans were so small and
inconsiderable a side, as now they make them. No man of what capacity soever
can admit this; it is to all undeniable, that the blame of a Parliament, is the
blame of a whole Kingdom. But I return to my Ecclesiastical Puritan. Though
it be true that Ecclesiastical Puritans are fewer now, then heretofore they
have been, yet it is as true that Ecclesiastical puritanisme is made a larger
thing by far then it was, being now spread abroad like a net to ensnare the
more, as our many late additions and innovations testify, which have crept
into the Church (as may be feared) for the vexation and molestation of such
men, as were not disquieted with former ceremonies. It is generally suspected,
that our Prelates have aimed at two things in the novelties which they have
lately induced into the Church; first, the suppression of those which are
enemies to their pride, avarice, and ambition, by them termed Puritans:
secondly, their own further ease, promotion, and advantage. Both these ends
seem to be leveld at in sanctifying the Altar, and unsanctifying the Lords
day, in advancing auricular confession, and corporal penances by external
mortifications, and crying down lecturing, and preaching; for if we mark it,
these new Doctrines do not only serve to terrify and scandalize tender
consciences, and thereby to deprive, and silence many painful good Ministers,
and to scare away into foreign Plantations whole troops of Laymen, and to
inwrap the rest in opposition* but each of these doctrines besides has a
further reach in it of benefit to the Clergy. The Communion Table has lately
gained a new Name, a new Nature, a new Posture, a new Worship that Emperors
and Kings may be brought again to take notice how far the persons and offices
of Priests excel in sanctity the persons and offices of Princes. Theodosius
within one hundred years after Prelacie began to arrogate to it self, was
presently taught this lesson, for taking his seat in the Chancell according to
the Eastern and ancient fashion, a Deacon was sent to him in great state, to
let him understand that none but men in holy Orders might presume to set their
feet on that sacred ground. This was then the Bishops Law, not the Emperors,
nor known in any other of his Dominions, but Italy only; but sure it was fit
discretion, that much should be ascribed by Bishops to that place, from which
they were to derive much, and which would be sure to repay their homage with so
great an advantage of homage back again. Preaching is now also grown too
burdensome, and the Lords Day to Priests according to that sanctity which
Puritans allow it, it requires too much praying, preaching, singing, which are
not only to them tedious, but also apt means to increase, and foment
Puritanisme amongst the people. Auricular Confession also is a godly devise to
bring the Laity into subjection, and to make the people bow before the power of
the Keys, and it may aptly force the consciences of Kings themselves to fear
the scourges of gowned men. Add lastly Mr. Wats his bodily mortification to
Mr. Sparrows confession, and then Laymen will be soon inured again to find
out the fittest penances, especially Praesbyteris, and aeris advolvi, and so in
time their purses, their bodies, their consciences shall all be made sensible
of the spiritual Scepter of Priests.

Its no great wonder then if our Court Divines, and their dependents do what
they can to draw us nearer daily toward Popery, under show of Antiquity,
Uniformity and Charity, for (without all doubt) of all Religions, Popery is the
most beneficial to Priests, most tyrannous to Laymen. Neither is it strange
that they pretend so much zeal and devotion to the Kings Crown and
Prerogative, as things now stand in England, as if none truly affected the same
but themselves, for its clear, that they cannot subject the people but by the
King, nor the King without the people: and so long as they stand possessed of
the Kings good opinion, no man shall have power to confute them.

King James is a great instance for Antipuritans, and a great prop to the
Episcopal Cause, its alleged of him that He hated Puritans for their hatred
to Episcopacie, and loved Episcopacie for its amity to Monarchy: His Aphorism
was, No Bishop, no King: Let us therefore appeal from King James in their
words to King James in his own. In his Preface before his Basilicon Doron his
words are: The style of Puritans properly belongs to that vile Sect of the
Anabaptists, only called the Family of love, Such were Brown, Penry, Howbeit
there are others which participate too much with Anabaptists contemning civil
Magistrates, etc. It is only this sort of men which I wish my son to punish
in case they refuse to obey Law, and cease not to stir up Rebellion. But I
protest upon mine Honor, I mean it not generally of all Preachers or others,
which like better of the single form of Policy in our Church of Scotland,
then of the many Ceremonies in the Church of England, which are persuaded that
Bishops smell of a Papal supremacy, that Surplices, Caps, etc. are outward
badges of popish error. No, I am so far from being contentious in these
indifferent things, that I do equally love and honor the learned and grave of
either opinion, It can no ways become me to pronounce sentence so lightly in
so old a controversy. Since we all agree in grounds, the bitterness of men
in such questions does but trouble the peace of the Church, and give advantage
to Papists by our division. These were the golden words of that peaceful, just
Prince upon his second thoughts: o that they were now duly pondred, and taken
to pieces word for word! o that they were esteemed, and understood in their
own weight amongst us, that they might reconcile our present differences, and
that the same peace which followed him to his glorious Urne, might still bless
these our times! o how contrary are these mild words to the unnatural
suggestions of Antipuritans! Such as daily accuse all good men for Precisians,
and all precise men for Puritans, and all Puritans for the only Firebrands of
the World, thus aiming the King against his Subjects, and by consequence
raising Subjects against the King; Puritans here are described both what they
are, and what they are not, the King had been misinterpreted before, writing
generally of Puritans, now to avoid all mistake, he expresses himself plainly
and definitely. A Puritan positively in King James his sense, is He which
imitates Anabaptists in rebellion, turbulence and opposition to Law, and such
are liable to Law; but negatively a Puritan in the acception of King James, is
not He which dislikes Episcopacie, or the Ceremonious Discipline of England.
This King James protests upon his honor, though to his great dishonor He be
now often cited to the contrary. As for those which relish not Bishops and
Ceremonies or the English Policy, Wishes them to be at peace only with those
of the opposite opinion, He himself vowing equal love and honor to the
grave, and learned of either side, and not taking upon him to be a Judge in so
old and difficult a controversy; He only like a sweet arbitrator persuades
both parties to peace and amity. I wish our Bishops would now stand to this
arbitration, I wish they would neither condemn the Scots discipline, nor urge
the English; I wish they would put difference between seditious and scrupulous
Puritans, and not infer the one out of the other; I wish they would either
disclaim King James as a manifest favourer of Puritans, or else imitate him in
the same definition, and opinion of them. King James further takes notice, that
the reformation in Scotland was far more disorderly, then in England, Denmark
etc. whilst the main affairs there were unduly carried by popular tumults,
and by some fiery-spirited Ministers, which having gotten the guiding of the
multitude, and finding the relish of government sweet, did fancy to themselves
a democratick form of policy, wherein they were likely to be Tribuni plebis.
That the Crown might be disincombred of these usurping ringleaders, the King
advises the Prince to entertain and advance godly, learned, and modest
Ministers, promoting them to Bishoprics, but restrayning them heedfully from
pride, ambition, and avarice. These things then are hence observable. First,
Scotland differs from England in turbulent Ministers: Secondly, this is imputed
to the iniquity of the times, not to Puritanisme, as if by nature the Scots
were more inclining to Puritanisme then other Nations. Thirdly, notwithstanding
that iniquity of those times, there was a number sufficient of worthy Ministers
fit for preferrement. Fourthly, King James erects Bishops Sees in Scotland for
peculiar reasons, and therefore He speaks not of Denmark, etc. Lastly,
notwithstanding that peculiar reason, He advises the Prince to be indifferently
at war with both extremes alike, as well to repress Papal Bishops, as to
curb proud Puritans. For (says the King) the natural sicknesses which have
ever troubled and been the decay of all Churches since the beginning changing
the Candlestick from one to another, have been pride, ambition, and avarice:
and these wrought the overthrow of the Romish Church in diverse Countries. King
James knew well how apt Churchmen had ever been to abuse their power and
pomp, what enemies the Highpriests had been to our Savior, and what a
tyranny Bishops had erected over all Christendom ever since Constantine
almost, and therefore though he dislikes a Democracie in the Church, (as He
had reason) yet He so limits and circumscribes his Bishops both in power and
honor, that they might be as sensible of their chains and fetters, as of
their Miters and Crosiers. I wish King James had particularly signified what
bonds and bounds He thought fit to prefixe to Episcopacie, to preserve it from
corruption, and what his opinion was of a Prelacie so active in secular
affairs as ours is now in England, and how it would have pleased him to see a
Metropolitan amongst Protestants almost a rival to the French Cardinal. The
world, in my opinion, has little reason to doat upon a gowned Empire, we
have all smarted long enough under it, men of mean birth commonly bear
preferment with little moderation, and their breeding having been soft and
effeminate, in their malice and cruelty they nearest of all approach to the
nature of Women: and by the advantage of learning they extend their power, and
win upon others more then they ought.

When the Church was at first under Heathen, or Jewish Governors, which sought
as enemies to ruin it, not as Fathers to protect it, they which were within
could not live in peace and unity without some Political bonds, so at that
time there was a necessity of some coercive power within, besides that which
was without. The world is now unsatisfied what kind of power that was, whether
Episcopal or Presbyteriall, or what Episcopacy, or Presbytery was in those
days. Yet me thinks what government so ever then was, it is not necessarily
precedentary to us now. The Episcopal faction at this day takes advantage by
the abuses of the Presbyteriall, and the Presbyteriall by the Episcopal, and
most men think either the one power or the other necessary, and some more
favor the Episcopal as K. James, some the Presbyteriall as M. Calvin; but
sure the Presbyteriall is less offensive then the Episcopal, and yet neither
the one nor other of necessity. Kings may grant usuram quandam jurisdictionis
either to Bishops or Elders, but the jurisdiction it self is their own
property, from which they ought not to depart, nor can without wrong to their
charge committed to them. For the power which God gives the Prince, is not
given for his use alone, but for the peoples benefit, so that since He cannot
let it fall to decay without making it insufficient for good and entire
government which is mischievous to the people, he cannot justly lessen it at
all. And it is manifest that except one supreme head be alone in all causes as
well Ecclesiastical as Civil, humane nature must needs be destitute of those
remedies which are necessary for its conservation, since power cannot be
divided, but it must be diminished to him which suffers that division, and
being diminished it proves insufficient. All confess some government necessary
for men in holy Orders, to whom the power of the Keys belongs, but some
account Princes but as mere Temporal or Lay persons, and therefore conclude
against their authority over sacred Ecclesiastical persons as incompetent,
especially in cases merely Ecclesiastical. For this cause spiritual
Governors have ever been in the Church to whom some have attributed a divine
right depending from none but God, and subordinate to none but God, but this
has been controverted by others, and no little debate and strife has
followed hereupon. But it seems to me, that Princes do receive from God a
spiritual Unction, whereby not only their persons are dignified, and their
hearts prepared and enlarged with divine graces fit for rule; but their
functions also innobled and sanctified above any other whatsoever, and higher
advanced then the sense of Laick or Secular will bear. To Princes an
assistance of counsel is requisite in spiritual as in civil affairs, but
that, that Counsel ought to be composed only of persons Ecclesiastical, or
that those persons ought to be invested with all those Ensigns of Honor and
Authority which our Bishops now claim as of divine right, seems not
necessary. Clergymen are not always the most knowing in all Ecclesiastical
cases, neither are they at all indifferent and impartial, in many which
concern their own honor and profit, (as the world feels to his regret)
therefore for jurisdiction they are not the most competent. But be they of what
use soever, they may still remain subordinate, and at the Princes election,
and admitted of ad consilium solum, not ad consensum, and it had been happy
for all Christians these many hundred years by past if they had not been
further hearkened to. The Sacerdotall function is not at all disparaged by this
subordination, for whether the order of Princes be more sacred then that of
Bishops, or not, it is all one to Priests, for an obedience they owe, and must
pay, be it to the one Order or the other. Our Bishops at this day stand much
upon their Divine right of Jurisdiction, and they refer their style to the
providence of God immediately, not to the grace of the King: and though in words
they acknowledge a Supremacy of power to remain to the King; yet indeed I
think they mean rather a priority of order. Whatsoever Supremacy they mean,
if it be not such as makes them merely subordinate, and dependent, so that the
King may limit, alter, or extinguish their jurisdiction, as far as He may to
his civil Judges, they derogate much from his Kingly office.

Bishops for their claim of Jurisdiction ought to prove that they alone did
exercise it over all in all causes from our Saviors days, till the entrance
of Christian Princes: and that being cleared, they must further prove, that
those times also are leading, and precedentary to ours. In both these their
proofs are lame, especially in the latter; for neither is the power of the
Keys the same thing as Jurisdiction, nor is jurisdiction now as it was in the
Apostles days, nor is the State of the times now the same as then.

In those days either Christians were to implead one another before Infidel
Magistrates whatsoever the case were, criminal or civil, spiritual or
temporal, or else they were to erect some tribunal in the Church, or else
they were to await no justice at all: and because some judicature within the
Church was most fit, therefore Christ himself according to the exigence of
those times, did endow his Church with a divine Economy, which was partly
miraculous, and of use then but not now. The Spirit of God did then internally
incite such and such men at such times to reside and preside in such and such
places; and some of the Apostles at some times could judge by inspiration
without proofs and allegations, and could execute sentence of death or other
spiritual punishment upon secret hypocrites, not intrenching upon temporal
authority, but in these times this discipline is useless, and therefore
decayed. Whatsoever the offense then was, what injury or trespass soever
betwixt brother and brother, the only remedy was Dic Ecclesiae, and yet that
precept serves as strong for temporal as spiritual trespasses, so that it
cannot be enforced now to continue, unless we mean to drown all temporal
authority. As for the extent also of spiritual power in those days, I will
only cite a learned Politician of the Popish religion: who admitting (it
seemed) that the keys of heaven were given to Saint Peter alone, and his
Successors, and not to all Bishops and Ministers whatsoever thus proceeds. By
the keys given to S. Peter many Holy Fathers mean, the one of knowledge, and
the other of power, and that that power ought not to be understood universally,
but only concerning the Kingdom of Heaven which is spiritual: for the Civil,
Royal, and Temporal power is expressly forbidden him by Christ. Even so that
also of knowledge, it is not to be understood of natural, politic, or moral
things, but as Saint Paul says, of Christ's mysteries only.

Wherefore in matters of faith Ecclesiastical authority may approve, and
Secular cannot condemn, but in matters of policy what all the Prelates in the
World approve, Temporal authority may condemn. It is a great wrong to
pretend, because Christ has given Saint Peter the cognizance and power of the
Kingdom, and forbidden him the earthly, contrary to this precept, to extend
spiritual things to temporal. Saint Augustine often says, That Grace does
not destroy any thing in Nature, but leaves her all her own; adding moreover
divine perfection. The Temporality has of its own nature, power to forbid all
things repugnant to public quietness and honesty; and Christ came not to take
away this authority from Magistrates, He only adds power to his Ministers in
matters of faith, not known by nature, but revelation. For ought we know,
this power of opening or shutting Heaven, of binding and loosing sins was
miraculous, and so but Temporary: but admit it in this Catholic Writers sense,
yet we plainly see, it is no prejudice at all to limit Secular Princes thereby.
The same learned Papist writes: That the Eastern and Western Churches
continued in unity and charity for the space of nine hundred years after
Christ, and this peace was easily kept, because the Supreme power was then in
the Canons, to which all Churches acknowledged themselves equally subject.
Ecclesiastical Discipline was then severely maintained in each Country by its
own Prelates, not arbitrarily, but absolutely according to Canonical rigor,
none of them intermedling in another government. No Pope of Rome did pretend
to confer Benefices in other Bishops Diocesses, or to get money out of others
by way of Dispensations and Bulls: but when Rome began to shake off all
subjection to Canons, then notwithstanding any ancient order of the Fathers,
Councels, or Apostles themselves, in stead of her ancient Primacy she brought
in an absolute Dominion, free from any Law or Canon, and this made the
division. Neither could any reunion be brought to pass within these 700
years, because this abuse which caused the Division is not remedied. Whilst
the union held, Saint Paul's doctrine was jointly observed, that Every one
should be subject to Princes, no man pretended to be free from punishment. Nay,
and after the division, the same opinion remained, that every Christian in
temporal businesses is subject to the Prince. And nothing is more temporal
then offense, because nothing is more contrary to the Spirit. Amongst the
Greeks also it is still held that Bishops ought to judge what opinion is sound,
what Heretical, but to punish those of hurtful opinions belongs to the
Secular.

The State of Venice, as well as other Catholic Kingdoms, walks between two
extremes, between Protestants, which have no other aim but to diminish
Ecclesiastical authority, and the Court of Rome which has no other aim, but
to increase it, and to make the Temporal her servant.

Those of the Court of Rome, making use of Religion for worldly ends and
respects under a spiritual pretense, but with an ambitious end and desire of
worldly wealth and honor would free themselves from obedience due to the
Prince, and take away the love and reverence due by the people to draw it to
themselves. To bring these things to pass, they have newly invented a doctrine
that talks of nothing but Ecclesiastical greatness, liberty, immunity, and
jurisdiction.

This doctrine was unheard of, till about the year 1300, then it began to be
written scatteringly in some books, but till 1400, there were not written above
two Books which treated of nothing else; after this such Writers increased a
little, but after 1560, there were scarce any Books printed in Italy, but in
diminution of Secular authority and exaltation of the Ecclesiastical: And now
the people have scarce any other Books to read, nor have the Confessors any
other doctrine, or need any other learning. Hence comes this perverse opinion,
that Magistracy is a humane invention, and to be obeyed for policy only, not
for conscience: but that every intimation of Ecclesiastical persons is
equivolent to a divine precept; there want not in Italy, pious, learned men
which hold the contrary, but they are not suffered to write, or print. Neither
are foreign Books permitted, or ancient Authors left ungelded of all which
serves for Temporal authority: as appears by a book printed 1607, called Index
Expurgatorius: and Clement the Eighth in 1595, published a rule in his Index,
that all Catholic Writers Books since 1515, might be corrected not only by
expunging but also by interlining, and this has been practiced though not
publicly above seventy years. Thus we find the Court of Romes, but not the
Authors meaning, and finally, we are sure to have no book true. I have
hitherto cited this egregious Politician, for these purposes.

First, That we may see how easy it is for Clergymen to wrest all authority
out of the Temporalties hands, if Princes will be so easy to be hood-winkt,
and deluded by them, and to resign their judgments to them in such cases as
concern their profit and advancement.

Secondly, That we may take notice how far the learned of Papists themselves
do discover, and detect the errors and tyranny of the Court of Rome, and that
mystical way of deceiving, whereby all hope of remedy is cut off. I observe
this also the rather because our Prelates in England at this day assume to
themselves almost as vast and unquestionable a power of stifling and repressing
all adverse disputes, and of authorizing and publishing all arguments
whatsoever favoring their cause, as the Court of Rome does.

Thirdly, that I might produce the same Author against himself in those points
wherein he taxes Protestants. We will yield that for the space of nine hundred
years the Sea of Rome did not usurp over other Sees, but did acknowledge
equal subjection to the Canons, and that the division and separation of the
Eastern Churches happened when Rome arrogated above Canons; but withal we
must have it yielded to us, that those Canons had been composed only by
Clergymen, and that in too much favor of Clergymen, and too much abridgement
of Temporal Rights and Privileges, and that they did concern matters more
then merely spiritual, and speculative, and things known by mere revelation.
So that though one Prelate did not usurp over another, yet all Prelates had
usurped over the Laity from the times of Constantine almost.

It is true, the Church had Bishops before in its times of persecution, but of
what power or pomp? It is said of Calvin, that in regard of his sway in
Geneva, he wanted nothing but the Name of Bishop; and it may be as truly said
of the Bishops before Constantine, that they wanted all but the Name.

The power of Bishops before the installment of Christian Princes, was rather
like that of Arbitrators then of Judges, and that held in all cases alike,
Civil and Spiritual, but in case of disobedience they did not entrench so
far upon the Lay power, as to inflict any pecuniary, or corporal punishment,
but they did deny the Sacrament, and eject delinquents out of the Congregation,
and this was then an abscission from Christ, being done Clave non errante: that
is, whilst God did inspire (according to his promise) a miraculous power of
binding and loosing infallibly.

The Priestly function was then an Office, not a jurisdiction, of sacred
dignity, not power: but the Function of a Prince was ever sacred both for
honor and power, for dignity and command. Constantine the Great was the first
Prince which took upon him the care and protection of the Church, after that
it had suffered contempt and poverty for 300 years: and now did even that
authority and protection cease, and devolve into his hands, which the poor
persecuted Bishops had but feebly managed before; but such was the
extraordinary indulgence of this pious Emperor, as well to religious persons,
as to Religion it self, that taking little notice what the Church had gained
by him as its Head and Governor, He heaped up greater Titles and Honors upon
Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs, and Popes, as if some other supreme Ruler
more sacred and competent then himself were necessary. Nevertheless it is
thought, that this was as poison poured into the Church, and not Balm, for
from that very time Clergymen began to be more glorious, but less gracious,
more rich outwardly, but more poor, and vile inwardly. Within a little space
after Constantine there was just cause of complaint that excessive Honors had
corrupted the Church, and that Religion had prospered better in former times,
when it had wooden Chalices and golden Priests, then now, when it had golden
Chalices, but wooden Priests. It is remarkable also, that soon after
Constantine the temporal power being too much restrained, and abased, and the
spiritual as much enlarged and exalted, the whole face of Christendom began
to be imbroyled with wars, and poisoned with heresies, so that the Historians
of those times have almost nothing else to write of but the forcible investing
and devesting by arms of such Bishops and Patriarchs, and of the oppositions
of such and such Councels and Synods, and of the Appeals, Iars, Schisms,
Excommunications, and Commotions of such, and such Priests, and Monks. Nay,
such were the ill effects of those ages, which were certainly more zealous then
politic, that they cannot yet be wholly rectified, and purged in these our
latter times, which are grown too too contrary, being more politic then
zealous: Thus did the Church fare for 900. years till the Roman Bishops began
to Empire above all, and then did the greatest part of the Clergy themselves,
especially East from Italy, make their departure and separation. Neither did
the Romish Vice-god after this great rent and division in the world hang his
head for shame, or seek any reunion by letting fall his pompous, painted
plumes, but audaciates himself rather to mount higher yet, and to detrude the
Western Emperor quite out of the bounds of Italy. And in this, his industry
fails him not, for after much bloodshed in many cruel conflicts He gains
in Italy a Temporal, and in all Europe besides a spiritual Monarchy, making a
triple Mitre shine as gloriously upon the seven-hilled City, as the Diadem had
done before. During his wars with the Emperor of Germany, He had other
contestations also with England, and some other Potentates at sometimes, but
all dismayed him not, only once He was heard to say, It was time for him to
compound with the Dragon, that he might crush the lesser Adders at his
pleasure. Yet after this even this Holy tyranny grows too insolent and
insufferable, and so conspires its own dissolution, so that many Countries in
the North-west parts lying more remote from Rome, quite revolt from her
Allegiance, and protest against her. Amongst those other Countries also less
distant, which still in words confess her Supremacy, her Reign is now but
little more then precarious: Venice regards not Bulls and Anathemaes, France
disdaines a younger brothers benediction, and Spain being honored with the
title of the Popes eldest Son, confesses him a Father but imployes him as a
Chaplain, gives verbal, but reapes real honors by him.

Augustus having cashiered an unworthy Commander, gave him leave to say, that
he had cashiered Augustus: and so the Popes great sons shake off his yoke by
degrees, but conceal it, and give him leave to do the like.

It is now very good policy in the Pope, not to pretend to Temporal things as
they stand in ordine, or have relation to spiritual things, but rather to
relinquish his right to spiritual things, as they stand in order to Temporal:
it is eminent wisdom in him to forbear threatening, roaring, cursing, and
sending his ridiculous Epigrams, out of his own Territories: as he was wont to
do: Nay, his very last refuge of sending forth his poisoning and stabbing
Ministers cannot remain in season much longer. But to return to our learned
Statesman: as He justly taxes the Court of Rome, so He unjustly taxes
Protestants of the contrary extreme, and this will appear out of his own
words. For He grants, first that the Secular Magistrates have nothing
diminished of their authority by Christ's coming* and it is clear that Princes
were absolute Governors of the Church before Christ both in Spiritual and
Temporal Cases.

In the next place He yields, that the power and knowledge of Clergymen,
called the power of the Keys, is no other but such as Christ infuses in mere
supernatural things, known only by Faith and Revelation, not by any
physical, or Ethicall Principles; but it is easily proved by us, that such
power can extend to no proper jurisdiction at all in humane affairs, but is a
mere speculative Notion, and such we deny not.

Thirdly, He yields that in Jurisdiction there be three things distinct.

First, matter of Law.

Secondly, matter of fact.

Thirdly, matter of execution: whereby retribution is made to every fact
according to Law. The first of these, and that in Spiritual Cases alone being
tryable by Clergymen only. Admit this and nothing follows, but that things
merely Spiritual, are best known to Spiritual persons, there is no power
here concluded. As for example. In case of Heresy, that I hold such an
opinion, must appear by witnesses and proofs, and herein all kinds of
witnesses besides Clergymen are competent.

Next, that this opinion is heretical, requires the judgment of
Ecclesiastical persons, but it does not follow, if they be the fittest Judges
herein, that they must be the supreme Judges herein, and not as well Dependent
and Subordinate as our Civil Judges are in common actions. But in the last
place, that such an heretical opinion, so dangerous and pestilent to the
Church and Commonwealth ought to be corrected or eradicated by such coercive
force, and the raising of that force whereby it is to be punished, is in the
judgment, and in the power of the Supreme Magistrate, for two Magistrates
cannot have a Supreme power of the same sword. Either the Secular must command
the Ecclesiastical, or the Ecclesiastical must command the Secular, as to
coercive power, or a worse confusion then either must needs follow.

So then, it is the Execution of justice alone, which is essential to the
Supreme Governor, Matter of Law requires a Counselor, Matter of fact a
witness, Matter of Execution alone intimates a Prince, and that Principality
cannot be divided betwixt two persons of a several nature.

From hence then it appears plainly that no Catholic differing from the
Court of Rome ascribes more to Clergymen, then this first point of adjudging
according to the Law of God in things Divine; and this implies rather a
dependent, then an independent condition in the judge: and in this Protestants
join with full consent. But all this while I find my self in a digression:
my scope is not to prove that Protestants do attribute sufficient to Priests,
it lies upon me to prove that they attribute too much to them, and herein I am
to undertake not only the Episcopal, but the Presbyteriall side also, not
only Protestant Prelates, but even Master CALVIN that great Antiprelate also.

Divines have much trumped the World hitherto in not setting forth the true
bounds and limits of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, but if I mistake not, the
first power (which they claim as most essential) they take to be the power of
the Keys, though they define not certainly, what that is, whether a power, or
Office; or to whom belonging, or of what extent, and continuance.

The second power which they insist upon, as next issuing out of the power of
the Keys, is in Excommunication, Ordination of Ministers, Exposition of
Scriptures, etc.

The third and more remote kind of causes wherein they challenge an
Ecclesiastical power, is of such as concern Matrimony, Testaments, Heresies,
Fasts, Tithes, and Immunities of Clergymen, etc. And further doubtless they
would proceed, but that these savor so much of the Temporality, and discover
their trumpery; but I have said, if in all these cases Clergymen are
necessarily more knowing and impartial then all men else, there is necessity
of their Counsel to declare matter of Law, but not of their Consent in
applying coercive, and forcible remedies for the execution of Law. I have said
also that Clergymen being as well Citizens of the Commonwealth, as sons of
the Church, and these Cases importing as well perturbance of the State,
annoyance to the Church, that there can be but one Head which ought to have
command over both, and in both. It is manifest also that many Cases are partly
temporal, and partly spiritual, and that scarce any is so temporal, but that
it relates in some order to spiritual things, or any so spiritual, but that
it has some relation to temporal things, so that the true subject of
Ecclesiastical and civil justice cannot rightly be divided. Further, also it
is as manifest that where any doubt, strife, or uncertainty may arise between
one Jurisdiction and another, neither acknowledging any supreme power of
decision, no assured peace can continue, and by consequence no stability or
permanent subsistence to either, is to be expected. It is natural therefore to
be inferred, that either the Temporal or the Ecclesiastical Magistrate must
be in all Cases absolutely predominant, and that since the Ecclesiastical
ought not by Christ's own command, therefore the Temporal ought, as has been
further proved by sundry arguments, and Scripture proofs alleged out of this
famous Politician. So much of the temporal power, and its necessary
Supremacy: my endeavor shall be now to maintain that no Ecclesiastical power
is at all necessary in mere Ecclesiastical persons.

Master Calvin according to the popish grounds maintains, that spiritual
jurisdiction differs from temporal, and is not incompatible but assistant
thereto, because it proposes not the same ends, but several, which by several
means may be the better compassed. But the spiritual Magistrate (as I
conceive) can propose no other end, then what the Secular ought to aim at, for
either the Prince ought to have no care at all of the Honor of God, and the
good of men, and that which is the prime mean of both, true Religion, or else
his ends must be the same which the Prelate aims at, viz. to vindicate
Religion by removing and correcting scandalous offenders. Secondly, to preserve
the innocent from contagion by the separation of open offenders. Thirdly, to
prevent further obduration, or to procure the amendment of such as have
transgressed by wholesome chastisement.

This is beyond all controversy, as also that the person and power of a
Prince, are as sacred to effect these ends, as the Prelates: and certainly, God
did not so sanctify their persons and offices for any less end. And therefore
in ancient times Holy Bishops did preach and recommend nothing more to Princes
then the care of Religion, though proud Prelates now arrogate this only to
themselves, and though it be still apparent, that no offense is so spiritual,
but that it is a civil evil, as well as a blemish to Religion: for so much as
true Religion is the foundation of a State. And this could not be, neither
were Princes answerable to God for the corruption of Religion, if God had not
given them a supreme power, and that effectual to bring all offenders
whatsoever to confession, satisfaction and contrition, or to expel them the
congregation by themselves, or their surrogates.

Master Calvin instances in adultery and drunkenness, etc. and says, That the
temporal power punishes these by external force, and for public examples
sake, as it concerns the State, but the Spiritual Judge punishes them without
force internally for the amendment of the delinquent. He might as well have
named swearing, lying, stealing, murdering, and all sins whatsoever, and so
have made all men twice punishable, and the Ecclesiastical Courts as full of
business as the Temporal to the great vexation of the State, and danger of
division, out of this false ground only that Temporal power has not a
competence for the amendment of offenders, or for the care of Religion, but
only for the satisfaction of wronged parties, and the expedition of Civil
Justice.

This is a way to erect regnum in regno, and to maintain such concurrent
jurisdictions, as cannot possibly stand together, for all being subject to sin
and offense, as well the Spiritual as temporal, either the one or other must
go unquestioned, and this may produce division, or else both; and that will
cause most certain confusion. Both sides here seem strangely puzzled, the
rigidest of the Episcopal faction allow Princes a coercive power over Priests,
and Prelates, where they perform not what their duty is in their functions or
jurisdictions, and this power requires a higher power of summoning, arraigning,
and legally trying them: and yet the moderatest of the Presbyteriall faction
would have Princes questionable, tryable and punishable by the Spiritualty.
This is a gross confusion, which will appear to be so more plainly in the
sequel; when it is more fully cleared, that to Princes alone God has precisely
committed utramque tubam, and utramque tabulam too, as our reverend Andrews
says.

It Is true, as Calvin alleadges, Princes are sons of the Church, they are in
it, not above it: the word intending the Church universal, such as is both
militant and triumphant; past, present, and future;for that has no other head
but Christ: to that all Princes and Priests are equally sons: but take Church
for such or such a National, Local Church, and then the Prince is head
thereof, under Christ; and the Clergy are part of his charge, and under his
protection.

The same man also may in diverse respects be both father and son to the same
man without confusion of relations. A King, a Bishop may hear the Word, and
receive the Sacrament from an inferior Minister; a Subject may be natural
father to his Prince, and in this respect, a filial subjection is due from the
Superior, and so a King may refer his own case to his Chancellor, yet this
destroys not the greater, higher, and more general superiority in other
things, at other times. And to me it seems that even in the exercise of the
Keys, the Priest officiates under the Prince, as the Chancellor does in
matters of Law, even when the Kings own case lies in Judgment before him, and
when perhaps he makes a decree against his own Master, and contrary to his
own Masters private advertisement: and yet the King is not properly either
Lawyer or Theologue, though both are actuated, and organized as it were, by the
soul like commanding, over-seeing, and overruling of his more sublime and
divine power.

Herein the Priest also may learn a limitation from the Lawyer, for though the
Judge be bound to pronounce right Judgment against his own Master, yet this
holds not in all cases alike; because of his limited condition, for in
Criminal cases such as concern the safety of the Kings own person, or the
Royal dignity of his calling, therein Judgment must be utterly mute. And
therefore it is a weak argument of Master Calvin, though it be his best: when
he inferres a necessity of an Ecclesiastical Judicature from hence, because
else the Prince himself wanting punishment, should escape free: for the reason
is the same in matters of Law; the King is not questionable, or responsible,
for personal crimes, and yet this is held no political mischief. Besides if
the Prince shall not go unquestioned, or undisciplined by the Spiritual, yet
the supreme Spiritual Magistrate must, and this is an equal, if not a greater
mischief: for both cannot be equally liable to the judgment of each other.
Neither is it to much purpose that the example of Bishop Ambrose so harshly, so
unreverendly treating pious penitent Theodosius, is so confidently cited always
by either faction Episcopal and Presbyteriall; for though the name of Ambrose
be great, yet I will crave leave to speak as an Advocate against him in the
name of the Emperor Theodosius.

Reverend Sir, you take upon you to be a Judge over me, and to condemn me of a
bloody Massacre committed unjustly at Thessalonica, and being so condemned, you
proceed against me with your ghostly punishment, subjecting me to your
Ecclesiastical severity: But I pray consider what mischiefs may follow
hereupon; if Emperors may be punishable by Bishops, then common equity
requires that Emperors have the benefit of a fair hearing and arraignment, or
else were their condition more miserable than the condition of the meanest
vassals: for as Princes actions are more inscrutible, and their counsels more
mystical; so also their ends are for the most part more liable to envy, and
misinterpretation: It is not possible for you without due discussion, inquiry,
and examination of impartial witnesses, perfectly to understand all the true
circumstances, reasons, and grounds of this my fa^^; and without this
understanding it is not possible for you to pronounce a just censure against
me. It Is necessary then that some Tribunal be prepared for you, and some Bar
for me, that upright Sentence may pass, and that Justice may be done
understandingly, and upon this it must needs follow that I am your mere
Subject, and must lay down my Scepter to bow my self under your Crosier, till
this difficulty be fully ended. Admit this also, and then you may use what
procrastination you please in this intricate decision; or in the like manner
question me of all other enormities, and scandalous deviations, which rumor,
envy, or treason it self forges against me; and thus shall I have no leisure
to judge other men, it will be scarce possible for me to acquit my self in
judgment from other men: that power which God has put into my hands for the
protection of so many Myriads, will be utterly disabled by that higher power
which is put into your hands over me. By the same reason also that I am to
render an account to you in this place, I am to render the like to all your
superiors, equals, or inferiors in other jurisdictions, of all sins
whatsoever, whether real, or imputable, Ecclesiastical, or Civil, so that no
end is like to be of my trials, purgations, or condemnations.

You will say, my crime is sensibly evident; if I would deny this, you could
not prove it so; and if I would not confess this, you could not force me, for
it was a political thing, and far off acted: and my mere confession can
give to you no Jurisdiction. But be my crime as manifest in it self as the
disobedience of Saul was to Samuel, or as David's murder was to Nathan, or as
Salomons incontinence was to all the World, or as Manasses his Idolatry: yet
why should I suffer more than they? What new coercive, vindicative authority
have Priests gained over Princes by Christ's Gospel, which the Jewish Priests
never used, claymed, or heard of? If Excommunication, etc. be now necessary,
sure it was in use before Christ; and then we should have heard of some Kings
Excommunicated, etc. by some Priests; for if the Temporal power had not of its
own nature a competent force and habitude to restrain all things repugnant to
public quietness, and honesty, a Spiritual power was necessary; and yet we
read of none such. But if there was a sufficiency in the Temporal power, as is
most manifestly apparent; then we cannot imagine that Christ came to take away
any of this authority from Magistrates: but that power which he added, was
rather an excellency of grace and virtue in matters of Faith, and illumination.

It cannot be alleged by you, that that punishment is merely spiritual, and
so no political evil: for as it puts other men into the condition of
Publicans, Heathens, and worse; so it further yet degrades, disables and
oppresses Princes. How shall he be honored and obeyed as the Vicegerent of God
in all causes, whom the Layty sees ejected out of the Church, and expelled out
of the Communion of the Faithful, as a rotten contagious member? How shall he
be held more sacred than a Priest, whom the sentence, interdiction, and the
confounding blow of a Priests spiritual execration, shall render so
contemptible, miserable and abominable in the eyes of the world?

Saint Paul being accused in matters of Doctrine, made his appeal to a wicked
Heathen Emperor; and yet now a Christian godly Emperor being accused by any
Churchman, no appeal is allowed, though in mere civil accusations. S.
Peter's Keys did either induce some new power not before known unto the world,
or not; if it did, then our Saviors Gospel came into the world to the
detriment of civil government, which is contrary to Religion, and all reason:
and if no new addition of power were imported, then Tiberius himself, though a
Heathen, and Tyrant, remained as absolute as before; and yet in his time there
was more necessity of an Ecclesiastical judicature, than is now. But you will
say, if Princes be not subject to some chastisement, then some scandals must
pass unremediable. Not so, for here God is the revenger, and strikes often, as
he did Vzziah; but if not, yet either the Temporal or Spiritual Governor
must pass unchastiz'd, which is all one; for two Supreames cannot be, nor no
entire Government without some supremacy, nor no supremacy without immunity,
and exemption from judgment.

The perpetual conflicts and contestations between Princes and Prelates, which
are likely to ensue, will soon clear this; that either Princes must at last
submit to the tribunals of Churchmen, and reign at their discretion; or else
Churchmen must submit to them: For both Tribunals cannot stand compatible. For
my part, I excuse so grave a Father as you are, of ambition herein; and
therefore I am the less cautious in summiting my self at this time: but I
conceive this Doctrine may be the ground of dangerous consequences to others,
and therefore I desire it may not from me pass into a president for the time
to come.

Let not proud Prelates from this my voluntary humiliation, arrogate to
themselves as if it had been due; or derogate thereby from the more sacred
order of Princes: neither let Princes from this particular learn to yield to
any Spiritual Monarchy whatsoever. My belief is, that the Prince is the Head,
the Fountain, the Soul of all power whatsoever, Spiritual, or Temporal;
wherein he ought not to endure at all any kind of rivality of Ecclesiastical
persons, nor can admit of any diminution in any part of his Jurisdiction,
without offense to God, damage to his charge, and danger to himself. So much
for Theodosius, and so much for that Jurisdiction, which is due to Prelates: I
should now speak of the exercise thereof, as it is granted by the favor of
Princes, but this is a very tender point.

It seems to some, that Princes ought not to incumber men in Sacred Orders, in
any kind of judicature which is not purely spiritual; nor that Prelates can
accept of any Temporal employment whatsoever, without dishonor to their
Orders, and neglect to their cure of Souls: and yet now none so greedy of such
employment. A sacred place may not be put to secular uses, that is profane: but
a sacred person may, that is honorable.

A Bishopric now adays is but a Writ of ease, to dismiss from Preaching, and
attending Gods service; whereby the man is preferred from the Church to the
Court, from the Altar to some Tribunal, from Gods Spiritual to the Kings
Temporal affairs. In the High Commission, at the Council Table, in the
Star Chamber, and the Chequer, Churchmen are now more active than in their own
Consistories, and yet their ambition further aims (as it is said) to the
Chancery, Court of Requests, etc. which could not choose but redound to the
scandal of Religion, the obstruction of Justice, and vexation of the Subject:
if there were not learned and skilful men enough in Policy and Law to serve the
King, unless Divinity were deprived of some of her followers, there were some
seeming umbrage why the King might borrow of God; as in the shady times of
Popery it was usual: when all learning was as it were engrossed by the Clergy,
and purloyned from the Layty: but when the clouds of universal Ignorance are
now dispelled as well from the Layty as Clergy; now the Clergy are not so
necessary in temporal affairs, unless we judge it fit that Gods more Holy
Offices should be neglected, for this purpose only, that the Kings meaner
business may be worse administered.

The functions of Divines are too sacred for any secular person to officiate,
and therefore it should seem, their persons also ought to be too sacred for
secular functions; for it seems prepostrous, that it should be thought an
honor to Priests to relinquish spiritual, and adhere to temporal
employments. Nic. Machiavell did observe that Christian Religion had long since
fallen to the ground, had not the regular strictness of poor inferior Priests
and Pryers held, and propped up the reputation of it in the world, as much as
the Pride and Luxury of the great Cardinals, and Princelike Bishops, did strive
to sink and demolish it. The same observation holds true amongst us
Protestants at this day, for the more our Prelates enjoy, the more still they
seek; and all our three Kingdoms are grown so sick of their Pride,
Injustice, and Pragmaticall faction, that scarce any remedy but bloodletting
can cure them. We find in Scripture the most High and Holy Offices of
Religion performed by Princes, even amongst, and above the greatest of Priests;
but we scarce find any instance at all where Priests intermedled with any
State affairs, either above, or under Princes: and yet with us now the
employing and entrusting of Clergymen in Temporal businesses, is held as
politic as it was in times of Popery: although no time could ever justly
boast of that use. But to pass over Temporal businesses, how violent have our
Bishops been in their own Canons about Ceremonies, and indifferencies? and
what disturbance has that violence produced? They strive as for the beauty and
glory of Religion, to bring in the same forms of Liturgy, the same posture of
the Communion Table, the same gesture at the Communion, etc. in all our three
Dominions; as if uniformity were always beautiful: and yet we see, all men are
created with several faces, voices, and complexions, without any deformity to
the universe.

It Is not external variety, but internal dissension, which spoils the
harmony of Religion; and dissension is more nourished by the harshnesse of
Pastors over their flocks, especially over the weak ones in scruples, than by
permitting various Rites and Forms in the external worship of God. Certainly,
liberty and variety in indifferences, and Ceremonies is more favored in
Scripture, than any universal similitude, or rigorous force whatsoever, over
the perplexed, anxious consciences of weak men. We see in Scotland, where
there is no Ceremonies, they enjoy that uniformity without contention, which we
aim at only, and seek to purchase with infinite debate, and persecution; and
under their peace and unity, the Protestant Religion thrives, and Romish
Superstition utterly ceases: whereas under our strife and disagreement,
Religion and true Devotion is overrun, and overgrown, like Corn choked with
weeds. Nay, it is thought that if our Bishops had been more gentle-handed all
this while toward such as dis-relish't Ceremonies for Poperies sake, and had
rather pitied them as men of tender consciences, than persecuted and defamed
them, as seditious Puritans, these differences had not lasted so long: for when
the Reformation was not yet fully perfected, the Puritans of those days were
more fiery than now; but not being so odious in the Church, less combustion
followed thereupon: whereas now they are so unmercifully treated, that no
moderate compliance can serve the turn.

There seems now little remaining of Puritanisme, but the breathless carcass
of it, and yet till that too be interred and consumed, no truce can be
admitted. The very sufferings of Puritans now are sufficient guilt, and imputed
as the effects of their own malice, their punishment is argument enough for
the desert of their punishment; the more they have borne, the more they must
now bear; and the more they now bear, the more they shall hereafter. Fury is
one of the maine things objected to Puritans; but in truth, the World has not
any thing more furious than such as most pretend against them.

Hence it is, that the hatred of Puritans flows and descends from the Highest
of the Clergy to the lowest: and young Students in the University know it now
their wisest course to Study the defamation of Puritans, as the first and most
necessary point of their Learning and qualification, and as their surest path
to promotion. And to make their detestation sure, and themselves
irreconciliable, they must engage themselves by some notable service of
novelty, quarrelling with some point of Protestantisme, or refining some point
of Popery; they must tax Protestants as some ways injurious to Princes, or
extol Papists as zealous observers of Antiquity. It must be maintained that
royalty cannot stand without the prop of Episcopacy, though it never yet found
greater enemy; and that Puritanisme only hinders the stretching of our
Religion, or else Papists and we should soon agree. Those of vulgar wits which
serve not for such strains, that they may be redeemed from suspicion of
Puritanisme, must do something factiously, or be vicious, or else their hopes
of preferment are almost desperate.

Charity to Papists, conformity to Ancient Fathers, and decent uniformity
amongst our selves, are the specious colors wherewith they dress and deck all
their pretenses; for want of Sectaries living in these days, they rack out of
their tombs Hacket, Copinger, Brown, etc. to upbraid us, for want of opposites
enough here in England, they calumniate the Scots to our dishonor; for want of
true imputations, they forge any crimes how monstrous soever, and their most
sure one is, that which is most undiscernible, hypocrisy. Nevertheless it
must be believed that the Antipuritan disparages not our Ancestors in the
Reformation, but for love of Antiquity; nor tears in sunder the bonds of
Religion Nature, Policy betwixt two the most close-united Nations of the World,
but out of love to unite: nor fills whole Kingdoms with blood, but out of love
to Order. Such was sure Diogenes his humility, trampling upon Plato's Couches;
such was Nero's uniformity, setting on fire the streets of Rome; such was
Procrustes his symmetry, cutting his guests according to his beds. And
therefore its thought Puritans are not so much hated for their opposition to
Ceremonies, as Ceremonies are multiplied, and enforced for suppression of all
zealous Christians, under the umbrage of Puritans: and that for the same
purpose the enemies of Piety have blown those coals which they might have
quenched.

Hooker that sweet and noble Antagonist of Ecclesiastical Puritans says much
in defense of the Churches authority in imposing of Ceremonies, but he says
nothing in defense of the Churches Charity in imposing many, and displeasing
Ceremonies. So S. Paul might have justified himself, as fitter to be
subscribed unto and complied withal then his scrupulous brother, and he might
have justified his case concerning eating of such and such meats: but S. Paul
in wisdom, and Charity, would do neither. S. Paul made not his strength an
Argument to make his brother yield who was weak, but he made his brothers
weakness an Argument whereby to prevail and win upon him being strong. And
why then does our Mother the Church maintain her authority against her own
scrupulous and tender-minded infants? If in Justice and rigor they ought to
obey her, and conform to her wise commands; does it therefore follow that in
Wisdom and Charity she ought not to pity, and prefer their foolish,
groundless doubts and jealousies? Is it honorable for the Nurce to contest
about authority with a forward Child, when by indulgence she may better still
it? If Ceremonies be but things indifferent, they are not so valuable, as
peace, for that is necessary. Admit fit and decent Ceremonies to be the
outworkes of Religion, the better to secure it from contempt, and profanation:
Yet let not the outworks be too vast, least they take up more admiration, than
they repulse disregard. Neither let us suppose that all times are alike liable
to profaneness. Before Moses, Religion was very naked and simple in her
Ceremonies, and yet we must not think that God did then make ill provision, or
was careless of the government of his Church; but under the Law, Ceremonies
were strangely multiplied to the Jews, and that by Gods own appointment; and
yet in those times, I cannot think that any Discipline could be invented more
honorable for Religion. I shall desire therefore to walk between two extremes,
neither wholly condemning all Ceremonies as superstitious, nor embracing many as
necessary, besides the Ceremonious use of water in Baptism, and of Bread and
Wine in the Eucharist; the Gospel recommends no external rites, but such as
the general rules of decency enclose, to our observation: but it seems
utterly to discountenance all Jewish, carnal ordinances; yet certainly if
multiplicity of pompous ceremonies had been very useful where knowledge
abounds, and to be looked upon as the outworks of Religion, the Gospel would
not have been so silent as it is concerning them. Were we now to plant a Church
in the West Indies, amongst rude Salvages, perhaps the external splendor of
our worship might be as convenient as it was amongst the Jews to attract
Proselytes: Or had we now such a dreadful presence of God residing amongst us,
as the Jews had in their Oracle, perhaps Music Vocal, and Isntrumental, and
Stateliness of attire, and fearfulness in our Gestures, and Postures would
beseem us in our solemn addresses and Festival celebrations: but the
difference betwixt these times and those, and these Christian Countries, and
those that are Barbarous is very great. What manner of Divine Service the
French Protestants and the Scots use, and some other Nations I cannot tell, but
I hope it is not so nasty, and slovenly as some of our Formalists would make us
believe: for it seems not impossible to me, but that in times of so much
Light, as these are, God may be very honorably and zealously served without
many Stately Ceremonies.

The Bishop of Down makes a very sharp speech to the Puritans in Ireland, as
being very disobedient, and animated therein by the Scottish Covenanters; but
his chiefest eloquence is uttered against his own Countrymen the Scots, whom
be paints forth, as the chiefest Traitors, Perjured Rebels, Heretics and
Hypocrites in the World: nay, he denounces them worse than Anabatists, and
such as have more than justified the Powder-Traytors, and all the rebellious
practices of the Jesuits. Afterward he adds also, That Puritanisme is not
the National sin of Scotland only, but that they of the same faction in
England had been as deep in the same condemnation, had they had so much power.
See here the lively portraiture of an Antipuritane, see a true B^ner revived
again, but in Protestant habit; and for ought I see, here are none exempted
from this black venomous censure in all the Kings Dominions, but those of the
Popish and Episcopal Faction. It Is not to be wondered at that the King thinks
ill of his subjects, or that Burton or Prin suffered worse than Traitors
merits. Its rather to be wondered at, that our streets do not run with blood
daily, since this is the Gospel our Reverend Fathers of the Church preach.

This Speech was thought worthy to be dispersed in Print over all our
Kingdoms in English; but since, because it redounds so much to the honor of
the three Nations, and the repute of Protestant Religion, its Translated into
Latin, and Coppies are Printed for all Christendom to take notice of. In this
Speech its urged, that Puritans, who began about 80 years since, have
proceeded from bad to worse by six degrees; first they did dislike, then
contemn Bishops; then they did disobey their Jurisdiction; then separate
themselves; then they fell into the Heresy of holding no difference between
Bishop and Presbyter: lastly, they rebelled, and grew more immoderate than
Anabaptists: And here S. Cyprian is alleged, who says, that the contempt of
Bishops is the beginning and ground of all Heresies and Schisms.

Here we see what Puritans are, the most cursed Miscreants on earth; next we
see who Puritans are, all such as hold not with Episcopacy: that is in
probability half Ireland, more than half England, all Scotland, and many
other Protestant Countries. King James did put a difference betwixt such as
dis^relisht Bishops, and Ceremonies merely, and such as under that pretext
fraudulently sought to perturbe the State, and make a factious separation. But
here the difference of all Puritans is graduall only, not substantial: for
dislike of Bishops is the beginning of all Heresy, and must needs end in
Anabaptisme and rebellion.

How plainly d^es it here appear, that Episcopacy is the true Helena of all
this war; and yet S. Cyprian is to be understood of the Pastoral function,
not of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of a Bishop, or else in his sense the
Genevans, and the greatest part of Protestants are Heretics, and King James
made a frivolous distinction.

Such stuff as this had not mis-beseemed a Papist, but its very odd in a
Protestant Bishop; except we consider him, as one who has looked back toward
the Onions and Fleshpots of Egypt, and is inamored again upon those glorious
Titles and Ensigns of Honor and Pomp, which Rome confers upon her Courtiers.

But to conclude this point, I wish Princes would not allow such Bishops to be
carvers to themselves, and make them Judges in cases of their own interesse:
they are surely good spectacles for Princes in Theological deliberations, as
Temporal Counselors are in State affairs; but miserable are those Princes
whose eyes cannot see without such spectacles. If Religion did not prosper
worse, if peace were not more violated, if persecution were not more common in
Countries where Bishops govern, than where they are expelled, we might suspect
the Scots as Heretical and rebellious by nature; for choosing all the plagues
of war rather than Bishops: but when we see the contrary, we may as well listen
to the Scots against Bishops, as to Bishops against the Scots. So much of the
Ecclesiastical Puritan, next after whom sprung up the Puritan in Religion, of
whom I shall speak very briefly.

There are many men amongst us now, which brook Bishops and Ceremonies well
enough; and perhaps favorably interpret our late innovations: and yet these
may be too grave to escape the name of Puritans. To be a Protestant may be
allowed, but to dispute against Papists, smells of preciseness: to hold the
Pope fallible is tolerated, but to hold him Antichrist, is abominable
Puritanisme: to go to Church is fashionable, but to complain of the Mass, or
to be grieved at the public countenance of Popery, whereby it intwines our
Religion, and now drinks up that Sap which is scarce afforded to
Protestantisme, or at all to take notice how far some of our Divines are
hereat conniving* if not cooperating, is a symptom of a deep infected Puritan.

He that is not moderate in Religion, is a Puritan, and he that is not a
Cassandrian, or of Father Francis Synclers faith, is not moderate: he favors
too much of Calvin's gross learning, exploded now by our finest wits.

Sir Robert Cotton professes, that he stands much amazed to behold the
magnificence of Churches built by our Ancestors, we their Successors being
scarce able to keep up the same: but that he is farther beside himself with
exceeding marvel, when he casts his eyes back upon the excellent groundwork
of Religion laid by our Fathers in the Reformation, and yet sees the same so
ill built upon, and so negligently seconded by us their children: But this (he
says) is not to be attributed to the hanging up of Pius 5. his Bull upon the
Bishop of Londons gate, or to that favor which has been showed to Priests, but
it is the idleness, and insufficiency of many of our own teachers, conspiring
with the peoples cold zeal, that has wrought this apostasy. The Name of
Recusant was scarce known till the II. of Queen Eliz. the Marian persequution,
being yet fresh in memory, and great zeal being begotten thereby, and the
finger-worke of God being so apparent in the sudden alteration of Religion.
Then did the Layty and Clergy with holy emulation, strive who should show
themselves most affectionate to the Gospel: then were our Ministers as
frequent in great men's houses, and as active as Jesuits now are: then were
Praying and Preaching both equally precious to great and small. The name of
Papist smelt then rank even to themselves, all sorts resorting daily to
Church, to avoid the shame thereof, until Archbishop Grindals disgrace, and
Hatfields hard conceit of Prophecies, brought the flowing of these good graces
to a still water: But when Sanders the Coripbeus of Catholics had slily pinned
the Name of Puritans upon all such as were most forward in encouraging, and
courageous in opposing Catholics, and when he perceived that the word was
pleasing to some ill affected of our own side; He quickly heated some of us
beyond the temper of discretion. And now with the cross tumults of both
factions in extreme choler vented in Pulpits, and Pamphlets, most men grew to
be frozen in zeal, and so benumbed, that whosever (as the worthy L. Keep.
Bacon observed) in those days pretended a little spark of earnestness, seemed
red-fire-hot in respect of others. Thus it betided Protestants, as those which
fare the worse for ill neighbors, for whilst they curb Papists, or reproove
idle drones, they are incontinently branded with the ignominious name of
Precisians.

See here Sir Robert Cottons Judgment, as touching the occasion and original
of our Religious Puritans: and see also his censure of the State, as touching
the same: For where he taxes the indiscreete zeal of those who were so
violently incensed at Sanders his nickname, so maliciously and subtly
fastened upon them there in his Margin, his Note is this; If these men's zeal
had been employed otherwise, and a task set them to do some good, they might
have been reformed, or made harmless by diversion.

But I pass from this kind of Puritan to another, whom I shall call my
Political Puritan; for the bounds of Puritanisme are yet larger, and enclose
men of other conditions.

Some there are yet which perhaps disfavour not at all either Ecclesiastical
Policy, or moderate Papists; and yet nevertheless this is not sufficient to
acquit them from the name of Puritans, if they ascribe any thing to the Laws
and Liberties of this Realm, or hold the Prerogative Royal to be limitable by
any Law whatsoever.

If they hold not against Parliaments and with Ship Money, they are injurious
to Kings; and to be injurious to Kings, is proprium quarto modo to a Puritan.

Our present civil, nay more than civil war with Scotland, and all the
mischiefs thereon attending, the disaffection between the King and his
Subjects, and all the mischiefs thereon attending the discontinuance of
Parliaments, the proper remedies of all State-maladies, and universal
grievances, which is a mischief whereby all mischiefs become incurable, all
are caused by the abusive mistake, and injurious mis-application of this word
Puritan.

The Scots are Puritans, and therefore enemies to Monarchy, the English are
Puritans, and therefore haters of Royal prerogative, both the Nations have
been hitherto famous for their devout reverence, and obsequious zeal to their
Princes; but now Puritanisme has infected them, and perverted them to
disloyalty.

Thus is the Kings heart alienated from his Subjects, and by consequence, the
Subjects loyalty blunted toward him, to the incomparable, almost irreparable
detriment of both: neither is this disaccord b^tween the King and his best
Subjects, more fatal and pernic^ous to the Commonwealth, then his accord with
the Recusant faction. Papists have now gotten the repute of the best Subjects,
and fittest for trust in places of eminent service; nay it is almost necessary
that foreign Papists be brought in for the supporting of the endangered
Royalty: for though the Popish faction at Court be strong and active enough for
matter of Counsel, yet for matter of force, the Puritans in City and Country
be too predominant.

The Bishop of Down in his visitation speech lays all the calamities of
Church and Commonwealth upon Non-conformists, and for proof thereof instances
in the Covenanters, whom he charges of rebellion, charging withal that
rebellion upon Puritanisme. The first thing (says he) that made me out of love
with that Religion, was their injurious dealing with Kings, which I observed
both in their Practice and Doctrine. He taxes first their Doctrine, because
they deny the Kings supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, and allow Subjects to
resist, nay and depose their King, if he be a Tyrant Surely Ahab could say
little for himself, if he could not lay his own crimes upon Elijah; but see
here by what art of confusion all Scots are called Puritans, and all Puritans
rebels.

King James spoke not so confusedly as if Puritanisme were a Religion; and all
that disliked Bishops and Ceremonies were of that Religion; and all of that
Religion were enemies to Kings. If a Bishop needed any proof, it his (...)
were not unquestionable, I would desire him to prove all Covenanters Puritans;
denyers of the Kings supremacy: or to instance in any Kings which have been
deposed or murthred by Presbyteriall authority. How far Bishops have incroached
upon Kings, is known to all the world: our Protestant Bishops lately have by
Oath and Canon, combined together to bind the Kings hands, though he be
Supreme, that he shall not govern our Church but by Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons, etc. And yet these troublers of Israel have the face to tax
Elijah of their own sin.

Presbytery indeed has heretofore passed her bounds, yet not of late, but
Episcopacy has ever from Constantine claimed an independance of Divine right,
till this instant. I conceive there are not in all the Kings Dominions, three
men, except Papists and Anabaptists, which hold it lawful to depose, or by any
force to violate the persons of Kings, how ill soever. The Scotch Divines
indeed maintain that a great body of men may defend themselves against the
unjust sword of misled Kings, because they cannot fly, or otherwise save
themselves; and this they take now to be their own case; whereas our Court
Divines in England hold, that in such case, we ought all to yield our throats
without defense. This seems unnatural, and truth was never unnatural, but I
forbear to dispute a point so horrid to man's imagination.

The Bishop next instances in the rebellious practices of Puritans, and reckons
up some Fasts in Scotland appointed by the Presbytery, without King James his
privity, and some other seditious Sermons, and actions whereby he was much
annoyed. But what? Did not King James know his own enemies, or how to blame
them? Did he condemn all Scots alike, or all Bishop haters alike, or join
the English in like condemnation? We know well enough, that King James called
rebellious precisians Pu^itans, but he never called all Puritans rebellious
precisians; He never used those terms as conve^tible, but declared his
contrary meaning by a manifest difference taken between them. But the Bishops
maine ^nstance is in the present Scotch insurrection; this he calls a rebellion
of Puritans, and far greater than the Powder Treason: For (says he) that plot
was but the act of a few discontented Gentlemen, but in this rebellion of the
Puritans they have engaged a great part of the Kingdom, so that this may be
said to be the common sin of that Sect. What could have been raked out of Hell
more slanderous to our Religion, more Apologeticall for Popery?

The Powder-Traytors are here preferred before the whole sect of Puritans: The
sin of the Powder-Traytors was, that they being but an inconsiderable party,
sought the destruction of their King and his issue, and the flower of the
Nobility, Gentry, Commonalty, and the extirpation of the true Religion, by a
most diabolical bloody practice and conspiracy. And it ought not to be charged
upon the mere actors, as a symptom of discontent, only we know how far the
Romish Religion it self favors and gives ground to such damned feats, and how
far it has owned some having proved prosperous, and justified the doing thereof
in nature as impious, though perhaps in degree not so heinous as this. For take
this as it was conspired, and questionless, since the crucifying of Jesus
Christ, the Light never discovered any treason more ugly and horrible.

Now to out-match this deed of darkness, the Scotch Nation by a strange
general unanimity have armed themselves to oppose the ill government of
Bishops, and other alterations in the service of God, and the administration of
Justice, and being invaded therefore by another Nation, have used force to
defend their lives; and seeing that defense not safe in their own Country,
they have since pursued it further by way of prevention in the Country of their
Invaders.

That is the greatest act of Rebellion whereby the common Peace and safety of a
Kingdom is most disturbed and impeached; but by the common act of a whole
Kingdom, that mischief cannot be effected: therefore the Bishop fails in his
politiques when he thinks that the Major part disturbing the Minor, is more
traiterous, than the contrary.

The unanimous act of a whole Kingdom ought to be presumed to be less
injurious, and more wise than the act of any small inconsiderable party, for it
has scarce ever been seen that a whole Kingdom, or the majority thereof has
ever been treasonable to its self in procuring its own ruin.

Many States have perished by the machinations of a few ill-affected,
ill-advised Counselors, (scarce ever any perished otherwise) but the total
body and collection has never been guilty of its own ruin: and if it were,
such Treason could not be so great as that which is plotted by a few. Whilst
the Scots contained themselves within their own territories, and were
considered as a kingdom within themselves, as they were when the Bishop past
his censure, they were not rightly so censured: neither was he then privy to
their intrusions, that they would infest our kingdom with the same combustion,
and so prove a disturbance to the greater part of our British Monarchy, whereof
they themselves are but a member of less bulk and value. Cursed therefore are
those uncharitable exasperating censurers, whereby the King is too far
incensed, and by whose rash instigations the commotions themselves become the
harder to be appeased.

Great insurrections are like great fires, wherein delay is mischievous, and
small remedies rather turn to fuel, then extinguish: and violent counsel
against an enraged multitude, is like oil, or pitch cast into the flame. The
wise politician proportions his remedy according to the mischief, if water
will not prevail, he uses milk; if a little quantity will not suffice, he
powers as the combustion it self requires. Unfortunate Rehoboam stands as a
Seamarke to warn all Princes how to shun this rock of violent counsel
against a people violently enraged and aggrieved. Some men have interpreted the
designs of the Scots to have been treasonable from the beginning, and wholly
bent upon the spoil and havocke of the English Nation from their first
stirring: Others have wholly justified their intentions and proceedings
hitherto as defensive only, and enforced by necessity: both these, I conceive,
are too rash and headlong in their guesses. In so great a body of men, there
must needs be variety of opinions, and its likely contrariety of affections;
and therefore it behooves the King to be the more tender, moderate, and
circumspect in his deliberations, as well for the one side as the other,
especially since the Scots have not evidently and universally as yet declared
themselves for the worse. We may at once be charitable in hoping the best, and
wise withal in preventing the worst; nay, a charitable and sweet demeanor, if
it be not too fond, may prove a great part of our prevention: doubtless
Rehoboam himself, had he not been wilfully devoted to young, rash, and violent
Counselors, might have easily retained within his obedience many of his
well-meaning Subjects, and reclaimed others of more moderation; and by that
means have divided and dissipated the most obstinate, headstrong, and furious
of all the rebellious party. Some Princes think themselves bound in Honor to
do unwise things, and this was the error of Rehoboam, his aged Counselors
advised him to that which was most politic, concluding that to be most
honorable; but his Genius rather led him according to the advice of his young
Gallants, to conclude that most politic, which to his haughty stomach seemed
most honorable: but what was the event? to avoid the scorn of young men, he
incurred the scorn of old men; to avoid the unjust censure of fools, he
incurred the just censure of wise men; to gain the honor of appearing stout,
he purchased the dishonor of being rash; to show a contempt of danger he made
himself a prey to it; rather then to decline a blow by a gentle bowing of his
body, he yielded himself to be inevitably oppressed by it.

At this time of revolt the Israelites were not so wicked, as their revolt
after made them; it may be so with the Scots, they are yet Protestants, and
perhaps may be retained so: and who can think of Protestants, that so great a
body of them, can at one fall so desperately tumble into the depth of
mischief, as to make Fasting, Praying, Oaths and Sacraments, mere instruments
and trains to commit murder, theft, sacrilege, treason, and the most
unnatural of all crying crimes? But to return to our own Nation, and what we
suffer by our own Divine.

Manwarings Doctrine is common at Court, and it is not long since a Bishops
Chaplain in Tearme-time, challenged a Judge of Treason, for delivering Law
according to conscience. And this is now no prodigy, for Pulpits are not
public enough to preach an unlimitable prerogative in; it is fit our learned
Doctors should mount the Benches of Justice also; there to advance Logic
instead of Law; for Law is grown injurious to Princes, and smells rank of
Puritanisme. Divines themselves will loose nothing to Princes, but all other
men shall, that they may gain the more: and neither Lawyers nor Statesmen
must direct them in any thing, but both Lawyers and Statesmen must be directed
by them in all things: but let us a little examine how the conditionate and
absolute forms of government come within the circle of Theology. The
Israelites were governed by Monarchs, but not all alike absolute. The
Patriarchs were not so absolute as the Judges, nor the Judges as the Kings, nor
the Kings as those Heathen Emperors, which at last made them tributary. The
due of Caesar, and the due of Solomon, and the due of Samuel, and the due of
Jacob, was not the same as to all points of State, or all degrees of Royalty,
and yet the nation was the same, and the form of government still remained the
same: viz. monarchical.

It should seem that God approved that degree of Sovereignty best, which was
by himself settled in the person of Moses, for when that people afterward
desired a King, of a more awful and large prerogative, in imitation of other
Nations, the thing displeased God. Samuel also wrote a book of this subject,
showing the just conditions of Regal power; (the loss whereof is much to be
lamented) for if it had been Gods will that all Kings should be equally
absolute in all respects, and free from all limitations and obligations alike,
Samuel needed to have written little thereof; one word had determined all. But
in Scripture, as it now remains, Samuels book being not extant, our chiefest
light and guide now is by example, not rule; and example we find very various.

The State and Sovereignty of the Jewish Kings in general, we find mild, and
gracious; but much differing in particulars. Solomon was heavy over his
Subjects, and under his Son they would not bear the like; yet Solomon's
pressure was not upon the estates of his Subjects by taxes, and impositions,
for He made silver in Jerusalem as stones for plenty; nor did He vex their
persons by Military hazzards and services, for He was at peace with all the
world: Neither did He any way let fall, or lessen their honor amongst other
Nations; He made them rather a spectacle of glory and prosperity to the world.
Solomon's harshnesse was only in employing so great multitudes for his own
pompous attendance, and for the performance of such public works, and
structures, as did tend to the Magnificence and beauty of the State. Besides,
Scripture does not satisfy us, neither by rule, nor example, whether Kings
ought to be successive always, or elective; or whether primogeniture of Males,
or unigeniture of Daughters, ought to take place: many things are left so
uncertain, that it is not always safe for Kings wholly to rely upon examples;
and for the rule of obedience, it is general, and no more advantageous for
free Monarchs, than conditionate Potentates; no more for supreme, than
subordinate commanders.

The Law of Nature best determines, that all Princes being public Ministers
for the common good, that their authority ought to be of sufficient latitude
for that common good; and since Scripture is not express concerning that
latitude, as to all people, the same not being to all alike necessary, the
several Laws of several Countries best teach that certain latitude. I could
wish therefore that Princes herein would not so much consult with Divines, as
Lawyers; or rather with Parliaments, which are the grand Courts and Counsels
of Kingdoms; for (as Cotton says) Every man in particular may deceive, and be
deceived; but no man can deceive all, nor can all deceive one. Ancient times
are not precedentary to ours by any necessity, for Laws are now more learned,
exact, and particular; and Courts and Tables of Justice, and Policy, are more
wisely and methodically composed and elected, then they were; and therefore
there needs not that vocal power, or indisputable force to remain in the
breasts of Princes, as was of old.

The Courts of Parliament, and their unquestionable Acts* and Ordinances, and
their infallible avisoes, are now in all well-governed Countries, the very
Oracles of all Policy, and Law, they are the fountains of civil blood,
spirits, and life; and the sovereign antidots of public mischiefs. That
Prince was never yet deceived which relied upon them, nor can he choose but be
deceived, which thinks he can be assisted with any more wise or faithful
advertisement, then that which is given him by his whole Realm united, and
contracted in a less circumference. What end can all the flower of the
Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of a Nation, being wise and religious, have in
seducing their Sovereign, or in limiting that Sovereignty, by which alone they
are protected? Or what one party of particular men can better understand the
true limits of sufficient Sovereignty, and the profit thereof; then this
collective universality, whole rays like the Suns, are every where dispersed;
and yet whose body of light is here as in a refulgent Globe concentred?

Individualls may have many particular ends, severed from the Princes or the
States, but Communities can aim at nothing but the common good; as the lesser
fountains scatter their branching streams up and down in various Maeanders,
whilst the Sea contains it self in an entire body, within its constant
bounds. Individuals also have but their own particular set limit of
perfection, and have judgments beside apt to be darkened by their own
several interests and passions; whereas the common body enjoyes a confluence
of several perfections, and has the less force from abroad to overcloud
them. Of all men therefore it will most concern Princes to suspect them which
are enemies to public assemblies, and to confide in them most, whose ends are
not divided from the generalities; and as they tender their own happiness, to
expect it chiefly from that generality, by which they are Kings, to which they
are Gods, from which their very Diadems receive honor and sanctity, to which
their very Royal Order imparts life, and breath, and necessary subsistence. I
come now to my Ethicall Puritan.

The name of Puritan must not rest here, for there may be some moderate, well
inclined, facile men, whose education may be such that they are not much versed
or insighted either in matters of Religion, or matters of State; they may be
such as are no ways busy but in their own particular affairs, and yet it
behooves that these men too be brought in within the opprobrious compass of
Puritanisme. To the Religious, Ecclesiastical, and Political Puritan, there
must be joined also an Ethicall Puritan.

This detested odious name of Puritan first began in the Church presently after
the Reformation, but now it extends it self further, and gaining strength as
it goes, it diffuses its poisonous ignominy further, and being not contended to
Gangrene Religion, Ecclesiastical and Civil policy, it now threatens
destruction to all morality also. The honest strict demeanor, and civil
conversation which is so eminent in some men does so upbraid and convince the
Antipuritan, that even honesty, strictness, and civility it self must become
disgraceful, or else they which are contrary cannot remain in grace: But
because it is too gross to deride virtue under the name of virtue; therefore
other colors are invented, and so the same thing undergoes derision under
another name. The zealous man is despised under the name of zealot, the
Religious honest man has the vizard of an hypocrite, and dissembler put upon
him to make him odious.

Here I may allege even Hooker himself in justification of this Ethicall
Puritan, that good ingenuous man in these days, though he opposed them in
polity, yet honored them in morality, and certainty if he were now living, he
would strongly inveigh against their opposers in this respect. He cites
Aristotle in his 5. book of Ethics, and 3. cap. that many men in domestical
things may be virtuous, and yet offend (...), yea, I am persuaded (says he)
that of those with whom we strive in this cause, there are whose betters
amongst men could hardly be found, if they did not live amongst men, but in
some wilderness amongst themselves. And the cause (says he) of their
disposition so unframeable to Society is, for that what they think privately
to be convenient and just with some show of probability, the same they think
themselves bound to practice and uphold, notwithstanding any Law of man to the
contrary: and thus by following the Law of private reason, where the Law of
public should take place, they breed disturbance. See here the maine taxation
of Puritans amongst their honest and wise opposers (such as I allow Hooker to
be,) is this, that in things indifferent, they will not recede from their own
consciences, for any command whatsoever, in all necessary points of morality
there cannot be found better men. I cannot tell, I am left to pronounce here
with the Poet. Crudelis Matter magis, an puer improbus ille?
Improbus ille puer, crudelis tu quoque matter.


I will only wish that neither the child would be so disrespectfull of his
mothers judgment in indifferencies, nor the mother so unpittifull of her
childs weakness in scruples. Hooker also in his preface confesses, that
Puritans at first were pityed only in their errors, and not much withstood by
any: for the great humility, zeal, and devotion which appeared to be in them,
was in all men's opinions, a pledge of their harmless meaning. The hardest
(says he) that men of sound understanding, conceived of them, was but this: O
quam honesta voluntate miseri erant! and for this cause Luther made request to
Frederick of Saxony, that within his dominion they might be favorably dealt
with, and spared, for that, (their error exempted) they seemed otherwise right
good men. So then whilst their meaning is honest, and whilst their honest
meaning tends only to make themselves miserable, that is, objects of scorn,
and punishment, favor ought to be showed. It Is true, Hooker after complains,
that this favor produced ill effects amongst Puritans, who by means of such
merciful tolleration gathered more strength then was safe for the State: but
under favor, this does not appear so with me: In France, Scotland, and those
parts of Germany where Zealots have had most liberty, and favor, I do not see
any effects so evident thereof, as these: that Popery has the sooner vanished,
and enmity been the better prevented. It seems to me, that England of all
Protestant countries has least cause to boast of her rigorous discipline
toward Puritans, having never yet been either quiet, or safe til this instant,
and now scarce being able to believe, that great work of deliverance, which
God has mercifully wrought for us. It cannot be denied, but the yet unsettled
condition of these times has been scandalous in multitudes of Anabaptisticall
sectaries, whose several conventicles cry, here is Christ, and here is
Salvation: but what? Is this the blame of the Churches indulgence to weak
brethren in nice scruples? surely no: for it is to be hoped, that when
government is again settled, as favor shall be used in matters of
indifferency, so the rod shall be resumed again against all obstinate
offenders in matters of weight.

And who does not see, that these swarms of conventiclers which now sequester
themselves from us, are but the dregs of the vilest and most ignorant rabble,
whose doctrines cannot prevail though they meet with no opposition, nor
subsist when authority once lifts up its hands or shakes its Staff against
them.

The feeble Flies of Summer, which every shower, and cloud almost disperses,
are not more contemptible, than these wretched throngs, whose works not being
of God, no nor scarce of Rational man, cannot prosper in such an age of
Knowledge, Learning, and Piety, as this is. Let us not then for some Gnats, or
frogs sakes ungratefully murmr against Summer, or undervalue all the sweet
influences of the Sun, and the softer gales of Heaven.

Puritans by some are parallelled to Jesuits, Jesuits are called Popish
Puritans, and Puritans, Protestant Jesuits; yet this is not indeed
disparageable to them: For doubtless fiery zeal and rigor were not blameable
in Jesuits, were not their very Religion false; as celerity and expedition in
a Traveller is not in it self faulty, but commendable, though the Traveller
being in a wrong path, it causes him to stray the further from his journies end.

My Lord of Down professes that the first thing which made him distaste the
Religion of Puritans (besides their gross hypocrisy) was sedition: So gross
hypocrisy, it seems, was the first. What is gross or visible hypocrisy to
the Bishop, I know not, for I can see no windows or casements in men's breasts,
neither do I think him endued with Saint Peter's prophetical spirit whereby to
perceive and search into the reins, and hearts of hypocrites; but let him
proceed. It is a plausible matter (says he) with the people to hear men in
authority depraved, and to understand of any liberty and power appertaining to
themselves, The profession also of extraordinary zeal, and as it were contempt
of the world works with the multitude. When they see men go simply in the
Streets, and bow down their heads like a Bull-rush, their inward parts burning
with deceit, wringing their necks awry, shaking their heads as if they were in
some present grief, lifting up the white of their eyes at the sight of some
vanity, giving great groans, crying out against this sin and that sin in their
Superiors, under color of long prayers, devouring widows, and married wives
houses; when the multitude hears and sees such men, they are carried away with
a great conceit of them, but if they should judge of these men by their fruits,
not by outward appearance, they should find them to be very far from the true
Religion. See here the froth of a scurrilous libeller, whereby it is concluded
that he that is of severe life, and averse from the common vanit^es of the
time, is an hypocrite: If these descriptions of outward austerity I shall not
only show what is an hypocrite, but point out also who is an hypocrit, our
Savior himself will hardly escape this description; doubtless our Savior, and
many of his devoutest followers did groan shake their heads, and lift up their
eyes at the sight of some public (...), and vanities, and did not spare to
tax the vices of Superiors, and to preach to, and admonish the meaner sort of
the people; yet who but an Annas or Caiphas will infer from hence that
therefore their inward parts burn with deceit, and that their end is merely
to carry away the multitude; such as judge only by outward appearance, and have
not their senses exercised to discern betwixt good and evil? It is likely the
High Priests and Pharisees did thus blaspheme in those days, and that the
rather, because from their own feigned sanctity, they were the more apt to
suspect the same in others: But what I must we needs follow them, or this
Bishop in this? But to proceed with this Bishop, Saint James (says he) gives
us a full description of true Religion.

Wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without judging, and Hypocrisy. None
of these properties will agree with the Religion of Puritans. It is not pure
for it allows Usury, Sacrilege, Disobedience, Rebellion, etc. It is not
peaceable, for these men are the incendiaries of Christendom, It is not
gentle, nor easy to be entreated, for they are more austere than Cato, and not
to be moved by persuasion or command. It is not full of mercy and good fruits,
for they are all for sacrifice, nothing for mercy; for the first Table, not the
second; for faith, not charity; they pull down Churches, but build no
hospitals. It is not without judging, for they are known to be most rigid
censurers. And he is an Hypocrite which spies a mote in his brothers eyes, and
not a beam in his own.

Here is a confused proof, that such Puritans are hypocrites, but no proof at
all, that this man is such a Puritan. If my Lord Say be such a Puritan, this
denotes him an hypocrite, but this does not prove that my Lord Say, or Brook,
or Dod, or Clever etc. or any the most famous Puritan living is guilty of
Usury, Sacrilege, Rebellion, pulling down of Churches, setting the World on
fire, or of renouncing the second Table and all works of justice and charity,
or of censuring and condemning malignantly other men: If these things were true
of particular men, calumny were needless: Accusation would better suppress
them. And sure it is not out of favor that Law proceeds not, for malice has
often enough showed her teeth, and would have bitten if she could, neither
would she now calumniate if she could accuse.

The Bishop expects not to be believed; if he puzzell, and work some into
doubt, it is sufficient: but since bitter censuring, and calumnious condemning
of others is s^ infallible a sign of hypocris^: how does the Bishop wipe this
off from himself? Can Puritans, speak worse of any, than he does of Puritans?
Sure they may well join with him upon this issue, that the greatest slanderer
is the greatest hypocrite; and yet seek no further for slanders, than this
very speech, wherein he so eagerly inveighs against slander; but if individuals
cannot be thus convinced by the Bishop, how shall these signs and symptoms be
applied to whole Sects, Religions, Kingdoms?

The most ordinary badge of Puritans is their more religious and conscionable
conversation, than that which is seen in other men's: and why this should make
them odious or suspected of hypocrisy amongst honest and charitable men, I
could never yet learn. A seeming religious consists in doing actions outwardly
good, and the goodness of those actions is apparent to man; but the false
hypocritical end of them is only discerned by God: and therefore with what
conscience can I condemn that good which is visible, for that evil which is
not visible? Say, Brook, Dod, Clever, etc. are known to me; yet no otherwise
but as men singularly devote, and as all the Prophets, and Appostles would, if
they were now living: and shall I conclude because they seem so, therefore they
are not so? I am so far from this, that my own conscience binds me to honor
them, and that in those things, wherein I have not the grace to follow them. I
have been a diligent inquirer into Puritans, and have exactly tried them three
ways. First, in themselves; and so I find them zealous, at least seeming so
outwardly, and distinguished principally from other men by their remarkable,
and singular zeal to God and the Truth: and this to me is no ground of
uncharitable censure. Secondly, in those, which in these times think and
speak charitably of them; and they are so many in number, and of so good
quality, that indeed to the Popish and Episcopal faction, all the kingdom
almost seems Puritanical; but for this I cannot think the worse of them. But
thirdly, when I consider Puritans, and compare them with their common notorious
adversaries, then their goodness seems most evident to me, and if it were
legibly ingraved in the open wickedness and scandal of their chief opposers.
Nothing but Truth, Hollinesse, and Goodness, seems to me to be the cause,
that Papists do so implacably abominate them: that our proud Hierarchists,
Ambidexters, and Neuters in Religion, do so uncessantly pursue their
subversion; that Court-flatterers and time-serving Projectors, and the ravenous
Caterpillars of the Realm, do so virulently prosecute them with defamations
and contumelies; that Stage-poets, Minstrels, and the jesting Buffoones of the
age, make them the principal subject of derision: Lastly, that all the
shameless rout of drunkards, lechers, and swearing ruffians; and the scume of
the vulgar are so tickled with their reproach, and abuse. Certainly, nothing
but an unappeaseable antipathy could be the cause of all this, and no testimony
of goodness can be more sure, un-erring, and unanswerable than such antipathy.

Amongst wicked men there may be particular hatred, but not a general
antipathy: One wicked man hates not another as wicked, but rather loves him
therefore, or else the World did not observe a decorum in loving her own, and
hating strangers: As there cannot be division in Satan's kingdom; so there
cannot be communion or compatibility betwixt Christ's and Satan's Subjects. But
it is a miserable thing to see how far this word Puritan in an Ethicall sense
dilates itself. Heretofore it was Puritanicall, to abstain from small sins;
but now it is so to abstain from gross open sins. In the mouth of a Drunkard,
he is a Puritan which refuses his cups; In the mouth of a Swearer, he which
fears an oath; In the mouth of a Libertine, he which make any scruple of
common sins; In the mouth of a rude Soldier, he which wishes the Scotch war
at an end without blood. It is sufficient that such men think themselves
tacitly checked and affronted by the unblamable conversation of Puritans,
Bishop Lake that good and godly man moved at the declining state of his time,
is said to have expressed his regret thus: We fear, says he, a relapse into
Popish error, and superstition; but my heart misgives me worse than so: Utter
irreligion and Atheism, me thinks, begins to prevail strangly amongst us: we
are not so likely to lose the light of truth, as the heat of zeal; and what
benefit is in Religion, where the name of it is honored, but the power of it
is not at all seen? where Gods Will is truly understood, but his commands are
wholly slighted? where men know like Christians, but live like Heathens? The
soul of Religion is hearty devotion, and that grows daily more and more
ridiculous amongst us; and yet Religion without the soul of it, is rather a
curse than a blessing to us. No impiety is so heinous in an ignorant Sodomite,
as want of Piety is in a right instructed Israelite. In this wise I have heard
that good Prelate did complain; and this makes me think, that he had in his
complaint some respect to this word Puritan, then which, certainly the Devil
has not a more fatal engine whereby to confound religion, and to subvert all
true zeal, goodness, and devotion. Thus far it appears what a vast
circumference this word Puritan has, and how by its large acception it is used
to cast dirt in the face of all goodness, Theological, Civil, or Moral: so
that scarce any moderate man can avoid its imputation. And thus it does
mischief to men, not commonly noted for Puritans, but if a man be so noted,
though perhaps irregularly, then it is farther otherwise abused: for all such a
man's evil shall be charged upon his Puritanisme, and all his good defaced for
his Puritanisme. Such a man is condemned for murder, and adultery; and at his
death gives strong assurances of unfaigned repentance, and contrition of heart.
He was a Christian, a Protestant, a Minister, a Puritan; yet this crime is
recorded and blown abroad, not for the shame of Christians, Protestants,
Ministers, but of Puritans. And as for his attestation of deep humiliation,
how excellent soever, the honor of them, if any be acknowledged, shall redound
to the Christian, the Protestant, the Minister, to any thing else except the
Puritan.

Howsoever in the first place it ought to be observed, that an unclean stream
does not always receive it is uncleanness from the filth of the Fountain, but
in the second place a pure stream necessarily infers a pure Source. It Is true,
Trees are known by their fruits, and so are men generally by their works;
but this similitude holds not in all men, at all times: for good men sometimes
commit soul sins, and bad men perform laudable services. David defiles
Vriahs wife, and to conceal it from the world, makes drunk and murders Vriah;
and together with him casts away the lives of many other faithful Soldiers:
yet nothing moved at this his own mis-doing, at the same time he sentences to
death a Subject of his for damnifying a neighbor, to the value of a poor
lamb: what might Joab, and the other privy Ministers of these his foul deeds,
censure all this while of this his externally professed sanctity, and purity,
and strictnes in point of justice to other men; or of his so great indignation
against pet^y offenders? what might they judge of the root, from whence these
fruits sprung? did they conclude these fruits, good? or did they conceive that
such fruits might grow upon a good stock? It Is strange, that he which would be
so rigid to a petty fellon, should himself find no remorse at his own murder
and oppression, in spoiling so gallant a Commander, of his wife, of his
sobriety, of his life, and to continue so long a time without regard either
what himself had done, or what Vriah had suffered. But it is well, David lived
in those times when the name of Puritanisme was not invented to blast all
goodness: had he lived amongst us, he had been accounted a Puritan, and being
a Puritan, God might have forgiven him, but the world never would: but it
seems the world was not then poisoned with the same base word, though I
believe under some other nicke-name goodness was always odious: for we read,
that for that very sin of David, Gods name was evil spoken of amongst the
wicked. So Solomon the Son of seduced Bathsheba, if we censure him by many of
his actions, perhaps Jeroboam, and Ahab that made Israel to sin, were not
personally addicted to so much excess of bodily lust, and pollution, nay
perhaps many heathens and Turks have detested his enormous lubricities.

I speak not this to countenance sin, but to discountenance rash censures of
sinners, wishing all that think themselves frail and mortal, to turn their
eyes inwards, and to lay their hands upon their own mouths, forbearing to
censure all sins, but most especially the most latent and obscure of all sins,
hypocrisy.

Solomon the magnificent is held the honestest of all the Princes which reigned
in his time, not excepting Christian Princes, nay not excepting the great
Father of them all, the Apostolic man of Rome: yet this is no shame to
Christianity, but to Christians rather; nay I wish it might be accounted rather
a rebuke, than a shame; rather a rebuke to humble them, than a shame to confute
them. For Christ tells us that many times the first are last, and last first,
God sees not as man sees, and yet he that will judge uprightly ought to see as
God sees, and not as man. So much of the extensive infamy of this word Puritan,
now of its intensive malignancy: but little more needs to be spoken hereof, for
he which tells you who is a Puritan, for the most part tells what is a Puritan.

The Papist we see hates one kind of Puritans, the Hierarchist another, the
Court Sycophant another, the sensual Libertin another; yet all hate a Puritan,
and under the same name many times hate the same thing. He which is an enemy to
our Religion which is the truth, hates the Puritan as an enemy to Truth; he
which is an enemy to Piety, Policy, Morality, charges the Puritan of being the
same: wherefore whatsoever is hated by the perverted and disaffected in
Religion, Piety, Policy, Morality, is a Puritan, and whosoever is a Puritan, is
censured, hated, and slandered as a man perverted and disaffected in Religion,
Piety, Policy, and Morality.

This sufficiently appears by the common slanders of all goodness in these
days, and particularly by the Bishop of Down, for as he justifies Jesuits,
Anabaptists, and the Powder-Traiters before Puritans; so he describes, and
proscribes whole Religions, Sects, and Kingdoms for Puritans.

In the year of grace 1588, when the Spanish Armado had miscarried,
notwithstanding that his holiness of Rome had so peremptorily christened it, and
as it were conjured for it, One of that Religion was strangely distempered at
it, and his speech was as it is reported, God himself was turned Lutheran: By
which, for certain, he meant Heretical. It Is much therefore that my Lord of
Down, now that Episcopacy is so foiled in Scotland, has not raged in the like
manner, and charged God of turning Puritan: but surely, if he has spared God,
he has not spared any thing else that is good; and if he has spared to call God
Puritan, he has not spared to call Puritan Devil: but to conclude, if the
confused misapplication of this foul word Puritan be not reformed in England,
and that with speed, we can expect nothing but a sudden universal downfall
of all goodness whatsoever. AElius Adrianus the Emperor, about an hundred
years after our Savior, having been certified by Serenius Granianus,
Proconsul of Asia, that the Christians in those parts were illegally oppressed
by the malice of unjust Sycophants, sends this his Imperial edict to the next
successor Minutius Fundanus.

If the Provincials can prove ought against the Christians, whereof they charge
them, and can at the bar of justice make good the same, let them proceed in a
juditiall course: but let them not appoach, the Christians merely for the
name, by clamouring, and railing scandals against them: For it is expedient, if
any be disposed to accuse, that the accusation be thoroughly known, and
judicially tried you; therefore if any accuse the Christians that they
transgress the Laws, see that you judge and punist according to the quality
of the offense, but if any upon spite or malice by way of calumny complain
against them, see you chastise such for their malice, and repay them with
condign punishment. I began with a Marquesso, I end with an Emperor, both
read the same Lecture, both teach us a difference betwixt privy malicious
calumny and open judicial accusing, or impleading; God sends us to hearken to
both, as much as the necessity of our case requires it.

FINIS.

