HOLY CHARACTERS CONTAINING A MISCELANY OF THEOLOCICALL DISCOURSES THAT IS
THEOLOGY, Positive, Scholasticall, Polemicall, and Moral.

Built upon the foundation of Scriptures, Traditions, Councils, Fathers.

DIVIDED INTO TWO BOOKS.

Written by GEORGE LEYBVRN Doctor of Divinity.

Bevvare lest there be any man that deceive you through Philosophy, and crafty
handling according to the traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the
world, and not according to Christ:

Coloss. 2. Of your selves shall men rise speaking perverse things to dravv
Disciples after them.

Act. 20. PRINTED AT DOWAY, By BALTAZAR BELLIER. An. 1662.

With Privilege.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD PERCY HERBERT, LORD POWYS OF POWYS etc.
MY LORD,
S. Clement in the eleventh book of Apostolical constitutions writes; that
Selene (the great beauty of Rome in those days) when she showed her self from
a high Tower unto the people of that City, Simon the Magician by sleight
conueyances represented as many Selenes, as were windows in the same Tower.
Howeuer there was no more then one true Selene, the rest being mere outward
resemblances (having nothing of inward substance) contrived by natural magic
unto deluding the Eyesight of the Beholders; in like manner, though true
Theology is not divided, nor has many faces, being the science of one God; that
shows her self front the high Tower of one divine faith, which supports her:
neuertheless through the subtle dealings of Satan, is represented with as many
faces, as there be new models of Christian doctrine, that is, as many, or
rather more, then ages down from Christ till these days, every age
respectively having coind new opinions in order to the mysteries of Christian
Religion. Heady, and high-mynded scholars, once they come to be blown up with
the actiuity of their own wit, and thereby become inordinate 2. Timoth. 3.
erunt homines seipsos amantes.
lovers of their own thoughts, leave the love of truth. As a troubled eye, so
the understanding deluded with opinions, which go beyond the boundaries of
nature, cannot see the light of truth: Mittit illis Deus operationem erroris,
quoniam charitatem veritatis recipere noluerunt. 2. These. 2. In regard heady
scholars are carried on the wings of Pride, and will not embrace the love of
truth, the supreme providence gives them up to their heart's lust unto
vncleaness of error, that is, God Secundum S. Aug. l. 20. ciuit. c. 19. Deus
mittit, quatenus diabolum facere ista permittit.
permitt's Satan to send them strong delusion unto believing lies, and taking
pleasure therein, which together with pertinacy so by degrees, blind's them,
that they still increase in madness, till at lengh through faction, sedition,
and schism they endeavor to ruin, as it were, all true Christian doctrine,
and Religion: witness Nestorius, Arius, Pelagius, Donatus, and sundry other
ancient and modern scholars, which (upon what designs of ambition S. Austin l.
de vtil. cred. c. 1. says, that he is an Heretic that for temporal interest
either coineth, or follows new opinions.
and interest is needless to express) through new coind Theologies have
labored to turn the Church of God into utter disorder, and confusion. As all
rebellion is to civil, so all schism is to ecclesiastical government
dangerous, and pernicious. In the old law, lest the people of God might be
deceived with false coin, and weights, the original Cycli, and original
weights were conseru'd in the Sanctuary of the Temple, and no money, or weights
allowed which were not conform to the original's of the same Sanctuary.
Likewise that the same people might not be deluded with false coyns, and
weights of doctrine, the chair of Moses by divine dispensation was clothed
with infallibility. The high Priest how wicked soever could not utter wicked
doctrine from Moses chair, as appears evidently from Christ's own words Mat.
23. The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair etc. From which sacred Text
S. Austin l. 6. con. Faus. Manichae. c. 29. infers thus. In Cathedra Moysis
mali sedentes bona dicere cogebantur. Besides when God erected Moses his
Chair (Deutro. 17.) he promised that all definitions, Decrees, and decisions
of matters in debate as coming from that seat should be of undoubted truth.
Moreover the children of Israel, were bound to submit to the sentence of the
high Priest, the law condemning of pride, and punishing with death those, which
disobeyed the commandment of the Priest, that ministered to our lord, and the
Decree of the Judges.

In the new law lest Christians might be carried away with every wind of
doctrine S. Peter, and his Chair by divine dispensation were invested into
much better privileges, then Moses, and his Chair. For our Savior took
special care, that S. Peter might not fall away from the true faith, as does
evidence his prayer. Luc. 22. Oraui pro te (Petre) vt non deficiat fides tua: I
have prayed for thee (Peter) that thy faith fail not: and doubtless his prayer
was effectual according to the Apostle (Hebrae. 5.) Exauditus est (Christus)
pro sua reuerentia. Our lord provided for S. Peter that his faith might not
fail, to the end says S. Leo (ser. 3. de Assumpt.) The head being made
invincible, the state of all the rest might be more sure: that is, the rest
thereby might be strengthened, and confirmed in faith. S. Peter according to S.
Ambrose (l. 9. Noui Testam. 9.75. Tom 4.) after his denying of Christ was
constituted the supreme Pastor of souls, because, it was said to him before,
When thou art converted confirm thy Brethren; neither was Christ's prayer
offered in order to the person of S. Peter only, but likewise in reference to
his office; according to the inter pretation of the best antiquity, so that the
effect of the same prayer will continue as long, as the Church of Christ shall
endure on Earth: and indeed even as Christ commands S. Peter to feed his
sheep Ioa. 21. so he commands him to confirm his Brethren Luc. 22. but that
saying of Christ: Feed my sheep, did not relate to the person of S. Peter only
according to all Orthodox Writers: but also to the office of supreme Pastor,
which was conferd upon S. Peter with intent to continue it in his successors,
being of necessary use in the Church: wherefore Christ saying to S. Peter,
confirm thy Brethren, ought to carry the same interpretation; and in earnest
it were manifest weakness to give unto the successors of Moses greater
prerogatives, as to power, authority, and infallibility in the government of
the Synagogue, then to the Successors of S. Peter in the government of the
Church of Christ; for this were to prefer the law of bondage before the law of
grace. In consequence of the premises the Roman faith of S. Peter's successors
cannot fail; not to fall away from faith is a privilege proper to the Church
of Rome, that is, to the Bishops of that seat, as also plainly appears by the
clear Testimonies of primitive Fathers. For example S. Cyprian Epis. 55.
affirm's That infidelity, or false faith, is inconsistent with the Church of
Rome: S. Austin Epis. 66. auer's that our lord has placed the doctrine of
truth in the office, and Chair of the Roman Church, and S. Bernard Epis. 190.
to Pope Innocentius against Abailardus, writes thus. We must refer to your
Apostle-ship all the scandalls, and dangers, which may happen in matters of
faith, for there, defects in order to faith ought to be remedied, where faith
cannot fail: for to what Other see was it ever said, I have prayed for thee
Peter, that thy faith fail not. Although Bishops of Rome that succeed in the
Chair of S. Peter may personally err, as private Doctors: neuertheless none
ever did, or shall err iudicially, or definitiuely, that is none of S. Peter's
successors have, or shall deuiat from the truth in their consistories, Courts,
Councils, consultations held concerning matters of faith, Religion and general
manners, because Christ's prayer (I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith
fail not) protects them. Wherefore the ancient Fathers recur'd to Rome, and
applied themselves to the Chair of S. Peter in all matters of controversy
pertaining to Religion, and faith, namely S. Austin and the Bishops of Affricke
unto Innocentius the first, and unto Celestinus (Epis. 90 95.) S. Chrysostom
had recourse to the same Innocentius (Epis. 1. and 2.) S. Basil to the Pope in
his time Epis. 52. S. Hierom to Damasus Epis. 5. 7 58. and S. Cyprian Epis. ad
Cornelium, expressly affirm's that, the cause of all schisms, and heresies
proceeds from want of obedience to the supreme Pastor. Nec aliunde, says he,
haereses obortae sunt, aut nata sunt schismata, quam inde, quod vni Sacerdoti
Dei non obtemperatur, nec vnus in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, and ad tempus
Iudex vice Christi cogitatur.

From disobeying of lawful Pastors began the notorious schism of Core, Dathan
and Abyron, who rose up against Moses, and Aaron, whom God had appointed
Chief Rulers over them, and the rest of the Children of Israel; puffed up with
proud thoughts of their own abilities, and conceipted worthiness, they were
troubled, and grieved at the establishing of priesthood in the family of Aaron
only, and therefore arrogated to themselves priestly function against the
ordinance of God, and to the upholding of their schism coind a new Theology
teaching, that Moses, and Aaron took too much upon them, lifting themselves
above the people of our lord, saying all were alike holy, and our lord with
every one of them alike: after the same manner all schisms, and heresies down
from our Savior Christ till these days have sprung up against God's
ordinance; in every age some one, or other wanton scholar has drawn
Disciples, and gathered Accomplices together against the supreme Pastor, that
is the Bishop of Rome, and our true Aaron, as S. Bernard calls him l. 2. de
consid. c. 8. pretending that he tak's too much authority upon him, lifting his
own chair above all others; seeing that the spirit of God is with every one of
them to teach, preach, and administer the Sacraments without dependence of him.
Their intent and aim in rising thus against the supreme Pastor of the Church,
is to persuade the unlearned, that the special privileges of Pasce oues meas:
confirma fratres tuos, which Christ co^fer'd on S. Peter, do not descend on
his successors alone: in consequence of which they conceive it needless to seek
to the Bishop of Rome for Confirmation of their new opinions, or to value any
condemnation in order thereto, that proceeds from that Apostolical Chair; and
as all wanton scholars, which coin new notions of Doctrine in order to the
mysteries of Christian Religion seditiously rise against the supreme Pastor
of the Church, so they speak contemptuously of the schools of orthodox
Doctors, in regard these be the supreme Pastors chiefest consistery, and the
Churches sanctuary, that keeps the Original Cycli, and weights of all
Christian doctrine where with they weigh all coyns of new Theologies, and such
as are found too light are laid aside for the high Priest to condemn and
anathematise, lest the unlearned learned be deluded thereby. And indeed since
the first erecting of schools, Co^nexae sunt, says the learned Canus, scholae
contemptio, and haeresum pestes; contempt of schools and heresies are
inseperably connected together. For example Luther afraid of the original
weights kept in the schools of Orthodox Doctors sharpened his tongue against
all the Universities of those days, which he called Lupanaria Antichristi, the
stews, or Brodel houses of Antichrist; and it is common alike to all such as
coin, or follow new opinions to have an extreme abhorrence from the schools of
Orthodox Doctors. But woe to all such wanton scholars, as go out from the
rest into several sects: for they perish in the contradiction of Core; They
are clouds without water carried about of winds, Trees of Autumn without
fruit, raging waves of the sea foming out their own shame, and confusion:
wandering stars, to whom is reserved the storm of darkness for ever (Ep. Cath.
Judae) because they despise the schools of Orthodox Doctors, rise against the
authority of their supreme Pastor, and cut out of their own brains
vnauthorized Models of new sects, and Religions.

As the Prince of darkness by divine permission transforms himself into an
Angel of light, so he guides the pencils of Ambitious scholars unto setting
forth false resemblances of true faith. The extreme wantonness of heady, and
high minded Teachers by the crafty dealings of Satan has even in our days
turned Christianism into great disorder, and confusion; As the People of Rome
through the delusions of Simon Magus were divided in order to the true Selene,
some conceiving her to appear from one window, some from an other, and some
from as many windows, as darted seeming resemblances of her; so very many
Christian people, especially these of our own nation, fince they have let go
their hold of S. Peter's Chair (that is since their falling away from the
obedience due to the Church of Rome, that first converted them to Christianism)
are of different judgments, as to the true faith, deluded by the subtle
sleights of new Teachers, which according to the several lusts of their high
mynds have divided them into several sects: some be Lutherans, some
Caluinists, some Protestants, some Anabaptists, some Independe^ts, some
fift-Monarke men, some Quakers, some Deists, and some Atheists. There are now
as many faiths, as wills, whiles either faith is represented, as new Teachers
will, or as they will, so is interpreted: and whereas according to one God, one
Lord, and one baptism, there is also but one faith, men of these days are fallen
away from that, which is the only faith, and begin to believe, that there is
none at all, confounded with the great variety of seeming faiths; The ground
whereof, as it is before intimated is in regard, Non vnus in Ecclesia ad tempus
Sacerdos, and ad tempus Iudex vice Christi cogitatur. Because due obedience is
not exhibited to Christ's Vicar, and the Chair by our lords voice founded on
S. Peter. As in the old law schisms, so in the new law, heresies spring up. The
Children of Israel fell into schisms, when they fell away from their due
Obedience, to the Chair of Moses; and Christians fall into heresies, as often
as they rise against the Chair of S. Peter coining, or following vnauthorised
novelties, whereby Christian souls are misled into most desperate precipices of
errors: in regard whereof, I have been moved to write a Theology conform to
the ancient Cycli, and weights of the holy Churches sanctuary, that is, to set
forth a whole body of Christian doctrine; built upon Scriptures, Traditions,
Councils, and Fathers which deserve to be preferred before Scholars of new
Notions; that is Christian people ought to adhere, conform their conciences
to, and rely their eternity rather on those, then these, which is the Counsel
that the great S. Austin guies in his 2. Book against Julian the Pelagian
Bishop (who had brocht new opinions to the prejudice of souls) exhorting all
Christians to regard rather the learning of the holy Fathers, which flourished
in the precedent ages, and the constant and universal practice of the
Catholic Church, then the profane novelties vented, and spread by the
Pelagians. Saying Hos (antiquos Patres) oportet, vt Christiani populi vestris
prophanis nouitatibus anteponant, eisque potius, quam vobis eligant adherere.

My lord herein lies the sole intent of these conceptions, which I present you
with, and under your authority adventure into public view unto aduantaging
such as are piously sober Secundum S. Aug. l. 14. de Trinit. c. 1. munns
Theologiae est and pijs opitulari, and veritatem contra impios defendere.
and to defend the truth against such as are impiously wanton. This is the aim
of my Theological discourses, and the height of my desires is but this, that
they may be received into your Lordships protection, which is ground
warrantable enough to gain them credit, in regard of the high measure of
knowledge which is extraordinary in you, beseeming a well studied divine, as
appears by your own writings, which together with your other gifts of nature,
and grace renders you admired by all, that know your Lordship aright, Besides
that which alone might embolden me to address these endeavors unto your
Lordship, is your eminent nobility. The best blood, that is in any English
subject, run's in your Lordships veins, as evidence your paternall, and
maternall descents from the most renowned, and ancient Houses of Pembrock,
Northumberland, and Derby: Again your sundry noble allyances. The lord Talbot
that was Heir of Shrewsbury married your only Daughter, a Lady of great virtue,
and Vere vidua. A widow indeed, having for above these 20. years continued in
her widow hood, notwithstanding her Ladyships youth, person, birth, and great
doury, which made her the ambition of many noble Suitours. Moreover your
Lordships only and most hopeful son married to the most accomplished in
honor, obligingness, sweetness, and piety the lady Elizabeth Daughter to Edward
Lord Marquess of Worcester, which brings forth also an alliance with the most
illustrious House of Norfolk, Arundell, and Surrey.

Since I am fallen upon your eminent Nobility, has not your own Lady much
added thereto? if your House were without an ample series of renowned
progenitors, might not your posterity have a glorious Rise from her Ladyship,
whose eminent virtues have rendered her memory blessed. Nobilitas sola est
atque vnica virtus. Besides has not that gallant Person the lord Crauen her
Ladyships Brother added something of greatness to your posterity, whose brave
and gallant actions performed a broad in foraine parts have gained much honor
to his Country. Moreover the rising of that family is honorable: the supreme
providence haueing brought it to the height of Eminence, which it now happily
enioyes (as the same providence Aug. l. 5. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 15. profitetur
Deum terrenam gloriam excellentissimi Imperij co^cessisse bonis artibus
Romanorum, id est, vt ipsemet interpretatur, virtutibus, quibus ad tantam
gloriam nitebantur.
extended the Empire of the ancient Romans) in regard of Moral virtues, which
were eminent in your ladies Father and Mother the Raisers of it, for as much as
their zeal to the law of nature, that is to do Justice (giving to every one
what is every on's own) and to show mercy unto the distressed (feeding the
hungry, and clothing the naked) rendered them admired of such as knew them:
and according to holy Scriptures, God exalted the Midwiues of the Hebrew women,
and made them houses, Exodus 1. For their compliance to the law of nature in
preserving of innocent Babes, which the Tyrant of Fgypt had commanded them to
kill: and since I am fallen upon Gods merveilous rewarding of moral good
works; in confirmation of this truth I might produce conuincing examples in our
own Country, where very many in these times through a supreme providence are
advanced to honors, dignities, and eminent offices, that is God has built
them new Houses of nobility, or increased the glory of the old, for preserving
loyalty to their king (which is the law of nature written in their hearts) they
feared God, and honored his anointed against the commandment of the Tyrant
of England, and therefore are exalted: and truly upon this score the supreme
providence has built his Grace the Duke of Albermarle a more glorious House
the^ any subject in the Christian world this day enioys, in as much as through
a happy managing of his loyalty he carries the name not only of Paterpatriae
but likewise of Pater Caesaris, having preserved both Caesar and his Countries.
In consequence of the premises his Maties. Catholic subjects, that with the
effusion of their blood, and loss of their Estates have cherefully performed
that duty of nature in order to loyalty, may hope, that a special providence
in good time will make for them Houses of Ease, which shall be the daily prayer
of

MY LORD YOUR HONORS Most humble and most obedient Servant GEO. LEYBVRN.

PREFACE TO THE COVNTRY-MISSIONARY.
SR.
Although these holy Characters (so named, because they describe, and set forth
the holy Mysteries of Christian Religion) contain Theology but compendiously
dressed up: neuertheless, want noe Requisits either essential, or necessary
thereto, being built on the foundation of holy Scriptures, Traditions,
Councils, and Fathers, vvherin lies the consistency of true Theology, which,
as the pillar of fire led the Israelits by night in their way to the land of
promise: so, in as much, as it carries the lights of the best Antiquity shows
Christians their way thorovv the dark Mysteries of Christian faith, as by
night, unto an heavenly Inheritance prefigured in the land of promise: that is,
God has instituted this divine science to direct Governors of souls in the
pursuance of their pastoral function, which is to crush heresies in the bud,
suppress schims, prevent scandals, and to preach the Gospel of Christ unto
salvation to every one, that belieueth. To this intent, and purpose I have
employed my endeavors. Hovveuer: some may conceive, that the aim of this
Theology leuel's at M.r VVhites Theology, because their foundations are as
opposite, as the ends of a Diameter are ouervvhart, and cross, this Theology
being built on the divine Dictates, which Christ left unto his Apostles, and
their Successors in Church-Gouernement unto the saving of souls: but his
Theology, contrariwise is built on the Digbean Peripateticks, which heathen
Philosophers left to their schools unto the exercising of men's wits: and as
the foundations, so the doctrines ex Diametro differ. Yet I set them not down,
because the principal heads thereof Jonas Thamon has learnedly set forth and
expressed to the life, and what of that kind has issued from the excellent
Latin pen of Dr. Pugh, evidence his learning, virtue, and zeal against impious
novelties: but that which ought to have fulness of weight with the good, and
wise Belieuers in order to an abhorrence from Mr. VVites new notions, is
because a famous University has censured, and the sea Apostolic condemned his
Tenants. Hovveuer the Chief design of my vvriting these holy Characters, is to
benefit Missionaryes, and if I may arrive to this, I shall esteem my self
most happy, who am

Sr. Yr. most affectionate Brother, and humble servant. GEO. LEYBVRN.

APPROBATIO.
LIber hic, cui titulus: Sacri Characteres etc. Anglice ab Exim. viro D.
GEORGIO LEYBVRNO, S. Theologiae Doctore compositus, nihil habet fidei aut
moribus dissonum; sed vndique spirat sanam doctrinam cum pietate coniunctam.
Quapropter magno cum fructu, praeli beneficio diuulgabitur.

Datum Duaci die 23. Augusti 1662. MATTHIAS GERTMAN S. Th. Doctor and
Professor, ac in vrbe Duacena librorum Visitator and Censor.

APPROBATIO.
NOs in fra-scripti ingenti cum voluptate per legimus librum, cui titulus, Holy
Characters etc. ab Eximio Domino, D. GEORGIO LEYBVRNO, Sacrae Theologiae
Doctore, ac Collegij Anglo-Duaceni Praeside elaboratum and in eo nihil
inuenimus fidei vel bo^^is moribus diffonum, quinimo ex firmis Sacrae
Scripturae, Conciliorum, ac Sanctorum Patrum authoritatibus fidem orthodoxam
dilucide ostendit, reiectis vanis speculationibus ac questionibus superfluis,
vocumque profanis novitatibus and opinionibus falsi nominis scientiae, quam
quidam promittentes, circa fidem exciderunt; magno ingenij acumine, stylo
eleganti, methodoque subtili ac nervosa, profunde investiga tur, clare
resolvitur, ac clucidatur perspicue; adeo vt, qui his duntaxat fac^is
Characteribus munitus fuerit, abunde habeat, quo Sectariorum ac Novatorum
praestigias, ex vano in Theologia philosophandi genere inductas, detegat ac
devitet, populumque fidelem genuinam fidei Catholicae veritatem, mira cum
facilitate edoccat; quapropter ad communem popularium nostrorum vtilitatem,
luce publica dignissimum censemus.

Duaci in Collegio Fratrum Minorum Recollectorum Anglorum hac 16. Augusti 1662.
F. BERNARDVS A S. FRANCISCO S. Theol Lector. F. IOANNES A S. CRVCE S. Theol.
Lector.


APPROBATIO.
PErlegi librum, cui titulus: Holy Characters, etc. Anglice ab Eximio D. ac M.
nostro D. GEORGIO LEYBVRNO Sacrae Theologiae Doctore, and Collegij Pontificij
Anglo-Duaceni Praeside conscriptum; paruum quidem mole; sed virtute magnum,
vtpote qui omnia Catholicae fidei mysteria clarissime enucleata, praecipuasque
quaestiones Orthodoxos inter, and vel manifestos, vel occultos haereticos
controucrsas solidissime diremptas, mirabili plane breuitate and perspicuitate
complectitur; in eo vbique relucet singularis, and ab omnibus agnita Authoris
eruditio, Pietas, and in Sedem Apostolicam obseruantia: qui memor, se
sapientibus and insipientibus debitorem, hoc in opere, ita paruulis in Christo
lac potum, id est, Christianae fidei rudimenta propinauit, vt in eo nec maximi
solidum cibum, eruditas, in quam, Theologicarum controuersiarum veritates
desiderarent. In opere ea est sermonis claritas, vt etiam infimos admittat; ea
materiei sublimitas, vt etiam summos exerceat: ea rerum varietas, vt illud
plane credam Controuertistis, Praedicatoribus, Confessarijs, Catechistis,
Orthodoxis omnibus, and Heterodoxis Anglis vtilissimum: nec vtilissimum tantum,
verumetiam hac tempestate Nouitatum auidissima paene necessarium. Quapropter
opto, vt quamprimum fieri possit, liber hic magno rei Catholicae commodo in
lucem emittatur.

Datum Duaci in Collegio Anglorum die 23. Augusti 1662. IOANNES WARNERVS S.
Theol. Professor.

A TABLE Of the Characters contained in the first Book.
CHar. I. Of God. page 1. Char. II. Of Adam. p. 6. Char. III. Of Original Sin.
p. 10. Char. IV. Of the Virgin Mary. p. 16. Char. V. Of the son of the Virgin
Mary. p. 25. Char. VI. Of the name of JESUS. p. 28. Char. VII. Of the name of
Christ. p. 34. Char. VIII. Of the Cross of Christ. p. 39 Char. IX. Of Adoring
the Cross. p. 45. Char. X. Of a Christian. p. 55. Char. XI. Of a Christian
persecuted for Christ's sake. p. 61. Char. XII. Of Christian faith. p. 67. Char.
XIII. Of a wit-belieuer. p. 74. Char. XIV. Of a singular Doctor. p. 78. Char.
XV. Of Christian Hope. p. 85. Char. XVI. Of Christian charity toward God. p.
89. Char. XVII. Of Charity toward our Neighbor. p. 94. Char. XVIII. Of Gods
Charity to Man. p. 99. Char. XIX. Of Gods Charity in laying his commandments
on man. p. 106. Char. XX. Of Predestination. Or Election to the kingdom of
Heaven. p. 112. Char. XXI Of Reprobation. p. 121. Char. XXII. Of Christ's
Charity to man. p. 127. Char. XXIII. Of virtue is general. p. 254. Char. XXIV.
Of Wisdom. p. 238. Char. XXV. Of Justice. p. 243. Char. XXVI. Of Temperance.
p. 252. Char. XXVII. Of Fortitude. p. 258. Char. XXVIII. Of sin. in general.
p. 263. Char. XXIX. Of Pride. p. 274. Char. XXX. Of Covetousness. p. 281. Char.
XXXI. Of Usury. p. 290. Char. XXXII. Of Luxury. p. 301. Char. XXXIII. Of Envy.
p. 315. Char. XXXIV. Of Anger. p. 322. Char. XXXV. Of Gluttony. p. 326. Char.
XXXVI. Of Slothfullnes. p. 331. Char. XXXVII. Of a Missionary Priest. p. 335.
A TABLE Of the Characters contained in the second Book.
Char. I. Of Sacrifice in general. page 1. Char. II. Of the Sacrifice of the
Bucharist, or Mass. p. 9. Char. III. Of Melchisedech. p. 37. Char. IV. Of
Sacraments in general. p. 44. Char. V. Of Church-ceremonies. p. 51. Char. VI.
Of Baptism. p. 67. Char. VII. Of Confirmation. p. 85. Char. VIII. Of the
Euchariste. p. 96. Char. IX. Of Communion in both kinds. p. 117. Char. X. Of
Penance. p. 134. Char. XI. Of Contrition. p. 144. Char. XXII. Of Confession. p.
156. Char. XIII. Of Satisfaction. p. 166. Char. XIV. Of Indulgences. p. 180.
Char. XV. Of Purgatory. p. 208. Char. XVI. Of Holy Order. p. 233. Char. XVII.
Of Matrimony. p. 261. Char. XVIII. Of Extrem-vnction. p. 279. Char. XIX. Of the
Church Militant. p. 291. Char. XX. Of Traditions. p. 333. Char. XXI. Of the
Church Triumphant. p. 351. Char. XXII. Of Foundamentall, and not foundamentall
Articles of faith. p. 289.
THE FIRST BOOK OF HOLY CHARACTERS Containing a Miscelany of Theological
discourses THAT IS THEOLOGY Positive, Scholasticall; Polemicall and Moral.
Built upon the foundation of Scriptures, Traditions, Councils, Fathers.
CHARACTER J. OF GOD
THE CONTENTS.
The necessary being of one God: his existence in three distinct persons: his
omnipotency together with his other divine attributes.

GOD is a spiritual nature; so eminent, that nothing can be apprehended by
man, or Angel Aug. l. 1. de doct. Chr. Deus est quo nihil cogitari potest aut
bonitate melius aut porsectione matus.
in goodness better, in perfection greater. His existence Si ab altero haberet
existentiam non esset ens supremu^ and improductu^: proinde debet necessario
essentialiter existere.
is his essence, and therefore to him essential, which euinceth a necessity of
his being, and all Creatures necessary dependence of him: for it is impossible,
that there should be more then Singularitas, seu vt loquitur Tertull. solitas
id est, incommunicabilitas ad extra, est essentialis supremo enti, quod debet
necessario essentialiter existere, quia existentia est rei singularis and
incommunicabilis, ideoque impossible est, vt multipliectur, nam essentiae sunt
omnino per se incommunicabiles.
one necessary being, and that is properly called God 1. Io. 3. There are
three, which bear vvitness in Heaven. the Father, the Word, and the-hold
Ghost: and these three are one. This Scripture testimony gives full evidence of
personal distinction, and essential unity in the blessed Trinity: and as S.
Austin well observes, ouerthrows two heresies at once, namely the Arian by
saying, one which signifies unity in nature: and the Sabellian heresy by faying
bear in the plural number which plainly expresses distinction, as to the
divine persons.
who in essence is one, and in persons three; one and the same individual
Deity essentially requiring to be invested with a triple personality, expressed
in the name of Father, Son, and holy Ghost: God sais, Isa. 66. Shall I cause to
travel, and not bring forth? from this sacred Text S. Austin infers, that it
were not equity if God should give fecundity of generation to his creatures,
and want it, as to himself.
and it were not reason, or equity, that God within him self should be barren
wanting production, that communicates fecundity of generation to all things
without himself.

God the Father is a beginning without a beginning having no beginning of his
being: God the Son has his beginning and being from his divine Father, who
begot him from all eternity, the full brightness of his glory, and Hebr. 1.
splendour gloriae, and figura substantia eius.
the express resemblance of his divine substance: God The Council of Florence
in the decree of Pope Eugenius the 4th. defines the procession of the holy
Ghost from the Father, and the Son. In this Council the Grecians renounced
their heresy, as to the same procession, though soon after they fell again
into it, and so continue obstinate in their pertinacy, notwithstanding that God
by evident signs manifested his just wrath against them, in regard of that
relapse. For soon after, and even at Pentecost, when the Church celebrates a
special Feast in honor of the holy Ghost, the Turks seizd on the Imperial
town of Constantinople, and thereby mastred all Greece, Be sides in the same
Council the Latin against the Greek Fathers asserted the procession of the holy
Ghost from the Father, and the Son, as from one sole beginning of his being.
the holy Ghost, proceeds from the divine Father, and the divine son, as from
one origin of his procession, being the reciprocal love and union of both.

As in the visible sun three things are obseruable The similitude as to the
globe, beams, and light of the sun, Gelasius the Patriarch of Constantinople
used in a conference with Amurath the Emperor of the Turks unto illustrating
the vnexpressisible mystery of the blessed Trinity.
the round body, or globe thereof, the beams, and the light; and as the beams
are derived from the same body, and not from the light, and the light from the
body, and beams, and the body from neither of both: and as all these three make
one only sun without confusion, or separation: so in God there are three divine
persons, and the Son proceeds only from the Father, the holy Ghost from the
Father and Son, and the Father from neither of both: and these three are one
sole God without Symbolu^ S. Athanasij neque confu^aentes personas, neque
substantiam separantes.
confusion of persons, or separation of fubstance.

Exodus 13. Omnipotens nomen eius vnde Aug. ser. 12 ait quod nomen Deus est
potestatis non proprietatis,
The name of God is Almighty for so he calls himself; and his works show
what his name speaks him to be: namely the world created out of nothing by
Psalm. 37. Verbo Domini Coeli firmati sunt and spiritu oris eius omnis virtus
eoru^.
the word of his power: the sweet order in the disposition of the fabric: the
extraction of man from the dust Genesis 2. formauit Deus hominem de limo terrae.
of the ground the universal deluge drowning the whole earth to the destruction
of man, and beast, Noe only with his family preserved Exodus 12. the Children of
Israe are said to have walked upon dry land through the mids of the sea, while
the waters were as a wall unto them on the right, and on the lest hand.
: the division of the red sea giving safe passage to the Israelites as by land,
and the reunion of its waters to the drowning of king Pharao, and his whole
army.

In these marvelous effects of Gods omnipotency as in a clear glass appear his
other divine attributes: in the creation of the world in time, his duration
before time Isaias cap. 51. appellat Dominu^ habitantem aternitatem.
which is his eternity: in the sweet order of the things created, his wisdom:
in the production of man after his own image, and likeness, his goodness: in the
general deluge his justice; in the preservation of the Israelites his mercy:
in the destruction of Pharao, his fortitude. And all his works joint, or
separate declare The intent of creation was the Creatours glorification;
wherefore the Royal Prophet Psalm. 18 makes the heavens to speak the glory of
God.
his glory which is the end of his working, who is above all his works, a God
without circumscription immense, without bounds infinite, in himself
invisible, Romans 5. Inuisibilia Dei a creatura mundi per ea quae facta sunt,
intellecta conspiciuntur.
in his works visible.

CHAR. IJ. OF ADAM
THE CONTENTS.
The integrity of Adams creation: his fall from original Justice through the
evil managing, of his free will: all his posterity concerned in his fall.

ADam was the first man that God made Genesis 1. creauit Deus hominem ad imagine^
and similitudine^ suam.
in his own image, and after his likeness S. Hieron. l. 3. com. in epis. ad
Ephesians. calls Adam the first man, and first Prophet, because he fore told the
mysterious Incarnation of the Son of God, in saying This now is bone of my
bone, and flesh of my flesh, which the Apostle names magnum Sacramentum. For
as much as it importes Christ's nuptial conjunction, or marriage with the
Church his Spouse.
the first Prophet that prophesied of the mysterious Incarnation of the Son of
God: and the first prodigal son, that unhappily managed his patrimony. Eccl 1.
God made man upright; that is, according to the interpretation of great S.
Austin, l. de cor. and gra. God gave him in his creation sanctifying grace. And
the same S. Austin l. 13. de civit. Dei, expressly teaches, that the first man
was created in grace, and l. 12. de civit. affirms that the Angels in their
creation received grace together with their nature.
His heavenly Father had settled him in a fair estate of original justice, as
to his soul, Sap. 2. Creauit homine^ inexterminabile^.
and immortallity as to his body, and he made away with both wilfully; for the
obedience, that was only required to the conseruing thereof Non foret homo
animal rationale nisi ei inesset libera boni, and mali electio: nec Deus foret
iustus si impossibilia iuberet. Aug. ser. de tem.
laid in his power. And it was necessary to injoyne Aug. l. 8. genesis oportebat,
vt homo sub Domino Deo positus aliunde prohiberetur.
him the performance of that virtue; for if nothing had been commanded him, or
he forbidden from nothing, he would have had nothing to know his own
inferiority, and to acknowledge his Creatours superiority.

The Command, that God laid upon Adam was that he should not cate of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil: so named not in reference to the fruit, that in
it self was good Genesis 1. omnia quae fecerat Deus erant valde bona.
for all that God created was very good; but in order to transgression, that
taught him to discern between good and evil: between the good of obedience, as
to the perpetuating of grace, and life, and the evil of disobedience, as to
the introducing of sin, and death. Yet God had no part in Adams transgression;
for his divine goodness, had bestowed on him sufficient auxiliaries to continue
him in obedience, and did nothing to necessitate his disobedience Ecclus. 15.
God made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his counsel: gave
him his commandments:.... they shall conserve thee: he has set water and
fire before thee; stretch out thy hand unto which thou vvilt: before man is
life, and death, good, and evil, what likes him shall be given him. This
sacred Text gives clear evidence of Adams free will, as to accepting or
rejecting divine grace, that might have led him to everlasting life: and indeed
S. Austin infers from the same text free will in all men, lib. de gra. and lib.
arb. arguing from thence, that though God gives to every one his merciful
grace unto obtaining of heavenly blessedness, nevertheless he necessitates none
to accept of it, being in the liberty of each one to reject it. And herein
according to the Council of Trent. Consists the reconciling of man's free
will, and grace together. Morouer the holy writer of Genesis clearly
demonstrats man's free will after Adams fall; for cap. 4. God said to Cain (who
was troubled, and angry to see his brother Abel, and his offerings respected
above his own) Why is thy Countenance cast down? if thou do vveli shall thou
not be accepted? and if thou do not well sin lies at the door, but the
lust thereof shall be under thee, and thou shall have rule oven it: that is,
says S. Austin l. 13. Civit. Dei cap. 7. thou shall bear dominion over sin.
Where by is evident, that man's free will was not extinct through Adams fall:
and this Catholic assertion is yet more plainly taught Deutr. 30. I call
heaven and earth to vvithess this day (says Moses to the People of Israel)
that I have set before you life and death, blessing, and cursing, choose
therefore life. These last particles evidence enough that God gave man liberty
to choose good or evil, which is the consistency of liberum urbitrium, free
will. S. Ambros in Psalm. 40. v. 10.
for he left him in the hands of his own counsel, election, and deliberation,
which euinces Adams free will: for what is necessary, or impossible, requires
noe consultation, or deliberatnes, these being manifest tokens of free actions.
Besides it is not agreeable unto reason, that he, who was established absolute
lord of all living thing created to the use of man Aug. l. de cor and gra.
docet obseruationem praecepti Adamo impositi dependisse ab eius libero arbitrio.
should want dominion, and free use of his own will, and liberty. Howeuer Adams
fall seems a strange thing, he having nothing in himself, that inclined to
disloyalty; for God had made him upright, and the integrity of his creation
extended to all his faculties spiritual, and sensible: in his will was
integrity of sanctifying charity, in his understanding integrity of both
natural and supernatural knowledge, and in his sensible parts integrity of
order with subordination, and peace with quietness; whereby plainly appears,
that his fall did not proceed from himself originally. Nevertheless it is
certain, that he did fall, yielding to a weak temptation, of which himself was
not author. Simple Eve, whom God made for his meet help, ill counseled by the
crafty serpent, propounded unto him the eating of the forbidden fruit, under a
fair color of bettering his, and her own condition in the knowledge Of good and
evil: Adams condescension to this out ward suggestion occasioned his fall,
wherein he imbarqued all men to ruin, leaving nothing behind him for their
reparation Zach. 13. Adam exeplum metem ab adolescentia mea.
save his own example of sacrilegious disobedience, to make them be wary how to
engage in the future against the virtue of obedience.

CHAR. IIJ. OF ORIGINAL SIN.
THE CONTENTS.
The innate propriety of Original sin: the difference between Original sin,
and Adams personal offense, and between Original sin and carnal
concupiscence.

Original sin is the Aug. Epis. 130. vocat peccatum originale vitium
haereditarium, and debitum paterni chyrographi.
hereditary vice, that passed from our first parent upon The Apostle Romans 5.
teaches, that as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, so
death went over all men, in whom all men have sinned.
all mankind. The preuarication of Adam did not prejudice himself only:
Council. Araus. 2. can. 2. condemns such, as assert Adams transgression to have
prejudiced himself only, and not his posterity. This Canon is set down in the
Council of Treat. sess. 6.
but also the posterity. God did not give him original justice so peculiarly,
as that it was not intended to all others descending from him; yet his divine
wisdom put in his will the cause of having, or wanting it, God had constituted
Adam head of all mankind, as to having, or wanting Original Justice: in
consequence of which the will of Adam (he being head of all human nature)
contained the wills of all men (taken in the moral sense) as to keeping, or
losing Original grace, God having placed in his will the cause, that might
preserve, or lose it; yet though the will of Adam taken in the proper real
sense, was the same when he sinned, and when he repented, howeuer it was not
the same morally, because he sinned as a public, and repented as a private
person only, and therefore his repentance profited himself alone.
whom he had constituted chief head of all men, and his disobedient carriage
deprived all of the intended grace, S. Anselm. l. de Concep. Vir. c. 26. names
Original sin nakedness of Justice due: that is a privation of Original
Justice: justifying grace being due to every man from the integrity of
creation, and lost by Adams preuarication.
the wanting where of is original sin, so named, because it proceeds
originally from Adam, by the conveiance of Council. Trid. definit peccatum
originale in omnes tra^sfundi per propagationem.
propagation accompanied vith carnal concupiscence, as the conduit of its
passage to all his race. S. Austin l. 3. oper. imperf. teaches that original
sin, is not only a sin, but also the pain of sin, whereby it is evident that
original sin is not the actual personal sin that Adam committed, which could
not be the pain of sin, for sin a fore was not come into the world.
Whereby plainly appears, that the actual, and personal sin of Adam, that
preceded propagation, is not original sin contracted by propagation. Besides
this passes upon all men, and consequently is common; but personal, and
common are diverse, and inconsistent together. Howeuer it is the effect of the
personal sin; yet so Sap. 10. eduxit illum (Adam) a delicto sico.
that the washing away of that, was not to prove a cure for this. It was in
Adams power to hurt, but not to cure the wound. He made his own peace with his
Creator by the virtue of true repentance, S. Austin. l. 3. de lib. arb. says,
that it were not as to equity consonant, that Adam should beget children better
then himself.
but could not therein include his family, as he did in his fall: wherefore
though justifying grace had cleard him of the guilt of sin; notwithstanding he
begot children, that were sinners. Even so pure grain sown in the ground
produces corn with chaff, and straw: good grapes bring forth wild grapes: good
olive trees wild olive trees: and circuncised Jews vncircuncised children.

As original grace is the life of the soul: so is original sin, which is the
privation thereof, the death of the soul, and thereby distinct S. Austin. l. de
pec. meant. and remis. expressly teaches that carnal concupiscence, (which the
Apostle calls lex in membris) remains after baptism: in consequence whereof
it is noe sin, sin taken in the proper sense; for baptism leaves nothing of
vncleaues in him, that is baptized aright. Again lib. de nup. and concup. and
in sundry other places of his writings he declares, that baptism does not wash
away concupiscence, thereby distinguishing original sin which baptism fully
destroys from concupiscence. Moreover S. Austin l. 2. de nup. and concupis.
plainly affirms, that the conflict, or rebellion that comes of carnal
concupiscence is not damnable, though troublesome, because of the extreme
unquietness, which it foment's.
from carnal concupiscence which is not mortal, and damnable, because it does
not perfect sin: though it is very troublesome, because it foments disquietnes,
Gal. 5. care concupiscit uduersus spiritum.
for it is the law in the flesh, that resist's the law of the mind. And albeit
that baptism washes original sin out of the soul, yet it does not wash
concupiscence out of the flesh, Aug. illa concupiscentia ex nobis ipsis
inobedie^tia iustissimo reciprocatu inobedientibus reddita est.
which is a disobedience laid upon all flesh by just reciprocation for the
disobedience of the first flesh. Whereby is plainly evidenced, that
concupiscence S. Austin. l. 3. coun. Julian. teaches, that concupiscence does
not proceed from God, but from sin: wherefore S. Paul sometimes call's
concupiscence sin, for as much as it came of sin. and inclines to sinning. And
indeed it is noe sin, sin taken in the proper sense, for a free voluntary act of
transgression against the law of God. Wherefore the Council of Trent has
defined, that it is not properly a sin, as it is left in the regenerated
through baptism, because as S. Austin teaches concupiscence does not perfect
iniquity, and it is left after baptism to a good intent, namely to be the seed
of a spiritual warfaire unto exercising of the soul in humility, virtue, and
godliness.
is not made by God, but by the sin of the flesh. Howeuer the supreme
providence lets it reign in the flesh, even after baptism, that the flesh may
minister matter of virtue to the spirit. Though the Children of Israel, Gods
chosen people passed the red sea (which is a Type of Christian baptism) came
safe to the land of promise (which is a figure of sanctifying grace that
baptism confers) and drove away the Cananites their enemies, that possessed it
before, which denotates the Devil, that the Sacrament of baptism cast's out of
the baptized; neuertheless the supreme providence left in the mids of them a
Iebusaeus (whereby is represented carnal concupiscence) that daiiy four ented
disquietnes, continually quarielling, fighting, and prejudicing them
extrea^ely. After the same manner the desires of the flesh fight whith, and
sometimes overcome the spirit, not by strengh, but by flattery. The flesh is
like the alluring Dalila that through fawning sweet enticing words mastered
Sampson, who exceeded her far in strength: carnal concupiscence is a fair
spoken lady, that tempts the spirit, as Eve did Adam, and if it find not the
spirit circumspect, watchful without sleeping, and extreme swift in flying
from its allurements, as Joseph did from the wanton lady of Egipte, it will
gain the victory infallibly: in consequence of which every Christian, that
will prefer heavenly enjoyments before wordly pleasures, ought to fly from the
crafty dealings of the flesh as from a serpent, lion, or tiger.

CHAR. IV. OF THE VIRGIN MARY
THE CONTENTS.
The Virgin MARY Mother of God, Mother taken in the proper sense: her maternity
did not prejudice her virginity, nor original sin her conception, which by
divine dispensation was immaculate: the power of her Intercession unto
salvation to every sinner, that humbly seeks unto her.

THe Virgin MARY was the Royal Stemm Isaias cap. 11. prophesied that there
should come a rod forth of the root of Iesse, and that a flower should grow
out of his root. Where according to the ancient Fathers, the Prophet meant by
the rod the Virgin MARY, and by the flower her divine son JESUS.
that sprung from the root of Iesse, and from her root sprung the fairest
branch of man kind. For she was the woman, Gal. 4. misit Deus Filium suum
factum ex muliere.
of whom the Son of God was made man, whence arised her most excellent title of
mother of God. And Saint Elizabeth was not more truly the mother of S. John
Baptist, then the Virgin Mary was Gods mother, mother taken in the proper
sense, having all necessary requisites to a true maternity. For the body, that
the son of God assumed, was made of her and by her disposed to the reception of
the reasonable soul, that informed the said body: also she cooperated to the
uniting of that soul to the said body, and bore to the world the singular
person Christ, God-man, and man-God, which was sufficient enough to inuest her
in the eminent title of mother of God, mother taken in the proper sense. For to
furnish all essential requisites to the making of Christ, namely his divine
nature, personality, and reasonable soul, are not necessarily required to make
her maternity. For if a mother could not be truly the mother of her son, unless
she should furni^h whatsoever is essential to a son, it would plainly, and
evidently follow, that S. Elizabeth was not the mother of S. John Baptist, nor
any other woman the mother of her child, since a child essentially requires a
reasonable soul, that is not produced by the mother, but created by God alone.

To declare how the son of God was conceived of the Virgin Mary lies not within
the reach of a natural understanding: the nuptial conjunction of divinity,
and humanity in the unity of his divine person, was the divine work of the holy
Ghost in an admirable, and inexpressible manner; howeuer it may be illustrated
thus. S. Greg. Thaumat. l.de Incarn. uses that similitude, unto illustrating
the manner of Christ's Nativity.
Naturalists have observed, that the shell fish, which brings forth a
precious stone, called an union, when the time of breeding comes (naturally
desirous of conception) opens its mouth to receive the dew descending from
Heaven, which afterward touched by a heavenly lightning contracts that
precious body of stone named union, through the cooperation of the same shell
fish. The Virgin MARY is the pure shell: the heavenly dew the son of God, that
descended from heaven into the Virginal womb: the heavenly lightning the holy
Ghost, that descended upon the Apostles in form of lightning, and fiery tongues
at Pentecost: the touch of the said lightning the divine operation of the same
holy Ghost, in virtue whereof together with the concurrence, and cooperation of
the Virgin MARY the son of God contracted a precious body justly named an
union, for he made one of two: united Judah; and Ephraim, the Jews, and the
Gentiles, demolishing the middle wall of the partition (namly the old law,) that
caused the division between them.

As in the Conception of the son of God the Virgin Mary was like the
aforementioned shell fish: so in his Nativity she resembled a royal bird, that
in bigness little exceeds a sparrow, and in color represents the sky, with
some increase of white, and purple: it sings amongst the low, and humble reeds,
builds its nest of thorns upon the sea, brings forth its young ones in winter,
Dies Alcionides.
and during the time of breeding the whole Ocean is quiet, and calm. The Virgin
Mary is the royal bird, in humility little, and whom celestial graces
beautified with an advantage of natural gifts: she sung amongst the low, and
humble reeds of a poor Cottage, Behold the hand maid of our lord: made her
cradle of a thorny manger, brought forth her divine son the 25th. of December,
and during the time of her traveling with child The Evangelist S. Luke cap. 2.
writes, that it happened in those days, there came a decree from Augustus
Caesar, that all the world should be enrolled.
the whole world did obedience to Augustus Caesar, acknowledging his
soueraignity in a full enjoyment of peace.

As in the Conception of the son of God no human seed did interuene to diminish
the sanctity of the Virgin Mary: so in his Nativity no vncleaues did occurr to
prejudice her Virginity; he went out of her pure womb, as the sun out of a
bright morning; he did not force his passage to a breach of the Virginal seal:
that as before, so after his miraculous birth continued sealed: the Virgin Mary
was the S. Hierom. aduersies Iouianum, haec (Virgo Maria, est, inquit porta
Orientalis Ezechiel, c. 44. semper clausa, per quam sol iustitiae, and Po^tifex
noster secundum ordinem Melchisedech ingreditur, and egreditur.
Oriental door that gave ingress, and egress to our high Priest, and still
remained shut. And though to her Conception concurred human seed:
notwithstanding by a divine dispensation she was delivered from all uncleanness,
and Original infection, which defiled the Conceptions of all others descending
by the interuening of human seed from the race of Adam. Quicksiluer infused
into any whatsoever vessel of Gold, silver, Iron etc. save a vessel of pure
glass, break's throw it: Original sin is the quick silver, that broke all the
vessels of human nature, save that of the Virgin Mary, who was the unbroken
vessel of pure glass. And it was necessary that she should be so Eccl. 3.
Pater sine honor est dedecus filij.
for a mother without honor, is the dishonor of her son. Neither was it
probable as to the light of reason, that she, who in her eternal
predestination was foreordain'd to be the mother of God, should be made in her
Conception an example of divine wrath: or who by an eternal decree was
appointed to fight the infernal serpent, and bruise his head, should at any
time be enslaued by sin, whereof the serpent is sole author. S. Andrew the
Apostle said, (as it is related in his history) that as the first man was made of
pure earth, so it was necessary that Christ should be born of a pure Immaculat
Virgin. Besides sundry Popes have named the blessed Virgins Conception
Immaculate, thereby ascribing to her exemption from the guilt of Original sin,
according to Pope Alexander the seventh, who has declared in a special Bull
put forth 1661. that by the feast which the Church celebrates of the Immaculate
Conception, is meant the blessed Virgins preservation from Original sin. This
feast of the Immaculate Conception, was (as to the western Church) first
celebrated in England, and afterward in France by the canons of lions; and
though S. Bernard reprehended the practice there of as to the same canons:
neuertheless he was not against the feast it self, being offended only because
the said canons had introduced it, by their own private auctority. But in the
Greek Church, the feast of the Conception was celebrated before the year 1000.
as attestes Gailatinus l. 1. c. 4.
Besides since God in the creation of our first Adam prepared for his
entertainment a terrestiall paradise beautified with all manner of pleasant
trees bearing fruit, and flowers breathing sweet smells, S. Austin l. de not.
and gra. c. 36. gives evidence enough of the blessed Virgins preservation even
from the guilt of original sin; for proving there against the Pelagians, that
young children are not without sin (which of necessity is meant of original,
young babes not being capable of actual offense) refuses to bring in question
the Virgin Mary. Now if S. Austin had impugned the Pelagians, as to actual
sin, he ought not to except the Blessed Virgin only, but likewise all young
children, these having nothing of actual, or personal transgression: whereby
plainly appears that S. Austin did not think, that the Virgin Mary was guilty
of original sin.
doubtless in the incarnation of our second Adam, he made his spiritual
paradise, to wit, the Virgin Mary fan beyond the other, as to beauty goodness
and splendor. S. Ansel. l. de Concept. Virginali. c. 18. decens inquit crat,
vt ea puritate, qua mayor sub Deo nequit intelligi Virgo illa Deipara niteret.
In her he planted spiritual trees of all virtues, and flowers of all the
graces, that ever had been distributed to any human, or Angelical creature.
And as God in the temporal generation of his only son thought fit, waueing
other feisable ways of his mercy, to make the Virgin Mary an Instrument of
universal redemption: so with reference to the merits of the said son he
constituted her a means of particular salvation: he in fused into her soul the
plenitude of celestial gifts, whereby it plainly appears, that all necessary
requisits to the purchase of eternal life proceed from God by the Virgin Mary
through the merits of her son JESUS: and therefore both primitive, and modern
times, have styled her S. Athanas. ser. in Euan. prays thus to the mother of
God: we together with the Angel Gabriel extol thee, saying: Hail Mary full of
grace our lord is with thee, pray for us, o Mistress, o Lady, o Queen, o mother
of God.
queen of mercy, that opens the bowels of Gods charity, and compassion to whom
she will: S. Ephrem in quadam Orat. de Deipara makes his prayer to the blessed
Virgin thus: Virgin before and after travel, by tsiee we are reconciled to
Christ our God, thy son: thou art the helper of sinners, the Heaven of such as
are lost with tempests, the worlds comfort, the deliverer of the imprisonned,
and the Redeemer of Captives. S. Austin de fide, and symbolo, and de agone
Christiano, says, that as Adam and Eve procured our fall: so both sexes
conduced to our salvation.
insomuch that the most grievous sinner cannot perish enjoying the support of
her protection. As Christ's saying to S. Peter, feed my lambs, feed my sheep was
directed to one, and intended to many lawfully succeeding him (that government
being of necessary, and continual use in the Church) so his saying to S.
John, behold thy mother was addressed to one, and meant to all, Aug. ser. 18.
de sanctis Tom. 10. vel (vt alij sentiunt) S. Fulgentius habet haec verba:
sancta Maria, succurre miseris, inua pusillanimes, refoue fiebries, ora pro
populo,... intercede pro deuoto femineo sexu.
that none at all might want a powerful, and tender mother of love and mercy
to fly unto for protection in their necessity. Hence is euidenced, S. Ansel.
apud S. Antonium 4. p. tit. 15. cap. 14. item S. Bernardus) sic alloquitur
Deiparam: quemadmodum o beatissima, omnis a te auersus, and a te despectus
necesse est vt intereat, ita omnis ad te conuersus, and a te respectus
impossible est. vt pereat.
that as it is necessary for such, as are auerse from the Virgin Mary, and by
her despised, to perish: so it is impossible for such as are converted to her,
and by her respected, not to be saved.

CHAR. V. OF THE SON OF THE VIRGIN MARY.
THE CONTENTS.
The promised Messiah: mediator of God, and men: his abundant love shown in
the pursuance of his mediatiou, and the blessed effects thereof.

THe son of the Virgin Mary is Jesus Christ According to S. Austin ser. 3. de
Ascens. to assert Christ to be man only, is to deny the glory of the maker, and
to say that he was God only, is to deny the mercy of the Redeemer; for neither
God alone could have suffered, nor man alone overcome death.
perfect God, and perfect man. God the second person in the blessed Trinity
made Aug. ser. Not. Domiui. Deus filius, inquit, se hominec fecit, vt homo
fieret Deus.
himself man, to make man God; not by the conversion of his divinity into man's
flesh, but by the assumption of human nature, to his divine person: so that in
this mystery of Hypostaticall union, God and man are not two, but one Christ
containing three substances, the divine of his person, the spiritual of his
soul, and the material, of his body. The Prophet Daniel cap. 3. and sundry
other texts of the old Scripture give clear evidence of Christ's coming into
the world, his destroying of sin, and his redeeming of mankind.
By the virtue of his Incarnation he finished preuarication, put an end to sin,
abolished iniquity, brought everlasting grace, and accomplished the visions and
predictions of the holy Prophets, who is the anointed holy of holyes, the
promised Messiah, that came into the world, a Timor. 2. vnus Deus and vnus
mediator Dei, and hominu^.
mediator of God, and men for peace: and in favor of these so charitably
mediated, that he gave his body in a sacrifice for the effecting of it S. John
the Evangelist cap. 3. calls Jesus Christ the lamb of God, that takes away
the sins of the world.
he washed away their sins (the sole ground of Gods heavy displeasure in his
own blood Jsai. 53. tanquam ouis ad occisionem ductus.
as an innocent lamb carried to the slaughterhouse, he emptied his veins,
superabundantly bleeding, even to the separation of his soul from his body, in
evidence of his superabundant love; According to S. Ambrose, one sole drop of
Christ's precious blood, had been sufficient to redeem all mankind.
for one only drop of that precious liquor had been sufficient for the
redemption of all mankind.

His extraction as man, is derived from the most illustrious Tribe of Romans 15.
Isaias says, there shall be the root of Iesse, and he that shall rise to rule
over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles hope, Christ was the flower, that
grew out of the root of Jesse, that came of the stock of Judah.
Judah, whereof he was Apoc. 5. ecce vicit leo de tribus Judah.
the conquering lion: he overcame the world, the devil, and the flesh: the
world by contemning it, the devil by putting down his principallity, the flesh
by Crucifying it. As a lion he appeared in his nativity; for it is the innate
propriety of that royal Beast to wipe out with his stern the prints of his
feet, that his steps may not be discovered: and Christ in his Nativity hid with
the stern of his humanity his God head that it should not be perceived by the
devil: as a lion Genesis 49. requiescens accubuisti vt leo, and quasi leaena quis
suscitabit eum.
he slept in his sepulcher, none daring to awake him: as a lion he waked
himself rising gloriously Mat. 27. soluite hoc templum, e in triduo
reaedificabo illud.
in the third day of his dead sleep by the virtue of his own power: and as a
lion he will come to the general judgment to put down the authority, power and
principallity of all his enemies, 1. Cor. 15. cum tradiderit Regnum Deo Patri.
and deliver the kingdom, which is the Congregation of the faithful (never
after to be exercised by the tyranny of the wicked) to his divine Father, to
whom, as God, he is equal, as man, inferior.

CHAR. VJ. OF THE NAME ISEVS.
THE CONTENTS.
The origin, excellency, and marueillous virtue of the name JESUS.

JESUS is the proper name of the son of man, Luc. 19. venit filius
hominisquaerere and saluum facere quod perierat.
that came into the world to seek, and save that which was lost, and to heal,
and quicken that which was mortally wounded. This is to say, that the son of
the Virgin Mary (who is also the son of God) is properly named Isaias cap. 62.
prophesied of the name JESUS: and thou shall be called (says he) by a new
name which the mouth of our lord has named. That is the Angel of God, whom
the Prophet Zachary calls the mouth of our lord, and it is set down Mat. 1.
that the words: thou shall call his name Jesus, etc. were uttered by an Angel.
JESUS, which signifies Savior, being born to save his people from their sins
S. Austin treating of Christ's coming into the world writes thus: take away
vvounds, take away death; if man had not perished, the son of man had not
come, because there would have been no need of remedies; whereby he means,
that if Adam had not sinned the son of God had not been the son of man.
which are the wounds, and death, that procured his coming, or temporal
generation. As in the administration of Ecclesiastical, and civil government,
names are given to men suitable, and proper to the charges, or offices they
undergo, (for example the names Pope, Bishop, Emperor, King, General,
Admiral, Mayor: etc.) so the son of the Virgin Mary was by Mat. 1. vacabis
nomen eius Iesum, ipse enim saluabit populu^ a peccatis eorum.
diuino dispensation named JESUS, Savior, the general redemption being
committed to his charge. And allbeit that this name was given to some others
long before (for the holy Scriptures make mention of Jesus Naue according to
Ecclesiast. 46. was a valiant warrier.
one JESUS Naue, and Jesus the son of Iosedech succeeded his Father in the
office of high Priest. Hag. 5.
JESUS the son of Iosedech high Priest,) yet it was new, and extraordinary in
the son of the Virgin Mary: first, as to his Person, being God and man, and
consequently far more excelling the other two, then substances their shadows,
or things figured their naked figures. And Jesus Naue though a Gallant Captain,
howeuer he conducted only the people of Israel into the land of promise, which
Moses before had brought out of Egygt; but Jesus the son of the Virgin Mary
came a guide to all nations unto conducting them into the kingdom of Heaven, of
which the land of promise was a figure only, as likewise Jesus Naue was a Type
only of Jesus the son of the Virgin Mary. And though Jesus the son of Iosedech
was a high Priest, yet he did not perpetuate his Priesthood. that dying with
him; but Jesus the son of the Virgin Mary Hebr. 6. tu es Sacerdos in aternum.
is a Priest for ever enjoying an ever lasting Priest hood. Besides Jesus the
son of the Virgin Mary saved his people from their sins: of slaves unto Satan
S. John the Evangelist. cap. 5. writes that Christ gave power to be the sous
of God unto as many, as received him.
he made Children of God, and showed mercy Isai cuius misericordia super omnem
carnem.
on all flesh. Secondly as to the name it self, that was new, and marueillous
also Philip. 2. at the name of Jesus every knee shall bovv, of those which are
in heaven, of those vvihch are on Earth, and of those which are under the
Earth, that is in Purgatory, for those which are under the earth in the hell of
the damned give nothing of reverence to the name of Jesus, being obdurate in an
abhorrence from it. S. Hieron. l. 3. Comment in Isa. attesteth, that in those
days bowing at the name of Jesus was counted a distinctiue sign, whereby
Christians were known from Jews, which showed noe more respect, and reverence,
when they heard Jesus named, then when they heard the name of Satan, or
Pharaoh. Howeuer Catholics do not honor the name of Jesus, in regard of the
Syllables, letters, or sound, that it carries, but because of the relation it
has to the Son of God called Jesus. Neither does this exhibition of Religious
worship render them more guilty, of superstition, then are the subjects of a
king, when they show a civil reverence, while they hear him named.
for at the name of Jesus (the Son of the Virgin Mary) every knee bow's, of
Creatures in heaven, in earth, and under the earth, Act. 4. non est aliud nomen
in quo homines saluari possu^t nisi in nomine Jesus Nazareni.
and it is the sole name that procures salvation for man: in respect, and
consideration whereof it has been a holy constant custom amongst ancient
Catholic Christians to bow at the name of this Jesus, in reverence, and
reference, not to the material elements, or sound of the name it self, but to
the son of the Virgin Mary, God and man, which kind of Religious honor was
never exhibited to the name of Jesus Naue, or Jesus the son of Iosedech: and
the best antiquity counted the said Custom of bowing at the name of Jesus a
distinctiue mark to the distinguishing of Christians from Jews, who hearing
the name Jesus spoken did no more bow their stiff necks, and proud heads,
then they did hearing the names Pharach or Satan S. Hieron. l. 3. Commentar ait
suo tempore Christianos hac nota a Iudais cognitos fuisse, quod hi nunquam
genuflectere^t audito nomine Jesus.
Besides the ancient Christians were piously accustomed to wear about their
necks the name of this Jesus formed in Agnus Deies, and Crosses which they
counted as Religious table books to preserve the memory According to S. Austin
there is no such soueraign medicin against sin, as is a reflection on the
grievous sufferings which Christ, God and man endured for our sake: and who is
(writes S. Bernard) so voluptuous, as will not abstain, so ambitious, that
will not repent, or so full of wrath, that will not grieve, when he takes into
his serious consideration the passion, and death of Christ.
of their God crucified, dead, and buried, knowing well, that if they would not
carry the name of the divine son in tables of their hearts, they should not
find their own names put down in the table book of the divine Father, which is
the book of life, since none can come to the Father but by the son, and the
merits of his passion. Whereby is plain that to a good Christian the name of
Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary Bonauo^tura in vita^ S. Francisci. scribit eum
solitum fuissa labia sua lambere dia legerot nome^ Jesus, and S. Bernardus ser.
13. in Cant. Jesus, inquit, mel in ore, in aure melos in cord Iubilu^.
is honey in the mouth, melody in the care and gladness in the heart. Further
more the very name of Jesus Lactantius l. 4, c. 24. affirms that many men were
delivered from devils through the name of Jesus, and the sign of the cross,
that represents his passion, and death. The same is asserted by S. Justin the
Martyr in his dialogue with Tryphon: this name Jesus, (says he) forces devils
to fly. Again the name of Jesus according to Origin heales wounds, cures
diseases, delivers from death, and expells devils.
has produced marueillous effects, overcame temptations, expelled devils, and
cured all manner of infirmities, in reference to him whose proper name it is,
to wit, the son of the Virgin Mary, who is also the son of God.

CHAR. VIJ. OF THE NAME OF CHRIST.
THE CONTENTS.
The exposition of the word Christ: his Priest hood, whereby he was constituted
Chief Governor of souls unto bringing them to the knowledge of truth, and to
healing the wounds also, which sin had inflicted: in the Cure whereof Christ
performed the seven works of mercy.

CHrist is a second name properly belonging to the son of the Virgin Mary, so
named: because he was anointed by the holy Ghost, in respect of Psalm. 44. thy
God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Christ
was anointed in regard of his hypostaticall union: in consequence of which he
was both peculiarly, and incomparably anointed, and endued with abilities, and
graces above all other kings, and Priests.
the hypostaticall union of his divine, and human nature in one divine person,
so that at once, and in a most eminent degree he was both king, and Priest, and
endued with gifts, and abilities effectually necessary for the performance of
each charge: The Royal Prophet Psalm. 49. assertes Christ's rule, and dominion
over the whole world.


As king, his inheritance was the whole world, and the plenitude of all things
therein contained, though while he lived on the earth, he did not exercise
Regal power.

As Priest he was chief Governor of souls, being married to the Church in
mercy and compassion Oseae. 2. Spensabo te mihi in aeternum.
for ever: and this spiritual government he executed in two kinds of ways.

As to the first S. John the Evangelist cap. 1. attesteth Christ to be the true
light, that enlighteneth every man, that comes into the world; from whence S.
Austin l. 1. de Genesis Con. Manich. c. 3. inters, that every man may keep the
Commandments, if he will himself, because says he, that light (Christ)
lightneth all men, that come into the world: and indeed, as S. Anselm teaches,
no man wants the light of grace, because God does not give it, but because
man will not accept it, being as S. Austin often inculcates, left to the free
will of each one to consent unto, or dissent from divine grace, which begins
every good work, and if not hindered through the resistance of our flexible
nature, effectually perfects the work it begins:
he was a general light, offering on his part to enlighten every one in
darkness of ignorance, and sin: insomuch that such as are not enlightened, it is
because they Ioa. 3. lux venit in mundum, and dilexeruns homines magis
tenebras, qua lucem.
love darkness more then light: like unto certain Ethiopians, who have so great
an abhorrence from the clear beams of the sun, that at the rising thereof, they
retire into woods, or dens, to eschew the brightness of it: such are S. Ansel.
homo no^ habet gratiam, non quia hanc no^ dat Deus, sed quia hanc no^ accipit
homo.
sinners, which through wilful blindness of error do Job. 24. ipsi era^t
lumini rebels. declinaueru^t oculos suos ne viderent solemn.
rebel against the light of divine grace, shutting the eyes of their
understanding, that it may not shine upon them. And as wood, wherein is much
water, does hardly take fire, the form of water mainly resisting the
introducing of the form of fire: so such love not the light of grace, as are
delighted with darkness of sin, darkness being an enemy to light. When Christ the
son of the Virgin Mary was born (the general light of the world,) he offered
his enlightening grace, as the rising sun its shining beams to all, though the
celestial quiers of Angels did communicate the glad tidings of this light
unto the shepherdes of Bethlem, (the place of his birth) and divinely sung
glory to God in the highest heavens, for sending it; yet they did not proclaim
peace, as to the reconciling earth, and heaven together, but only to men Bonae
voluntatis, Luc. 2. and in terra pax hominibus bonae voluntatis.
of good will, plainly showing thereby, that the reconciliation of man unto God
should depend of the free will of each one prepared by the said light of grace
Aug. misericordia eius nos in omnibus praeuenit co^sentire vero vel dissentire
proprie voluntatis est.
to consent or not consent unto it; for God forces no man unto his freindship.

As to the second kind, or way of government, Christ the son of the Virgin Mary
was Aug. 95. haer. filius hominis venit magnus medicus, quia magnus iacebit
aeger, and ipse medicus factus est medicamentum phraenetici.
a great merciful phisician undertaking the Cure of a great infirm patient,
which was all mankind, afflicted with sundry mortal infirmityes, in healing
whereof he applied no other remedy then himself: he was made both the phisician
and the physic, to show his merciful greatness: Christ In the pursuance of the
general redemption performed all the seven works of mercy.
and in the Cure of each infirmity he performed a work of mercy. Man was half
dead with hunger: himself gave him Heavenly Jo. 6. Christ is named bread of
life.
bread, his own body unto everlasting life. Man was half dead with thirst,
himself ministered drink made of his own blood, that he might be no more a
thirst. Man was a very Idiot, as to the knowledge of his Creatours glory, and
his own happiness, himself taught him, it was foretold Ierem. 31 that the law of
grace should. be given in the inward parts, and writ in the hearts of the
faithful.
and writ his holy ordinances in his heart. Man in a journey between Jerusalem,
and Ierico met with thieues, that robbed him of his garments, wounded, and left
him for half dead: himself was the charitable Samaritan, that took compassion
of him, Lut. 10. he went to him and bound up his wounds and powered oil, and
wine.
bound up his wounds, powered in oil, and wine of several graces, and made
full provision for him. Man was detained in prison for a debt, that was not in
his reach to discharge, himself visited him, wiped out, and cancelled Coloss.
2. Christ is said to have cancelled the handwriting of the decree, that was
against us.
the handwriting of the decree, that was against him, and fastened it upon his
Cross, wherein he dying spoiled the principalities, and powers of death and
hell, triumphing over them, which had brought all the fore mentioned
infirmities upon mankind.

CHAR. VIIJ. OF THE CROSS OF CHRIST.
THE CONTENTS.
Of the Cross of Christ came all our happiness: honor, and worship due to the
Cross: the custom of ancient, and modern Christians to make the sign of the
Cross in their foreheads: the ground, manner and meaning thereof.

THe Cross of Christ is the Altar of general redemption, that is the Tree that
was erected in Mount Calvary, wherein Christ the second Adam by a supreme
sacrifice of his precious body, and blood redeemed the general loss, that the
first Adam made in the tree planted in the terrestiall Paradise, divine
providence fore ordaining so, that the devil Canit Ecclesia inpraefatione de
Dominica passione, vt qui in ligno vincebat in ligno quoque vinceretur; and S.
Ignatius mar. Epis. ad philad. Crucis signum, inquit, est trophaeu^ contra
virtutem principis mundi. quod videns expauoscit and audiens timet.
who in wood overcame, should in wood be overcome. And as a stagg worsted in
single fight by another of his fellows, ever after stands in awe of the
Conqueror, waves his walk, or if by accident, or necessity he passes by him,
bows his lofty head in recognisance of his inferiority, and the others
superiority: S. Damascene calls the Cross of Christ a sign, or token of his
victory over the devil, and erected to the intent, the conquered enemy may not
dare to come near the place, wherein it is exposed: and S. Chrysostom expressly
affirms, that devils cannot abide near such, as make the sign of the Cross on
their forcheads, Again Origin Hom. 8. in locis diuerfis calls the Cross of
the son of God our victory, at the sight whereof devils tremble: Nothing afraid
(says he) of golden Capitolls they stand in fear of the Cross.
so the devil stands in fear of the Cross, that subdued him, runs from it,
and though he make light of gilded palaces, and contemn the Scepters of
kings; neuertheless he is afraid of the weapon, that wounded him, and trembles
as often as he sees the sword, that deprived him Io. 12. Christ said, the
Prince of this world (the devil) shall be cast out, and when I shall be
exalted from the earth, (that is put upon the Cross) I will dravv all men unto
me. Wherefore S. Ignatius the Martyr calls the Cross a trophy, or sign, that
is set up against the power of the Prince of this world, who while he see it,
is afraid, and while he hears the naming of it, trembles.
of his principallity, and power. This is one reason of the general practice
used by Catholic Christians in making the S. Chryfost. si vultui tuo signum
sanctae Crucis affixeris nullum daemonium prope stare poterst.
sign of the Cross on their forheades, on their meat, and drink S. Hieron Epis.
ad Eustoch. exhorts this holy virgin to make the sign of the Cross with her
hand in the doing of every work.
and in all their conuersations, and exercises, at their going out, and coming
into their houses, at their going to bed, and rising: and this pious, and
religious use has descended from Father to son ever from the beginning of
Christianity: Tradition left it (says Tertullian) custom confirmed it, and
faith practiced it. Another reason is, because the Cross is a lively
representation of the General redemption unto conseruing the memory of Christ's
passion, who did choose, says S. Austin (in exposit. Euang. S. Joan. trac. 43.
That kind of death to hang on the Cross, and to fasten the same Cross in the
foreheades of the faithful, that a Christian may say, God forbid, that I
should glory, save in the Cross of our lord JESUS Christ. Besides Christians
by imprinting the sign of the Cross in their foreheades, and saying in the name
of the Father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost, do confess, and profess
together with the mystery of general redemption, the mystery of the holy
Trinity; for they mention expressly the three divine persons; and in as much, as
they say, In the name of the Father etc. and not in the names, using the
singular number only, they signify implicitly the individual, or singular
unity of the individual, or singular divine nature equally participated by
each person. Also they plainly, and orderly express the marvelous order, that
the divine persons had from all eternity, for example, they name the Father in
the first place, the son in the second, the holy ghost in the last. And in
regard the divine Father is a beginning without a beginning, and as it were,
the head of the other two divine persons, in making the sign of the Cross they
carry their right hand to their head naming the Father: and because the second
person, son to God the Father, became incarnat in the womb of the Virgin Mary,
they carry the same right hand down to their stomach, or belly, naming the said
divine son: likewise in regard the holy Ghost S. Aug. vocat Spirisum sa^ctum
charitatem and vinculum reciproci amoris, qui e^utercedit e^nter Patre^ and
Filium.
is the Charity, unity, or union that unites Father, and son together as the
middle link in three linkes of a chain, in naming this divine person they carry
the same hand from the left to the right shoulder, thereby uniting as it were
the other two divine persons, the holy Ghost being the reciprocal divine love
that unites the Father, and son together. Furthermore Christians in making the
sign of the Crosson their foreheads, or otherwise, saying In the name of the
Father etc. implore divine assistance, as to their necessities, in virtue of
the three divine persons, acknowledging thereby all gifts natural, and
supernatural to come from them jointly; for as the same singular nature
subsisting in each singular person does not suffer one person to be separated
from the other: S. Austin trac. 22. in John. affirms that the Catholic faith
establis'hd by the holy Ghost against the pertinacy of all heretics teaches
that the works of the Father, and son are inseparable: and Epis. 102. expressly
auerres that all created things subsiste by the Creation of the B. Trinity.
Likewise other ancient Fathers assert that god, who is three, as to divine
persons, and one as to nature, or essence, is one sole cause of the whole
universe in regard all the three persons have one, and the some power of working
outwardly.
So likewise it does not let one divine person to act, or work without the
others in the communication of graces out of themselves, the original power of
working consisting in that singular divine nature. Insomuch that even the
general redemption of mankind is owing to the three divine persons: for though
the second divine person only was made man, was borne of the Virgin Mary, and
was crucified (the mystery of the Incarnation being in and by him only executed
personally) neuertheless all the actions, as real created actions, that did
accompany the said mystery proceeded from all the three divine persons equally.

For the closing of this Character, only shall be added the vision Apoco. 7. I
savv says S. John an other Angel come from the East, which had theseale of
the living God, and he cried with a loud voice....hurt ye not.... till we
have sealed the servants of God in their fore heads; where according to the
interpretation of S. Austin. tract. 43. in Joan. the Evangelist alludes to the
sign of the Cross, which true belieuers make on their forheads, in testimony
that they are not ashamed of Christ.
of S. John the Evangelist, wherein he saw four destroying Angels, and one
saving Angel, that had the mark, or sign of the living God to mark, or sign
his servants in their foreheads, that they might not be inuolued in the
general execution of just revenge upon the wicked. In this vision by the
mark, or sign of the living God, is meant the Cross of the son of God, that
is, our lord Jesus Christ crucified, the sign whereof is his royal mark, or
signature, that mark's, and sign's all his servants in their foreheades, to the
end that being formed, and fashioned into the similitude of his death, they may
be transformed, and translated into the similitude of his life, and delivered
from destroying Angels.

CHAR. IX. OF ADORING THE CROSS.
THE CONTENTS.
Sundry kinds of adorations, or worships: God, Christ God, and man, the true,
and representative Cross of Christ, the blessed in Heaven, Images and holy
Relics, and civil Magistrates Challenge adoration according to their several
excellencies respectively.

ADoration of the Cross is a Religiout honor, or worship according to
Christian Religion exhibited to the true, or representative Cross of Christ in
respect of supernatural excellency, or dignity. This is the present Character
in brief, which to illustrate, and make plainly clear, it is obseruable.

First, that by the law of God, and nature, honor, and worship are due to
excellency; in consequence whereof there are as many diverse branches of honor
and worship, as there be differing kinds of excellency.

Secondly, Christian Religion is a virtue, that by inward, and outward acts
procures due adoration, or worship to be exhibited unto the Creator in respect
of his proper increated excellency, and withal to creatures, in respect of
created excellency participated, and derived from the Creator, who is the
fountain of all good things, and cause of all graces: and as between
excellency, and excellency, so between adoration, and adoration, there is
essential difference, excellency being the formal motive, or cause of
adoration.

Thirdly, adoration or worship includes of necessity two inward acts: one as to
the understanding, which is knowledge of the excellency, in respect whereof
adoration, or worship is rendered; the other, as to the will, is an affection,
or willingness in him that adereth, or worshipeth, to submitt, and humble
himself to the thing adored, honored, or worshipped.

Besides these inward actions are requisite also in men composed of an
intellectual, and sensible nature, outward sensible actions: for example
prostrating on the ground, bowing the body, head, or knee, etc. And in as much,
as these outward do correspond to the inward acts, they bear the name of
outward adoration, or worship.

Fourthly, adoration, or worship is of two kinds; one civil, human, or
natural: the other Religious, and sacred. Civil or natural adoration does
correspond to Civil excellency, dignity, or worthiness, wherefore that kind of
adoration, or worship, is due even to Civil Magistrates in regard of their
charges, and offices, wherewith they are invested above, and over others. Judith
bowed her self, and adored Holofernes, Jacob, Pharao, Bethsabee David on the
score of Civil excellency belonging to the said persons adored. And every soul
for conscience sake Romans 13. omnis anima subdita sit porestatibus (...) b^^.
owes obedience, submission, and subjection unto the higher powers, being there
is no power but of God, and derived from him.

Religious, and sacred adoration, or worship does correspond unto supernatural
excellency, or dignity, of which there being two kinds namely increated, and
infinite, created, and finit excellency, it follows necessarily, that there be
two kinds also of Religious adoration, or worship: one whereof in respect of
increated excellency named by appropriation of a Greek word S. Austin l. 10. de
Civit. Dei says, that Latria according to the form of speech used by those,
which have delivered unto us the divine Oracles, signifies always, or for the
most part that kind of service, or worship which pertaines to God only. And
whereas Mat. 4. his said, the lord thy God shall thou adore, and him only shall
thou serve; the Greek has (...), which importes supreme worship proper only to
God in regard of his divine excellency, and to give this kind of worship to a
creature is idolatry.
(...) and in English divine, or supreme adoration, proper to God only, for it
is his glory, Mat. 4. Dominum Deum tuum adorabis and illi soli seruies: vnde
illa scriptura, gloriam meam alteri non dabo.
which he will not part with, in so much that whosoever shall give divine, or
supreme worship to any Creature, as an Idolater turning the proper glory of
God, who is all things, to an Idol, The Apostle 1. Cor. 8, says: We know
that an Idol is nothing in the world.
that is nothing, as to increated excellency, for which it is adored.

Notwithstanding all this, supreme adoration is due to Christ, even as man; for
Christ has not The Churches Councils, and ancient Fathers condemn Nestorius
for asserting two persons in Christ, and likewise his inference from thence,
viz. that Christ lays claim to two distinct adorations.
one person, as man, and another, as God, According to S. Chrysostom. hom. 3.
in Epis. ad Hebr. all the Angels adore the humanity of Christ in as much, as it
is united to the divine word: and hom. 5... it is a great, and marvelous thing
(says he) that our flesh united to the word should sit above, and be adored
by the Angels, Archangels, Cherubins etc.
his humanity together with his divinity is united in one, and the same
personality, so that the singular person of Christ is the support of both
natures, and being a divine increated excellency necessarily claims exhibition
of divine worship: neither is it requisite, that excellency, for which worship
is offered, should be in each part of the whole, that is worshipped. For example
Solomon was honored, as to the whole singular man for wisdom, that was in his
soul, and not in his flesh.

The other Religious, or sacred adoration, or worship in respect of superna
urall created excellency, called by use, (which is the best arbitrator of
words) from the Greek, Dulia, is a middle worship between the supreme, and
civil, far exceeding this, and infinitely exceeded by the other, and is due to
special friends, servants, and Saints of God, in regard of supernatural
created graces supernaturally co^ferred on them Nabuchodonosor adored Daniel
Dan. 2. Abdias adored Elias 3. Reg. 18. Abraham adored three Angels, which
appeared unto him in the form of young men Genesis 18. Balaam adored an Angel Number.
22. and Bethsabee bowed her face, and adored the king 1. Reg. which Sacred
Texts are not meant of divine honor, but of Religious worship, which is due to
several creatures in order to their several graces, dignities and
excellencies: namely to Angels because of their supernatural gifts, and to
other things, and places in regard of their relations.
Nabuchodonosor adored Daniel for his supernatural gift of interpreting
Mysteries, and consequently with religious adoration: neither is it as to
reason credible that so great a king, as Nabuchodonosor should worship Daniel a
private man, and a captive with civil worship in respect of civil, or worldly
dignity. In like manner Abdias a Chief Prince of the kingdom where he lived,
religiously adored Elias upon the same score: that is for his supernatural
gift of prophecy: and Abraham bowing himself toward the ground adored three
Angels, religiously doubtless, in regard of their supernatural excellency and
charge, for it cannot be conceived that he should adore them with civil
adoration, since he had no civil conversation with them, for the Angels were
Citisens of Heaven, and Abraham only a Citisen of the earth: besides the Angels
were in possession of eternal life, and Abraham a passenger only aspiring
thereto: in consequence of which the Angels were exalted to an eminent degree
of excellency above him; for otherwise Abraham ought not to have adored them,
adoration (taken in the proper sense) being due only to exceeding excellency.

But though God will not part with his glory unto any creature whatsoever, that
is will not part with his supreme, and divine worship: neuertheless be is well
pleased that honor, or worship be given to his special servants, friends and
Saints conform to, and agreeing with their conditions respectively. Luc. 10.
qui vos audit, me audit, qui vos spernit, me spernit: and Mat. 10. and Joan.
13. qui vos suscipit mo suscipit.
As he counts himself despised, when these are despised, so he esteems
himself honored, when they are honored for their supernatural created
gifts, which himself is sol Author of. And indeed Christian Catholics do
honor Saints, S. Hierome Epis. 53. teaches that we honor Relics of Martyrs
with intent to adore him, whose Martyrs they are: we Honor the servants, that
the honor exhibited to the servants may-redound to the lord. Again S. Ambrose
ser. 6. affirms, that as often as we celebrate the memories of Martyrs, we are
bound to render them worship, since by the effusion of their blood they have
obtained for us safety.
and their Relics with intent to honor God thereby, whose Saints they are:
they honor his servants, to the end the honor of his servants may return
back to him, who is their Lord, and Master, that gave them excellent graces,
for which they ought to be reverenced religiously.

Lastly Religious, and sacred adoration or worship, as to the manner of
exhibiting it, is of two sorts: one absolute in respect of excellency, that is
in, and proper-to the subject adored, and such is the forementioned adoration
exhibited to God, and his Saints: the other Religious, and sacred adoration or
worship is relative, offered in relation, and for extrinsecall excellency. And
The second Council of Nice Act. 7. in the definition concerning faith,
commandes exhibition of honorable worship in order to The venerable and
life-giuing Cross; so the ancient Fathers in that Council style the Cross of
Christ.
as to this kind of adoration, the representative Cross of Christ is
religiously worshipped for Christ's sake (whom it represent's dying) and the S.
Damascene Orat. de Imag. says that Christians in regard they are no longer
under the Pedagogue ship, or bondage of the old law, and thereby less inclined
to idolatry, give reverence, and honor to pictures, which he names the books
of the unlearned: because of the relations they have to their prototypes, and
in deed exhibition of religious worship to pictures is approved by the second
Council of Nice Act. 4. from the words of the bishop of Neopoleos Cypri which
are these. Even as the book of the law is vvorship'd and not the parchement or
inck thereof, but the divine word contained therein, so we worship the
picture of Christ without worshipping the vvood, or colors there of.
Image of his blessed Mother for her sake; (whom it represents living) Council.
Nice. appellatum 7. Synodus generalis quicunque, inquit, sententias sacrae
Scripturae de Idolis contra venerandas imagines adducunt anathema: qui
venera^das imagines Idola appellat, anatbema. Qui dicunt quod Christiani
adora^t imagines vt Deos, anathema.
wherein there is nothing of Idolatry, But to the true Cross of Christ is due
absolute religious adoration, in as much as it has contracted a moral
intrinsecall excellency, or sanctity through a real, and substantial touch of
Christ's sacred body; and if the earth could truly be called holy in respect of
an Angels presence, with greater reason and equity Christ may besaid by his
personal prefence to have honored, and sanctified his Cross. Besides if the
ancient Jews Gods chosen people in a time disposed to Idolatry did adore
religiously without reproof the Tabernacle (of all things then consecrated to
divine service the holiest) because it contained the sacred Arc of the
Testament, stament, the heavenly Manna, the marueillous rod of Aaron, and the
glorious Cherubins shadowing the propitiatory, with much more reason
Christians, (idolatry being suppressed through Christ's coming into the world)
have, and still do religiously adore this Cross, it importing an excellency
above all others joint, and separate, being the holy Altar of the bloody
Sacrifice, that Christ offered for the redemption of mankind: as also the
Ladder by which Christ was exalted to the glory of his body.

CHAR. X. OF A CRISTIAN.
THE CONTENTS.
A man through Baptism is made a Christian, and listed a soldier of Christ to
fight against the world the Devil, and the flesh: ways set down how to
overcome those adversaries.

A Christian is a soldier of Christ from whom he According to S. Athanas. ora.
2. con. Arium we be named, and are indeed Christians from Christ, and to be a
right Christian is to be a follower of Christ. After the same manner S. Cyprian
affirms, that no man can lay claim to the name of a a Christian unless his
comportement be conform to the life of Christ. Again S. Austin says, that it
auailes us not to bear the name of Christian unless we show it in our works.
takes the name of Christian in Baptism, promising with all to sight for, and
in imitation of him his God against the flesh, the world, and the Devil. He
only is a true Christian, that makes Christ's life the Compass to steer by in
the whole course of his own life. It is not enough, that a man is Aug. ser. 16.
de verbis Apostolit ecce baptizati sunt homines: omnia illis poccata dimissa
sunt: iustificati sunt a peccatis, negare non possumus; restat tamen lucta cum
carne, restat lucta cum diabolo restat lucta cum mundo.
baptized into the glorious name of Christian, unless his works do show what
his specious Character speaks him to be, viz: an imitatour or follower of
Christ, in subduing the before said adversaries, this spiritual combat
necessarily attending even such, as are baptized unto full remission of sin, as
soon as they shall attain to the years of discretion.

To subdue the first adversary the flesh, a Christian must use it hardly, and
by fasting, watching, and praying beat it into subjection after the example of
Christ his Captain, who fasted forty days, watched whole nights, and prayed
till the sweat tricled down his flesh like drops of blood falling to the
ground: and furthermore suffered it to be scarified with sharp rods, to be
torn with thorns, to be fastened to a Cross with nails of Iron. Since Christ
the head, for the example of his members has so rigorously treated his flesh,
that was quiet without rebellion, members in imitation of him their head, ought
in all reason, and equity to mortific their flesh, that is unquiet, unto the
suppression of rebellion: According to holy Scripture 1. Cor. c. 11. Jf we
would judge our selves. we should not be judged, that is, we might escape the
heavy hand of Gods vindicatiue justice, if we should punish our selves during
this life throug fasting, and other painful works of penance. In other places
of Scripture to judge according to the usage of speech among the ancient Jews,
signifies to punish, and indeed the office of a Judge is not to take
recognisance only of a fault committed, but likewise to inflict punishment
sut^ble to the Guilt, or malice thereof.
and such, as shall punish their flesh in this life shall not be punished for
heir flesh in the next.

As to the second adversary the world, which to wrestle with Hieron. stadium
est hac vita: hic contendimus, vt coronemur.
unto a victory, a Christian must not let it come within him August: amarc,
inquit, mundum, est amare proditorem: ama saculum, and absorbebit te.
Whosoever receives the world into his arms, embraces a Traitor to his ruin.
As Judas betrayed Christ to the scribes and Pharisees, so the world betraies
Christian souls to the devil: and even alike, as to each circunstance of the
treachery. Judas gave soldiers, that were sent to apprehend Christ a sign, or
token, whereby to know him, saying, Whom soever Marc. 4. quemcunque osculatus
fuero, ipse est, tenete cum. and ducite caute.
I shall kiss, that is he lay hold on him. The same token the world gives to
know Christian souls by, which it betrays to the Devils, saying, whom soever I
shall kiss with a kiss of honor, dignity, prosperity, etc. that is he, lay
hold on him. And as Judas when he had delivered Christ into the hands of the
soldiers bad them to lead him away warily, lest he might make an Escape: so
the world says to the devils in order to Christian souls, which it delivers
up: lead them away softly to hell, that is to say, let them fell nothing of
misery till they ariue there Isat. 28. vexatio dat intellectum.
lest affliction should give them full understanding of their condition. Hence
follows plainly, that to prevent the unhappy trcachery of the world, is to
entertain no freindship with it: and a Christian whom the world hates is a
true follower of Christ, glorying in his Cross only, whereby Gal. 14. absit
mihi gloriari nist in Cruce Domini nostri Jesus Christi, per quem mihi mu^dus
crucifixus est, and ego mundo.
the world is crucified to him and he to the world.

As concerning the third adversary the devil, he is a cruel pirate that roueth
about in the sea of man's life seeking whom he may rob, and destroy: Chrysostom.
vocat daemonem pyratam.
and as a pirate does not molest much empty vessels, but rich ships laden
with silver, Gold, precious stones, and considerable Merchandise: so the devil
does not buisy himself greatly with Christians, that serve the world, and the
flesh, they being empty vessels, and already under his dominion, but
follows after rich ships of Christian souls furnished with treasures of all
virtues: he molesteth such chiefly, as are constant in their faith, steadfast in
their hope, fervent in their charity, patient in their sufferings for justice
sake, and laudable in exercising works of mercy: such rich ships of Christian
souls he mainly assaulteth, to get them to yield unto him: for the devil can
not rob them unless they do yield themselves, nor he cannot destroy them,
unless they accept of his Eccles. 21. bis acuta rumph^a omnis miquitas.
two edged sword (which is sin) to destroy themselves, as did Saul 1 Reg. 31.
Saul took a sword, and fell upon it, and when his Armor-bearer saw, that he
was dead, he fell likewise upon his sword, and dyed with him.
foolishly and his Armour-Bear'er: neither can the devil come to board rich
Christian ships, if they will stand out against him, he can persuade, not force
his entrance: but in the pursuance thereof he uses fair, and foul means: he
begins with offers of brave conditions: propounds, and promises all the
delightful pleasures, that the world, and the flesh can afford (an these be
the devils S. Austin calls worldly pleasures the Devils moustraps, because
while a man catches them, himself is caught.
mouse trapps) wherein failing, he proceeds to threats, menacing all manner of
miseries, and afflictions: hoeweuer true Christian soldiers make light of his
fair promises, and threatened vexations, Diabolus pugnat nobiscum duplici manu,
dextra prosperitatis and sinistra aduersitatis, prosperis alliciens, aduersis
tervens: sednec illa appetenda, nec ista timenda exemplo Christi.
following the example of Christ their God, who, says S. Austin, while he was
a passenger on Earth contemned all wordly pleasures, and endured in his own
person whatsoever afflictions he commanded Christians to suffer for his sake,
to the end they should not place their felicity in temporal enjoyments, or be
frightened with the afflictions of this time, that Rom 8. no^ sunt condig^^
passiones (...) temports ad futuram gloriam, quae reuelatur in nobis.
are not worthy of the future glory, which shall be reueiled unto them. Romans 8.

CHAR. XJ. OF A CHRISTIAN PERSECVTED FOR CHRIST'S SAKE.
THE CONTENTS.
God breeds up his Children in the School of tribulation, that they may be
made partakers of heavenly enjoyments: persecutors do not prejudice those,
which they persecute, being instruments only of divine permission, whereby the
persecuted are tormented unto blessedness from persecution came full happiness:
whosoever has endured nothing of affliction, is not begun to be a Christian:
such as suffer for Christ's sake sind inexpressible comfort in their sufferings.

A Christian persecuted for Christ's sake is a child especially beloved of his
heavenly Father, who scourges every son, that he receives, Haebr. 12. quem
diligit Deus, castigat, and flagellat omne^ silium quem recipit.
He Chasteneth him in whom he delights Aug. in psalm. 39. non vis, inquit,
flagellum? non datur tibi hareditas: omnis enim filius necesse est vt
flagelletur, vsque adeo omnis flagellatur, vt nec illi pepercerit, qui peccatum
non habuit: qui proprio silio, ( inquit, Apostolus Ro^. 8.) non pepercit.
and spared not him, that never had sinned. God breeds up his Children in the
school of tribulation, that they may be partakers of his holiness, and heavenly
enjoyments. The rod of persecution is given for our profit, in as much, as it
ministers matter of merit, fortitude, constancy, patience, faith, and
devotion, which are the requisits necessary to the purchase of our blessed
heritage: in consequence of which persecutours do not prejudice those, whom
they persecute, they being through a supreme providence assumed to that
ministry only, as meet instruments to bring the Children of mercy unto the
inheritance of blessedness. Aug. in Psa. 73. Deus per malos erudit bonos, and
per patie^ti^m damnandorum exercet disciplinam liberandorum.
God by the wicked instructs the good, and by a patient toleration of such,
as will be damned, exercises the discipline of such, as shall be saved. Of
affliction is come all our happiness: Aug. Epi. 93. Judas tradidit ad passionem
silium Dei, and per passionem filij Dei omnes gentes rede^ptae sunt.
Judas delivered the son of God unto death, and through his passion all nations
were redeemed. Again Christ the same son of god voluntarily endured his
affliction teaching us an example, that we should follow his stepps, 1. Pet.
2. and all that will live godly in Christ, shall suffer persecution 2. Tim. 3.
Whosoever thinks, that he has nothing of affliction, is not begun to be a
Christian, nor to live godly in Christ, faith the great Aug. in Psalm. 55. qui
nihil, inquit. afflictionis sentit, nondu^ Christianus esse incipit.
S. Austin: wherefore all the blessed Saints of God very gladly rejoiced in
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecution, in anguish for
Christ's sake. As a bright, and shining resemblance, or image is seen in a clear
looking glass: so they saw plainly in the example of Christ how much it would
2. Cor. 4. id aute^ quod est in prasenti momentaneum, and leave tribulationis
mastra supra modu^ in sublimitate aterua gloriae pandus operatur.
advantage them to eudure tribulation for his sake. They saw that to suffer
with Christ was to be glorified with him: and therefore counted Romans 8. existimo
enim quod no^ sunt co^dignae passiones huius temporic ad futuram gloriam quae
reuelabitur in nobis.
that the afflictions of the present time were not worthy the glory, that would
be showed unto such, as every where bear about in their bodies the
mortification of their lord ISSUS. Whereby it is evident, that a Catholic
Christian under the black rod of persecution is not without comfort; for as the
sufferings of Christ abound in him, so his consolation abounds through Christ.
Besides he belieueth that he cannot enter into the kingdom of God, but Act. 14.
per multas tribulationes oportet nos intrare in regnum Dei: vnde D. Gregor. vir
sanctus. inquit, quos hume exhibet pro veritate tuenda labores, tot ia^
remunerationis suae pignorae intra pectoris sui cubiculu^ tenet: and sanc dear
securus est qui habet bonu^ pignus apud s^ atque^ afflictiones toleratae per
fide Christi sunt quadam pignora seu arrhae regni calestis.
through many afflictions these being the pledges, and earnest of eternal
life: Wherefore he very gladly rejoices to follow the steps of Christ, suffer
in the defense of his faith, and to be spoiled of his goods, that thereby he
may come to participate of a better, and enduring substance in heaven. Moreover
he, that is persecuted for justice sake, takes great pleasure, when he
seriously considers, that his persecutours are rather his servants, then his
lords, and Masters; for as servants present unto their lords a cup of drink: so
persecutours reach unto those, they persecute a chalice of affliction, whereby
they serve, and help them to a purchase of heavenly blessedness. A goldsmith
serves a king, when he makes for him a crown of Royalty; persecutours serve
good Christians, when they afflict them, in as much, as they devise and form
for them crowns of eternity, and with ihe hammer of persecution fit them to
their heads. Wherefore though persecutours lord it, while they inflict
torments; neuertheless they are indeed, but the servants of the tormented: and
only above them, as chaff is above the good grain, not because they are more
worthy, but in regard they be more light: and when the time of winowing with
the fan of divine justice shall come, God will make clean his floor, and
gather his good grain into his garner, but will burn up the chaff with
unquenchable fire, Mat. 30. Wherefore persecutours of justmen Aug. in psalm. 53.
florent (inquit) iniusti persecutores felicitatesaeculi, pereunt in virtute
Dei. Non enim quomodo florent, pereunt, florent enim ad tempus, pereunt in
eternum: florent falsis honis, pereunt veris tormentis.
do not perish, as they flourish: they flourish for a short time, and perish for
ever. Furthermore good Christians under the blak rod of tribulation, in as much
as they suffer for God, and doc not desert him in their sufferings, God does
not desert them, he is with them in their trouble, and delivers, and
glorifieth them: God went down Sap. 10. descendit ei^ illo (Joseph) in foueam,
and in vinculis non deroliquit e^m.
with Joseph into the dungeon, and left him not in the bands; he covers them
under his wings, and secureth them Ps. 90 scapulis suit obumbrabit tibi, and
sub pennis cius sperabis.... cu ipso sum in tribulatione, eripia^ eum and
glorificabo cum
under his Feathers; he is their shield, buckler, and fortress: he is near to
all that call upon him in truth, Psalm. 104. He was not far Ion. 2. orauit
Jonas ad Dominum Deum suum de ventre piscis etc.
from Jonas, whom he mercifully heard even praying out of the fishes belly,
while the waves of the sea compassed him about: he foresook not Daniel in his
den of affliction; for Daniel prayed unto him, Dan. 6. Deus meus misit Angelum
suum and conciu^^: ora leabum etc.
and he sent his Angel to shut the lions mouths, that they might not hurt
him, his Angel likewise descended with Azarias, and his fellows into the hot
fiery furnace, quenched the flames of the fire, and made the midds of the
furnace, as a wind of dew blowing, Misit Angelum suum and eruit seruos suos qui
crediderunt in eum.
and the fire had no power over their bodies: for not an hair of their head was
burnt, Daniel. 3. The wind of dew blowing in the mids of the furnace denotat's
the spirit of God giving comfort in the midds of tribulation: as that wind did
so mitigate, and temper the hot fire of the furnace, that it had no power over
the bodies of the three Innocent children: so does the spirit of God mitigate,
and sweeten the afflictions, which innocent Christians suffer for his sake,
that they may not be swallowed up with overmuch heaviness. Wherefore such, as are
under the black rod of persecution have no cause to fear, or apprehend
prejudice thereby having God ready to defend them, and his spirit to comfort
them, which is all sweet, and sends influences of divine sweetness to their
hearts, that stirs them up to praise, bless, and glorify him with Azarias, and
his fellows in the midds of their affliction, and to pray with S. Paul, Blessed
be God the Father of our lord Jesus Christ the Father of mercies, and the God
of all comfort, which comfort us in all our tribulations. 2. Cor. 10.

CHAR. XIJ. OF CHRISTIAN FAITH.
THE CONTENTS.
Christian faith is a gift of God: conuinceth the truth of things, that are not
seen, and brings into captivity all understanding to the obedience of Christ:
through faith poor fishermen subdued kings, and Emperors unto embracing
Christian Religion: devils believe, and tremble, yet have nothing of divine
faith being they want obedience: the greatest praise of a faithful Christian
is to confess with his toungue outwardly, what he belieueth with his heart
inwardly: faith without good works (proceeding from divine grace through the
merits of Christ) is a body without life: faith alone cannot justify: no man
through faith is certain, that his sins are forgiven him.

CHristian faith is the substance of things hoped for. As substance gives
existence to the thing, which it is the substance of: so Christian faith
causes the existence of the thing hoped for, representing it as present, that
during this life is absent, with greater certainty, then if the hand touched, or
the eye saw it. It is According to the Apostle Hebr. 13. faith is the substance
of things hoped for, the argument of things, which are not feen; but S. Austin
l. 2. de pec. merit. and remis. cap. 30. defining divine faith, in room of
argument, uses conviction, saying faith is the substance of things hoped, and
the conviction of things, which are not seen: that is, faith, as a strong
argument, conuinceth the truth of things unseen.
the conviction of things not seen, that is to say, neither by sense conceived,
nor by reason comprehended. Ephesians. 2. Dei enim donu^ est, nempe fides.
It is the divine gift, that brings into 2. Cor. 10. in captiuitatem redigentes
omnem intelictum in obsequium Christi.
captivity all understanding to the obedience of Christ in a firm assent to
supernatural truth supernaturally reueiled, and propounded by the authority of
the Catholic Church to be believed. This captivity is a supernatural motion
laid on the will, which it inclines effectually and uses nothing of violence;
it proceeds 1. Pet. 2. qui de tenebris vocauit eos in admirabile lumen suum.
from the marvelous light of says, that enlightens the mind among the dark
mists of error. As the carbuncle has a singuiar prerogative of brightness
beyond all other precious stones, which is, to shine in darkness, and chase away
night: so faith has a special excellency of light above all other virtues,
which is to dissipate the darkness Unless God had been the author of Christian
faith, and assisted the Apostles, poor fishermen, that preached it, the
conversion of so many kings, Emperors, and other illustrious Princes to the
faith of Christ, had been impossible; for abstracting from divine assistance it
had not been, as to reason consonant, that so great Monarchs might ever have
been persuaded to despice wordly pleasures, riches, and honors, unto embracing
of humility, poverty, and the ignominious Cross of Christ, for a reward of
happiness they saw not. This sole motive carries evident credibility, and
weight enough to persuade a rational prudent man to embrace Christian faith.
Wherefore Picus Mirandula Epis. 5. writes thus. It Is an extreme madness not to
believe the gospel, the truth vvherof blood of Martyrs proclames, Apostolical
voices echo forth, wonders, and miracles prove, reason confirms, mute
elements speak, devils confess; but it is a greater madness, (adheth he) if a
Christian that doubts not of the truth of the gospel, neuertheless shall live.
as if he did question the truth thereof.
of infidelity. Examples of this captivity were the learned Pagan Philosophers,
namely S. Denis of Areopagus, Aristides, Justin, Magistrat's, Princes, Kings,
and Emperors of all nations, who illuminated with the admirable splendor of
faith through the preaching of poor fishermen, forsook their sacrilegious
worship of many Gods to embrace the religion of one crucified Christ (that
seemed to most Gentiles foolishnes, and to most Jews the stumbling stone of
offense, and rock of scandal) having respect only to a reward of an enduring
happiness unseen.

Obedience an effect of the before said captivity, and a necessary requisite to
faith, is an humble submission of the will to divine truth, which
distinguishes it from all human persuasion; for an assent to natural verities
apprehended either by sense, demonstration, or experience, requires nothing of
obedience: in consequence of which though devils S. lames cap. 2. says that
devils believe and tremble: that is, they believe unwillingly forced there to
by clear evidence of the miracles of Christ: in consequence of which their
faith is not divine, supernaturally infused. The devils were afraid in regard
they were conuinc'd, that Christ was the son of God, who must come to judge
both men, and Angels: wherefore devils stand in awe of Christ, and his office
of judge is an inexpressible terror unto them.
believe: neuertheless they have not the virtue of divine faith, because they
want the virtue of Aug. do verbis Domini c. 9. says that the faith of wicked
men that want the virtue of obedience comes near to the faith of devils: and
truly the says of our witsectaries in these days is extreme like unto the
faith of devils, because they will not believe the mysteries of Christian
Religion in obedience to authority, but in clear evidence of natural reason.
obedience. Examples of this obedience were millions of Christians Primitive,
and modern, who in obedience to Christ endured mockings, scoffings,
imprisonments, wheels, knives, swords, and all manner of torments, steadfast,
and valiant in maintaining the faith of Christ, and what they Romans 10. cord
creditur ad iustitiam, ore fit confessio ad salutem.
believed, with their hearts they confessed with their mouths: with their
hearts they believed to justice, and with their tongues made confession to
salvation: in which consists the chief praise of Christian faith. It is not
enough, that a Christian Catholic has faith within himself, Mat. 10. qui
confitebitur me coram hominibus confitebor and ego eu^ cora^ Patre meo qui in
coelis est.
unless he express it outwardly: if he will have Christ to confess him before
his heavenly Father, he ought to confess Christ be fore men. Nothing is more
gratfull to Christ then an open confession of ones faith. Saint Peter's
confession of Christ's divinity S. Hilar. fides (Petri) de diuinitate Christi
habet claues Regni caelorum.
got the keys of Heaven, and that joined to a full expression of love to
Christ, merited the chief place among the twelve Apostles. But faith wanting
charity is a lamp without oil, a candle without flame, and a body without
life: faith in the absence of charity is Jacob. 2. fides sine operibus mortua
est.
dead, having neither nourishment to burn, or flame to enlighten, or life to
live: and as the body does act by the influence of life: so faith does work by
the support of charity, S. Bernard ser. 38. teaches that the want of merits is
a pernicious poverty, and bids us take care to have merits: and know when we
have them, that they are given us: and indeed the Council of Trent sess. 6.
can. 32. has defined, that the good works of a just man be the gifts of God,
and the merits of the same just man, for as much, as they proceed from him by
divine grace, and the merits of Jesus Christ.
and other good works proceeding from divine grace grounded in the merits of
Christ, which are not only signs, or testimonies of faith's presence, but they
do increase, Jacob. 2. en operibus fides co^summata est.
and perfect it in the work of justification, of which faith is the foundation
only. Whereby is plainly euidenced, that the sole essential requisite to
sanctifying justice is not faith 1. Cor. 13. nunc autem manet Fides, Spes, and
Charitas, tria haec: mayor autem horum est charitas, Igitur cum charitas sit
mayor fide, non debet dici quod sola fides iustificet, and saluet.
alone, called by the name of special faith, and counted a certain evident
cognition infallibly assuring the beleiuer, that his sins are forgiven him in
particular, and that he is made an adopted child of God through Christ. Neither
is such a faith the substance of things hoped for, which is the definition, or
description of Christian faith delivered by the Apostle, for hope, that is seen
is not hope, nor a thing Hieron. l. 2. con Iouin. writes thus. Tvvere great
injustice in God if the should punish sins, that is, wicked works, and have
no regard to, or revvard for good works.
peculiarly assured is a thing hopd for. Besides when S. Peter bid Simon Magus
(who after his baptism had retained wickedness in his heart) to repent, he did
not assure him, that his sins should be forgiven him, saying only unto him:
Repent of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine
heart may be forgiven thee.) And S. Paul while he preached to others, although
he did not apprehend in himself any guilt of mortal wickedness, yet he durst
not pronounce himself justified, being afraid of damnation: he feared lest
while he preached to others, himself should become a reprobate. Aug. ser. 19.
de verbis Apostoliait Paulus suo timore nos terruit; quid enim faciet agnus,
vbi aries tremuit?
But what shall the lamb do when the Ram is afraid: Chrysostom in Comment.
super 10. Epis. 1. ad Cor. writes thus. Let him, that thinks he stands, take
heed, lest he fall, for if Paul the Apostle (says he,) the strongest of all
men was afraid, we have greater reason to fear.
if S. Paul the most sted fast, and valiant in the faith of Christ did tremble,
and fear in the working of his salvation, what shall other Christians do,
which be far inferior to him?

CHAR. XIIJ. OF A VVIT-BELIEVER
THE CONTENTS.
A wit-sectary set forth: the greatest praise of faith is first to believe, and
then to know: an inordinate love to Philosophy is the mother of Heresies.

A Wit-belieuer is an inuader of Christian faith inordinately attending to
natural reason, and scientificall demonstrations in the search of
supernatural truths, which faith only is entrusted with: S. Austin l. de
vtili. cred. c. 1. arguing against the Manicheans (which taught, that
Christians ought not to assent unto the mysteries of faith, unless they knew
them before by the light of reason) says expressly, That we do not know unto
believing, but vee believe unto knovving.
and ambitious to know before he belieues, he robs faith of its greatest
praise, which is first to Aug. tract. 79. in Joan. haec est, inquit, laws
fidei, si quod creditur non videtur: vnde illud Isa. si non credideritis, non
intelligetis.
believe, and then to know, or to believe what is not known. Also he is an
inuader of the true belieuers Aug. de vtilitate credendi con. Manichae.
sidelis, Christianus, non rationalis appellatur.
name, which is Christian, changing it into an novel Title of rational, and
accordingly styles himself the rational belieuer. Besides blown up with a
conceited actiuity of his own wit, he chooses to teach amiss, rather then to
teach with the current of other belieuers: and invent S. Paul 1. Tim. Counsels
Timothy to avoid profane novelties, and oppositions of knowledge falsely so
called, which men of corrupt minds, and puffed up with pride promising have erred
about faith.
vnauthoriz'd, and vnparal lel'd modells of new doctrine, rather then to be
counted in the rank of Luc. 18. dixit superbus Pharisaeus no^ sum. sicut
caeteri homines, ergo sicut caeteri daemonu^ infert S. Bernardus.
Caeteri homines. In the pursuance of his ambition he rips his brain, and
forcibly cuts out abortiue notions, which go rather in a rownd circle of
fancy, by which he is biased, then in a right line of reason, tending to the
law Romans 12. The Apostle condemns knowledge, that is not according to
sobriety, that is, which is not conform to the general practice of the holy
Church: and such (says S. Iraeneus. l. 5. c 17.) as forsake the preaching of
the Church argue the holy Priests of unskillfulness, not considering how far more
worthly a religious Idiote is, then a blasphemous and impudent sophister.
of sobriety, and charity, which is the only center of religious consistency.
His fancied thoughts he puts forth in bold assertions, dressed up with obscure
words, and dark sentences to take the ears of the ignorant, or such, as being
desirous to be esteemed witty, do abandon their judgment to an implicit faith
of his new exotic notions. In sum he is a wit-sectary, that fancy under a
specious color of reason has deboiched, making him eat too Proverb. 25. mel
multum comedendo nocet.
abundantly the honey of Philosophy, and thereby create her the Mistress, which
is but the hand maid of Theology, her office being only to call unto the Tower
of wisdom, and not to rule therein. Philosophy is the captive woman, that S.
Hierome wisely advises Pammachius to diuest of her alluring, and bewitching
hairs, and make her bald, assuring him, that by so dressing her, she shall
bring forth much captive fruit, and of a Moabit, become an Israelite. S. Hier.
ad Ctesiph. con. Pelag. c. 1. and Tertullian de praescrip. con. Marcio. l. 5.
call Philosophers the Patriarcks of Heretics, affirming, that the ancient
Heresies have sprung from such, as were too much addicted to profane
Philosophy. And S. Ambros. l. 1. de fide cap. 5. con. Aria. ascribes to
Philosophy the Origin of all impieties, and moreover excludes Philosophical
arguments in the resolution of faith, as unnecessary; For we give credence,
says this great Doctor, to fishermen, and not to Philosophers.
Philosophy so long only is profitable to the Church of God, as she is kept in
awe of divine faith, and in obedience to the schools of Christian Catholic
Doctors. If it were granted that S. Tho. do Villa-noua, ser. de Epiph. page 33.
experimento saepe didicimus, vt qu^ nimium cupit esse Philosophus, facile
desinat esse Christianus: sicut magi dum quaerunt in Jerusalem humanum
consilium amisere caeleste signum: sic Christiani nimium quaerentes humanas
rations in diuinis mysterijs perdunt fidei lucom, and fulgorem.
Philosophy might furnish clear demonstrations as requisits to Christian faith,
it would follow of necessity, that faith were not faith, being faith, and
natural evidence are inconsistent together according to the Apostle, who
excludes sight from the walk of faith. 2. Cor. 5.

CHAR. XIV. OF A SINGVLAR DOCTOR.
THE CONTENTS.
Singular Teachers compared to Erostratus, and Pausanias: from the singularity
of one Doctor proceed's the curiosity of many hearers: one singular Master
planteth a sect, which the curiosity of many scholars spreads: singular
Teachers appear outwardly in sheeps clothing, while they are inwardly
ravenous wolfes.

A Singular Doctor is a wanton scholar of new notions, that blown up with
vanity, and arrogance ambitiously endeavors, to get a name above other
Teachers contempory with him S. Bernard ser. 65. in Cant. writes, that the
intent, and aim of all heretics, is to in hance, and spread their name through
singularity of doctrine. And S. Gregor. l. 24. mor. says, that it is natural
unto heretics to be puffed up with vain pride of science, and to scorn, and
laugh at the simplicity of other belieuers. Also Theodoret. in praet. in
Polymor. observes, that some men which have done no gallant laudable actions
worthy renown, endeavor by wicked entreprises to celebrate their name. Aug. in
psalm. 9 says, that those which cannot be known by well doing, strive by ill
doing to abide for ever in the mouth of posterity, desirous of an evil name
rather, then to have none at all.
which is the sole ground of his singularity: and rather then to have none he
labors for an ill one, turning from wholesome learning Martianus Imperator in
Council. Calcedo. qui post veritatem repertam, inquit, and Doctorum vnitate
stabilita^ aliquid vlterius discutit, me^dacium quaerit.
established in the unity of Doctors to exoctick, and vnauthorised Tenants
which though he craftily diuulgeth for primitive verities, and vaunteth S.
Chrysostom in com. oper. imperf. super Mat. hom. 45. writes thus. When thou
shall hear any man extolling, and beatifying the ancient Doctors, observe his
carriage tovvard those which are contemporary with him, for if he shall
approve, and honor those, doubtless he would have respected the others, if be
had lived in their days: but if he contemn the modern, he would likewise
have contemned the ancient. Teachers, if he had been contemporary with them.
to have left modern, as troubled waters, for ancient doctrins, as clear
springs; neuertheless he carries not the least sound that way teaching nothing
that has any relation to truth or antiquity. In the pursuance of his ambition
he makes proselytes of such, as having their ears itching, do after their own
lusts seek Masters of new notions. Scientia, iuquit, Apostolus Paulus, inflat,
vbi charitas non aedificat: quam sententiam freque^ter vsurpat S. Aug.
As science without charity begets pride, and pride Teachers of Novelties:
so want of science without sobernes brings forth curiosity, which makes
itching cares in order to new Masters. The Vincen. Lyrinen. 2. p. tom 5. Bid.
vit. S. Patr. addresseth himself to Priests, and Teachers in order to avoiding
of Novelties thus. O Priest, o Doctor, if the aiuine power has furnished thee
with wit, and abilities fit for exercise, out out faithfully the precious
stones of divine doctrine, deck, and set them forth vvisely, add splendor,
grace, and comeliness, but so teach what thou have learned, that while thou
speak after a new method thou deliver nothing of new doctrine.
singularity of one Doctor planteth a sect, and the curiosity of many
increases it. In the completing of his ambition he does not only equal, but
exceed the ambition Volaterranus l. 15. Anthrop. Erostratus, inquit, Te^plum
Diana Ephestae incendit nominis, and famae libidine.
of Erostratus, that to perpetuate his name set on fire the Temple of Diana at
Ephesus, counted one of the seven wonders of the world; for the ambition of
Erostratus destroyed one Temple only, but the pride of a singular Teacher
ruins 2. Cor. 6. vos estis te^plum Dei and 1. Cor. 3. Templu^ Dei estis, and
Spiritus sa^ctus habitat in nobis.
as many temples, as the Christians, (which by crafty dealings he seduceth, and
brings into error) every Christian being a temple of the living God, and the
habitation of the holy Ghost: and consequently, as the God of Christians
surpasses in worthiness Diana of the Ephesians: and as a spiritual exce^edeth
a material temple: so a destroyer of Christian souls, goes beyond Erostratus
in wickedness. In like manner he exceeds the Regicide Joan. Sarisburiensis
polycratio. Pausanias, inquit, cum Hermaclea percunctatus esset quo nam modo
clarus euadere posset, subito atque^ hic respondisset, si occidisset aliquem
virum clarum continuo Philippam interemit.
Pausanias, that made his way to an everlasting memorial of a wicked
enterprise, through the Royal blood of Philip of Macedo, which ambitiously he
spilt; for a singular Teacher murthereth as many Secundum Bedam l. 3 in cap.
10. lucae quos Lucas appellat Reges, matthaeus vocat iustos, ipsi sunt, ait
ille, Reges magni, qui tentationu^ suatum motibus non consentie^do succumbere,
sed regendo praeesse nouern^t:
kings, as there are just men, which he peruerteth, and draws from the truth.
Howeuer a singular Teacher will not profess openly the malice of his ambition,
as did Erostratus, who afraid, as it were, to lose the renowning of his name,
himself diuulged his Hier. l. con: Heluidium cap. 8. mullo, inquit, prodente
sacrilegium, fertur ipse (Erostratus) in medium processisse clamitas sese
incendium subiecisse.
sacrilegious crime; for though a singular teacher is inwardly a ravenous
wolf, yet outwardly, for the most part, he appears in sheep's clothing. And
indeed his ambition is a subtle inordinate desire of glory, a secret poison,
an occult plague author of crafty dealings, and mother of hypocricy. A singular
Teacher never publishes his wicked affection, lest the effects thereof might be
thereby obstructed: he is like unto a white tomb, which appears beautiful
outward, but within is full of filthiness. Howeuer, that such teachers should
rise even of Christians, Apostolical prophecies give evidence enough to
believe so. When S. Paul said 1. Cor. 11. There must be heresies even among
you, he pointed at singularity of doctrine; for the word heresy taken in the
precise sense for a choosing, and adhering unto a peculiar opinion imports as
much. When the same Apostle said, as is related Act. 20. I know of your own
selves shall men rise speaking perverse things to draw disciples after them; he
foretold the ambition of a singular Teacher. When S. Matthew said Beware of
salse Prophets, which come unto you, in sheeps clothing, he hinted at the
hypocrisy of singular Teachers, which disguise their malice with a visard of
outward sanctity, and thereby craftily circunuent, and bring into error such,
as through weakness, or wavering in faith, or through itching ears, are given
to novelties. Vincen. Lirinen. writes of Origin, that he might have been of
great authority, if an exemplar life had been sufficient enough to have made
him so, for he was a person of singular integrity, purity, learning, industry,
etc. but that gallant person, says he, in regard he insolently abused the
grace of God, (confiding in his own abilities, and despising the simplicity of
Christian Religion) presumed, that he knew more then all other men, and
interpreted holy Scriptures after a new mode, deserved, that the Church of God
should say of him: Non audies verba prophetaeillius: thou shall not hearken to
the words of that Prophet. Baronius in his Ecclesiastical History. An. 449.
after he had said much of Eutiches the Heretic in order to his outward
sanctity, advises the reader to learn from him, that other Heretics so
comport themselves, as if they breathed forth purity of faith, and sanctity of
manners. The same Baronius writes in his Eccles. Hist. An. 428. that the
Arch-Heretick. Nestorius with his sordide clothing, pale face, and lean body,
(whereby he was counted a person of great abstinence, and mortification) drew
many followers after him. Again An. 411. of his Eccles. History he relates,
that Paulinus in an Epistle to S. Austin, extolleth Pelagius the Heretic for
great sanctity of life, who notwithstanding, as Baronius attesteth, was a
ravenous wolf clothed in a Monastical habit, a new Proteus, that according to
place, time, and persons with whom he conuersed, changed his discourse.
Moreover Wicleff the first English heretic through his sordide clothing, and
affected humility bewitched, and infected nany with his pernicious novelties.
Under a false show, and disguise of outward holiness, singular Teachers in all
times of the Christian Church have spread their pernicious Doctrins, as do
plainly evidence the Ecclesiastical Annals of each age respectively: and
indeed Origines, Nestorius, Pelagius, Eutiches, (to say nothing of sundry
others) while they wantonly presum^d of their own wits, and insolently
despised the ancient plainess, and lownes of Christian religion, together with
the general practice thereof, affected outward piety, thinking thereby to get
authority, and credence to their new notions, wanting ordinary Mission to
preach them. The actiuity of their own wits caused wantonness, wantonness pride,
and pride a preferring themselves before all other Teachers of those days; yet
though the end of such teachers be evil, the end for which the supreme
providence permits them is good; for God suffers them to be, that the
approved, as gold in the fire tried, may be manifested, and discovered from the
holow hearted members of the Church. The supreme providence suffers them to
be, that the carnal thereby may be stird up to seek, and the spiritual to
clear the truth: the supreme providence tolerateth them to the end, that many
may be raised out of their sleep to see the day of God, and be glad thereof, S.
Aug. c. 8. de verae religione: the supreme providence suffers them to be
choosing rather to draw good out of evil, then to permit no evil at all. But
woe to such, as through their fault commit the evil, that God suffers to be.

CHAR. XV. OF CHRISTIAN HOPE.
THE CONTENTS.
Good works supported by divine promises have a good claim to the glory of
Heaven, which is the consistency of Christian hope: God by promising makes
himself man's debtor: the assurance, that man has, that God cannot fail of
his promise does not render him sure of the thing promised, till he shall
perform the condition of the promise made, which is, full perseverance in the
exercise of good works, whereof no man can be certain: the death of Christ
brought forth Hope of life.

CHristian Hope is a certain S. August. vocat Christiana^ spem certam
exspectationem gloriae futurae.
expectation of future glory supported by divine promises, and perseverance in
good works (the condition of the promises) proceeding from divine grace through
the merits of Christ. And as God cannot fail of his promise, who is 2.
Thessal. 3. fidelis autem Deus est.
faithful in all he promises, or falsify his word, who is the eternal truth,
so works done a right cannot be frustrated of the reward promised being Bona
opera quae procedunt ex gratia sunt quasi pignora, and arahae regni caelestis.
pledges of full assurance, which render God their According to Tertull. l.
depenit. a good work makes God man's debtor: likewise S. Austin ser. 31. de
verbis Domini. Says, that God under his handwriting has given us an
engagement of his promises.
debtor; not because God owes any thing, that is not his own, who is lord of
all things, and good works themselves are his According to S. Austin in Enchir.
c. 107. good works are the gifts of God, and God by crowning our works, crowns
but his own gifts: and indeed every good work conducing to heavenly blessedness
proceeds from druine grace, which is Gods free liberal gift.
gifts derived from his grace, that make, them good; but because the reward,
that his goodness gratis, and frankly promises, justice performs; Hebrae. 6.
non enim iniustus Deus, vt obliuiscatur operis vestri, and dilectionis, qua^
ostendistis in nomine ipsius, qui ministrastis sa^ctis and ministratis.
for God is not unjust to forget the work, and labor of love shown toward
his name. Holy Ioh having this full assurance of divine promises shut up in the
cabinet of his heart, was not a more illustrious king sitting in his Regal
Throne, then he was glorious lying on his dunghill, where he rejoiced, and
gloried in the assurance of promised glory, through Christ his Redeemer, though
he Though I were, says holy Job c. 9. perfect neuerthess my soul is ignorant
thereof: and Solomon Proverb. 20. Who can say my heart is clean, I am clean from
sin? and (the Apostle) 1. Cor. 4. durst nost pronounce him self justified,
albeit his conscience was not guilty of evil. Again S. Austin l. 1. de ciuit.
c. 12. teaches, that though we can be certain of the reward of perseverance
neuertheless we cannot besure of perseverance it self, since no man can know
certainly without a special reuclatio^, that he shall continue in the exercise
of good works till the end of his life.
was not sure of salvation, nor yet or his own justification. Hence evidently
appears the eminency of divine Hope above any human expectation; for this is
like dust, that is blown away with the wind, or like the smoke, that is
dispersed here, and there with a tempest, to the confusion of him, that places
his trust in the arm of flesh; but divine Hope does not make ashamed: it is
the ancre of the soul, and holds it firm, and steadfast in the greatest storm
of tribulation, and affliction. And as the ancre of a ship does not fix in
water, but in the firm earth below: The Apostle Hebr. 6. assures us, that
Christian Hope enters into those parts, which are within the vail, that is,
Sanctum Sanctorum, which is an allegory taken from the ancient Tabernacle, or
Temple of the Jews, the inward part whereof was called Sanctum Sanctorum,
which, the interposition of a vail separated from that part, where the people
assembled together. This inward part was a type of the divine Tabernacle, and
represented everlasting blessedness, wherasthe other part was a figure only of
enjoyments proper to the present life.
so Christian Hope does not stay at the porch, or entry of the veil of the
Tabernacle (which misteriously represents the floating waters of transitory,
and visible enjoyments) but passes into the inward parts thereof, which is
Sanctum Sanctorum, the holiest place mysteriously showing the throne of the
invisible God, whether is entered the forerunner for all true beleiues
JESUS CHRIST the author of divine Hope. Christ came into the world as a great
Phisician to heal the infirmities of man, and he made of his own blood Aug.
sanguis medici factus est medicamentum phraenetici.
the physic, that healed him, whereby he begot him unto a full assurance of
Hope, so that it would be impossible, that he should hate him, as to
perdition, for whom he has shed his blood, as to salvation. Thus Christ's death
was made the Hope of life, which his resurrection confirmed: Christ rising did
perfect what dying he had merited, and gloriously risen he entered into the
inward parts of the veil, that is, of his heavenly kingdom, making way for all
such The Apostle Romans 2. ascribes justification to the doers, not to the
hearers of the law: whereby is evident, that not faith alone, but the keeping
of Gods commandments is of necessity required unto obtaining heavenly
blessedness.
as shall observe his commandments, to follow, and to receive the reward of
eternal life, that his death has merited.

CHAR. XVJ. OF CHRISTIAN CHARITY TOWARD GOD
THE CONTENTS.
God will not be loved for a reward, that is not himself: in the exhibition of
love God exacteth all: the love of God, and the love of the world are
iuconsistent together: whosoever loves God a right keeps his commandments:
where there is deadly transgression, there is nothing of justification: as
water extinguisbeth fire, so each mortal sin drives away charity out of the
soul.

CHarity toward God is a supernatural love, wherewith the soul being
invested, loves God only for the goodness, sanctity and perfection essential
unto him. And God is not loved aright, when he is loved for Aug. in psa. 52.
Deus non propterea se amari vult, quia dat aliquid praeter se, sed quia dat se.
a reward besides himself who is the Genesis 17. ego, ait Deus Abrahamo,
protector tuus sum, and and merces tua magna nimis.
great reward of right love: also the soul, that loves God aright loves him
with all its faculties, strength, and thought, Aug. medita. 35. immensus es
Domine and ideo sine me^sura debes amari. Et rursum totu^ (amorem) a te exigit
Deus, qui te tetum fecit.
for in the exhibition of love God requires of man it all, who made him all. As
a chaste woman, that loves her husband, loves no other man besides him (for to
love so, where not at all, or less to love him, then she ought) so a chaste
soul, that loves God its spouse, loves no other reward besides him, for that
were not to have at all, or less affection for him, who will not be loved for
any reward, that is not himself: and indeed a river divided into two riuolets,
or branches, the more water it gives to one, the less it bestows on the other.
Furthermore, as a woman does not love her husband, that loves him for his money,
goods, and estate: so a Christian soul does not love God, that loves him for
worldly enjoyments. Aright lover of God does not stoop his love to any
creature, but mount's up, and sixes it in the Creator only, that is,
renounces all leagues of love, and friendship with the world. And truly the.

According to S. Chrysostom hom. 42. in Mat. a man, if he loves God, does not
love the world, for if he loves the world, he loves not God with all his heart;
a gain in an other place S. Chrysostom says, that whosoever will love God of
necessity must hate riches, and whosoever will love riches, of necessity must
hate God.
The love of God, and the love of the world, as contradictories are inconsistent
together: to love God is to hate the world, and to love the world is to hate
God: Iac. 4. amicitia huius mundi inimica est Dei.
whosoever will be a friend of the world makes himself the enemy of God. As
the same eyes of the body cannot behold the heaven, and the earth together: so
the same eyes of the soul cannot look on God, and the world at once: this
cannot fly up on high, when the wings of its affections are glewed to earthly
delights. God and the world are two contrary Masters, and command contrary
wise. God command's man to abandon all terrene things for him, and his faith,
and he will give him eternal life: the world says to man, deny, or dissemble
thy faith, and Religion, and I will bestow on thee riches, and honors, bring
thee out of trouble, and misery, and make thee live in peace, and plenly at
thine own house with they wife, children, and family.

The observation of Gods commands is the proof, and evidence of Christi an
charity: for whosoever loves God, Joan. 14. si diligitis me, ma^data mea
seruate. Et cap. 10. haec (inquit) est charitas Dei, vt ma^data eius
custodiamus, and quo modo (dicit Aug.) dlligis eum, cuius odisti praeceptum?
quis est qui dicat, diligo Imperatore^, sed odi leges eius.
keeps his commandments, and does those things, which are pleasing in his
sight: and good works proceeding from the root of charity are without guilt of
sin, and consequently grateful sacrifices unto God: Io. Deus charitas est, and
qui manet in charitate in Deo manet.
who is charity it self and in whom a Christian soul abides, whiles it
abides in charity: Quod charitas de fasto deperdatur totaliter quolibet
peccato mortali, est assertio fide certa ex Tridentino sess. 6. cap. 15. and
can. 27. read the character of luxury wherein this Catholic doctrine is
clearly proved.
and it is as impossible for charity to remain with mortal sin, as fire to
burn in water; for as water extinguisheth fire, so each mortal sin drives
away charitv. Lucifer was deprived of charity by the sin of pride: Adam by the
sin of disobedience: king David by the sins of adultery, and homicide: and S.
Peter lost his charity by denying of Christ, though not Iuxta antiquos Patres
S. Petrus peccauit ex timore non ex infidelitate: charitatem amisit, non fidem.
his faith, he sinning through fear only. And albeit, that some natural works
may be S. Austin ser. 52. de tempore c. 2. besides divine supernatural,
acknowledges human natural charity, and expressly affirms, that such mere
moral affection, if no evil circunstance interuene, is laudable; lawful and
honest; in consequence of which, he teaches that pagans, Jews, and other
unbelievers may love one another: namely pagan husbands may love their wifes,
and parents their children with a love, that is no deadly sin, although it be
not grounded on Christian faith; whereby it is plain that S. Austin did not think
(as the new Teachers of these days impose upon him) that every moral action
done by a pagan, or Jew, is a mortal sin, because of the want of Christian
faith: neither matt'ers it, that it is said Romans 14. Whatsoever is not of faith
is sin. Fot the Apostle means only (as appears by the same chapter (that
whatsoever work a man does against faith, or contrary to conscience is a sin:
ant doubtless it is not meant thereby that an infidel sins in honoring his
parents, giving of alms, fighting for his Country, tilling his ground, and in
all other moral good works where unto an insidel is bound by the law of nature.
good morally without both divine charity, and divine faith; (for if liberum
arbitrium, free, will could produce no good moral action at all without Gods
special help, by necessary consequeuce it would follow that it were wholly
extinct; for example he, who could perceive nothing of any color without a
special concurrence, and assistance of God, would be counted wholly blind, that
is, it would be thought, that his sight or faculty of seeing were totally
extinct.) Howeuer mere works of nature invested with moral goodness only have
but withered leaves, wanting real fruits, such as tend Aug. l. 4. con. Julia
nullum bonu^ beatificum sine charitate: hoc, inquit, amore opus est, vt sit
bonum beatificum.
to the glory of Heaven, which is the center of Christian charity.

CHAR. XVIJ. OF CHARITY TOWARD OUR NEIGBOUR.
THE CONTENTS.
The love of God brings forth love toward our neigbour: whosoever loves
God, as he ought, loves his neigbour also: every man is every man's neigbour,
those come the nearest to God in imitation, which love their enemies without
dissimulation: the highest praise of Christian charity toward our neigbour is
that it cannot be idle, nor fall away, and in Heaven it increases.

CHarity toward our neigbour is a divine love derived from the love of God, as
a copy drawn from the original: S. Greger. ait, quod per amorem Dei amor
proximi gignitur, and per amorem proximi amor Dei nutritur.
Yet as the love of God causes love to our neigbour: so this does nourish
that, passing from, and for God upon our neigbour; in consequence of which both
loves are reciprocally necessary to each other: their consistency depeuds of
their uniting together: neither of them is love to blessedness, if divided. As
God in the creation of time blessed the first day, that was one only, and is
not said to have blessed the second, which made two, that being a number of
division: so he blesses the love exhibited to himself, and to our neighbor
for his sake, if undivided, and one only: Aug. l. 4. confess. c. 9. Beatus qui
amat te, and amicum in te, and inimicum propter te.
he is blessed that loves God for himself, and for, and in him, his neighbor.
Whereby it is plainly evident, that the love of such, as love by reflection on
worldly advantages only, or principally, do not tend to blessedness which is the
center of charity toward our neighbor: nor freindship is a right scoare to
love upon, if it be not with conformity, and subordination to the love of God,
Mat. 5. qui facit solemn oriri super bonos, and malos, and pluit super iustos,
and iniustos.
who as he makes the sun to arise on the evil, and the good, and sends
rain on the just, and unjust: so commands love, not only to friends, but
even to enemies; these, as well as the others being our neighbors: Aug. in
psalm. 115. tom. 8. omnis homo, inquit, est omni homini proximice.
for each man is each man's neighbor; neither is their any thing, that makes a
Christian Secundum S. Chrysostom. nihil est quod sic Deo similes facit vt
malignis, and laedentibus esse placabi^^m.
so like to God, as to love them, that curse him, to do good to them, that hate
him and to pray for them that hurt, and persecute him: besides in an enemy is
the image of God, a possibility of justification to life, and capacity of
blessedness, which are the chief inducements to charity toward our neighbor.
Hence is euidenced, that because the Image of God, the possibility of
justification to life, and the capacity of blessedness are proper to all men as
well others, as our selves, pesants, as kings, foes, as friends, therefore we
are bound to love and respect all a like, our neighbor, as well, as our
selves, poor, as rich, foes, as friends, for there is no just difference where
the true loves motives are the same.

The praise, and eminency of charity above the virtues of Hope, and faith,
(though all three are necessary to salvation) consist's in the continuance
thereof after the enjoyment of blessedness, the other two falling away, and
ceasing. A Christian soul that shall depart out of this life in charity shall
ever keep it in the kingdom of Heaven, for charity never falls away, or
wants, the acts which are proper unto it; nay the blessed souls now love Aug.
in Psalm. 91. si amamus, inquit, quem non videmus, quomodo amaturi sumus cum
viderimus.
more perfectly God, whom they see, then when they saw him nor, and rejoice in
the glorification of the good, through mercy Psalm. 57. laetabitur iustus cum
viderit vindictam: and Lucae 18. an, inquit, Deus no^ facit vindictam electorum
suorum clama^tium ad se die, and nocte.
and the punishment of the wicked, through justice. Also they love their
neighbors more intensly: for charity The Apostle teaches that charity never
falls away; the prerogative of this divine virtue is, that it cannot be
abolished in Heaven, or cease from the exercise of its own proper innate
actions, which it had on earth, and these it performs in a far higher degree
of perfection according to S. Austin l. de cura pro mortuis c. 14. and S.
Hierom.
increases in Heaven, whence by necessary consequence follows, that they
intercede for their friends on earth, intercession, or prayer for friends,
being the necessary office, or act of charity, and idle S. Gregory hom. 30.
super Euang. teaches that the love of God is never idle, if it abstain from
working it is not love. And l. 4. dial, says, that exhibition of work is the
trial of love.
charity, acting nothing is not charity: neither in reason can it be objected
to the blessed, want of S. Gregor. l. 4. Dial. cap. 33. quid est, quod ibi
nesciunt, vbi scientem omnia sciu^t. Loquitur de sanctis in coelo, qui clare
intuentur diuinam essentiam.
knowledge who perfectly know and see him, who knows, and sees all things.
Besides Abraham after his death though then he was not admitted into the
kingdom of Heaven, had knowledge of Moses, and the Prophets books, which he
never saw while he was on Earth, and the holy Prophet Jeremy The holy writer
of the Machabies 2. cap. 15. affirms that Jeremy the Prophet dead before,
prayed much for the people, and City of Jerusalem. As to this, and other books
of the Machabies S. Austin l. 18. de ciuit. Dei auerres, that though they be
not comprehended in the Canon, or Catalogue of the ancient Jews: nenertheless
the Catholic Church ever held them as Canonical: also the third Council of
Charthage whereof S. Austin was a member, counts the books of the Machabies
in the number of divine Scriptures and for such they are set down in the Decree
of Pope Gelasius in a Council of 70. Bishops.
after his death did pray much for the people, and holy city of Jerusalem:
neither does such intercession derogat from Christ, it being effectual only
through his merits: nor can it be displeasing to God Psalm. 136. nimis honorati
sunt amici tui Deus.
who will be honored in his Saints, and who promised protection to the City
of Jerusalem L. Reg. pretegam, inquit, Deus hane ciuitatem propter me, and
seruu^ meum David.
for his own, and his servant David's sake.

CHAR. XVIIJ. OF GODS CHARITY TO MAN.
THE CONTENTS.
God is an infinite lover of mankind: desires on his part to bring all men to
salvation, which is the end of their creation: Gods will to save on his part,
does not take away free will on man's part: life and death, good and evil is
put before man, he can stretch out his hand to which he will: God does not
necessitate him to either of both: man of himself works evil unto damnation,
and God furnishes meet helps to do good unto salvation: neither Pharaoh, nor
Esau had been rejected, if they had not resisted divine grace whereby they
might have been elected.

GOds charity to man is the It Is called the will of mercy in regard, it proceeds
from God only, being man on his part has nothing, that is able to merit Gods
love toward him, because he is conceived, and born in sin, which makes him a
child of wrath, and not of lou^.
will of his mercy toward all men to justification, and glorification, which
is the end of their creation Orig. tract. 340. in Mat. Deus, inquit, quantu^ ad
se, homines non ad perditionem creauit sed ad vitam aeternam.
for God made no man to damnation; in consequence of which his will on his
part, is to save S. Ignatius Epis. 6. ad philad. writes, that God is so
exceeding a great lover of mankind, that he desires to save all men, and bring
them to the knowledge of truth, in testimony whereof, (says this great Saint)
God makes the sun to shine as well on the wicked, as the just.
and bring all unto the knowledge of the truth, and in evidence thereof swears
by the mouth of his Prophet Ezechiel c. 33. Ezech. 33. quare moriemini domus
Israel, dicit Dominus, viuo ego, nolo mortem impij. Ubi Tertul. l. de pen. c.
4. ait, Deu inrasse vt sibi crederetur, quatenus dixit viuo ego.
he coueteth not the death of a sinner saying: As I live, I desire not the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his evil ways, and live;
which plainly she was Gods love, and mercy to a sinner, for whose sake he
swears, and argues withal the unhappiness of a sinner, that shall not believe
God, when he swears. Howeuer God does not save all sinners because all Occumen
in cap. 2. ad Timoth. Si Deus, inquit, vult omnes homines saluos fieri, quare
non fit, quod vult, non fit quia illi nolunt, nihil enim ex necessitate facit
in nobis Deus. Idem docet Aug. l. 1. de genesis con. Manichaeos cap. 3.
will not be saved, and Gods will to save on his part S. Austin l. de spir. and
lit. c. 33. or 32. writes, That the will of God is, that all men be saved,
and come to the knowledge of the truth: but (adds) not so, as that he will
take away their free will, according to the good, or evil managing whereof,
each one shall be judged most justly; from whence this great Doctor infers,
that those Infidels, which do not perform the will of God (for as much as
they do not believe in the Gospel of Christ) deprive themselves of an
exceeding great benefit, and thereby shall experience in their punishments his
power, whose mercy in gifts they have contemned, and the same S. Austin l. 2.
Act. cum felice Manichaeo, says expressly, that it is not an action unbeseeming
God to say to those, go ye into everlasting fire, which through their own
free will despised his mercy.
does not take away free will on their part, but most justly he judges them
according to the usage of their liberty (prepared by his grace) well, or amiss:
he does not necessitate either to virtue, or vice; for where there is
necessity, neither virtue can merit the crown of glorification, nor vice the
pain of damnation: Aug. l. 3. de lib. arb. cap. 18. nemo peccat in eo, quod
vitare non potest.
a fault that cannot be avoided is not counted a sin unto damnation: and
therefore S. Austin l. 3. de lib. arbit. c. 19. and l. de natura and gra. c.
67. arguing against the Pelagians says, That God imputes to no man, as a fault
vnuoluntary error. Again says he, it is not ascribed to any man, as a crime,
that he heals not his vvounded members (caused through Adams transgression)
but in regard he contemns God, that is vvilling to heal them. Furthermore l.
de praedes. Sanctorum. c. 7. he teaches, That no man is barred from knovving to
seek profitably, what unprofitably hekuovves not, or from an humble Confession
of his own infirmity, and weakness, to the end God may assist, him so seeking,
and confessing, who neither erreth nor labors while he assisteth; which
testimonies clearly evidence against the new Teachers of these days, that S.
Austin believed, that God gives sufficient grace to every man unto bringing him
to the knowledge of his truth.
God does not impute to any man as a damnable offense, for being defective in
binding up his wounded members, or in driving away his ignorance, blindness, and
difficulty of living aright unto justice, these being necessary infirmities,
which came of Adams disobedience; the offense that God imputs unto sinners, is
for resifting him, who is willing to cure them: for he gives to every one
sufficient S. Tho. 1. 2. q. 106. a. 2. ad 2. and Scotus in primum dis. 46. q.
vnica ad primum arg. agnoscunt gratia^ sufficientem in statu naturae lapsae cui
homo refragari, seu resistere possit: and hi Doctores sunt duo Theologiae
Scholasticae Principes.
remedies, or meet helps through grace to heal his wounds, and to know to seek
unto his advantage, what he is ignorant of to his disadvantage. God shuts not
the door of his mercy against the greatest sinners, who is the universal
Father of mercy: from these premises is conuincingly deducible the full reason
of the different Aug. l. de praedest. and gra. cap. 15. docet Nabuchodonosor
manum Dei sentientem in recordatione propriae iniquitatis ingemuisse Pharaonem
vero contra misericordissimam Dei voluntatem pugnasse arbitrio. Dicant autem
hune librum falso ascribi Aug. vtcunque hoc sit, locus cit. in canonem
Ecclesiae redactus est. Decret. par. 1. cau. 23. q. 4. cap. Nabuchodonosor.
ends of Nabuchodonosor, and Pharaoh, though in both was parity as unto nature;
for both were men: as unto dignity; for both were kings: as unto injustice: for
both unjustly detained captive the people of God: as unto correction: for both
were chastened for the same fault: and as unto the merciful will of God: whose
bountifullnes lead them both unto repentance: Neuertheless there was no parity
in their ends; for Nabuchodonosor by a happy managing of his free will in
obedienee to Gods merciful will S. Austin l. de predes. Sanctorum says, that
unless our lord shald build the house, those labor in vain, that endeavor to
build it. Whereby he expresses the necessity even of inward grace unto
justification of life: and indeed the written law, or Evangelical doctrines,
which are outward graces only, if inward grace were wanting, would rather
exasperate; then heal the wounds, as S. Austin teaches in sundry other places,
and in his book despir. and lit. cap. 5. says expressly, that the doctrine,
whereby we receive the precept unto living continently, and godly, is the
killing letter, if the quickening spirit be not there also.
(that by holy inspirations had tempered his free will) became sensible of his
own misery, and humbly acknowledged his own imbecility whereby, he found the
blessed effects of the divine bountifullnes Romans 2. ignoras, quoniam benignitas
Dei ad poenitentia^ te adducit.
that led him to repentance. But Pharaoh through the flexibility of his free
will resisted Gods merciful will, and continued in his pertinacy Aug. l.
quaes. in Exodus q. 18. ascribit proprio Pharaonis vitio, quod habuerit tale
cor, vt patientia Dei non moueretur ad pietatem, sed potius ad impietatem.
and hardness of heart, whereby he experienced in punishments Gods power, whose
mercy in divine Gifts he had contemned. In like manner Esau for having
contemned the divine call to the light of truth, became Aug. l 1. ad simplicia.
noluit, inquit, Esau, and non cucurrit..... spreta Dei vocatione reprobus
faectus est.
a reprobat, which God foreseeing long before (to whom all future things are
present, and secrets of all hearts open, and manifest) pronounced his heavy
displeasure against him, saying: I have hated Esau; yet God did not hate Esau
for what he made him, Aug. trac. 12. in Joan. sub fine^ quod audis, homo, Deus
fecit: quod audis, peccator, ipse homo fecit dele quod fecisti, vt Deus saluet,
quod fecit.
but for what Esau made him self; God made him unto salvation, and he made
himself unto damnation, dispising the divine calling, that might have saved
him. S. Austin trac. 12. in Joan. says, that if it were asked of him, why the
Jews could not believe, he should suddenly answer, because they would not.
Which reply is conform to the sacred Text Act. 7. How long (ye stift neckt
Jews) will ye refist the holy ghost.
The blind, and hard hearted Jews deprived themselves of the marvelous light
of Christian faith; for they might have believed in Christ, if they had not
resisted the holy Ghost, that offered them holy inspirations to chase away
their darkness, to soften the hardness of their hearts, and to make pleasing what
was displeasing unto them: namely, the holy Prophesies co^uincingly showing
Christ to be the promised Messiah: According to S. Austin in Euchir. ad
Laurent. c. 95. tom. 3. Deus, non unjust noluit saluos fieri habitantes (sci.
Corozain, and Beth aid cum potuissent salui esse, si voluissent. That is, the
will of God in order to not saving the inhabitants of Corozain, and Bethsaida,
had nothing of injustice, since they might have been saved, if they would
themselves; wherefore Epis. 105. ad Macedo. be assertes that the neglect, or
resisting of divine grace, which is given to make us good, makes us evil. And
S. Chrysostom hom. 28. in Mat. 26. and hom. 46. in Joan. 6. Teaches, that
since many among those, whom God calls, do perish, by necessary consequence
it follows, that it lies within the power of their free will to perish, or be
saved. It seemed expedient to set down the fore mentioned clear authorities out
of S. Austin to show against the new Teachers of our days, that this chiefest
Doctor of grace after S. Paul the Apostle, did teach, that God gives to every
man sufficient grace to save his soul; see the Annot. of the following
character.
Again the inhabitants, of Corozain, and Bethsaida abused a measure of divine
grace to their perdition, that would have been sufficient to the inhabitants of
Tyrus, and Sidon unto their conversion; and therefore woe was pronounced to the
Cities of Corozain, and Bethsaida: for if the marvelous works, which were
done in them, had been done in Tyrus, and Sidon, they had repented in
sackcloth, and ashes: howeuer Gods Gifts, neither outward; Per externa
beneficia dumtaxat, qualia sunt lex, doctrina, etc. Dei benignitas non adducit
ad poenitentiam, sed insuper and simul operatur in eo intrinsecus occulta
inspinatione. Audit, inquit. Aug. homo hominem, vel Angelum dicente^, vt autem
cognoscat verum esse quod dicitur, illo lumine men's intus spargitur, quod
aeteraum manet, and lucet in toncbris.
nor inward were wanting to these latter inhabitants; for God is not desectiue
in necessary expedients to the salvation of any one people, whose merciful
will is to save all.

CHAR. XIX. OF GODS CHARITY IN LAYING HIS COMMANDMENTS ON MAN.
THE CONTENTS.
If God had commanded man nothing, man should have had nothing whereby to know
his own inferiority, and his Creators superiority: God imposed easy
commandments giving withal sufficient auxiliaries for the performance
thereof: to assert an impossibility to keep the divine laws, and ordinances,
is to accuse God of impiety, and injustice.

GOds Charity in laying his commandments on man is the execution of his divine
will in remonstrance of his supreme soueraignity unto salvation to every one,
that will keep his commandments: Gods ordinances do show his superiority, and
man's inferiority, and are the divine compasses by which all such steer their
course as tend unto justification of life. Original sin had so wounded the
chief faculties of man's soul, that in his understanding little light was left
to see evil, and in the will less delight to do good: yet the merciful will
of God compassionating this condition of human misery S. Austin l. de sp. and
lit. c. 33. teaches, that God uses two kind of persuasions to bring men unto
Christian faith, one whereof is outward by Evangelical exhortations, whereby
the precepts of the law work something, says he, for as much, as they
admonish us of our infirmities, to the end we may recur to justifying grace;
the other is an inward persuasion consisting in illuminations unto clearing our
understanding, and in pious affections unto delighting our will, which are
inward actual graces, where of God is the sole cause; for according to the
same S. Austin, it is not in the power of any man to hinder God from putting
inward persuasions into his mind, though when they are put there he can cast
them away, being his will is free to assent, or dissent there to.
gave his commandments written with his own hand in two tables to Romans 7.
peccatum no^ cognoscebam nisi per lege^.
point at sin, and gave together sufficient grace to take away, what the tables
of commandments only pointed at, Aug. l. 3. de lib. arb. c. 28. rerum
moderatori su^mo placuit iustissime, and vt in ortu hominis originaliter
appareat iustitia punientis, and in prouectu misericordia liberantis.
though in man's nativity appears Gods vindicatiue justice, as unto the said
original sin, and the calamities annexed there to: neuertheless in man's groth
to the using of reason, God manifests his delivering mercy, giving to each
man sufficient helps to overcome the punishments, or miscries, which his
nativity meriteth; And as Aug. l. 3. de lib. arb c. 2. vt primus parens,
inquit, meliores gigneret, quam ipse esset, non erat aequitatis, sed ex
conuersione ad Deum vt vinceret quisque suppliciu^, quod origo eius ex
auersione meruerat, adiuuari oportebat.
it had been against reason, and equity that Adam should beget children better
then he had made himself by his fall: so it were against Gods mercy to continue
them in the calamities, unto which they were begot, these being no defects of
theirs personally. By necessary consequence is evident Gods clemency, and
bountifullnes in laying his commandments upon man. The Council of Trent sess.
6. defines, that God commands nothing, that is impossible, but by commanding
warns us to do what we can, and to ask of him what we cannot do, and so God
assistes us to do, what of our selves we cannot and S. Austin l. de gra. and
lib. arb. c. 16. teaches, that therefore God commands what we cannot do of
our selves without his grace, to the end we may know thereby what we ought to
demand of him. So that, O lord give requisits to do thy commandments and
command what thou vvilt, was a prayer often used by S. Austin.
By commanding he admonishes him, as to free will, to do what he can of
himself; as to grace to ask of him, what himself cannot do, and God most
bountifully, and sweetly does operate in man's asking, and cooperate in his
doing, graciously S. Tho. 1. 2. q. 106. a. 2. ad 2. lex noua, inquit, iram non
operatur, quia quantum est ex se dat sufficiens auxilium ad non peccandum. Et
paulo antz, si quis, ait, post acceptam gratiam noui Testamenti peccauerit, eum
maiore poena dignum esse tanquam maioribus beneficijs ingratum, and auxilio
sibi dato non vtentem.
furnishing every one with requisits for the execution of all things commanded:
furthermore God promises a reward of eternal life to such, as shall
faithfully execute his commands, as it we extorting from them the service, and
duty which the law of nature obliges, and the expectation of promised
blessedness encourages unto; so that the divine laws, and ordinances are
sweet, and easy, God only requiring from each man (come to the using of reason)
what lies in his power, or will (fortifyed by grace) to perform. It is the
denil that asks of man hard things, for example, to hate God, blaspheme his
holy name, decline his divine worship, dissobey parents, wrong out neighbor,
detract from him, wound his honor, and reputation, which are things very hard,
being contrary to the light of natural reason, but God requires only to love,
and serve him, and our neighbor for him, in which consists the fullnes of all
his commandments, and very easy, being conform to the dictates of natural
reason. Whereby follows that whenever the devils request is granted, and
Gods denied, it is not because Gods request is hard, but because man's heart is
hardened in obstinacy, and pertinacy against the clear light of natural reason
and supernatural inspitations. Since the first age of Christianity, for about
1500. Years till Luther, and Caluins time, no example of any author can be
produced for having impugned a possible observation of divine laws, and
ordinances, all writers unanimously affirming Aug. ser. de tempore, ait, nec
impessibile potuit (Deus) aliquid imper are, qui iustus est, nec damnaturus est
hominem pro eo quod non potuit vitare, quia pius est. Vnde l. 1. retrac. c. 10.
ait omnes homines posse si velint implere precepta Dei, sed praeparari
voluntatem a Domino, qui operando incipit, and cooperaendo perficit, vt docet
Aug. multis in locis, and quod misericordia Dei nos in omnibus praeueniat,
consentire autem, vel dissentire propriae voluntatis est.
that as God, who is good, does not dam any man for an offense he cannot
avoid: so being just, he does not command things impossible: and indeed to
impute to God an impossibility in his commands is S. Hieron Epis ad Damas.
writes thus, We detest the blasphemy of those which teach that things
impossible are commanded, or that all men cannot keep the commandments, and S.
Basil in Regul. c. monach. c. 33. affirm's, that God, who is both just, and
merciful would never command us any thing, unless he gave power to do it.
blasphemy, and sacriledg deuesting God of his justice: besides it gives the
lie to the holy Ghost, who says, that the Priest Zacharia^, and his wife
Elizabeth were both just before God, and walked in all the commandments, and
iustifications of our lord without reproof.

CHAR. XX. OF PREDESTINATION OR ELECTION TO THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN.
THE CONTENTS.
Grace does not proceed first from merits: it is given Gratis, and from thence
is named Grace: election, or Predestination to divine Grace comes not of him,
that wills, nor of him, that runs but of God, that shows mercy: Gods
election, or Predestination of man to the kingdom of Heaven supposes fore
knowledge of Good works through Grace Graetis given: the glory of Heaven is a
prize, a just crown, a reward ordained for those, which employe faithfully
their Talents of Grace, which mercy bestowed: S. Paul found mercy after many
evil works: yet he had never found the kingdom of Heaven, but for his many
good works.

PRedestination, or election to the kingdom of Heaven is a firm purpose or
decree of Gods elective will unto glorifying such, as shall depart out of this
life in due conformity to his divine laws, and ordinantes; although God as the
universal bountiful benefactor; The Prophet Isaias cap. 5. setting forth
general mercy in the person of God, faith: What could I have done any more to
my vinegard, that I have not done unto it: whether have I looked. that it
should bring forth grapes, and it brings forth vvild grapes. Where, by the
vinegard, the barren people of Israel: by the grapes, good, by wild grapes
evil works are figuratively meant, God signifying thereby, that on his part he
had furnished the people of Israel with all requisits necessary to the
exercising of good works, who neuertheless on their parts brought forth evil
works only, and in the 62. chap. of the same Isaias God complains of the
Israelits, saying I have spread out mine hands all the day unto a rebellious
people, that walks ina way, which is not good, after their own
imaginations.
does furnish each reasonable creature with sufficient expedients to see his
own infirmity, to confess his imbecility, and to know to seek profitablely,
what vnprofitablely he knows not: namely, a divine cure for his miseries: and
this act of bountifullnes is properly named grace, grace The Apostle Romans 11.
affirms, that grace were not grace if procured by our works: and indeed as S.
Austin teaches grace comes not of our merits, but is given gratis, and
therefore is called grace, so that our call, or election unto grace comes not
of him, that wills, nor of him, that runs, but of God, that shows mercy.
Romans 9.
being frank, and Gratic bestowed on every man come to the use of reason: so
that it does not depend of him, that wills nor of him that runs, Romans non
est volentis, neque curre^tis, sed miserentis Dei: id est, Dei vocatio, seu
electio ad prima^gratiam neque est ex merito bonae voluntatis, quod importat
velle, nec ex merito boni operis, quod importat currere: sed ex solo, and
libero beneplacito Dei miserentis, and ideo gratia nominatur, quia gratis
datur. ait Aug.
but of God only that shows mercy Romans 9. who (if so he had pleased) might
have left all mankind in the lump of perdition: S. Austin l. 1. ad simplicia:
q. 2. expressly teaches, that man: justification goes before his election to
glory in the fore science of God, from whence he infer's. that God ordaines
none to glory without a fore knowledge of his good works: for he makes a
difference between Gods will, or purpose, as to justification, and his will,
and purpose, as unto election in order to glory, saying, that Gods purpose to
justify does not suppose in us works deserving of justification: wherefore the
holy Scriptures, and ancient Fathers call eternal glory a prize, a just crown,
a salary, a reward, because it supposes good works: and indeed eternal life
properly bears the name of a reward, and is only called grace in regard it is
procured by good works, which proceed from divine grace.
neuertheless God does not predestinat, or elect any one to the glory of
Heaven, whose meritorious works (proceeding from his grace) he has not a
prescience, or fore knowledge of Aug.l.de gra. and lib. arb. Paulus, inquit,
post meritae bona consecutus est gloriam, qui post mala merita consecutus est
graetiam. Act. enim 9. dicitur Saulus adhuc spirans caedis, and minarum in
discipulos Christi: Deus nobis inimicis confert gratiam ex meritis Christi Romans
5.
S. Paul in the mids of many ill meritts, breathing out threatenings, and
slaughter against the disciples of Christ received divine grace even to
justification of life Gratis. Yet he did not obtain his incorruptible crown,
but after many good merits: he had mist of eternal blessedness, if he had not
both willed well, and run well in the sweet odor of that grace, which he got
through mercy without his own willing, or his own running. According to holy
Scriptures, and ancient Fathers the present life is a course, wherein the
faithful run, that is endeavor by their good works to make their calling, and
election sure.
This present life is a race, wherein only good runners obtain the prize,
namely everlasting blessedness, which God gives only to those, who persevere
running in sanctity of life, and works of mercy to the end of the race, that is
to the hour of death; for such only are the good runners in the race of
predestination. Brethren says the Apostle, Labor the rather, that 2. Pet. 1.
Quapropter Fratres magis satagite, vt per bona opera certa^ vestram vocationem,
and electionem faciatis; and sane qui habet in sua potestate causam
efficientem, habet and effectnm torrespondentem talt causae: atqui efficax
motiuum, quo Deus deputat efficaciter homines ad gloriam aeternam consistit in
bonis operibus factis ex gratia, and in statu gratiae, and in perseuerantia
vtriusque vsque ad finem vitae inclusiue, and hat sunt in potestate cuiuseunque
adulti, ergo and efficax electio ad gloriam.
by good works you may make sure your vocation, and election: whence plainly
appears, that Gods eternal election, or predestination to life everlasting is
in order to our free will, and good works: In consequence of which it is.
manifest weakness, and a clear sign, that such are reprobate, and will perish
which say, if we be predestinate, do what we will, we shall be saved: nay the
Apostie bids us, if we Hope to be in the number of the predestinate (for
know we cannot without a special revelation) do well, that is exercise good
works, that thereby our predestination to glory may be assured: and indeed as
God does distribute his glory, as to execution in reserence to the deserts of
those, to whom he distributeth it: so as to predestination, he prepares it upon
the same score: for God does not distribute the prepared reward otherwise, then
he has prepared it to be distributed; whereby is euidenced, that since God
gives the inheritance of Heaven in respect of good works proceeding from his
merciful grace: he does predestinat also to the enjoyment thereof upon the
same scoare, and consequently S. Austin ser. 1. de Verbis Domini c. 1. sets
down a double election, for example one in order to grace, the other in order
to glory, and teaches, that the first election, which is to grace goes before,
and the other which is to glory follows in the divine fore knowledge of good
works. God gives grace Gra^is without any respect to our meritts: but he gives
glory according to our works. Saul, says S. Austin l. de gra. and lib. arb. c.
6. after many good works obtained glory, who after many evil works obtained
grace. And S. Ambrose l. 1. de fide c. 2. observes, that the Apostle Romans S.
says, that those, which God knew before, were predestined, for he did not
predestinat before he knew, but foresaw the works of such, as he predestined
to rewards.
good works precede predestination in Gods prescience, or fore knowledge, those
being the motives unto this. Now ill runners (in the race of predestination of
the first class, or rank, are Infidells, who have, and do contemn still the
merciful helps, which God furnishes to make them run even unto salvation, for
he gives unto these, beside exterior S. Austin l. 10. confess. c. 6. affirms,
that though Heaven, and earth, and all things contained in each of both speak
unto us to love God: neuertheless they speak in vain outwardly, if God shall
not speak inwardly. The divine goodness brings no man to repentance, without
the working of some inward occult inspiration, and infusion of grace. The
letter of the law says S. Austin l. de spi. and lit. c. 4. 5. 33. 34. that
reaches against sin, rather hardneth, and kills the soul, if the quickening
spirit (which is inward grace) be wanting.
interior grace to love him, and to keep his commandments, which are the law
of nature so firmly written in their hearts, Aug. lex tua Domine insita est in
cordibus nostris, quam nulia delet, vel delebit iniquitas.
that no iniquity does, or can blot it out: wherefore for as much, as they
wilfully neglect these bountiful remedies Aug infideles, inquit, magno bono
se priuant, quod non credunt Euangelio, experturi scilicet in supplicijs eius
potestatem, cuius misericordiam in donis co^tempserunt.
they deprive themselves of a great good, or benefit, and shall sind in
punishments, the power of him, whose mercy in gifts they have contemned, Ill
runners of the second Class are wicked Christians, who wilfully deuesting
themselves of, sanctifying grace received in or after baptism, become servants
to sin, which does so Psalm. 37. sicut onus grave grauatae sunt super me:
scilicet iniquitates meae and Proverb. 5. iniquitates suae capiunt impiu^, and
funibus peccatorum co^stringitur.
ouerburden, and with cords bind them, that as Asses ouerloaden they cannot
go, or fleas tied in chains they cannot leap: so they cannot run; Haebr. 12.
Adulteri, fornicatores etc. no^ possidebunt regnum Dei.
such are voluptuous, luxurious, wanton, drunken, and all unjust Christians,
who will never obtain the inheritance of Heaven, not because they cannot,
Oecumenius in cap. 2, 1. ad Timoth. says, that-seeing it is the will of God to
bring all men to the knowledge of his truth, why is not his will done? he
answers, that therefore it is not done, because all men will not do his
will, and God forces, or necessitateth no man to do his will.
but because they will not take of their loads, and deliver themselves out of
their cords, The Apostle Romans 2. says, Do not know O sinner, that the
bountifullnes of God leads thee to repentance: but thou after thine hard, and
impenitent heart heapest up, as a treasure vnta thy self wrath against the
day of wrath, and of the revelation of the just judgment of God; where, by the
divine bountifullnes is meant divine grace, which the sinful Jews through
their hardness of heart resisted.
which is in their power to do through tears of true repentance, whereto the
divine bountifullnes leads every sinner. By help of tears, occasioned
through divine grace, holy David, S. Peter, and S. Paul, and S. Mary Magdelen,
cast of the heavy loades, and troublesome fetters, which sin had caused, and
thereby restored to their liberty, run happily unto obtaining the prize, which
is eternal glory.

In the great day According to the holy Evangelist S. Matthew cap. 25. Christ
shall say in the day of general Judgment: Come ye blessed of my Father
possess the inheritance of the kingdom prepared for you, from the fundation of
the world etc. from this sacred text evidently appears, that the kingdom of
Heaven is ordained for such, as shall do good works of mercy, namely giving
meat to the hungered, drink to the thirsted, clothing to the naked etc. in
consequence of which God electeth those to glory, whose good works he had
foreseen.
of general accounts, when the great king of Heaven, and earth shall
distribute rewards Mat. 16. tunc reddet vnicuique secundum opera eius.
according to the works of each one, the good runners will be put on his right
hand, and among the sheep entitled the blessed of his Father, for having given
meat to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, clothes to the naked, assistance to
the sick, and alms to the imprisoned, which are the works, of mercy; contrary
wise the ill runners wanting such merits, and that through their own fault,
will be put on the left hand of the king, among the goats, and condemned to
the everlasting fire of hell: and Aug. non est indignu^ Deo dicere ijs, ite in
ignem eternu^, qui misericordiam eius contempserunt.
it is not an action unworthy a king infinitely just to say to such, as have
contemned his mercy: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the devil, and his Angels.

CHAR. XXJ. OF REPROBATION.
THE CONTENTS.
There is no positive Act in the divine will to reprobate, that is to exclude
any one from the kingdom of Heaven, and to adjudge to everlasting pains of hell
without a foreknowledge of evil works: God deserteth noe man before himself be
deserted: nor does he refuse to give even his plenteous grace, that leads
effectually unto justification of life, if his call thereto be not rejected.

REprobation is a definitive, or absolute sentence of Gods justice unto
excluding from his glory, and punishing with everlasting fire such, as shall
depart out of this life in mortal sin, committed Definita est reprobatio in
ordine ad adultos,
by an act of their own will. This double pain, one of separation from God,
called Poena damni the other of sensible torment, named Poena sensus, is
expressed in the sentence it self, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil, and his Angels: Matt. 25. Where departure does
import separation from God, and everlasting fire, sensible punishment; but Gods
knowledge of himself, as just revenger does not precede his foreknowledg of
man, as unjust offender: for though God can deliver without merits Gratis whom
soever he pleases out of the lump of perdition, that is, out of original, and
actual sins, because he is infinitely good; yet he does not condemn any unto
everlasting pains for noe fault, because he is infinitely just: whereby is
plainly evident, that there According to the Euaugelist S. Matthew. c. 23. God
on his part would, Gather his children together, as the hen gathers her
chickins under her vvings, and they will not that is, God on his part is
unwilling to depart from them, though on their parts they will depart from
him Isai. 54.
is noe positive act in his divine will to exclude from Heaven, and adiudg to
Hell without preuision of ill works proceeding from human free will: besides it
would contradict Gods general condition will (so often inculcated in holy
scripture) to save all reasonable creatures, which observe his laws, and
ordinances, if he had an absolute private will to damn some without respect to
transgression of the same laws, and ordinances: again that proceeding might
argue in God either forgetfullnes of his general will, or mutability in
changing, or illusion in inculcating it, which to conceive of God were both
blasphemy, and sacraledg: for thereby he would be deuested of his goodness, and
be also believed to necessitate man to ill, leaving him without free will, or
to work, as birds build their nests in the summer by natural instinct, and
consequently to extinguish in him his own image, and likeness, Liberum
arbitrium, free will, being an essential part thereof. Neither can God be said
according to truth, and equity to harden any man, whom pertiacy, and obstinacy
through perseverance in wickedness has not hardened before: that is, According
to S. Austin l. de not. and gra. c. 26. God never deserts any man, that
deserts not him first. To desert, or forsake God, is to resist, and cast away
the inward helps of his mercy, namely holy illuminations, and inspirations,
which lead to justification of life.
God does not desert before himself be deserted, and that is to say God does
not refuse his Mat. 7. If ye, that aere evil can give to your children good
gifts, how much more shall your Father, that is in Heaven give good things to
them, which ask him. This sacred text evidently shows Gods willingness to
furnish all expedients necessary for the saving of every soul, if asked aright,
and indeed by good things, are meant all spiritual meet helps of divine grace.
plenteous measure of grace, that brings effectually unto justification of life,
if man does not refuse Gods call unto it: neither does God cease Apoco. 3. ecce
sto ad ostium and pulso. Et Luc. 11. pulsate, and aperietur vobis.
to call though man never comply with, or consent to Gods calling: and as the
whole air is said to be darkened in the absence of the sun, notwithstanding,
that stars remain in the firmament, which furnish an inferior light: so man is
said to be hardened (through obstinate Aug. l. 1. ad Simplicianum. Noluit Esau,
and non cucurrit: sed si voluisset, and cucurrisset, Dei adiutorio peruenisset,
qui and velle and currere vocando pr^staret, nisi vocatione contempta reprebus
fieret.
resisting of the divine mercy) although he does not want sufficient grace to
call him to Gods plenteous grace, who obstructs the way of correction to none,
and gives power of doing well even to every one, though hardened against him,
According to S. Austin l. 3. de lib. arb. c. 19. every man has power to know
to seek profitably, what unprofitably he know's not: and l. de cor. and gra. c.
17. teaches expressly, that in the day of general judgment it may be answered
to a damned soul, that shall plead want of perseverance in grace, that he might
have perseuered, if he would himself; and therefore in an other place ascribes
the hardness of Pharaohs heart to his own fault, being he resisted Gods
merciful grace, whereby he might have cast from him his transgressions.
Likewise S. Austins Disciple S. Prosper in his answer to Vincentius questions,
auerres that God depriu's no man of power to do well, nor obstructs his way
unto correction.
Pharao as well, as Nabuchodonosor might have obtained plenteous grace of true
repentance unto justification of life, if he had not contemned gods call unto
it, it was in his, (mercifully called) as well, as in the others power to
embrace the divine call unto amendment: Gods plenteous grace In order to the
royal dinner mentioned Mat. 22. S. Austin l. 38. quaes. 68. expresses his
sentiment thus To that supper, which our lord says, was prepared, neither
all those which were invited would go, neither those which went could
have gone unless they had been called: in consequence of which, says this
greatest Doctor of grace, neither these, that went ought to ascribe their
going to themselves, nor those which refused to go, ought to impute their not
going to any other, then themselves, since it was in their own power to go,
being they were invited.
is like the plentiful nuptial dinner prepared by the king mentioned in the
Gospel at the marriage of his son, of which many of his subjects made
themselves unworthy, because being bidden they did not only refuse to go, but
also sharply treated those, that bid them; Pharao was like these unworthy
bidden guests, for he did not only contemn Gods call to plenteous grace of
repentance, but also made light of the callers, and therefore God made him an
example of his just wrath, multiplving his miracles, and wonders in the land of
Egypt even to the desolation of him, and his kingdom. Hereby may be
illustrated, what is inserted in the said Gospel, to wit, Many called, few
chosen. God calls as he is a merciful bountiful benefactor, and is said to
call many, because he calls all: for his calling is an act of his first will,
which is According to S. Chrysostom hom. in ep. ad Ephesians. Gods first will is,
that even those, which have sinned against him, may not perish: but his second
will is to let the wicked perish. For this subsequent, or secundary will of God
is called the will of his justice, because, as to this will rewardsare decreed
suitable to the merits of each one; God rendereth the enjoyments of Heaven for
good, and inflicteth the punishments of hell, for evil works.
his will of mercy to save all, having made none unto damnation: but God
chooses to his glory, as he is a just rewarder. And this his choosing is an
act of his second will, which is the will of his justice to reward every one
according to his works, and he is said to choose few, because in respect of the
many ill works, which God finds deserving damnation S. Chrysostom hom. 30. in
act Apos. teaches, that Gods preordination to glory supposes his fore
knowledge of good works, in regard whereof he preordaineth, and pred^stinateth
to glory effectually: in consequence whereof the sole way to obtain eternal
blessedness is to abstain from sin, and persevere in good works.
he finds few good works to choose worthy glorification.

CHAR. XXIJ. OF CHRIST'S CHARITY TO MAN.
THE CONTENTS.
Christ came into the world to destroy sin, and death, and accordingly offered
the Cup of his passion for as many, as were liable thereto, that is for the
deliverance of all men, the elect, and reprobat: the whole world joint, and
seperat (except the Virgin Mary) had sinned, and perished in Adam: Christ's
murderers had no reason to despair, being Christ even for them offered his
prayer.

Christ's charity to man is the Cup of his passion made According to the Apostle
2. Cor. 13. Christ was crucified, as infirm, that is according to the infirmity
of human nature, which he had assumed: in regard where of S. Prosper names
Christ's charity toward, mankind, the Cup of his passion made of human
infirmity, which is conform to Christ's own words set down in S. Matthews
Gospel. Can ye drink the Cup, that I shall drink of. And the 26. Chap. of the
same Gospel. If it be possible let this Cup pass away from me. Where is meant
by the Cup, Christ's passion.
of human infirmity, and divine virtue, unto salvation to every one that shall
drink of it: As Christ purposely came into the world Timoth. 2. Christus Dei,
and hominum mediator.
mediator of God, and men excepting none from his mediation: so he purposely
offered the Cup of his passion for all, excluding none from drinking thereof;
which is to say, that, S. Leo. ser. de natiuit. Domini. Dominus, inquit, noster
peccati, mortisque destructor, sicut nullu^ a reatu liberum reperijt, ita
liberandis omnibus venit.
being come to destroy sin and death, and finding none free from the guilt of
either he made himself the General Redeemer of all for their deliverance out
of both; himself became the full propitiation, for the sins of the whole
world joint; and seperat, comprehending even children of one days old, and
such as are hardened against him Council. Valent. 3. cap. 5. Christus Jesus
Daeminus noster, sicut nullus homo est, fuit, vel erit, cuius naturae in illo
assumpta no^ fuerit. Ita nullus est etc.
as there is none, or has been, or ever shall be any, whose human nature is
not assumed in Christ: so there is none, or has been, or shall ever be any,
for whom Christ has not suffered his passion: in regard whereof he is called
Savior of all, though specially of those, which by baptism are buried with
him into death, that is which drink of the Cup of his passion: for baptism was
instituted by him as an essential requisite for the drinking thereof unto
justification of life: and the offering the Cup of his passion had been little
conducible to the end, it was offered for, if necessary means had not been
provided to profer it; an end cannot be obtained without the application of
helps convenient, and conform there to: and as to this point of general
provision Christ was wanting to none: for such as are baptized in him, and
consequently buried with him by baptism into death of sin, receive the benefit
of his passions Cup, which if they shall constantly keep, they cannot be
deprived of eternal blessedness due to their holy perseverance in sanctity
through the merits of Christ's death; and all those, Secundum S. Aug. qui
nunquam audiuit Euangelium Chricti habet gratiam, qua possit vel praeceptu^
naturae implere, vel qua possit implorare auxilium ad praeceptu^ naturae
implendum: vnde illud psalm. 83. benedictione^ dabit Dominus qui lege dedit.
who are not baptized, if they are come to the years of discretion, do
infallibly participate of Gods general grace on the same scoare of Christ's
death sufficiently, as to the observation of the commandments, which if they
shall faithfully keep, (and these are written in their hearts) they must
certainly enjoy the benefit of baptism, or some other advantage equalling
that, as to justification. Touching According to S. Prosper l. de voca. Gent.
c. 23. Young children born of unbelieving parents might receive meet help in
order to their salvation, if the same parents should use well the grace, that
Christ through his bitter passion has procured for every kind of people, and
nation, being Christ offered the Cup of his passion for all men joint, and
seperat excluding none on his part from the possibility of drinking of it.
children, who die before the use of reason without baptism, though they want
thereby the benefit of general redemption, and consequently are deprived of
full felicity: neuertheless their misfortune must not be ascribed to the
wanting of a general Redeemer The Apostle 2. Cor. 5. infers from Christ's
dying for all men, that all were dead in Adam, saying if one (Christ) be dead
for all: from whence it is evident that Christ dyed for all, which were dead in
Adam: and indeed otherwise the Apostle had made a very weak inference, and to
noe purpose: wherefore since according to the Apostle all men were dead in Adam,
without doubt Christ dyed for all men joint, and seperat: and S. Austin after
the same manner infers from the text set down, that all men were dead in
Adam because Christ dyed for all, and l. 6. con. Iulia c. 1. makes use of the
same argument to prove against Julian, and the Pelagians, that all children
were dead in Adam; because one Christ dyed for all, and this Catholic doctrine
S. Austin inculcateth, urges, and presses against all opposers. Hanc, inquit,
doctrinam inculco, impingo, refercio recusanti, so that our modern Teachers say
unadvisedly that S. Austin nouer taught, that Christ gave himself a
propitiation, was crucified, or dyed for all men joint, and seperat. besides S.
Austin trac. 31. in Joan. says expressly, that the Jews which murdered Christ
ought not to despair being Christ even for them offered his prayer, and a
little after, Christ, says he, considered his death, as offered for; and not as
procured by them: which doctrine S. Prosper confirms l. 2. de vocat. gent.
Christ having dyed for, and to redeem all, excluding none on his part: it is
to be imputed either to the negligence of their parents, who (if Christians)
let them die without baptism; if infidels help them not, as they might do by
embracing Graetia implorandi diuinum uuxilium, and imple^di omnia praecepta
naturae omnibus hominibus adultis gratis co^cessa est and proinde nemo est cui
ad fidem Christi aliquis non patent accessus: vnde Io. 1. erat lux veraquae
illuminat omnem bominem venientem in hunc mundum.
Gods general grace, that leads them to the marvelous light of Christian
faith. Again many times it is to be ascribed to natural secundary causes,
which take Children out of this life before baptism can be administered to them;
howeuer God is not wanting in necessary requisits, or means, as to the full
happiness of those Infants, which by natural causes are prevented of the
application of baptism: because they do not suffer prejudice for want of
sufficient expedients, since Christ has instituted baptism, as a most
sufficient remedy unto blessedness in order to all men: and infants are deprived
of the fruit, for as much only, as the application of it is obstructed by
certain natural causes, which God did not dispose, and ordain to that end,
or purpose, but for a general good of the whole universe, which God is not
bound to hinder: for he does not inuert, or obstruct the order of things
settled from the creation of the world: he is not only general benefactour
according to mercy: but also a general prouider, according to providence: he
takes not care of one creature so, as to neglect his care of another, or so to
benefit one, as to prejudice another; for example if a man should cast himself
wilfully into a hot fiery furnace, God to preserve him from burning should be
obliged to hinder the innate actiuity of fire, which is to burn, and so to
work miraculously above nature, as he did in the hot furnace of Babylon, which
God is not bound to do: howeuer the premises give evidence enough to believe,
that Christ is rightly named the Redeemer, and Savior of all. Besides, as a
king is truly a king, soueraign lord, and supreme Governor of his people,
though they rebel against him, and will not be governed: so Christ is truly
The Apostle 1. Timoth. 4. calls Christ the Savior of all men, but specially
of the faithful, where the particle specially, gives evidence enough against
our modern Teachers that Christ, dyed for the Redemption of all men joint and
seperat: which Catholic doctrine S. John the Apostle cap. 2. clearly
demonstrates saying, that Christ Is the propitiation for our sins, and not for
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world, whereby is meant
according to the interpretation of the Council of Trent sess. 6. c. 3. not the
elect only, but the reprobat also, being the whole world importes both the
one, and the other kind of men.
a Savior of the whole world, notwithstanding, that the greatest part thereof
through obstinat perseverance in rebellion against his divine grace, will not
be saved: but Christ's charity to save infinitely exceeds the zeal, that any
temporal Prince ever showed in governing his people: for Christ did not only
make a law to save: but also dyed for the establishing, and conseruing it, as
to saving the whole world, which no earthly Monarch ever did, as to governing
his people; furthermore Christ left necessary expedients (through the merits of
his death) whereby every one come to years of discretion, might come to the
knowledge of this saving law, unless such as should be The ancient Philosophers
were inexcusable, because, though they knew God, neuertheless they did not
glorify him according to their knowledge.
vnexcusably negligent of the helps mercifully given them to that end, and
purpose.

CHAR. XXIIJ. OF VERTVE
THE CONTENTS.
The property, and nature of true virtue is, that it, cannot be used amiss: as
star's in the night, so virtue in adversity clearly shines: the supreme
providence suffered holy Job, and Toby to fall into tribulation, that they
might be an example of virtue unto imitation. Four kinds of Cardinal virtues
described.

Virtue (taken in the moral seuse) is a good disposition, or inclination
tending to the exercise of honest laudable actions conformable to the dictates
of reason Aug. virtus est quae recte viuitur, and nemo male vtitur.
no man can use it amiss, in regard its natural property is to bring forth
good fruit, to make Aristot. 2. Ethic. virtus est qua bonum facit habentem, and
opies bonum.
him good, that enjoys it, and to flourish for ever. As the plant called
Mayor, colleg. 20. meminit herbae semper viuae.
the herb of life is never preiudic'd through cold, heat, drouth, or moisture,
but all ways continues in a fresh liuelynes without withered leaves: so
Uirtus aeternum viuens.
virtue bears up, and florisheth in the midds of trobles, and miseries: for
as the brightness of the sun obscureth greater lights: so the power of virtue
ouercometh the greatest affliction; and indeed, as stars do not shine, but in
the night: so virtue makes the greatest show in adversity, which is the trial
thereof. The virtue of holy Job, and Toby lay, as it were, hid in darkness while
they continued in prosperity: but after they fell into misery, put, as it were,
on a public stage, evidently appeared: fire increases with the blasts of
wind, that press it, and virtue with the fire of tribulation that tries it.
Again when the good Christians of the primitive Church were racked, tried by
reproaches, and scourgings, by bands, and impri onments, stoned, howed a sunder,
slain with the sword, then the greatness of their virtue gave clear evidence of
their love to God, the desire of heavenly things, and their contempt of the
world; hereby it is plain S. Gregor. l. moral. aduersitas est probatio virtutis,
no^ indicium reprobationis.
that adversity is no argument of Reprobation, it being the proof of virtue
unto salvation, and piously endured is a manifest token of godliness unto
imitation. For truly there is no man so senseless, but beleiuing the old
Testament, will receive comfort in sickness, or other corporal infirmities,
when he shall call to remembrance how patiently that great servant of God holy
Job endured his grievous ulcers, and how cherfully Sacra Scriptura refert, quod
ideo Deus permisit, vt illius modi tentatio eueniret Tobiae, vt posteris
daretur exemplum patientiae eius, and S. Job.
the noble Toby especially beloved of God bore the loss of his sight. Neither
is any man so void of reason if he believe the new Testament, but will suffer
with joy reproaches, contumelies, the spoiling of his goods for Christ's sake,
when he shall piously consider how cherefully the primitive Saints of the new
Testament endured stripes, prisons, banishments, gibbets, swords, saunces,
knives, and all sort of cruel torments for the same cause.

The chief heads of moral virtue be four, which in respect of their eminency
are named Cardinal virtues; for example, wisdom, Justice, Fortitude, and
Temperance, Zorostrates taught, that the soul had wings, and being asked of his
scholars, how they might get flying souls, he bid them water the wings thereof,
with the water of life: and being demanded again, where that water might be
had, he replied darkly after his wonted manner, saying, the Paradise of God is
watered with four rivers, and that they might draw from them water of life. By
the four rivers of Zorastrates S. Ambr. S. Ambro. l. de paradiso, and allegor.
per quatuor flumina, quorum meminit Zorostrat. intellexit quatuor virtutes
Cardinales.
understood the four Cardinal virtues, which be wells of water, that spring up
unto everlasting life. But the sour rivers which are said to have their springs
in the terrestiall paradise, be Ganges, Nilus, Tigris, and Euphrates. The first
whereof in as much, as it brings forth gold the Prince of Metals, and the
Carbuncle the best of precious stones, expresses wisdom, which is the queen of
sciences, and all knowledge. The second for as much as it waters the land of
Egypt against the violent heats of the sun represents temperance, the innate
property whereof, is to suppress the fire of carnal lusts. The third namely
Tygris in regard of its swift, and rapid waters, which cast down strong
fortresses, represents fortitude, that ouercomes the hardest difficulties. The
fourth that is Euphrates because of its fruitful fecundity is a symbol of
Justice, that furnishes human society with a great abundance of good fruits
through the true exercise the rof.

CHAR. XXIV. OF VVISDOME.
THE CONTENTS.
Whosoever finds true wisdom gets a treasure of all good things: a wise
man indeed loves virtue, and hates vice, reuerenceth the best antiquity, and
detesteth profane novelties, embraces sobriety, and escheweth curiosity,
affects knowledge of profitable, and seeks not after science in many things.

Wisdom is an armor Romans 13. armatura lucis (sapientia) Sap. 70. proposui pro
luce habere eam, sapientiam scilicet.
of light, which delivers from darkness of error, enableth to wrestle against
flesh, and blood, and to resist spiritual wickedness in the defense of truth.
She is a light in as much, as she furnishes knowledge, understanding, and
counsel Proverbs. 20. and an armor in regard a man truly wise Solomon Sap. 7.
calls wisdom the mother of all good things, and prefer's her to scepters, and
throns, and counts riches nothing in comparison of her.
receives together with wisdom an army of good things, and treasures of
heavenly graces, whereby he is armed against his own lusts, and wanton desires
Seneca compares a wise man unto the strongest army; because a wise man indeed
stands firm against poverty, slanders, reproaches ignominies, and all manner of
tribulations.
and made vndantedly valiant in all encounters with adversity: wherefore wisdom
is an infinite treasure unto such, as lay hold on her, for her counsel
preserves, and her understanding keeps them; as a pillar of a cloud led the
Israelits in their way by day, and the pillar of fire gave them light by night,
that they might go both by day, and night Exodus. 13. so wisdom, is a guide
unto men, which walk in prosperity, as by day, and a light unto men, that walk
in adversity, as by night. Wisdom is the schoolmistris of the knowledge of
God, the chooser out of his works, the teacher of sobernes, the giver of
holiness, and the doer of all things most profitable, and acceptable in the
sight of Heaven, Jacob 30. Sapientia desursum est.
whence she is descended. Whereby is plainly evident, that wisdom is not the
same thing with science, which taken precisely, has no bounds, being common a
like to each human knowledge: besides many times 1. Cor. 8. Scientia, inflat.
science puffs up him, that finds it, and deceives his judgment, rendering
him curious in superfluous things Those which know profitable, and not such as
know many things, are wise men indeed.
which have nothing of profit. Of this curiosity in order to science the
Athenians were guilty, who, says S. Luke Act. 17. gave themselves to nothing
else, but to speak, or to hear something of nouelty, which is the mother of
schism, and heresy: but in all times some wanton wits have either begot, or
revived dangerous vnauthorised doctrins blown up with their own science to the
end they might be counted learned above the ordinary rank of knowing men: so
that it is no strange thing, that the present age should bring forth new
Teachers, and new hearers of profane novelties; in consequence of the
premises noe man how knowing soever he seems, is truly wise, when S. Austin in
an Epistle to Dioscorus condemns those scholars, which rejoice in knowing of
Anoxagoras, Anoxemenes, Pithagoras, Demosthenes, to the end they may seem
learned, because there is nothing of solid doctrine, and true erudition in
them.
he seeks out curiously things, that have nothing of profit, or searches
into hidden mysteries, which exceed his capacity; for a wise man indeed
thinks with reverence upon what God has commanded Eccles. 32. in
superfluous things search not, and be not curious in many of his works, for
many things are showed unto thee above the capacity of men. Furthermore true
wisdom, which is from above, is pure, Jacob. 30. That is, without uncleanness. A
wise man indeed Ecclesiasticus cap. 3. says, that an heart, which is wise, and
understanding will abstain from sin, and shall prosper in the works of
Justice, wherefore S. Bernard teaches that those sind wisdom which are sorry
for their sins.
purges out of his heart the leven of sin, casts a way wickedness, presses
down the lusts of curiosity, of ambition, of vain glory, commits not
fornication with schism, and heresy, despises wordly pleasures According to S.
Austin l. de ciuit. the intent, and aim of true wisdom is to be where God is
all in all things, with an assured eternity, and perfect peace.
and sets his affection on things that are above, and not on things which
are on the earth: true wisdom is peaceable Jacob. 30. A wise man indeed has
nothing of strise in his heart, is a lover of union established in the unity of
Christian schools, is gentle, humble, modest, without leuity, pride,
wantounes, is full of obedience to the Churches laws, and ordinances, and full
of mercy and good fruits without hypocrisy. Again a wise man indeed, is wise in
order to himself Proverbs. 90. if thou be wise thou shall be wise for thy
self. The primitive Christians were wise indeed to themselves, which every
where bore in their bodies the mortifications of Christ JESUS, for they
suffered with great patience all manner of tribulations together with the
spoiling of their goods for his sake, that they might be glorified with him,
counting that the afflictions of this present time were not worthy of the glory
to come through his merits: and truly what shall it prosit a man, though he did
win the whole world, and lose his own soul: or What exchange shall a man give
for his soul Mat. 8. Wherefore such Christians, as desert the Catholic Church
to get worldly honors, to heap up earthly treasures, preferring the world to
the faith of Christ, earth to Heaven, flesh to the soul, transitory pleasures,
to eternal blessedness, S. Bernard. de consideratione. Sic alloquitur Eugenium
Papam: quid prodest si vniuersum mundum lucreris te vnum perdens? etsi sapiens
alijs sis, deest tibi sapientia, si tibi non fueri^,
how wise soever they be to others are not wise to themselves: for the wisdom
of such men does not descend from above, but is earthly, sensual, and
deuilish. Jacob. 30.

CHAR. XXV. OF JUSTICE
THE CONTENTS.
The things, that are made equal are said to be adjusted, from whence Justice
deriues its name: the property of Justice is to render to every one what is
every on's own: Justice requires of every man worship, and obediencein order
to God: exacteth love, kindness, respect, honor, and duty in order to man: man
in Justice is bound to do to his neighbor, what he would his neighbor should
do unto him: Justice exhorts the faithful alive, to show pity unto the
faithful departed: apparitions of souls after their remouall out of their
bodies asserted.

Justice is a Iustitia definitur virtus reddens vnicuique quod su^^ est. Seu
consta^s, and perpetua voluntas ins suum vnicuique tri^ buens.
constant perpetual inclination of the will to render unto every one, what is
every on's own: That is to give unto God the things, that are Gods, and to give
unto man the things which are man's; as the immobility According to Aristotle l.
2. de coelo. the earth is equally poisd in the mids of the world, in
consequence whereof it is immovable, and indeed according to the holy Scripture,
terra in aeternum stat Eccles. 1. that is, the earth for ever stands firm
without moving at all.
of the earth is perceived through an equal weighing of its parts in the
center of the world, so the firmnes, and constancy of Justice is established,
and perpetuated by an equal adjusting of debts unto God, and man, which is the
center thereof Justice is a moral virtue so named, because of necessity it
requires equallity, and things are said to be adjusted, which are of equal
parts, wherefore the great lawer Constantine, defines us to be ars boni, and
aqui.
and from equalling, or adjusting of things due by right, Justice deriues its
name, which in order to God is meet exhibiting of praise, and service in regard
of his divine perfections, and thanksgiving in reference to the infinite
benefits he has conferred on mankind, and a meet satisfying for sin, whereby
God is injured. It is meet, and just, that we praise, and serve God, who is our
soueraign lord, of whom we hold all our goods both temporal, and spiritual,
and which-indeed are rather his goods, then ours, he having delivered them to
us only upon condition we render him faithful service, that is, Ad Epes. 6.
non ad oculum seruientes, quasi hominibus placentes, sed vt serui Christi
facientes voluntate^ eiuo ex animo.
not service to the eye, as men-pleasers but as good servants doing his will
with a perfect heart, and willing mind. S. Chrysos cum tali, inquit, vultu
respicit. Deus ea, quae facis, cum quali facis.
For God regards our service according to the manner we do it; he glorifyeth
the good, and casts the evil servants into utter darkness: wherefore whosoever
will be for himself, and not for God S. Gregor. de nihilo Deus fecit omniae:
and qui sibi vult esse, and non tioi, nihil vult esse inter omnia.
will be nothing amongst all things, which God made of nothing: besides it is
meet, and just, that we praise, and serve God in regard he is our Father; we
are the clay, and he our potter, and we all are the work of his hands Isa. 64.
if a child is bound to honor, and serve his earthly Father in deed, in word,
and in all patience Eccle. 30. from whom he receives his body, much rather he
ought to honor, and serve his heavenly Father, that both forms the same body,
and breathes into it a breath of life unto making him a living soul, and
exalting him to a heavenly inheritance; wherefore doubtless every good
Christian, when he says our Father which art in Heaven, has a great sense of
his condition, and takes thought for pleasing God his heavenly Father, lest he
come to hear the heavy sentence of Judgment declared to the wicked Jews: I
have nourished, and brought up children, but they have rebelled against me Isa.
50. or that other Io. 8. ye are of your Father the devil, and the lusts of
your Father ye will do; Again it is meet, and just that we celebrate the
remembrance of Gods immense benefits bestowed on us with thanksgiving: for he
Ephesians. 2. Deus, qui dives est in misericordia propter nimiam suam charitatem,
qua dilexit nos.
which is rich in mercy through the great abundance of his love where with he
loved us even When we were by nature the children of wrath, and dead in sin,
has quickened us together in Christ by whose grace we are delivered from
bondage, death, and made partakers of eternal life, to the end we may reign
with him celestially. Ephesians. 20. One of the ten lepers Luc. 17. was just, fell
down on his face at the feet of Christ, and gave him thanks for the healing of
his corporal leprosy; much rather we Christians, ought to exalt the great
mercy of God with thanksgiving, for as much; as he has cured us through
JESUS CHRIST of our spiritual leprosy, which is sin, unless we will be like
the other evil nine lepers, which returned not to praise God, that had cleansed
them; or like the pagan Philosophers Romans 10. which God gave up to their vain
thoughts deceitful vanities, and their hearts filthy lusts, because though
they knew, yet they did not glorify him, neither were thankful: Again it is
meet, and just, that we acknowledge our sins to God unto repairing of the
injuries done him thereby, and when we An humble confession of our sins
appeaseth Gods wrath. I did confess (says the Royal Prophet) against my self
my injustice to our lord, and he forgave the impiety of my sin.
confess with a contrite heart against our selves our wickedness, his mercy
forgiues the punishment of our guilt, Ezechiel. 18. si impius egerit poenitiam
ab omnibus peccatis suis quae operatus est....omnium iniquitatum eius non
recordabor.
neither will God remember the iniquities of him, that turns from them, and
makes him, a new heart, and a new spirit.

Justice in order to our neighbor is to pay to all men love, respect, honor,
and duty: that is to do to every man whatsoever we would Haecest lex naturae.
Quod tibi no^ vis facere alteri nefeceris.
that every man should do to us; for every man is every man's neighbor, there
being nothing of Aug. in Psalm. 118. omnis homo omni homini est proximus: nec
vllae cogit anda est longinquitas generis, vbi est natura communis.
distance, as to birth, or kindred, where nature is common alike. Besides Gods
law of charity excepts none, his will being to save, and bring all men unto the
knowledge of his truth; According to the general practice of the Catholic
Church, public prayers are offered on good friday for all men of what
condition, or profession soever they be, which holy custom plainly
demonstrates the sense of the whole Church in order to Christ's offering his
passion for the redemption of the world, that is, the Church beleiues, that
Christ excluded none from that oblation.
Pagans, Jews, and heretics through the great mercy of God may cast from them
their iniquities unto justification of life, in respect whereof the Apostle
Timo. 2. exhorts, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of
thanks be made for all men: in consequence of the premises, as we would that
our neighbor should do to us, so must we do to him likewise: as we would,
that our neighbor should give to us love, respect, honor, and duty, so must
we give to him likewise: as we would that our neighbor should not prejudice us
in word, counsel, or deed, so must we do to him likewise: as we would that all
men should keep their faith pawned to us, so must likewise we perform
faithfully our engagement with all men. Furthermore Justice in order to our
neighbor is to fulfill S. Gregor. l. 4. Dial. c. 58. advises us as a thing
more safe, and profitable to procure in our life time those benefits, and
advantages which after our death we exspect from those, which are entrusted
with our pious legacies, saying it is better to depart out of this world vnliable
to imprisonment, then afterward in prison to seek liberty.
the will of the dead, according to the trust put in us, and to power out our
prayers: to give of our abundance, alms, and to under go voluntary
afflictions for the faithful departed, to the end, that such, as after their
remouall out of their bodies, stand liable S. Bernard auerreth, that the
torments of faithful souls in Purgatory are shortened through the fasting,
praying, and alms deeds of the faithful on earth, and moreover says, ser.
66. in Canti. that the same happy souls perceive the prayers, and sacrifices of
the living by the mediation of Angels, which comfore them.
to temporal punishments due to their sins committed when they lived on earth,
may receive refreshment unto shortning of their painful accounts. S. Bernard
writes in the life of S. Malachias, that this holy monck had so great an
abhorrence of the wicked courses, which a certain sister of his own embraced,
that he made a vow never to see her in the flesh. But (says S. Bernard) she
being removed out of the body, he was freed from his vow, and whom he detested
to see in the flesh S. Austin l. de cura pro mor. c. 10. assertes apparitions
of souls departed. Jf we shall answer says he, that such apparitions were
false, we shall seem impudently to contradict sundry faithful vvriters, and
even the sense of such, as attest they have seen them. Other ancient Fathers,
and S. Bid especially affirm, that such apparitions have been always counted
amongst divine (...) racles; besides Moses and Elias truly and really appeared
in (...) Transfiguration of Christ, and the true Samuel 1. Reg. according to
the common opinion of orthodox writers appeared to Saul, whereby is euidenced
the impudency, and manifest weakness of those who name such apparitions old
wives tales.
saw in spirit; for in a dream he heard a voice, that said unto him thy sister
is in the court before thy door, and has received nothing of nourishment for
the space of thirty days, wherewith being raised from sleep, he apprehended
suddenly the meaning of the vision, and computing the time of her want of food
with the time he had omitted to offer for her the sacrifice of mass, he found
the number of days to be the very same: then he (says S. Bernard) that hated
the sins, but not the soul of his sister. began again to offer for her
refreshment the heavenly bread of the altar, the sacrifice whereof he had
omitted during thirty days before: and not in vain according to the same S.
Bernard: for a very little while after he saw her before the door of the Church
clothed in a mourning weed, yet not suffered to enter in, and perseuering in
his great work of piety saw her afterward in a whitish habit admitted into the
Church: but not admitted to touch the Altar; at lenght in a third vision he saw
her invested with a fair whit garment together with sundry others clothed in
white robes, which gave evidence of her deliverance out of the bitter
afflictions which she had endured in Purgatory. Whereby appears how much
Jacob. 5. assidua iusti oration multum valet.
the prayer of a just man avails, if it be fervent; truly the kingdom of God
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. Mat. 11. The extreme
feruor of S. Malachias piety, as it were by force opened the gates of Heaven to
his distressed sister, whoobtained through the constant violence of his prayers
a speedy enjoyment of hlessednes, that was before denied to her own merits.

CHAR. XXVJ. OF TEMPERANCE
THE CONTENTS.
Temperance is a bridle to the flesh, whereby it is hindered from formenting of
disquietnes, and trouble to the mind: the property of temperance is to purge
out of man's body the malignant humors, which tend to the prejudice of his
soul: human flesh is the evil servant, that requires whipps, correction, and
employment: the rebellion of the flesh comes of idleness, and disorder: many
good fruits proceed from abstinence, which is the daughter of temperance.

TEmperance is a moral virtue, that enableth the soul to bridle the body: as a
bitt is put into the mouth of an horse, that he may obey the rider: so
temperance is the bodies bitt unto obeying the soul, in regard it suppresseth
the just of the flesh, that foments disquietnes, and trouble to the mind.

As God through wisdom has formed, and tempered man in measure, number, and
weight. Sap. 11. disposing sweetly the members, every one of them in the body
with proportion, decency, and order: so through temperance he has ordered him
in measure, number, and weight, moderating all his affections thereby, that he
be not carried about with inordinat lusts of the flesh. Astrologers teach, that
the planet called Mercury reigns in the house of the sign named Virgo, and
rules over the sign Gemini (the two twins) temperance is like this planet, for
in the House of Virgo she keeps her Court, that is to say, virginity is the
certain token, and chief habitation of temperance: again she bears rule over
Gemini viz: the senses of the body, which are two eyes, two ears, two
nostrills etc. as twins borne at one birth, and committed to the care,
jurisdiction, and government of temperance, it being proper to this virtue to
obstruct the wanton ways of wickedness, whereto the senses lead.

The only daughter of temperance, and nurce to all other moral virtues is
abstinence, which coueteth nothing, but what is consonant to the light of
reason, and rejects all things tending to the prejudice either of the body,
or soul. (a) For it drives out malignant humors unto keeping the body in
health; purges away the leaven of original concupiscence unto preserving the
soul in sanctity: and as hunger forces a wolf out of the wood, he lurks in,
so it chaseth the diuid out of the soul, he lodges in; although no man in
Justice can destrov his own flesh: neuertheless in; reason he ought to keept it
under. Hieron. nihil magis aestuaet, qua^ iuueniles medullae vino, and dapibus
inflamatae.
For when it is inflamed through much abundance of wine and meat, it is like
to a wild unruly horse, and cannot be tamed, but with the bridle of abstinence.
The flesh is the evil servant Eccles. 33. seruo maleuolo (carni) tortura, and
compedes: mitte illum in operationem, ne vaeet.
that needs whipps, correction, and work, lest it grow idle, seek liberty,
become insolent, and breed much sorrow, truble, and vexation: the fatter any
ground is, the more thistles it breeds; even so the flesh, the more it is
pampered up with dilicacies, the more desires it brings forth to the Boethius
says that we have exceeding great need of integrity, and honesty, because we
can do nothing out of the sight of the judge, that sees all things, and S.
Bernard exhorts us to reverence our Angel in every corner, and forbids to
do that thing in our Angels presence, which we dare not attempt in the presence
of him, or any other man.
disquieting S. Pet. 2. obsecro vos abstinere a carnalibus desiderijs, quae
milita^t aduersus spiritum.
of the spirit. He, says Solomon, that delicatly brings up his servant (the
flesh) from youth, at lengh it will become disobedient. Besides such, as from
youth be delicatly nourished, celebrat the feast before the vigil, that is,
they feast before they fast: the present, and the next life are, as it were two
days, whereof one is the vigil, the other the feast, the present time is after
the similitude of a vigil, the time of rest to come after death is as a
festival solemnity: good Christians wisely consider this. Wherefore in this
present life, as in a vigil, they suffer many tribulations exercising often
watching in hungre, and thirst, and often fasting in cold, and nakedness: but
when the festival time of the next life is come, they do then feast for ever,
and are clothed in white robs of glory: but the wicked, which inuert the order,
that the supreme providence has appointed, feasting in the vigil: that is, in
the time of this life, whereas they should have prayed, fasted, watched, put on
sackcloath, and suffered tribulation in punishment of their sins, when the
festival day shall come, they will be spoiled of their rich garments, deprived
of their pleasures, and cast into utter darkness of hell to keep an everlasting
fast in torments.

Yet in regard the soul of man is a nobler part, then the body, the best
abstinence is in order to it: wherefore S. Paul 1. Coloss. 4 declares, that it
is the will of God our sanctification, that is, the command of God, who has
not called us unto uncleanness, but to holiness of life, that we abstain from
fornication, and S. Peter. 1. Pet. 20. in the person of God beseeches, and
exhorts, that we will abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the
soul, and indeed to fast from, and without sin, Cor sapiens, and inzelligibile
abstinebit a peccatis.
is the true fast unto salvation: for he that fasteth with the guilt of a
mortal offense offers the body to God Romans 12. obsecro vos per misericordia^
Dei, vt exhibeatis corpora vestra hostiam vinentem no^ mortuam.
as a dead carkeise only; that wants the spirit of life; but he that fasteth
both from, and without sin gives the body. a living sacrisice, holy, and
acceptable unto God. Hereby appears the manifest blindness of many carnal,
and sensual men, which say, that they cannot abstain from the pleasures of
this life: that it is impossible to fast from unclean affections: that it is not
in the power of any whosoever to stop the course of the law of wantonness
written in the flesh, to the mastring of fleshly lusts, carnal love when it
engrosseth all power to it self, and bears rule, makes men foolishly mad:
for even then the most carnal man, can fast from meats which he thinks will
prejudice the body, but not from sin, though he know it will Aug. omn^
seminarium voluptatis venenu^ puta,' id est voluptas est animae mortifera.
poison the soul: likewise shame can refrain him from the exercise of his
fleshly lusts in the sight of a temporal Prince S. Hierom compares
abstinence to a wine press in as much, as it purges out of our souls the
abundant humors of sin: and indeed abstinence is able to drive away the
devil, for according to S. Ambrose, as fasting spitle is poison to a serpent,
so abstiinence is to the devil. And some kind of devils cannot be cast out, but
by prayer, and fasting. Mat. 17.
howeuer he is not ashamed to commit fornication in the presence of God, who is
the Prince of Princes. But the spiritual man, that is wise, and understanding
will abstain from sin. Eccle. 30.

CHAR. XXVIJ. OF FORTITVDE
THE CONTENTS.
Fortitude taken in the proper sense inclines neither to the right, nor left
hand, that is attempteth nothing of danger out of vashnes, and escheweth
nothing of difficulty out of pusillanimity: many enterprises begin happily
which end unhappily: the gift of perseverance only is able to crown the virtue
of fortitude.

FOrtitude taken in the proper sense is strength, whereby a just man is enabled
to overcome the works of the flesh, which are adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
wantonness, emmulations, contentions, seditions, heresies euuy, murder,
drunkenness, glutony, and such like Gal. 5. S. Ambrose, and S. Gregory ascribe
true fortitude to such only, as bear rule over their passions, feight against
all vices, and endure persecution for Justice sake cheerfully.
fortitude is the conqueror of all vices, and the defender of all virtues in as
much, as it quenches the heat of fleshly lusts, extinguisheth the fire of
unclean delights, refraineth the inbrdinat pleasures of this life, moderateth
the sweetness of prosperity, sweeteneth the bitterness of adversity, S. Hierom.
com. in Esa. counts those, which turn to the right, rash, and those which
incline to the left hand faint hearted: and S. Austin Epis. ad Hierom,
teaches, that such as have the virtue of fortitude, neither attempt rashly,
nor fear unadvisedly.
declineth neither to the right, or left hand, that is, attempteth nothing of
danger out of rashness, and flies nothing of difficulty out of fear, loves
persecution for justice unto obtaining a crown of reward for merit; but as
fortitude is the armor of all virtues: so all virtues respectively are the
support of fortitude: for example, as fortitude is the shield, that defends
faith: According to S. Austin, faith is the ground of all good things, and the
root of all other virtues.
so faith is the root, that brings forth fortitude: for God gives fortitude
to those, who with a prefect heart believe, in him 20. parae. 16. as fortitude
is the preserver of hope: so hope is the renewer of fortitude; for they that
hope in our lord shall renew their strength Esa. 40. as fortitude renders
Cantico. 8. fortis est vt mors dilectio.
charity as strong as death Can. 8. so charity gives fortitude power The
Apostle. 1. Cor. 13. denies that there is any meritorious work without
charity; and indeed Charitas est principium meriti: and according to S. Austin,
if a man has charity he can do what pleases him, for nothing of wickedness can
proceed from the root of charity.
for the meriting of life 1. Colos. 13. yet there is but one virtue, that
crowns fortitude, which is perseverance: for he only, that continues strong
in the exercise of good works to the end, shall be saved. Perseverance is the
coat of Joseph reaching down to the feet: the preistly garment coming down to
the ancles: the rump of the peace offering due to God: the heel of good works,
that protecteth against the bite of serpents ( Augus. ser. 8. ad fratres in
Erenio. tom. 10.) no man, that strives for a prize is crowned, except he
strives as he ought to do, perseuering to the end: a good beginning without a
good ending has nothing of profit; Saul when he began to reign was humble, and
innocent as a child of one year 1. Reg. 13. Saul falling of from humility, and
innocence lost his kingdom together with his life; if Solomon had perseuered in
godliness, he had not been deprived of wisdom, nor Sampson of his mighty
strength, if he had taken diligent ligent heed Mat. 10. Judah vna cu^ alijs
Apostolis dixit Jesus: euntes praedicare, dicentes quia appropinquauit Regnum
calorum: infirmos curate, mortuos suscitate, leproses mundate, demones eijcite.
and what avails Judas his election to the high dignity of an Apostle, his
familiarity with Christ, his society with other Apostles, and the power given
him against unclean spirits to cast them out, to heal every sickness, and to
raise up the dead Mat. 10. seeing his good beginning ended in wicked treachery
to the delivering up of his divine lord unto death; many begin well, that end
ill: many depart from Egypt, and come to the wilderness, which do not enter into
the land of promise; that is, many are brought to the marvelous light of
Christian faith even unto justification of life, that come not unto
glorification: he that endures to the end, shall be saved. Without S. Bernard
Epis. 29. ad Ianuenses assures, that without perseverance neither those, which
fight can gain the victory, nor those which overcome obtain the prize.
perseverance, neither he that strives to get the victory, nor he that
ouercometh obtaines the prize. And although perseverance be a divine gift
freely given, Aug. I de prad. SS. aliqua, inquit, danda praeparari a Deo non
orantibus, vt initium fidei, alia vero non nisi orantibus, vt donu^
persenerantiae.
neuertheless the fervent According to S. Austin I. de dono perseu. c. 6. an
humble prayer can merit the gift of perseverance (merito de congruo duntaxat)
and he means final perseverance. And indeed, it is but meet that a friend grant
assurance of his friendship to his friend, that humbly intercedes for it.
prayer of a just man conduces some thing to the having of it. Hereby is
plainly evident, that true fortitude does not consist in the arm of flesh, or
in the outward gallantry of every man: but in the spirit of a just Christian,
that ouercometh the lusts of the flesh unto sanctifying, and glorifying the
soul: in consequence of which the fortitude of Mutius Sceuola, of Cocles, of
Attilius Regulus so much renowned, and extoiled by the Roman writers, was but a
shadow of true fortitude, in regard their brave enterprises, and gallant
sufferings tended merely to get a name unto perpetuating a memorial of their
own praise, that thereby the remembrance of their gallantry might be as honey
sweet in all mouths for the future. No man how glorious soever his actions, or
passions appear in the sight of the world can lay claim to true fortitude,
when they do not tend to the glory of the soul. Many heathen Captains which
have been renowned to the ends of the earth for valiantnes, are not now crowned
in heaven for fortitude; for though with their courage they mastred fortresses
of earth unto winning of Cities; yet they did not overcome the works of the
flesh unto the obtaining of blessedness, wherein is the consistency of true
fortitude.

CHAR. XXVIIJ. OF SIN
THE CONTENTS
God that made all things of nothing made not sin, which is nothing: The devil
is the sole author of sin, whereby he makes those his servants which he
ouercom's through a voluntary condescension thereto: to whomsoever a man gives
himself to obey, his servant he is: exceeding great miseries accompany the
servitude of sin: to be delivered from the bondage of sin is a work of divine
grace, whereby a finner turns to God his maker whith a penitent heart
confessing his wickedness against himself.

SIn taken in the formal sense God made all things, and without him was made
nothing 10. 10. where according to S. Austin by the particle nothing is meant
sin, which God made not: and indeed sin taken in the formal sense has nothing
of a real entity, being a mere pri^^tion of that conformity to the law of God,
which ought to be in all in ward, and outward human actions, that is to say in
all our outward deeds, and inward thoughts. Wherefore S. Austin l. 22. con.
Faustum Manichae. defines sin to be That which is done, or said, or coueted,
contrary to the eternal law: so that outward deeds, or sayings, or inward
thoughts are the acts only whereby sins are committed.
is nothing; yet not that nothing, of which God created all things, that were
very good: but that nothing of which the devil has made all things, which are
very evil. For example the devil through sin overcame man, and thereby brought
him into servitude; for of whomsoever one 2. Pet. 2. a quouis superatus est:
huius and seruus.
is overcome, even unto the same is he in bondage, which is an evil thing,
because a slave is tied to the will of his master; wherefore a sinner S. Chris.
homo obligatus peccato per propriam voluntatem ia^ non agit quod vult, sed quod
diabolus vult.
of necessity as it were walks after the flesh in the lusts of uncleanness
being it is the devils will (whose slave he is) that he do so.

A stag, that is once mastred by an other stag, afterward resists him no
more Sic referu^t naturales de ceruo victo.
but boweth down his head whenever he passes in presence of his conqueror
in token of his subjection: a maid, that once suffers her self to be
deflowred will go whether it pleases the deflourer: even so, he that is once
overcome of the devil through voluntary condescension unto sin, afterward is
unwilling to resist him; some times it is in the power of man to make king
whomsoever he pleases: but once made he cannot unking him at his pleasure: for
To whomsoever we give our selves, as servants to obey, his servants we are to
whom we obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto justice
Romans 6. Wherefore, as a servant cannot cast of the yoke of servitude, when, or
as he pleases: so neither can a sinner according to the form of moral speech,
The Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans cap. 7. says; Not the good things
which I would, but the evil, which I would not, that do I: now, if I do
that I would not, it is no more I, that do it, but the sin, that dwells in
me: whereby is meant, that the iustest man carried by the violence of carnal
concupiscence (which he calls sin taken in a larg sense) may do, or suffer
many things in his outward parts, or faculties without the consent of his will;
in consequence whereof a man put in that condition is so far from sinning (sin
taken in the proper sense for a voluutary act of the will) that according to S.
Austin, he never need say to God forgive us our sins, for sin unless it be
voluntary contractes nothing of guilt, that is, there is no sin taken in the
proper sense without a free consent of the will.
free himself of his bondage at his pleasure. As a ship, that has lost her
helm, cannot sail whether, and as her self would, but is carried whether, and
as the wind will: even so a sinner, that is deprived of the helm of grace
cannot do the good things, which he should, but the evil which he should not,
and as ship of it self can descend, but not ascend: so a man by the power of
his own free will can fali into, But cannot rise from sin. The works of nature
God said by the mouth of his Prophet Ose. cap. 13. Perdition is thine, O
Israel, only in me is thine help, whereby is clearly euidenced, that the evils
which happen, come of our own procurement in regard of the sins we commit,
which do not proceed from God, who cannot be the author of evil, as it is an
evil work, though according to the Prophet Amos cap. 3. he is cause of
punishment due to sin, which is called malum poena. But God punishes in order
to amendment in this life, and Justice after death: so that those which amend
their life, need not fear the divine justice after death.
can cast him down, but the works of grace only can raise him up again; that he
is a servant of sin, and freed of justice is his own free act: but that he is
freed of sin, and a servant unto justice, is the work of grace through
JESUS CHRIST; and indeed if the works of nature were sufficient enough to raise
up a sinner unto justification of life, Christ had dyed Ga. 2. so per legem
iustitia: ergo Christus gratis mortuus: vnde Aug. infert contra Pelagi Si per
natural tustitia, ergo Christus graits moriuus, ergo scandalum crucis euacuatum
est.
without cause. Furthermore besides this bondage, there be sundry other evil
things, which the devil has made of sin: for he that sins speaks Jsa. 5.
va vobis, qui dicitis malu^ bonum, and bonum malum, ponentes tenebras lume^,
and lumen tenebras, pone^tes amarum in dulce, and dulce in amaru^.
good of evil, and evil of good, puts darkness for light, and light for darkness
puts bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, goes far from the springs of live
waters, and dies in the waters of unclean delights: that is to say a sinner
prefers wickedness to godliness, ignorance to knowledge, vice to virtue, and
death to life, for as much, as he forsakes God his creator without whom
nothing can be lightened, sweetened, sanctified, quickened; know therefore says
the holy Prophet Jeremy cap. 2. and Behold, o sinner, that it is an evil thing,
and bitter, that thou have for saken God thy lord, which is an infinite treasure
of good things.

The devil makes a covenant with every man that sins (which is like the
league 1. Reg. 11 Naas interpretatur serpens, and significat diabolum.
of Naas the Amonite 1. Reg. 11.) on condition, that he may thrust out his
right eye, that is, his obedience to God, and his love to spiritual things,
which is a very ill agreement, in regard it spoileth him of knowledge, grace,
and glory; a chess player by one negligent remouall, or touch of his men a miss
often times loses the whole game, and the whole gain too: even so one sin
destroys much good Eccles. 9. for even When a just man turns away from his
justice, and commits iniquity all his justice, that be bath done shall not
be remembered, but in his transgression, that he has committed, and in his
sin, that be bath sinned, in them shall be dye Ezech. 8. That is: when a sinner
does not cast away from him his wickedness, whereby he has taken the covenant of
the devil, and turn to God with a new heart, and a new spirit, but die in the
bitterness of his soul, he shall lose all the fruit of his good works together
with the glory of Heaven. Neither are these all the evil things, that the
devil has made of sin: for the burdens which he lays on the shoulders of
him, that sins mortally are most beauy, and grievous: and albeit, that for
the present, they seem sweet, and light, yet afterward they press him down: as
he, that in water draws a log of wood feels not the full weight thereof till he
come to land: so the burden of a sinner is not felt in the waters of fleshly
delights, and the pleasures of this life, but when he shall go out of them,
that is, when he shall depart out of the world, he will find the S John Apoca.
8. faith that the waters destroy many, that is, worldly delights, which after
death are made bitter.
water, in which he delighted, as bitter, as wormwood, and the load that sin
laid on his neck so heavy, that it will suppress him suddenly; for as
lightening descends from Heaven in the turn of an eye: so a sinner will fall
down into hell in Job. 21. in puncto descendune ad inferos. Ex Luc. 10. videbam
Satanam sicut fulgur de calo cadentem.
a trice, which is the place of divine execution in punishment of
transgressions. As earthly kings have fair lodgings for the entertaining of
the good people, and dark prisons for the punishing of malefactors: so the
king of glory, that is exalted above all Princes of the earth, has goodly
palaces for delighting such, as do well, which is Heaven, and dungeons of
utter darkness for tormenting of those, that do evil, which is hell, where the
wicked experience in bitter suffering, the power of him whose mercy in
bountiful gifts they have despiced: as he that walks in justice, and
shuts his eyes from seeing evil, shall dwell on high with God in full
enjoyment of all good things: so he that deuiateth from the ways of godliness,
and delights in the pathe of iniquity, when the number of his life is cut of
The Prophet Isaias cap. 33. expressing the punishments, which the wicked endure
after their death, speaks to sinners thus, Who among ye can endure to dvvell
with the devouring fire? who among ye with everlasting burnings? Wherefore
S. Gregory. says that the death of the wicked, is an everlasting death.
shall dwell below with the devil in devouring fire, and everlasting burnings,
which is a death without dying; and sorrow without ending; for death there, is
always S. Gregor^^it miseris ^^ors sine ^^^rte.
beginning, and sorrow never ending, in reguard the devouring fire is for ever
burning, and no deliverance from hell, which is a laborynth in the mids of the
earth, though easily entered into, yet affordes no guide, or thread to direct out
again, and the windings, and turnings thereof minister nothing of pleasure: for
brimstone is scattered in every walk, Job. 14. vndique terrebunt eum
formidines.
and trouble, anguish, fears, together with despair, and horrible confusion
be on every side, hope of blessedness being rooted out of this dwelling; yet
though there is no regress out of this labyrinth full of all miseries; howeuer
not even the wickedest man, is necessitated to enter into it: for God desires
not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live
Ezech. 33. and when the wicked casts from him all his transgressions, that he
has committed, he shall furely live, and shall not dye Ezech. 18. According to
S. Prosper 1. sent, ex S. Aug. there is no divine vengeance, if human vengeance
go before; that is God will not aueng himself of us, if we will do vengeance
on our selue^^ by fasting, praying etc.
God cease from his just vengeance, when man turns to humble repentance; if
we would judge our selves, we should not be judged Cor. 11. that is, we should
not be tormented in hell, if on earth we would examine our selves, acknowledge
to God our infirmities, punish our transgressions in the Sacrament of Penance,
master fleshly lusts, and abstain from the pleasures of this life, unto the
exercise whereof conduces much an often reflection on the greiuous torments, and
everlasting afflictions, which the damned endure; a serious thought of hell
encourages us to fight valiantly against the deu^l, considering, that if we be
overcome of him, he will lead us captive thither, and no ransom shall be
accepted for our deliverance out of his tyranny. Often serious thougts of hell
unable us to subdue the Iusts of the flesh and despise the pleasures of this
world, seeing that, if these reign, and bear rule we must of necessity give our
members as weapons of iniquity unto sin, that brings death: for they be the
devils in truments whereby wickedness is committed unto the killing of our
souls: in consequence of which it is manifest madness to take a sword, and fall
upon it, as Saul, and his armor-bearer did: that is, to run wilfully after un
clean delights, which are the devils swords, that destroy as many souls, as
fall upon them: if a child of one year will refrain from the milk, which it
delights in, when at weaning time vnsauoured bitterness is applied to the
breasts of the nurce: much rather a man come to the age of discretion ought to
abstain from wanton pleasures, considering they shall make him dye in the
bitterness of his soul unto everlasting damnation. And who in reason can taste a
thing 6, Nu^quid potest aliquis gustare, quod gustatum affert mortem.
which tasted, bringes eternal death. Moreover often serious thoughts of
Heaven strenghen us mainly against sin, for as much as nothing of uncleanness, be
it coueted in the heart, uttered with the mouth, or exercised by outward works,
can have admittance there: But as sin is the devils sword, that sendes souls
into hell: so is it Gods sword, that gards the way to the tree of life Genesis 30.
And suffers no sinner to enter into Heaven. Wherefore if the wickedest man, that
breaths upon the earth will take Heaven into his serious consideration he
must of necessity abhor, and cast away his wickedness, which obstructs the
passage thither, that is, depriues him of the Summum bonum Aug. quid per multa
vagaris o homuncis, quaerend^ anima tuae and corpori, hic ama summu^ bonum.
which is the fountain of all good things: for Heaven is a glorious City, a
secure dwelling, and a country, that Iudic. 18. tradit nobis locum (coela^) in
quo nullius rei est penuria.
abounds in all delights; in Heaven the just shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the son of God. Romans 8. in
Heaven the just shall shine as the sun Mat. 13 in Heaven the just shall be in
the hand of God, and no torment shall touch them Sap. 3. in Heaven the just
shall have fullnes of joy Psalm. 16. and lack nothing, they shall be clothed
with robes of immortallity, they shall hunger no more. Live bread, that
descended from Heaven shall be their meat, neither shall they thirst any more:
the water, that springs up unto life everlasting, shall be their drink; they
shall endure no tormenting heates: the wings of the almighty shall cover them.
They shall suffer no cold: the sun of justice shall warm them; they shall
desire no sleep: the bright rays of the divine majesty shall expel darkness
from their rest: the things which eye has not seen, neither ear heard,
neither come into man's heart, God has prepared for them, that love him 1. Cor.
20. The sins which drive away thoughts of Heaven are seven especially, named
capital vices in regard they be the heads of all others, for example Pride,
Avarice, Luxury, Envy, Gluttony, Anger. slothfullnes, or wearines in the
exercise of good works.

CHAR. XXIX. OF PRIDE
THE CONTENTS.
Pride the first sin, that came into the world: Lucifer, and the confederat
Angels pust up with the brightness, and excellency of their own nature became
proud, whereby they. fell from sanctifying grace, which they had received in
their creation: the Angelical pride was an inordinate desire of dominion over
all other creatures, and of independence in government even of their Creator.
God resists the proud, and exalts the humble.

PRide is an inordinat love Definitur superbia inordinatus amor propriae
excellentiae.
of self excellency, which is the Eccles. 10. dnitium omnis pecence est
superbiae vnde Chrysostom. toll, inquit, hoc vitium vt nom velint homines
hominibus praestare, and sine labor catera vitia resecantur.
Origin of all evil affections. For the proud man turns his heart from God,
and disdaineth to be Luc. 18. dixit superbus Pharisaeus no^ sum sicut cateri
homines, ergo, inquit, S. Bernardus sicut cateri damones.
counted as other men: wherefore he is indeed, as other Angels, which puffed up
with pride because of their eminency, and inordinately carried away with the
greatness Ezech. 28. eleuatum est cortuum in decore tuo.
of their brightness coueted equallity with their maker as to similitude S.
Cyprian 1. de ieiunio, and tenta. Christi. Ascribes the cause of the devils
ruin unto an ambitious desire of dominion: and S. Austin l. 14. de ciuit. c.
11. speaks thus in order to the fallen Angels. That proud Angel, and therefore
envious (for envy is not properly the cause of pride, but pride is the cause of
envy) by the same pride, turning from God to himself, and ambitiously seeking
rather to have subjects, then to be subject, fell down from Heaven: he
inordinatly coueted rule over all other creatures: and doubtless the Angels,
that sell never went about to equal God, as to divine perfection, knowing by
the light of nature the impossibility of such an enterprise.
in order to dominion, affecting, as it were, with tyrannical arrogance rule,
and authority over all things created by him, and independence in government
even of him their lord: and therefore God gave them up to: heir own lusts S.
Austin l. 14. de ciuit. says, that a devil is neither a fornicatour, nor a
drunkard, but he is proud, and envious: though devils persuade men to commit
carnal sins: neuertheless their proper sins are spiritual.
unto spiritual uncleanness: for they were perfect in sanctifying grace from the
day, According to S. Auslin l. 12. de ciuit. the Angels received grace together
with their creation: and S. Basil in psalm. 32. affirms, that the Angels in
their first making, or being, were endued with inward sanctity; again the
Prophet Isaias c. 14. says expressly, that Lucifer was the son of brightness
before he was brought down to the grave of utter darkness. How art thou (says
the sacred text) fallen from heaven Lucifer, son of the morning.... yet thou
said in thyn heart, I will ascend above the height of the clouds, and J
will be like the most high. This doctrine is so Catholic, that the famous
Faculty of Sorbon Doctors, have counted the contrary as erroneous. Besides S.
Anstin l. 1. de cor. and gra. c. 10. expressly teaches, that the Angels were
created in a state, wherein they might merit, or demerit: We profess
profitably. says he, because most certainly we believe, that God did so
ordain the life of Angels, and men, that first he might show what the free
will of the one, and the other was able to do, and afterward the power of
his helping grace.
of their creation till pride was found in them, which plainly euinceth their
mutability both in order to their understanding, and will, in reguard they were
made perfect both in the one, and in the other unto salvation, though through
the flexibillity of their own free will they used ill their received
sanctification against the divine will, unto damnation: as those evil Angels
lifted up with arrogance inordinatly desired to have subjects, and not to be
subject (according to the great Dr S. Austin) so wanton scholars blown up with
an actiuity of their own wit, ambitiously covet to have disciples, and to
teach all others. A keeper of sheep no sooner puts the tinckling bell about the
neck of any one of them, but it suddenly strives, how poor soever, to go
before, and lead all the flock: even so God bestows on man a talent of
learning, which no sooner begins to tinckle, and sound in his care unto
delighting him, but he lifts up his thoughts above Isa. 14. ascendam super
altitudine^ nubium, and ero similis altissimo.
the height of the clouds, and endeavors to sit upon the mount of the
congregation, as Lucifer did Isay. 14. that is to say, arrogantly affects
knowledge above, and rule over all others, though very many of the congregation
exceed him even in that talent, whereof he is proud: which kind of pride is a
thing, as unnatural, and monstrous as if a toad should be borne of a woman:
and such a vain glorious vaunter According to S. Gregory, those which proudly
vant of the grace, that God gives them, kill themselves, not with a sword, but
with a soueraign medicine: in regard that God gives us grace unto healing of
our wounded souls, and through pride it is lost, and thereby our wounds grow
mortal.
of the gift his maker has given him, is sick of health, and dies of a
sovereign medicine. Likewise God gives unto some men great abundance of
wealth, which through ill managing blows them up unto dominiering over, and
despising all others, that be not equal with themselves in riches: which is a
thing Seneca, si videamus murem dominari velle alijs muribus, nu^quid risum
teneds.
as ridiculous, as to see one mouse alone lord it over all other mise: for as
every mouse is every mouses companion, so every man is every man's fellow,
seeing that by the law of nature every man is every man's neighbor.

As the beginning of the first Angels pride was an inconsiderate enterprise to
make himself like The most high in dominion: so the beginning of the first
man's pride was an inordinate desire to make himself like The most high Genesis vt
essent sicut die cognosce^tes bonum, and malum.
in knowledge, and God the most high brought both their prides to condign
punishment excluding the one from his heavenly, the other from his terrestiall
paradise: yet for as much, as Adam the first man was less culpable being a
weaker vessel, S. Gregory l. 9. mor. teaches, that the spirit of Angels
finned irreparably, for as much, as they had more strength to conserve their
intergrity, and therefore he teaches again l. 32. mor. c. 18. that an Angel
was damned without pardon, because he was created exceeding great, and
powerful, to stand against wickedness.
then Lucifer the first Angel, the divine mercy led him, together with his
consort unto repentance, whereas the divine Justice without delay sent the
other together with his associates into devouring fire, and everlasting
burnings, whereby their beauty was defiled, their brightness covered with
darkness, and their pride turned to malice, and envy, and of Angels made devils,
which hate God, as the chastiser, or inflicter of their torment, and every man,
as the adopted heir of that blessedness whereof they were justly disinherited:
and it is hard to tell whether their hatred against God, or their envy against
man is greater; to the dishonor of God they power out curses, blasphemys, and
all abominations: to the destruction of man they employ all crafty dealings
seeking whom they may bring into the snares of perdition; they deal cunningly
with men, as crows deal with nuts, the fruit whereof they covet: for as these
take up nuts, which they cannot break on the ground, and lift them on high to
let them fall against stones: so the devil strius to lift up such, as they
cannot master while they be on the ground of humility, to honors, riches, and
dignities, that so elevated he may bring them into the snares of pride, and let
them fall down into the pit of everlasting miseries. Buildings of riches,
honors, and dignities made without the Proverb. 17. qui altam facit domum
quaerit ruinam.
foundation of humility are like fair high houses, that want competent walls,
and pillars to support them, and consequently must fall of necessity to utter
ruin. Besides God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble, that
is, his mercy translateth S. Prosper non per^enitur in altitudine^ Dei, nise
per humilitatem, and cui appropinquat subditus ab eo recedit elatus.
into Heaven such as humble themselves, and casts down into hell those, that
exalt themselves. As waters descend from the mountains into the valleys: so
divine gifts come from above upon the humble. Wherefore o Christian man humble
thy felfe under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt thee in due time: be
sober, and watch: for thy adversary the devil, as a roaring lion walks,
seeking whom he may devour 1. Pet. 5. and the greater thou art in wealth,
dignity, and place, the more humble thy self, and thou shall find mercy with
blessedness before thy maker S. Gregory says, that pride is an evident sign of
reprobation, and contrary wise humility a most clear token of election to glory.
as pride is an evident sign of reprobation, so humility is a manifest token of
predestination.

CHAR. XXX. OF COVETOVSNES
THE CONTENTS.
No greedines so insatiable, as an inordinat love to worldly riches; a covetous
man is but rich in imagination, a mere dreamer, that wakened out of his sleep
(...) death finds nothing of all his riches to carry with him: virtues, and
holy sciences be man's proper goods. worldly wealth in it self is not evil: a
rich man that distributeth the superfluiries of his temporal fortune to the
poor profits his soul unto just: fication of life: Christ's example has
rendered poverty estimable above worldly riches.

Covetousness is an inordinat desire of riches, which are the service Ephesians. 5
diuitiae appellantur Idolorum seruitus.
of Idols, in regard the Covetous man turns Idolater of his goods, thinking,
that felicity stands therein Chrysos. 64. in mat. sicut Jaolum, inquit,
temples, sie auari auru^ clau^tris, and vectibus sepiunt etc.
as Idolaters, says S. Chry sostome, enclose Idols in temples: so covetous
men enclose, and defend with bars, and locks gold, and silver, preparing in
the room of temples chestes, and afterward adore their shut up treasure, and
choose rather to lose their eyes, or life, then any part thereof. They be like
unto a certain people Plutarchus in quas. Gracis.
called AEneani, who were persuaded by their Oracle, that they should be
spoiled of their country, if they gave away the least parcel of it: for though
they see their brother to have need: neuertheless Auari ita clausos omnibus
volu^t benignitatis fontes, vt quod est in sordido charactere apud
Theophrastum) neque salem alijs commodent, neque illicmium.
they shut up their compassion from him, as if they were to lose all their
goods by parting with the least piece of coin to the helping of him: besides
there is no more According to Isidorus l. 2. de summo beno. The thirst of a
covetous man is never satiated: the more he has, the more he coueteth.
insatiable greedines, then is the love of money: as the matter of fire is, so
it burns, and according to the abundance of riches the desire thereof
increases, and cannot be satiated: for as wine shut up in a vessel quenches
not the corporal thirst: so money locked up in a chest never puts out the
fire of avarice: the soul which is the cabinet of love (because of its
spirituallity) cannot be filled with money, no more then the chest, that is the
cabinet of gold, can be filled with love in regard of its corporallity, there
being nothing of proportion between a corporal, and spiritual thing; again,
he that loves riches inordinatly shall be without the fruit thereof Eccles.
50. no good comes to the owner thereby, but the beholding of, or wallowing in
them, as did the Tranquillus writes of the Emperor Caligula, that he made a
spacious room to be spread all over with heaps of gold, and his chief delight
was to walkein the mids of them barefoot, and therein also to tumble himself.
covetous Emperor Caligula.

A warran keeper after he has made his ferret very hungry, then he sowes the
mouth, and puts it into a cunnyburrow, where the famished beast tumbles among,
scratches with its nails the rabbits, but cannot devour any one to the
satiating of hunger: the like stratagem the devil uses with the covetous man:
he stirs up in him a vehement love, and an insatiable greedines to keep up
riches, but lets him not have the enjoyment, as to using them: S. Cypria cpis.
2. nec intelligit miser auarus speciosa esse sibi supplicia auro se alligatum
teneri, and possideri magis quam possidere opes.
nor says, S. Cyprian ep. 2. the covetous man understands, that to be
confined to gold, and to be possessed by, rather then to possess his treasures
are but honorable punishments. Hereby appears, that the poor man, that
dream h a dream, that he has found a mine of gold, is as rich, as the
covetous man, that has chests filled with wealth, which he uses not: and
indeed he that is couetously rich is a very Psalm. 75. dormierant semnium suum,
and nihil inuenerunt omnes viri diuitiarum in manibus suis. Et Job. 27. dives:
cum dormierit, nihil secum auferet: aperiet oculos suos, and nihil inueniet.
dreamer: the time of his dream is the night of this present life: the time
when he wakeneth is the hour of death: the dream it self a vain deluding
imagination, that he abounds with worldly treasures; for death comes with his
dart, opens the door of his soul, and seizing on him, says, that he must depart
suddenly from his goods, where with wakened out of sleep, and perceiving an
unavoidable necessity of his departure looks on every side thinking to bear
something away, but finds nothing: only he sees to his grief, and sorrow, that
he was but rich in his imagination, and that the multitude of riches, in which
he delighted were turned into a dream. Furthermore the rich man is like unto a
dog, that follows two men, and it is not perceived to which of either he belongs
till they part themselves, but then the dog goes with him, that is his own
master: for till the rich man departs this life it is not known whether the
riches he enioyes be his, or the worlds goods: but their stay with the world
after his departure gives evidence enough to believe, that the world, and not
he had the supreme dominion over them; neither are worldly riches properly
According to S. Ambrose mercy only accompanies man after his death, and the
riches, which he cannot carry to his grave ought not to be counted his proper
goods.
the goods of man: for such only be his proper goods, as are within his soul,
namely virtues, and sciences, or within the body, for example, health,
strength, beauty: as a wall is not denominated whit of whitnes abiding in a
subject distinct from it: so no man can be named properly rich in regard of
temporal riches, these having norhing of inward connection with either body, or
soul. Outward worldly-goods be properly called goods, fortune, and in reason
such frail treasures ought not to be counted man's goods, because they turn him
from the supreme good, which is God: because they draw him to vice, and hinder
his advancement in virtue: because they are thorns, which choke the good seed
of the Evangelical sower, that is, the word of God, rendering it unfruitful:
filles the soul with unprofitable desires: prick, tear, and pine away the body
through tormenting cares: and lastly bringes poor man into the pit of the
devil: for they that will be rich, says the Apostle, 1. Timot. 6. fall into
temptation and snares, and into many foolish, and noisome lusts, which drown
them in perdition, and destruction.

A ship, that is fastened to the earth cannot sail to the haven, she tends to:
even so a man whose affections are fixed on earthly riches cannot pass to
Heaven, which is his haven, in regard the ship of his soul sticks fast to the
ground of worldly treasures: howeuer riches in themselves are not evil: as the
poor labourer, that spreads fatt dung abroad over all his field, renders it
fruitful unto According to the holy Scriptures, Alms deeds deliver from sin.
The holy Prophet Daniel counseled Nabuchodonosor to redeem his sins by
giving alms: and to releive the poor is a counsel Christ himself gave,
saying Give unto the poor, and thou ^halt have a treasure in Heaven.
bringing forth much corn: so the rich man that distribut's his riches to
such, as be in necessity, prosits his soul unto justification of life: but who
is he, that uses well his riches, which he might abuse? who is he, that might
do evil with his gold, and has not don it, might offend, and has not
offended? who is this blessed rich, which is found without blemish, and has
not gone after riches, nor hoped in money, or treasures whereby so many are
destroyed? who is he? for he is an example of glory, and his goods be
established in our lord, and all the Church of Saints shall declare his alms
Eccles. 31. the blessed rich is he, that makes himself poor having great
riches: or he that of his little substance is not afraid to give a little
alms. In the law of Moses the old Tobias was blessedly rich: he gave the first
tenth part of all his goods to the Priests the sonns of Aron: another tenth
part he sold, and every year bestowed it in good uses at Jerusalem: the third
tenth part of his goods he distributed among them, to whom, it was meet: he
powered out great alms to his brethren, and gave his own bread to such, as were
hungry, and his own clothes to those which were naked. Tob. 10. likewise
Zaccheus was blessed in riches, that gave half of his goods Qui miseretur
pauperi beatus erit; beatus, qui intelligi^ super egenu^, and pauperem; id est,
qni prouidet egenis, and pauperibus.
to the poor, because salvation came thereby to his house. Luke 19. and that
alms laid up a good store for him self, in regard it delivered him from
death, and suffered him not to come into darkness. In the law of grace the
primitive Christians were the blessed rich: for many, which were possessors of
lands, or houses sold them, and brought the price, and laid it down at the
Apostles feet, and it was distaibuted according to the necessity of each one
respectively. Act. 4. and down from the Apostles to the present times the
Church has produced numberless numbers of blessed rich in every age
respectively, and our country of England makes a larg claim to the blessed
rich, as evidence the many beautiful Churches, sumptious Monasteries, goodly
Colleges, and famous hospitalls, which the alms of its primitive Catholic
Christians have erected in the honor of God, his glorious Virgin mother, and
other blessed Saints. But truly the modern have much surpassed even the
primitive Catholic Christians of this Island for as much, as they have gladly
born the yoke of persecution, patiently endured the spoiling of their goods,
and willingly suffered banishment taking up their Cross of tribulation after
the example of their heavenly Master the son of God, that desceuded from Heaven
to exalt, and render poverty estimable beyond worldly treasures; for coming
into the world he made choice Elegi te in camino paupertatis, ait Propheta.
of a poor Virgin in the furnace of poverty, of whom he was made man, and in
lieu of a glorious palace suitable to the king of glory at his first entrance
into the world, was lodged in a stable: in room of rich mantles was wrapped in
poor swaddling clothes. In stead of a bed of state he was laid in a crath, or
manger; and while he was conversant on earth, he had not whereon to rest his
head; besides at his departure out of this world he was stripped of all
clothes. Wherefore it is a great abuse, says S. Bernard, and manifest madness if
we shall S. Bernardus magna abusio: vt quis dives esse velit, pro quo Deus
pauper fier^ voluit.
covet to be rich, for whose sake the son of God made himself poor.

CHAR. XXXI. OF VSVRY
THE CONTENTS.
To lend unto usury is forbidden by the law of nature, the written law of
Moses, and the Evangelical law of Christ. The ancient Jews by divine
dispensation lent upon usury to the Cananites; to lend for a spiritual gain
precisely implies nothing of usury, nor to exact, or receive temporal gain
either in regard of gain that cease by, or damage that comes of loan
precisely. Those, which lend money, or other commodities, that consume in using
transfer the dominion thereof unto the borrowers, in consequence of which
Mutuum, loan, differs from letting, or setting to hite. The condition of
usurers is miserable.

USury, whichcomes of covetousness taken in the proper sense implies lucre, that
is, gain gotten, exacted, or coueted of the loan of money principally, and
precisely above the Capital sum, or of some other thing, which through using
consumes away, namely oil, corn etc. above the capital stock. Here the
particle lucre denotates real money, or a vantage, that carries the price, or
valeu of true money: for he, who lend's to an other man with intent only to
make him his friend, or to keep him from being his Enemy, or lends merely to
prevent an unjust vexation, does not commit usury, since he reaps thereby
nothing of lucre, that bears the price, or valeu of money, because the motives
of such loan be spiritual, in consequence of which the lucre, that comes of
them must of necessity be S. Math. c. 15. and centuplum accipietis etc. hic
saccrtextus intelligitur de lucre spirituali.
spiritual also. The particle principally makes the primary, or principal
intent, and aim of receiving increase above the Capital to be a requisite
necessary to the guilt of usury: and indeed a secundary, or less principal
intention of gain has nothing of wickedness, for example it is lawful to serve
the Church, or the chief Prelate of a Church with a secundary, and less
principal intent in order to the obtaining of a benefice for his service:
likewise it is lawful to celebrate, or hear divine service unto receiving
daily distributions, or to serve God in hope, and in reguard secondarily of
worldly rewards and enioyements Psalm. 118. inclinaui cor meum ad faciendas
iustificationes tuas propter vetributione^.
which is the doctrine of the Council of Trent sess. 6. can. 3. The particle
coueted is inserted in this character, or definition, because usury does not
consiste only in opere: in the receiving of unlawful interest: or in ore in
the exacting thereof, but also in cord, in the desire, and coveting of it:
(whence comes the distinction of real, and mental usury) for S. Austin defines
sin, Factum vel dictum, vel concupitum contra legem Dei: that is, sin is a
transgression of the law of God either in deed, word, or thought. By the
particle precisely is meant, that in the lucre, or gain, which comes of lending
is the consistency of usury: for a man that has a sum of money designed, and
ready at hand for traffic in a certain, or probable way of increasing his
riches lawfully, and notwithstanding all this, of his good will (which is
charity) lendes the same sum to a neighbor, that is pressed with necessity, he
does not commit usury in coveting, exacting, or receiving interest above the
Capital, because lucre invested with that circumstance comes not precisely of
lending, it being rather a recompense upon an other scoare called by divines
lucrum cessans, lucre ceasing, which may be lawfully exacted, or sold, without
incurring usury. Neither matters it, that the gain exspected from money, that
is actually ready, and deputed to traffic is uncertain because, of the many
casualities, whereby it may be obstructed: for a fisher man does not commit the
sin of usury, that selles a cast, or draught with his net, though nothing of
benefit arise thereby to the buyer, and indeed the profit is uncertain
according to the Apostles answer to Christ Luc. 5. Domine per totam noctem
laborantes nihil caepimus. Master we have travailed all night launcing into
the deep, and letting down our nets to make a draught, and have taken nothing
Again it is not usury to receive, exact, or covet vantage above the capital in
regard of prejudice precisely suffered by the loan thereof, and this Divines
call damnum emergens, damage that comes of loan precisely: and truly no man is
bound to pleasure his neighbor to the prejudice of himself; in consequence of
which, a man for example, that lends a sum of money out of good will, and
thereby receives damage, may lawfully receive moderate interest unto
compensing his loss: for this is not to increase his riches in virtue of the
loan precisely, but to repair the damage suffered thereby, which is the
doctrine of S. Thomas q. 78. ar. 2. ad 2. And the common assertion of Catholic
Doctors. Besides Pope Leo the tenth in consideration of damnum emergens, has
defined in the Council of Laterain, that the public banks named montes
pietatis, mounts-piety, contain nothing of eueil, and that they may justly
exact, and receive something of moderate increase above the capital in respect
of the expenses where unto they are liable, which in earnest are great, for
they require a spacious house together with convenient rooms for the receiving
of pledges; likewise they entertain many servants in order to sundry offices,
namely, to receive, price, distinguish, and conserve the pledges, to call in,
pay out moneys, and to take, keep, and give accounts of affairs; whereby is
plainly euidenced that the mounts-picty are subject to great expenses, in
reguard whereof they may lawfully exact, and receive something of moderate
interest above the capital: for Aequum est vt nulli sua pietas noceat:
moreover it is a rule in law, qui sentit commodum debet etiam sentire onus. The
particles moderat interest is added, because those are guilty of usury, which
in taking of interest upon the scoar of damnum emergens, or lucrum cessans, do
not what is lawful, and right, do not show mercy unto the poor: do not
restore the pledges to their debtours, but contrary wise oppress, and tie them
to hard conditions, and bargans, and exact immoderate interest under specious
pretenses of damnum emergens, or lucrum cessans, which is a mere color of
seeming equity, that serves as a cloak to palliate, that is, to cover, or hide
usury, and palliated usury is no less detestable, and execrable in the sight of
God, then if it were outwardly apparent: for all manner of usury taken in the
proper sense is unlawful bearing the guilt of deadly sin: 10. the old law
forbid's it ps. 14. Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, who shall rest in
thy holy mountain....he that has not given his money unto usury: from this
sacred text the Council of Nyce infers a divine precept condemning usury: again
it is forbidden Exodus 22. If thou lend money to my people (says God by the mouth
of his Prophet) that is to the poor with thee.... thou shall not oppress him
with usury: neuertheless the ancient Jews Deuteronomy. 23. had a privilege by divine
dispensation to lend upon usury unto a stranger, that is to an enemy, whereby
were meant the Cananites, and Amorits, whom God commanded the Israelites to
destroy lest they should be a mean of their ruin, and according to S. Ambrose
l. de Tob. c. 15. Vbi ius belli, ibi ius vsurae in consequence of which since
the Israelites might kill the Cananites, and Amorites without sinning, they
might lawfully spoil them of their riches: and since God de facto, as Dominus
vniuersorum, supreme lord of all, granted the same Israelites leave to deprive
the Egyptians of their gold, and silver vessels, it ought not to seem a strange
thing if he tolerated S. Tho. q. 78. ar. 1. ad 2. and q. 13. de malo ar. 4. ad
primu^ cui subscribunt Caietanus and Soto, ait, Judaeis non suisse concessum
exigere vel recipere vsuras ab alienigenis tanqna^ ailiqnd in se licitum sed
permissum, seu toleratum, quo pacto tolerabatur inter illos libellus repudij
causa maioris mali euitandi.
the loan of money upon usury. 20. it is forbidden in the new law Luc. 6. Date
mutuum nihil inde sperantes, lend hoping nothing thereby; The latter particle
of this sacred Text, namely, hoping nothing thereby, implies an absolute
precept, though the particle lend, that goes before, importes counsel only,
and the sense, and meaning is, lend, but in virtue thereof take, exact, or
covet nothing of increase (above the capital) that is of interest, that
carries the price, and valeu of money. 30. Usury includes an intrinsicall
malice, in consequence of which it is forbidden by the law of nature: and indeed
it is against the dictates of natural reason to exact lucre of a thing, that is
not ones own neither as to the dominion, nor usage thereof: but he that
lend's, for example, money, wine, oil which through using consume away
Co^tractus transferentes dominiu^ sunt emptio, venditio, donatio, and mutuum
per quod gratis creduntur res quae in numero me^sura vel po^dere consistunt and
vsia consumuntur.
transfers the dominion, and the use thereof from himself, wherefore it is
manifest injustice to exact, or contracte for lucre above the capital stock,
that is lent, and herein precisely lies the consistency of mutuum, loan:
Besides it is unlawful to exact interest of fruit from a thing, that is
unfruitful, and wholly barren of it self: but for example Nummi no^ pariunt
alios nummos, nec frumentum in arca, vel iam consumptum, parit aliud frumentum.
money cannot bring forth money being in it self fruitless. Agam the selling
of time is a transgressing of the divine, and natural law, that have made
time, sun, and air common to all alike: but such as in virtue of lending
precisely (namely money, bread, wine, oil which consume away with using) for
days, weeks months years, receive, or exact interest above the principal
stock, sell time: for since a thousand crowns exceed not the valeu of a
thouland crowns, to exact lucre, or interest precisely in regard of the loan
thereof for a month, or a year, is to exact an increase of riches for the
time of the same loan, which implies selling of time: neither matters it though
the party that lendes say, that he does not exact interest in respect of time,
loan, or using of the thing lent, but in virtue of the gain, which the party,
that borrows reaps thereby: it matters not, I say, because it is unlawful to
exact an increase of riches from any thing, that is not ones own: but he, that
lendes money can have no just claim to the lucre, that comes of lending, and
using it, because the loan transfers the dominion, and use of the money to the
party, that borrowes, wherefore the gain pertaines in equity to him, who has
the property, and use of the thing of which the gain comes, whereby appears
clearly the difference, that is between a thing lent taken in the proper sense
before mentioned, and a thing let, or set to hire: Conductor de proprietate rei
locatae quaestionem refer non potest c. de pignore action l. credito.
Proinde contractus locati and conducti, per quem vsus alicuius rei, puta,
domus, praedij, equi, quae vsu non consnmitur pretio concediturlicitus est:
item contractus deposite per quem sola custodia rei alteri co^mittitur: verum
quando res, quae in numero, mensura, and pondere consistunt, deponuntur facta
potestate depositario, vt eis vtatur, tunc incipiunt esse mutua, simul ac
deposrtarius incipit eis vti, and qui sic deponit facta expressa, vel tacita,
aut intention principali vt aliquid lucri inde ei redeat, committit peccatum
vsurae, quia qui sic deponit in effectu mutuat and sperare principaliter lucrum
ex re mutuata, est vsura: Item, licitus est contractus commodati per quem
conceditur vsus alicuius rei, quae vsu non consumitur, vt gratuita commodatie
equi, libri, and rursum licitus est contractus pignoris per quem debtor
aliquid creditori in cautionem pignorat: huiusmodi enim contractus non
transferunt dominium, sicut emptio, venditio, permutatio, donatio, and mutuum.
for the dominion of what is let, or set to hire, it not transfered from him,
that lets, or sets to hire, so that the Hirer has noe good claim to the
property of the thing hired: and therefore it is lawful for him, that lets,
or sets to hire, to exact, or reciue lucre for the thing let, or set to hire
in regard of the use of it, being the dominion, and property thereof belonges
to him: but for as much as the dominion of things lent, which consum in using,
is transferd from the lender to the debtour, it is impious, and execrable to
exact, or receive increase of riches upon that scoare, being the profit is due
to him, that can challenge the property of the thing, that yeeelds it: wherefore
the hazard, or danger of losing a thing let, or set to hire concerns him, that
lets, or sets to hire, and not the hirer, so that if a thing hired
perish without any fault of the hirer, the loss is his, that lets, or
sets to hire; but if a thing lent only, for example money, bread, wine,
oil, perish by accident, it is the debtours loss, to whom the dominion thereof
was transferd.

The premises clearly evidence the Aug. cur miser homo faeneraris homini?
fanerare Deo, and centuplum accipies and vitam aeterna possidebis.
wretched condition of an usurer: his life is cursed of God for he sels what is
not his own to increase his riches by unjust dealings: and since such, as did
gather wood upon the saboth day were stoned number. 15. what shall become of an
usurer that gathers lucre on every day, selling all the days of the year for
the increasing of riches. Vsurarius omni die and omni felto facit suos
operarios (nu^mos) operari.
Besides in his deadly sin he inuolues as many, as he employes in his wicked
practices, and Notaries especially that compose vsurarious contracts, for
thereby they contract the guilt of perjury, Notarij qua^do crea^tur iurant s^
non facturos instrumenta vsuraria. Deinde perjurus testificari non potest
quantumcunque poenitentiam egit cap. extra and testibus.
which depriues them of power in the future either of making public
instruments, or bearing legal witness.

CHAR. XXXII. OF LVXVRY,
THE CONTENTS.
Evil effects come of carnal lusts: whores, and whore keepers both are
abomination to God: the laws of Christian commonwealths, that tolerate whores
to the eschewing of greater inconveniences, are not unjust: to permit is not to
commit a sin: to do wickedness, that good may come of it is evil: every mortal
sin expels charity out of the soul: the daughters of lot retained nothing of
charity in their outward sin.

LVxury is an inordinate coveting of carnal pleasures, which are the works of
the flesh: namely adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness; Job. 31. ignis
est vsque ad perditionem deuorans.
Luxury is a sire, which deuoureth to destruction, for as much as it Hierom in
cap. 4. Osea fornicatio, and voluptas peruertit sensum, animam debilitat, de
rationabili homine brutum efficit animal. Et S. Greg. l. mor. idem docet^
dulle the sense, weakness the understanding, spoils the memory, darkness the
sight, makes the body loath some to the sight, ill favored, pale, ill
sauoured, stinking, hastens old age, and roots out of the soul the young
plants of divine grace Isa. 41. halitus eius (^diaboli) prunas
(concupiscentiae) ardere facit.
This sire is kindled by the devil, who is the author of carnal lusts: and as
a smith, when he cannot temper a piece of iron to his mind, putes it in the
sire, blows the coals till it b red hot, then works it according to his own
will, and pleasure: so the devil, when he cannot lead a soul into wickedness,
blows the coals in the fire of luxury unto making it warm, and thereby draws
it into whatsoever sin he pleases; besides Isa. 54. ecce ego creaui fabrum
(diabolum) sufflantem in igne prunas, and proferentem vas in opus suum.
the bellows of the devils own mouth, wherewith he blows the coals in this
sire of luxury he bringes forth other instruments to the work: for example old
whores, which keep a school of incontinency, instruct young maids in all
unclean acts of carnal wantonness, and sell their Joel. 3. puellam ve^diderunt
pro vino, and biberunt.
Virginity for wine to drink, are the devils incendiaries, that work in the
furnace of luxury. I Ier^m 1. ollam incensam ego video: id est, vetulam nigram.
Olla enim (quantumcunque alba, si ad ignem freque^ter ponatur denigratur.
see says the holy Prophet a seething pot: that is an old harlot, who boileth
young women in the pleasures, and lusts of the flesh unto destruction both of
body, and soul. As sire makes a pot black as a coal, that was white before, and
consumes it: so at last the most beautiful men, and women, that frequente the
fiery furnace of luxury become deformed, and withered like a stock, as to their
bodies, and in order to their souls most hateful unto God, that Deutro. 23.
Endures no whores of the daughters of his people, nor no whore keepers of the
sonns of his people: for the one, and the other is abomination in his sight.

Because the people of Israel began to commit whore dome with the daughthers of
Moab, God commanded Moses to take all the heads, that is the principal among
them, and hang them up against the sun; in regard phinias slew Zambry
fornicating with an Midianitisht woman, he merited his priestly charge, and
dignity for ever: Number. 25. and it matters not that laws of some places, namely
in Italy, suffer whores; for the said laws do not consider the sin of
whoredom, but the peace, and tranquillity of the commonwealth obtained
through that indulgence, in as much as adulteries, and other great
inconveniences tending to the disturbance thereof are prevented, and avoided
thereby: to permit, and to commit sin, is not the same thing: God permits
wickedness, which he does not commit himself. And though whores be exempt (in
regard of whore dome presisely) from penal laws of Magistratos, which
tollerat them: neuertheless they are not delivered thereby from the tribunal of
God, that punishes all wicked sinners. In consequence of the premises it is
evident, that no man ought The common saying: of two evils the lesser ought to
be chosen, is not meant of two sins, which be spiritual evils, but of
corporal harms, or damages, for according to the Apostle Romans 8. noe man can
lawfully commit the least sin, although much good may come of it.
to commit a lesser, for preventing the doing of a greater sin: wherefore S.
Austin condemns the fact of lot Genesis 19. that offered his innocent daughters
to be deflowred for preventing the filthy lusts of the Sodomits; all though Lot
was worthy of praise in regard of his abhorrence of so detestable a sin: yet he
deserved blame in seeking unlawful means to avoid it. No wickedness ought to
be done, that good may come thereby.

Furthermore the company Tritum adagium est: mare ignis, mulier tria mala: sed
tamen minus tempestuosum est mare, ignis minus inflammat, in muliere omnia
nocent: oculi instar Basilisci, vel solo aspectu venenant, labia, and ora
flammas vomunt, vel leuis attactus inficit. Et mulierem sacrae literae cum
lcone, vrso, pardo, colubro, serpente comparant.
of wanton women is the devils instrument that blows the coals in this fire
of luxury: for through it love is kindled, as a fire unto destruction, Eccle.
9. a cat, that sits near the fire scorcheth her whit skin, and a fly, that
touches the candle burns its wings; even so a man, that uses According to
S. Hierom. a woman smites the conscience of a man with flams of fire, and if
young women dwell with men, the devil has his snares among them.
the company of wanton women falls into the snares of concupiscence, and
defiles his soul. Besides as material fire is kindled by adding thereto wood,
oil, and pitch: so delicat meats, S. Hier^. venture vino aestuans spumat in
libidinem.
and strong wines taken immoderatly increase the flame of luxury: and indeed
whosoever eats, and drinks wantonly shows no more willingness to extinguish
the burning coals of fiery lusts, then he that castes into a house set on
fire, wood, oil, and pitch, shows an inclination to quench it: moreover the
body of man is not made for fornication, or carnal uncleanness, but for our
lord, that bought the whole man with the price of his precious blood to the
end, that both body, and soul should serve to his glory: our bodies are members
of Christ, and consequently a fornicatour is sacrilegious, in as much as he
gives his body, that is consecrated unto God, to any other; likewise he is
injurious, and contumelious to his body: for he, that commits fornication
According to the Apostle 1. Cor. 6. fornication defiles the body with a
peculiar kind of uncleanness so that carnal sensuality differs exceedingly from
the inordinate delights of the other senses, which have nothing of brutall
filthiness: howeuer carnal pleasure has no deformiry, as to married people,
because of the vprightnes and integrity of conscience, desire of issue, holiness
of the Sacrament, which therefore be called Bona matrimonij.
sins against his own Body, where as other sins, which a man does, are with
out the body; that is, luxury defiles the body with a sordide brutall
filthiness, which is not common a like to sins committed by the other senses
vix: hearing, seeing, tasting, smelling.

But notwithstanding all this even among Christians of these days, do rise
cinick Philosophers, which so flatter themselves in their carnal pleasures, as
to think, that simple fornication has nothing of mortal guilt. Likewise the
Digbean diuins so fool themselves, as to believe that an outward sin: for
example outward fornication, adultery, incest, murder, do not of necessity
expel the love of God out of the soul; and in consequence thereof do not
obstruct the passage to Heaven: and both the cinick Philosophy, and the Digbean
Theology lay claim to scripture testimony respectively, for the proof thereof.
The cinick Philosophy alleges the first chapter of Osea where is mentioned,
that our lord said to Osea go take unto thee a wise of fornications, and
children of fornications, and thence infers, that luxury is lawful, as to
simple fornication: but it is a very weak inference: for God commanded not the
Prophet to commit fornication, but matrimony with a woman, that had fornicated
before, that is to make an honest wife of a dishonest woman unto representing a
divine mystery, that might set forth the Idolatry of the Synagogue, and the
people her children.

After the like manner the Digbean Theology (which is the product of Mr. Whites
40. years study) to prove, that outward sin does not necessarily exclude
charity from the souls nor that the soul is excluded from the kingdom of Heaven
by outward sin make scripture give an example thereof. Genesis 19. that is of the
sweet agreement, between the love of God, and outward sin in Lot, and his
daughters: yet indeed no one place of holy scripture attestes, that Lot, and
his daughters retained charity with their outward sin. As touching Lot the holy
writer seems rather to excuse, then accuse him in order to outward sin taken
in the proper sense. For it is expressly set down, that his daughters made him
drink wine, and lay with him, but he perceived not, neither when they lay
down, neither when they rose, so that lot might want knowledge of, and thereby
voluntary condescension to the fact, and in consequence of which might not sin,
because sin properly taken importes of necessity Sin of necessity includes a
voluntary assent of the will, which supposes an act of the understanding; for
as S Austin often inculcateth no man sins by doing a thing, which he cannot
avoid.
a voluntary act of the will: for S. Austin teaches that no man sins in a
thing, that he cannot Hac propositio, homo peccat damnabiliter in ^o, quod
necessario facit, est damnata a Pio 5. and Gregor. 13. and secundum Aug. eam
asserere summae est iniquitatis, ac deme^tiae, and ait S. Hiero. vbi est
necessitas, ibi neque meritum, neque demeritum, neque laus neque vituperium,
neque vita aeterna, neque damnatio.
avoid, or eschew, in regard whereof some of the ancient Fathers endeavor to
absolve lot from all guilt, albeit, that the mayor part, and current of
Catholic Doctors of these days, do ascribe unto him the sin of drunkenness,
at least in the second bout, and to his daughters the guilt of both, for as
much, as they voluntarily procured the one, and committed the other sin. But as
to Mr. whites assertion Author of the Digbean Theology to wit: If one should
commit an outward deadly sin, retaining a love to God notwithstanding he might
go to Heaven; which importes communion; fellowship, and a Iouing agreement
between charity, and outward sin, (a doctrine truly, which has been hid in
darkness since the first age of christianity for 1660. years till the supreme
providence sent Mr. white to teach Christian schools, that charity, and deadly
sin are not inconsistent together,) which he proves, from the text set down
thus. God did bless the progeny, that proceeded from Lot, and his daughters:
therefore Lot, and his daughters retained charity, that is, continued in holy
society, and freindshipp with God notwithstanding their external sin of Jn
filiabus Lot proprie fuit peccatum incestus, vt fuse probat Aug. l. 22. contrae
faustum, cu^ ab illis fuerit causatum voluntary.
incest: but good God, what a poor demonstratiue argument is this? where the
antecedent proposition is evidently false, and the consequence, (suppose the
antecedent were true) very inconsequently deduced. Falsity, as to the
antecedent, plainly appears: for as that issue was born in horrible incest: so
was it, and the posterity thereof namely the Amonites, and the Moabites vile,
and wicked, Aug. l. quaes. in Deutro. qu. 35. notat ab Abrahamo (cuius frater
erat Lot) vsque ad Ruth (quae prima ex Moabitis intrauit in Ecclesiam) december
generationes inueniri.
in so much, that even to their tenth generation they did not enter into the
Church of our Lord according to scripture testimony: and the deduction is very
inconsequent, if the antecedent proposition were granted, because the supreme
providence many times blesses the children of wicked parents, so that the
divine blessing bestowed upon children is no infallible argument to
demonstrate, that their parents did adhere to God in charity, and holy society
at the time they got them. For example God blessed the issue of Judas, and
Thamar in a great measure, Christ as man descending from it, albeit, that both
were grievous sinners in order to the bringing forth of the said issue: for
Judas the Father voluntarily committed simple fornication, and Thamar the
mother the sin of incest. But perhaps the student of 40. years standing will
allege, that the antecedent before mentioned: That God did bless the progeny
etc. is meant of temporal blessings only, and indeed it cannot be denied, but
that the said progeny, for example Moab the son of Lots elder daughter, and
Ammon son of the younger, were heads of great nations, the Moabites descending
from the one, and the Ammonites from the other; yet this answer will auail him
nothing at all, as to the point of the present difficulty, being it implies
manifest weakness to infer from the worldly advantages of Moab, and Ammon, that
Lot, and his daughters retained charity, that is, holy society with God in the
outward sin of incest. For God prospered the kings of Egypt many hundred
years, though they did not adhere unto him in communion, and holy society: And
S. Austin attesteth, that God did extend the territories of the Roman Empire
for the moral virtues practiced by the ancient Romans. which notwithstanding
were not endued with divine charity. Hereby plainly appears that the holy
scripture will not receive into their sanctuary Mr. Whites Theology: truly noe
wonder, for it is a doctrine destructive of all morality and christian Religion,
in regard the excellent agreement, that it setles between charity, and
external sin must, as it were of necessity, induce frail nature to commit
outward sins of the flesh presuming, that notwithstanding all outward
uncleanness, namely of drunkenness simple fornication, adultery, the love retained
to God shall bring a man so sinning outwardly, to Heaven. Besides it does
prejudice the Apostles Theology: Neither drunkards, nor fornicatours; nor
adulterers shall inherit the kingdom of Heaven. Heb. 13 But perhaps it will be
replied, that the Apostle excludes only such drunkards, fornicatours, and
adulterers etc. from the kingdom of Heaven, as have nothing of charity together
with the sins of drunkenness, fornication, and adultery: so that though
drunkards etc. without charity cannot inherit the kingdom of God: neuertheless
charitable drunkards, charitable fornicatours, charitable adulterers,
charitable murderers shall not be excluded: is this the Theology, that 40.
Years study has brought forth?

But to return unto the matter in debate: it is an article of Christian faith
(Trident. sess. 6. can. 15. and can. 27.) that charity, and deadly sin are
incompatible, and S. James the Apostle gives evidence thereof in the 2. Chapter
of his canonical Epistle, saying Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet
offends in one, he is guilty of all: Because whosoever transgresses one sole
precept of the law is liable to eternal malediction enioyn'd by God to the
transgressors of it, according to S. Hieroms interpretation l. 1. cap. 7. con
Pelagia. And that the sacred text set down speaks of deadly sins appears
evidently by the subsequent words: for example, the Apostle adds: He that
said thon shall not commit adultery, said also thou shall not kill (which are
deadly sins) and if thou do none adultery, but shall kill, thou art made a
transgressour of the law. Again no man is counted worthy eternal life, and
eternal death at once: no man is God friend through charity, and his enemy
through deadly sin at the same time: but every morrall sin renders a man
liable to everlasting death Romans 6. stipendia peccati mors. The wages of sin is
death: contrariwise charity brings forth life and heavenly blessedness Joan.
14. he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will ^^ue him; and
wilt show my self to him; in consequence of which, as life, and death, so
charity and mortal sin are inconsistent together; neither matters it that
divine faith, and divine hope can abide in a soul desiled with deadly sin,
forthese two supernatural virtues taken precisely import nothing of that
union, and friendship, which is between the Creator, and the creature, that
being the proper product of charity: neither matters it, that a natural habit
is not lost by one sole contrary act (though some learned Philosophers assert
otherwise:) for there is nothing of parity between an habit naturally produced
and an habit supernaturally infused; unto continuing, and conseruing a natural
habit, is not required, that the acts, that produced it continue also to the
conseruing of it: a man may for some time have the enjoyment of a natural
habit without exercising any act at all: but the conservation of habitual
charity, necessarily depends of Gods special influence, which is obstructed
through deadly sin, that rendereth a soul unworthy of it.

CHAR. XXXIIJ. OF ENVY.
THE CONTENTS.
An envious man has pleasure in evil, and heaviness in good things. through
envy a man is made worse then devils: the daughter of envy is detraction, the
property whereof is to report amiss, and to aggrauate wicked aspersions: the
mouth of a detractour is a sepulcher of corruption: who soever harkneth
willingly to a detractour cooperateth to his sin.

Envy is a killing plague: man that God created without corruption, the devil
through envy brought to destruction Sap. 2. inuidia diaboli mors introiuit in
mundum.
death came into the world together with this infection: and indeed men through
envy resemble devils, for as these wicked spirits, so envious men have
pleasure in evil, and heaviness in good things, Aug. inuidia est dolor alienae
felicitatis: inuidus de bono dolot, de malo gaudet.
the prosperity, that is not their own afflictes, and the affliction of other
men rejoices them: they be like the syrenes of the sea, that lie hid in a calm
mourning, and exalt themselves in a storm singing, while distressed mariners
strugle with the raging waves unto saving their life's: they noe more endure the
light of good works, then owls the brightness of the sun; they have in extreme
detestation such as exceed them in authority, godliness, dignity, or wealth,
because they cannot equal them: neither do they love their inferiors lest they
may come to be their equals: likewise they despise their equals even upon the
scoare of equallity. The sonns of Jacob through envy sold their brother
Joseph, lest he might come to bear rule over them Genesis 39. Cain through envy
murdered his brother Abel Genesis 4. because he saw that God had a greater kindness
for him in regard his virtue, and vprightnes had rendered him more amiable in
the sight of his Creator: king Saul though he coueted victories over his
enimyes: neuertheless he laid wait for David's blood unto taking away his life,
because the glory of the batles won was ascribed 1. Reg. percussit Saul mill,
and David december millia. Mihi dederunt mill, aiebat Saul, David vero december
millia.
to the conduct, and courage of David: whereby is plainly euidenced, that envy
r^ndreth man S. Chrysostom. hom. 4. in Mat. inuidia reddit homines peiores diabolis.
Na^ diabolus non vult nocere diabol^.
worse then devils; for devils do not hurt devils, but men through envy
prejudice men, which, as to kind, and nature are alike; the envious man
sharpeneth his tongue as a serpent, and adders poison is under his lips, that
is, wicked detraction, the innate property whereof is to report evil of others
in their absence, which is an impiety forebidden Leuit. 19. thou shall not
curse the deaf, that is, thou shall not detract from the absent, that
cannotheare what is objected against him. Again the natural property of
detraction is to augment, or aggra^at evil reports, and to travel after the
hearing thereof, as a woman, that is about to bring forth a child, which is a
wickedness forbidden Eccles. 19. If shou have heard a word against they
neighbor let it dye with the: furthermore the innate property of detraction is
to darken the luster of good works, though never so clear, and manifest: to
extenuate their greatness, or steal away the right pertaining thereto, whereby
plainly appears, that a detractour is an abomination to God, and the worst S.
Ambr^. asserit tolerabiliores esse fures, que^ vespes, and alia bona nostra
diripiu^t, quam fures, qui famam nostram lacerant.
seed of theifes; for example other robbers spoil, and carry away temporal
goods only, namely gold silver, and garments, whereas a detracter takes away
spiritual enjoyments: that is our good name, which is to be chosen above great
riches Proverb. 22. and he that detracteth is B^siliu^ co^parat detractatorem
muscae, quae sanam carnem percutit, vlceri incidit and ibi figit rostru^.
like a fly, that makes a would in whole flesh, where none was before, sits
on, and fixes its nib in it: for a detracter strives to wound such, as for
innocence, and purity of life shine without reproof. He is like a butchers
dog, that lies wait for blood, and has his lips always bloody: for nothing of
cleanes is in the mouth of a detracter, whose throat is an open sepulcher of
corruption: he is like a spider, that turns sweet savors into poison,
converting good into evil: he is like a swine, that entering into a garden,
where in one quarter are beds of sweet flowers, and in another part thereof
dunghills, hasteneth from the odoriferous plants to the stinking dirt, which is
his pleasure; for a detractour passes over the flowery beds of virtues, and
hasteneth to dunghills, that is to the sins of other men, wherein is the
consistency of his delight: in sum he is like Eccles. 10. qui famam alterius
occulte laedit, similis est serpe^ti morde^ti in sident^o.
a serpent, that windeth, and turns about craftily, carries fair before, and
stingeth behind secretly: for a detractour speaks sweetly, and praises thee
to thy face, but at last turns his tale, and sharpeneth his tongue to hurt
thy good name: and indeed the tongue of a slanderer is a venomous serpent, that
kills three (says S. Bernard) with one sole blast of his mouth: namely, the
slanderer himself, the party slandered, and likewise him, that willingly
inclines his ears to a slandering tongue, Romans 1. digni sunt morte non solum
qui peccata faciunt, sed etiam qui consentiunt facientibus.
not such only, as commit wickedness are worthy of death, but also those, that
countenance, and favor such, as commit it: Romans 1. whosoever harkeneth
willingly to a slanderer cooperateth unto his sin, either directly, if he
induces him thereto, as a taleteller, that sows strife, or indirectly if he
can, and does not hinder him from detracting. Wherefore the holy writer Eccles.
28. exhort's us to hedge our ears with thorns, and make doors, and bars
for our mouth, that is, to stop our ears against wicked tongues, and put
away from us slandering lips. But there would be no need of doors, or bars
if the heart of the hearer were not inclined to evil: for as the north wind
drives away rain, so an angry countenance dissipateth the slandering tongue
^r^nerb 25. no man will tell a story to an other, that abhorres to hear it. S.
Bernardus detrahere, aut detrahentem audire, quid borum damnabilius sit non
facile dixerim.
Whether to detract, or to harken to a detracter be the more grievous crime
cannot easily be decided; each of them is an abomination to God, for as much as
he, that harkeneth to a slandering tongue consents to the evil it brings.
The sovereign remedy against destraction is to eschew envy, S. Basilius hom.
11. v ar. arg inuidiam, inquit, fugiamus pugnae in Deum magistram, homicidij
matrem, naturae confusionem, amicitiae and familiaritaetis expertem.
that kindles strife, teaches rebellion against God, causes murders,
disordereth nature, and destroys familiarity together with friendship: and to
fly from envy is to set light by earthly enjoyments, to tread under foot the
goods of the world, and to aspire unto the treasures of Heaven: whosoever
regulateth his life so, shall sooner be moved to pity, then envy, when he
beholdes other men more honored, more eminent, and more rich then himself: S.
Gregor. l. 5. mor. c. 34. plena, inquit, mors inuidiae, est perfectus amor
aeternitatis.
a perfect love to heavenly blessedness extinguisheth the fire of onuy, and
suppresseth the lust of detraction.

CHAR. XXXIV. OF ANGER
THE CONTENTS.
Of Anger comes much evil: as water, that is troubled wants light to cast a
shadow: so an angry man wants light to understand reason: it is better to
converse with savage beasts then with men, that cannot rule their passions:
anger is an abominable thing, and the sinful man is subject thereto.

ANger is an inordinate Hugo de S. Vict. definit iram irrationabilem mentis
perturbationem.
truble of the mind destructive of reason, in as much, as it hides the soul
of man from understanding aright. As troubled water cannot cast forth a shadow,
or as a trubled eye cannot see clearly, so whosoever is carried away with an
inordinate passion of anger cannot Psalm. 6. turbatus est a furora oculus meus.
know himself, or God his maker. Anger is blind: and as the crafty fisherman
trubleth the waters, that the fishes at vnawarres may run into his nots: so the
devil stirs us up unto anger, that we may fall into his snares, which
trubled with wrath we do not perceive; a thief when he enters into a house
shuts the windows, and extinguisheth light, lest he may be seen ( Every man,
that evil does hates the light, lest his deeds should appear Io. 30.) so the
devil when he has got possession of a soul dimmeth the light of its
understanding through anger, that he may rule it at his pleasure, and as the
Philistians after they had pulled out Sampsons eyes, put him to vile, and base
offices, namely to grind in their prison house Iudic. 16. so the devil, after
he has extinguished in a soul the light of reason through anger, brings it
to much villainy, that is, to vile, and wicked enterprises: Anger opens a
door to all vices: for he that inclines to indignation, abounds in
transgression Proverb. 49. Anger gives the devil full dominion over us unto
obeying him in all wicked, and barbarous villainy: for a man in S. The. 2.2. q.
158. definit iram esse vitium animae ad appetitum vindictae inclinans: id est,
mentem humanam ad quiduis audendum vindictae desiderio praecipitat. Ex hoc
vitio nascuntur septem alia: ne^pe, in dignatio, tumor mentis, clamor,
contumelia, blasphemia, opprobtium, and rixa.
his wrath neither spares servant, wife, nor child, but like a killing serpent
breaths devouring fire out of his mouth: so that It Is better to meet a bear
robbed of her whelps, then the wicked man in his anger Proverb. 17. When Herod
saw, that he was mocked of the royal Sages in order to the babe JESUS (for
whose blood he laid wait) became exceeding angry, and in his wrath slew all the
male children, that were in Bethleem, and all the coasts thereof from two years
old, and under. Theodosius the Emperor at solonique in Macedonia transported
with inordinate anger to see Nicepho. l. 12. his. Eccles. l. 40. Baron. ad an.
309.
one of his own courtiers killed in a popular tumult assembled the people of
that city unto a certain place under a specious pretext of some solemneshew,
or play there to be exhibited: but when the said people were come together to
the number of 7000. souls, Prenerb. 26. qui ad indigna^dum facilis est, erit ad
pecca^dum procliuior.
he commanded, that each of them should be murdered, for which vile inhuman
action S. Ambrose excommunicated this Emperor, kept him out of the Church, and
pardoned him not, till he did public penance in the sight of all his people
rehearsing in tears, and sobs, (while he laid prostrate with his face toward
the ground) the 118. Pslme of the royal Prophet, My soul cleaves (...) the
pauement etc: no sin has so great a measure of brutall distemper, as anger.
Wherefore though every man be every man's neighbor, and upon that scoare every
man is bound to love every man: neuertheless no man, as to prudence ought to
entertain S. Chrysostom. hom. 49. ad popul. Antio. praestat, inquit, cum bestia
Syluestri habitatare, quam cum homine iracundo, qui nescit affestus suos
regere. Nihil, inquit, peius, nihil periculosius, nibil horribilius homine
iracundo.
familiarity with an angry man, that wants ability to command his affections,
lest he receive prejudice by his evil conversation. Howeuer anger taken
precisely has nothing of wickedness: it is like a dog, that S. Basilius in ora.
de trac.
is good when he barketh against enimyes, and naught when he hurts friends;
that is, if it so fall out, that a man is angry, and notwithstanding bridles
his wrath according to reason, and justice without putting in wicked execution,
what he has wickedly conceived, is not guilty of sin; for moderate anger
advisedly managed is without reproof, as plainly euidenceth the Apostle Ephesians.
4. saying: Be angry, but sin not: let not the sun go down upon your wrath;
which is to say. He that is stirred up unto anger, ought not to let himself be
carried away unto wicked enterprises, or give his passion one nights lodging in
his bosom, lest it be converted into hatred, and revenge: irrational, and
immoderate, not rational, and moderat anger bears the guilt of
transgression: for example, anger acco^paned with inordinate desires is a
grievous sin, and anger, that seeks justice unjustly, is damnable, for as
much as it either exceeds in the pursuance, or uses crafty dealings for the
execution thereof. But anger that artempteth wicked enterprifes kindles strife,
breaths forth injuries, raiserh slanders, and utters blasphemies, is an
abomination to God. The sovereign cure of inordinate anger is integrity, and
innocence of life: as storkes devour venomous serpents, and receive noe hurt,
but nourishment thereby: so the virtuous digest poisonous words, calumnies,
detractions, without suffering harm thereby.

The sin of anger cannot enter into the heart of the spiritual man, he that
delights in godliness, will not swear, curse, and blaspheme, as does the
carnal man, when he encountereth with any co^tradiction, or hard difficulty. A
stone cast into a fountain, that has a botome filled with dirty mudd easily
truble^h the water thereof: so every small stone of offense trubleth such, as
have fullness of wickedness in their hearts. It is the spiritual man, that
governs his assections unto bridling of anger, because he is meek, lowly in
mind, and lively touched with the feeling of his Redeemers meeknes, that did
not once open his mouth while he was reproached, and slandered, or showed
trouble, or unquietness, while he was buffered, whipped, crowned with thorns,
and as a lamb carried to the slaughterhouse: an innocent, and godly life in
imitation of Christ our Savior, is a sure remedy against the sin of anger.

CHAR. XXXV. OF GLVTTONY
THE CONTENTS.
Excess in abundance of meat, or drink has nothing of reason, and
preiudiceth nature: a glutton pleases his gust unto satisfying his belly, and
displeases his Creator to the destroying of his soul: drunkenness is a
voluntary madness.

GLuttony is an vnuaturall greedines of meat, and drink: a glutton passes the
bounds of nature, that is content with moderat nourrishment, and likewise of
reason, that detesteth transgression: for example he requires either meat for
his Just, as did the Israelits in the wilderness Psalm. 78. or lusts after
exquisit feeding, as did the sons of Hely 1 Reg. 2. or exceeds in abundance
of cheer, as did the Sodomites Ezech. 16. or is hastily greedy even after
gross meats, as was Esau; that chose rather to sell away his birth right for
bread, and potage Genesis 25. then to refrain his greedy appetite one sole moment.

A glutton prefereth the present pleasure of eating, and drinking before
worldly riches, or heavenly treasures: his heart lodges in his belly, Philip.
3. quoru^ Deus venture est, and gloria ^n confusione ipsorum: que^ locum
explanans Tertulliamus Deus, inquit, venture, pu^mo templum, a qualiculus
altar, quibus tota charitas in cacabis feruet, fides in culina, spes tota in
ferculis.
which is the God, he serves, and adoreth, little considering, that such
service will bring to him sham, and destruction: for whosoever sows in the
flesh, of the flesh reapeth corruption Ephesians. 6. it were extreme madness to put
good wine into a vessel, which is sure to corrupt it: such a vessel is the
belly, that corrupts whatsoever it receives: meat eaten in desight, and loel
vlulate, qui bibitis vinum in dulcedine, quoniam perijt ab ore vestro. Nomine
vini intelligitur omne genus potus, quod obrietate^n procurare potest.
wine drunken in sweetness perish from us: besides in the end thereof they bite
like a serpent, and hurt deadly like a cockatrice. To whom is woe? to whom is
sorrow? to whom is strife, and to whom be wounds without cause? even to them
that tarry long at the wine Proverb 23. Clemens Alex. Esca, inquit, ventriest,
venture Escae: Deus autem hunc, and ha^c destruet.
to them that exceed in abundance of chcare: by surfeiting, and drunkenness,
have many thousands perished: wherefore Christ JESUS Luc. 21. warns us to
take heed to our selves, lest at any time our hearts be oppressed with
surfeiting, and drunkenness, lest that day surprise us at vnawarres, that is,
lest while we spend the time of this life in excess of meat, and drink, death
come Job. 21. ducunt in bonis dies suos, and in puncto descendunt ad inferos.
and carry us down suddenly to hell. The rich glutton Luc. 16. clothed in
purple, and silk fared every day delicately, and splendidly: but as soon, as
death seized on him, he was buried in hell, where in lieu of delicat morsells
his feeding was of Adders, Psalm. 6. ignis, and sulphur, and spiritus
procellaru^ pars calicis little.
and fire, and brimstone was the portion of his cup: whereby clearly appears
the extreme madness of such, as to please their gust unto satisfying their
belly, displease their Creator unto destroying their souls. But if there were
no place of torments appointed by the supreme providence for the punishment of
sinful disorders after death. Neuertheless inordinate eating, drinking, taking
pastime, living at ease, and making full cheer daily, is a detestable practice,
as to natural reason: because such, as live so, murder themselves thereby: the
law of nature commandes conservation of life, which they shorten through
voluntary excess; Luc. 21. attendite vobis, ne forte grauentur corda vestra
crapula and ebrietate.
again gluttony oppresses nature, and obstructeth all the faculties thereof:
the belly of a glutton is full, while his soul is empty, and he that delights
in wine is destitute Chrysologus, ebrietatem qui habet, homo no^ est: and Aug.
eam qui habet, seipsum non habet: Cicero, recta, inquit, mente vti non potest,
qui multo cibo, vinoque repletur. Et Seneca vocat ebrietatem voliitariam
insaniam.
of wisdom Proverb. 20. The excess of it, is a voluntary madness: whosoever is
drunk, neither knows where he is, nor what he does, nor sensible of the
evil whereto drunkenness brings him, thinks that he does well when he is
fallen into a deadly precipice. Furthermore a glutton is a sham to mankind,
insomuch, as he turns the glory of an incorruptible soul into the similitude
of a corruptible body, and of beasts; for inordinat eating, and drinking
Clemens. Alex. anima, inquit, por saginam degenerat in corpus.
change the soul into the nature of a body, and the whole man into the
similitude of the Image of beasts. Tigers of mighty strengh, and courage, when
their bellies are filled, become so cowardly, that a company of Curres shall
frighten, and chase them away: in like manner immoderateating, and drinking
convert manly courage into effeminatnes; besides, as the ravenous animal named
Gulo (created doubtless to the shame of all gluttons) after it has fed so
plenteously of a carrion, that more cannot be crammed down, hasteneth to some
narrow passage between two trees, and there presses its belly unto making more
room, which done forthwith returns to the same carryon and falls on afresh:
so a glutton after he has discharged his stomach, which immoderat eating or
drinking had ouercharged before, hasteneth to the table again for a fresh charge
which was the daily practice of Vitellius the Emperor, as Tranquillus writes;
in consequence of the premises gluttony is an enemy to nature, a shame to
mankind, a fawning devil, a pleasant poison, a sweet sin, a cruel thief, that
spoileth the body Proverb. 21. qui diligit epulas in egestate erit: qui amat
vinum, and pinguia non ditabitur.
of temporal goods, depriueth the soul of everlasting treasures, and carries
both of them Psalm. 77. adhuc escae eorum erant in ore ipsorum, and ira Dei
descendit super eos.
to hell.

CHAR. XXXVJ. OF SLOTHFVLNES
THE CONTENTS.
A slothful man is the unprofitable servant, that buryeth his masters talent
in the earth making no advantage thereby: a man, that is not employed in good
works cannot profit himself: every tree that brings forth nothing of good
fruit shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire.

SLothfulnes is a faint remisnes in the exercise of good works corporal, and
spiritual. The slothful man is the unprofitable servant, that buried his
Masters money in the earth making nothing of advantage thereby. Mat. 25. he
hides the treasure of divine grace in his bosom, and refuses to employe it
even unto helping himself: if he would put it to increase, though he were naked
he might be clothed, though poor he might be made rich, and though he were
blind, he might procure eye-salue, that might give him clear sight. Through
heaviness, and want of courage, he neglects the work of his divine master to
his own disadvantage, that is, he refuses to work with the treasure of divine
grace, that leads to blessedness: he has an abhorrence of painful labor,
wherefore as Proverb. 24. per agrum hominis pigri transiui, and ecce totum
repleuerant vritcae: and operuerant supersiciem eius spinae.
a field, that lies idle unlabored and vnsowen brings forth thorns, netles,
and other unprofitable herbs, so the field of his soul in as much, as it is
not exercised in good works engendereth evil weeds of wicked vices: and
indeed his sole delight is to live at ease without working: Proverb. 6. sicut
ostium vertitur in caxdine suo, ita piger in lectulo suo.
he cleaves to the bolster of his bed, as a door to the hinges, and turns
therein alike, while he entertaineth his thoughts with delight he coueteth
earthly, and celestial treasures, but will not work for the gitting of
either. His loving Master stands at his door, and knockes, Apoc. 3. yet he
will not rise to let him in: he is afraid lest a lion stand without laying
wait for his blood Proverb. 22. That is, he inuentes idle excuses to the
excusing of his idleness unwilling to work in the pursuance of his duty: he
thinks to live by desiring, Proverb. 21. desideria occidunt pigrum: tota die
concupiscit, and desiderat.
and his desires kill him. The spider all day weaues a web to catch a fly: the
cat all night watches to surprise a mouse: the pismire labors all summer to
provide meat against winter: in sum all lived beasts take pains respectively
in order to the end whereto the supreme providence has ordained them:
notwithstanding man, more unreasonable then beasts with out reason, through
sluthfullnes neglects to work for the obtaining the inheritance of Heaven,
which is the noble end of his creation; the delight he has in the dream of his
vain desires, as cords bind, and as heavy fetters load him, and fille his
heart with wickedness: abundance of idleness causes the execrable abominations
into which the Sodomite; fell Ezech. 16. Sampson while he was employed in
assaulting the Philistians escaped their snares: but as soon as idleness carried
him into an inordinate affection toward a wicked woman, God departed from him,
and suffered him to come into the hands of the same Philistians, who bound him
with fetters and put out his eyes Iud. 16. nor Solomon was defiled with luxury,
and Idolotry as long, as he was busyed in building of the Temple: a vessel
when it is filled with wine, is not capable to contain more: a man full Aug. non
facile capitur tentatione qui bono vacat desiderio.
of godly employments gives no place to the devil, whose entertainment is among
such only, as exempt themselves from the exercise of good works, among such as
live at S. Bernard est otiosus, inquit, tanquam mollis calcitra, in qua
diabol^s quiescit libenter.
ease, and delight in sloghfull idleness, and among those which are unprofitable
servants, that put not their Masters excellent tallent to increase, and such
will be cast into utter darkness; for every tree, that brings not forth good
fruit shall be hewn down, and put into the fire Mat.

CHAR. XXXVIJ. OF A MISSIONARY PRIEST.
THE CONTENTS.
The honorable end of Priestly mission, and what is required of a Missionary
Priest in the pursuance of his charge.

AMissionary Priest is the holy minister of Christ according to the order of
Melchisedech, the faithful servant rightly ordained, approved, and sent to
work in the vineyard of his lord: the dispenser of the Evangelical word
Malach. 2. The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and they shall seek the
law at his mouth, for he is the Angel of the lord of Hosts.
the mouth of God by which God speaks to his people, and declares his
ordinances: and since God is 1. Io. 3. Deus charitas est.
charity, the speeches, and deeds of a Missionary Priest ought to come from him
as the sanctuary of charity unto salvation to every sinner, that will be
converted to God, whose charity is to save; and the honorable end of his
mission is the zeal of souls which God created after his own Image, in respect
whereof amongst all divine things According to S. Gregory l. 1. in Ezech. hom.
12. there is no sacrifice more agreeable to God, then 2 holy zeal to save souls,
which bear the Image of the blessed Trinity: again according to S. Denis l. de
caeles. Hier. to cooperate with God in the conversion of sinners, of all divine
things is the diuinest.
the diuinest, as also amongst all facrifices the gratfullest to the divine
Majesty consisting in a daily exercise of good works spiritual, and corporal
charitablely employed for the salvation of sinners. The Panther by a natural
quality breathes forth a pleasant perfume, the swetnes whereof allures beasts of
the wood to his sanctuary, and then he kills them: the Priest is the Panther,
sinners the wild beasts, the delicious odor of charity the sweet perfume, that
enticeth sinners to the Priests tribunal, the sinkiller: and the property of a
Priest is with S. Peter Act. 10. surge Petre, and occide.
to kill unclean beasts. As charity in a missionary is the loadstone, that
draws sinners to salvation: so the want thereof is the Remora, that keeps them
from it: nor can a golden tongue draw, when the heart is made of iron. Christ
the chief missionary Priest sent by his divine Father to be Teacher, and
governor of souls, first begun to do well himself, as to the law of charity,
and afterward to teach well, as to the way of salvation. Nothing better teaches
others to live well, then the well ordered life of the Teacher, who is the guide
of others, laudable deeds are more effectual, then fair speeches; Aug. super
Joan doctrina per malos, est palms in sepe, Botrus inter spinas: caute aliquis
colligit vuas inter spinas, ne dum quaerit fructum, laceret manum, and du^
audit bona dice^tem imitetur mala facientem.
good sayings coming from a Teacher, that does ill, are like a goodly bunch of
grapes in a hedge of thorns; whoeuer will attempt gathering them, shall hazard
the pricking of his fingers, and tearing his hands: so the hearer of a Teacher,
that speaks well, and does ill runs a hazard of imitating evil doings, while
he hears good sayings. A Priest does ill when he seeks praise, and glory in
order to himself, or looks more to 1. Pet. 5. pascite, qui in vobis est,
gregem Dei.... neque turpis lucri gratia, sed voluntary: indignum est
Sacerdote sacram functione^ suam quaestui habere.
worldly advantages then his spiritual function, preferring his own gain
before the gaining of souls, and while by holy sayings, and good doings he
might render himself capable According to the Apostle 1. Timoth. 5. Priests,
which rule well ought to be had in double honor. Which is meant of such
specially, as instruct the unlearned in the mystcries of Christian Religion.
of double honor, and judge of all others, he contracts an incapacity of
enjoying either, and makes himself S. Chrysostom. ad id Mat. 13. super cathedram
Moysis. Si been vixeris omnium Judex eris: si male vixeris, and been docueris
Iudex eris tui solius, quia male viuendo doces Deum quomodo te debet
condemnare. Porro vt ait S. Bernardus, misera Sacerdotum co^uersatio fit misera
dominicae plebis subuersio; hinc illae in Ieremia lachrymae, quia stulte
egerunt pastores, and Dominum non quaesiuerunt, omnis grex meus dispersus est.
judge of himself only, teaching God how to condemn him of vnfaithfullnes in the
pursuance of his charge. Hereby plainly appears, that the charitable zeal to
work in the vineyard of our lord, that is, to deliver souls out of error, and
sin, is the compass by which a missionary Priest ought to steer the whole
course of his life: in consequence whereof he ought not to run after vain
sportes, and worldly pleasures, which have nothing of relation to the end of
his mission, and which indeed prejudice the sacred dignity of his function;
neither every thing though indifferent in it self, and whereof the exercise is
laudable, as to a secularperson According to the Apostle 1. Cor. 6. even things
which in themselves are lawful, be not at all times, and to all persons
expedient, or profitable: and indeed clamarous hunting in order to Priests was
alwaise prohibited, though it be an exercise in it self lawful.
is lawful to him. For example the Churches ordinances Semper fuit prohibita
clericis venatio quae fit in saltibus and syluis cum strepitu, and clamore.
forbid Priests to practice clamarous hunting after hares, does, bucks, stags,
which is an honest recreation in order to lay people; but in Priests it is a
great scandal to cry, and hollow among the trees of forests, and woods after
dogs, Joel. 2. pl^rabunt Sacerdotes ministri Dei inter vestibulum, and altar,
and dicent, parce Domine, parce populo tuo.
whose office is to weep between the porch, and the altar, and say Spare o
lord, spare thy people, and give not their inheritage into reproach, that the
lusts of the flesh should rule over them: yet in as much, as Priests exercise
charitable works, power forth prayers, and tears for the conversion of
sinners, they be hunters too, not of clean, but of unclean beasts, namely sins;
they be spiritual hunters of souls unto justification of life in the vineyard
of our lord, the king of hunters: and never any huntsman made such marvelous
leaps in hunting beasts unto destruction, as the son of God made in hunting
souls unto salvation; our lord the son of God to save souls leapt from Heaven
into the womb of a Virgin; from the Virginal womb like a young Heart came
skipping into the world, and leaped by the mountains, and by the little hills
of Iudaea working miracles, by word, and example teaching all men every where
the way of God truly. Afterward he leapt into Mount-caluary, where lift up
from the earth, and put on the tree of the Cross gave himself a full
propitiation for the sins of all men: from his Cross he leapt into the
sepulcher wherein his body remained for three days whilst his soul Catholic
faith teaches, that before the Incarnation of the son of God there were
receptacles of good souls in the lower parts of the earth, which the Prophet
Zachary c. 6. names a lake without water, that is without water springing up
unto everlasting life according to the interpretation of Theodoret. S. Cyprian,
and other ancient Fathers: yet S. Peter 1. Epis. c. 3. calls the same
receptacles a prison, where the good souls (unto which Christ, at his
descending into hell, as to his soul, preached) were detained as prisoners. And
Christ preached according to S. Damascene l. 3. de fide ortho. c. 9. as Angels
speak one to an other, by mutual communication of thoughts. Again Christ Luc.
16. styles the said receptacles the bosom of Abram, and all antiquity names
them Limbus, or Purgatory; and truly the ancient Fathers Irenae: l. 4. c. 19.
Nazan. Ora. ad pasch. S. Ambros. de mysterio paschatis attest, that Christ's
descending into the lower parts of the earth released many souls, which he
found in the bosom of Abram; whereby appears, that there was an other place, or
receptacle besides the Heaven of the blessed, and the Hell of the damned. Calvin
that he might the rather deny Purgatory, he denied Limbus, and that he might
the better deny Limbus he denied, that Christ descended into hell, otherwise
then by suffering on his Cross the torments of a damned soul, which, says
Calvin in cap. 26. mat: were so grievous that even words of despair came
from him. So impudently this great reformer of religion blasphemed against
Christ: but the Catholic Church teaches that Christ truly, and properly
descended into hell, that is, the soul of Christ removed out of his body with
its proper presence penetrated the lower receptacles of the earth, where good
souls were detained, as pr^sonners, and brough with him from thence such, as
were ripe, and fit for the kingdom of Heaven. Lege S. Jgnat. Epis. ad Trallia.
Clem. Alex. l. 2. and 6. stromatum. Basil. in Psalm. 48.
visited the lower parts of the earth comforting such, as were departed in
perfect grace before his coming thither. From his sepulcher, he leapt again into
the world, from whence, after that he had settled a Priestly ministry, that
should be of perpetual use in his vineyard (that is, the Church) like a
hunter, that gladly rejoices in his obtained prey, went with joy home, leading
captivity captive: that is, rendering happy the captivity of just souls
detained, as it were, in a prison under ground, and carrying them with him in
glorious triumph: for he opened the gates of his Fathers Palace, which were
ever before shut against them.

As clamorous hunting, so covetous playing, Aleae lusus Clericis interdictus a
Concilijs, Patribus, Canonibus, and Aristoteles Aleatores latronum,
praedonumque societati inserit.
at cards, or dice for money is an exercise unworthy Priests, which ought to
seek no other lucre, then the gaining of souls unto Jesus Christ, who is their
proper treasure, and Sacerdos dicit Christo, tu es, qui restituis haereditatem
meam mihi.
heritage, and money betrayed him, sold Joseph, and damned Judas. Augustinus
vocat Theatra cau^as turpitudinis, and publica^ professiones flagitiorum: and
laudantur Massilienses quod sic abhorrebant a spectaculis, vt mimis locum in
scaena non conceder^nt.
Again stage plays, as they be commonly exhibited in our country are
inco^sistent with Priestly function, for as much as the outward words, and
counterfeited Gestures of the players representing reciprocal passages of
wicked lovers, tend to carnal wantonness, and uncleanness, and such a a Theater,
Says S. Chrysostom, is the chair of pestilence, schole of incontinency, and
shop of luxury, that sets out to sale the lusts of the flesh, howeuer
stage plays are laudable recreations in order to lay people while they
represent, but heroical actions of gallant persons unto imitation, and un
godly enterprises of wicked men unto detestation thereof, or while they exhibit
delightful fictions without obscenes. Furthermore Missionary Priests must not
affect to be counted 2. Timoth. 2. homo militans Deo non se implicet negotijs
saecularibus.
statesmen, they being private persons professing a spiritual vocation, which
has not any relation to the temporal affairs of state. The supreme
providence has set bounds to every vocation: Tractent fabrilia fabri, nec
suitor vltra crepidam, vt fert vetus pronerbium.
nor ought any man to put his sickle on strange ground. Let Priests manage what
is theirs, and Christ's business; and the affairs, which pertain to Caesar,
let them leave to Caesar, and the ministers of his Council: yet there are some
wanton wits, which like the raging sea transcend their prefixed limits, lifted
up above the hight of the clouds with an opinion of their own science, fancying
to themselves knowledge of all things (though indeed the greatest part of what
they know, Sapiens ille Mercurius Trismigistus: maxima ^orum, inquit, quae
scimus, est minima pars eorum, quae nescimus.
is the least part of what they know not) and thus wantonly carried away,
entangle themselves with public affairs of civil Magistrates before they be
called thereto. Howeuer Priests ought to know nothing, Apostolus Paulus
profitetur se nihil scire praeter Iesum Christum, and hunc Crucifixum.
but Jesus Christ, and him crucified; and if the supreme providence has
bestowed on one alone a better memory, and wit, then on others contemporary
with him, he is to use his abundant abilities according to charity,
temperance, and sobriety: for otherwise he shall by his high attempts unhappily
verify the old Proverb: much wit, little judgment. Besides great wanton wits
are not without a mixture of madness. And truly experience shows that common
wealths are unfortunate, when the things named wits manage the affairs thereof;
it is judgment, not flashes of wit, that makes gouernements happy.

FINIS I. BOOK.
The faults escaped in printing, a courteous Reader will easily correct and
pardon.

THE SECOND BOOK OF HOLY CHARACTERS containing a Miscelany of Theological
discourses THAT IS THEOLOGY, Positive, Scholasticall, Polemicall and Moral.
Built upon the foundation of Scriptures Traditions Councils Fathers.
CHAR. I. OF SACRIFICE
THE CONTENTS.
Proper sacrifice defined: no Priests (Priesthood taken in the proper sense) if
proper sacrifice be laid aside: asserting of improper metaphorical sacrifice
only, brings confusion, and rendereth priestly function common to all alike.

SAcrifice (taken in a spiritual general sense) is every Aug l 10. de ciuit.
Dei c. 6. ait sacrificium generaliter sumptum esse omne opus, quod agitur, vt
sancta soci^tate inbaereamus Deo^
work, that a belieuer imployeth to the end, that he may continue in holy
society, and freindship with God. There are According to S. Thomas two kinds of
sacrifice (taken in the general sense) are offered upon the altar of Christ,
whereof one is called devotion in order to God, the other pity, or compassion
in order to our neighbor.
two kinds thereof, the one is devotion toward God, comprehending all such
actions inward, and outward of the mind, and body; as tend to the honoring,
and praising of God: the The Apostle Hebrae. 13. exhorts us to do works of
Alms, and charity, saying, that such sacrifices promerite God, that is,
procure his grace, and favor, and according to Ecclesiastes cap. 5. Those
offer sacrifice, which show mercy.
other is pity, or compassion toward our neighbor including the works of
mercy, and justice; to both kinds of spiritual sacrifice the Royal Prophet
David exhorts all God's people of whatsoever condition, or sex, saying, Psalm.
15. tibi sacrificabo hostiam laudis. Et psalm. 4. sacrificate sacrificium
iustiti^.
Offer to God hosts of praises, and sacrifice sacrifices of Justice: and
according to the Apostle spiri uall sacrificers of these kinds, are 1. Pet. 4.
vos autem genus electum, vegale Sacerdotiu^. Idem habetur Apoc. 5.
kings, and Priests investedwith the honor of royal Preisthood; and indeed
devout Christians, in as much, as they daily serve God, and have dominion over
their concupiscen^es declining whatsoever inclines to sin are kings in a
spiritual metaphorical signification, and in as much, as they daily offer
themselves a living sacrifice holy, and acceptable unto the divine Majesty, are
Priests in a spiritual metaphorical signification, their works so offered
being sacrifices in a spiritual metaphorical signification.

Sacrifice taken in a special, and proper sense, is Catholic definition of a
sacrifice taken in the proper sense.
an outward oblation of a sensible visible thing, by lawful authority
exhibited to God only (no other object interuening) unto destruction, or real
change of the thing offered, in recognition of his supreme excellency, and
dominion over all creatures. In this Catholic definition of sacrifice are
obseruable seven sundry requisits's necessarily concurring unto the completing
of a true proper sacrifice, 1. Oblation: for in every sacrifice (taken in the
proper sense) some sensible visible thing is offered to God, and consequently
every true proper sacrifice is an oblation, though Secundum S. Thomam omne
sacrificium est oblatio, sed non e contra.
every oblation is not a sacrifice in the proper sense: for many things were
offered in the old law, namely brass, silver, gold, oil, which were only
sacrifices improperly and metaphorically. 2. Outward oblation of a sensible
thing: for proper sacrifice is an act of heighest worship, called by This
usage, and practice has continued warrantable down from the beginning of
Christian Religion till these times. Quem penes arbitrium est, and vis, and
sorma loquendi.
use (...), whereby God is honored, and worshipped in respect of his supreme
excellency: in consequence whereof proper sacrifice is the chiefest kind of
adoration, which consists of some external thing, signifying the internal
esteem, that such, as adore, have of the thing adored. 3. The sensible thing
must be permanent; because a proper sacrifice is an exhibition of tribute due
to God, as king of Heaven, and earth: but tribute is a permanent during thing,
as experience teaches in the payment of tribute unto temporal Princes, which
is not a mere locution, or other action enduring only for a little while; but
brass, silver, gold, or some other permanent thing, that is not flitting, as
are naked words. 4. Oblation instituted by lawful authority For proper
sacrifice (if the will of God and his institution were excluded) is not an act
even of moral virtue, having of, and in it is self no goodness worthy praise,
nor worthiness deserving esteem. For example, in the old law the slaughter, or
death of Lambs sheep, and calfes, was not more laudable, then the killing of
dogs, wolves, and hogs, nay it had been far less laudable to kill those then
these if God had not instituted in the old law sacrifices of Lambs, sheep, and
calves, excluding the others. Furthermore the death, and passion of Christ
(that was the most excellent, and proper sacrifice) considered in it self only,
abstracting from the According to S. John the Evangelist cap. 10. Christ, after
he had declared to the Pharisees his power to lay down his life, immediately
added, This commandment have I received from my Father.
command, he had from his divine Father to give his life for the redemption of
the world, is not an action of virtue, because the death of Christ participated
it is goodness and worthiness, from the divine command, and his own will; and
indeed Abraham's willingness to kill his son Isack (who was a type of Christ)
had been a detestable wickedness, if he had not had God's warrantable authority
for it, who is Author of life, and death. 5. Exhibited by a lawful Minister,
for every man is not a proper Minister of proper sacrifice, but he only, who
is by lawful authority designed, ordained, and consecrated for that special
charge, and Hebrae. 5. nec quisqua^ sumit sibi honorem, sed qui vocatur a Deo
tanquam Aaron: sic and Christ is no^ semetipsum clarificauit, vt Pontisex
fieret: sed qui locutus est ad eum: tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secu^dum ordinem
Melchisedech.
no man should take this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as
was Aaron; neither did Christ take unto himself the office of High Priest; For
he gave it him, that said unto him, thou art a Priest for ever after the order
of Melchisedech; And though God declared unto the children of Israel, that if
they would hear his voice and keep his Covenant, he would make them Exodus 19.
si audieritis voce^ meam eritis mihi in Regnum Sacerdotale gens sancta.
a priestly kingdom, and a holy nation: neuertheless they were not all royal
Priest's taken in the proper sense, but According to S. Hierom. in quaes.
Hebraicis, it was a tradition amongst the ancient Iew's, that down from Noe
unto Abraham the eldest son of each family was a Priest by divine dispensation;
but the family of Aaron was invested with priestly dignity long after the
institution of the pascall Lamb Exodus 12. and 28. so that in order to that
sacrifice, the ancient privilege granted to the eldest son of the family
continued in force.
only such, as descended from Aaron; and both Saul and 2. Paralip. 26. and 4.
Reg. 14. Osias lepra punitus.
Osias were severely reprehended, and punishad, for attempting to offer
sacrifice, to which they were not specially deputed. If every private man
should turn Priest, and minister of proper sacrifice, such unnatural
proceeding against the law of God, and nature, would cause as dangerous, and
execrable confusion in the spiritual Church-gouerment, as in civil
State-gouerment, if every private man should turn king, affecting to rule, as
king; howeuer even such Priest's, as assume to themselue, special, and proper
priesthood, and deny special, and proper sacrifice acknowledging spiritual,
and metaphorical only, open a door to the said confusion, giving occasion to
every private man to count himself as lawful a Priest, as such are, being by
baptism designed, and consecrated to offer spiritual sacrifice, and
consequently, as to the proper function of a Priest, which is to Hebrae. 5.
omnis Sacerdos, and Pontifex institutus, vt offerat dona, and sacrificia.
offer sacrifice, there is no distinction between a private man so baptized,
and such Priest's before mentioned. 6. Exhibited to God only, because the end,
and motive of proper sacrifice, which is omnipotency, or supreme dominion, in
recognition whereof sacrifice is offered, is found in God only; although the
catholic Church According to S. Austin c. 20. con. Faustum c. 21. Though
Altars were erected in memory, and honor of Martyrs, neuertheless it was not
the custom to offer sacrifice to Martyrs, but to the God of Martyrs.
erecteth Altars in memory, and honor of Martyrs, and other blessed Saint's,
neuertheless she does not offer sacrifice but to the sole God of both Martyrs,
and of other Saint's; and no man has ever thought fitting Augus. l. 10. de
ciuit. cap. 4. quis, inquit, sacrificandum ce^suit, nisi ei, que^ Deum sciuit,
vel putauit. Et cap. 19. docet daemones ideo velle sibi offerri sacrificia, vt
sic pro Dijs habeantur. Vnde Exodus 22. qui unmolat Dijs occidetur, praeterquam
Domino soli.
to sacrifice to any, whom he ha h not known, believed, or feigned to be a
God. 7. No other object interuening: for God alone is the immediate object of
proper sacrifice, for as much, as he contains in himself alone the sole
motive thereof. Whereby it plainly follows, that the oblation of tithe, that
is given immediately to the Ministers of God, is not a proper sacrifice, though
it be exhibited for God's sake. 8. Unto destruction: in recognition of God's
supreme excellency, and power over his creatures: this necessary requisite
experience shows in all the sacrifices of the old law, wherein the sensible
thing offered was either killed, if quick, and alive, vzt: Ox, lamb, calf; or
broken, or burnt, if liueless, According to Leuiticus dry-offerings were either
broken, or burnt, and liquid offerings were destroyed by pouring them out,
whereby appears, that an unbloody manner of effusion, nothing derogats to the
true nature, or essence of a sacrifice.
hard, and dry: or consumed by effusion, if liquid, namely wine, in testimony
of God's omnipotency, thereby manifesting him to be Author of life, and death,
and consequently to have power to conserve his creatures, as the thing before
oblation was conserved, and to destroy his creatures, as the thing destroyed
after oblation.

CHAR. II. OF THE SACRIFICE OF THE EVCHARIST, OR MASS.
THE CONTENTS.
The sacrifices of the old law weak unprofitable Element's: Christ the night
before his passion instituted, and offered in the room of them all a sacrifice
of his body, and blood under the form's of bread, and wine according to the
Order of Melchisedech, called sacrifice of the Eucharist, sacrifice of the
Altar, sacrifice of Mass, which is a perfect commemoration of the bloody
sacrifice, Christ offered on the Cross, a propitiation, whereby grace is
obtained, and sins remitted, and the public service of every true christian
Church down from the Apostles till these times, celebrated in one of the three
holy tongues, which be Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. The Apostle 1. Cor. 14.
forbids not saying of public, or private prayers in an unknown tongue.

THe sacrifice of the Eucharist is the special, and proper external sacrifice
of the new law instituted, and offered by Christ in his own body, and blood,
under the forms of bread, and wine, Hebrae. 7. secundum similitudinem
M^lchisedech, sic Apostolus interpretatur secundum ordinem Melchisedech.
after the similitude of Melchisedech his Sacrifice, of whose order Christ was
anointed high Priest for ever. The law of Moses, and sacrifices thereof as
they had institution, and confirmation of God in respect of Christ only, so
they were to continue only, till Luc. 10. l^x and Propheta vsque ad Joa^nem.
Christ came, that was the Hebrae. 6. lex vetus lata fuit duraxat donec veniret
seme^ promissum.
seed to which the promise was made of a new law, and a new sacrifice unto
blessedness, which the law of Moses, and the sacrifices thereof could not
effect. The law written in Tables could not make the Aug. lex in tabulis
exarata non potuit efficere eam inscriptionem, quae est iustificatio.
inscription, which is justification of life: It Chrysos. l^x erat tantum
iubens, and nihil afferebat auxilij.
showed but could not heal the soar of man's soul: And though the old
sacrifices conferred Hebrae. 9. exterior, and legalis mundities appellatur
iustitia ca^nis, and emundatio carnis.
legal purity on the body: neuertheless they could not give spiritual
sanctity to the soul unto salvation. Besides, the commandment, that went
before, that is to say, the old law was peculiar to one people only: namely the
Iew's; and the sacrifices thereof were but According to the Apostle Hebrae. 10.
the old law had the shadow of good things only, and not the very Image of the
things. Whereby appears that the sacrifices, and Sacraments of Moses were
imperfect resemblances, and dark representations of the good things procured by
the sacrifice, and Sacraments of the new law, namely general redemption, and
sanctifying grace: wherefore S. John cap. 1. says, that the Law was given by
Moses, but grace, and truth came by Jesus Christ; in consequence of which the
new law is called the law of Christ, the law of grace, Christ being the
lawmakers, and the Grace-giuer.
holy figures of a better oblation, and those polluted through the sins of the
Priests, that offered them, in so much that God had no affection for either of
both; because Hebrae. 1. Reprobatio quidem fit praecedentis ma^dati propter
infirmitatem eius, and imbecillitate^, promde Christus, ait Io. 13. mandatum
nouum do vobis.
of the weakness, and unprofitableness of the sacrifices, and the vncleaness and
wickedness of the Priests: wherefore he sent his own son to give a new
commandment, that is, the new law of sanctifying grace to the saving both Jew,
and Gentile, and to institute a new sacrifice of a clean oblation to the
exalting his name even among the Gentiles, that being to be celebrated Malach.
10. From the rising of the sun even to the going down ^^n every place shall be
sacrificing, and a clean oblation shall be offered to my name. In the room of
sacrificing beasts, and other creatures, which were not able to purge out the
leaven of sin, and likewise often times were polluted through the uncleanness of
the Priests, that offered them, God by the mouth of his Prophet promised a
daily, clean, and vndefilable sacrifice, that should continue in all places of
his Church for ever unto celebrating his name. And this is the sacrifice Christ
instituted of his own body, and blood under the forms of bread, and wine,
according to the interpretation of the ancient Fathers. S. Justin the Martyr in
dial cum Triphone. S. Cyprian. l. 1. c. 14. aduersus Iudaeos. S. Damas. l. 4.
c. 14. de fide orthodoxa. S. Austin. l. 18. c. 35. de Ciuit. S. Chrysostom in
psalm. 95 and ora. 2. con. Iudaeos, and all modern writers that are orthodox:
wherefore the Prophesy is fulfilled by the sacrifice of the Altar, which is
daily offered in the Catholic Church from the rising of the sun to the going
down.
in every place of the world from the rising of the sun to the going down
thereof, according to the Prophecy of Malachias, signifying, that God was
determined to abolish the said weak, and polluted sacrifices, and substitute in
lieu thereof an effectual, and most pure oblation, which is that, Christ the
son of God, and man instituted of his body, and blood, and offered at his last
supper under the form's of bread and wine according to the Order of
Melchisedech: and that the Eucharist, as it was instituted, and celebrated was
not only a Sacrament, but also a sacrifice, is plainly euidenced out of the
words expressing the action, that Christ used in the instituting, and
celebrating thereof, for example: The three Evangelists S. Matthew, S. Mark, and
S. Luke express the words Christ used in the instituting, and celebrating of
the Eucharist in the present Tense, for example, IS GIVEN, IS shed, likewise S.
Paul, as to Christ's body 1. Cor. 11. is broken. Besides the French, and Latin
Bibles of Caluinists have, IS given for you, IS shed for you. But according to
the Latin vulgar translation the particles, given, shed, broken, are expressed
in the future Tence, namely shall be given: shall be shed: shall be broken.
Howeuer Howeuer whether they be expounded in the present, or future Tense it
matters not, since the sense is the same: for although is given, is shed carry
the signification of the present Tense: neuertheless the subsequent particles,
namely: Do this in remembrance of me (until our lord shall come to judge the
quick, and the dead 1. Cor. 11.) imply the future Tense. The Greek Church has
alwais used the future Tense in their Liturgies (namely S. James. S. Clement.
S. Basil. S. Chrysostom) to prove that Christ offered the sacrifice of his
body, and blood when he was present with his Apostles at his last supper, and
indeed Christ himself paue evidence enough of this Catholic assertion, by
saying Hic Calix Sanguinis mei. This Cup of my blood. And the Latin Church
uses the future Tense, shall be given: shall be shed, to show plainly, that
Christ spoke not of his body, and blood only then at his last supper offered,
but of the same sacrifice, that was to be offered for the future till he should
come again to judge the quick, and the dead.
This is my body, which is given for you Luk 22. which S. Paul expresses in
other term's viz: This is my body, which is broken for you. 1. Cor. 11. This is
my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many Mar: 14. This is my blood
the new Testament that is shed for many unto remission of Sins: Math. 26. All
which sentences import sacrificing, since they contain the proper words of
sacrifice, as it is plainly deducible out of other evident
Scripture-testimonies, in consequence whereof the Eucharist instituted, and
celebrated by Christ in his last supper is not a Sacrament only, but a
sacrifice also. Again the before said Verbs namely to give, to break to shed,
are uttered in the present tense after the Greek Translation signifying that
Christ did did not only offer sacrifice in a bloody manner on the Cross, but
in an unbloody also at his last supper. S. Luke cap. 22. expresses the action
that Christ used in the institution of the Eucharist (as to his body) under the
elements of bread, and wine in these words. This is my body, which is given
for you, which S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. delivers thus: This is my body, which is
broken for you: and 1. Cor. 10. he says, The bread, which we break, is it not
the participation of the body of our lord? S. Chrysostom expounding this
sacred Text, demandes, why S. Paul added, to the words of the Evangelist,
which we break; and answer's to his own question, saying: This is done in the
Eucharist; and not on the Cross, where no bone of him was broken Io. 19.
According to S. Chrysostom, as likewise Theodoret, and Occumenius who were
versed in the Greek tongue, Christ suffered himself to be broken in the
Eucharist (under the form of bread) unto filling of all, which he did not
suffer to be done, says S. Chrysostom, on the Cross (unto redeeming of all:)
and indeed Calvin in his Commentary upon the 11. Chapter set down notes, that
the particles Is Broken: signify is offered, or is sacrificed, whereby appears
that the Apostles intent, and aim was to show that Christ's body was truly
broken in the unbloody oblation offered at his last supper, for as much, as the
species of the consecrated bread were then truly broken.
Besides as the words of the action which Christ used in instituting, and
celebrating the Eucharist, viz: This is my body which is given for you. This is
my blood shed for many unto remission of sins do evidently import The
sacrifice of the Euchariste in as much, as it appeaseth God, rendereth him
propitious, and procures divine grace unto remission of sin^, is truly a
propitiotary sacrifice taken in the proper sense according to the ancient
Fathers S. Gyprian. S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose. S. Austin; and the
Council of Trent assertes this Catholic doctrine, and adds withal, The
sacrifice of the Eucharist according to Apostolical tradition is not only
offered for sins, pains, satisfactions; and other necessities, but likevvisa
for such, as are dead in the state of grace, and not sufficiently purged, as
yet.
a propitiatory sacrifice for blood to be shed is to be sacrificed for
propitiation, or pardon of sins: so the words of precept which follow (This is
my body given for you) namely: do this in remembrance of me: That is, in
memory of my death, and passion, do signify a commemoratiue sacrifice, and
consequently plainly demonstrate the Eucharist not to be a Sacrament only, but
The ancient Fathers S. Cypr. Ep. 63. and Caeci. Orig. in cap. 16. Mat. and
others also, compare the sacrifice Christ offered of his body and blood at his
last supper, unto the sacrifice of the paschall Lamb, and other sacrifices of
the old law whereby appears that the sacrifice Christ offered at his last
supper, was a sacrifice taken in the proper sense, wherefore S. Gregor. Nyssen.
Ora. 1. de Resur. says expressly, that Christ in celebrating the Euchariste at
his last supper sacrificed himself before he was sacrificed upon the Cross.
a sacrified also: For otherwise it would not be a lively, and perfect
commemoration, or representation of the sacrifice offered on the Cross, such as
Christ requires Luke 22. for as a Sacrament cannot be perfectly represented,
but by an other Sacrament: (...) a sacrifice cannot be lively represented, but
by another sacrifice: there is necessarily required similitude, and proportion
between the thing, that represents, and the thing represented: for a man
cannot represent an horse, or an horse a man; nor the saying of the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 11. (as often as you shall eat of this bread, and drink of this drink, you
shall show the death of our Lord) does infirm the strength of this argument.
Patres antiqui in tribus oecumenicis Concilijs, puta, Ephesino, Calcedo.
Constantinop. (vt constat ex praefatione Ephesi.) sic interpretati sunt verbae
Apostoli quotiescunque ma^ducabitis -- mortem Domini annunciabitis.
For the true sense, and meaning thereof is, that the sacrifice of the
Eucharist, which is a perfect representation of Christ's death, and Passion
suffered on his Cross, must precede the eating of that bread, and drinking of
that drink: for Christ's death and Passion was S. Austin. l. 13. de Trinit. c.
17 and Epis. 49. quaes. 3. attestes, that it is foretold in the old Testament,
that there should be in the law of grace a true, proper outward visible
sacrifice: again it is foretold that in the last age of the new Law (that is
when Antichrist shall come) the usual sacrifice shall cease, which give
evidence enough of the continuance of some one sacrifice in the law of grace
till the time of Antichrist. Which cannot be meant of a Metaphorical, and
invisible sacrifice, being that kind of improper sacrifice will not cease in
the days of Antichrist according to the holy Prophets Dan. 12. and Isaias cap.
10.
a proper special sacrifice that cannot be represented perfecttly by a
Sacrament, but by a sacrifice wherein destruction must interuene necessarily,
either by death, if what is offered by a living thing: or by fraction, if what
is offered be a hard, and dry thing, as breard, or by effusion, if what is
offered be a liquid thing, as wine, which experience shows in all the
sacrifices of the law of nature, and Moses. And indeed the end, and innate
propriety of a proper sacrifice (being an external sensible act of supreme
adoration) is, to signify God's omnipotency, as to his power over life, and
death: whereas a Sacrament signifies the sanctifying of such, as believe in,
and serve God, which is but the product, or effect of Christ his bloody
sacrifice. If perfect representation of the sacrifice of the Cross could be
attributed to any Sacrament, it were to be ascribed to the Sacrament of
Baptism, whereby, as the Apostle says Heb. 9. Wear buried with Christ into his
death: Neuertheless Baptism does not represent the death of Christ, but the
death, and resurrection of him, that is baptized, Baptism signifying, that he
that is baptized does die, as unto sin, and rise, as unto newnes of life:
neither is Christ said to die in Baptism, as he is believed to be immolated in
the sacrifice of the Eucharist.

Furthermore, as Sanguine hostiae obsignabatur vetus testame^tum, vt post
Moysen declarat Apostolus Hebrae. 1.
Moses began, and dedicated the old Testament, law, or Religion in the blood
of calfes contained in his cup, saying: This is the blood of the Covenant etc.
So Christ began, and dedicated the new Testament in his own blood contained in
the Chalice of his last supper, saying: This is the Chalice the new Testament
in my blood etc. Luc. 22. which the other Euangelist's more plainly express
introducing Christ to say: This is my blood of the new Testament, whereby is
evidently certain, that Christ's blood in the Chalice shed in an unbloody
manner was the blood of sacrifice, and consequently in that sacrifice, which is
the sacrifice of the Eucharist consists the external Religion, and proper
service of the new Testament, as the outward Religion and sovereign worship of
God in the old law did consist in the sacrifices thereof, under which it was
established Heb. 7. And though Christ hanging on his cross did confirm, and
ratify the new Testament, yet he made it only at his last supper, when he said.
This is the Chalice the new Testament in my blood: or this is my blood of the
new Testament: For then Christ was free, and alive: whereas on his cross he was
deuested of liberty, and deprived of life, and consequently not in a condition
to make it: the making of a Testament being an act of a person free, and alive.
Also though Christ's death, and passion was the perfect sacrifice, that The
Apostle Hebrae. 1. teaches that Christ By one oblation consummated for ever
them, that are sanctified: where by one oblation is meant the sacrifice of the
Cross, which the Apostle there calls sacrifice of consummation; that is of
general redemption, and indeed that sacred Text speak's only of the sacrifice
of the Cross not mentioning the sacrifice of application, that is the sacrifice
of Mass, called the sacrifice of the Altar, or the sacrifice of the Eucharist,
whereby the sacrifice of general Redemption called the sacrifice of the Cross,
is particularly applied, and offered daily in all places of the Church unto
sanctification of life. And indeed to affert, that Christ only once offered
himself to God the Father, were a manifest blasphemy, since Scripture
Testimonies show evidently sundry oblations Christ made of himself. For
example he offered himself in the time of his conception, and during his abode
on earth, he made several offerings in order to his own person, for he offered
his body his soul, his life, his fasting, his praying, his watching, his sighs,
and tears: howeuer the offering of his body in a bloody sacrifice, was made
once only.
consummated the general redemption, or remission of all sins whatsoever, as
to sufficiency, neuertheless, that bloody sacrifice enduring only for a day of
time, could not be the external sacrifice, which the people of the new
Testament might have recourse unto, even to the end of the world: and to auerre
the taking away of such external sacrifice, is to acknowledge the taking away
also of external Priesthood, (sacrifice, and Priesthood being correlatiues)
and consequently the S. Cypria. de coena Dom. asserit nullam posse esse
Religionem si sacrificium corporis, and sanguinis Christi auferatur.
abolishing of the new Testament: for if the Priesthood, and sacrifice thereof
be disannulled then of necessity must there be an abrogation of the law, that
was established under them. Furthermore it is conuincingly manifest, that it
was an external proper sacrifice, which Christ offered at his last supper: for
the one oblation according to the order of Melchisedech, which succeeded That
one sole sacrifice of Christ's body, and blood succeeded in the room of many
sacrifices is a catholic assertion unanimously taught by the ancient Fathers.
And S. Aus. l. 8. c. 27 and l. 17. c. 20. de ciuit. and l. 3. de bap. c. 19.
names the sacrifice of Mass, the sacrifice that suffices for all sacrifices
which were offered in the old law, for as much, as the body of Christ is
offered in the room of all those sacrifices.
in the room of all the sacrifices of the old law, was that one, or none was
that one: but that one was an external proper sacrifice, and cannot be meant
of the sacrifice of the Cross, that being rather after the order of Aaron since
it was celebrated in real effusion of blood, then after the similitude of
Melchisedech, who offered no bloody oblation. Besides all the necessary
requisits unto proper sacrifice are plainly obseruable in that action, that
Christ used in instituting, and celebrating the Eucharist at his last supper.
10. is obseruable Christ himself, that is a Priest instituted by legal
authority, and more solemnly made then all the Priests, that went before, to
wit, with an oath, by him, that said unto him: Our lord has sworn, and will
not repent, thou art a Priest for ever according to the Order of Melchisedech.
2. Outward oblation is obseruable, which is expressed in the words whereby
Christ consecrated his body, and blood, saying: This is my body, which is given
for you. The Apostle S. Paul. uses the verb, give, in that signification when
he mentions our redemption procured by the sacrifice of the Cross, for
example Gal. 3. ad Tit. 2. likewise holy scripture uses frequently the verb,
to shed, for to Sacrifice. Exodus 29. Leuit. 1.2.3.
This is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for you; which are the
terms of proper sacrifice, and were outwardly uttered in the last supper. For
indeed all the actions performed by Christ in celebrating the Eucharist were
outward, actions, namly blessing of the bread, giving thanks to his divine
Father, before consecration, and Christus in vltima coena manducauit corpus
suum, and bibit sanguine^ suum vna cu^ Apostolis, vt post s. Hiero. and alios
Patres docet S. Thomas 3. p. q. 81.
eating his own hody, and drinking his own blood together with his Apostles
after consecration. 3. Oblation of a sensible permanent thing is obseruable,
vzt, Christ's body, and blood (which are sensible things) under the form's of
bread, and wine, which are sensible also. 4. There is obseruable destruction,
or real change in the oblation, to wit, by substantial conversion of the
bread into Christ's body, and wine into his blood. Besides by eating and
drinking thereof the body, and blood of Christ lose that sacramental being,
they had by reproduction under the elements of bread, and wine, which is a
real change also. 5. It was an oblation exhibited to God alone: for Christ in
celebrating the Eucharist addressed all his speeches to his divine Father:
lastly there is obseruable recognition of divine omnipotency, as is plainly
euidenced by the oblation it self, since it succeeded not only in the room of
the Pascall lamb: but of all the other sacrifices of the law of Moses and
consequently ought to contain in it self the perfect moral signification
essential to those sacrifices, which is recognition of divine omnipotency, and
representation of the sacrifice of the cross. Nor is it inconvenient for a
sacrifice going before to be a representation, or commemoration of a sacrifice
coming after: for all the old sacrifices went before the sacrifice of the
cross, which neuertheless they represented: How ever the sacrifice of the
cross is only distinct from the sacrifice of the Fucharist, as to the manner of
offering, bloodily, or vnbloodily: for the head-offerer is the same, Christ,
and the thing offered the same also, body and blood of Christ. And albeit, that
Christ by one sole bloody oblation, that is, by once offering himself in a
bloody manner, consummated the general redemption; neuertheless he did not
think fit to make that one general oblation an effectual redemption, or
remission of sins without the application thereof: for so he had entailed the
kingdom of Heaven upon every sinner, and consequently deuested himself of all
power to disinherit any for what fault soever. But the applicatiue perfection,
as to a sacrifice, he gave to the unbloody oblation only, which by his own
institution, and appointment, is and shall be the external service of the new
Testament, and the continual application of his passion unto sanctification;
As corporal remedies how perfect, and sufficient soever do no cure upon a
sick body, that is to say are not effectual remedies unless they be applied:
so Christ his death, and passion though a spiritual remedy superabundantly
sufficient to take away all the sins of the world, neuertheless is not an
effectual remission of any, till it be applied aright: neither is the
preeminent perfection of Christ's death, and passion a jot lessened thereby:
application being necessarily requisite to its effect by Christ his own
appointment. And prayers which the faithful offer to God one for an other do
not prejudice, or diminish any part of the intercession, which Christ himself
made for his people while he lived upon earth Io. 17. nor of those, which
sitting at the right hand of his divine Father he presents continually Romans
8. Heb. 7. But rather do apply the fruit thereof to the effecting of the said
faithful their holy desires, especially when prayers are offered by the
Bishopps, and Priests of the catholic Church, unto whom God has committed the
God, says the Apostle 2. Cor. 5. Has given unto us the word of
reconciliation, now then are we Ambassadors for Christ, God as it were
exhorting by us. Whereby is meant that Christ as man, is the principal Minister
unto reconciling of sinners to God, and for, and in the room of Christ in order
to the office of reconcilement, the Apostles, and their successors were
instituted as his Vicars, namely the Bishops, and Priests of the Catholic
Church. Wherefore their absolution from sins by offering sacrifice, and their
ministering the Sacraments, ought to be counted as Christ's own absolution,
remission, or pardon, being the absoluing from, and remitting sins in the
room of Christ: in like manner their preaching, and exhorting in stead of
Christ, is, as if it were Christ's own preaching and exhorting, the office of
Bishops and Priests, being the Vicarship of Christ. So that when the same
Apostle says Hebrae. 8. that Christ only is the Priest of the new law, or
Testament, his meaning is, that Christ is the chief Priest, that is the Prince
of Priests to whom as to his Ambassadors he has committed the ministry of
reconciliation. In the old law according to the Apostle Hebrae. 7. there was a
series of many chief Priests succeeding one an other in that function, for none
of all them was of perpetual durance. But in our new law there is but one
chief Priest, or Bishop that shall endure for ever, and all other Priests are
his Vicars only, who in his room exercise Priestly function visibly: wherefore
Christ is chief Priest for ever, and exercises his Priesthood by his
substitute Ministers, or Vicars, which execute the office of reconciliation for
him, and in his room.
ministry of reconciliation for, and under Christ, who is the high Priest, and
chief Minister, according to his humanity, of man's reconcilement to God: the
others exercise Christ's vicarshipp only; These pray, and minister sacrifice,
and Sacraments in Christ's stead, both unto remission of sins, and the verifying
his For ever Priesthood according to the order of Melchisedech; so that Christ
is a Priest for ever after the right order, and similitude of Melchisedech, for
as much, as he daily does, and shall to the end of the world offer by the
Priests of the new law, as his Vicars, the unbloody sacrifice of his own body,
and blood under the form's of bread, and wine called by use (which is the
arbitratour of words, and language) sacrifice of the Eucharist, sacrifice of
the Mass, sacrifice of the Altar. The name Eucharist comes of the Greek:
Eucharistia, that signifies thanksgiving: for Christ in celebrating his
unbloody oblation the night before his death gave thanks to his divine Father
both in general for all the benefits conferred upon all mankind, as in
particular also, for that one singular grace, whereby he was empowered, as man,
to iustitute so divine a mystery. So that undoubtedly by a special providence
the name Eucharist is appropriated to the sacrifice of Christ his body, and
blood, to the end, that even the name thereof might excite Priests (whose office,
and function it is to ofter that sacrifice) to imitate the thanksgiving, that
Christ exhibited in the enterprise of this mystery.

The name Mass comes of Missa which is latin doubtless, for if it had been an
Hebrew word, the use thereof would have remained, and continued among the greek
Fathers, as well as of Alleluya, Osanna, Amen, which be Hebrew words; But none
of the Greek Fathers use this term Missa, and consequently it is a denomination
which the people of the latin Church have imposed to express the sacrifice of
Christ his body, and blood, and signifies the same thing, that dimissio in
latin: that is to say, dismissing, or sending away; for in the primitive
Church it was an ordinary ceremony practiced by the Deacon, to cry aloud twice
in the Church, during the time of celebrating divine service: Ite Missa est:
once in the beginning of the mystery, or sacrifice, wherein the Catecumens were
not suffered to be present being Belieuers unbaptized; signifying thereby, that
all such should depart out of the Church; and once again in the end of the said
mystery, or sacrifice, intimating thereby the dimissing, or sending away of the
faithful baptized. This signification of the name Missa (in English Mass) and
this original grownd thereof is approved by the uniform judgment of the mayor
part of orthodox writers. Howeuer the appropriation of the said name, as to
signifying the service of the mystery, or sacrifice of Christ's body, and blood,
is deriuable even from the primitive successors of the Apostles who S. Clement
that succeeded S. Peter in the supreme government of the Church composed a
Missale, and in his writingmentioneth the word Missa, Mass. And S. Denis did
not only write of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, but of the Mass also. And
whereas sectaries do not ascribe that work unto him, it is without warrantable
ground: howeuer whosoever was the Author thereof it is certain that the Church
of God has approved it, for the first Council of Nice styles the Author
Magnum: which Title he had given unto him before, and S. John Damascene calls
him Magnum Theologum, a great divine; but all antiquity make mention of the
Mass. For example Alexander, that was the fourth Pope after S. Peter. Epis. 1.
ad orthodox. And Sixtus, that succeeded him according to S. Damascene in the
life of the same Alexander. S. Telesphorus seth forth an ordinance that
commanded Priests to say 3. Masses in the feast of Christ's Nativity. S. Soter
prohibited all Priests to eat, or drink before they said their Masses. S.
Steven the Pope under the persecution of Valerian the Emperor was killed at
Mass. S. Felix Ep. 2. ad Episcopos Galliae mentions saying of Masses upon the
Tombs of Martyrs. S. Hierom. in cap. 11. Proverb. affirms that the souls of
the faithful departed, receive comfort, and help by the celebration of Mass,
and S. Austin Epis. 49. tom. 2. ad Deo gratias c. 3. teaches that the
sacrifice which Christians now offer, is euidenced both by Evangelical, and
prophetical Scripture: besides this Catholic assertion is taught in sundry
Councils, namely in the Nicen. cap. 14. Carth. 2. can. 4. So that it is a
manifest weakness in sectaries to deny a doctrine, that all antiquity by
unanimous consent plainly assert.
use the name Missa, and the signification thereof: namely S. Dionys. S.
Clement. S. Euarist. S. Alexander. S. Sixtus. S. Telesphorus. S. Higinus. S.
Soter, S. Fabianus. S. Stephanus. S. Felix. S. Syluester. S. Damascenus. With
whom were contemporary the great lights of the Church S. Basil. S. Gregory
Nazianzenus. S. Ambro. S. Chrysostom. S. Hieron. S. Epiphan. S. Cyrill. S.
August. where unto may be added sundry general Councills, whereof the
unquestionable testimonies, and records are enough to evidence the truth of
this primative doctrine: so that with great reason it may be much wondered at,
how the People of England came to look with so envious an eye upon the Mass,
as to count it Idolatry: since the practice thereof is agreeing with the full,
and evident Testimonies of all the primitive Fathers. And as to the Realm of
England even from the first plantation of Christianity settled therein, Mass
constantly continued the sole public worship, or service, that was resorted
unto, till the civil power of Parliament in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth put
it down: upon what design of avarice, liberty, and ambition, is needless to
express: But in the room of the Mass was substituted a new outward service
named the book of Common prayer, and set forth in the vulgar tongue; whereas
since the first age for 1500. Years not one example can be produced of any
Christian kingdom which had not for the common public service of Religion the
Mass, and that celebrated in Hebrew, Greek, or Latin: neither were the holy
Euangels wrirten in other language then Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, which are
the three holy tongues. The Hebrew was sanctified from the beginning of the
world: God even then conferring with Adam in the Hebrew tongue, and teaching
him the names of each living creature. Genesis 2. Besides all three were
sanctified in the death, and Passion of Christ the son of God; the inscription
over his Cross (Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews) being written in Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin letters, and prophesied Septuaginta super psalm. 56.57.58. ne
disperdas David in tituli inscriptione^.
of long before. This doctrine does not prejudice what S. Paul writes 1. Cor.
14 saying, That he that speaks a strange language edifieth himself; but he
that prophesies edifieth the Church of God. I would that you all speak with
tongues, but rather that you prophesied: For it is conuincingly evident, that
the Apostle neither by these, or any other words of that chapter commands the
use of the vulgar tongue in the Church service: For so there had been no need
of prophesying, that is of interpreting unto edification, exhortation or
instruction, which the Apostle expressly enjoyneth, saying, That if any man
speak a strange tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by three, and that by
course, and let one interpret. Besid's it is plain, that S. Paul there treats
of the miraculous gifts, or strange tongues infused both into men, and women
in the first beginning of the Church, and not intelligible without the
miraculous gift of interpretation also, and consequently he cannot mean the
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin tongue, as to the public service of the Church,
these being no strange languages inspired by miracle, but the known tongues of
the Christian world, and the most proper, and significant to express the
divine mysteries, because of the elegancy, emphasy of their words, and
sentences, and also of their grammar rules, whereby they are contained within
certain bounds, and limits to the clearing of vncertaintyes, and intricacies,
unto which other languages are subject in regard of the great similitude of
cases, numbers, and tenses, that occasion inextricable doubts; for this respect
all the Scriptures of the old, and new Testament were written, and set forth in
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. And S. Paul himself composed his Epistles in Greek,
which he directed to the Romans, whose vulgar tongue was latin: Furthermore it
is evident, that the Corinthians had their public service in Greek when the
Apostle writ unto them, whereby manifestly appears, that he meant not of the
Church service, which in no place of the world was celebrated, but in Hebrew,
Greek or Latin. And though S. Paul says in the aforenamed Chapter; If I pray
in a strange tongue my spirit prays, but my understanding is without fruit:
Neuertheless he does not The Apostle 1. Cor. 14. reprehendes certain
Corinthians endued with the gift of tongues, because they uttered prayers, and
Hymns in the private meetings of the faithful of those days, which neither
themselves, nor others there present understood, and puffed up with a vain
opinion preferred the gift of tongues before all other miraculous gifts, and
this is what S. Paul condemns in the Chapter set down.
mean of private prayers, which the faithful of all fexes, even in this age
do devoutly use upon their latin Primers especially: for the private prayers
he speaks of were psalms, hymns, sonnets, revelations inspired by miracle,
and uttered in a strange tongue given extraordinarily by miracle also; howeuer
without doubt the Apostles intention in the words above mentioned was not to
forbid even strange languages, since he expressly says in the same Chapter:
Wherefore brethren covet to prophecy, and forbid not languages; but the true
meaning of the aforesaid words is, that if any one shall use a strange tongue in
praying, and want the knowledge thereof, though his spirit, heart, and affection
prays well: neuertheless he is without fruit, as to the understanding, for as
much, as the understanding does not penetrate the things, or mysteries, that
the words signify, and this is incident even in this age, to such, as pray in
the latin tongue, wherein they are not versed: yea to such also, as be knowing
in the grammatical signification of latin words, especially if in praying they
use the Psalms of David, because of the tropes, and figures contained therein.
For example how many, even of the learned reciting the words of the Psalm 59 (
Moab the pot of my hope. Into Edom I will stretch out my thooe; or of the Psalm
67. If ye sleep among the midst of the lotts, the wings of a dove covered
with silver: rebuke the wild heasts of the reed. The congregation of bulls in
the kine of the people) do comprehend the sense, and meaning thereof:
notwithstanding all this, neither private prayers, which are said, and not
understood, nor public prayers, which are heard, and not understood likewise,
ought to be contemned, or counted as unprofitable; for whosoever says, or
hears prayers so, if he prays, and hears devoutly, enjoyes the fruit, and
comfort of a mind S. Damas. ait oration est mentis eleuatio in Deum. Suppoint
autem hac orationis definitio, vel includit rerum dece^tium petitionem.
elevated to, and fixed in God, wherein lies the consistency of praying, and
hearing aright, albeit that his understanding wants it is proper fruit, which
is to feed of the sense signified by the words: and indeed it happene^h often
times, that many good catholic men, and women praying in a language unknown to
themselves do merit, and obtain more spiritual advantages of God, then
others, that have the understanding of what they utter in praying: especially
if they pray with greater humility, piety, fervor, and reverence toward the
prayers, for as much, as they be set forth, and approved, as holy, profitable,
and acceptable to the divine Majesty by the general practice, and warrantable
authority of the holy catholic Church, Aug. Epis. 118. cap. 5. any thing that
the whole Church practices, and observes through out the world to dispute
thereof as though it were not to be done is most insolent madness.
that cannot err in it is ordinances. Besid's there is more respect, and
devotion had toward a thing, that is not known by the understanding, nor
perceived by the senses, if credence be given to the profitablenes thereof, then
toward any other thing, that is familiar to the understanding, and obuious to
the senses; for example all true Christians do most religiously honor the
Mystery of the Incarnation, and most devoutly reverence the Sacraments, for as
much, as they believe the Incarnation to be the principal, and the Sacraments
the isntrumental cause of justification unto eternal life. God does not so
much look after the Aug. Epis. 102. ad Euodium, non enim quantum intelligas,
sed qua^tum credas, and credendo ames, quaerit Deus! nam saepe fit, vt qui
intelligunt, contemnant, qui non intelligunt afficiantur.
accuratnes of knowledge, as to the understanding of the words of holy prayers,
Hymns etc. privately, or publicly said, as he does after the credence given
thereunto, whereby a belieuer is excited to love him; for often times it
happens that such as understand do contemn, when such as are Dixit quidam
sanctus Pater. Jlliterati rapiunt Coelum, and nos vbi cu^ scientia nostra.
unlearned, and know little, or nothing are carried on the wings of a fervent
devotion, and zeal to the inward veil of the divine Tabernacle, that is to
say, to the Thron of God. For this reason, which is taken out of S. Augustine,
it may be probably coniectured, that in the primitive Church the holy Ghost did
give sundry Christians gifts to speak in strange tongues, which they
understood not, thereby to show to posterity, that no man ought to condemn, as
unprofitable the prayers of such as say them in an unknown language, especially
they relying on the Church Authority for the profitablenes thereof, as also
vseing attention S. Tho. ponit tres intentiones orationis: vnam ad verba, qua
ora^s profert: alteram ad sensum; tertiam ad finam, qui est Deus. Et prima. and
secu^da aliquando nocent in qua^tum impediunt deuotionem.
as to the end of prayer, which is God only, though they should not have
attention as to the words uttered in praying, or as to the sense thereof; the
two last attentions being neither the best, nor necessarily required to the
consistency of prayer, and some times, do obstruct, and hinder devotion, whereas
the fervor, and humility in the unlearned do compence even the want of an
exact, and distinct understanding: howeuer it is very expedient, that every
belieuer say our lords prayer in the tongue he knows: for it is not enough to
understand confusedly, that the petitions therein contained are good, and
profitable: but likewise to know them distinctly. Wherefore sundry constitutions
set forth by Synods of Bishops require understanding of words, and sense, as to
our lords prayer.

CHAR. III. OF MELCHISEDECH
THE CONTENTS.
Melchisedech a type of Christ: by divine dispensation invested in holy
Priesthood: offered a proper sacrifice of thanksgiving in bread, and wine:
Melchisedech's sacrifice figured the sacrifice Christ offered of his body, and
blood under the elements of bread, and wine: Christ's unbloody sacrifice
sulfilled the figurative of Melchisedech: Those which deny, that Christ
appointed Priests, as his Vicars to offer in his room daily sacrifice of his
body, and blood under the forms of bread, and wine, of necessity destroy his
everlasting Priesthood according to the order of Melchisedech: the practice of
Priestly blessing.

MElchisedech was king of Fuit salem vrbs terrae Chananaeae (vt constat ex
historia Genesis) quae fuit filijs Israel a Deo promissa, and iam dicta Iudaea
Palestina, seu terra sanctae.
salem, that it, by interpretation, of justice, and Peace: According to holy
scriptures Melchisedech was a Priest, priesthood taken in the proper sense, for
he is called the Priest of God most high. Genesis 1. and Hebrae. 7. and this
catholic assertion the ancient Fathers have unanimously taught, as likewise
Philo Iudae. l. de Abraham.
a Priest of God most high, counted without Father, and mother, without
kindred, without beginning of days, or end of life, the holy Scriptures no
where making mention of his genealogic. He met the great Patriarch Abraham as
be returned from the slaughter of the kings, brought forth bread, and wine,
which he All the ancient Fathers that florish'd in the years 100.200.300.400.
namely S. Irenaeus, S. Hypolitus, S. Chrysostomus, S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, S.
Austin etc. teach that Melchisedech offered a sacrifice of bread, and wine: and
S. Cyprian Epis. 63. ad Caecil. says expressly, that Melchisedech Priest of God
most high made an offering of bread and wine; and in an other place he calls
the sacrifice of Melchisedech the Image of Christ's sacrifice (offered under the
forms of bread, and wine) so that according to S. Cyprian, Melchisedech said
Mass figuratively, his sacrifice being a Type, or figure of the sacrifice of
the Eucharist: and doubtless Melchisedech brought forth bread, and wine with an
intent to offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving for the great victory Abraham had
won, and not precisely to refresh the soldiers, who needed no meat having
refreshed themselves before. Gen, 14. Howeuer it is probable, that Melchisedech
did distribute amongst the soldiers of Abraham the bread, and wine, which he
had consecrated, in representation of the sacrifice Christ offered at his last
supper, wherein he consecrated bread, and wine, and after gave them to his
Apostles: and indeed Clemens. Alexand. l. 4. stroma. Calls the meat
Melchisedech distributed sanctified nourishment: and S. Epipha. ser. 55.
affirms, that Melchisedech gave to Abraham, and his soldiers consecrated
bread, and wine.
offered in sacrifice to give thanks, to him, whose Priest he was for the
obtained victory: and afterward blessed him, which shows his excellency above
Abraham (who was a Priest also) and consequently above Leui, and all the
Priests of the old law, that came out of the loins of Abraham. S. Paul Hebrae.
7. says, that without all contradiction the less is blessed of the better,
signifying thereby that Melchisedech, was a greater Priest then Abraham, whom he
blessed; moreover the Scripture Text teaches that to bless after a sacred
manner is proper to Priestly function, in consequence of which without all
contradiction a Priest is greater in dignity then any temporal Prince, that
wants authority to give sacred benediction. As Melchisedech blessed Abraham
so Priests number. 6. were commanded to bless the people, and Christ Mark 10.
blessed young children, and his Disciples. Luk 24. and after the same manner
the Bishops, and Priests of the catholic Church bless lay people, and other
creatures, namely Agnus Dei, bead's, Crosses, medal's, candles, Ashes, Palms,
Belles, new ships etc. all which creatures are sanctified by the word of God,
and prayer, for so the Church blesses all such things by express invocation of
God alwaise using this preface. Adiutorium nostrum in nomine Domini. Our help
is in the name of our lord, and so beseeches God to bless, consecrate, and
sanctify his creatures in virtue of his passion, and death suffered on the
Cross, that so they may be delivered from the power of Satan, and become
beneficial to men, and the Church concludes all benedictions, Per Christum
Dominum nostrum.
For it is the prerogative of the greatest Priest to bless the lesser: besid's
Abraham gave him tithe, which does evidence the others exceeding dignity: yet
in these excellencies, Melchisedech was a type only of Christ in whom the real
verity was contained. Melchisedech as king of justice, and peace (by
interpretation) was but a shadow of Christ, who was, and is actually, and
indeed king, and Author of both, for he came into the world Zachar. 9. Ecce
Rex tuus venit iustus, and Saluator.
a just and peaceable king, that 1. Cor. 1. qui factus est nobis iustitia,
sanctificatio, and redemptio.
justified and reconciled man to God, and his Angels. Melchisedech as Priest
of God, that offered a sacrifice of bread, and wine, was a figure of Christ the
son of God, who being anointed Priest by the holy ghost offered S. Austin in
psalm. 33. says that Christ instituted a sacrifice of his body and blood
according to the Order of Melchisedech, that is under the forms of bread and
wine And l. 6. de ciuit c. 22. speaking of Melchisedech's sacrifice, therein,
says he, first appeared the sacrifice, which Christians offer to God, and
thereby is fulfilled the prophetical saying: Thou art a Priest according to the
Order of Melchisedech.
a sacrifice of his own body, and blood under the forms of bread, and wine at
his last supper. Melchisedech as Priest without beginning of days, or end of
life, signifies the continuance of Christ his Priesthood for ever, in as much,
as Priests instituted by, and substituted under Christ as his proper Vicars,
shall continually offer to the end of the world the unbloody sacrifice, that
Christ himself celebrated in his last supper: neither can any man in reason
deny, but that Christ even then offered an unbloody sacrifice; for that were to
auerre, that Christ did not fulfill the figurative sacrifice of Melchisedech,
and consequently, that he was no Priest according to his order, or similitude,
since it cannot be proved, that Christ at any other time did offer a sacrifice
under the forms of bread, and wine wherein consist's the similitude of
Melchisedechs sacrifice; Again to deny, that Christ instituted, and appointed
Priest's as his substitutes to offer even to the end of the world the
sacrifice, that himself celebrated at his last supper, were to deny Christ to
be a Priest for ever, there being no other means to establish his eternal
Priesthood, then by the sacrifice of Priest's instituted by, and substituted
under him, Priesthood being but a power or faculty Hebrae. 5. omnis Sacerdos,
and Pontisex est institutus, vt offerat dona, and sacrificia.
to offer sacrifice, which Christ sitting at the right hand of his divine
Father cannot do in his own person, sacrifice taken in the proper sense for an
outward visible act of supreme worship, as of necessity it must be taken:
whereby plainly follows, that whosoever does take away Christ his power to
sacrifice, does destroy his Priesthood also, or render it unprofitable, and
useless: and to allow Christ improper, spiritual, and metaphorical sacrifice
only, is not enough to make good his Priesthood, as to the order of
Melchisedech, who offered outward sensible sacrifice of bread, and wine.
Neither can Christ in respect of spiritual sacrifice only, be counted more a
Priest, then every faithful man, or woman, that offers to God contrition of
a penitent heart, which is an insensible spiritual sacrifice, Psalmo 50.
Furthermore Melchisedech in meeting Abraham, as he returned from the victory
over the kings, and blessing him, is a mysterious representation of Christ, who
meets, and blesses his faithful servants returning to their Country of
Paradise (whence their first parent Adam was eiected) with the spoils of the
devil, that eiected him; lastly Melchisedeck in taking Abraham paid Tithes to
Melchisedech as a duty, or homage, and not for his own person only, but even
for Leui then unborn, and consequently for the whole Priesthood of Leui's stock
acknowledging thereby Melchisedech to be Priest, and his superior, and of all
the leuiticall order. payment of tithes is a natural duty which is done to
Priests, that thereby they may receive both honor, and liuelihood. Jacob vowed
to pay tithes Gen 28. Moses appointed them. Leuit. 27. number. 18. and the ancient
Fathers prove them to be due to the Church Pastors. Namely S. Cyprian Epis.
66. S. Hierom. Epis. 1, 7. S. Austin ser. 1 ^^ de Tempore.
tithe of Abraham, is a type of Christ also, who can in equity exact, as tithe,
service and obedience of all reasonable creatures, whom he has delivered out
of captivity by the merit of his death, and passion.

CHAR. IV. OF SACRAMENTS
THE CONTENTS.
The Sacraments of the new law by divine institution are enabled to produce
inward grace unto justification of life (ex opere operato) that is, through
their own outward sensible working. They be soueraign remedies against all
kinds of spiritual infirmities: the Catholic Church the shop, that keeps
the medicinal Sacraments: Christ the divine Apo^^ecary: no sinner ought to
despair of s^luation, while he abides in a shop of saving remedies, which is
the catholic Church.

SAcraments (taken in a large general sense) be outward visible ceremonies
employed in corporal creatures, or elements, whereby men, as birds of one
feather, flock together and Aug. l. 9. Con. Faustu^ cap 11. in nulla, inquit,
religione homines colligantur inter se sine consortio Sacramentoru^, id est,
sine aliquibus caer^monijs sensibilibus. Et S. Chrysos. hom. 83. ideo ait Deum
nobis dedisse intelligibilia sub sensibilibus, quia constamus anima, and
corpore: si vero essemus incorporei, incorporea et^am dedisset dona, id est,
Sacramenta.
unite in the profession of some one Religion true, or false: the worship of a
thing that is indeed, or counted a God depending necessarily thereof. Pagans
worshipped the sensible elements Through human weakness, and the crafty dealing
of the Devil certain people have been brought to that height of madness, as to
think, and worship for Gods, and godesses the four elements, namely, fire,
air, water, and earth, as likewise other parts of the universe, especially
such, as conduced to the generation of any thing. From hence the vital spirit
was called the God Jupiter, fire the God Vulcan, air the godess Pallas, and
the earth the godess Ceres.
of their ceremonies, ascribing a divinity even to the meanest creatures. Jews
worshipped the true God under corporal creatures, wherein they used their
ceremonies: but the multitude thereof being numerous, difficult, and greiuous
made their Religion a yoke of bondage. The society of christian people are
delivered from the Pagans Idolatry, and the Iew's servitude being called unto
the liberty wherewith Christ has made them free to serve, and worship one true
God under Aug. l. 38. c. 9. ae doc. Chris. and l. 19. con. Faus. cap. 13.
Sacramenta, inquit, mutata sunt; facta sunt faciliora, pauciora, salubriorae.
a few ceremonies most proper for an agreeable exercise both of body, and soul,
being sensible things most clean in reference to the body, and most precious
in order to the soul: to wit, seven Sacraments The decree of Pope Eugenius set
down in the end of the Council of Florence asserteth seven Sacraments, which
catholic assertion the Council of Trent has defined sess. 7. can. 10. and
Calvin l. 4. instit. c. 19. confesses, that the opinion of seven Sacraments is
grounded in antiquity, and was universally approved.
mysteriously figured in the seven pillars wisdom hewed out in the building of
her house Proverb. 1. that is, which Christ the eternal wisdom hewed
According to S. John the Evangelist cap. 19. When the soldiers savv, that
Jesus was dead, one of them with a spear pierced his side, and fortvvith
came there out blood and water. whereby are signified mystically all the
Sacraments, though two especially: namely Baptism, which opens the door unto,
and the Euchariste, which is the end of all the other Sacraments: wherefore S.
Austin, c. 120. in Joan. infer's, that the Sacraments of the new law, came from
the side of Christ.
out of his side in the erecting of his Church. Also mysteriously represented
in Naamans washing himself seven times in Jordan: and in the five breads and
two fishes wherewith Christ fed, and satisfied many Thousands: and taken in the
strict proper sense they be outward visible signs, or rites of inward
invisible sanctity, and The Council of Trent cast's an Anathema upon those,
which shall assert that the Sacraments of the new law do not contain the
grace, which they signify, or that they be not effectual instruments Ex opere
operato (through their own working) of the same grace. This Catholic assertion
is conform to the doctrine of the ancient Fathers in the first Council of Nice,
which speaking of Baptism say. Aquam vides, considera vi^ti^tem Dei in aqua
absconditam. Thou beholdest water, consider the virtue of God, that lie's hid
in the water. Wherefore the new Teachers of these days impiously assert, that
outward works, as are the Sacraments, exercise no efficiency in the production
of sanctifying grace. But this their heretical assertion Luther tought l. de
captiuit. Babylon.
effectual instruments thereof by divine dispensation; As God did enable the
earth in it is creation to bring forth corporal fruit's to the nourishment of
the body: so he did enable the Sacraments in their institution to bring forth
spiritual fruits to the refection of the soul: and indeed it is mad ignorance,
or extreme madness to think that God is sufficient to give effectual virtue
Chrysostom. hom. 24. in illud Jo. 3. nisi quis renatus fuerit. Docet, quod
quemadmodum terra accepit a De^ virtutem producendi fructus: ita aqua in
institutione baptismi accepit virtutem faciendi regenerationem spiritual^^^.
to vnliu'd seed unto producing living bodies in corporal generation, and
insufficient to infuse effectual force into Sacraments unto sanctifying souls
in spiritual regeneration: that is to say, to exercise efficiency in the
production of justifying grace, and truly when Christ instructed Nicodemus of
the necessity of the Sacrament of Baptism. Io. 3. saying, That except a man be
borne again of water, and the holy ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
Heaven, undoubtedly he did attribute the same kind of causality unto water, as
unto the holy Ghost which the particle (and shows clearly since it joins
both causes together: and though an instrument in working be subordinat to the
principal cause, in virtue whereof it works: neuertheless there is but one
kind of causality in both. Wherefore since real causality, or efficiency is of
necessity due to the holy ghost, the same with subordination is belonging to
the outward element of water in Baptism: whereby is conuincingly proved, that
Baptism is not (and consequently Si Sacramenta a Christo instituta essent 7.
duntaxat symbola quaedam externa, quibus salus per Christu^ accepta velut
sigillis obsignetur, and co^firmetur, no^ dixisset Christus Io. 3. ^isi quis
renatus fuerit ex aqua and Spirit^ sancto. N^c Apostolus dixisset mu^dans cum
lauacro aquae in verbo vita Ephesians. 5. na^ istae particulae, non nud^m sona^t
obsignationem salutis acceptae, sed causalitatem, vnde S. Grego. Niss. Ora.
Catech. c. 33. extremae, inquit, dementiae est, and ignorantiae animi
tribuentis Deo tantam vim semini in generatione hominis, existimare eum esse
imbecillem, vt hoc idem tribuatur aqua ad iustificandum suscipientem Baptismum.
other Sacraments neither) a naked sign only to stir up, or excite to an act of
faith, or a mere signet to seal the divine promises; for the outward element
of water is an effectual isntrumental cause of inward sanctity Ex opere
operato, that is, does with it is own outward visible action, enabled by divine
institution, produce inward grace unto sanctification of life in such, as
receive the Sacrament of Baptism aright. Besides if sacramental water were but
a mere sign of justifying grace Christ Io. 3. had spoken as improperly,
(saying: except that a man be born again of water etc.) as if a man should say
to his friend, that is a thirst, except that you drink of the Iuy bush, you
cannot quench your thirst; for as sacramental water according to the contrary
opinion is a naked sign of grace only: so an Iuy bush, is a naked, or a sign
only of wine; or other drink ready for sale; whereby is plainly evident, that
Sacraments even as outward works do exercise efficiency in the production of
sanctifying grace. Yet as the water of the pool named in the holy scripture
Probatica Piscina did not cure corporal diseases by an innate quality proper
to the water it self: but through the motion of an Angel, that went down at a
certain season; and stirred it: so the Sacraments do not heal spiritual
infirmities, that is, sins, but by a special extraordinary virtue, which they
receive from the holy ghost, or Christ, who to that purpose did institute all
of them. Christ the son of God is our great Physician, and Apothecary also; the
catholic Church his shop: the Sacraments placed therein the pots, boxes,
vesells, that contain, and preserve the heavenly medicines, which Christ
brought with him into the world, and the sundry sacramental graces divinely
prepared unto effectual healing of all spiritual wounds are the said heavenly
remedies; wherefore it is a most extreme advantage to be log'd in the bosom of
the catholic Curch, wherein be present soueraign remedies against all manner of
spiritual discases; no man how sick, or wounded soever can despair of his
health while he continues in the shop of the divine Apothecary, that is
furnished with medicines which cannot miss in the cure of any infirmity, if
applied aright thereunto: As a tree planted by the water's side want's not
corporal nourishment to preserve it alive: so such, as abide in the catholic
Church want not spiritual help's whereby to nourish them unto eternal life,
which be the Sacraments, that Christ has left to his Church, as certain
preservatives against the poison of sin.

CHAR. V. OF CHVRCH-CEREMONIES.
THE CONTENTS.
Public Church-seruice requires outward acts of Religion, namely ceremonies:
holy ceremonies set forth the majesty of God, stir up attention, move
reverence, beget devotion. Ceremonies pertaining to the sacrifices of Mass.
Answer to an objection against Church-ceremonies drawn from Christ's conference
with the Samaritan woman Joan. 4. The beginning of Schisms: Heretics, and
Schismatics adore not in spirit, and truth: holy ceremonies warrantable
without express authority of scripture.

CHurch-ceremonies are outward sensible Rites of christian religion: yet are
but the An Ecclesiastical ceremony is an outward secundary act of Religion,
that answer's to the inward first act thereof, which is to will, or desire due
exhibition of honor, and worship unto Gods and it comprehendes Sacraments,
sacrifice (which is supreme outward worship unto professing Gods omnipotency)
Sacramental's, namely Churches, Altars, Chalices, Priestly ornaments, bowing,
kneeling, holy water, the sign of the Cross etc.
secundary acts thereof; for the first is an insensible desire to advance the
worship due unto God, which Church ceremonies do execute only. As civil
ceremonies used in the consecration of temporal Princes (they be inoyld,
invested with royal robes, presented with Scepters, crowned with Diadems, and
beset round with armed guards) do demonstrate their eminent charge, and
dignity above the people, which they rule over: so Religious ceremonies
employed in the exhibition of divine worship do set forth the majesty of God,
and his supreme dominion over all creatures; besides they stir up attention,
move reverence, beget denotion, and conduce unto the understanding of
supernatural mysteries, which they imprint also in the memory of the
faithful. As pictures: so Church-ceremonies are the books of the unlearned.
All the visible Rites employed in and about the sacrifice of the Mass tend unto
instruction, and Hoc facite in mean co^memorationem, id est in memoriam
passionis, and mortis meae. Et 1. Pet. 4. Christo passo in carne, and vos eadem
cogitatione armemini. Vnde ait S. Bernardus passio Christi, est vltimum
resugium contra omnes illicitas voluptates, visa, inquit, Christi passione,
quis tam deliciosus, qui non abstineat, and quis ta^ iracundus vt non doleat,
and quis tam malitiosus, quem non poeniteat: and S. Augustinus, nullum est, ait
remedium salubrius, quam iugiter cogitare de passion^ Christi.
full commemoration of Christ his death, and passion in compliance with his own
command, as it is plainly obseruable in the garments wherewith the Priest is
invested during the time of sacrifice: as likewise in the Altar, and ornament's
thereof; for example 10. The Amice, in as much, as it is a linen cloth, which
the Priest pulls over his face, and fasten's in his neck, does signify the ragg
of linen, wherewith the Jews blind-folded Christ in mockery, when they smote,
and buffited him, (saying Prophecy to us o Christ, who is he that smote thee
Mat. 20.20. The Priests Albe (that is a white linen garment) does represent
the raiment, in which Herod invested Christ after that he had despised, and
mocked him Luc. 23.30. The maniple, that the Priest wears on his left arm,
and the stole, that hangs about his neck do figure the cord's, and fetters
with which the officers of the Jews bound Christ Io. 18. and led him from one
place to an other from Annas to Caiphas, from Caiphas to Pilat, from Pilat to
Herod, and from Herod to Pilat again. 40. The Chasuble (that is the uppermost
vestment) does express the purple garment the soldiers put on Christ. Mar. 25.
and the heavy cross also, that Christ carried on his shouldiers to mount
Caluary. 50. The Priests Tonsure, that is a round crown made in the heads of
Clergymen, is an ancient ceremony: and according to S. Bid l. 5. (...). S.
Peter wore it in remembrance of the crown of thorns wherewith Christ's head was
crowned; again S. Anicetus, that was Chief Church-gouernour in the first 200.
years in a certain Epistle to the Bishops of France commanded all Priests to
cut their hair, to the end they might not appear delicate, and effeminate like
secular men, that wear long hair for ornament sake.
Tonsure (that is to say the crown of his head shaued in fashion of a round
circle) does show the crown of thorns, which the soldiers platted, and put
about the sacred head of Christ. Mar. 25.60. The sundry crosses, that the
Priest makes over the host, and chalice before, and after consecration are
mystical representations of the many greiuous torments, which Christ endured
in pursuance of the general redemption. 70. The elevation of the host, and
chalice does figure the lifting up of Christ on the cross; and in as much, as
that ceremony is exhibited a part, or severally it declares the seperatio^ of
Christ's soul from his body, and his blood from his veins. 80. The division of
the host into three distinct parts does show the three substances in Christ
vzt: the divine of his person, the spiritual of his soul, and the material of
his body: and whereas one of the said parts is put into the chalice, and as it
were buried therein, thereby is signified Christ's body in the sepulcher:
likewise the mingling thereof with the blood demonstrates, that the divine
personality was never separated neither from his soul in his descent into Hell,
nor from his body lying in the sepulcher. 90. The Priest's According to the
Decrees of Ancient Councils a Priest ought not to depart from the Altar before
he give his benediction; again the people were bound to remain in the Church
till the Priest had blessed them, and indeed priestly benediction was ever
practiced. In the law of nature, Melchisedech blessed Abraham; in the written
law, Moses, and Aaron blessed the people of Israel, and in the law of grace
Christ blessed his Disciples.
benediction given in the end of the sacrifice of Mass relates unto the
peculiar recommendation, whereby Christ: did recommend his Church at the
rendering of his soul into the hands of his divine Father. 10. The Altar
representes Mount-Caluary, and signifies the cross therein erected, on which
Christ offering as on an Altar a sacrifice of his own body, and blood,
consummated for ever those, that are sanctified Heb. 10. And truly as the name
of smoke puts us in mind of fire, because of the necessary mutual relation to
each other: for smoke of necessity comes from fire, that is the cause thereof:
so the name of an Altar does relate unto sacrifice necessarily, this being
included even in the definition of an Altar taken in the proper sense for a
real Altar to sacrifice on: And such is the Altar employed in the sacrifice of
Mass called by the Ancient Fathers the Altar of Christ his body, and so meant
by the Apostle The Apostle by saying Hebrae. 13. that (We have an Altar
whereof they have no authority to eat, which serve in the Tabernacle) meant an
Altar taken in the proper sense, that is, an Altar, on which is offered the
sacrifice of Christ's body, and blood according to the interpretation of the
Ancient Fathers S. Greg. Nazian. in ora. desorore Gorgonia. S. Chrysostom
demons. an Christus sit Deus. S. Austin Epis. 86. de ciuit. l. 8. Confess. c.
27. Theophy. in 23. Mat. and of the sacrifice of this Altar, those cannot eat
which serve in the Tabernacle, that is, which follow the rites, and custom's of
the ancient Jews, nor those which believe not in the sacrifice of Christ's body,
and blood. But this holy Altar, si sometimes called Mensa Dominica. The Table of
our lord, because of the heavenly meat, our lords real body, and blood which
is eaten, and drunk there: and indeed Mensa, Table, according to holy scripture
often signifies an Altar, namely, Isa. 65. Malach. 1. likewise S. Austin ser.
103. de diuersis, discoursing of S. Cyprian's Table, so called in order to his
holy Relics, which were put under the Table, or Altar erected in the same
place, where S. Cyprian had suffered Martyrdom. In the same place, says S.
Austin, a Table, though erected to God, neuertheless was named S. Cyprians
Table, not because S. Cyprian had feasted there, but in regard he had been
sacrificed there, and through his Martyrdom procured that Table, not that he
might feed, or be fed at it, but that upon it sacrifice might be offered unto
God, to whom himself had been made an oblation.
Haebr. 13. saying We have an Altar whereof such have no authority to eat, as
serve the Tabernacle: and for as much, as Christ's body is spiritual meat, and
his blood spiritual drink, it is named also our lords Table. 1. Cor. 10 you
cannot (says the Apostle) be partakers of our lords Table, and the table of
devils, that is to say, such as are not members of Christ's Church have no
right to the mystical meat, and drink, which is the real body, and blood of
Christ. 11. The corporal, and linen clothes that cover the Altar do signify
the linen cloth, that wrapped the sacred Body of Christ, when he was laid in
the sepulcher Io. 19.

Furthermore, besides the many religious visible ceremonies God commanded to be
employed in exhibition of divine worship during the continuance of the old law
Exodus 29. Christ Author of the new law instituted sundry ceremonies, and
rites, which be of necessity: namely washing with water in Baptism, imposition
of hands, and anointing with consecrated oil in the Sacrament of Order etc.
Yea Christ himself practiced visible ceremonies for he fell on his face, and
prayed. Io. 26. lift up his eyes, and prayed Io. 11. lift up his hands, and
blessed Luc. 24. Besides when he found in the Temple (which is a sensible
ceremony too, deputed unto divine worship) those, that sold oxen, sheep, and
doves etc. Io. 20. he was offended to see his Fathers house made an house of
marchandice. Hereby is evidently plain, that Christ, when in his conference
with the Samaritan Woman Io. 4. said the hour comes, and now is, when the
true adorers shall adore the Father in spirit, and truth, he did not mean,
that he was come to take away sacrifice, Sacraments, prayers, Churches, and all
other sensible ceremonies practiced in the service of the new law: but for as
much, as the cited Text is often times alleged by ancient, and modern
sectaries especially against all visible rites of christian religion, it will
conduce greatly to vndeceiuing the deceived in the sense, and meaning thereof,
if they consider duly, that the Samaritans were Schismatics; as Luther, and
Zuinglius (religious men both, and Priests) illegally, and sacrilegiously
married against the holy Canons, and vowed chastity, went out from the
catholic Church, in the time of Henry the eight king of England, and began a
schism in Germany: likewise as Ballev, Peter Martyr, Martin Bucher etc.
Apostat-wedded-priests also, in the reign of Edward the Sixth a child, began
the schism in England (countenanced and supported by Bishop Cranmer specially)
to which Henry the eight king Edwards Father had opened a door only; so a
certain Priest of the Jews called Mansses to retain, and enjoy an unlawful
wife fell from the society of the faithful Jews at Jerusalem, and broached
schism in Samaria; Besides as Luther and those other before mentioned to
establish their schisms leaped Joseph l. 11. Antiquit. cap. 8. est propriu^,
inquit, Haereticis, and Schismaticis transilire capita antiquarum Ecclesiarum,
vt suam reddant Religionem antiquissimam.
over the heads of all christian Churches then, and for many ages before
established, pretending, that these were not agreeing with Christ, and his
Apostles in the essentialls of doctrine, worship, and government; and in
consequence thereof made reformation the disguised end of their leap: in like
manner Manasses to render his schism plausible, and taking with that people he
leaped over the Prophet Moses to Jacob the Patriarch, and over the Temple in
Jerusalem to the Temple of the Samaritans in Mount Garizim, tying thereto the
sacrifice of the Jews religion, upon pretense, that the said Patriarch Jacob
had therein adored long before the Temple of Solomon was built, or the law
given; to obtain superiority in his schism he gave the preeminence in
Church-seruice to the place wherein he began it. This was the true cause, that
moved the faithful Jews to abstain from the company and conversation of the
Samaritans, who maintained their adoring in Garizim to be more ancient, then
the worship of the Jews in Jerusalem. In regard of this contention about the
Temple in Jerusalem, and the Temple in Garizim, the Samaritan woman conceiving
Christ to be some Prophet (for as much as he had revealed unto her the secret
passages of her whole life) propounded unto him a Theological question
touching the before said controversy, on design to be informed to which of the
two, public According to holy scriptures by public solemn adoration is meant
proper sacrifice namely Joan. 12. and There were certain Gentiles amongst them,
that came up to adore at the feast. And Act. 8. the Euneuch came up to adore in
Jerusalem, in both these scripture-places by adoration, which was public, and
solemn is understood proper sacrifice, that was offered only in Jerusalem; but
all other adorations outward, and inward, might be used in any whatsoever place
besid's Jerusalem.
adoration, or sacrifice was tied, and confined, saying: Our Fathers adored in
this mountain, and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to
adore; that is to offer sacrifice to which Christ replying The Jews, and
Samaritans contended about the place of sacrifice, and for as much, as both of
them were in fault, therefore Christ formed his answer in order to both.
Although the Jews sacrifice was the true sacrifice, neuertheless it was
unprofitable; being not able to procure sanctifying grace: but the Samaritans
sacrifice was erroneous, for they were schismatics, and adored, that is,
offered sacrifice, where God would not have had them, that is, they offered
sacrifice out of Gods Temple in Jerusalem, and therefore Christ said to the
Samaritan woman Ye adore what ye know not.
said: woman, believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this
mountain, nor at Jerusalem adore the Father etc. Whereby he for'told her, that
the adoration, or sacrifice, as to both the Temples should shortly cease, and
be disannulled, and that the true sacrifice (suddenly to be instituted in room
thereof) should not be tied to one place, or nation, but should be offered in
all the parts of the world according to the Prophecy of Malachias cap. 10. and
instructed her with all concerning this new sacrifice, signifying, that is
should not be a gross, and carnal adoration exhibited in, and by the flesh,
and blood of goats, sheep, oxen etc. as before; but that it should be a clean
adoration, or sacrifice containing in it self spirit, grace, and life, which
the others wanted, yea that it should be the verity it self, whereof all former
sacrifices were shadows, and figures only: wherefore Christ told her, that the
new adorers should adore the Father in spirit, that is to lay, should offer to
God a sacrifice giving grace, and life. Christ did not inculcate adoration of
God in spirit to condemn adoration under whatsoever sensible rites, and
ceremonies: but to exclude the carnal adoration, or sacrifice of the Jews that
wanted spirit to give life to the soul: In like manner Christ did intimate
adoration of God in verity to condemn the erroneous worship of the Samarita^s,
who albeit they did adore the true God of Israel, neuertheless being
Schismatics they did not adore him in verity, because they adored him out of
the communion, and unity of the faithful Jews, and in the mountain of
Garizim, where God would not be adored by sacrifice, this being confined to the
Temple at Jerusalem. Whereby follows evidently, that such, as worship, or
adore God otherwise then he will himself be worshipped, or adored, do not
worship, or adore him in verity, or Truth. Sithence God will be adored in one
sole Church founded on the merits of Christ, all Schismatics, and Heretics,
that abandon the communion, and unity thereof, do not adore God in verity unto
salvation, howeuer they may flatter themselves with their mountain of Garizim,
that is, with their own fancied worship founded on the mountain of pride:
wherefore to such worshippers may be said, both according to reason, and equity:
you adore what you know not: for salvation is of one Church: and such only do
pray, worship, and adore Aug. in psalm. 130. ipse, inquit, in spiritu, and
veritate orat, qui in pace Ecclesiae orat.
in spirit, and truth, which pray, worship, and adore in peace and communion of
one catholic, and apostolic Church, whereunto is tied, and co^fined the
sacrifice, worship, and service of the new law unto justification of life:
Again though sundry Church-ceremonies be neither commanded, nor mentioned The
Council of Trent sess. 21. c. 2. declares, that God has left power unto the
Church to ordain, and institute what she shall think expedient, and conducing
to the reverence of the Sacraments, and the advantages of such, as receive
them: wherefore Church-gouernours are called dispensers of the mysteries of God.
1. Cor. 4.
in the holy scriptures farther then unto an implicit faith: neuertheless they
are not to be condemned: for many things appertaining unto divine worship do
not of necessity require an express ordinance. Noah built an Altar to God, on
which he offered a sacrifice of every clean beast, all eit he had no Noe non
iussus altar construxit, vt notat S. Ambrosius.
warrantable authority by special precept. Abel in like manner unbidden,
offered sacrifice that was Respexit Deus ad Abel, and munera eius.
acceptable to the divine Majesty. According to the dictates of nature God is
to be worshipped, Priesthood to be instituted, Hosts to be immolated, ministers
to be deputed for exhibition of divine scruice, and special ornaments are to
be ordained, and appointed, as holy signs to distinguish them from the rest of
the people: moreover works of special command even executed aright are not so
pleasing in the sight of God, as works Vulgar apud Theologos est dictum. Deus
imperat minora, de maioribus dat consilium.
counseled only, if they be done according to the rule of a discreet zeal. A
good work that is done in, and for as much, as God does counsel the doing
thereof, is more laudable, and noble, then a commanded work, because of a
greater alacrity, and promptitude, that is required to the performance of a
good work unbidden. Christ Hierom. l. 1. con. Iouia. ait Christum plus amare
Virgins, quia sponte tribuunt, quod jis non fuit imperatum.
bears a more special affection to Virgins, that do consecrate unto him their
virginity without a special command; and indeed it is a more noble action in a
man to give an alms, which he is not obliged unto, then to give it upon the
score of an obligation. Furthermore Church-ceremonies ought not to be counted
Augus. Epis. 40. quaes. 3. dicit non esse c^nsendu^ superstitiosum omne, quod
christiani cum infidelibus quomodocunque habent commun^.
superstitious, though Pagans, and other Infidells do use the same, or the
like, unto superstition; for according to that argument christians should
condemn vowed chastity; because the Pagans had their vestall Virgins, that did
bind themselves by vow to a single chaste life: Christians should pull down
Churches, because Pagans built Churches: christians should abolish sacrifice,
because Pagans offered sacrifice: christians should despise all manner of
prayers, because Pagans used prayers: christians should not reverence, honor,
and worship one true God, because Pagans reverenced, honored, and worshipped
many false Gods; To conclude, christians should not wear breeches, because the
Turks, which be Infidells, wear breeches, howeuer truly according to
Tertullian it is an Pudeat, inquit, Tertullianus, insulsos christianos, quod ab
Ethinicis Idoloru^ suorum solemni pompa, religioso gestu, and officio
superentur.
exceeding great shame unto Christians to use less solemn pomp, less ceremony,
and less reverence in the service of the true God, then is used by the Heathens
in the worship of Idols.

CHAR. VI. OF BAPTISM
THE CONTENTS.
Baptism is the sole door, that opens a passage into the Church of God: The
kingdom of Heaven is for ever shut against the unbaptized, that is, no man can
come to the clear sight of God, that is not washed sacramentally before with
natural water under an express invocation of the blessed Trinity de facto, or
in desire: The sanctity of holy faithful parents cannot render their children,
that dye without Baptism Heirs of Heaven, coheirs, and brothers of Christ:
Through divine mercy those which dye without Baptism, and have nothing of any
other guilt are not punished with sensible pain after their death: they are
banished the court of Heaven only: S. Austins opinion, as to this point cleard.
Baptism ministered aright imprinteth an indelible character, or mark in the
soul of the baptized, Anabaptism confuted. Ceremonies pertaining to
sacramental baptism set down, and explicated.

BAptism is a Sacrament of new birth, or regeneration unto justification of
life, through the washing of Sensible natural water is the proper remote
matter of necessity requisite to the Sacrament of baptism, and accordingly the
Council of Lateran haith defined it, out of the third Chapter of S. John.
Except that a man be born again of water etc. and from thence is named a
Sacrament of regeneration, which is conform to the doctrine delivered by the
Apostle ad Tit c. 3. where he calls baptism, the washing of a new birth:
and indeed washing is the immediate, and water the remote matter only, so that
neither ye, hail, or snow, unless, they be made fluid, and thereby proper to
wash, are a sufficient matter of baptism.
natural water under an express invocation of The true form of sacramental
baptism is. I baptize thee in the name of the Father, son, and holy Ghost,
which is cut out of Christ's own words. Mat. 28. Where is required a distinct
invocation of all the three divine persons. Wherefore Pelagius the Pope dis. 4.
can multi de consecra. reiectes baptism administered in the name of Christ only.
And S. Cyprian Epis. 73. ad Jubaia. affirms, that the Apostles never baptized
de facto in the sole name of Christ: howeuer he grant's, that S. Peter, and the
other Apostles named Jesus Christ in the conferring of baptism together with
the other divine persons. For example, saying. J baptize thee in the name of
the Father, and Jesus Christ his son, and the holy Ghost, and this was done
with intent to render the name of Christ more honorable: but S. Cyprian denies
expressly, that remission of sins can be procured without naming of the three
divine persons, which is the opinion of S. Austin. l. 1. de baptismo con. donat.
the Holy Trinity. As there is fecundi^y in carnal parents to beget carnal
children: so by divine dispensation fecundity is given to elementary water in
baptism to bring forth spiritual children: and as no man comes into the world,
that is not born of carnal parents: So no man enters into the kingdom of
Heaven, that is not born again by sacramental washing of water unto
justification; whosoever will put himself in a capacity to obtain celestial
enjoyments, must put of the old, and terrene man, and put on the new, and
spiritual creature: he must purge out the old leaven of original sin, and by
christian circumcision cast of the sinful body of the flesh Col. 2. which is
inconsistent with heavenly endowments, that is to say, he must be buried with
Christ by baptism Romans 6. christian circumcision unto remission of sms, and
newness of life consisting therein. Wherefore since that all men by the law
Apostolus dicit omnes peccasse in Adamo primo nostro Parente, and esse
conceptos in peccato.
of their conception, or birth are liable to the guilt of sin, that only
baptism de facto, in deed, or in desire received can wash away it is most
evident, that baptism is a requisite absolutely necessary unto salvation. And
so i is defined 10. 3. Except that a man be born again of water, and of the
holy Ghost he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Where the definition
extend's even to Ancient Councils, namely Carthag. and Mileuit. convince those
of foolishness, which teach, that even young children can have full enjoyment
of Heavenly blessedness without baptism, and so it is defined in the Council of
Trent sess. 5. decret de pecta. originali: and this catholic assertion was
counted so certain in S Austins days, that he l. con. Iulia. c. 10. and 12.
writes that Pelagius out of fear of his own damnation, damned such, as
exclude vnbaptis'd children from eternal life. Yet though the Pelagians
denied, that children contracted original sin; and in consequence thereof,
that Baptism, as to them, was no requisite necessary unto the washing away of
original guilt: neuertheless they taught that children without baptism could
not be made Heirs of the kingdom of Heaven.
infants that dye in their infancy unbaptized according to the
Church-interpretation, expressing the want thereof to import the loss of Heavens
blessedness: so that it is extreme blindness to assert the reception of children
into Heaven unless baptism be applied unto them indeed, or by some
extraordinary means employed above the common, and ordinary law of Christ, who
has instituted no other ordinary remedy then Ambro. l. 2. de Abra. cap. 11.
post citata verba Domini 10. 3. it a subiungit: vtique nullum excipit, non
infantem non aliqua praeuentum necessitate. Ite^ Aug. Epis. ad Optatum. mortis,
inquit, transmissae ab Adamo chyrographo, nullus omnino, antequa^ per baptismum
liberetur, non tenetur obnoxious.
sacramental washing of water for the remission of original sin, as plainly
shows the scripture-Testimony set down, and the constant tradition, and
universal practice of the catholic Church since the first age for 1662.
years: and truly children ought not to be exempted from a divine law generally
given with reference to all men joint, and seperat without warrantable
authority of scripture According to the ancient Fathers Orig. l. 5. in c. 6. ad
Romans S. Chrysostom hom. ad Theoph. S. Austin l. 1. de Baptismo con. dona. the
baptising of young children is an Apostolical tradition, in consequence of
which it is no humane invention introduced by Pope Higinus, or Pope Syrisius,
as some sectaries unadvisedly write: and indeed it can lay claim to the best
antiquity, as plainly appears by the Testimonies set down. Besides Act. 16.
Paul, and Silas, baptized the keeper of the prison, and all his House, and 1.
Cor. 1. the family of Stephanus was baptized, and even young children are
members of a family.
Church-tradition, or special revelation, whereof not one example can be
produced in all antiquity, that even such, as are born of faithful, and godly
parents can be made of Adams children Gods children, and be cleansed, and
purged of original sin without the washing of water in the word S. Paul Ephesians.
5. says, that Christ sanctified his Church cleansing it by the washing of
water in the word of life Which sacred Text S. Chrysostom. interpreting hom. 20. ad
Ephesians. asks, in what word? and answers to the question, saying, in the name
of the Father, the son, and holy Ghost; and S. Austin: l. 6. con. donat. c. 25.
affirms, that God is present with the Evangelical words. without which
baptism has nothing of efficacy, and l. 3. de baptismo, explaining his meaning,
vnderstand's by Evangelical words Christ's own words set down in the Euangile
of S. Mat. cap. 28. In the name of the Father, the son, and holy Ghost. Whereby
it is evident, that by the word required to the administering of baptism is not
meant preaching unto, or instructing of those which receive that Sacrament, as
some sectaries unadvisedly expound that scripture-Text in opposition to the
baptism of children, that are not capable of instruction.
of life: that is to say, through the evangelical invocation of the most
blessed Trinity, Father, son, and holy Ghost: and though Christ by his absolute
power could have instituted other remedies, then the Sacrament of baptism to
purge out the leaven of original sin: yet it is evident, that his will was
only to apply that, and none other, as the ordinary cure thereof. Wherefore the
faith, and sanctity of faithful and holy parents is not enough to sanctify
their children unto salvation without baptism, hereunto being necessarily
required justifying grace through divine faith, the collation whereof is the
prerogative of Christ's merit's. The grace, that does sanctify parents souls
does not sanctify their childrens souls, every soul is sanctified by its own
inherent sanctity, and not by the sanctity of an other in the formal sense.
Parents can only through their sanctity dispose, and prepare unto spiritual
sanctity, for as much, as they can procure for their children christian
baptism, whereof they be neither the formal, nor efficient causes: so the holy
prayers of S. Steven did dispose unto the marvelous grace, that sanctified S.
Paul. Act. but did not effect it: notwithstanding in regard of this holy
preparation practiced by faithful Parents the same S. Paul names their
children holy 10. ad Cor. that is to say Tertull. l. de monologia vocat liberos
parentum fidelium sanctitati destinatos. Et Hierom. Epis. 153. ad Paulinum,
Christianae fidei candidatos.
as to preparation holy: according to the interpretation of the ancient
Fathers. Furthermore though the faithful of the new law do succeed in the
Covenant established between Abraham, and God Rom 9. The words whereof are
these: I will be God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee Genesis 17.
neuertheless there cannot be alleged any one Scripture-testimony to prove,
that the children of believing Parents be sanctified in virtue of the said
Covenant: for they are not Abraham's seed, and heirs in their Mothers womb, or
as soon, as they be born, according to promise, but after they be made sons of
God by faith Gal. 3. quicunque enim in Christo baptiz ati estis, Christum
induist is: si autem vos Christi, ergo semen Abrahae estis haeredes secu^dum
promissionem.
in Christ Jesus through baptism, Gal. 3. Moreover the Covenant was made on
condition that every man child should have the foreskin of his flesh
circumcised, or otherwise cut of from the people of God Genesis 17. in consequence
of which it is evident, that even in the old law the Malesex descending from
Abraham by corporal generation were not counted de facto, indeed, children of
the Covenant without circumcision: in like manner in the new law no man is
Abraham's seed, child of the Covenant, and Heir of blessedness according to
promise, that is not Christ's before, by spiritual generation in baptism, which
is christian circumcision, and the condition of promised blessedness. Wherefore
it is a weak imagination of modern sectaries to think that faithful, and holy
Parents bring forth sanctified children. Besides Isaac, and Rebecca were most
renouned for faith, and holiness: neuertheless not even Caluinists will dare to
say, that their son Esau was sanctified in his mothers womb. Sithence the
Sacrament of baptism is a requisite absolutely necessary unto salvation
according to the common, and ordinary way instituted for the obtaining of it, a
christian woman conceiving a child shall do most prudently, and christianly
during the time of trauail to desire of God by daily prayers, and alms-deeds,
that the fruit of her womb may not be deprived of baptism, and God, whose power
is not confined to Sacraments, and whose mercy is above his other ordinary
works, can be moved at the piety, and devotion of a believing Mother to use a
special privilege to bring the said child to the kingdom of Heaven, though
natural causes do obstruct the baptism thereof: howeuer Infants of what
condition soever, dying in their infancy unbaptized with the guilt only of
original treason against the divine majesty committed by their first Parent
are but banished the court of Heaven, no sentence of sensible punishment passes
against them, being their consent, as to their own According to S. Bernard
cited by S. Tho. q. de malo ar. 2. a man burns in the fire of hell in regard
of his own will only. But Original sin is noe product of our own will.
will, was not given to the treason; so that their banishment is most mild,
and favorable, compared with the According to S. Gregory Nazian. Ora. 40.
young babes, which through misfortune are not baptized, neither enjoy the glory
of Heaven, nor endure the pains of Hell, which S. Austin. l. de pec. mer. and
remis. c. 16. calls mitissimam damnationem, the mildest damnation: and that
no man may conceive, that S. Austin so names the condition of children, that
dye without Baptism as if he so named it, in comparison of the torments those
suffer, which are punished with everlasting sensible burnings in regard of
their actual personal sins. ^ 5. con. Julia. cap. 8. affirms expressly,
that his meaning is, that children dying unbaptized are not afflicted with so
grievous pains, as that it were better they had never been born: but Christ
says of the damned in Hell, melius esset si natus non fuisset homo ille,
wherefore according to Christ's own saying it were better never to be born, then
to dwell in Hell: and hereby appears that poena sensus sensible pain, is not
procured by original sin, and indeed the punishment a man incur's through
original sin, is a privation of beatificall vision only, according to S.
Thomas in 2. dis. 33. q. 12. ar. 2. wherefore whereas S. Austin ser. 14. de
verbis Apostoli says that children vnbaptis'd are on the left hand, and go
into everlasting fire, doubtless he mean's not, that they shall be tormented
with the everlasting burnings of Hell. Besides perhaps S. Austin aggrauated the
punishment of children vnbaptis'd in heat of dispute with the Pelagians, that
ascribed unto them eternal felicity without the kingdom of Heaven. Howeuer S.
Austin in Enchir. ad Laur. cap. 47. ingeniously confesses, that he neither
can, nor dare define Qua, qualis, and quanta set poena illa parvulorum sine
baptismo morientium: and names it only mit^ssimam, aut leuissimam poenam. And
doubtless though children that dye without baptism in as much, as they be
deprived of the clear sight of God, suffer something of heauiness, neuertheless
it is not grievous unto them, being they know, that they are not deprived of
heavenly blessedness in regard of any personal fault of their's; again fince
that heauiness, or sorrow is not Poena sensus, a sensible punishment, there can
be no outward cause thereof.
banishment of ill Angels, and wicked men, that have by their own voluntary
act engaged in a rebellion against God their soueraign lord.

In regard of the absolute necessary dependence, that eternal life has of
baptism, Christ out of a favorable providence toward all mankind so
instituted this Sacrament, that even According to Tertull. l. de Baptis. c. 16.
Lay People can minister baptism lawfully when the necessity thereof urges, and
cannot otherwise be supplied: which opinion S. Hierom assertes Dial. 1.
adversus Lucif. and truly the Apostles, Joan. 4. ministered the baptism of
Christ while they were laymen, for they were made Priests at the last supper,
moreover this doctrine is asserted, as an Article of faith by the Council of
Florence in the Decree of Pope Engenius.
private persons of what condition, or sex soever (unclothed with authority by
ordination, or jurisdiction) can both lawfully, and validly exercise the
administration thereof in the occurrence of urgent necessity occasioned through
the absence of Pastors lawfully called thereunto, applying the true matter, and
true form, and employing also an intention conformable to Christ, and his
Church: and albeit that setting aside the case of necessity, baptism so
administered, is unlawful as to conscience in him, that is the Minister thereof:
neuertheless it is valid, as to the essence of the Sacrament: circumcision
performed by vncircumscised Gentills was counted valid: and the same reason
makes for the validity of Baptism exercised by unbaptized persons, seeing there
is parity between baptism, and circumcision, as unto necessary application.
But to proceed further, as to the excellency of this Sacrament of Christ (for
so it is named properly, and therefore Ephesians. 4. One lord, one faith, one
Baptism. Christ is our one sole lord upon the score of general redemption,
which he procured by his death, and passion. Faith is one only because the
object is but one, and common alike to all the faithful. Baptism is one only
because by virtue of the fame baptism all men are incorporated in to the
mystical body of Christ, which is the catholic Church.
one alone, whereas if it were a Sacrament of sole man, it should be many)
besid's it is chief product of sanctifying grace, whereby man is made a child
of God, Heir of Heaven, coheire, and brother of Christ To. 8. in regard whereof
it surpasses circucision, (that figured only, what it is indeed, and verity,
and the The baptism of S. John Baptist was no Sacrament taken in the proper
sense being a preparation there unto only: howeuer Christ thought fit to be
baptized of S. John his precursor, that thereby the water might be sanctified
through a touch of his sacred body, and likewise consecrated, as the
isntrumental cause unto giving ingress into his Church even then designed by
him to be built forthwith, for Christ's baptism happened in that very year of
his age, when he began to preach the Gospel.
baptism of S. John Baptist, that prepared only thereunto) it does S. Gregory
Nazian. Ora. 40. calls baptism a seal, or mark, whereby a man is signed,
and marked for a soldier of Christ: and S. Cyril. Ierosol. names it a sacred
vndelible seal: wherefore S. Austin l. 2. con. Epis. Parmeni. c. 12. affirms,
that as the mark's made with a hot iron in soldiers, that run from their
colors abide in their flesh, so baptism and holy order continue in Apostates,
that desert their faith, and religion. wherefore if such rebellious straglers
return after wards to the Church, those two Sacraments ought not to be
administered again, because they imprinted characters, which can never wear
away.
imprint in the person baptized a Character, which is a spiritual Mark, whereby
the soul is figured, and fashioned in conformity to Christ, as also known for
his, and distinguished from such, as are not his. Wherefore it is a distinctiue
sign, and consequently indelible, eternally permanent: so that after a soul is
once charactarised, or sealed Anabaptists are so named because such, as were
baptized in their infancy, those sectaries baptize again, as soon as they come
to perfect use of reason, as if the baptism conferred before were invalide; they
ground their Heresy in Christ's word's Mat. 28. teach all nations, baptising
them etc. but without cause, as in the character is proved.
with the seal of baptism, it ought not to be sealed again.

As concerning the ceremonies belonging to the solemnity and meetness of this
Sacrament they be outward sensible actions decently, and profitably employed
before, in, or after the administration thereof. Before the receiving of
baptism as meet preparations required there unto are first S. Hieron in cap.
28. Mat. non potest fieri, vt corpus baptismi suscipiat Sacramentum, nisi antea
anima susceperit veritate^. Loquitur de adultis.
instructions in the rudiments of christian religion if the person, or persons
suing for baptism are grown to full age of reason Math. 28. which scripture
does set down the order therein to be observed according to the condition,
capacity, or ripeness of each one: such as are apt, and capable to understand
christian doctrine ought to be instructed before they be admitted to the
Sacrament: which was the practice of the Apostles Act. 2. and 3. S. Philip the
Deacon preached unto the Eunuch Jesus, and required credence thereunto, before
he did baptize him Act. 8. and indeed it is impossible for the body to receive
the Sacrament of Baptism unless the soul receive before the verity of faith when
there is sufficient ripeness of judgment in the subject to receive it. Howeuer
neither instruction, nor any other disposition is of necessity, as to the
nature, or essence of this Sacrament: Infants in their infancy Mar. 10. Luc.
18. Christus ait, sinite paruulos, and nolite prohibere illos venire ad me,
talium ^nim est Regnum Coelorum.
being capable of heavenly blessedness, are not incapable of baptism though
they want capacity for instruction: Christ did express the necessity of
baptism, as to the new Testament after the same manner, as God did explain the
necessity of circumcision, as to the old Testament, Gen 17. and consequently
since infancy was no hindrance to circumcision neither is it a let to baptism.
Secondly Scrutiniu^, quo fides baptiz andoru^ explorabatur agnoscit Aug. l. de
side, and operibus c. 6. and exprimitur hac caremonia in Rituali, quande dicit
Sacerdos infan^ulo; quid petis, and patrinus respondet fidem, deinde Sacerdos
dicit abrenuncias Satanae? Huius ceremoniae meminit Tertull. l. de spectaculis
cap. 4.
inspection, or examination as to faith by interogatories. Thirdly Signi Crucis
vsurpati in baptism meminit Aug. l. de Catech. Rudibus cap. 20.
sign of the cross, which shows, that Christ does not work in this Sacrament
unto remission of sin's by water only, but by water and blood shed on the
cross. It was JESUS CHRIST that Christ is said to come by water because he
instituted the Sacrament of baptism in water signified by the sacred water,
that sprung out of his side hanging on the cross: and he is said to come by
blood in regard the blood of Christ cleanses from all sins. 1. Joan. 10.
came by water, and blood unto salvation of all men Io. 1. cap. 5. fourthly
Exorcismi meminit Justinius Maertyr Dialogo de Tripho.
exorcism whereby the devil is hindered so, that he cannot obstruct the
ministering of baptism, or the effect thereof. Fifthly Insufflationis (qua vtitur
Sacerdos solemniter baptizans, dicens, exi ab eo spriritus immu^de, meminit S.
Ambros. l. de ijs, qui initiantur, significat expulsionem Daemonis.
insufflation, or breathing on the person, that is to be baptized signifies
the casting out of the devil: for every one before baptism is a child of
wrath, of Hell, of damnation through original sin. Sixthly Gustus salis
memenit Council. Carthag 4. can. 5. transfertur ad significa^dam sapientiam.
Vnde dicitur sal sapientiae.
salt given to taste, which does represent the wisdom of christian doctrine
received in baptism. Seauenthly Mar. 7. misit (JESUS) digitos suos in auriculas
eius, and expuens tetigit linguam eius, and inspiciens in caelum gemuit, and
ait illi (surdo and muto) Epheta, quod est adaperire, Huius contactus narium,
and aurium meminit S. Ambrosius, loco supra citato.
the putting of spittle into the nostrills, and ears, which signifyes the
receiving of faith, and grace in virtue of the Sacrament. And this ceremony is
grounded Mar. 7. Eighthly. Mar. 1. co^plexans (LESVS) eos (paruulos) and
imponens manus super illos benedicebat. Huius caeremoniae meminit Aug. l. 2. de
pec. merit. c. 16.
Imposition of hands, and the Priests benediction with all after the imitation
of Christ Mar. ^. Ninthly Unctionis ex oleo benedicto in pectore, and scapulis
meminit Aug. ser. 206 de Tempore.
anoiming breast, and shoulders with holy oil, whereby is signified, that who
ever is haptized is prepared to fight the devil, the world, and the flesh.

Ceremonies employed in administering of baptism: that is to say: which
accompany the doing of the Sacrament are first: the Nomina Gentilium imponere
prohibitum est can. 33. Council Nicaeni.
naming of the person, that is to be baptized: a ceremony not at all times
practiced. Secondly Godfathers and God mothers Tertull l. de baptis. c. 18.
names sure ties, because of their engagement in order to such, as they
chrisen, and indeed thereby they are bound to instruct their God-sons, and
God-daughters in all requisits necessary to christian Religion. Trident. sess.
24. cap. de reform. But their obligation is far less when the children they
chrisen abide under the conduct of catholic Parents. From the Sacrament of
Baptism arises a spiritual kindred between the Godfather, or God-mother, and
the party baptized, and again between the Godfather, or God-mother, and the
Parents of the party baptized. In regard of this spiritual kindred it is
unlawful (without special dispensation) for either Godfather, or God-mother
to marry with the party they chrisen, and the marriage is invalide. Howeuer now
since the publication of the Council of Trent no such spiritual kindred
arises to the anulling of marriage between the Godfather, and God-mother. And
from hence it comes that Fathers, and Mothers ought not to baptize their own
children, if their baptism can be supplied otherwise, neither ought they to be
Godfathers, or Godmothers of their own children according to the Churches
canons. can. 30. q. 1. ad simina.
Godfathers, and Godmothers so called in regard of their concurrence unto the
spiritual regeneration by baptism, whereby they contract spiritual kindred
with the baptized, and parents thereof only; in as much as they undertake the
spiritual conduct of the baptized, as to instruction in the rudiments of
christian doctrine, and thereby contract an obligation according to justice to
the performance thereof, they be named suerties. Thirdly blessing of water:
fourthly immersion, or washing of water considered as it is a ceremony only,
and not as it is the immediate matter of this Sacrament, for taken in that
sense, it is more then an accidental ceremony being an essential part of
baptism.

Ceremonies employed after baptism is ministered: that is to say which be
subsequent thereunto are, first: anointing of the crown of the head in the
person baptized with chrism consecrated by a Bishop, which ceremony does
signify, that the baptized in Christ has put on Christ, and incorporated
himself into him, as to his head. Fourthly the putting of a wax candle lighted
into the hand of the baptized, which is a mystical representation of the
marvelous light of faith the baptized is called unto. Fifthly a white garment
which expresses the innocence and spiritual candor of him, that is baptized,
whose sins though they be as crimson, or scarlet by baptism be made white, as
snow, and wool.

CHAR. VII. OF CONFIRMATION
THE CONTENTS.
To lay hand's on the heads of such, as are baptized anointing their foreheads
with Chrism, and signing them with the sign of the cross, wherein consists
the true matter, and form of sacramental Confirmation, is a function proper to
Bishops only. Although the Sacrament of Confirmation, is not of so exceeding
great necessity as baptism: nevertheless it produces an additionall sanctity
unto perfecting the grace, that baptism brought forth before: baptism begets
christian soldiers, and sacramental confirmation improu's, and strengthens
them in professing Christ. As to confirm sacramentally, so to consecrate
Chrism is an office proper to Bishops only. Episcopal ceremonies practiced in
the consecration of Chrism.

COnfirmation is a The Councils of Florence in the Decree of Pope Eugenius, and
of Trent sess. 7. can. 7. define Confirmation to be a Sacrament of the new law.
Neither matters it, that it is not set down expressly in the holy Euangile, for
according to S. John cap. vlt. JESUS did many things, which the Evangelists
never committed to writing: and indeed it is mere accidental to a Sacrament,
that either the iustitution, or any essential part thereof be expressed
plainly in the holy scriptures: for before the new Testament was written both
batpism, and the Eucharist were Sacraments taken in the proper sense.
Sacrament of the new law taken in the proper sense: the ordinary Minister
whereof is a Bishop. S. Philip. Deacon, and disciple of Christ, though he did
confer the Sacrament of baptism Act. 8. neuertheless, he did not lay his hand's
on the heads of those whom he dad baptized anointing their forehead's with
Chrism, and signing them with the sign of the cross in the name of the Father,
son, and holy Ghost (wherein is this Sacraments consistency) that being an act
proper Though a mere Priest has power to baptize, and anoint the baptized with
the oil of Chrism consecrated by a Bishop, neuertheless he wantes authority
to sign with the same oil the forehead of the baptized: that function being
proper to Bishops when they give the holy Ghost to the baptized: howeuer by
special privilege of the sea Apostolic Abbates, that are no Bishops and mere
Briests also, may minister the Sacrament of Confirmation where there is no
Bishop to perform that office: and de facto Pope Gregory dispensed, as appears
by his own writings l. 5. Epis. 26.
to the Episcopal function. Wherefore when the Apostles, that were at
Jerusalem heard that the Samaritans, through S. Philips preaching had embraced
christian religion, and were baptized with all, they sent S. Chrysos. in 8.
Act. hom. 18. and Epiphan. haer. 21. express negant S. Philippum (cum esset
Diaconus dumtaxat) fuisse sufficientem muneri impone^di manus, vt Samaritani
reciperent Spiritu^ sanctum, proinde intentio ob qua^ missi fuerunt Petrus and
Ioannes ad id officium praestandum, fuit, quod essent Episcopi, vnde constat
Episcopum esse ministrum ordinarium sacramentalis confirmationis. Vnde S.
Dionys. Eccl. Hierar. cap. a. Sacerdotes, inquit, offerebant baptisatum
Episcopo, vt eum posset signare diuino, and Deifico vnguento.
S. Peter, and S. John (which were Apostles, and Bishops too) to lay their
hands on the heads of those, which were baptized, that they might receive the
holy Ghost; that is they sent unto them Bishops to minister the Sacrament of
confirmation unto giving of sanctifying grace: so the Theodor. in cantica ad
illa verba, vnguentum effusum nomen tuum, dicit baptizatos sub visibili
vnguenti specie huius Sacramenti, invisibilem sancti spiritus accipere gratiam.
Jtem S. Cyrillus Hierosol. Cateche. 3. vnguentum, inquit, confirmationis
postquam est consecratum. non est amplius vnguentum nudum, and commune, sed
Chrysma Christi, quo corpus quidem vngitur anima autem sancto, and viuifico
spiritu sanctificatur.
ancient Fathers nearest to the Apostles times do vnanimonsly interpret the
meaning of the Scripture Act. 8. that says: then laid they their hands on
them, and they received the By imposition of hands mentioned Act. 8. The
ancient Fathers understood the administing of sacramental confirmation, namely
S. Cyprian Epis. 73. S. Hierom. Dial. con. Lucif. ad S. Austin l. 15. de
Trinit. c. 26. affirms, that the Apostles (Peter, and John) prayed, that those
might receive the holy Ghost, on whom they had laid their hands. By the holy
Ghost is meant the third person in the B. Trinity, and he is said to be given
when sanctifying grace is infused into, or augmented in our souls; and
doubtless the imposition of hands before mentioned Act. 8. through the virtue,
and efficacy of it is application was indeed an effectual isntrumental cause
of grace: for it is said in the same chapter set down, that when Simon saw, that
through the imposition of the Apostles hands, the holy Ghost was given, he
offered to buy it, conceiving, he might obtain that divine gift with money.
Holy Ghost. And albeit that signing, and anointing with Chrism in the forehead
be not mentioned therein, yet it is clear, that then S. Peter, and S. John did
not administer confirmation without either of them, they having been by
continual usage received, and practiced in the catholic Church down from the
Apostles, to the present times, as the essential parts thereof: in so much
that even anciently confirmation is named the Sacrament Aug. l, 2. con. lite.
petit. c. 104. vocat Sacramentum chrysmatis, and dicit esse Sacramentu^ sicut
Baptimus etc. Aug. and alij Patres vocant illud signaculum in front.
of Chrism, Sacrament, or sign in the forehead, Christ did think it fitting
that the forehead should be signed because of the outward eminence thereof above
the other parts of man's body, signifying thereby, that a Christian ought not to
be ashamed of the cross. Besid's in the same chap. Act. 8. though S. Luke
relates only, that the Eunuch (before S. Philip baptized him) said: I believe
the son of God to be JESUS, making no mention of the other divine persons to
wit: Father, and Holy Ghost, nor of other necessary requisits to divine faith:
notwithstanding according to S. Austin lib. de fide and oper. cap. 9. it is
certain that S. Philip instructed the Eunuch in all points necessarily
belonging to christian faith: howeuer it is a weak argument, that has the
support of negatiues only: and a manifest weakness to question what the Church
of God armed against all Heresies through the constant infallible assistance of
the holy Ghost does practice universally. Moreover Christ at his last supper
(when he instituted Christ iustituted the Sacrament of confirmation at his last
supper according to tradition set down in the 2. Epis. c. 1. of Pope Fabianus,
who expressly assertes, that Christ at his last supper appointed, and determined
Chrism for the proper matter of this Sacrament, and taught his Apostles how to
make it.
the Sacrament of confirmation) taught his Apostles the mingling of oil, and
Balsom to the making of Chrism, which is the necessary matter thereof, and
instructed them as to the form also, which is, this or some other equalling
it, for example Catech. Trid. par. 2. cap. 3. ait and Christum tradidisse qua
forma administretur hoc Sacramentum and legitima^ formam esse hanc, vel aliam
aequiualentem. Consigno to signo Crucis etc.
I sign thee with the sign of the cross, and confirm thee with Chrism of
salvation in the name of the Father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost,
Amen. Which words, or others equalling them are The general practice of the
Church, and the Decree of Pope Eugenius in the Council of Floreuce give
evidence of the from of sacramental confirmation. The particle Salvation is
put, unto signifying the chief product of this Sacrament, which is sanctifying,
and strengthening grace; again the particles with the sign of the cross are
inserted in the form, because the military mark, that the party confirmed
receives, is the sign of the cross, and indeed all christian signing is
performed with the sign of the cross, as plainly appears by the general
practice of the primitive Church.
the form of this Sacrament. The According to S. Hierom Dial. con. Lucif. c.
4. Bishops give the holy Ghost by laying on their hands on the baptized that is
by the Sacrament of cofirmation the holy Ghost is given and Epis. 150. ad
Iubaian. he calls sacramental confirmation grace of strengh unto professing
the faith of Christ before king's, and Tyrants: also observes that even the
Apostles wanted courage, and strengh before they were confirmed through the
coming of the holy Ghost at Pentecost: but afterward (says S. Hierome) they
spoke boldy to the Prince of the Jews, saying, They were bound to obey rather
God, then men, and rejoiced in the mids of their bitter sufferings.
special effect of confirmation is additionall sanctification, and armor of
grace, or grace of strength, as a pleadg of the spirit in the heart. 2. Cor. 1.
Whereby the person baptized is established in Christ, and enabled to wrestle
against spiritual wickedness, and stand boldly against the sensible assaults
of Tyrants, that persecute the catholic religion. The Apostles after they were
confirmed, with great confidence preached the word of God, and with great power
gave testimony of the resurrection of Jesus. Act. 4. S. Peter vnconfirmed was
frighted at the voice of a poor Maid. S. Peter confirmed made light of the
imperial sword of Nero.

In as much as this Sacrament is vniterable deputing a christian to a special
office in the service of Christ, that is, admitting him into Christ's militia,
and withal arming him with the grace of courage, and strengh to stand against
Tyrants in defense of Christ, and his faith, of necessity imprinteth an It Is an
Article of christian faith defined. Trident. sess. 7. de Sacram. in genere
Floren, in decreto Eugenij that the Sacrament of confirmation imprints an
indelible Character, which bear's the name of a military sign, or mark.
vndelible cbaracter, which is a spiritual mark, or quality, that receiu's its
existency in the soul of him, that is confirmed through a real impression
thereof made in virtue of the Sacrament: In like manner the Character of
baptism is a real physical quality, or entity imprinted in him, that is
baptized aright, and can never be blotted out, either by Apostasy, or Heresy.

For as much, as of necessity cofirmation presupposes the Character of
baptism; it is of no effect if conferred on a person unbaptized. A man must be
made a christian through baptism, before he can make a progress in christianity
through confirmation. A man must be made a member of Christ through baptism,
before he can be a soldier of Christ through confirmation. A man must be endued
with faith through baptism, before he can be deputed to a special office in
the exercise thereof (which is to defend it against the assaults of Tyrants
through confirmation. A man must be invested with Hieron. diolog. con. Lucifer.
cap. 4. quemodo, inquit, ab Ecclesia recipiet (confirmatione^) qui nec dum
remissionem peccatorum co^secutus est. Docet Arianos qui errabant contra formam
baptismi non accepisse spiritum sanctu^ per Sacramentum Co^firmationis.
grace unto remission of sins, through baptism, before he can receive the holy
Ghost unto perfection, through confirmation, which does not confer sanctity
after the manner of other Sacraments only: but also does Omnes S. Patres qui
agunt de Sacramento confirmationis doce^t baptismi gratiam perfici, and
consummari per gratiam co^firmationis.
increase, and perfect the sanctity received before by baptism, it being the
complement, or consummation thereof. Whereby it is plainly evident, that albeit
this Sacrament is not, as baptism, a requisite absolutely necessary unto
obtaining eternal blessedness; neuertheless it is conditionally necessary: to
wit, as to the armor of grace, and According to Pope Urban. (did. 5. de
consecratione) there is no perfect christian, that has not received the holy
Ghost through the imposition of Episcopal hands: and Hugo de S. Vict. l. 2. de
Sacram. par. 7. cap. 3. countes it dangerous to dye without being confirmed
before, which is conform to the doctrine of ancient Fathers (S. Dionys. L^de
Eccles. Hierar. c. 4. S. Cypr. Epis. 72. ad Iubaian.) which assert, that then a
man has fulness of sanctity, and is made an adopted son of God, when he receives
both the Sacraments, baptism, and confirmation.
perfection thereof, as also to a more ample measure of blessedness, then
baptism alone does effect: so that christian catholics, especially such, as
live under persecution ought to use extraordinary endeauours for their
admittance to this Sacrament, the proper office there of being to strenghten
them by grace, that they may not fall from the Church of Christ, In Epis. ad
Fabium vti refert Eusebius l. 1. cap. 35.
S. Cornelius affirms that Nouatus fell into Heresy for the want thereof. If
they have no conueniency in their own country to repair unto a catholic
Bishop, the spiritual advantages, which they may reap from the Sacrament of
confirmation will compence the charges of a journey into foreign parts, where
catholic Bishops are to be found: but this is to be understood in reference to
such catholics, as have ability of body, and a competency of temporal
fortunes.

As touching the sensible rites, or ceremonies employed in, or about the
Sacrament of confirmation, the most remarkable are two only. For example a
Bishop in making of chrism breaths three times in form of a cross on the
mouth of the pot, or flagon, that contains the said Chrism, signifying
thereby, that even at that time through episcopal consecration Chrism
receives virtue from God. whereby it is empowered, as his instrument to confer
strengthening grace to such, as do receive the Sacrament aright: and ceremonies
signifying the thing, that is done for the time they are employed, are
profitable by the confession of such Caluinus in sua harmonia ad cap. 7. S.
Marci fatetur caeremonias illas, quae habent significationem eius, quod tunc
fit, du^ exercentur, esse vtiles.
as impugn catholic ceremonies. The other ceremony is the reverence a Bishop
exhibiteth to the consecrated Chrism, bowing down his head, he saluteth,
saying: Hail holy Chrism. This ceremony has nothing of Idolatry: for an
vnliu'd thing may challenge religious adoration in reference to an other
distinct, wherein excellency is contained, to which religious adoration is due.
The ancient Jews adored the Ark of the Testament, because of the relation it
had to God, that is an increated excellency; and all Christians do religiously
worship, and adore the sacred books of the new Testament in reguard of the word
of God therein comprehended, And subjects of a temporal Prince do render civil
reverence to his chair of state in relation to his sacred Person (if a king,
or Emperor) to which is due civil adoration by the law of God, and nature: in
like manner religious worship is exhibited to holy Chrism, in as much, as it is
the effectual instrument of God to give armor of grace to such, as are
baptized, and is by special benediction deputed to the effecting thereof.

CHAR. VIIJ. OF THE EVCHARISTE
THE CONTENTS.
Christ the night before his passion made his last Testament, gave unto his
Church a legasy of his body, and blood in the Sacrament of the Euchariste under
the form's of bread, and wine for to continue the spiritual food of souls till
he come to Judgment. The express words of the Testament. This is my body. This
Chalice is the new Testament in my blood, exclude each figure, that is
inconsistent with the litterall sense intended by the Testatour that uses not
to say one thing literally, and mean an other mystically: because Christ Said
this is my body, this Chalice is the new Testament in my blood, no man in
reason ought to doubt of it. Authorities of Councils, testimonies of ancient
Fathers, and the warrantable practice of both primitive and modern Churches
euince the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Euchariste: in
virtue of the same word, that was made flesh, and made all things of nothing
bread is transubstantiated in to the body, and wine in to the blood of Christ,
who is in Heaven, and in the Sacrament at once. One body can agree with many
places by divine dispensation. Requisit's necessary to a worthy receiving of
Christ's body, and blood in the Sacrament.

THe Euchariste is the The blood of Christ shed unto remission of sins is the
proper legacy of the new Testament according to Christ's own words set down 1.
Cor. 11. This Chalice is the new Testament in my blood.
legacy of the new Testament unto eternal life, that Christ bequeathed to his
Church in a Sacrament of his body, and blood the night before he suffered his
passion in the presence of witnesses without exception, which were his
Apostles. The same body, and blood, that Christ offered in a sacrifice on the
cross visibly to the redeeming of man kind unto liberty, he left in a Sacrament
under the elements of bread, and wine invisibly to the feeding of man unto
eternal life. In the bestowing of this legacy, Christ, who is faithful in all
he promises, fulfilled the promise he had made long before, and which is set
down Io. 6. Christ Joan. 6. promising, and recommending the Sacrament of his
body, and blood, said whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood has
eternal life, and except you shall eat the flesh of the son of man, and
drink his blood you have no life in you: again the bread, that I will give, is
my flesh for the life of the world. Thus, says S. Austin (ser. 2. de verbis
Apos. c. 1.) life said of life, and to him, that thinks life to be a liar,
this meat shall be death, and not life.
The bread, that I will give is my flesh for the life of the world etc. Thereby
signifying plainly his intent of leaving to his Church his substantial real
body in meat, and his substantial real blood in drink, as an effectual
expedient for the obtaining eternal life: for always the words of Christ, or
God, which do importe a thing promised tending to man's salvation ought to be
understood in the sense wherein they be outwardly expressed in scripture: that
is to say, Aug. l. de doc. Chris. cap. 10. and 16. in sermon, inquit, diuino
id omne pertinet ad sensum literalem (id est debet accipi literaliter, vt verba
sona^t, and non figurate) quod potest referri ad morum honestatem, vel fidei
veritatem: and locutio quae iubet vel vtilitate^, vel. beneficentia^, est
propria, non figuratiua secundum Iustinum codice de legibus.
literally, setting aside Tropes, and mystical significations. Besides a law,
or precept, that exact's obedience from subjects (and such indeed is the legacy
of the new Testament) ought to be clear, and plain to the understanding of
every man; that each one may decline what is forbidden, and observe what is
enjoined. For no law, or precept can be understood by all subjects if the words
thereof be mystical, or figurative: but Christ to show that he spok according
Council. Nicae. quod est 7. synodus generalis. Act. 6. probat ex citato Textu
Jo. 6. con. Iconiclastas, Sacramentum Eucharistiae non esse imaginem Christi,
sed verum, and reale corpus erus: probat insuper ex eodem loco Trid. sess. 21.
can. 1. laicos non adctrings iure divine ad communionem sub vtraque specie.
to the plain litterall sense: when he perceived, that the Capharnaits (for in
the synagogue at Capharnaum Christ taught these things) began to reason among
themselves concerning the possibility of giving his flesh to eat, and his
blood to drink, he did not correct their conceptions, as to orall manducation,
and orall drinking thereof (yet his custom In regard Nicodemus conceived
spiritual regeneration after the similitude of natural generation, Christ
rectifyed his understanding: in regard the Pharisees Io. 16. Mat. 15. imagined
that a mere omission of washing their hand's before refection, was a grievous
crime; Christ instructed them in the knowledge of sin: and in regard the
Apostles made a wrong construction of his saying in order to eating his body,
anddrinking of his blood, Christ forthwith expounded his meaning telling them,
that the words he had spoken were spirit, and life, that is, according to S.
Austin Epis. 98. they were spiritually not carnally meant, as if Christ had
intended to give unto his Apostles particles of his body divided from the
whole, so that Christ in order to the manner (and that only) of eating his
body, and drinking of his blood corrected his Apostles.
was constant in conformity to his pastoral office to instruct his auditory
conceiving amiss of his sayings) but repeated the same words confirmed with an
oath: saying to them: Amen, Amen: except ye eat the flesh of the son of man
and drink his blood ye have no life in you: which conuincingly shows, that
Christ spoke not figuratively, but literally: and indeed an oath is sworn to
the end, that such, as doubt of the things promised, or spoken, may be assured
of the true meaning of him, that promises, or speaks any thing Hebrae. 6. in
consequence of which a thing confirmed with an oath, ought to be interpreted in
the Innocentius 3. cap. veniens. Extra de iuramento.
plain literal sense, and according to the conceptions of those, for whose
sake an oath is sworn: but the Capharnaits, for whose sake Christ Augus. ait
Christum iurasse dice^do Amen, Amen.
swore, conceived Christ to speak of orall manducation of his body, and orall
drinking of his blood, wherefore it was that manner of eating, and drinking,
that Christ confirmed with his oath: but when he saw, that his Disciples did
misunderstand his meaning as to the eating his flesh, and drinking his blood
imagining him to mean, that they were to eat his flesh, and drink his blood
with the mouth of their body after the manner of common meat, and drink: that
is, to tear Christ's body, and blood, dividing one part from an other in
eating, and drinking it, he corrected, According to S. Cyprian ser. de Coena
Domini the intent and aim of Christ's saying Joan. 6. Unless you eat etc. was
to instruct us that our abiding in him is meat and drink: from whence
Caluinists unadvisedly infer, that S. Cyprian. interpreted Christ's words
Unless you eat etc. Of spiritualll manducation only. For in the place set
down S. Cyprian expressly assertes that Christ commanded Christians in the new
law to drink his blood, the eating whereof in the old law (Deuteronomy. 12.) was
prohibited, which doubtless is meant of true real drinking. Wherefore S.
Austin 9.57. in Leuit, ingeniously confesses, that in the new law we are as
truly commanded to: drink the blood of Christ, as were the Jews in the old law
forbidden to drink the blood of sacrifices offered unto expiating sins, in
consequence of which according to S. Cyprian and S. Austin real drinking of
Christ's real blood is commanded in the chapter alleged.
and instructed them, as to the manner thereof only: saying, The words that I
spoke unto you are spirit, and life: that is, says S. Aug. on the 98. Psalm.
They ought not to be understood carnally: as if Christ's intent had been to give
certain particles, or pieces of his body divided from the whole: but they
ought to be understood spiritually; which is to say, that Christ's body is in
the Sacrament after the manner of a spiritual substance, invisible,
indivisible, whole, and entire in the whole entire subject: also whole, and
entire in each part thereof. And here is observable, that a real substantial,
and true body may be considered after two sundry fashions conformably to the
Apostle, that says 1. Cor. 15. A body is raised spiritual in incorruption,
that is sown natural in corruption. First as it is clothed with terrene
conditions, and qualities, which naturally accompany a body in this mortal
life. For example visibility, divisibility, and mortality. Secondly as it is
deuested of such rayments of corporal accidents, and invested with the noble
conditions, and qualities of a spirit, or spiritual substance, namely
invisibility, indivisibility, impassibility. According to this latter
consideration, which is proper to things spiritual, Christ meant the orall
eating of his flesh, and orall drinking of his blood, saying, The words that I
speak unto you, that is, those things (my flesh, and blood) are Trid. sess. 13.
ait Christum instituisse Sacrame^tum Eucharistiae ta^quam spiritualem animaru^
cibum.
spirit and life, and that is to say are spiritually clothed after the
imitation of spiritual substances exempted from the carnal proprieties, which
naturally adhere to flesh, and blood in this mortal life but are no essential
requisits there unto: whereby it is plain, that the eating of Christ's body, and
drinking of his blood in the Sacrament of the Eucharist may be said spiritual
in reference to the spiritual being they have therein. Besides Christ's body,
and blood be indeed spiritual supersubstantiall meat, and drink whereby the
substance of humane souls is supported, and nourished spiritually. As corporal
meat does repair material breaches, which natural heat mak's in a
material body: so this spiritual meat does repair the spiritual ruins,
that the fire of concupiscence does cause in a spiritual soul. Also the eating
of Christ's body, and drinking of his blood, may be termed spiritual through
faith: for as much, as a Christian, that eats, and drinks worthily, is
united to Christ by faith which is aspirituall quality. Again the eating of
Christ's body, and the drinking of his blood may be styled spiritual, because
of Christ's death and passion figured therein, and this Sacrament imports
Quotiescu^quo, ait Apostolus, manducabitis panem hunc, and calicem bibetis
mortem Domini annunciahitis donec veniat.
a commemoration thereof: so that a Christian receiving worthily does
communicate with Christ's passion suffered on the cross, and this manner of
spiritual locution is used sometimes by ancient Fathers, who neuertheless
expressly affirm Christ to be truly The second Council of Nice Act. 6. declares
evidently, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist ought not to be called the Image
of Christ's body; because he did not say, take, eat the Image of my body: also
declares, that in the Sacrament is the true body of Christ, because he said;
This is my body.
really, and substantially in the Sacrament of the Eucharist; neither is the
literal sense of words inconsistent with the spiritual signification of
things, which they express taken in the literal sense. For example though
Isaac and Ismael do literally signify the two sons of Abraham, as the history
of Genesis plainly shows: neuertheless the Apostle Gal. 4. by Ismael, that
was born of Agar a servant, spiritually, and figuratively understands the old
Testament, that was a law of bondage: and likewise by Isaac, that was born of
Sara a free woman spiritually, and figuratively understands the new
Testament, which is a law of liberty, and grace: and indeed all Sacraments
whatsoever besides Aug. l. 2. con. aduers. legis c. 9. ait Christi locutionem,
nis^ manducaueritis etc. codem modo esse figuratam, ac duo filij Abraha fu^^unt
duo Test amenta and Jsaac; and Ismael secu^dum literam vere, and de facto
fuerunt filij Abraha, figurabant tamen duo Testamenta. Idem Aug. l. 3. de doct.
Christ. c. 16. ait illam Christi locutionem, nisi manducaueritis etc. figuratam
esse, quatenus praecipit communicandum passioni Christi, and vti^^ter
recondendum in memoria quod pro nobis caro Christi crucifixa sit. Non negat
tamen dictam locutionem in sensu literali etiam intelligi de reali. and oral^
manducatione corporit Christi and bibition^ (...) sanguinis sub spocicbus
consecratis panis, and vins.
their literal, do admit a spiritual, or figurative construction, being
defined visible figures, or signs of spiritual invisible grace. The Sacrament
of Circumcision according to the literal meaning thereof did signify corporal
circumcision, as to the foreskin of the flesh called prepuce, and according to
it is spiritual, and figurative signification did import spiritual
circumcision, as to the foreskin of the heart, which is of spiritual vices, as
also did shadow grace given in the new law. In like manner the words uttered in
baptism, I baptize thee: taken in the literal sense, which is expressed
immediately by the said words, do signify real washing of natural water, as
to the body: and taken in the spiritual sense they signify spiritual washing
of grace, Aug. vnde tanta vis aquae, vt corpus tangat cor vero abluat?
as to the soul. Furthermore the words, whereby Christ instituted the Sacrament
of the Eucharist in full performance of the promise before mentioned Io. 6. give
clear evidence of Christ's meaning in recognition of a real eating of his
body, and real drinking of his blood.

The words of institution (according to the consenting Testimonies of all
ancient and modern writers are these. This is my body, which is given for you
Luc. 22. This is my body, which shall be delivered for you. This Chalice is the
new Testament in my blood. 1. Cor. 11. This is the blood of the new Testament,
which shall be shed for you. Mar. 14. This is my blood of thenew Testament,
that shall be shed for many unto remission of sins Mat. 26. Which words of
Christ being as plainly, and clearly uttered, as to the litterall sense, as
those of God the Father in the Transfiguration of Christ to wit: This is my
son: Mat. 30. and consequently there being no more reason to wrest the former,
then the latter words to a figurative signification, it is a manifest blindness
in the Caluinists, and other ancienter sectaries to wrest the proper clear
words, and to substitute in their room improper obscure tropes, and figures
without any ground of reason: for what can be more unreasonable then to think
that Christ saying ( This is my body which shall be delivered for you. 1. Cor.
11. This is my blood, which shall be shed for many unto remission of sins Mat.
26. meant a figure Both canon, and civil lawers treating of Testaments,
legasies, and contracts, teach that we must not recede from the words of the
Testament, nor from the rigor thereof, and that we ought to presume of the
Testatours intent, and meaning according to the signification of the words
taken in their proper sense.
of his body only: and a figure of his blood only since a figure was not
delivered in a Sacrifice, but Christ's true, real, substantial body: nor a
figure was shed unto remission of sins, but Christ's true real, and
substantial blood. Besides a thing that is mysterious unheard of before, and
instituted for an article of faith, as is the Sacrament of the Eucharist, of
necessity ought to be propounded According to S. Chrysostom. Hom. 83. in Mat.
because Christ said; This is my body, we must not doubt of, but believe it to
be so. And S. Austin Tom. 8. in psalm. 33. says expressly that when Christ gave
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, he did that, which no other could do: for
Christ, says he, carried himself in his own hands, while giving his body he
said. ( This is my body.) But truly he had not done what no other could do, if
he had carried in his hands a mere figure or sign of his body only. Again S.
Cyril Hieros. Catech. mysti. affirms, that the wine is as truly changed into
the blood of Christ, as water was converted into wine in Cana-Galilaea.
Moreover S. Cyprian ser. de Domi. coena, asserts, that the bread Christ gave
unto his Disciples, is changed, says he, not as to the form, or figure (that
is as to the accidents thereof) but as to the nature (that is as to substance)
through the Omnipotent power of the word, that was made flesh.
plainly and evidently otherwise the mystery established unto salvation might
lead into error, and damnation, since a thing delivered in Tropes, and
figures is subject unto uncertainty, and intricacies. Again the words before
mentioned set down by three Evangelists, and one Apostle, importe the new
Testament made by Christ himself the night before his passion: and it is
incredible, that a Testatour expecting death suddenly, should say in express
terms, what he meaned not. In regard whereof the ancient Fathers do
unanimously declare, that the cited words of institution, vzt. This is my body:
This is the blood of the new Testament ought to be taken in their proper sense,
that no man according to reason might doubt of the ^^all, and substantial
presence of Christ's real, and substantial body, and blood in the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, Christ the divine Testatour expressing himself therein plainly,
and clearly. Wherefore it is an infallible Article of christian faith, that
under the elements of bread, and wine is contained Christ's true real, and
substantial body, and blood through a marvelous transubstantiation, that is to
say, substantial Transsubstantiation signifies conversion of one substance
into an other.
conversion of the bread into his body, and the wine into his blood in virtue
of the word, that was made flesh, which the word made, that made all things of
nothing Genesis 1. In virtue of the word that changed Lots wife into a pillar of
salt. Genesis 19. that turned Moses rod into a serpent Exodus 4. that converted
the rivers, and fountains of Egypt into blood Exodus 7. that made wine of water
Io. 2. that created man of the dust of the ground, and breathed in his face
breath of life. Genesis 1. In virtue of the word, that was God. Io. 10. Wherefore
since the omnipotency of the word can work such marvelous effects, it is
evidently plain, that Christ, who is this omnipotent word, to wit, the son of
God, can convert bread into his flesh, and wine into his blood: and the divine
omnipotency, as to transmutation of one created substance into an other in like
manner created, the Devil did acknowledge when he said unto Christ: If thou be
the son of God, command, that these stones may be made bread. Mat. 4. Wherefore
such as deny transubstantiation in the Sacrament of Christ's body, and blood, as
an action impossible, are worse then Devils, and do not consider the infinite
power of God according to the innate virtue thereof. Besides if the nutritive
faculty of nature can turn bread into the substance of him, that eats it,
and change wine into the blood of him, that drinks it: if art can make Iron
of earth, and glass of ashes: why cannot God, that is above nature, and art,
convert bread into Christ's body, and wine into his blood: Christ's body, and
blood being created substances. Furthermore it is extreme weakness in a
Christian, that ought in the mysteries of christian doctrine to be ruled by
faith, which is a conviction of things not seen, to think, that he cannot
receive in the Sacrament with his corporal mouth the true real and
substantial body, and blood of Christ because he does not see them: for indeed
he might, as to reason, think as well, that there are not three persons in God,
and one substance: two natures in Christ, and one person: or that there was
never such a man, as Solomon; or any such, as are called his great
Grandfathers, and Grand-mothers because he has not seen them, or to think he
is not endued with an immortal soul which quickneth each part of his body
because he cannot see it: and it is as great weakness to think that if all the
belieuers had eaten of Christ's real body from the first age for 1662. it would
have been wasted, and spent long ago though it had been as big, as a great
mountain: for Christ's It Is no strange thing for the substance of Christ's body
to exist after an indiuisibie manner, since according to true Philosophy the
substance, or essence of every real thing has an indivisible existency.
body by divine dispe^sation is spiritually clothed in the Sacrament, being
invisible, indivisible, and incorruptible, and consequently deuested of outward
extension in order to place: and therefore not subject to natural alterations,
which do accompany common bodies: As Heat, brightness of fire, sweet odor of
a rose, do not suffer prejudice for as much as they be communicated to many:
and as the pot of meal, and vessel of oil did not fail, or diminish, though
the widow of Sareptha, and her family did eat thereof continually, while the
Heavens were shut from rayning through the prayers of Elias 30. Regum: so the
body of Christ in the Sacrament is not wasted spent, or prejudiced, albeit that
the whole Church does daily feed thereof.

Likewise it is extreme weakness to think that Christ cannot be in Chrysostom. l. de
Sacerd. ait, qui (Christus) cum patro sursum sedet, in illo ipso temporis
mome^to omnium manibus pertractatur.
Heaven and in the Sacrament at once, in as much as one body is not capable
according to Philosophy to possess two places together: for God is not confined
to Aristotle's principles, The divine omnipotency transcend's Philosophy her
Rules, and all the works of nature. God made all things of nothing contrary
to the maxim of Aristotle. Nothing is made of nothing. Furthermore in Christ
are two natures, and one sole person: Christ was conceived of the Virgin Mary
without prejudice to her virginity: and in the day of his Ascension penetrated
the Heavens, which are solid bodies, without boring into them: and other
effects which unto Philosophy are impossible, to God are possible. Howeuer one
body, and many places are not inconsistent together, as to natural Philosophy,
especially when a body is in many places after the manner of a spiritual
substance deuested of outward extension in order to the places, that contain
it, (and so Christ's body is in many consecrated Hosts at once) or when one body
is in one place with it is quantity extended outwardly thereunto, and in another
deprived thereof at the same time, and so Christ's body is in Heaven, and in the
Sacrament together: all which according to natural Philosophy ought not to
seem things impossible, outward extension in order to place being an
accidental propriety only of a body clothed with quantity, as natural
Philosophy teaches, and consequently the want thereof destroieth not the
nature, or essence of a body, as natural Philosophy teaches also. Besides
though the light of the sun be a corporeal quality, neuertheless, it is well
nigh in infinite places at once: likewise the words of a preacher are corporal
things, which in the same moment of time possess the ears of all such as are
attentive to his sermon: and one man walking in a Chamber, where be placed
sundry looking-glasses, his Image appears in each of them at the same time:
in consequence of which doubtless God in the virtue of his word can put
supernaturally one singular Man in many places, since his figure (which is some
thing) does naturally occupate many looking-glasses at once.

Out of the premises plainly follows, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist
has a singular prerogative beyond all the other Sacraments of the new law, in
as much as it is not an effectual instrument only to confer divine grace,
which is a soueraign Antidote against the poison of sin: but it contains, and
gives also the Author of grace: wherefore it comprehends within it self both the
sweetness of inherent sanctity, and the giver thereof, which is all sweet, being
the fountain of sweetness and sweetness it self, whereunto the fair spowse in
the Canticles inuiteth saying. Taste ye, and see how sweet our lord is. Howeuer
as Manna, which was a figure of this Sacrament, as to Christ's body, did seem
bitter, and loathsome to the ill minded, and pleasant only to the good
Israelites. In like manner Christ's body to Christians, that receive it
unworthily, is the bitterness of death unto death, and to others, that eat it
aright, the sweetness of life unto life: so fire, that purges gold consumes
wood: so the suns light, that recreat's the sound, offend's the unsound eyes:
so the sweet savor of an oynt^^ent, that refreshes doves, kill's beetles.
Christians by eating Christ's natural body worthily are not united to him only
Ephesians. 5. quia membra sumus de corpore eius, and de car ne ^^us, and de ossibus
cius.
through faith, and charity mystically, but really, and are flesh of his flesh,
and bones of his bones Ephesians. 5.

To eat worthily unto a natural union with Christ, a christian ought 1. Cor.
probet autem seipsum homo, and sic de pane illo edat, vnde dc Sacramento
corporis, and sanguinis Christi canit Ecclesia mors est malis, vita bonis.
to examine himself before, and purge out the leaven of vice. Christ has Nulla
conventio Christi ad diabolum: nulla conventio charitatis ad peccatum mortale.
no concord with sin, nor consequently union with a soul, that sin has
dominion over: Christ's body will not be Luc. 23. in sindone mu^da, and in
sepulchro in quo nondum quisqua^ positus sit.
wrapped but in a pure linen cloth, that is to say, in a clean heart: nor
will be laid in a Tomb, that is not hewn out of a rock, wherein never any laid
before. As there is no agreement betwixt Christ and Belial, no communion betwixt
sanctity and iniquity, no society betwixt light, and darkness: so there is noe
union betwixt Christ's body and a Christian, that serue's Belial, delight's in
iniquity, and walks in darkness: wherefore let no Christian think to tie a
knot of union with Christ, if he shall put his body where already is L. 6.
super cap. 9. Lucae, ait, nemo accipit cibum Christi, nis^ fuerit ante sanatus.
Et Aug. trac. 26. in Joan. sic praecipit: Innocentiam ad altar portate.
established Belial, that is to say, the devil through mortal sin: and truly
Christians, that 1. Cor. 11. qui manducat, and bibit indigne reu^ erit
sanguinis, and corporis Domini.
unworthily receive the body of Christ as much, as lies in them do betray him
to the devil, putting him in a place, the devil command's in, and
consequently become guilty of Christ's body, and blood in as high a measure,
According to S. Chrysostom hom. de non contemnenda Ecclesia, and hom. 8 ad
popul. Antioch. those which receive the Sacrament of the body, and blood of
Christ unworthily do an injury to Christ's proper person like the Jews, and
Gentiles, that crucified him.
as Judas, that betrayed him to the Jews. As the children of Israel were
for^idden Exodus 12. to cate the paschall lamb (which was a figure of Christ's
Sacramental body too) Exodus 12. non comedetis ex eo crudum quid, nec coctum,
sed tantum assum igne.
raw, or boiled, butrosted only: so Christians be prohibited to eat Christ's
body raw: that is before the fire of charity has prepared them for it; or
boiled namely in luxury, and voluptuousness, but roasted only viz. at the fire
of a contrite heart inflamed with the memory of Christ Ecce agnus Dei, inquit,
Apostolus, qui tollit peccata mu^di.
the lamb of God, that was roasted in the hot furnace of affliction for the
taking away the sins of the world.

CHAR. IX. OF COMMUNION IN BOTH KIND'S
THE CONTENTS.
Christ instituted the holy Euchariste under the elements of both bread, and
wine: Christ by his institution did not oblige the Church to dispense the
Euchariste under both kinds: Christ left it in the Churches power to give the
Euchariste to lay people under one, or both kinds, accordingly, as she should
think fit in order to times, places, and persons: those, which receive the
Euchariste under one sole kind have nothing less, nor such, as receive under
both kinds have nothing more of Christ, nor of the Sacramental grace, if there
be parity in the receivers, as to worthiness: objections answered.

Communion in both kinds is the receiving of Christ's real body, and blood
under the two Sacramental shapes, or element's of bread, and wine afrer
Christ's own institution Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22. Howeuer from thence it
follows not, that communion under both kinds is necessary to the whole
Church joint, and separate unto salvation: for matrimony. and the orders of
Bishops, and Priests do challenge divine institution: neuertheless none of
them be necessary to each member of Gods Church. A Priest celebrating, as he
ought to consecrate the body, and blood of Christ under distinct elements
through distinct form's of words, for as much, as he then representes Christ's
person, supplyeth his room, and offers an unbloody sacrifice on the Altar,
that is an express remembrance of Christ's bloody sacrifice offered on the
cross, wherein his blood was separated from his body in consummation of the
general redemption: so he ought likewise to communicate in the distinct
consecrated elements; but communion in order to lay people, which are no
Priest's, Christ has left free, According to S. Austin Epis. 108. Christ left
power unto his Church to determine how the Euchariste should be ordered: and
indeed the Church-goucrnours are the proper ministers of Christ, and the
dispensers of the mysteries of God 1. Cor. 4. in consequence of which the
Church has authority to constitute, and appoint in order to dispensing the
Sacraments, what she shall judge expedient according to time, place, and
persons, but with that prouiso, that she alter nothing pertaining to the
nature, or essence of them.
muesting his Church with authority, and power to dispense, and order therein
(so the integrity, and substance of the Sacrament be not prejudiced) as in
prudence she might think fit, in regard of places times, persons, and
circumstances. Communion under the form of bread only was practiced in the
primitive Church according to the best antiquity, proving the lawfullness
thereof out of the 2. and 20. chapter of the Acts. For example S. Austin Epis.
6. ad Casulanum; S. Bid in 20. Act. and indeed many of the first Christians
were Nazarits, who were bound by their vow not to drink any licour of grapes.
pum. 4. wherefore since the legal ceremonies of the old law were in force, as
appears by the fame chapter of the Act. doubtless those new Christians received
the Sacrament of the Euchariste under one kind only. Besides S. Cyprian, that
lived in the first 300. years l. de lapsis set's down two examples of
communion under one kind. Again S. Hierom in epitap. Paul. ad Eustach. e. 23.
S. Austin l. 3. de consensu Euang. c. 23. affirm. that Christ gave the
Sacrament of the Euchariste under the form of bread only unto the Disciples
going to Emmaous Moreover Tertull. l. 2. ad vxor. and l. de Orat. attest's,
that it was a practice, or custom to take Christ's body forthwith, or to carry
it home, and defer the taking to an other time.
Lay-communion under one kind only was practiced in the primitive Ages, as
plainly do evidence scripture, and Father-Testimonies, preserving of the
Eucharist under one sole kind, as spiritual provision for sick persons (which
though they were Priests did nor communicate in sickness but under one kind de
only, namely bread The custom of communicating Infants continued in Some
Churches till the days of Hugo de S. Victor. who lived about the year 1130.
for l. 1. c. 2. de caeremon. he affirms that the Priest with his finger dipped
before in consecrated wine ministered the Sacramen: of the Euchariste under the
form of wine unto Babes newly born they being able to suck. Besides in the
ancient Roman office cap. de Sabbato parents are admonished not to suffer their
children to suck milk until they had communicated: But now the Church for
good, and just reasons has wholly abolished that custom; and a principal
motive there of was to resist the heresy, which even in those days the Bohemian
Hussits had spread, teaching, that Infants could not be saved without receiving
the Euchariste, and an other reason of taking away that practice was the
eminent danger of profaning so holy a Sacrament because of the great number of
children.
and the distribution of the Sacrament unto Infants in one sole kind also,
Namely wine: for albeit, these could not eat the sacramental bread: yet they
might suck the sacramental wine from the Priest's finger, which truly they did
according to the custom of some Churches. Again lay-communion Conueniut omnes
Doctores Caetbolici communionem sub vtraque specie fuisse in vsu in quibusdam
Ecclesijs, eiusque meminerunt S. Dionys. cap. 3. de Eccles. Hierarch. S.
Justinius Martyr. Apolog. 2. S. Gregor.l. 3. Dial. cap. 36 alijque Patres.
under both kinds was anciently practiced at some times in several precincts
of particular christian Churches, as do plainly show the writings of primitive
Fathers. And S. Leo the first, being supreme Pastor in Church-gouernment under
Christ, by a special ordinance commanded public lay-communion at Easter under
both kinds: the chief intent whereof, was to discover the manichean
heriticks, who to conceal their heresy (these sectaries did foolishly believe,
that there was a good, and evil God: and as foolishly held wine to be created
by the evil God: and therefore had an abhorrence of it) were observed to
receive the sacramental bread at Easter (which sole kind was then in
practice) with Catholics promiscuously. Again lay-communion under both kind's
was abrogated absolutely, and universally because of certain Bohemian sectaries
named Hussit's, that condemned lay-communion under one kind only, teaching
both kind's, as necessarily required to all Christians unto salvation. In
detestation of this heresy, as also for other good reasons the general
Council of Constance obliged all lay-Catholick's to communicate in one kind:
and indeed the Church of God ought to exercise her authority to the crushing of
all heresies in the bud. Yet the Greek-Church continued lay-communion in both
kind's though it did not esteem both the species of the Sacrament necessary to
salvation. For in the general Council of Florence, which was called with
design chiefly to setle concord, and union between that, and the latin,
Church, neither the greek, or latin Fathers did except against lay-communion,
as to the practice thereof under one sole, or both kinds: whereby it is
evidently manifest, that Christ hat left it in the Churches liberty to
determine, and appoint the distribution of the communion unto mere lay people
in one only, or both kind's, as it shall think fit according to the various
condition of times, places, persons, and circumstances: so that though in this
present age, lay-communion be given in sacramental bread alone through all the
precincts of the eastern Church: neuertheless it is in the power of the
supreme Pastor to change that into another usage of both kind's, if he shall
see as good reasons to move him thereunto, as he sees cause to continue it
under one sole kind, vizt. in opposition, and detestation of modern heresies.
First in regard of many Lutherans, who believe, that Christ's body only is
contained with the bread, and his blood only with the wine, and not all Christ
entirely: which is a manifest ignorance: for wheresoever Christ's body is truly
really, and substantially from the day of his Resurrection, there it is truly
Romans non amplius moritur (Christus.)
alive, being impossible for Christ to die again: and since the life of the
flesh Leuit. 17. anima omnis carnis in sanguine.
is in the blood Leuit. 17. it follows evidently, that wheresoever Christ's
body is there his blood is also: and since Christ has deuested himself of no
real thing, that he once assumed, and whatsoever he assumed was united
hypostatically to his divine person, it is again plainly evident, that
wheresoever S. Ambrosius vbi carpus Christi Christus est.
Christ's body, blood, or soul is, there is all Christ entire without separation
of one part from another: and albeit the words, that consecrate Christ's body
according to their proper signification do constitute the body only under the
forms of bread, and the words which consecrate Christ's blood according to
their proper signification do put the blood only under the form's of wine:
neuerth eless in virtue of natural concomitancy, that is to say, of the
natural connection, which is between all the natural part's of Christ now
invested with immortality, it is manifest by necessary consequence, that
wheresoever Christ's body, and blood is, there is all Christ undivided: and so
it is alike in the mystery of the blessed Trinity, that includes three Persons
really distinct: though the word Father according to it is proper signification
be appropriated to the first Person only: notwithstanding whersoeuer the first
divine Person is, who only lays claim to the name Father taken in the proper
sense, there also is the second Person, the son, and the third Person the holy
Ghost in virtue of the natural connection, that one Person has with an other.
Hence it is plainly evident, that the Euchariste distributed under one kind
only ought not to be counted a lame Sacrament, since one sole species contain's
as much of Christ, as both together to wit, all Christ entirely. Neither is a
greater measure of grace conferred Ex opere operato, that is by the Sacraments
working precisely, when it is taken in one sole, or in both kind's, the
spiritual effect thereof, which is supernatural grace unto refreshing, and
feeding of the soul being equally divided to all such, as receive the Sacrament
with the same worthiness whether under one only, or both kind's, and all such
are 1. Cor. 10. multi vnum corpus, sumus, qui de vno pane participamus.
one bread, and one body in as much, as all are partakers of one bread 1. Cor.
10. which is an other effect of the Sacrament. Also he that shall eat of this
bread, worthily (which is converted into the body of Christ) shall live for
ever 10. 6. And as 2. Cor. 8. qui multum non abundauit and qui modicum no^
minorauit. Et Exodus 16. filij Israel colligerunt (Manna) alius plus, alius
minus -- nec qui plus collegerat habuit amplius, nec qui minus parauerat, r.
perit minus.
an Israelite, that gathered much Manna had nothing over, and an Israelite,
that gathered little, had not the less: so a Christian, that receives the
Sacrament under both kind's has no more of Christ, or of sacramental grace,
then he that receives under one kind only if there Gratia sucramentalis
confertur iuxta dispositiones (supernaturales) eorune qui recipient Sacramenta.
be parity as to the disposition of the receivers: notwithstanding all these
premises, it cannot be said in proper speech, that he that eats Christ's
body, does drink his blood, or that he that drinks Christ blood under the
form of wine does cate his blood, albeit, that whosoever receives his body,
receives his blood withal: and whosoever receives his blood, receives his
body withal: for the reason of difference, in order to the proper form of
speech, does not proceed from the absence of the one, and the sole presence of
the other: but from a different manner exercised in the conueyance of the
consecrated elements ( Innocentius III. ait, quod quamuis dum bibitur sanguis
Christi simul accipiatur eius corpus quod tamen tune non dicitur proprie
^^a^ducari.
under both of which be contained, as well the body, as the blood of Christ)
from the mouth into the stomach. no man eating, and thinking alike. Secondly
lay-communion under one kind only is continued because of other modern
sectaries, that lay claim to a divine precept to prove a necessary usage of
both kinds, which is a manifest weakness: for Jems. 6. hic est panis de co^le
descendens, s^ quit (...) ipso manducauevit non morictur. Et v. 52. (...) si
quit manduc^^erit etc hoc pane viuet in ater^^^. Rursiam qui ma^duc^t ^^am
(...) vi^^t in aeternum.
many scripture-testion onies do declare communion in one kind to be enough
for one obtaining eternal life: and not any one does exprosse an obsolute
command to oblige the Church unto lay-communion under both kinds. For of all
the three Euangelist's, which set down the Institution of the Eucharist only S.
Luk cap. as mentions an absolute precept given by Christ vizt. Do this in
(...) of me: but from this scripture no man ought to argue an obligation even:
for consecration in both kinds, and consequently much less for lay-communion
under both kinds: because the precept does immediately follow the consecration
of the bread asone, and was enjoined before Christ did institute the chalice:
and though Christ Mat. 6. after he had consecrated the chalice said: drink ye
all of it yet that was a precept given to the Apostles only, which were
present; for S. Mark chap. 14. says. And they All drank of it, that is: all the
Apostles then sitting at the last supper. Furthermore Christ by giving the
before said precept. Do this in remember ance of me, whereby is commanded the
execution of all the actions joint, and separate, that Christ then did, cannot
be meant universally in order to all the faithful joint, and separate, the
said actions being inconsistent with mere lay people, who are not invested with
power to offer proper sacrifice, consecrate Christ's body, and ordain Priests
for the distributing the Euchariste to others, which were the actions, that
Christ exercised, and proper only to the Episcopal, and Priestly function,
Trident. sess. 22. cap. 1. can. 1. ait, per verba: hoc facite, Christum
ordinasse Apostolos Sacerd^tes.
that Christ instituted at his last supper. Amongst the Apostles S. Paul. 1.
Cor. 11. only relates the Institution of this Sacrament, and according to his
Testimony the absolute precept Do this in remember ance of me: is given also
before Christ consecrated the chalice: and albeit that S. Paul mentions a
conditional precept that felloweth the institution of the said chalice, to
wit; This do, as often as ye drink it, in remember ance of me: neuertheless, as
no man ought to argue, according to the rules of true Logic, from a
condititionall proposition, an universal absolute: so no man ought to infer
from a conditional, an absolute precept universally obliging the whole Church
joint, and separate, and consequently there cannot be produced out of the three
Evangelists, and S. Paul: which set down the words Christ used in the
institution of this Sacrament any warra^table ground to prove a divine precept
obliging all belieuers universally to communicate under both kind's: and
although. S. John the Evangelist chap. 6. does show an express warrant from
Christ commanding, as it were, communion under both kinds in order to the whole
Church joint, and separate. The warrant runs thus: Except ye eat the flesh of
the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, howeuer modern
sectaries and Caluinist's especially cannot in reason lay claim to that passage
as a proof of their forbidden doctrine in order to communion in both kind's, in
regard they deny, that any part of the said chapter of S. John is meant of
sacramental eating, or drinking, lest by assenting thereto, they might be
forced to grant Christ's real presence in the Sacrament, which the chapter
plainly declares, if it shall bear an interpretation of sacramental eating,
and drinking. Howeuer the precept so interpreted does not euince communion
under both kinds to be enjoined of necessity in order to each Christian in
particular: since according to scripture usage the particle Julius Paulus
insignis Jurisconsultus ait comparatum esse, vt coniuncta pro disiunctis
accipiantur. Di gestis de verborum significatione l. saepe.
(And) is frequently taken in a disjunctive sense only. For example S. Peter
Act. 3. says: Silver, and Gold have I none, where the particle (And) is taken
disiunctiuely: the true meaning thereof being Silver, or gold have I none. In
like manner it is written Exodus 21. He that smites his Father, and Mother (so
it is read in Hebrew) shall die the death. Where (And) is taken for (or) Again
Math. 20. it is said by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned. Where likewise the particle (And) is taken
disiunctiuely for (Or) and Aristotle also takes (And) in the disjunctive
sense, when he defines Nature to be Author, or cause of motion, and rest, all
his interpreters understanding the particle (And) in that definition, to
signify (Or) and truly by the latter particle (And) in the cited passage of
scripture vzt. Except ye cate the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood
See. doubtless was meant (Or) as do plainly demonstrate other word's of Christ
there set down, whereby he explaines that precept: saying. v. 47. I am the bread
of life. v. 50. This is that bread, that came down: from Heaven. If any man
eat of this bread he shall live for ever, and the bread that I shall give is
my flesh, which I shall give for the life of the world. Whereby is plainly
evident, that Christ did ascribe the effect of this Sacrament as common alike,
to the bread alone, and to the bread, and wine jointly. Howeuer sectaries have
nothing of advantage, if the latter particle (And) in S. John ought to be taken
in the copulative sense: for the precept even so meant (and indeed so catholic
writers do understand it) importes an obligation only in order to the whole
Church (wherein there is never want of Priests, that be obliged to communicate
in both kinds, as often, as they offer sacrifice) and not to each member
thereof. In the old law God having iustituted Circumcision added this precept in
general terms vizt: Ye shall circumcise the foreskin of your flesh. and
notwithstanding only such had right to exercise that function, as were deputed
thereunto by the Church, or Synagegue: which shows plainly, that though the
precept did oblige the whole Church, or Synagogue, yet it did not reach to each
member thereof, howeuer it seems, as if it had been enjoined in order to all
universally. Again when God instituted the pascall lamb as a Sacrament, and
sacrifice also; he imposed two precepts Exodus 12. the one: Let every man take
unto him a lamb: the other all the multitude of the children of Israel shall
kill it: which two precepts though they be expressed in general words to the
obliging the whole Synagogue: yet every particular member thereof had not right
to choose, and take unto him a lamb, and sacrifice it: but the heads of each
family only, which executed Priestly function as to that sacrifice being a
privilege given to them before Priesthood was appropriated to the family of
Aaron, as appears manifestly by the said chapter of Exodus As to the passages
which some sectaries allege (out of S. Innocent Ep. 26. and S. Augustine lib.
7. against Julian the Pelagian) to prove a necessity of communion under both
kinds in regard, that these ancient Fathers expressly assert, that Infants
cannot be saved except they eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood, they
make not a jot for them, who require a presonall act of inward faith to the
eating of Christ's body, and drinking of his blood, Infant's being incapable of
exercising any such acction, in consequence where of the alleged Agunt
Innocen. and Aug. contra Pelagium, qui negabat peccatum originale in infantibus.
authorities afforde them nothing of advantage. But, as to the true sense of
these primitive Fathers, doubtless their meaning is only to show, that Infants
cannot enter into the kingdom of God, except they receive sanctifying grace in
baptism through the merits of Christ's body, and blood that were offered for
all men unto remission of sins. According to Origin. hom. 29. in number. we are
said to drink of Christ's blood, not only when we receive the Sacrament. but
when we hear his divine word preached wherein is life according to Christ's
own saying, the Words which I have spoken are spirit, and life in as much as
they be dispositions, to divine grace, which is the life of the soul through
the merits of Christ. Again such as hear Mass devoutly, and join, in heart
with the Priest receive life, and fruit by the Sacrament, though they neither
eat of Christ's body, nor drink of his blood sacramentally.
Fourthermore in as much, as Infants through baptism be made members of that
Church, which eats Christ's flesh, and drinks his blood, the same Church as
it does furnish them Aug. Tom. 10. ser. 10. de verbis Apostoli. Matter Ecclesia,
inquit, accommodat parvults alioru^ pedes, vt veniant ad Ecclesiam, altorum
cor, vt credant, alioru^ linguam vt fatcantur: it a Ecclesia accommodat aliorum
ora, vt comedant, and bibant.
with the feet of others to come unto it, with the heart of others to believe,
and with the tongues of others to profess the christian faith: in like manner
according to a spiritual metaphorical form of speech, it may be said to
furnish them with the mouths, of others to eat Christ's flesh, and drink his
blood.

CHAR. X. OF PENANCE
THE CONTENTS.
Penance has a just claim unto all requisits necessary to a special Sacrament
of the new law; Christ after the similitude of an outward Court of justice
instituted an inward Tribunal where, by divine dispensation Priest's sit as
Judges of sins committed after baptism: whatsoever Priests judge here below,
God approu's above: the power Christ gave to the Apostles, and heir successors
in priestly function, and authority was not only to declare, but effect indeed
remission of hones in virtue of the word of reconciliation joint unto a sinners
sincere sorrow, and humble Confession of his sins together with a full
purpose to sin no more.

PEnance is a There are three requisits necessary to the nature of a Sacrament
of the new law: namely outward Rite, or sign, promise of sanctifying grace, and
the institution of Christ: The outward Rite, or ligh, as to the Sacrament of
Penance, is the sensible absolution of a Priest: The promise of grace appears
by the words of Christ Joan. 20. Whose sins you shall forgive they are
forgiven them; and the institution of Christ is expres'd in the precedent words
of the same Chapter. As my Father sent me. so send I you. Wherefore the ancient
Fathers treating of sacramental Penance in order to such, as are baptized,
teach that Christ gives power unto a Priest to remit thereby even occult
sins; in consequence of which they appropriate to Penance the name of a
Sacrament, as much as to baptism. Tertull. l. de praescript. adversus Haeret
Ambros. l. de poenit. c. 7. and S. Austin l. 5. hom. c. 5. compares this
Sacrament ministered by a Priest to the raising yp of Lazarus by Christ, and to
the untying of his cords by the Apostles.
Sacrament of the new law taken in the proper sense unto remission of sius
committed after baptism: and therefore named Hieron. ad Demetr. vocat
Sacramentum poenitentia secundam tabulam post naufragium.
the second spiritual board, or plank of a souls spiritual wrack. Grace given
by baptism restores sanctity, that Original sin took away: grace received
through Penance recouereth that sanctity, being lost again through actual sin.
A christians life on earth is a warfare against flesh, and blood: against
principalities: against powers: against worldly Governors the Princes of the
darkness of this world, and against all spiritual wickednesses, which are the
assaults of the devil. And for as much as humane nature is infirm, and the
power of this adversary great, it is impossible for any whomsoever to escape
unwounded without armor of extraordinary protection: In regard whereof Christ
has provided a sovereign remedy, as an effectual cure for all the personal
wound;, a christian might receive in this warfare exercised after baptism: and
this is the Sacrament of Penance instituted by Christ himself Christ Mat. 18.
saying to his Apostles. Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
Heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in Heaven, only
promised them, and their successors in Priestly function authority, and power
to forgive sins, and invested them in it, Joan. 20. saying unto them. Receive
the holy Ghos^ whose sins you shall forgive are forgiven them. Neither has
Christ left less power unto Priest's to loose, then to bind, as S. Ambrose
asserted against Nouatianus, who taught that Priests had power to bind, but not
to loose,
10.20. when he said to his Apostles. Receive the holy Ghost: whosoeuers sius
ye shall remit, they are remitted: and whosoeuers sins ye shall retain they are
retained. Although Christ alone had the Apoc. 3. qui habet clauem David etc.
key of David, which opens, and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man
opens (Apocal. 30.) as to supreme excellency, and power of remitting, and
retaining sins, being enabled in virtue of his divinity to open to, and shut
against sinners the kingdom of Heaven without help of a Sacrament:
neuertheless the same power as to participation and outward Ministry thereof he
communicated to his said Apostles, and their successors in priestly function,
committing to them the Word of reconciliation 1. Cor. 5. That is to say the
Aug. accedit verbu^ ad elementum and fit Sacramentum. Eleme^tum, seu materia
proxima Sacramenti poenitentiae est confessio and contritio.
word of sacramental power employed in the form of sacramental absolution vzt:
I absolve thee: which joined to the elements, contrition, confession, and
actual satisfaction makes the Sacrament of Penance, these acts being the
material parts thereof. And although Christ did not appoint this form in
express terms: neuertheless, for as much, as he instituted this Sacrament
Great is the dignity of a Priest, says S. Chrysostom hom. 85. in Joan. For
whose sins they shall remit are remitted to them: and hom. 5. de verbis Isa.
Vidi Dominum. Speaking of the Sacrament of Penance writes thus. Heaven takes
from the earth chief power: for the Judge sits in earth, our lord follovv's
the servant: and whatsoever he shall judge here below, God approu's above. By
the judge that sits in earth is meant a Priest, whose judgment, or sentence
goes before, and the sentence of God comes after. In consequence of which,
seeing that a sentence mere declaratory cannot go before, but of necessity
must follow, it is evident, that a Priest sacramentally absoluing a penitent is
a judge taken in the proper sense; wherefore S. Cyprian Epis. 73. ad Iubaian.
S. Ambrose lapsis de poenit. c. 1. and 2. S. Austin l. 2. con. Epis. parmeni.
c. 11. and S. Chrysostom l. 3. de Sacerdot. expound the particles (whose
sins ye shall forgive) of power and authority given unto the Apostles, as
judges in order to remitting of sins.
after the similitude of an outward iudicatory Court, or Tribunal (wherein the
penitent acts the accused, and the witnesses too: and the Priest supplies the
part of the The Council of Trent declares, that no man can be restored by the
Sacrament of Penance to that sanctity, and integrity, which he received by
baptism without bitter tears, and painful labors.
judge in the room of Christ it is evidence enough to prove it. As in an
outward Court of justice the judge gives sentence, and thereby absolueth, or
condemns the accused. So Christ did think fit, that a Priest, as lawful
judge should pronounce sentence of absolution unto remission of sins committed
after baptism for Christ in saying Whosoeuers sins ye shall remit are
remitted: substituted the Apostles 1. Cor. 5. vbi dixisset Apostol is dedit
nobis ministerium reconciliationis. subiungit: pro Christo ergo legatione
fu^givnur, id est, Sacardotes succedunt in munus, seu ministerium
reconciliationis eo modo, quo Christus reconciliauit homines Deo, ramitte^do
paccata little, vt constat av citato Textu. Et Chryso.hom. 11. in^llam 2. Epis.
Pauli, sic scribit: quod igitur pro Christo legatioue fungimur, idem est, ac si
dixisset, Christi vice, nos enim ipsius muneri successimus.
his special Legates to reconcile sinners to God: neither is it of necessity
required to the form of a Sacrament, that it be expressly set down in holy
scripture: the universal tradition of the Church being testimony enough to
prove it: and even Caluinists, and sundry other sectaries do use in baptism
the words: I baptize thee: for which they cannot allege any
scripture-euidence. Besides Calvin in his fourth book of institutions chapter
3. 5. 6. treating of imposition of hands exercised in the ordination of
Church-minister's, deriueth that ceremony from Church tradition, and practice
only, and confesses withal, that it ought to be counted in lieu of a precept.
By the premises plainly appears that Christ 10.2. did not give to the Apostles,
and their successors in the function of Priesthood power, and authority only to
preach remission of sins: because the form of speech, and circumstances of that
action therein expressed do evidently demonstrate, that Christ both spoke, and
meant of a new power, that he had not conferred before his passion: but Christ
before his Resurrection invested his Apostles with power to preach remission of
sins Mat. 10. as ye go, saying the kingdom of Heaven is at hand: which words
even Calvin in his evangelical Harmony does interpret of preaching salvation
through remission of sins. Wherefore S. Chrysostom hom. 85. explaining that
passage of S. John compares the collation of the power, that Christ there
bestowed on the Apostles, to the authority given to officers of a tempoall
Prince, whereby they are enabled to imprison, or deliver out of prison such, as
be accused of transgressing his laws, and adds withal these express words:
Great dignity of Priest's, whosoeuers sins, says be, (Christ) ye shall remit
are remitted. Again power to preach the Gospel to all nations was given to the
Apostles Mat. 28. as a distinct office from the power, that Christ conferred on
them Io. 20. as plainly will appear to any rational, and judicious man, that
shall consider both Texts together with the circumstances therein expressed.
Neither did Christ confer upon his apostles and their successors power only to
declare remission of sins: since he did not say Io. 20. Whosoeuers sins ye
shall declare remitted, are remitted: but whosoeuers sins, ye shall remit.
Besides these words ye shall remit; ought to be interpreted in the same sense,
as those others: Are remitted. For other wise the form of Christ's speech had
been extreme improper, in regard, that both of them: shall be remitted: and are
remitted be uttered in one, and the same sentence. But the latter particles,
viz, (are remitted:) do not signify mere declaration of remission of sins (for
so Christ's words would carry this sense Whosoeuers sins ye shall declare to be
remitted are declared to be remitted, and consequently since such a declaration
is speculatiue only, and not practical effecting nothing in order to remission
of sins: a man, to whom suc^h a declaration is intimated shall remain in sin,
as much after, as before. Again Christ after he invested the Apostles, and
consequently their successors with the power mentioned Io. 20. said to them: as
my Father sent me: so I send you: but Christ was sent by his Father endued with
power to remit sins indeed, and not to declare remission only. Wherefore Mat. 9.
that ye may know, says Christ, the son of man has authority in earth to
forgive sins etc. Whereby it is plainly evident that he sent his Apostles
invested with power to remit sins giving unto them the ministry of
reconciliation 2. Cor. 5. Furthermore by the premises is plain that penance is
not Aug. l. 2. de adulterinis contugijs c. 26. distinguit baptismum a
p^nitentia. St inquit. a Cathecun. eno factum, scilicet vxorcidium, baptismo
abluitur, si a baptizato, poenitentia, and reconciliatione.
a mere remembrance of baptism received before; and indeed setting aside
Trident. dicit nos per poenitentia Sacramentu^ sine magnis nostris fletibus and
^aboribus ad nouitatem, and integritate^, quam per baptismum adepti eramus,
peruenire no posse.
voluntary acts of corporal affliction, and inward contrition together with a
full purpose of amendment, the mere Sacrament of penance has not power enough
to restore the integrity, and newness of life got by baptism, and lost through
actual sin. Again penance has all requisits necessary to a Sacrament viz.
sensible Rites, promise of grace, and the institution of Christ, as by the
premises appears, so that together with baptism, it makes two Sacraments of
the new law, and may often The ancient Fathers S. Cyprian Epis. 52. S. Ambrose
in 2. Cor. 5. S. Austin con. Epis. parmeni: affirm that the Sacrament of
Penance may be often reiterated, and it is an article of christian faith grounded
on the words of Christ Luc. 17. Mat. 18. where he bid's his Apostles to remit
sins, as often, as through humane frailty they are committed, which is meant
in order to such only, as are sorry to have sinned: for without true sorrow
remission cannot be obtained.
be reiterated: but baptism cannot. For it is impossible, that they, who are
once lightened, if they fall away can be renewed again to penance. Hebrae. 6.
where the particle lightened does signify baptized according to the
interpretation of primitive Fathers, who also do name baptism a light, and
consequently the words (impossible to be renewed again to penance) beat this
meaning, vizt. (Impossible to be baptized again) for the particle (Again) does
import a repetition of what was meant before by the words (lightened) and indeed
otherwise the particle (once) had been impertinent and inserted to no purpose
at all: since (once) and (Again) put in the same period, or sentence ought to
relate to one, and the same thing: and therefore seeing that by the first place
baptism is understood, the Apostles doubtless by the latter meant baptism too.
This cited scripture Hebr. 6. the Nouatiani pratextu disciplinae Ecclesiasticae
lapsis ad Ecclesiam redditum per poenitentiam negarunt, ex qua haresi multarum
animarum interitus secutus est.
Nouatians made the ground of their heresy teaching that no man falling into
mortal sin after baptism could rise again by penance unto justification: and
Calvin therein growndeth his heresy impiously asserting, that it is impossible
for any one, that deserteth his faith entirely, and becomes an apostate to be
renewed again by penance unto remission of his fins, thereby denying God's
general mercy: and so proud contentious men, that follow only the mere words
of scripture together with their own sense without respect of the Churches
judgment, and interpretation of ancient Fathers (after which every scripture
ought to be expounded) plunge themselves into damnable errors.

CHAR. XI. OF CONTRITION
THE CONTENTS.
Two kinds of contrition; the one perfect, the other imperfect: perfect
contrition, which is formerly, or includes a formal act of charity (whereby
God in regard of his infinite goodness, and supreme excellency is preferred
before all earthly enjoyments, and sin detested) was of absolute necessity
before the establishing of the law of Christ: imperfect contrition called
attrition (whereby a sinner detesteth his sin, because of the deformity
thereof, or fear of everlasting punishment) joint to the Sacrament of penance
equalleth perfect contrition, as to the effect thereof: if perfect contrition
were of absolute necessity in the new law: christians should be in a worse
condition then were the Jews under the old law: Those which assert absolute
necessity of perfect contrition at all times in the law of Christ prejudice
christian faith.

Contrition is Trident. definit contritione^ per dolorem animae: est autem
contritio actus voluntatis non appetitus sensitiui.
a bitter griese, and detestation, that a penitent sinner voluntarily conceiues
to the punishing of his sin, as an offense against God, together with a full
purpose to confess, satisfy, and never to sin again. As the innate heat of new
wine put into a close vessel makes to boil the whole substance thereof, and
thereby purges out the dregs: so the fire of contrition kindled in a penitent
soul, makes it sees in tears of bitter sorrow Psalm. 50. cor co^tritum and
humiliatum Deus no^ despiciet: and proinde peccator eliciens contritionem
perfectam Deo reconciliatur.
whereby the filth, and uncleanness of sin together with the ill affection
inclining thereto, purge away. As the heat of the sun does disperse the black
clouds, which obstruct its brightness: so the warmeness of a contrite heart
dissipates sins, which are the dark clouds obstructing the light thereof. But
there Love that proceed's from the motive of charity precisely, is perfect and
called Amor amicitrae: the love of friendship, which imports remission of
sins. Love that comes of the motive of Gods justice, or fear of him, is named
Amor benevolentiae, love of good will, which is imperfect. An example of
remission of sins by perfect love, or perfect contrition (which includes
perfect love) without the Sacrament or penance is set down. Deuteronomy. 4. Jf thou
seek our lord God, thou shall find him, if thou seeks him vvithall thine
heart, and with all thy soul.
be two kinds of contrition the one perfect, in as much as a penitent sinner
grieueth for, and detesteth his sin in regard precisely, that he loves God
with all his heart: that is, makes Gods own goodness the chief motive of his
love, and in respect thereof prefers him before all earthly enjoyments: The
other is imperfect; and by usage of speech named Attrition proceeding from a
motive far inferior to that of a full love to God. For example: a sinner
conceiueth an act of imperfect contrition, or attrition, when he grieueth to
have sinned, and purposes amendme^t in regard merely of the deformity of sin,
which is it is formal essence; or fear of eternal fire, which is the proper
effect thereof, if mortal.

Perfect contrition was of absolute necessity unto remission of sins in all
times before the establishment of the new law. No man even in the old, law did
find God, that did not seek him with all his heart, and with full tribulation
of his soul Deuteronomy. 8. (which imports perfect contrition) notwihstanding the
Sacraments, and sacrifices thereof, they being poor beggarly elements, and no
effectual instruments of grace, and life. Yet in the new law of Christ, which
is not a law of bondage, but of grace; not of beggary, but of plenty, and
consequently abounding with saving privileges, and prerogatives above the
other, by divine dispensation attrition, The Council of Trent fess. 14.
declar's, that imperfect contrition, called attrition, though it be grounded in
the fear of Hell, or in a serious reflection on the deformity of sin:
neuertheless if it exclude an affection to sinning is Donum Dei, a gift of God,
and a motion of the holy Ghost. And notwithstanding, faith the Council, that
attrition of it self cannot bring a sinner unto justification of life, howeuer
in the Sacrament of Penance it disposes him thereto: Whereby evidently
appears, that attrition is not the same disposition separate from, that it is
joint unto the Sacrament: in consequence of which. the meaning of the Council
is, that seeing it is a remote disposition unto justification without
sacramental penance, joint thereto, is made an immediate disposition, that of
necessity procures justifying grace.
that of it self is not sufficient enough to bring a sinner unto justification
of life joined to, and supported by the Sacrament of penance, is an effectual
expedient for the obtaining it: and indeed Christians under the new law were in
a worse condition, then the Israelits under the old law, if beside perfect
contrition God should exact of them, as a necessary requisite to remission of
sins, Confession, since he required of the Israelites perfect contrition only
Deuteronomy. 4. Wherefore that the trouble employed in confession of sins, might be
compensed by taking away the absolute necessity of hearing the other burden
employed in perfect Contrition, Christ has so instituted the Sacrament of
penance in his new law, that as water, which albeit according to its own
natural propriety has nothing of heat, yet made hot with fire, can produce
heat; so Attrition, which though in order to it is own virtue, is no
effectual instrument of grace to the quickening a dead soul, howeuer together
with the help of the Sacrament can deliver out of the laws of death, and
restore it to newness of life. Again if perfect Contrition were of absolute
necessity penance ought not to lay claim Poenite^tia est Sacrame^tum
mortuorum, nam id ad quod est primo, and per se institutum, est prima gratia
sanctificans, seu hominem baptizatum in peccata laepsum reconciliare. Ita docet
Trid. sess. 14. can. 1.
to the Title of Sacramentum mortuorum: that is, Christ did not institute it
for an effectual help of such, The chief effect of sacramental penance is to
reconeile unto God such as have sinned after their baptism, and because mortal
sin is the death of the soul, sacramental penance that is specially instituted
to confer the first sanctifying grace unto remitting of deadly offenses, is
called Sacramentum mortuorum, a Sacrament of the dead.
as are dead in sin: because it would presuppose always the remission thereof,
perfect Contrition including a full love of God, which is inconsistent with
deadly sin: and thereby would plainly follow, that the sacramental Absolution
of a Priest were a mere declaration of sins remitted before: In consequence of
which sacramental penance should not produce the effect, which it signifyes:
to wit remission of sins, which is contrary to the nature It is an Article of
catholic faith, that the Sacraments of the new law produce sanctifying grace
ex opere operato, that is, by the efficacy of their working after the manner of
natural causes, which employe their whole actiuity while they work, so that
the Sacrament of penance produces ex opere operato, a greater, or lesser
measure of grace according to the greater, or lesser dispositions of those,
which receive it. As to the form of speaking ex opere operato, taken in the
passive signification, it is ancient; Pope Innocentius the third, used it, and
the catholic Church in the Council of Trent received it, which makes it a
matter of faith.
of the Sacraments of the new law, they being by virtue of their institution
practical Rites, or signs for the effecting of sanctifying grace, which
indeed they signify: and to say, that perfect contrition includes a desire of
the Sacrament of penance, has nothing of weight with it, to weaken this
catholic doctrine. For if perfect contrition together with the said desire
shall allwaies be necessarily required unto remission of sins, and that, before
the outward working of the Sacrament, it is evidently plain, that the grace,
whereby a sinner is justified, ought never to to counted the product of the said
Sacraments immediate working: which inference, if it were granted, would
prejudice catholic faith, it teaching that the Sacraments of the new law in
virtue of their institution do confer sanctifying grace ex opere operato, that
is, through their own outward immediate working, and efficacy. For example the
outward sensible washing of water in baptism, together with the outward
sensible uttering of certain words: vizt; I baptize thee: do actually produce
grace, and life, if no impediment interuene, being sensible actions instituted
by Christ himself for that intent, and purpose: whereby is clearly manifest
again, that if Facultas Parisiensis An. 1638. die Iulij 1. notauit censura banc
propositione^: Attritione de peccatis insufficientem esse pro accipiedae
remissione peccatoru^ in Sacramento poenitentiae, contritionem ex perfecta
charitate ad id necessaria^ esse cum hac altara propositione ex priori
seque^te: Absolutionem Sacrame^talem nihil a^^ud esse qua^ declarationem
iuridicam peccati iam ramissi.
perfect contrition proceeding from a full love of God (which is inconsistent
with deadly sin) were of absolute necessity at all times, the Sacrament of
penance at no time should produce sanctifying grace by it is own outward
working, and efficacy: because it would allwaies be prevented by perfect
contrition, which is opus operantis only, that is to say, an action or working
of a penitent sinner through an actual motion of the Holy Ghost, which of
necessity would bring with it sanctifying grace before the sacramental
absolution and consequently before the perfecting of the Sacrament of penance,
sacramental absolution being the sole form thereof. Wherefore though
contrition, as it does abstract from perfect, and imperfect, be an essential
part of the Sacrament of penance: yet perfect contrition is not, because
imperfect contrition, or attrition, as it is a supernatural motion of God
joined to the Sacrament, S. Austin l. de Catech. rudibus cap. 17. expressly
affirm's, that attrition, which through special assistance of divine grace is
procured by the fear of Hell, or by a desire of eternal life joined to the
Sacrament of Baptism is a sufficient expedient unto obtaining remission of
deadly sins in order to those, which are grown up to full years of
discretion. But if attrition be a sufficient disposition to procure sanctifying
grace in the Sacrament of baptism, it must likewise be a sufficient disposition
unto producing the same effect in the Sacrament of penance, being there is full
parity between the one, and the other Sacrament, for both baptism, and penance
have power by their institution to confer the first sanctifying grace unto
remitting of mortal sins, and therefore be named Sacramenta mortuorum,
Sacrament's of the dead.
is a sufficient: disposition unto the obtaining remission of sins: in so much
that a penitent, who is attrite only in virtue of the Sacrament, is Est axi^ma
apud Theologos. Attritus per Sacramentum sit contritus.
made contrite that is, is enabled to receive grace of justification, which is
the proper effect of perfect contrition. Wherefore a mere act of attrition
founded Isaiae 26. oculi Domini super metuentes eum, in timoretuo Domine
concepimus, parturiuimus, and peperimus spiritu^ salutis. Et Aug. ser. 1. timor
qui co^cipit poenite^tiam, parit compunctionem cordis, quae importat
remissionem peccati.
either in hope of eternal life, or in fear of eternal death, or in
abhorrence of sin in respect of it is filthiness, being by the power of the
Sacrament invested with the power of perfect contrition draws from the heart
of a penitent the poison of sin: and as physic does first afflict, and
afterward heal a diseased body: so attrition made a soueraingn medecin in
virtue of the Sacrament does first trouble a soul sick of sin with bitterness
of grief, and afterward works a perfect cure on it. So that a sinner is truly
reconciled to God, that for fear of his justice detesteth sin, and turns to
penance According to S. Austin ser. 10. de tempore, to confess, and not to
abstain from sin, is rather to excuse our faults, then to amend them, neither
are our soul's healed thereby. Wherefore the holy scriptures command sinners to
cast from them their iniquities, and never to return to them again. John. 5.
Behold thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.
And Joan. 8. go, and sin no more.
confessing against himself his wicked ness together with a full purpose to
make him a new heart, and a new spirit for the future, casting away all
affection to his former transgressions: and truly it is impossible for a sinner
to put on the new Aug. trac. de poenitentia: nemo fue libero arbitrio potest
inchoare nouam vitam nisi de priori se poeniteat. huc spectat illud Ezech.c.
18. si impius egerit poenitentiam ab omnibus peccatis suis, quae operatus est,
omnium iniquitatum eius non recordabor, and hac est prudentia leonis, qui ne
inveniatur a venatoribus cauda sua vestigia operit.
without putting of the old man with his works: he must for sake the old ways
of death, if he will enter into newness of life. Howeuer acts of sorrow, and
detestation in order to sin, even joined to the Sacrament are dry, unless
they be moystned Psalm. 6. lauo per singulas noctes lectum meum lacrymis and
psalm. 118. ab oculis meis fluxerunt magni aquae riuuli, quia non custodierunt
legem tuam.
with tears, which in as much, as they flow from a heart truly penitent be
Gods special delight, According to S. Gregory tears shed for our sins
procure divine mercy, and according to S. Bernard the tear's of a Penitent soul
are Angels wine, which rejoice over a sinner doing penance.
the Angels wine: and undoubted tokens of a sinners renewed alliance with
Heaven. Philo the prime Historian among the Jews, relates that David, and
Ionathas did so passionatly love eath other, that at one time in their
reciprocal embracements they shed tears in such plenteous measure, that they
were received in vessels, and reserved as pledges of that vehement freindship
mutual expressed. The hearty tears of a penitent sinner heavenly Angels
receive, preserve, and offer as the gratefullest libations to God, wittnessing
thereby, that he has cast away from him all his transgressions, and made him a
new heart, and a new spirit: and indeed no repentance, that does not bring with
it newness of life is of any value, or consequence as to eternal blessedness.
Antiochus 2. Machab. 9. although he came to the knowledge of his own infirmity,
left of his great pride, detested the wickedness, that he had committed in the
holy Temple of Jerusalem, and prayed also unto God: nevertheless found no
mercy unto justification of life: because his repentance proceeded from
natural S. Thomas ^it, actum poenitentiae, quem exercuit Antiochus fuisse ex
motive pure natutali.
motives precisely. For he did not cast away from him the thoughts of sins in
regard they were offenses to God: but in respect they were punishments to
himself. In like manner Esau found no place to penance though he sought with
tears. Heb. 12. because he did not weep for his sins, whereby he had offended
God: but for the loss of his father Isaacks blessing, that by a divine
ordinance was annexed to his Birth right which he had sold before, for one
portion of meat. Besid's his heart was full of envy, and malice againsT his
brother Jacob, whose death he had threatened, Genesis 27.

A sinner that will find place to penance, and blessing to inheritance, ought
to behold his ways Vide vias tuas in con^alle, scito quid feceri^. Jerem. 2.
in the valley of humility and know what he has done, call to his rememberance
the days of his life, that are passed, think Heb. 10. borrendum est incidere
in manus Domini viuentis.
how terrible it is to fall into the hands of the living God, consider how
Jerem. 2. scito. and vide, quia malum est and ^marum reliquisse Do^^inu^ Deum
^num.
evil a thing, and bitter it is to forsake his Creator, and thereby in virtue
of an humble, and contrite heart to cast away from him the serpent in his
bosom, the poison in his stomach, the thief in his house: that is, deadly
sin, which keeps away from him wrongfully the place to penance, and the
blessing to the inheritance of Heaven.

CHAR. XIJ. OF CONFESSION
THE CONTENTS.
It Is not enough that a sinner confess his sins to God with his heart, unless
he tell them to a Priest with his mouth also, that is the Minister of Christ,
to whom the word of reconciliation is committed Joa. 20. As secret auricular,
so entire perfect confession, and likewise the seal, or obligation to keep
secret what in secret is sacramentally confessed, lie claim to a divine
precept: according to the practice of some primitive Churches public
confession of public sins were enioyn'd, as satisfactory penances unto
humbling public sinners; the church of God haith laid aside public
confessions for just reasons: those hazard their foul's, which defer
sacramental confession of their sins, till grievous sickness seize on them.

Confession is an outward act of penance, whereby a penitent sinner humbly
accuses himself of himself, telling his own sins in the ear of a Priest (in
uested with power of jurisdiction) to the end be may obtain full remission
thereof in virtue of his absolution. Christ when he instituted the Sacrament of
penance Joan. 20. wherein he conferred on his Apostles, and their successors in
priestly function, authority to absolute from sins committed after baptism,
enjoined also sacramental confession: for by the words set down Io. 20.
plainly appears, that Christ even then instituted an inward tribunal in order
to remission of sins: and constituted Priest's the spiritual Judges therein:
wherefore, as in an outward Court of Justice, a person arraigned cannot be
absolved, or punished by a temporal Judge legally, unless Proverb. 12. qui
iudic^t quod no^^t iudex est iustitiae.
he has the hearing of his cause: so a Priest, to whom the keys of authority
are given, as to the opening, or shutting the gates of Heaven, cannot open to,
or shut against a sinner iuridically, whose sins he has no knowledge of: The
Council of Trent fess. 14. c. 6. and 7. as likewise others more ancient,
namely, Lateran. sub Innocent. 3. Constant. etc. have defined the necessity of
sacramental confession, as to mortal sins committed after baptism. And
indeed venial sins importe no such necessity, because the Sacrament of
penance has nothing of power to retain them.
and consequently confession is of divine right, and an essential part of the
Sacrament of penance: neither matters it, that Christ pardoned the sins of S.
Mary Magdalen, and others, of whom he exacted no confession: for he, that
searches the heart, knows exactly the state, and condition of the spirit,
albeit nothing be outwardy expressed. Howeuer now the Sacrament of penance
being instituted after the similitude of an outward Court of Justice, wherein
the penitent supplieth the part of the person accused, and the Priest of the
Judge in the room of Christ, sacramental confession is of absolute necessity
for the remission of mortal sins committed after baptism: According to S.
Austin l. 65. hom. 49. c. 3. if to confess our sins to God privately, were
sufficient unto the remission of them, without cause it is said, whatsoever ye
shall loose in Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven etc. and in vain the keys are
given to the Church of God: and thereby, as this great Doctor observes, we
should frustrate the holy Euangell, we should frustrate Christ's own words,
promising to our selves, what he denies. And according to S. Basil in regulis
breuioribus interrog. 288. there is a necessity of confession our sins to
those, which are dispensers of the mysteries of God.
it is not enough, that a sinner confess his sins to God with his heart,
unless he shall tell them also with his mouth unto a Priest, who is the
Minister of Christ, to whom is committed S. Basil in Regulis breuioribus
interrog. 228. necessario, inquit, ijs peccata aperire debent, quibus credita
est dispensatio mysteriorum Dei, (qua habetur 1. Cor. 4.
dispensation of the mysteries of God, together with the word of
reconciliation. A penitent, that out of the tribunal of Priests seek
absolution from his sins, deceiues himself: for it is not said in vain
Whatsoever ye shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed in Heaven: nor the keys
of authority in order to the forgiving of sin's are given in vain to the
Church of God: which would prove a necessary consequence, if the antecedent
were granted. For the Sacrament of penance, which Christ instituted for the
pardoning of sins would not be useful a^ot, if sin's might be pardoned without
it.

In the primitive times two kind's of confession were in practice: the one
public, the other secret, in reference to two kind's of offenses: the one
openly, the other in secret committed: and the primitive Bishops in their
several Dioceses respectively deputed certain special Priests for hearing the
confessions of such, According to Orig. in hom. 2. in psalm. 37. S. Cyprian l.
de lapsis, and Tertull l. de poenit. c. 9. Confession of public sins was
public in the primitive Church, and public penitent's had a place in the
Church a part from the rest of the faithful, whose sins were not public, as
attest Tertull. and S. Cyprian.
as had openly sinned to the disedifying of other belieuers: whence they named
them Penitentiaries, and those so sinning, Penitents and for distinction sake
allotted them places in their Churches apart from the rest of their flock: yet
now by usage of speech the name of penitents is appropriated to all sinners
joint and seperat, that confess their sins to any Priest lawfully ordaind, and
approved. Howeuer even those public offenders did confess their public,,
together with their secret offenses unto the penitentiary Priests secretly,
Secret confession made to a Priest is no humane invention, but a divine
institution. Council. Trid. fess. 14. c. 6. and S. Chrysostom. hom. in Genesis de
Lazaro, names secret confession made to a Priest, confession made to God
himself, because a Priest is Christ's Vicar, or substitute, and Judge
appointed by Christ unto loosing, and binding, who is chief principal cause,
that work's in every Sacrament: for example a Priest that ministereth Baptism,
though he truly baptizes, neuertheless Christ specially is said to baptize
according to the holy Evangelist Hic (Christus) est qui baptizat. This is he
(Christ) that baptiseth.
secret confession importing a divine precept in order to both kinds of sins;
entire confession being an essential part of the Sacrament of penance: and
public confession, that was made in an open assembly was a mere iniunction, as
to satisfaction, in flicted by the said Penitentiaries, to whom power was given
by their Bishops to impose public confession of sundry public sin's, as in
prudence they should think it expedient for the humbling of public sinners,
and thereby unto terrefying, and edifying of others. Yet in this, and many ages
before, public confession together with Penitentiary Priest's in order to the
practice mentioned, are laid aside. Socrater qui narrat factum nectarij, ait
eum tantum sustulisse quod Episcopi Ecclejiaru^ adiunxerant Canoni (id est,
praecepto diuino confitendi) propter haeresim Nouatianorum.
Nectarius Patriarch of Constantinople in respect of great inconveniences
occasioned thereby annulled both: they being Church additions only, joined to
the divine precept of sacramental confession: and S. Chrysostom, that
succeeded Nectarius, approved his proceeding therein, judging it unreasonable,
and too heavy a burden for sinners to confess unto men, t at might reproach
them for their sins, as be such, as are no Priests, and consequently such, as
are not concerned in the seal of sacramental confession Obligatio sigilli
nascitur ex omni and sola confessione Sacramentali, id est, quae suscipitur
animo suby^ciendi peccataclauibus Ecclesiae.
which is an obligation not to reveal, what is confessed sacramentally, the
precept thereof being of divine right: and whereas it includes a negation after
the manner of mere negative precepts, for example, Thou shall not commit
adultery, thou shall not tell a lie, which be binding without exception the
seal of sacramental confession ought not to be broke in any case whatsoever:
again as confession in secret, in order to the Sacrament of penance has it is
institution, and command from Christ: and as the seal of sacramental
confession has institution, and command from Christ also: The necessity of
whole and entire confession evidently appears by sundry general Councils.
Namely Latera. cap. omnis v. riusque sexus. Flor. in Decreto Eugenij, and
Trident. fess. 14. cap. 5.
so integrity, as to confessing of sins committed after baptism has it is
institution, and command from Christ, in order to a Christian, that will
confess unto full remission thereof: in so much, that sacramental confession of
necessity must be perfect, entire, and undivided in order to all mortal sins,
which occur to a Penitent's memory after sufficient examination of his
conscience: for that thing is a necessary requisite to sacramental confession,
which if it were omitted, the Priests absolution would be in vain, and of no
effect, or purpose: and a Priest's absolution is of no value without integrity
of confession in order to all mortal sins, which occur to a Penitents memory
after a serious examination of his conscience, not confessed before, because one
mortal sin confessed apart, from another mortal alike, cannot be pardoned.
Wherefore it is not enough. as to the integrity of sacramental confession to
confess (wittingly) one mortal sin unconfessed before sacramentally, to one
Priest, and another mortal alike to another Priest: but all mortal sins,
joint, and separate ought to be confessed to one, and the same Priest, together
with the Trident. sess. 14. docet eas. circumstantias in confessione
explicandas esse, quae speciem peccati mutant, quibus verbis damnat no^nullos
haereticos asserentes circumstantias peccatorum fuisse ab otiosis hominibus
excogitatas.
circumstances that bring with them a new mortal malice to the making of a
distinct sin; for example, it is not enough for a man, that has robbed a
Church to confess, that he has committed theft; because that circumstance
import's a new, and distinct sin, integrity of sacramental confession being
inconsistent with voluntary omission of any one mortal sin. And for as much
as a penitent cannot procure integrity of confession without Eccles. 18. ante
indiciu^ interroga to ipsum, and in conspectu, Domini inuenies propitiationem.
a due inspection over his conscience, S. Athanas. (in illud Euangelij,
profecti in-Pagum) writes thus 1. letus examine our selves whether our fetters
be loosed, whereby he requires inspection into our consciences before we come
to confession. 2. in case, says he, the cord's of sin, that tie us fast be not
loosed already, we must deliver our selves up to the Disciples of JESUS (that
is, we must confess our sins to a Priest) for they are those, that can loose
our cords by the power which they have received from our savior JESUS, who
said. Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and
whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven; in consequence
of which Priests have power to absolve iuridically, as true Judges in the
Sacrament of penance.
it is expedient for him to call to his remembrance the hours of his life,
that are passed, especially since his last confession, what businesses he has
managed, what persons he has haunted, and what sins he is inclined to most. As
a prudent Physician, that vndertak's the cure of a diseased body, gives
preparatiues to the loosening, or stirring up of ill humors, that are cause of
the disease, before he applies soueraign physic to the purging of them away,
whereby the cure is done: so a discreet penitent in the cure of a sick soul
prepares his conscience by examination, unto the remouall of malignant humors
of sins, which are the cause of it is sickness, before he applies the remedy
Aug. de poenitent. confessio est salus animarum, dissipatrix vitiorum,
expugnatrix daemonum: quid plura? obstruit os inferni, and paradiso portas
aperi^.
of sacramental confession to purge out the leaven thereof, whereby he is cured.
For as a wounded body, cannot be healed, while the arrow, that gave the wound,
continues therein: so neither a wounded soul can be cured, whiles sin remains,
that wounded it. Wherefore as an impostume, that breaks not outwardly causes
corporal death: so sin's that stay within the soul S. Aug qui inconfessus
lates, inconfessus condemnaberis.
unconfessed, cause eternal death. Whereby evidently appears, the greatness of
the hazard, that sinners run which S. Cyprian l. de lapsis writes thus. Let
every man confess his sins, while he is alive, while his confession may be
accepted, while his satisfaction, and remission given by a Priest is grateful
in the sight of God.
defer confession of their sins, till great sickness sieze on them: and such be
like unto malefactors, that confess their wickedness at the gallows, when they
can sin no more, being deprived of further opportunity to sin, so that their
sins do rather leave them, then they their sins. Besides this kind of
slow-negligent penitents seldom confess unto justification of life retaining
for the most part an affection to their former transgressious; in consequence
of which, they die in their wickedness: for love to, and remission of sin, are
inconsistent together. Furthermore, as a man, that is afflicted with many
grievous wounds cannot perform any hard work; so a penitent oppressed with
many deadly sins, togegether with violent sickness, cannot Psalm. 14.
dereliquit me virtus mea.
stand against the difficult assaults of the devil.

CHAR. XIIJ. OF SATISFACTION
THE CONTENTS.
The integrity of sacramental penance requires sacramental satisfaction; the
propriety whereof is to discharge the debt of temporal punishments, which even
after the pardoning of sin, as to the guilt thereof, often remains behind
unsatisfied: satisfaction has nothing of weight with it, unless the penitent,
that satisfyes be in state of grace: God scourges every son, whom he
receives: neither holy scriptures, nor ancient Fathers exhort sinners to
turn to God with inward penance only: outward penance is required, namely
fasting, praying, Alms deeds, and other painful afflictions: outward penance
does not prejudice the satisfaction of Christ, from the merits whereof
proceed's whatsoever it has, as conducing to heavenly blessedness.

SAtisfaction is a painful, and laborious exercise of some one, or more
outward good works, namely fasting, praying or giving of Alms etc. which a
Penitent Satisfaction consistes in the exercise of painful works appointed,
and enjoined by a Ghostly-Father in manner of command: and indeed, if such
works were required by way of counsel only, the Penitent might choose whether
he would receive the whole entire Sacrament of Penance, or not, being
satisfaction pertaines to the integrity fhereof.
by command of his Ghostly-father Satisfactio debet esse actus voluntarius, nam
qui inuitus poenanae sustinct dicitur potius satispati, quam satisfacere.
voluntarily embraces, for the remitting of temporal pain due to his sins,
as offenses against God, together with full purpose to sin no more. The prime
propriety of satisfaction, is to discharge the debt of temporal punishment,
which after pardon of sin, in order to it is mortal malice, and eternal pain,
if the sin be mortal, often times The Council of Trent. fess. 6. cap. 14.
declar's, that satisfaction is one part of sacramental penance enjoined to the
remitting of temporal pain, which according to holy scriptures is not all
ways taken away wholly together with the guilt of sin: and the Council of Trent
fess. 14. cap. 8. expressly teaches, and cap. 12. defines Sub Anathemate, that
often times God remitteth the guilt of sin, without foregiuing the temporal
pain due thereto: and vponthis catholic assertion is grounded christian faith
in order to Indulgences, and Purgatory, the fire whereof purges away temporal
pains due to sins before remitted.
remains behind unpaid. Although a penitent sinner by a perfect act of
contrition, or real receiving of the Sacrament of Penance find grace again in
the sight of his Creator: Neuertheless he is not alwaise delivered from
temporal afflictions. For example God as soon, as he saw Dauid's contrition,
and detestation of the adultery, which he had committed with Bersebe, and the
Murder, that the had exercised on Vrias her husband, remitted the guilt of
those sins, and received him into favor again: yet notwithstanding his happy
reconciliation, he was left to endure many temporal calamities even in order
to the offenses pardoned before: For afterward God raised evil against him in a
great measure. The child that was borne unto him, died: the sword never
departed from his own house: sundry of his seed were violently slain, and his
people rebelled against him. In like manner although Moses, and Aaron long
before their death's got remission of the guilt of their incredulity contracted
Number. 20. Moses and Aaron Deo contradicebant non loquentes ad Petram in
conspectu filiorum Israel, quod tamen Deus praeceperat illis.
at the waters of contradiction Number. 20. believing not God to sanctify them in
the presence of the children of Israel: According to S. Anstin (l. 16. con.
Faus. Manich. c. 16.) Moses, and Aarons sin of incredulity was remitted them
long before their death.
yet in punishment of that very fault committed before, they were not suffered
to conduct his people into the land of promise, which was the thing they
passionately coueted. Again S. Chrysostom hom. 80. ad popul. Antich.
discoursing upon those words Math. 12. The men of Niniue did penance at the
preaching of Jonas, writes thus. Every where sackcloth, every where Ashes,
every where Tears; and the king of Niniue himself left his Throne, laid aside
his Royal Robes, put on a hair shirt, and powdered his head with ashes,
whereby the Town was delivered from destruction.
the people of Nineue at the preaching of Jonas the Prophet believed in God
Jonas 3. and turned unto him in tribulation of soul, whereby doubtless they
procured pardon of their transgressions in order to the guilt thereof:
Neuertheless they voluntarily afterward exercised works of satisfaction: for
they proclaimed a fast of three days: put on sack cloth, even from the
greatest to the least of them, and turned from their evil ways in bitterness
of sorrow. Besid's. S. John Baptist Mat. 3. after he had seuerly reproached the
Jews, to whom he preached salvation for their grievous sins, and exhorted
them to penance he inferred upon it thus: do therefore fruits S. Hier^^ nymus in
2. Joells per fructus dignos poenitentiae intellig in ieiunium, orationes,
eleemosynas, and id ganus alia.
worthy penance, thereby distinguishing penance, that is to say, inward
contrition, and detestation of sins committed, from outward good works thence
proceeding, as observes S. Gregory hom. 20. in Euangelia. And indeed a sinner,
that is really penitent detesteth, and abhors his sins, and turns to the
exercise of good works opposite thereto: namely fasting, praying, Alms deeds
etc. S. John did not require of the sinful Jews inward detestation of their
transgressions only: but exacted likewise the exercise of painful works
outwardly as to compensation, or satisfaction thereof: wherefore, as fruit's do
suppose the Tree, that produces them: so good work's, which be fruits of
penance, suppose sins pardoned before through penance taken in the sense
mentioned: in consequence whereof they suppose something of temporal pain due
thereunto: otherwise they ought not to be called fruit's worthy of penance,
since after the remission of sinn's in order to the guilt thereof, nothing
remains, that requires fruit's worthy of penance, if temporal pain be laid
aside: for the malice of sin, which is it is mortal guilt, cannot be taken away
in part, to wit: partly by contrition, and partly by painful works outwardly
exercised, being indivisible, and without parts, so that to exclude temporal
punishments as due to sins remitted before, is to ascribe nothing to outward
works, of satisfaction in reference to penance, which is contrary to the word's
uttered by S. John: Do fruits worthy of penance: And hereby is required
besid's mere works of penance, proportion between the works, and the sin's
committed, as plainly shows the word ( worthy.) S. Grego. hom. 20. non debet,
inquit, esse par fructus boni operis, eius, qui minus, and eius, qui amplius
peccauit.
For example, one, that sins little, is liable to less satisfaction, then
another that sins much, Caeteris paribus: and although sacramental
satisfaction be proper only to the new law established by Christ: yet taken in
the general sense in order to temporal pain, that remain's after the guilt
of sin is blotted out, was in all times a necessary requisite for the obtaining
eternal life, as do clearly evidence the scripture-testimonies set down.
Howeuer, no satisfaction is worthy, unless the Penitent, that satisfyes be in
the state of grace, and thereby incorporated into Christ: for satisfaction is
made worthy only through the merits of his death, and passion: the application
whereof is an effect of his supernatural friendship, which is not between him,
and a sinner continuing in the state of mortal sin: in consequence of which,
outward works worthy penance do suppose sanctifying grace in him, that works
worthily unto remission of temporal pain. Furthermore this catholic doctrine
is even agreeable to the dictates of natural reason: for as much as amongst
men, it is not enough, that he who wound's the honor of his neigh hour
conceive inward grief of that offense only: but he ought also to exercise an
outward action to the restoring of the honor taken away, which has something
of satisfaction in order to the party offended, and something of pain, in order
to him that offends: so According to S. Leo. ser. 7. de Epiph. Domini. No man
is so clens'd from sin, as that neither justice can findein him what to
condemn, nor mercy what to pardon.
it is expedient for him, that is a penitent besides an act of inward
detestation of his sins, to endure something to the satisfying of God, as to
the dishonor done him thereby: and as by sinning he has used ill the creatures
of God taking inordinate delight therein: so he ought to suffer from creatures
something of affliction, to the repairing of the injury, that God suffers on
that score, the divine justice exacting that satisfaction of penitent sinners,
whom he chasteneth after their admittance into his favor. God scourges every
son Hebrae. 12. whom be receives for his better correction and amendment.
Again since every sin how great, and malicious soever, is remitted, as to the
guilt thereof by Contrition necessary to justification requires not any certain
degree of intensness, or certain endurance of time: for contrition how remiss
soever it be, and how little soever it endures, is either formally, and indeed,
an act of perfect charity, or importes as much, in consequence of which the
least measure, or degree of true contrition, that includes the love of God
above all things, is inconsistent with deadly-sin.
every contrition how litle-soeuer contained within the bound of true
contrition: and since most sin's have an Haecinaequalitatis ratio depro^pta est
ex Council Trid. quod sic ait, qui non peccarunt per ignorantia^. quique semel a
peccari, and daemonis seruitute liberati accepto Spiritus sancti dono scie^tes
Templum Dei violare, and Spiritum sanctum co^tristare non formidaru^t, minori
venia, and indulgentia digni sunt.
vnequiall, and different malice, one being greater, then an other, reason
requires in conformity to divine equity, and justice, that a sinner, who
through lesser contrition is reconciled to God, and becom's Heir of
blessedness, does so receive remission of sins, that neuertheless he suffer
withal something of affliction to compense the remissnes of his contrition. In
respect of this painful satisfaction endured after the remission of the guilt
of sins, the Sacrament of penance is called by holy Father's a Laborious
baptism, whereby it is distinguished from the Sacrament of baptism, which
washes away at once both the pain, and guilt of sins, as often, as it is
worthily received: and the reason of difference in order to their effects
respectively, beside the will of God, that has invested these two Sacrament's
with an unequal power of working, is, because such as after the receiving of
sanctifying grace through baptism, whereby they be delivered out of the
servitude of sin, and the devil, do knowingly, and by a voluntary act of
their own will, sin again, pollute the Temple of God, which is their soul,
and grieve the Holy Ghost, as far as lies in their reach, deserve less pardon,
and indulgence: in consequence whereof the application of Christ's merits made
in the Sacrament of penance ought to be less perfect in order to remission,
then the application of the same merits made in the Sacrament of haptism: yet
it would not be less, as to perfection if mere contrition, or the mere
Sacrament of penance should at all times procure full remission in order to the
guilt, eternal, and temporal pain of sins committed after baptism. S.
Chrysos. hom. 5. in Epis. ad Hebrae. makes this difference between the wicked,
that receive from God in this life riches, dignities etc. and the good, which
endure miseries, and afflictions, to wit. God so carries himself toward's the
wicked that albeit he let us them have full enjoyment of worldly fortunes,
neuertheless will punish them in the next life. But during the present life God
is wont to punish the good, that delivered thereby from the vncleaness of sin,
they may depart out of the world without reproach.
Wherefore the Sacrament of penance does not so remit sins, but that in
remitting the eternal pain corresponding to the malice of them; it changes
eternal into temporal pain, that remains behind as a just debt liable to
satisfaction. Neither does this prejudice Christ's satisfaction: for though in
order to it is own value, and efficacy, it is more then abundantly sufficient to
ransom all sins whatsoever joint, and separate: neuertheless it causes
remission only according to the disposition of the subject, to which it is
applied, after the similitude of natural causes, which how potent, and active
soever they are themselves: yet the subjects on which they work, put bound's
to their actiuity, and efficacy in working: wherefore, as it does not argue
insufficiency in natural causes, though they do not produce effect's
proportionable to their efficacy through the indisposition of the subjects: so
neither does it argue imperfection in Christ's satisfaction to the prejudice
thereof, although sin's are remitted thereby, as to their malice, and eternal
pain, the temporal pain remaining vnremitted through remissnes of a
penitent's contrition. By the premises evidently appears the extreme weakness
of modern sectaries, that acknowledge inward penance only, which is a
detestation of sin, together with a purpose of amendment, S. Cyprian l. de
lapsis treating of Confession in order to secret sins, mentions expressly
satisfaction as a part of true penance: Et confiteantur, ait, singuli delictum
suum, dum adhuc qui delinquit in saeculo est, dum admitti confessio eius
potest, dum satisfactio, and remissio per Sacerdotem grata est apud Dominum:
and a little after exhort's sinners to turn to God with their whole heart, and
to appease his wrath through fasting, praying, weeping and wailing, and
according to S. Ambrose trac. ad Virginem lapsam cap. 8, if a sinner shall not
be indulgent to himself, God will show him indulgence: that is, if he shall
punish himself, God will not punish him.
and reject outward penance, which is called satisfaction, belicuing that God
Council. Trid. sess. 6. can. 30. si quis post acceptam iustificationis gratia^
cuilibet peccatori poenitenti it a culpam remitti, and reatum aternae
poenadeleri dixerit, vt nullus remaneat reatus poenae temporalis exoluenda vel
in hoc saeculo, vel in futuro in purgatorio, antequa^ ad regna caeloru^ aditus
patere possit, anathema sit.
does never inflict temporal punishment's for sin's whose mortal malice, and
eternal pain due thereto, is pardoned before: for the scripture-testimonies
alleged do plainly demonstrate the contrary. Besides although the malice, or
deformity of sin be the sole cause of temporal pain: neuertheless it is no
formal, or material cause, it is but the efficient moral cause only, which
is not allwaies in being together with it is effect, as clear experience
teaches in things physical, and moral: and therefore no man ought to infer
from the remission of the malice of sin the remission of all pain
corresponding thereto. Again albeit that remission of eternal pain be a
greater thing, and far more difficult, then is the remission of temporal
pain: neuertheless that does not of necessity infer this: for an outward Court
of Justice often times does spare a malefactors life, that deserves death
enioyning him a penalty, that is a lesser thing. To forgive a greater
punishment is not to forgive a lesser, that has noessentiall connection with
the greater: and indeed though eternal pain be inconsistent with the remission
of the deformity, and malice of mortal sin, in as much as sanctifying grace,
whereby such remission is purchased does constitute a sinner a child of God,
Heir of Heaven, and coheir of Christ; howeuer sanctity, and temporal pain are
not incompatible together. God took to mercy again the children of Israel,
that had made them God's of gold, which they adored, being pacified by the
prayer of Moses for their Idolatry Exodus 32 Exodus 32. Our lord therefore
plagued the people for the fault in order to the calfe that Aaron had made.
Where the particles (Therefore for the fault) give evidence, that the sole
reason, which moved God to punish them again (that is after the prayer of Moses
had appeased him) was the sin of Idolatry before pardoned, as to the guilt
thereof, neither does Calvin deny (in his Comment. on the same Chap. of Exodus.)
but that the fault was remitted before.
yet afterward he did visit that very sin upon them with temporal
punishment's, as does evidence the same Chapter. To conclude all primitive
Fathers of the new law do not exhort Christians only to turn unto God with
inward contrition of heart S. Cypria. ser. 5. de lapsi^. Oportet, inquit, orare
impensius, and rogare, diemluctu transigere, vigil^^s, and fletibus noctes
ducere, and tempus omne lacrymosis lamentationibus occupare.
but also with praying, fasting, mourning, weeping, Almes-deed's, and other
painful afflictions. Wherefore it is mere foolishness to believe, that God is
pacified by inward penance, which is detestation of sin, and not by outward
penance, which is satisfaction for temporal pain due thereto together with
reparation of the injury, which God suffers by sin. Neither does the saying
of S. Paul. (Ephesians. 5. viz. No man ever ye hates his own flesh, but
nourishes, and cherishes it) infirm, this christian doctrine for the same
Apostle 1. Cor. 9. confesses that himself punished his flesh: saying, I beat
down my body, and bring it into subjection. Though no man can hate his flesh
out of hatred to his flesh precisely yet he may punish his flesh out of hatred
to the many miseries the rebellion thereof brings to the soul and indeed God
Apo. 3. ego quos amo, arguo and castigo.
chasteneth the flesh of as many as he loves.

CHAR. XIV. OF INDVLGENCES
THE CONTENTS.
The Church of God inheriteth the abundant satisfactions of Christ, and his
Saints unto remitting of temporal pains due to sins pardoned before (as to
the guilt thereof) which is the consistency of the Churches Indulgences, or
pardons, the dispensing whereof is proper to the Church-gouernours which use
less, or more moderation in the releasing of temporal punishment's according
to times, places, and persons? greater-penances, and fewer pardons agreed with
primitive christians, that carried about the dying mortifications of their
crucified Lord: there is nothing of substantial difference between ancient,
and modern Indulgences, as those, so these import remission of temporal pains
not only in the Ecclesiastical before men, but likewise in the divine Court
of Justice in the sight of God: sundry kinds of Indulgences set down: The state
of grace necessarily required unto the gaining of them.

INdulgences are remission of temporal pain due to sins (pardoned before)
through the application of the Pope Clement the sixth Extra. vnigenitus. Tit. de
poenit. calls the prize of Christ, and the Saints satisfaction 2 Treasure
taken in spiritual signification after the similitude of a corporal Treasure
laid up, and conseru'd for the common uses of a community, or common wealth
without being propriated to any particular person.
abundant satisfactions of the blessed Saints, and Christ's specially: the
value, and worth whereof, is the spiritual treasure laid up in the Churches
spiritual Treasury, and by her supreme Pastor dispensed. The end for which
God ordained the mystery of the Incarnation, was not to remit sin only: but the
pain of it also; wherefore Christ did not give the great price of his
suffering's for sin alone: but likewise for the pain corresponding thereunto,
in consequence of which it is necessary, that, According to the definition of
Pope Leo the tenth, that condemned, Luther; the Church of God possesses a
spiritual Treasure of Indulgences consisting of the abundant satisfactions of
Christ, and the blessed Saints: and this catholic assertion is set down in
the Councils of Constance ses. 8. and of Trent. ses, 21. c. 9. where Indulgence
are named Celestial Treasure: likewise this latter Council declares, that
Christ has given to his Church Indulgences, and power to grant them.
when the price, or satisfaction is abundant, and exceeds the greatness of
the debt contracted, something of it remain vnexhausted, and vnapplyed: but
the satisfaction of Christ was so abundant, that in respect of the infinite
dignity thereof it was sufficient enough to redeem the sins of all men joint,
and separate, if it had been applied, 1. Cor. 5. Christus mortuus pro omnibus.
1. Jo. 2. ipse (Christus) est propitiatio pro peccatis nostris etc.
for Christ died for all 1. Cor. 5. and was a full propitiation for our sins:
and not for our sins only, but also for the sins of the whole world 1. Io. 2.
Wherefore something of Christ's satisfaction still remain's to show in Ages to
come the exceeding riches of his suffering's, which are the spiritual Treasure
reserved in the Treasury of his holy spouse the Church to the benefit of her,
and her children: and truly the abundant goods, that a loving Husband,
purchases, he leaves to the use of his wife, and children, in consequence
whereof Christ bath left all his abundant, and undisposed riches of his
abundant satisfaction to the Church Legatione pro Christo fungimur, inquit,
Apostolus Paulus.
and the dispensation thereof to the supreme Minister for him on earth.

Although all Christ's sufferings considered, as merits precisely Luc. 4. Nonne
bac oportuit Christu^ pati, and sic intrare in regnum suum. Et Philip. 2.
humiliauit semetipsum vsque ad merte^, mortem autem Crucis: propter quod and
Deus exaltauit illum, and de^it ill^ (...) quod est super ^mne nomen.
were rewarded in the glory of his body, According to the holy scripture
Philip. 2. Christ humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the cross: wherefore God exalted him, and gave him a name above every
name.
and the exaltation of his holy name: neuertheless they did not receive a full
reward thereby: for as concerning the body's glory, of necessity it does
accompany the blessedness of the soul, which by natural consequence is derived
into it, if no hindrance interuene: wherefore since Christ did not merit the
glory of his soul, that had full enjoyment of the beatificall vision in the
first moment of it is assumption, the glory of his body cannot be the reward of
his merits: neither could the exaltation of his name exhaust all his merit's,
since one action of Christ alone was sufficient to deserve both the exaltation,
and the glory of his body: whereby is plainly evident, that many meritorious
actions exercised by Christ are laid up in the spiritual Treasury of the
Church. Howeuer though it were granted, that the glory of Christ's body, and
the exaltation of his name did equal all his actions joint, and separate
(considered, as meritorious) to a full reward: yet it cannot be said, shat his
satisfactory actions are exhausted thereby. For satisfaction is only ordained to
remit temporal pain due unto sin, which was inconsistent with Christ's
impeccability: and sithence all the sins of the world were not sufficient
enough to exhaust his satisfactions, they containing an intrinsecall infinity
of worth, and dignity, for as much, as they were the products The infinite prize
of Christ satisfaction proceeded from the infinite dignity of his divine
person, that was intrinsecally annexed unto it: for as S. Thomas teaches,
actiones sunt suppositorum: But if there were an infinite unworthiness, or
deformity in the sins of all men joint, and seperat it is extrinsicall only,
because it comes merely of the object, which is extrinsicall, namely God, whom
a sinner offendes: in consequence whereof the infinite valor, or worthiness of
Christ's satisfaction far exceeds the unworthiness of sin taken in it is whole
possible latitude.
of his divine person, doubtless some part of these satisfactions do remain
still in the Churches Treasury to be dispensed for the benefit of the faithful
unto remission of temporal pains due to their sins, which was the sole end,
and motive of all his actions considered, as satisfactory: because it is proper
to satisfaction, only to remit temporal punishment's due to sins. Neither is
it inconvenient that one, and the same action exercised by Christ should have
something of merit, and something of satisfaction, for by his bitter passion he
merited the exaltation of his name and the glory of his body Luk 24. Philip 2.
yet other scripture-testimonies plainly declare, that he suffered for us, and
satisfied for our sins 2. Cor. 4 and indeed evident experience shows
different effects to proceed from one, and the same individual cause: for
doubtless he, that charitably prays for his enemies, by one, and the same
prayer may obtain something of advantage in order to them, and something of
reward in order to himself, as appears by the promises, which God has made
to such, as love their enemies: and whereas the sufferings of the blessed Saints
A good work, is counted meritorious for as much, as it proceed's from a man
invested with sanctifying grace, which is the ground of merit, howeuer a
meritorious work is satisfactory also, when it is performed with pain, and
labor.
had something of merit, and something of satisfaction (for they were
meritorious in as much, as they proceeded from them through sanctifying grace,
which is the root, and prime cause of good merits: and in as much, as the
exercise thereof was laborious, and painefnll they were satisfactory) it
follows clearly, that though God has rewarded them with blessedness Deus
praemiat vltra dignitatem,
even beyond what they did merit, and consequently, all their merits are fully
exhausted: yet because remission of temporal pain due to sin is the reward of
satisfaction, painful suffering, as satisfactory had no full reward in the
persons, of sundry blessed Saint's, and therefore remained unrewarded, and
vnexhausted in order to them. For The Council of Trent defines, that the
Virgin Mary never committed mortal, or venial sin.
example the Mother of God had not the least guilt of sin: yet Et tuam
ipsius, inquit, S. Lucas, portransibit gladius.
she endured grievous afflictions, and painful sorrows: S. John Baptist who
exceeded in sanctity all others of his sex by Christ's own testimony did
practice extreme penance: and the calamities, that holy Job suffered were
greater then his sin's required, as himself witnesses in the sixth Chapter of
his book, saying: Oh that my sins were weighed, whereby I have desernad wrath,
and my miseries together in the balance: as the sand of the sea this would
appear heavier: in like manner it may be turly said of the passions endured by
other blessed Saint's: wherefore since the supreme providence does reward every
good work beyond what it deserves, undoubtedly he has assigned reward's
suitable thereto, that is both in order to merit, and satisfaction, according
to that of S. Luke cap. 21. There shall not an hair of your heads perish:
Whereby Christ promises a recompense to each good work how little soever it be:
But if the works of blessed Saint's, as meritorious only, and not as
satisfactory should receive reward, many baires of their head's would perish;
that is, many of their good works, as they are satisfactory should not be
recompensed, which is contrary to Christ's promise.

Sithence the condition of satisfaction is such, that it is applyable by him,
that satisfyes for others distinct from himself, as appears by S. Paul that
wished to be Anathema for his brethren, and by Moses, that beseeched God to
blot him out of the book of life for the conservation of the Israelites, it is
conformable to reason, and divine justice, which has a reward for every good
work, that the abundant, and exceeding satisfactions of blessed Saints, that
remain vprecompenced, be laid up in the Treasury of the Church unto the
remission of temporal pain due to sin, which is the reward, that good works,
as satisfaction specially challenge: and undoubtedly 2. Cor. 12. Ego autem
libentissime impendam, and super impendam ego ipse pro ani^^bus vestris. Et S.
Timoth. 2. omnia sustineo propter electos.
the saints themselves now departed in as much, as they were invested with the
grace of charity, when they did exercise their voluntary satisfactions, and
endured their violent passions, had at least a virtuall intention to assist,
and profit thereby the rest of the faithful, the law of charity requiring that
Vnum, inquit, Paulus, corpus in Christo sumus. Et Gal. 6. alter alterius onera
portate.
all members of the holy catholic Church concur mutually to the perfecting
of the whole body, one bearing another burden, and one satisfying for an
other applying a mere price for temporal pain due to sin, In Bulla Pij 5.
damnatur propositio Michaelis Baij dice^tis per passiones sanctorum
co^municatas Jndulgentijs non proprie redimi debita.
which is the consistency of Communio Sanctorum, that christians profess in the
Nicene Creed, and the Apostle practiced, saying Now rejoice I in my suffering's
for you, and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ's in my flesh for his
bodies sake, which is the Church. Neither hence ought any man to infer the
saint's to be our Redeemers: because their satisfactions for others in order to
remission of temporal punishment's, if Christ's satisfactions were to be laid
aside, would signify nothing, being founded therein: Though the blood of Christ
be sufficient enough to olenst a soul from both the guilt, and the pain of sin:
neuertheless it does not procure that deliverance unless it be applied by the
Churches Sacraments, or by acts of faith and contrition: and indeed even
sectaries assert a necessity of says, and contrition unto remission of sins.
In consequence whereof, whereas Christ is said Hebra. 10. with one oblation to
have consummated forever them, that are sanctified, it is meant, as to
sufficiency, being that one oblation without the application thereof does not
sanctify indeed, and effectually.
and he alone is properly our Redeemer in, and by whose proper merit's through
the effusion of his blood was purchased our redemption unto forgiueness of
sins. Collos. 1. And that was Christ only, One mediator of God and man: and
as no man ought to be said his own Redeemer according to the form of proper
speech, for as much, as through good works of painful satisfaction he pays a
ransom for temporal punishment's corresponding to his sins, or for as much,
as he exercises an act of perfect contrition, whereby his sin's are remitted:
so the blessed saint's ought not to be called the Redeemers of such, as receive
remission of temporal pains due to sinn's through the application of their
satisfactions. Neither hereby are Christ's satisfaction's prejudiced: For as
the prayer, that one belieuer on earth makes for another does nothing at all
diminish the dignity of Christ's daily praying for us at the right hand of his
divine Father Romans 8. quotidie interpellat pro nobis.
Romans S. since the efficacy of it is founded in the merit's of his death, and
passion: so the satisfactions of the blessed saint's applied for the remission
of pain due to sin do dot lessen the infinite valor of Christ's
satisfactions, being they receive from them all their worthiness, and efficacy.
And doubtless Christ's own will was to have it so, to the end, that his
faithful on earth might exercise reciprocal works of charity toward one an
other, and exhibit honor to such; as he had translated to his kingdom of
eternal blessedness, being the honor done to a servant does redound to his
lord, and Master.

Power to dispense this spiritual Treasure of Indulgences, or pardons is
committed to the Catholic Church, as appears evidently by Christ's own
word's Mat. 16. saying: And I will give unto thee the key's of the kingdom of
Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth shall be bound also in
Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall Quoad verba Christi: quodcu^que solueris;
nomine solutionis non intelligitur sola absolutio iudiciaria, sed etiam omnis
dispe^satio, imo and omnis favor, and gratia ex vi illius potestatis facta, and
proinde Indulgentia concessa pro and extensa ad defunctum a summo Pontifice
(eius enim solius est dare Indulgentias per defunctis) infallibiliter prodest
defuncto per modum suffragij, id est pro modum auxilij, and adiutorij
Ecclesiastici eidem defuncto applicata si caetera sint paria: puta si
Jndulgentia fiat ex rationabili causa, sique defunctus existat in gratia etc.
his suppositis, Indulgentia applicata defuncto alicui semper est valida and
rata apud Deum; luxta tamen Ca^etanum and Henricum Indulgentia non babes
infallibilem effectu^ respectu animae defuncti, sed liberum est Deo eam
acceptare, vel non acceptare.
loose an earth shall be loosed also in Heaven: whereby Christ promises to S.
Peter, and his successors in Church-gouernment authority, and power for the
removing of all impediment's inconsistent with the enioyment of heavenly
blessedness: wherefore since not sinn's alone, but pain's due thereunto obstruct
the passage to the kingdom of Heaven according to Christ's own preaching Mat.
5. Verily 1 say unto thee thou shall not come out thence till thou have paid
the utmost farthing; it is evident, that the power of the Church does not only
extend unto the remitting of sinn's: but likewise to the releasing of temporell
punishment's due thereunto: this catholic Truth is clearly euidenced by S.
Paul's proceeding with the incestuous Corinthian, whom he had commanded before
to be delivered up to Satan, as to destruction of the flesh, that his spirit
might be saved. 1. Cor. 5. For when the Apostle heard that the incestuous
adulterer had exercised great penance for his sin, least he should be swallowed
up with over much sorrow, at the earnest request of the Corinthians he for gave
the rest, or surplus of the pain, he had inflicted on him, writing to them
thus. Whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also: for if I forgive any thing, to
whom I forgive it for your sakes, forgive I it, in the person of Christ 2. Cor.
2. by these words plainly appears, that the Apostle forgave something, and
since what he forgave could not be sin in order to the guilt thereof (for by the
Epistle it is clear, that the adulterer had exercised great contrition in
consequence of which he had received remission of his grievous offense, as to
it is malice, or guilt) It follows of necessity that the thing forgiven was
part of the temporal punishment which the greatness of the sin had deserved:
and indeed in order to that alone the Corinthians presented their request.
Hereby further appears the authority, wherewith Church-gouernours are invested
for the remission of temporal pain's remaining after sin's are forgiven, which
is the power of granting Indulgences, proper to the Vicars of Christ in whose
room they exercise it: And the word's set down bear evidently this sense
vizt: In the person of Christ. As the Apostle did deliver unto Satan the
adulterer in the name, and by the power of our lord JESUS CHRIST 1. Cor. 5. so
2. Cor. 2. In 1. Cor. 5. Patianus Epis. contra Nouatianu^. Vide, inquit,
Apostoli Jndulgentiam, proprias etiam sententias temperantis.
he did moderate his sentence by remitting part of his temporal affliction S.
Ambros. l. 1. de poeniten. c. 6. agens con. Nouatianos, ait ex eo quod
Apostolus dicit se condonare in persona Christi, ipsu^ vendicasse ius a Domino
acceptum and non indebitum vsurpasse.
challenging to that effect authority received of Christ, whose person he
represented in the dispensation of that pardon, or Indulgence. Neither is this
doctrine infirmed at all, because of the Apostles request directed, to the rest
of the Corinthians, whereby he, (hearing of the said adulterers exceeding grief
for his sin) exhorts them to pardon, and comfort him saying: It is sufficient
unto the same man, that he was rebuked of many: so that now contrary wise ye
ought rather to forgive, and comfort him, lest exceeding heauiness should
swallow him up: Cor. 2. For though it was not said to all the faithful of the
Church joint, and separate, Whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed
in Heaven: But to the Apostles, and their successors in Priestly function,
such only being Christ's ministers, and Vicegerents, to whom the power of
loosing is committed properly, as to the iuridicall exercise of it: A belieuiug
Christian, that has nothing of jurisdiction can by way of request, or prayer
obtain for an other remission of the pain due to his sin: for example a man,
that is bound to suffer pain, or punishment, may notwithstanding transfer, and
apply the prize of that satisfaction to the advantage of his friend: for as the
Apostle says Charitas patiens est. Charity is patient, wherefore a charitable
man is inclinable to suffer affliction unto profiting his Neighbor, whereof
the Apostle Collos. 1. gives evidence euough saying, Now rejoice I in my
sufferings for you, and to fulfill those things, that want of the passions of
Christ in my flesh for his bodies sake, which is the Church? though Christ's
Passions were wanting in nothing as to sufficiency: for he was made unto us
justice, sanctification, and redemption 1. Cor. 1. that is according to the
same Apostle 1. Cor. 6. he was made the Author, giver, and meritorious cause of
our justice, sanctity, and redemption: neuertheless as to efficacy there was
something wanting, viz. the application of Christ's merits, which is made by the
Sacraments of the Church unto remitting both the guilt, and pain of sin, and by
our own afflictions charitable offered in order to our Neighbor unto remitting
of temporal punishment due to sin remitted before: But no man can satisfye for
the sin of an other, as to the guilt thereof: for he divine Justice will remit
no man his sin, that shall not be sorry for, and dereste it himself according
to the holy scripture Luc. 13. Except ye do penance (that is except ye have in
ward sorrow, and detestation of your sins) ye shall all perish: Besides
neither the guilt of a mortal sin nor eternal pain due thereto is forgiven,
and taken away without the infusion of sanctifying grace according to the
Council of Trent. sess. 6. c. 7. nay venial sin according to the common
opinion of Catholic Doctors is not purged out of a soul, unless grace be
infused into it: howeuer neither of both is remitted to those, which are come
to full years of discretion without an act of detestation, and sorrow.
Wherefore when the Popes Bull's, whereby Indulgences are granted mention
remission of sins, they mean remission of the temporal pains due unto them.
And indeed the Popes declare in their Bull's that they grant their Indulgences
to such, as are contrite, and truly penitent. Again accordiug to holy
scriptures sin is taken sometimes for the pain due thereto, namely Machabae. 2.
neuertheless all the faithful together with their Pastors forgive, and loose
by consent, desire, The Apostle 2. Cor. 8. in saying, Let your abundance
supply their want, that also their abundance may supply your want, gave
hopes to the Corinthians (whom he exhorted to furnish Titus, and Luke with
corporal necessary's) that the spiritual abundance of the same Titus, and
Luke, might supply, and enrich their spiritual want through their good work's,
prayers, and corporal satisfactions. And truly this sacred Text shows
evidently, that not only worldly goods, as Alms, may be rewarded through
spirtuall riches, namely prayers, and other holy works, but that the Saints,
or godly persons may as well apply their abundant satisfactions unto
supplying the spirtuall want's of others, as those which abound with worldly
riches, may supply with their superfluities the corporal necessities of their
Neighbors.
commiseration, outward ward good works, and holy prayers offered to God for a
sinful Brother: and truly this kind of forgiving, and loosing is common alike
to all such, as devoutly, and charitably recite that petition of our Lord's
prayer: Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive the trespasses against us, as
witnesses S. Augus. trac. 58. upon S. John: and doubtless by the mentioned
word's of the Apostle vizt. Ye ought rather to forgive, and comfort him, and
whom ye forgive any thing, etc. is meant of this general manner of
forgiving, and loosing, which is common alike to all the faithful of the
Church: but to demonstrate, that he himself laid claim to a higher, and better
kind of forgiving, and loosing, he professes, that he exercised his
forgiueness, and power of loosing in the person, or room of Christ. Whereby
again appears, that the Apostle did not forgive this adulterer the rest of the
pain enjoined him in order to the rigor of Church Discipline only: that is,
to the intent only, that it should advantage him in the ecclesiastical Court:
but also in order to the divine Court of Justice, that it might benefit him
before God: and this is so manifest a truth, that no sectary can say the
contrary without contradicting the Apostles own words, vizt: I forgave it in
the person of Christ, that is in the room of Christ, and as his Minister, to
whom Christ had committed his power of loosing, and binding upon earth: and
indeed S. Paul should have extremely prejudiced the said miserable adulterer
(which were great impiety to think) if his forgiveness should have had no
weight S. Cypria. Epis. 14. agens de relaxatione poenarum impositarum
peccatoribus, ait illam fieri per intercessionem martyrum vel aliorum fidelium,
quorum satisfactionibus, and suffragijs adiuuantur in delictis apud Dominum, id
est in foro Dei.
with the divine Court, and been of no value before God: for according to that
supposall he should have pardoned a pain of this life, in respect whereof the
adulterer should have suffered a far greater in the next: because the
punishment a man endures upon earth is a thousand times lesser, then the
torment's of Purgatory: and thereby S. Paul would have brought his penitent
Corinthian out of the frying pan into the fire. That is out of the prison of
the ecclesiastical Court into the prison of the divine Court. Conformably unto
this catholic doctrine, Bishops in the primitive Church enjoined sinners
penances to satisfye God, and to compence the injury done to him through their
sin's: According to Tertullian. l. ad martyrs and S. Cyprian Epis.
10.11.12.13.14. sundry Christians, that through frailty fell from the Church in
time of grievous persecution were wont to recur unto the Martyrs, and
Confessors, that their penances might be remitted unto them: and these ancient
Fathers did not mean penances, or pains enioynd, and due only in the Churches
Court, but due also in the Court of God: wherefore S. Cyprian Epis. 14. faith
expressly, that they received help, and deliverance from their pains apud
Dominum, that is in the divine Court: in consequence whereof Indulgences remit
penances, or pains at the Tribunal of God, as due there, and not as due only
in order to the Churches Canons (as wanton scholars of these days unadvisedly
teach) for otherwise according to S. Thomas q. 25. a. 1. Indulgences would be
more unprofitable, then profitable reserving the penitent to more grievous
pains in Purgatory. Besides according to the holy scriptures whatsoever
priest's shall bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever they
shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven: in consequence of which God has
a Court in Heaven, that remits the guilt, and pain of sin accordingly as
they be remitted in the Churches Court: and indeed if there were no remitting
of pains in the Court of Heaven there would be no need at all of the Churches
spiritual Treasure consisting of the abundant satisfactions of Christ, and
the blessed Saints (and yet that there is this spiritual Treasure is an
article of Christian faith) for as such a Treasure could not be necessary unto
remission of pains in a civil Court, so it could not be necessary unto
remission in an ecclesiastical Court. The ground on which the Digbean divines
build their opinion, is a damned heresy, namely, that God does not forgive us
our sins as to the guilt thereof except her pardon the pain also, as is
plainly clear according to the definition of the Council of Trent sess. 6.
can. 30.
and this practice was, both in order to such, as had publicly sinned (in
reference to which canonical pain's were instituted only) as also in order to
such, as had sinned in secret, as do demonstrate Burchard in the 13th. book of
decretalls, and sundry others, which have made a full collection of the
canonical pains.

Furthermore no man can say without running into manifest error, that the
Apostles forgiveness, or indulgence in order to the penitent Corinthian was
but an absolution of excommunication, or of his sin given in the Sacrament of
penance: for first a deliverance from an ecclesiastical censure of
excommunication is never named by scriptures, or Fathers a condonation,
forgiueness, or indulgence. Again by the Apostles words appears, that he
forgave part only of the punishment enjoined, which cannot be meant of an
absolution either from excommunication, or sin's in the Sacrament of penance,
where there is no sharing out by parts. Yet notwithstanding all this, the
usage of indulgences was not near so frequent in the primitive times, as in the
subsequent ages, because primary Christians carrying the fresh memory of their
crucified Redeemer, and thereby much enflamed with love toward his sufferings,
always bore about his dying mortification, that his life also might be made
manifest in their mortal flesh 2. Cor. 4. so that then there was strict
discipline, and great penances enjoined sinners. For example rigorous fasting,
much praying, and other painful afflictions, In 1. Council. Nicae cui
intersuerunt 318. Patres, indicitur poena vndecim annorum. Item in Council.
Ancyrano iniungitur poena septenij ijs qui bis vel ter Idolis sacrificauerant.
Porro vulgatum est vnicuique peccato mort ali poenitentiam septem annorum
iniungendam esse iuxta Canones pro quo tam en nullus Textus reperiri potest. Et
contrarium tenet S. Tho. in 4. l. sent. dis. 20. and sane Gratianus, qui
allegatur pro contraria sententia non dicit Ecclesiam septemnem poenitentiam in
singula peccata statuisse, sed tantum pro grauissimis iniungi solitam fuisse
deinde dicit illam poenit entiam non taxatam fuisse pro foro interiori, sed
exteriori, and constat illos Canones ad forum exterius pertinere.
as by the ancientest Councils appears: Nevertheless such was their fervor
of spirit, and extreme zeal in compliance to Christ's sufferings, that they
fullfilled them willingly, and cheerfully: few sought after pardons unto
remissions of their punishments; But now in the declination of charity, and
fall of devotion christians commonly have an abhorrence from much sufferings,
notwithstanding that their sins are far greater, then ever before, in respect
whereof our holy Mother the Chnrch not ignorant of Satan's crafty enterprises,
lest in these delicate times 2. Cor. 2. vt non circumueniamur a Satana.
he might circumuent, and bring them either to despair, or to forsake Christ,
and his Religion, has moderated the Church discipline, condescending to the
great weakness of her children: and truly Christ did not put in the power of
his Ministers dispensations of such discipline only, but also Cu^ Christus sit
supremus Dominus and Judex potest tum per se, tum per ministros misericorditer
relaxarepoenas debitas quoad suu^ Tribnnal. vt costat ex cap. 21. Joan.
invested them with authority to proceed with sinners more, or less
rigorously, and to inflict longer, or shorter punishments, as in their wisdom
they should think fitting in regard of places, times, persons, and
circumstances; Neither does this great moderation cause any substantial
differences between the ancient, and modern Indulgences: as these, so those
importe remission of temporal pains not only in the ecclesiastical, but also
in the divine Court of Justice before God, An Indulgence taken in the formal
sense in a mere releasing of temporal pain due unto sin, wherefore it
supposes remission of the guilt, which it cannot take away. In consequence
whereof the state of grace is of necessity required unto obtaining the fruit,
or benefit of Indulgences.
which is the essential consistency of Indulgences, that never do remit
eternal pain due to mortal offense, because this is always forgiven
together with the guilt thereof through the infusion of sanctifying grace,
which is a necessary supposall to remission of temporal pain. Wherefore when
Church-gouernours grant their letters of Indulgences, they say expressly that
they do grant them to such Clemens 6. extra. vnige. de peccat. and remis. ait
eos, qui vsi sunt hoc Ecclesiae thesauro fuisse in amicitia Dei, quae supponit
remissionem culpae, quam Indulgentia non remittit, ideoque status gratiae
praesupponitur ad fructu^ Indulgentiae percipiendu^.
as are contrite, and confessed, which supposes the state of grace, as an
essential requisite for the receiving fruit thereby. neither does it lie in the
power of the supreme Pastor to forgive a sinner the temporal pains
corresponding to his sins, unless the guilt of these be forgiven before: for
he is only the dispenser of Christ's treasure, in consequence whereof he has
not absolute dominion over it: and it is nt probable, as to reason, that
Christ's will is, that his Minister should confer the gracious benefit's, which
proceed merely from his bounteous liberallity to such, as be his enemies, and
persevere in ingratitude toward him.

In regard, that Indulgences do release temporal pains, whereunto a penitent
sinner is liable even in order to the divine Court of Justice, that is to say
before God, when days, Months, and years of temporal pains are remitted in
virtue of them the pains of Purgatory are remitted withal according to a meet
proportion corresponding to that space of time: for by the Church -- practice
appears, that the supreme Pastor grants sometimes many more years of
pardon, then perhaps any soul shall remain in purgatory: wherefore the said
years of Indulgence are to be understood, and explicated in reference to those
years, which great sinners, Job. 15. perditissimi peccatores bibunt
iniquitatem, sicut aquam
that drink in this life iniquity as water, ought to endure unto full
satisfaction for their sinn's in order It was the custom of the primitive
Church to remit penances enjoined by the Churches Canons, as appears evidently
by the ancient Council's namely Nicae. can. 10. and 11. Ancyra. can. 5.
Lardisae. can. 5. Carthag. 4. can. 75. and 76. and indeed the concessions of
Popes which give faculty to grant many days, and many year's Indulgences to
those Priests, which shall say Mass for peace amongst christian Princes,
exaltatio^ of the Church etc. as likewise to such, as shall assist in the same
Mass, of necessity are meant in order to the penance inflicted by the Churches
Canons in primitive times; for they cannot be understood of common penances,
few whereof continue for many years, or many days.
to the penitential Canons, if they should continue alive for so long a series
of years: for example: in ertue of a thousand year's Indulgence, such a
quantity of the pains in purgatory is remitted, as does correspond to the pain
prescribed in the penitential Canons: yet no man can know precisely what
portion of time in purgatory does correspond to the space of one, or more
years of temporal pain's inflicted by the said ancient Canons: because laying
aside divine revelations, no man can have a true knowledge of the proportion,
that is between the pains of purgatory, and the afflictions of this life:
Howeuer it is an undoubted truth that by a much shorter pain of this life may
be released the longest pains of purgatory, supposing parity in all
circumstances. For a man while be lives upon earth is in a capacity of
obtaining greater measures of grace, and mercy then in the next life, where
there is no meritorious working of blessedness. The supposall of parity is
added in respect of the extreme intensnesse of purgatory pains, whereby they be
sufficient enough in a short space of time to equal a long continuance of this
life's afflictions.

As concerning the sundry additionall particles, or names frequently expressed
in the concessions of Indulgences for example plenary, more plenary, most
plenary, and also Iubily: this variety of words does not cause any real, or
substantial difference in order to the prime effect of an Indulgence, which is
remission of temporal pain due to sin: for he that forgiueth all, excludes
nothing; wherefore since a plenary Indulgence remitteth all the pain a sinner
stands liable unto, there remains nothing of it pardonable by a more plenary,
or most plenary Indulgence, yea or by a Iubily. Howeuer these additions are
prudently expressed for to take away scruple^ thereby, or to explicate more
clearly what is granted, and the weightiness of the motives on which a plenary
Indulgence is grounded: yet they may be distinguished in respect of certain
privileges, which are annexed to one Indulgence, and not to an other. But this
is accidental to an Indulgence, which taken in the proper formal sense is
remission only of temporal pain due to sin. The Privileges are power to
absolve from censures, and reserved Cases: liberty to make choice of any
ghostly Father approved, and faculty to change vows, which privileges are not
granted in virtue of each plenary Indulgence, being proper to the Indulgence
called a The Name of Iubily comes of the Hebrew word Jobel which according to
Saint Hierome and Saint Ifidore signifies remission, or fulness of rest.
Jubilee, which word Church-gouernours have translated from the Hebrews to
signify full remission. For in the times of the ancient Hebrews every fifty
year was named the year of Jubilee, and holy unto them, for as much, as each
man did return to his possession Gratis; servants were delivered out of
bondage, and all inhabitants left their land unlabored enjoying full rest.
After the like manner in virtue of a christian Jubilee those temporal
advantages are supplied by spiritual benefits namely rest from worldly
delights, employments, and also deliverance out of sin both in order to it is
guilt, and temporal pain corresponding thereto; for though the Iu^ilie it self
be a releasing only of temporal pain, yet through According to the Popes
intention the benefit of a Iubily cannot be obtained except confession of our
sins go before: and truly confession is required as a work enjoynd, and
communion also according to the common opinion of catholic writers.
confession, and contrition, which ought to accompany it, even the guilt of sin
is remitted, in so much, that a sinner, which confesses, and detesteth his
wickedness in compliance to the Iubily returns to his possession of
sanctifying grace lost before.

The usage of christian Iubilies was anciently practiced, though Pope Boniface
the eight of that name about the year after Christ's Incarnation 1300. by an
express written ordinance did institute, that they should be celebrated in
every hundred year, as appears by In Extra. de poenit. and remiss. (quae
condita Juit anno 1630. iuxta Nauar. notab. 7.) dicitur Antiquorum babet fida
relatio, quod accedentibus ad bonorabilem Basilicam principis Apostolorum in
vrbe concessae fuerint magnae remissiones, and Indulgentiae peccatorum.
the Extra: Antiquorum de poenitentijs, and remissionibus: neuertheless they
lay claim to a higher antiquity, as does plainly evidence the same extrauagant
made in the year 1300. Wherefore it is an extreme weakness in such, as assert
Iubilies to be new inventions: yet the Popes, that succeeded in
Church-gouernment afterward, altered the institution of Boniface: Clement the
sixth reduced Iubilies to every fifty year: Urban the second to every thirty
three year in memory, honor, and reverence of the years Christ lived on
earth; again Paul the second, and Sixtus the fourth contracted them to every
twenty five years, and so they have continued ever since.

CHAR. XV. OF PVRGATORY
THE CONTENTS.
The soul's of believing christians, that remove out of their bodies in the
state of grace, and be not fully cleansed from the dregs of sin endure
punishment's in the lower part's of the earth, till they become fit for the
enjoyment of their heavenly heritage, which is inconsistent with uncleanness:
though some soul's as soon, as they depart out of their earthly Tabernacle^
receive the reward of faith, and good works, yet others are sent to prison
(Purgatory) whence there is no deliverance till the last sardin be paid: God
often forgiues sin, as to the mortal guilt thereof without remitting the venial
defects, or temporal pains: such soul's only go to Purgatory, as are liable
to venial fault's, or temporal satisfactions, from which there is deliverance
before the general Resurrection through the sacrifices, suffrages, fastings,
almsdeeds, which the faithful alive offer to God to that intent, and purpose:
The fire that by divine dispensation torments good soul's in Purgatory, is not
imaginary, or metaphorical, but true real, and corporal fire.

PVrgatory is a receptacle of soul's deuested of their bodies, which stand in
need of the holy Churches suffrages, and sacrifices for their deliverance out
of satisfactory pain's due to the sins they committed when they were invested
with their bodies. Besides the receptacle of blessed souls, which is the Coelu^
empyrcum est locus beatorum aterna vita fruentium.
highest Heaven, S. Austin in Psalm. 85. and Epis. 99. calls the receptacle of
damned souls the Hell of Hell, and according to the common opinion of diuin's
Purgatory is not situated far from thence, toward the Center of the earth.
Wherefore the holy Church sing's in the office of the Dead. Deliver o lord, the
souls of the faithful departed from the pains of Hell. that is from the pains
of Purgatory. So that, S. Austin Epis. 99. ad Euod. expound's the scripture
Act. 2. (whom God raised up loosing the sorrovves of Hell) of Christ's descent
into Hell, that is into the lower parts of the earth, which doubtless were not
the Receptacle of damned souls; whereby appears, that the Hell of the damned
was not the sole Receptacle of souls removed out of their bodies; and indeed
holy scripture gives evidence enough of this catholic truth: for
Ecclesiasticus c. 24. personating Christ, says thus. J will penetrate all the
lovver part's of the earth, and will behold all that sleep, and will
enlighten all that hope in our lord. From whence, is plainly inferred a
Receptacle under earth different from the Hell of the damned, in which soul's
hope not in, but blaspheme onr lord. As to Christ's descending into the lower
parts of the earth, it is an article of christian faith, and so evident a
truth, that S. Austin Epis. 99. ad Euod. expressly says, Who but an Jnfidel
will deny that Christ descended into Hell, and with intent according to the
ancient Fathers to deliver the Patriarchs, and just men which were detained
there as Prisoners till his death, and Resurrection.
and the receptacle of damned soul's, which is the lowest Hell; There is a
third receptacle under earth of souls suffering unto blessedness, called
Purgatory: because the fire thereof, which is an instrument of the divine
Justice purges out the leaven of venial sins, and wears away temporal
pains, which even just men sometimes die liable unto. Though small faults, and
gentle debt's do not undo the knott of reciprocal friendship, that is once
tied between God, and a sinner in virtue of perfect contrition, or attrition
with the help of sacramental penance: neuertheless they obstruct his passage
to the kingdom of Heaven, till they be fully compensed, and satisfied for,
either in this life through voluntary act's of sorrow, and corporal
afflictions, or in the next through purgative fire, whereby is meant Purgatory,
which is the By the prison mentioned Mat. 4. the ancient Fathers understand
Purgatory: for example S. Cyprian Epis. 52. ad Antonia. teaches that some
soul's suddenly after their removing out of their bodies receive the reward of
faith, and good works, and a crown from our lord: but others are sent to prison
from which is no deliverance till the last farthing be paid.
prison out of which there is no deliverance till the utmost farthing be paid.
Math. 5. for eternal life has nothing of imperfection, and consequently is
inconsistent with all sort's of defects. Wherefore since the soul's even of
just men after the quitting of their bodies sometimes be liable to satisfactory
punishments, S. Austin l. de bono coningij cap. 6. names mortal sin. deadly
crime, and Epis. 89. and in sundry other places he calls offenses which are
not deadly (and therefore commonly named venial sins) little fault's, of which
the Apostle S. James, cap. 2. in many things we sin all. And S. Matthew cap.
6. foregiue us our treipasses etc. and of venial sins the Mileuitan synod
interpretes these scriptures, so that the iustest man, that lives is liable to
venial sins.
and venial defects, and therefore counted imperfect, they continue deprived
of blessedness, till all imperfection be purged away. As a Judge does not punish
all offenses with death: and as one man after that he is reconciled to another,
that has injured him, demands some satisfaction for the injury done: for
David though he pardoned Absolon his offense: Yet he did not suffer him Reg.
14. David condonauit filio suo Absoloni peccatum, sic tamen ci placatus, addit:
reuertatur in domum suam, and faciem meam non videat.
to abide in his sight, or in his house: so God, though he does not punish all
sins with eternal death (some having nothin g of mortal malice) and though
he receives a grievous sinner into grace, that casts away all his mortal
transgressions, and turns unto him with a new heart: neuertheless he does not
admit him to his glorious presence, till he has made full satisfaction, as to
the reparation of he injury done him: whereby it is clear that God neither in
this life, nor in the next Proverb. 23. Tu virga percuties eum, and animam eius
de inferno liberabis. Item Tob. 13. Tu flagellas, and saluas, deducis ad
inferos, and reducis.
chasteneth sinners, that have turned away from their iniquity, as his enemies
to destroy them: but as his children to make them fit, and proper for the
enjoyment of their heavenly inheritance. This catholic truth all antiquity
acknowledges, Councils define, the approved universal practice of christian
Churches teaches, and authority of scriptures warranteth.

The second book of the Machabees prayseth the noble Judas Judas Machabae us
piously conceived all, or at least many of his soldiers to have dyed godly,
that is in the state of grace and though they might have coueted, and detained
some part of the silver, and gold, that was on the Idols, contrary to the
commandment of God Deuteronomy. 7. Neuertheless we ought not to infer from thence,
that the same soldiers did not repent of that sin before their death, or that
by doing so they committed a deadly sin, being they might want sufficient
instruction, and recogni zance in order to that law. Howeuer it is certain, that
Judas Machabaeus appointed a sacrifice to be offered for those only, which dyed
godly. As to the books of the Machabies S. Austin l. 18. de ciuit. cap. 3.
attests, that though they be not contained in the Iew's Canon, or Catalogue,
neuertheless the catholic Church counts them for canonical. Besides the
third Council of Carthage whereof S. Austin was a member places he Machabies
in the number of divine scriptures.
who judged, that it was a holy, and good thought to pray for the dead, that
they might be delivered from sin, and therefore sent three thousand drachmes to
Iesusalem for the offering of a sin-sacrifice in regard of his soldiers, that
were ssaine in the holy war, believing that there was great favor laid up for
those, that died godly: that is, in the state of grace; and since this action
of religious piety cannot be meant in order to blessed soul's, these having full
enioyment of blessedness, nor in order to damned souls, these being sentenced
to eternal fire: it is plainly evident, that the meaning thereof is in
reference to good souls, which are neither in Heaven, nor in Hell, but in a
third place suffering unto heavenly blessedness: this doctrine the Apostle
teaches Ex scriptura 1. Cor. 3. Patres Latini in Conlio Florent. Purgatariu^
dari definiunt. Et quod ibi Apostolus intelligat igne^ Purgatoriu^ testantur
Orig. hom. 25. in Exodus Jtem Aug. in Enchyrd. c. 68. and l. 21. de ciuit c. 2.
and 26.
1. Cor. 3. where he affirms, that after this life some souls are saved by
fire, saying; If any man's work's burn be shall suffer prejudice, but he shall
be saved himself:" yet so, as it were by fire. In which scripture he
distinguishes two kind's of work's, that a catholic christian constituted in
the state of grace, exercises, whereof some are meritorious, and in as much,
as they contain nothing of vncleaness, or imperfection the Apostle compares
them unto gold, silver, and precious stones, which can receive no detriment
through fire: thereby signifying, that such souls, as build on the foundation,
that is Christ, and his grace, works of gold, silver, and precious stones:
which is to say pure, and holy actions without mixture of vncleaness, According
to holy scripture fire shall try all works; yet not so, as that all works, and
all the workers shall have their trial in burning flam's: but because fire,
that is ordained to purge out of our works the dregs of corruption, is said to
try works, which have nothing of uncleanness, because the fire does not touch
them in regard of their pureness. Which is s. Ambroses explication in Psalm. 118.
and after the same manner wild beasts, are said to have tried many martyrs,
though they touched not their sacred bodies.
will suffer no prejudice by fire in the day of particular, or universal
Judgment; but there be other works built upon Christ, as the foundation, which
include small defects, and imperfections. to wit, venial sins only, which
the Apostle names Wood, bay, or stubble, that do consume in the fire; wherefore
such soul's, as be charged with this kind of unclean works, do suffer
detriment in the day of particular Judgment remaining afflicted by fire, till
all vncleaness be purged away: and this to be the true meaning of the Apostle,
his own words, explicated aright do clearly evidence. For first, that by gold;
silver, and precious stones be understood good work's, pure without thout
stain, orthodox writers unanimously grant. Secondly that by wood, hay, or
stuble are meant venial sins, it is manifest enough: because the Apostle
expressly does assert, that the works signified by those word's are to be burnt
by the fire, and neuertheless such, as have exercised them, are to be saved,
which cannot be understood of mortal offenses, the guilt whereof undoubtedly
damneth every one that dies charged with it: neither can the said word's carry
the sense of works, that have nothing of vncleaness because fire cannot
prejudice those, they being as gold, silver, and precious stones vnc^mbustible;
wherefore of necessity wood, hay, or stuble do signify small faults, which
being once purged out by fire, the soul, that committed them is saved: that is
to say translated to eternal life: and indeed since the Apostle speaks of
saving after death, it is clear that he means eternal salvation thereby.
Thirdly that by the words The day of the lord shall declare it, is understood
the day of each souls particular judgment, is manifest likewise, according to
that saying Math. 24. Watch therefore for ye know not what hour the son of man
will come: that is to say, what hour ye shall die, and be judged. Again the
same Apostle 2. Timoth. 4. says that there was laid up for him a crown of
Justice, which At that day our lord would give him, a just Judge. Yet doubtless
he obtained that reward instantly after his death as to essential blessedness.
Lastly, that by the word According to S Austin l. de fide and operibus the fire
of hell is everlasting against the error of Origin. and the Latin Father's in
the Council's of Florence assert true fire in Purgatory, and speak after the
same manner of it, as of Hell fire, and the Current of catholic Doctors
teach, that the fire of Hell is true corporal fire.
fire, true, and real fire is meant, appears by the Apostles saying, That if
any man's work burns, for to burn is proper to true fire: and as concerning
the particles Jo. 1. vidimus gloriam eius, quast gloriam vnigeniti a Patre, vbi
quasi, non est particula diminuens, aut faciens comparationem inter veram and
metaphoricam gloriam, sed potius explicat veritatem, vt notant S. Patres, sic
loquendo de Rege, dicimus incedit quasi Rex, id est, vt Regem decet: and de
v^ro iusto: venit vt vir iustus, id est, vt decet virum iustum.
(as it were) they do rather affirm then infirm the reality of fire: for
when S. John says of Christ cap. 1. we saw the glory of him, as it were of
the only begotten of the Father: the particles (as it were) do not deny Christ
to be the true, and natural son of God the Father: but rather affirm, that
undoubted truth, as all catholic writers do observe in their Commentaries
upon that scripture. Hereby it is clear S. Cyprian Epis. 52. ad Antonia.
writes thus. It Is not the same thing to be sent to prison, and there to remain
till the last farthing be paid; it is not the same thing to receive suddenly
the reward of faith, and virtue, and to be clens'd, and purged by fire after
long suffering of grievous sorrovves for sins committed before.
that the Apostle held purgation of some souls after they were deuested of
their bodies, and before their translation unto eternal life: and this the
catholic Church calls Purgatory, which name, though it be no: used in holy
scripture no more then the words Trinity, person, and sundry others, which are
received, and allowed of by all writers in order to a clearer explicating some
mysteries of christian Religion: howeuer the name Purgatory taken in the sense
before mentioned lays claim to a large series of Antiquity. But seeing that
scriptures, and S. Cyprian. Epis. tota. 52. ad Anton. Orig. hom. 6. in Exodus
cum. inquit, venitur, si quis multa opera bona, and parum aliquid iniquitatis
attulerit, illud parum tanqua^ plu^bum resoluitur, and purgatur, and totum
remanet aurum purum.... Hilar. in illud Psalm. 118. (concupiuit anima mea)
purgatorium vocat indefessum ignem, in quo grania sustinentur supplicia, per
quae animae a peccatis expiantur. Aug. l. 2. 1. de ciuit. c. 24. ait constare
quod spiritus aliquorum fidelium poenas aliquas temporales post mortem
patiantur.
primitive Fathers do assert the thing signified by the name of Purgatory vzt:
purgation of some souls by suffering of temporal pains in the next life Aug.
quando de re constat de nomine non est conte^ndendum.
no man can contend about that name without incurring a censure of manifest
weakness; yet in regard of two states only to which God promises eternal
life, or eternal death, that is: beatitude, or damnation (for Purgatory shall
cease after the day of general Judgment is past) both the scripture, and the
Fathers sometimes do mention only after death the Paradise of the blessed, and
the Hell of the damned, De locis, seu statibus perpetuis intelliguntur hae
scripturae: Eccles. 11. si ceciderit lignum ad Austrum aut Aquilonem, in
quocunque loco inciderit, sbi erit. Item Mat. 25 Jte maledicti in ignem
aternu^, and venite benedicti possidere Regnu^.
which be the two everlasting states of souls: but hence no man can argue an
absolute negation of a third place, or state in reference to temporal
afflictions after death without preiudicing both scriptur's, and Fathers, as is
sufficiently enough proved: and though S. Austin Ser. 14. de verbis Domini and
lib. 10. de peccatorum meritis, and remissione cap. 20. does expressly affirm,
that the catholic faith acknowledges two places only vat: an eternal
kingdom (of Heaven) or Hell eternal neuertheless by his other writings
appears plainly, that he held the Purgatory of some faithful soul's after
death, and in the cited writing's he denies only, that the Catholic Church
does acknowledge such a third place, as Pelagius contended for, who taught,
that children dying without baptism should be saved, though they were not
admitted into the kingdom of Heaven: which error S. Austin confuteth. By the
premises is evident that such souls only go to Purgatory, as are liable either
to venial sins, or temporal satisfactions corresponding to their sins
pardoned in this life, as to the guilt thereof, both of them importing defects,
that are inconsistent with the perfection of heavenly blessdeness: yet these
suffering souls, while they endure their painful afflictions have something of
comfort, and refreshment: Pope Leo the tenth in his condemnation of Luther's
26. article has defined that soul's in Purgatory are assured of their
salvation.
for they know, that there is favor laid up for them, they are certain of
their salvation, they love God with all their power conforming themselves in
the bitterness of their afflictions to his divine will of Justice, they have
confidence in the suffrages, and sacrifices of the faithful upon earth in
order to their deliverance, and are visited by their good Angels, that cheer
them up. Neither does it hence follow, that their pains are less grievous: for
the intensest sorrow is not incompatible with the said refreshments, as
appears by Christ, whose grief abounded, and exceeded others in intensness,
notwithstanding the assurance of glory, the comfort flowing from his Godhead,
the conformity to the will of his divine Father, and the extreme willingness to
suffer his death, and passion for the Redemption of the world: and indeed it is
a certain truth, that the anguish, and tribulation which a soul endures in
Purgatory Docent S. Aug. l de euva pro mortuis agenda c. 16. and S. Ansel. in
cap. 3. 1. Cor. poenam quam patiuntur animae Purgatorij esse grauiorem omni
poena huius vita.
is more grievous, then all the sufferings of this life: for therein is the
place, and time of executing the divine Justice, the instrument whereof is true,
and real fire, that is applied Aug l. 2. de ciuit. c. 10. docet spiritu^ posse
pati ab igne corporeo per omnipotentiam Dei.
for the tormenting of such souls (truly and really) according to the
proportion of the guilt of petty-treasons, and debt's, they stand charged with;
yet in as much, as they being departed in faith, hope, and charity, which be
the spiritual chains of union, in order to all the good members of Christ's
mystical body, and in as much, as it is proper, and natural to the According
to the Apostle 1. Cor. 12. members of one, and the same body can mutual help
one, another: and it is an Article of Catholic faith, that the soul's in
Purgatory are members of one, and the same Church, and can be helped through
her prayers, and suffrages. And as to this point of doctrine there was full
agreement between the Latin, and Greek Fathers in the Council of Florence, as
clearly appears by the letters' of union. Besides Aerius was counted an
Here^ick by S. Epipha. haer. 75. and S. Austin haer. because he denied that the
dead might receive relief through the suffrages of the living. Moreover this
Catholic truth is asserted by the ancientest Fathers, namely S Deny's l. de
caeles. Hierar. c. 7. S. Cyprian Epis 66. and S. Austin l de curae pro mortuis
agenda and ser. 22. de verbis Apos. expressly teaches that the doctrine, which
assert's, that the faithful departed receive help by prayers sacrifices, and
Almsdeeds etc. is approved by the universal Church.
members of one, and the same body, to comfort, and help one an other,
doubtless the souls of Purgatory can be comforted, and helped by the prayers,
and suffrages of the living, as plainly appears by the testimonies, and
Liturgies of primitive Fathers, authorities of Councils, and the universal
practice of the catholic church, that offers daily, and howerly prayers, and
suffrages for the faithful souls of such, as die in grace, that they may be
comforted, and delivered out of the grievous pains, which they endure in
Purgatory. Besides for as much, as they are not According to S. Austin l. 20.
de Ciuit. c. 9. the souls of the faithful departed are not separated from the
Church, which even now is the kingdom of God: and indeed the good soul's of
Purgatory are united unto us in charity, in regard at their departure out of
this world they were in the state of grace: again they are united unto us in
faith, and hope, because these two virtues are not euacuated before the soul's
admittance into Heaven.
separated from the Church, they be in a capacity to receive benefit even by
Indulgences, it being in the Churches power to apply those spiritual treasures
for the advantage of all such children, as abide in union with her through
faith, Hope, and charity. And though prayers, Church-suffrages, Indulgences
etc. do not remit sins in the next life these requiring necessarily Trid
sess. 6. cap. 7. docet peccatu^ mortale non remit ti sine infusione gratiae, at
sola Sacramenta in re, vel in voto suscepta in fundu^t gratiam ex eode^ Council.
sess. 6. cap. 4. sed Indulgentia no^ est Sacramentum, and culpa venialis
nunquam tollitur sine aliqua displicentia de tali peccato veniali.
infusion of grace if mortal, or a detestation thereof, if venial: no man can
say, but that souls be delivered thereby out of their pames, and translated to
the kingdom of heaven, without contradicting the authority of ancient Fathers,
the definition of a general Council, the Ordinances of sundry Popes, and the
universal practice of the catholic Church. For example S. Austin places
souls after their purgation in the next life, in heaven, to expect their bodies
lib. 15. de Trinitate cap. 25. Again S. Austin puts no longer bounds to time in
Purgatory, then the matter, as to satisfaction, for each sin, requires. The
Council of Florence defines the transplanting of suffering soul's out of
Purgatory, into Heaven before the general Resurrection: Pope Benedict the 12.
decreto Benedictus Deus in donis suis rancketh such, as hold with pertinacy the
contrary doctrine in the number of Heretics. Pope Gregory the first, and Pope
Siluester before granted Although an Indulgence be an act of jurisdiction, and
although the Church militant has nothing of jurisdiction over the souls
suffering in Purgatory: neuertheless she has power over her spiritual
Treasure. In consequence of which Indulgences are not granted in order to the
dead after the manner of a Judges absolution, but in nature of a suffrage unto
helping of such only, as remove out of their bodies in communion with Christ's
body, and blood: wherefore when the Church-gouernours grant Indulgences for the
dead, they insert the particles per modum suffragij: after the manner of
suffrages, whereby is signified, that they do not give Indulgences in order to
the dead, as if the dead were continued under their jurisdiction, but they
grant them only, as competent recompenses, or convenient satisfactions for as
much, as the faithful alive offer them as satisfactory works unto satisfying
the pains due to the sins which the dead had committed before they were
removed out of their bodies. And doubtless every particular belieuer, that is
in the slate of grace may offer to God their fasting. praying, and giving of
alms, as worthy satisfactions unto compensing of the torment's which good
soul's endure in Purgatory.
Indulgences to such Priests, as offered the sacrifice of Christ's body, and
blood in a Chapel dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary called by the name of
Mariae Liberatricis that they might free one soul out of Purgatory as does
appear by the ancient Records of the said Chapel, and Pope Pascall the first
gave deliverance of one soul out of Purgatory to Priests celebrating five
Masses in a Church consecrated to S. Praxes, which Indulgence eleven succeeding
Popes confirmed whereunto may be added the Indulgence of Pope John the eight,
that administered supreme Church-gouernment in the year 878. granted to
soldiers, that should loose their life's in the holy war for the defense of
the Church; and this practice was never yet reproved by any Council, Pope, or
catholic writer, wherefore it seen eth a strange thing, that Mr. Thomas White a
private man, and in outward profession a catholic christian should assume so
vnauthorized a liberty, and vnparalelled boldness, as to publish a writing in
the year 1653. entitled (An Account of his husbanding the middle state of
soul's) in contradiction of the According to S. Austin Tom. Epis. 118. ad
Ianua. it is a manifest madness to call in question, what the universal Church
practices.
constant, and universal practice, that agrees with so warrantable, and
evident testimonies, as are set down. Howeuer he produces but weak, and
inco^sequent proof's for the establishing of his novel doctrine: for example
from these words Maccab. For if he had not hoped that they, which were slain
would rise again, it had been superfluous and vain, to pray for the dead) he
does infer that the soul's in Purgatory are not freed of their sufferings till
the general Resurrection, and this inference he proves only saying: For if
soul's were released out of their pains through the prayers of the living
before the Resurrection, it would be extreme profit able to pray for the dead,
though no Resurrection should follow. But where is the connection between the
Scripture-Text, and Mr. Whites inference? shall it follow, that good soul's
must be imprisoned till the general Resurrection, because the noble, and godly
Judas according to the profession of his Religion did believe in the
immortality of soul's, and the Resurrection of their bodies? and indeed the
true meaning of this scripture before alleged according to all Orthodox
writers, is this, vizt: if Judas Maccabaeus had believed soul's to be mortal,
and to die with their bodies, which consequently should never rise again, it
had been superfluous, and vain to pray for them: and therefore religiously
thinking of the Resurrection, and fearing, that the souls of his soldiers,
that were slain in battle might be punished in the next life, in respect of
some sins they had committed upon earth, he commanded, that prayers, and
sacrifice should be offered for their deliverance from sin, that is to say from
temporal punishment due to their sins: whence doubtless no wise, and
indicious man can infer the imprisonment of soul's in Purgatory till the
general Resurrection, which would never have happened if souls had been
mortal, and died together with their bodies. After the same manner he abuses
the new Testament. Let the new iustrument, says he, keep time and harmony
with the old: let S. Paul be heard preaching to the same effect 1. Cor. 15.
what shall they do, which are by baptism for he dead the Apostle may mean
water of tribulation, and persecution, wherewith primitive Christians seemed,
as it were baptized: again may understand voluntary afflictions: for example
praying, fasting, giving of Alms etc. which the living offer to God for the
comfort and benefit of the dead, moreover the Apostle may mean the baptising of
such, as deferred their baptism till the hour of death, which Custom was
usual in the primitive Church, and the Apostles sense is then, if souls be
mortal, and in consequence thereof no resurrection of the dead, those which are
baptized dying, that is at the hour of their death reapo nothing of advantage
by their baptism.
baptized for the dead if the dead do not rise at all. From this holy text he
infers, that no benefit is obtained by baptism for the dead before the
Resurrection, not by so doing can soul's till then be released. But in earnest,
this is a pitiful deduction, like unto this: God is in Heaven, therefore Mr.
Thomas White is at Roterdam: for indeed there is nothing of connection between
the antecedent, and consequence, and Mr. Whit's inference, for it does not
follow, that soul's obtain nothing of profit before the Resurrection, because
S. Paul says: What shall they do, which are baptized for the dead, (meaning
thereby to what purpose shall Christians pray, fast, give Alms, or suffer
tribulation for Christ's sake) if the dead rise not again. Besides if Mr.
Whit's inference were warrantable, and unquestionable the Apostle himself is
not as yet in a capacity to obtain that eminent benefit of being delivered
before the Resurrection. For in the same Chapter he adds to the word's set
down, Why are we (Apostles) in icopardy every hour (if the dead rise not at
all?) what aduantageth it me (to have prayed, fasted, endnred great
persecution) if the dead be not raised up: let us eat, and drink for to morrow
we shall die; that is, if there be no Resurrection after death why do we
give our selves to any thing el's, save to eating, and drinking. Wherefore S.
Paul himself according to Mr. White is but in the way to his blessed crown,
for if his soul were already translated into Heaven, his sufferings would have
aduantaged even though no Resurrection should follow. But it seems a strange
thing, that Mr. White should presume to gather from the words set down, that
good souls shall not be released of the pains, which they sufferin Purgatory
before the general Resurrection, the said words not carrying the least sound
that way: for they neither speak of pain's in order to the next life, nor of
releasing souls out of Purgatory: and indeed the Apostles sole intent in the
Chapter alleged, is to prove the Resurrection of the dead, and to that purpose
brings sundry argument's. The first whereof is that Christ our head is raised
up, and therefore we his members shall rise again in regard of the fast
connection, that is between the head, and the members thereof. And what Mr.
White alleges for the imprisonment of souls to the day of Judgment is a
secondary argument, which S. Paul uses only as a confirmation of his first
argument to demonstrate the Resurrection of bodies, signifying thereby, that he
himself together with the rest of the Apostles, and primitive Christians of
those day's had suffered in vain afflictions, and tribulations if sou'ls had
been mortal, and consequently never to rise again: for it is clear by the very
form of the Apostles speech, that he supposed the false opinion, that teaches
souls to be mortal, whence of necessity would follow, that there should be no
Resurrection at all: and truly if the Apostle had not made that supposall, he
would have concluded nothing; for supposing souls to be immortal, good works
of this life would have much aduantaged him for the obtaining of Heavenly
blessedness, though no Resurrection at all had followed. And the same supposall
is made by the holy writer of the Macchabies, signisying thereby if the dead
were not to rise again, it would follow; that soul's were mortal in
consequence of which all prayers offered for them would be in vain; where is
obseruable, that the Jewish sectaryes, to wit, Sadducies held, that the soul's
were mortal, and consequently denied the Resurrection of Bodies: other Jews
which believed aright, professed immortality together with the Resurrection,
there being in each soul an innate desire to resume the body whereof it was the
true form once, and as to reason it is most consonant, that God, who creates
nothing in vain, will not frustrate that desire: hence it was, that the ancient
Iew's spoak of the immortality of souls, and the Resurrection of bodies alike:
and our Savior Christ Math. 22. to prove to the Sadducies the Resurrection of
bodies infer's it from the immortality of the soul, using that
scripture-testimony: I am God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, and
subsumeth thus: there is no God of the dead, but of the living, arguing thereby,
that the dead rise again, since their souls do not die with their bodies.
Besides it is obseruable, Oachinus an Apostata Capucin cutteth an argument out
of the cited Chap. Macchabae. 2. against Purgatory arguing thus. If there were
a Purgatory, though there were no Resurrection of the dead: neuertheless
prayers offered for the dead might not be in vaiue, because the souls thereby
might obtain deliverance from their pain's.
that Ochinus an Apostat Capucin friar abused the fore mentioned
scripture-testimony 2. Macchab. 12. to destroy Purgatory: and after the very
same way of arguing Mr. White abuses it to overthrow a catholic assertion,
that teaches the deliverance of souls out of Purgatory in virtue of holy
Churches suffrages. Likewise sundry heretics have made use of the same Text to
weaken the authority of the books of Machabies pretending, that the words (If
those that were shain should not rise again) contain a manifest error,
namely, that soul's die with their bodies, and rise again: whereby is plainly
evident, that it is no difficult business for a man, that is wantonly ambitious
to be singular in teaching, to cut out of scripture abortiue interpretations,
and to fit them to his vain unquiet fancy, by which he is biassed. But how
happens it, that Mr. White alleges scripture-authority unto the deteyning of
good souls in Purgatory till the general Resurrection, Mr. White in Dimenso 2.
affirmamus itaque nos, euideter conuinci ex hoc testimonio non solus poenis
Purgatorij animas ante Resurrectionem.
and to lay claim to evidence in his deduction from thence. It is not his
custom to fly to that sanctuary for protection of his Novelties, nor to
acknowledge evidence enough in the scriptures themselves to determine any
controversy: for he expressly writes, that It were as ridiculous to seek the
decision of controuersyes out of the Bible, as to cut with a Beatle, or knock
with a straw: howeuer it seems, he has a good mind to cloth his doctrines
in the scripture colour's, when that holy livery (how vnhandsomly soever put
on) may serve him for a disguise. From the premises is euidenced how little
reason Mr. White has to boast of the two mentioned scripture-Testimonies viz.
2 Machab. 12. 1. Cor. 15. vauntingly saying: These two texts therefore remain
inviolable, as first not to be resisted without manifest violence, secondly,
pointing at the very knot of the controversy, that souls once engaged are not
capable of that eminent good of being delivered from their pain's before the
Resurrection. And from these pitiful inferences he passes unto other
scripture-Testimonies, whereby he endeauour's to prove, that even blessed souls
have need of prayers: but of his unnatural, and irrational arguments, as to
this point, the Character of the Church triumphant shall give evidence enough.

CHAR. XVI. OF HOLY ORDER
THE CONTENTS.
As God in the old law constituted superior, and inferior Ministers to serve
in the Temple, so in the new law he has appointed Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
Subdeacons etc. one more eminent, then an other to dispense divine mysteries
in the Church of Christ: Though every Bishop is a Priest, neuertheless enery
Priest is not a Bishop: to confer the Sacraments of holy Order, and
Confirmation is proper to Episcopal authority only: there be seven
Ecclesiastical Orders taken in the proper sense corresponding to as many
distinct functions exercised in relation to the celebrating of the holy
Euchariste: clericall tonsure can make noe good claim to an Ecclesiastical
Order taken in the proper sense: Episcopacy in an holy Order, the noblest part
of the Churches Hierarchy, a proper Sacrament, and imprint's a special
character in the soul of him, that is ordained a true Bishop: Bishops, and
Priests down from the Apostles till these times embraced a single life:
answers to sundry Arguments made in favor of Priest's Marriages.

HOly Order (taken in the restrained Ecclesiastical sense) 1. Timoth. 4.
Neglect not the grace (S. Paul says) that is in thee, which was given thee
by prophesy, and imposition of hand's of Priesthood. S. Chrysostom hom. 13.
commenting upon this sacred Text affirms. that the Apostle meant by imposition
of hand's the Sacrament of holy Order, which Timothy received of him: after the
same manner Theodoret interprets the sacred Text 2. Timot. 1. Stir up the
grace of god, which is in thee by the imposition of mine hands. That is by my
ordaining thee, who am a Bishop, and S. Ambrose writing upon the same Text
implies in the imposition of hands all the outward actions, and words, which
were done, and said over himself, when he was ordained a Priest: Besides in
the primitive Church when a Bishop conferred the holy Order of Priesthood, he
used to bless the party ordained, lie his hands on his head, and give him power
to offer sacrifice for the living, and the dead in the name of our lord, that
is in the room of Christ. In consequence of the premises, since in the
ordination of Priests grace is given by an outward sensible sign, holy Order is
a Sacrament of the new law, and so is desin'd by the Council's of Florence In
the Decree of Pope Eugenius. And Trent sess. 23. can. 4.
is a proper Sacrament of the new law, whereby a reasonable creature of the
male sex, Baptismus requiritur in eo qui ordinatur, quia baptismus in re
suscept us est Janua alioru^ Sacramentorum, cuius proinde characterem,
character Ordinis supponit, vt patet ex cap. si quis presbyter.
and baptized, is ordained, and enabled to perform the ministry of the
Euchariste, or in the celebration thereof to serve after a special manner
Diaconesses mentioned Epis ad Timoth. could make no more claim to an
Ecclesiastical Order taken in the proper sense, then the Religions men, and
women of those days being they had no power, or jurisdiction, as to the
accomplishing or administering of a Sacrament. And although Deanship,
Arch-Deaconship, Priorship, and Abbat-ship lay claim to something of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: neuertheless by virtue of their institution, and
consecration they receive no power to administer a Sacrament, or to serve
specially in the administration thereof, and it is the same, as to Arch Bishops
and Patriarchs considered precisely in order to the dignity they have over, and
above the Order of Bishops.
in virtue of his ordination. Hieron. Epis. 57. quae est ad Euagrium, vt
sciamus, inquit, traditiones Apostolicas sumptas de veteri Ecclesia (puta ex
Vaticinio Jsaiae cap. 6. Assumam exijs in Sacerdotes and Leuitas) quod Aaron,
and filij eius, and Leuita in Templo fuerunt, hoc sibi Epistopi, Presbyteri and
Diaconi vendicant in Ecclesia: and S. Hieron, locum Isaiae intelligit ad
literam, de Apostolis, and successoribus little in officio sacerdotali.
As God in the old law took of his people to be Priests and Leuits: that is
constituted superior, and inferior Ministers for the administering of divine
things in the Temple: so in the new law he has ordained diverse degrees, or
states of Ministers, one more eminent, then an other: for example Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, and other Clergy men to The Apostle says Romans 4. Let a man
think of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and the Dispensers of the Mysteries
of God, that is of the Sacraments. From whence the Council of Trent infers,
that it is in the Churches power to dispose, appoint ordain in the dispensing
of Sacrament's, what she shall think expedient for the benefit of those which
receive them, and the greater reverence of the same Sacraments, so that no
alteration be made as to the substance thereof.
dispense divine Mysteries: that is to say, the Sacraments in the Church of
Christ: as concerning Bishops the scripture makes mention of them, as divinely
instituted Act. 20 rake heed unto your selves, and of all the flock whereof the
holy Ghost has made you Bishops to rule the Church of God: and the name Bishop
according to the consenting testimonies of all Interpreters, and Fathers
signifys an Ecclesiastical person, that by common usage of speech is called a
Bishop, According to the Apostles doctrine set down Act. 20, Bishops receive
their power of government in Order to the Church from the holy Ghost, wherefore
they be Pastores Ecclesiae, Pastors taken in the proper sense, seeing that
Church-gouernment is proper to them. Again according to the same Apostle 1.
Timot. 3. 2 Bishop is clothed with power of jurisdiction above a mere Priest.
So that according to divine right a Bishop is above a mere Priest as appears by
the Council of Trent sess. 21. c. 1. and indeed a Bisphop by virtue of his
ordination, and character has power to confer the Sacraments of holy Order,
and Confirmation validly: in consequence of which, he is by divine dispensation
above a mere Priest, because both his ordination and character have institution
from Christ: nor matters it, that a mere Priest by special privilege may be
enabled to confer the Sacrament of Confirmation, being his ordination, and
character gine him no such power.
which is a Church-gouernour invested with superiority over mere Priest's in
respect both of ordination, and jurisdiction. Again the scripture names
Priests, as distinct from Bishops 1. Timoth. 5. against Priests: receive none
accusation but under two, or three witnesses: where doubtless the Apostle
means Priest's as wanting Episcopal dignity, and ordination, both because
Timothy exercised authority over them, as also in regard, that in the same
Chapter he gave a command to Timothy, whom he had ordained a Bishop before to
cherish, and feed those Priests, for as much, as they were under his charge,
and as substitutes administered the Sacraments unto the faithful of the Church
under him: which command cannot be meant in order to Bishops, since these are
not Aerius made no difference between a Bishop, and a Priest, which error
wickless the first English Heretic espoused, and after him Luther, and is now
an assertion generally taught by sectaries of these days: near unto this
heresy is the opinion of certain singular scholars, who teach that the
ordination of a Bishop and a Priest is the same: and although S. Hierom
assert's, that the primitive Churches were governed by common Counsel of
Priests: neuertheless he never assert's parity between a Bishop, and a mere
Priest, as to the power of iurisdictiou, which is the matter in debate between
catholick's. and sectaries: howeuer catholic Bishops confer with mere Priests,
and embrace their Counsels in the government of their several Churches
respectively, but from thence no man ought to infer equality between Bishops,
and mere Priests, as to unrisdiction: for a mere Priest cannot ordain a
Priest, or confer the Sacrament of confirmation.
as mere Priests subject to the jurisdiction, and committed to the care of an
other Bishop. Furthermore the scripture mentions Deacons 1. Timoth. 3.
Deacons must be chaste having the mystery of says in pure conscience, and the
condition of their office does evidence plainly enough their inferiority, and
subordination not only to Bishops, but also to mere Priests, and the Apostle.
Act. 6. declares also as much. Likewise this catholic assertion does appear
by the ecclesiastical Hierarchy instituted by divine ordination Trid sess. 23.
can. 6. definit esse in Ecclesia catholica Hie^^rchia^ ordinatione diuina
institutam, quae constas ex Episcopis, Prasbyteris, and ministris. Et can. 2.
eiusdem sess. dicit anathema negantibus esse in Ecclesia catholica prater
Sacerdotium, alios ordines and majores and minores, per quos veluti per gradus
tendatur in Sacerdotium.
to consist of Bishops, Priests, and Ministers Trid. sess. 23. can. 6. which
manifest's a real difference in the offices of each of them: Howeuer the
scripture sometimes does call Bishops Per impositione^ manuum Presbyterij S.
Timoth. 4. Apostolus no^ intelligit nomine presbyterij, Officium dignitate^
sieve authoritatem presbyteri vel Sacerdotis, sed catum vel collegium
presbyteroru^ sic tamen, vt nomine presbyteroru^ etiam Episcopos includat, quod
est iuxta consuetudinem scriptura, and liquet Apostolum ibi locutum fuisse de
Episcopis, de illis enim presbyteris loquitur. quorum ille erat vnus. Nam cap.
2. Epis. 1. loquens de eadem ordinations Timothei, ait per impositionem manuum
mearum, and proinde ipse Paulus erat vnus ex Episcopis qui ordinauerunt
Timotheum. Deinde iuxta vetorem Ecclesia morem, non simplices presbyteri
sedsoli Episcopi manus imponebant Episcopo ordipando, vt notut. S. Chrysostom.
and 1. Council. Nicanum lege Lata sanciuit, vt Episcopus non nisi a tribus
Episcopis consecraretur, and ideo in ordinations Episcopi plures Episcopi manus
imponunt, ordinando vero presbytero vnus sufficit Episcopus.
by the name of Priests promiscuously: for example in the Epistle to Titus the
Apostle says. I left Titus in Creet, that be should ordain Priests in every
City: that is Bishops: for so the Apostle in the same Chapter does interpret
his meaning, adding after that appointment, these words: For a Bishop must be
without fault unreprovable: where the particle (for) does import a conjunction
causatiue, which does evidence. that the Apostle understood by Priests Bishops.
But hence no man ought to infer full parity, or equallity between a Bishop, and
a Priest, since the distinction of Bishops from, and the preeminence above
Priests, is by continual usage received, and preserved in the catholic Church
down from the Apostles to the present times. And though every Bishop is a
Priest: neuertheless every Priest is not a Bishop: as every Cherubin, and
Seraphin in the celestial Hierarchy is an Angel (this name being common to
all alike) but every Angel is not a Cherubin, or Seraphin, that being a
peculiar Order of Angels distinct from the rest. And albeit that S. Hierom
(and but he alone among all the ancient ecclesiastical writers) does assert in
his Epistle 85. to Euagrius, that in the primitive times a Bishop, and a Priest
were one, and the same thing: also that Bishops got superiority over mere
Priests rather in respect of ecclesiastical constitution, then divine
institution: yet no man must argue thence, that S. Hierom did deny a Bishop
taken in the ordinary ecclesiastical sense to be distinct from a mere Priest
without having him contradict what himself has written in sundry other
places, which were to play the part of an unjust Judge. Besides it is not
consonant at all, as to reason, that so great a learned Prelate, as S. Hierom,
should be ignorant of bishops superiority over mere Priests in regard of
jurisdiction, and order, as to divine right: since Timothy, whom all
interpreters, and Fathers call Bishop, was invested with iudicatory authority
over mere Priests, as does plainly appear by the Apostles own words 1. Timoth.
3. Against Priests receive none accusation but under two or three witnesses:
Moreover S. Hierom does not deny in the epistle before alleged the superiority
of Bishops over mere Priest's to be grounded in the truth of our lord's
disposal: for he does assert only, that maiority to proceed rather, or more
from ecclesiastical custom, then from a true ordinance of Christ, for as much
as ecclesiastical constitutions have rendered the dignity of Bishop's more
eminent, then it was in primary times adding thereunto preeminence of places in
the Church, peculiar ornaments, and privileges to consecrate diverse thing's
which mere Priest's cannot do: Howeuer S. Hierom does assert expressly
ordination, that is power to ordain Priests, proper to Episcopal function
only, in his said Epistle to Euagrius, and likewise power to confer the
Sacrament of Confirmation in a Dialogue written against Luciferus. But it is
conceived by coniecturall deductions from the writings of S. Hierom, that in
his Epistle 85. to Euagrius Credibile etiam est S. Hieron. prae oculis habuisse
Ioannem Ierosolymae Episcopum, qui unjust afflixerat eum, and fratrem ipsius,
and voluit deprimere fastum eius. Legatur Epis. 61. ipsius Hieron.
he played the Orator, using the figure hyperbole, being heartily angry with
certain Deacons, that ambitiously preferred themselves before Priests, or at
least suffered themselves to be preferred: wherefore to suppress their
inordinate ambition, and extreme insolence he made a parity between Bishops,
and mere Priest's: which doubtless he meant only in respect of the great, and
maine function in order to the celebration of the holy Eucharist, that is
equal, and common alike to both of them.

Est propositio de fide quod sint. 7. ordines communiter dicti, presbyte ratus,
Diaconatus etc. vt patet ex Concilijs Roma. sub Syluestro can. 7. Carthag. 4.
cui interfuit S. Aug. and Trid. sess. 32. and catechismus Trid. cap. de ordine
recenset omnes 7. ordines sigillatim.
As touching the number of ecclesiastical Orders, it is a constant Tenet of
catholic faith, that there be seven, orders taken in the proper sense, viz, of
Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolists, Lectours, Exorcists, and doorekeepers
corresponding to as many sundry functions, which are exercised in reference to
the celebrating of the Eucharist. The first is the consecration thereof proper
to Priest's alone: the second administration of the Sacrament, which belongs
to Deacons. The third is the preparing of the sacramental matter, whereunto
Subdeacons are ordained: the fourth is the presenting of the matter at the
Altar, and unto this function does relate the order of Acolits. But the other
three orders regard the disposition of such, as be attendants only at the time
of celebrating the Eucharist among which some are unbelievers: and
doore-Keepers are ordained to debar, and keeper of such Persons; others have
a desire to believe aright, but are not sufficiently enough instructed: for the
perfecting of these Lectours are ordained. Others though they are true
belieuers, and want no instructions: yet in as much, as they, be possessed with
devils, or otherwise vexed by them, Exorcists are ordained for their meet help
According to Pope Innocent the third, and other Orthodox. writers before him,
namely Steph. Eduensis In opus. de Sacra. Altaris pr. 6. all the functions
proper to the seven orders were represented in the outward actions of Christ.
And S. Austin, and other ancient Fathers affirm, that Christ represented the
Sacrament of penance in the raising of Lazarus, for as much as he commanded the
Apostles to untie the cords, that bound him. Again S. Austin Comment. In Joan.
c. 9. says that the washing of the man's eyes, that was blind from his birth, in
the water of Siloe was a figure of christian baptism.
And all these seven ecclesiastical orders are figured, and represented by
sundry actions, which Christ exercised on earth. For example Christ Io. 3. made
a scourge of small cords, and drove out of the Temple of Jerusalem those, that
sold oxen, sheep, Doves, and changer's of money, whereby are figured
Door-keepers, whose office is after Christ's example to shut the Church doors
againsT the unworthy, and open them to the worthy. Christ Luc. 4. read the
Prophecy of Isaias, wherein the Order of Lectours is signified, their office
being to read the holy Prophesies. Christ. Mark. 8. cast out Devils, whereby
Exorcists are represented. Christ. Io. 8. says I am the light of the world.
Whereunto do relate Acolites, the carrying of burning candles to enlighten
being their function. Christ Io. 13. preparing to celebrate the Eucharist took
a Towell, girded himself, and powered water into a basin to wash his disciples
feet, in which action Subdeacons be expressed: for one office of these
Ecclesiastical Ministers is to prepare water for celebrating of the Eucharist,
and to wash the Corporalls as is prescribed in the Roman Pontifical. Christ
Mat. 26. at his last supper distributed to his Apostles the Sacrament of the
Euchariste, and afterward Io. 13. preached unto them: in these two actions are
shadowed deacons whose office is to preach, and sometimes to distribute the
Sacrament of the Euchariste, as does appear plainly by the hystory of S.
Steven, and S. Lawrence, which as Deacons exercised the said actions. Again
Christ at his last supper did offer the sacrifice of the Euchariste, that is of
his body, and blood which is proper to Priestly function. S PP. Aug. Gregor.
and al^^ testa^tur Christum action illa, qua suscitauit Lazaru^, iussitque eum
vinculis quibus erat ligatus, ab Apostolis dissolui, adumbrasse nostra^
poenite^tiam, and potestate^ tradita^ Ecclesiae pro remitte^dis peccatis. Et
Aug. comment. in Euang. Joan. dicit ablutionem oculorum caeci naii ad natatoria
Siloe tepraesontasse ablutionem nostri Baptismi.
In like manner Christ's actions expressed in raising up of Lazarus, and in
commanding the Apostles to loose the cords, wherewith he was tied do represent
Christian penance, and the power, that Christ gave the Church to loose, and
remit sins, as do evidence the testimonies of ancient Fathers, who also do
expressly assert Christ by his actions to have prefigured the mysteries of
christian religion: Howeuer no man can deny without running into manifest
error, but that the seven before named ecclesiastical order have had their
beginning from Christ's own institution, and it matters not that every Church in
the primitive times was not served with so many: for then in regard of the
scarcity of belieuers, and want of members to promote to the ministry there
could not be so many ordained, in so much, that for the most part one Church
was governed by one Priest only, or by one Bishop, and a Deacon: yet after a
happy increase of belieuers, and persons proper to exercise ecclesiastical
functions every Church was supplied with all the seven orders of ministers and
served according to their distinct offices. As touching Catechismus. Trid. cap.
de ordine parag. 13. ait Parochu^ debere docere primam To^suram esse praeparat
ionem quanda^ ad sacros ordines suscipiendos, sicut sunt Exorcismi ad Baptismum
and sponsalia ad matrimoniu^: doce^t autem Beda. l. 4. His. Aug. and Baronius
Tom. 1. Annal. an. Christi 58. antiquitatem, vsum, and significationem
clericalis To^surae.
clericall Tonsure it is no ecclesiastical order taken in the proper sense
being only a disposition, or preparation unto ordination, as exorcisme is to
Baptism, or spousalls unto Matrimony, that is to say, it is the first step
only to ecclesiastical promotion: howeuer the usage thereof is ancient, as is
also the clipping of the hair in the crown of his head, that receives it;
whereby literally is signified the crown of royal Priesthood, whereunto a
Clergyman is disposed, and deputed by Clericall tonsure: or the crown of
glory, which he expects in virtue of Christ's death, and passion: or
mystically is represented thereby worldly employments, and superfluous cares,
and entertainement's which a Clergyman ought to cast from him, as he does the
hair of his head in the receiving of Tonsure. But Episcopacy, as a function
distinct from Priesthood, has a good title to ecclesiastical order taken in
the proper sense. for the consecration of Bishops is called ordination, and the
Hierarchy of the Church, which is a subordination of ecclesiastical ministers
(in respect whereof, some are more eminent then others in the administration of
divine things) does consist of Bishops, Priests, and other inferior ministers:
wherefore Episcopacy is essentially required thereunto, as the noblest
Hierarchicall member: and indeed that, which the Apostle gave to Timothy by
laying on of his hands, was Episcopal dignity, or Episcopacy according to the
interpretation of S. Chrysostom Hom. 13. in 1. Epis. ad Timoth. Theophilactus.
S. Anselm, and others. Besides the ancientest Fathers do call Episcopacy an
holy Order. Anacletus Ep. 3. cap. 1. Caius Pope in the numbering of orders
acknowledges two orders of Priests, the one of Mayor Priests, that is Bishops,
and the other of Minor Priest's, that is mere Priests. Likewise. S. Epiphan.
Haeres. 75. Yet the degrees, and states of Primates, and Patriarchs, as
distinct offices from Episcopacy lay no claim to the Churches Hierarchy being
in respect of Episcopal function one, and the same order: and the maiority,
that these can challenge above mere Bishops proceeds from human constitution
only.

As the ordination of Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons etc. is a Sacrament
taken in the proper sense: so is According to the Current of catholic writers
since the Council of Trent, Episcopacy is a Sacrament taken in the proper
sense, and the contrary opinion counted erroneous. And truly S Austin con.
Parmeni. and other ancient Fathers while they call holy Order a Sacrament, they
instance in Episcopacy, which has divine institution Act. 20. the holy Ghost
appointed Bishops to govern the Church, and though according to the 2. Toletan
Council mere Priest's laid their hands together with the Bishop in the heads of
those, which were ordained, which was the custom of some Churches of those
days: neuertheless, that imposition of hands, as to mere Priest's, had nothing
of the proper matter, and at the most was a condition only, required to the
validity of the Sacrament of holy Order, as now the personal presence of the
Parish Priest, or some other by him substituted, is an essential requisite to
the validity of Marriage.
ordination of bishops having all necessary requisits thereunto viz. outward
sensible Rites, Grace conferred thereby, and Christ's The Sacrament of holy
Order, as to Episcopacy Christ instituted Io. 20. when he said to his Apostles.
As my Father sent me, so send I you, receive the holy Ghost. And indeed as to
reason it is not probable, that Episcopal. Order was instituted before, for then
doubtless Christ had instituted it at his last supper by the word's hoc facite,
do this. But these particles according to the Council of Trent sess. 21. can.
2. were meant of power given unto Priest's in order to the celebrating of the
Euchariste.
own institution which do plainly appear by the words of the Apostle 2. Tim.
1. stir up the grace of God, which is in thee by the putting on of mine hands:
that is by ordaining thee a Bishop, according to the interpretation of the
ancient Fathers. Again divine institution of Episcopacy is deducible
sufficiently enough from the Hierarchy of the Church instituted by divine
ordination: Episcopacy being the noblest member thereof: for the Hierarchy
According to S. Epiphanius. haer. 57. or 77. Orders of Church-ministers were
perfected by little, and little only: and he observes that the Apostle Epis. ad
Timot. ad Tit. mention's a Bishop, and a Deacon only, because those primitive
Churches had only those two orders of Ministers in regard there was then
exceeding great scarcity of persons fit to be ordained, and the Council of
Trent does not exact the whole number of Ministers but in such Churches as can
conveniently be furnished with all the Orders.
does consist of Bishops, Priests, and The principal Church Ministers after
the Priest's are Deacons according to S. Denis l. de Eccles. Hierar. c. 23. and
5. the function proper to them is to serve in order to the holy Euchariste.
Also according to S. Ignat. Epis. ad Trullo. Deacons were not dispensers of
meat, and drink, but of christian Sacraments. Besides according to S. Justin in
fine Apologet. Deacons were wont to minister the Enchariste to those, which
were present and to carry it to such, as were absent. Again this catholic
doctrine appears evidently by the History of S. Lawrence which S. Ambrose
set's down l. 1. offic. c. 41. and doubtless to have care of the poor was the
secundary, and not the primary office of Deacons.
ministers. Hereby it is clear that Episcopacy does imprint a spiritual
character in him. that is ordained a Bishop, which is the Tenet of all
catholic writers that assert Episcopacy to derive it is institution from
Christ, and to be an ecclesiastical order taken in the proper sense: for the
Council of Tent sess. 23. c. 4. can. 4. does define the Sacrament of Order to
imprint a character, which definition being absolute without restriction, or
distinction between one order, and an other, it does evidently follow, that all
orders, do imprint a character, which is a spiritual sign derived into the
soul, whereby a man is muested with power to exercise certain ecclesiastical
functions in order to the ministry of the Eucharist: and it matters not that
the priestly is more worthy, and excellent, then the Episcopal character, as
distinct from it: for the impression of a new, and distinct character is not
grounded in the more, or less perfection, and excellency of a precedent
character: but in the distinction of powers, and abilities in reference to
exercising the ministry of the Euchariste; neither Matters it, that Fathers,
and Councils when they number the Sacraments of the new law do acknowledge seven
only, comprehending holy order for one, for in so numbering of them they
consider holy Order in According to the Ancient Fathers ordination of a Bishop
and a Priest is said to be one and the same, that is taken in the general
sense, and holy order so taken is but one Sacrament only: but a Bishop taken
in the proper sense even according to S. Hierom. Dial. con. Lucif. has in the
Church the preeminence which Aaron had in law of Moses, and to mere Priests he
gives that Degree of preeminence only into which the sons of Aaron were
invested. Besides s. Epiphan. l. de Sacerdot. dignit. c. 6. calls Episcopacy
a Deified Order, and cap. 7. assert's difference between a Bishop, and a mere
Priest, being God exact's not the same thing's from a Priest, as from a Bishop,
that has preeminence above him.
a genericall signification, as it contains all it is sundry species, or
kinds. Wherefore in as much, as according to the rules of Logic, what can be
rightly affirmed of a thing taken in the general sense, may be also affirmed
of all the sundry species contained therein, it does plainly follow that, since
ecclesiastical order taken in its genericall signification is a Sacrament, and
does imprint a Character every true species thereof is a Sacrament, and
imprinteth a Character: In like manner Fathers, and Councils reckoning seven
Orders they do comprehend Episcopacy under Priesthood. And for as much as
Christ had but one spouse which is the Church, a Bishop, and a Priest, that
supplieth his room, and represents his Person in the ministry ought to be
married to the Church only S. Hieron. in sua Apolog. con. Jouin. Apostoli,
inquit, vel virgins, vel post nuptias contine^tes fuerunt, id est, absquo
vxorum consortio.
wherefore the Apostles after they were ordained Bishops, and Priests led their
life's in all godliness, purity, and chastity: and this apostolical practice
Bishops, and Priests down from them to these times have religiously observed.
S. Hierom L. in vigilantium exclaimeth against some Modern Heretics of those
times for taking such of the people only to be Priest's as had According to the
second Council of Carthage continency was enjoined to Bishops, and Priests, the
ancient Fathers there assembled declaring with one accord, that they ought to
observe it being the Apostles taught it, and antiquity kept it. Besides the
first Council of Nice put forth an ordinance, that Bishops. Priest's and
Deacons should entertain no woman in their families except Mothers,
Grand-mothers, sisters, and Aunts making no mention of wifes. From whence S.
Basil Epis. 17, infer's that to take wifes after the receiving of holy Order
was not permitted: And indeed Clergymen of those days had so great a
reverence to chastity, that even the Arian Bishop's ordained no man that was
married, as witnesses S. Epiphan. her. 37. moreover it was never permitted in
the Church of Christ that a Bishop, or Priest might marry as appears by the
Testimonies of ancient Fathers of the Greek Church, though now this Church fallen
into schism differs from the Latins in opinion, and practice, as to such as had
wifes before their ordination.
wives contrary to the custom of both the Eastern, and western Churches, that
allwaies promoted to the Maior-orders, Virginia, or such, as were esteemed
chaste, and pure from all carnal vncleaness, and though in the primitive times
when there was great scarcity of single persons, as proper, and fit to be
ordained Bishops, Priest's, Deacons, and Subdeacons, the Church-gouernours
took of married men for the exercising those functions: neuertheless these did
not accompany with their wives after their ordination, but led their lives in
all purity, and chastity as did their wives also, according to a mutual
promise of continency: and since the Priests of the old law (to whom marriage
was permitted, as it were of necessity, to multiply the people of God, and who
did s^adow only in their ministry what the Priests of the new law do really
offer in their sacrifices: viz. the true, and real body, and blood of Christ
in memory of his death, and passion) did abstain, not only from the carnal
embracement's of their wives: but also from the houses, wherein they resided
before they were to enter into the Temple for the performance of their
spiritual functions respectruely, it is most consonant, as to reason, that
Priest's of the new law do observe continency together with purity and
holiness. Besides, the unmarried cares for the things of our lord how he may
please him; but he that is married cares for the things of the world how he
may please his wife 1. Cor. 7. Wherefore such, as leave the world to be ordained
Bishops, Priest's, Deacons, and Sub Deacons ought to lead a single life
without wifes, and truly in regard thereof there is less danger of dissipating
ecclesiastical goods and converting them to the making up of inheritance for
Clergy-mens children. Furthermore Priests unmarried are in a better condition
to reprove the vices of lay people, then if they were married: and for as much,
as they are single men they be less unquiet, contentious, and troublesome to
their flock not seeking to enrich children, which they have not. Iouinianus and
Vigila^tius were the first sectaries, that stood up in defense of Priests
marriages, and Luther, and Calvin raised up again that heresy after that it
had been dead, and buried for many ages, teaching, that it is not only lawful
for Peiests to marry before, but even after their ordination. These are followd
by all the sectaries of the present times. And knowing well, that the opinion
contradicts all antiquity they labor to make it agree with the holy
scriptures, whence they cut out weak interpretations, and form coniecturall
deductions only abusing sundry text's for Example God says Genesis 1. bring forth
fruit, and multiply, whence they very weakly argue a precept obliging all to
marry. For those words cannot carry a command since they were uttered to men,
and beast alike, which are not capable of a precept: howeuer if God thereby had
commanded marriage it cannot be meant in order to all men joint, and separate:
for thence it plainly follows, that Abel In the law of Moses Iosue, Elias,
Elisaeus and Jeremy renowned for sanctity of life were never married according
to S. Hierom, and S. Ambrose. Besides 2. Machabae. express mention is made of
reclus'd Virgin's in the Temple. And it matters not, that the sacred Text.
Deuteronomy. 7. says, that there shall be neither male, nor female barren among you.
For neither the one nor th other was counted barren, because of being
unmarried, but in regard in marriage they wanted children, which kind of
barreness was counted in those days, as a reproach, or malediction: because
God had promised plenty of children to married people, that observed his
commandement's.
Iosue, Daniel; S. John Baptist, S. John Evangelist and sundry others, which
led their life's in all chastity did transgress a divine law and consequently
sinned mortally, which were a blasphemy to say of such godly Persons Again from
the words of the Apostle 1. Cor. 7. for to avoid fornication let every man
have his wife and let every woman have her own husband they as weakly infer
marriage to be enjoined every man and every woman: for the Text is meant of
such as are married already, and so the Apostle does interpret his meaning,
saying, in the same Chapter: Art thou bonnd to a wife? seek not to be loosed.
Art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a wise: be that gives his Virgin to
marriage does well, and be that gives her not to marriage does better:
wherefore the alleged words be uttered in respect of the married, the Apostle
signifying thereby, that although it were good for a man not to touch a woman,
or for a woman not to touch a man, but to abide even as he did a chaste Virgin:
nevertheless he asserteth it lawful for every married man to use his wife,
and for every married woman to use her husband that thereby fornications, and
other vncleanesses may be avoided. In like manner they abuse the scripture 1.
Timoth. 3. and Titus 3. that say a Bishop must be a husband of one wife arguing
thence an Apostolical precept obliging a Bishop to take a wife, for it plainly
appears by the Apostles own practice, and sundry Council's, and the ancientest
Fathers-testimonies, that S. Paul did not mean, that a Bishop after his
ordination might marry: or if married before might lawfully perform the act of
Matrimony: because there is not one example in all antiquity, that shows
permission given According to the custom of the primitive Church no married man
could be ordained, unless he had promised before his ordination continency with
his wifes consent, as several Councils have declared, and Iouinian the
Heretic ingenuously confesses this truth according to S. Hierom. l. 1.
adversus Iouinia. Thou confesses (says this great Doctor, to Jouinian) that
he cannot be a Bishop, that beget's children in his Diocese, otherwise if he
be perceived he shall not be counted, as a Husband, but he condenm'd as an
adulterer.
to the married to be ordained Bishops, or Priests unless first they had made a
promise of continency together with their wives consent thereto, and their
promise to live in all continency likewise: wherefore the true meaning of the
Apostles words is, that a man, which has been married more then once ought not
to be ordained a Bishop: and so of necessity he meant, both in regard the place
cannot be understood in reference to Polygamie which signifies marriage of one
single man with many women together, polygamy being inconsistent with Christian
religion as also because the According to the ancient Fathers namely S. Hilary
in Psalm. 117. Epiphan. haer. 5. 8. S. Hierom l. 1. con. Iouian. S. Austin l. de
gra. and lib. arb. cap. 4. S. Paul was never married. Howeuer Clement
Alexandri. (and only he) asserted a contrary opinion conceiving, that he was
able to prove from holy scripture that S. Paul had been married: but Theodoret,
Oecumenius count's it folly to in^er from holy scripture S. Paul's marriage.
Apostle, Timothy, and Titus were Bishops unmarried, as does witness all
antiquity: but S. Paul with great reason permitted such as were but once
married to be ordained Bishops, because among the people of Creet where he was
the chief Church-gouernour, it was a difficult business to find Virgins, the
Secundum Baronium in Annal Eccles. ad an. Christi 58. leges Cretensium
cogebant, vt quilibet a puero vxorem duceret.
laws of that Country commanding every man and woman to marry, as note h
Baronius in his Ecclesiastical Annals. Moreover in favor of Priest's marriage
they do allege S. Paul's word's, that say These. 13. Marriage is honorable
in all, and the bed unpolluted: inferring from thence an obligation upon every
man to marry, which inference does carry a manifest weakness; for it is
certain, that the marriage of adulterers, and adulteresses is dishonorable,
and infamous; besides marriage contracted between Brother, and sister is not
honorable: wherefore the true meaning of the Apostle is, that marriage ought to
be honorable among ass: that is to say, the married ought so to have marriage
in honor, as to know how to possess his vessel in honor, and holiness, and
not in the just of concupiscence, as the Gentiles, which knew not God 1.
Thessal. 4. and though marriage in it self be honorable, and a great
Sacrament: neuertheless that does not hinder the Church to constitute a law
obliging the ordained to refrain from marriage, since she forces none to
receive ordination, and to prohibit marriage in order to ecclesia ^icks is not
to condemn it altogether, as unlawful, and diabolical, as did Simon Magus,
Saturnius, and those other Marcionist's, which are meant by the Prophecy of S.
Paul 1. Timoth. 4. In the latter times some shall depart from the faith
forbidding to marry. Furthermore the before mentioned sectaries to prove the
lawfullnesse of their own Priests marriages do produce S. Paul himself for a
President saying, that this great Apostle was married, and led about his wife
by the name of sister 1. Cor. 9. have we not power to lead about a woman a
sister: and by the name of a faithful companion. Philip. vltimo. I beseech
thee my faithful companion; whereby does appear their extreme peruersness, or
blindness contradicting the consenting testimonies of the ancientest Fathers,
which assert this Apostles virginity, as he himself does also 1. Cor. 7.
therefore I say unto the unmarried, and unto the widows, it is good for them
if they abide even as I do: wherefore doubtless 1. Cor. 9. he does not mean by
a woman a sister, a wife, but some other devout Christian woman, that after the
manner of Iewry did furnish him with necessaries whilst he pursued the exercise
of his Apostolical Ministry, of which sort many followed Christ, and
sustained him, and his, of their substances Luc. 8. and the Apostle calls
that woman a sister after the imitation of the Jews, that named the men among
them Brethren, and the women sisters. Hereby it is evident, that the Apostle by
the words faithful, or sincere companion, could not understand a wife: and
indeed the chiefest sectaries do reject the Commentaries of such, as do argue
from that scripture against the single life of S. Paul since his own word's
before alleged 1. Cor. 7. do speak him unmarried: The Euangelist's S. Luke
cap. 8. and S. Matthew cap. 7 signify, that certain women accompanied Christ,
and ministered unto him of their substance: in imitation whereof the Apostles
carried about women, that furnished them with necessary sustenance, to the
intent, that themselves might enjoy greater liberty, and better conueniency to
preach the Gospel, and doubtless women are more proper then men, as to
providing of necessary sustenance.
wherefore it must be some other, that was his coadiutor, and fellow laborer in
propagating the Gospel of Christ, which is the interpretation of the
ancientest Fathers: and truly it had not been hand some for the Apostle to have
made such an Apostrophe to his own wife in an Epistle written to the
Philippians, and to have left her with them to help those women which labored
with him in promoting of the Gospel together with clement and other his
fellow laborers, as is set down in the same Chapter.

CHAR. XVIJ. OF MATRIMONY
THE CONTENTS.
The first instituting, and celebrating of Marriage was in paradise: carnal
copulation is not a requisite essential thereto: The B. Virgin Mary, and S.
Joseph were married, marriage taken in the proper sense: Polygamy in the law of
nature by divine dispensation was lawful: Christ in his new law annulled
Polygamy, and confirmed Monogamy, as agreeing with the first institution of
Marriage: Though Marriages amongst Persons unbaptized have nothing of a
Sacrament; neuertheless they be lawful. Marriages contracted by christians
even of contrary professions challenge the essence of the Sacrament: It lies
not in the Churches power to untie the knot of christian Marriage after
consurnmation has tied it: a Parish Priest must assiste at Marriages, though
he be no efficient cause thereof.

MAtrimony (taken in the precise formal sense) is Definitio contractus a
Iurisco^sultis tradita, est vltro, citreque obligatio.
a civil contract expressed in words, or signs, whereby a man, and a woman by
mutual consent, give, and receive power of each others body reciprocally:
According to the Council of Trent, God inspired Adam to speak the words set
down Genesis 2. (This now is bone of my bones etc.) and thereby to take Eve for
his wedded wife.
The first Marriage was celebrated in the terrestiall Paradise, when Adam said
of the woman; that God had made out of one of his ribs, and brought unto him:
This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: and doubtless even then
Adam took Eve to his wife: for so he named her immediately after, adding to
what he had uttered before: Therefore shall man leave his Father, and Mother, and
shall cleave to his wife: hereby it is conuincingly evident, that Eve likewise
took Adam to her husband, since she could not have been his wife without her
own voluntary consent thereunto, Marriage essentially requiring mutual
acceptance. And as Marriage was first celebrated in paradise: so was it there
Genesis 1. God created them male, and female: that is according to S. Cyprian l.
de bono pudicit. God instituted that diversity of sex, that they might marry
together, in consequence of which the creation of Adam, and Eve is rightly
called the institution of marriage.
instituted: for God then made the first man, and first woman Genesis 2. in
consequence whereof he designed, and determinated them to contract matrimony;
that is, instituted matrimony by creating them a man, and a woman. Constat ex
2. Genesis Ada^ non babuisse copula carnalem cum Eua in Paradiso
Yet Adam, and Eve did not perform the act of generation in compliance with the
duty of nature, till they were e^ected thence, through their own voluntary act
of disobedience^ which clearly manifest's that the Julianus asserebat copulam
carnalem esse de essentia matrimonij, co^tra quem Aug. hanc infert
absurditatem, scilicet fore, vt matrimoniu^ inter senes coniuges statim, at quo
nequenut copulam carnalem exercere deficeret: item fore vt adulterium esset
proprie matrimonium.
carnal exercise of the lust of concupiscence is no essential requisite to
Marriage; and it matter's not, that carnal copulation is one end of it, for an
end laying claim only to extrinsecall causality, as do teach all Philosophers,
can be no essential part of the thing, in respect whereof it is the end;
besides if the essential consistency of Marriage should depend of carnal
copulation, of necessity it would cease, as to each married couple, which is
respect of old age were disenabled to company together in the act of
generation: nay it would plainly follow, that fornications, and adulteries
ought to be counted Marriages, taken in the proper sense: wherefore the S.
Austin l. 3. con. Faustum Manichae c. 8. and l. de nup. and concup. treating of
the Marriage between the B. Virgin, and S. Joseph denies, that coming together
of both sexes in the act of generation mak's a Marriage, which other ancient
Fathers deny likewise, and call S. Joseph the Husband of the Virgin Mary.
Virgin Mary, and S. Joseph might truly, and really contract marriage, though
they did not come together: and doubtless they were married, marriage taken in
the proper sense. For the Virgin Mary was betrothed, and affianced to Joseph
Mat. 1. and consequently both of them were engaged in a mutual promise of
marriage: so that if they were not truly married, they must have violated their
faith, or by consent released each other of the reciprocal engagement: neither
whereof is agreeable to the exceeding sanctity of Persons confirmed in grace, and
godliness, as were the Virgin Mary, and Joseph, for to violate faith once
pawned by promise, is a manifest argument of leuity and inconstancy? Besides
both scripture, and Fathers do call Joseph the husband of the Virgin Mary:
neither did her B: Virgine^ virginitate Deo dicasse, id est, voto firmasse,
testantur omnes Patres Graecae Ecclesiae and hanc doctrinam Augustinus in
Africa, and Ambrosius in Jtalia defenderunt.
vow of Virginity expressed in her answer to the Angel Gabriel viz: How shall
this be? I know not man Luc. Ye put an impediment thereunto: for a vow of
chastity together with a full purpose never to perform the act of generation
does not prejudice the essential requisit's to marriage: wherefore According to
the Council of Trent sess. 24. cap. 1. marriage is a holy thing, and ought to
be observed and performed in holiness: which doctrine is conform to the Apostles
instructions 1. Cor. 7. He that gives his Virgin in marriage does well. And
Hebrae. 13. Marriage honorable in all, that is in all those, which are indeed
lawfully married. In consequence of which the act of generation in persons
married aright is both lawful, and honorable: but in such as are not lawfully
married together, it is damnable 1. Timoth. 5. For example in Brothers, and
sister's, and in Virgins, that have vowed to God perpetual chastity.
consummation of marriage through carnal copulation though it be lawful,
honest, and laudable having a lawful honest, and laudable end, which is the
generation, and education of children for the propagation, and conservation of
mankind: neuertheless it adds no essential perfection unto marriage being
extrinsecall thereunto only: Howeuer God in the beginning made and determinated
but It Is set down Genesis 1. God created them male, and female in the singular
number, and Genesis 2. they shall be two in one flesh, wherefore S. Innocent. cap.
Gaudemus dediuortijs faith, that one rib only was converted into one, and not
into many women.
one man and one woman to contract marriage (as it is said before) forming of one
rib one woman only, whereby it is plain, that Polygamy which is a plurality of
wives in order to one man can challenge no institution from the beginning: and
indeed such plurality, setting aside extraordinary means for supplying of
natural imperfections, is destructive at least of the secondary end of
marriage (which is a sweet sociable living together of man, and wife) as
appears by the example of Sara, and Agar Genesis 16. of Anna, and Phenenna 1.
Reg. Again it is not consonant, as to the law of nature, that a man having once
given the power of his body to one woman by marriage should afterward give it
to an other: yet in as much as Polygamy in order to many wives is not
absolutely prohibited by any natural ordinance, and is consistent with the
principal end of marriage, which is procreation, and education of children,
God can, and has de facto dispensed in it; for both Sara, and Agar were
rightful wives of Abraham the Patriarch, as likewise Anna, and Phenenna of
Alcana, and Lia and Rachel of Jacob being the scripture praises these men, for
their great sanctity of life without reproaching unto them plurality of wives.
Doubtless persons renowned for sanctity of life would never have married many
wives unless God had inspired them, and the ancient Fathers S. Hierom. Ep. 83.
ad Ocia: and S. Austin l. 22. con. Faus. affirm, that God dispensed with the
Patriarchs, and Jews in the plurality of wives. But this Indulgence began only
in the days of Noe, who taught it his posterity, for neither Adam nor any
other married many wives before the general deluge except Lameth Genesis 4. who
therefore was counted an adulterer, and is reproch'd for that same act by Pope
Nicholas in an Epistle written to king Lotherius. And albeit according to holy
scripture all the wives of one singleman except the first be sometimes named
Concubins, nevertheless, it is not meant thereby, that the others were not true,
and lawful, but that they were secundary wives, which were also true and
lawful wives.
And doubtless God inspired these holy men to do so, that thereby ma^kinde
might be sooner propagated, and the divine blessings promised to the children
of Israel fullfilled, whereof one was increase, and multiplication of children.

As God after the general deluge appointed the flesh of beasts to be meat for
Noah, and his posterity without any restriction at all Genesis 5. and afterward
restrained that appointment, or concession, limitting it in order to the flesh
of such beasts, as by the law of Moses were counted clean, and unpolluted, and
lastly, ^nulling that restriction reduced the eating of flesh to the first
concession: so in the beginning God instituted Monogamy, that is to say,
marriage between one man, and one woman only: afterward he granted Polygamy,
that is, power to take many wives, and lastly revoked the concession of many
wives, and reduced marriage Matthew. 15. ab initio non fuit sic, id est, ab
initio non fuit Poligamia.
to it is first institution, as also raised it (which before was a civil contract
only) to the dignity of a Sacrament; The Council of Constance sess. 15.
declar's marriage between persons baptized and fit to contract a Sacrament of
the new law, taken in the proper sense. Likewise the Council of Florence In the
Decree of Pope Eugenius, and Trent. sess. 24. cap. vnico. and can. 1. Besid's
the Apostle Ephesians. 5. names marriage a great Sacrament, that is, the marriage of
those which are baptized, for of such only he speak's in the Chapter set down,
saying For ye were once darkness, but now light in our lord, that is through
baptism: for according to holy scriptures, and ancient Fathers, baptized, and
lightened, importe the same thing.
for now marriage contracted by persons that are baptized, and enabled to
contract is a Sentiunt communiter Theologi quodlibet matrimoniu^ valide
contractum inter duas personas baptizatas esse proprie Sacramentum, nec duae
personae baptizatae valide contrahentes possunt facere, vt illud non sit
validum, vbi obserua quod pecunia, quae datur in matrimonio, non datur pro
matrimonio, sed pro eius oneribus, nempe pro nutritione familiae, educations
filiorum, and id genus alijs. Jdeoque inde non committitur simonia.
Sacrament of the new law taken in the proper sense, being clothed with all
requisits necessary there to; for first it is an outward sensible ceremony in as
much as it is a contract expressed in outward words, or other sensible signs,
secondly it does effectually sanctify such, as receive it aright through a
special grace, that is conferred on the married to love each other mutual
after the imitation of that reciprocal love, and charity, which is between
Christ, and his Church, in respect whereof the Apostle Ephesians. 5. calls the
marriage of the faithful baptized Magnum Sacramentum: a great Sacrament: but I
speak (says he) in order to Christ, and the Church, exhorting withal
husband's to love their wives, even as Christ loved the church, which is his
wife, that was taken, and formed out of his own side hanging upon the cross (a
mystery S. Aug. often inculcates) as Eve, Adams wife was made of his rib, and
consequently bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh whereby is plainly
manifest that the marriage of Christians lies just claim to divine institution
also, since there is no outward sensible sign, or ceremony that effectually
produces sanctifying grace in the new law, which is not instituted by Christ
according to that of S. John cap. 1. Grace, and truth came by Jesus Christ. by
the premises appears, that the marriages of unbaptized persons According to S.
Austin l. de bono coniug. c. 24. every marriage is in order to generation; but
christian marriage only, is invested with the dignity of a Sacrament.
have nothing of a Sacrament taken in the proper sense viz: for an outward
practical sign of sanctifying grace, that is, for a sensible ceremony, that in
virtue of it is institution can effectually sanctify, which is an effect proper
only to the Sacrament's of the new law, whereof Baptism is the door: howeuer
they be civil contracts conformable to the law of nature, and by no divine law
forbidden, and therefore lawful: 2. Cor. 6. Nolite ducere iugum cu^ infidelibus.
yet the marriage of a christian belieuer with an infidel of what kind
soever, when there appears danger of subversion thereby, is against the
dictates of nature, which oblige every one to avoid whatsoever tendes to his
ruin: in consequence whereof such marriages be unlawful: in respect whereof
the Apostle 2. Cor. 6. forbids the Corinthians converted to the faith of
Christ to bear the yoke with Infidells, which is meant in regard of the
danger, as to subversion: and indeed no divine ordinance making such marriages
unlawful appears either by the old, or new Testament: for Solomon even at
that time, when the old scripture reported him to be loved of God, and to walk
in all the commandments of his Father David, married the daughter of Pharao,
and though God Exodus 34. prohibited Moses to make any compact with the
Amorites, and the Cananites, which adored false Gods, or to take wives of their
daughters for his sons: S. Austin l. de fide and operibus c. 19. treating of
marriages between Catholick's, and Heretics affirm's, that in his days they
were not counted, as sins, because in the new Testament nothing is commanded
in Order to such marriages.
nevertheless that divine prohibition according to the precise form of speech
was in reference only to the danger of subversion (which by the law of nature
every man is obliged to avoid) for God makes the eminent danger of their
ruin to be the ground of his prohibition, adding these words: Lest their
daughters go a fornicating after their Gods, and make thy sons go a
fornicating after their Gods: neither does the new Testament express any
special law, that prohibiteth christians to marry with Infidells. Besides in
the primitive times Clodoueus king of France was converted to the faith of
Christ by the means of his Queen, that was a christian. Again S. Monica, S.
Austins Mother prevailed with her husband, and S. Cicily with her spouse
Valerianus, to embrace the christian Religion, which verifies what the Apostle
says 1. Cor. 7. The unbelieving husband is sanctified by a believing wife.
sundry gallant women for virtue, and sanctity were yoked with unbelieving
husbands, and the supreme providence blessed their marriages with happy
success. using them as a means to bring their said husbands to the marvelous
light of christian faith. Notwithstanding the catholic Church wisely
considering, that many spiritual subuersions and other great inconveniences
arose from such marriages has even anciently prohibited, and annulled them:
that is, has disenabled christians to bear the yoke with Infidells; whereby is
evident, that the marriage of a Catholic with an Heretic is unlawful in
respect of an ecclesiastical constitution only, Ex cap. ex literis extra. de
consuetudine: talis co^suetudo quae est in Polonia aequipollet legi, sed lex
posterior potest abrogare priore^.
which in Poland, and germany seems to be abrogated by a contrary custom
introduced with the tacit consent at least of the Churches chief Pastor (the
Churches consent express, or tacit being a necessary requisite to the
introducing of a Custom unto the abrogating of an ecclesiastical law) in
regard of Catholics, and heretics promiscuous living together, and the
toleration of them both, As to the marriages of Catholics with Heretics, that
matter of controversy was at sundry times disputed before Pope Clement the 8.
by many learned Cardinals, and other famous diuin's which with one accord
declared, that his Holiness might lawfully grant leave unto a Catholic to marry
with an Heretic. or Infidel, and in Poland, and Germany where there is
toleration of one, and the other profession, and where Catholics, and
Heretics live promiscuously together such marriages are usual, and common,
either in regard in those countries, it is a Custom introduced through a
tacit consent of the sea Apostolic, which has abrogated the ecclesiastical
law, that forbids such marriages (and they be forbidden in the Councils
Laodis sub Syluestro, Carthag. 3. and others) or because in those Countries
which give freedom in the exercise of every Christian profession there is no
moral apparent danger of subversion, as to to Catholics. And it matters not
that when a catholic (man, or woman) marrying with an Heretic, knows, that
the party he, or she that marryes, will minister, and receive the Sacrament
unworthily, for the marriage thereby no more ceases to be a Sacrament, then
Baptism cease to be a Sacrament unworthily received; neither does the
Catholic sin thereby, because Vtitur iure suo duntaxat. For example a man,
that through necessity borrow's money of an usurer, whom he knows morally will
exact unlawful lucre, does not offend, because he uses but his own right, and
the usurer if he would, might commit no sin, being in his power to pleasure his
neighbor in an urgent necessity without exacting, or expecting gain for the
loan of his money.
which probably takes away eminent da^gerof subversion in order to a Catholic
man, or woman so marrying, and his, or her children; howeuer it does not lie in
the Churches power to loose the knot of christian marriage after consummation
has tied it upon any occasion whatsoever, either for adultery, or any other
enormous crime, so as to give leave to the innocent party to marry again,
whiles the other lives: for no humane authority can put a sunder that, which
God coupled together: wherefore the Apostle says 1. Cor. 7. And to the married
I command, not I: but our lord: let not the wife depart from her husband, where
he expresses a double departure: the one unjust forbidden by the words set
down: the other just in respect of a lawful cause, namely fornication, which
he allows upon condition only, adding, But if she depart let her remain
unmarried, or he reconciled unto her husband, signifying thereby the bond of
marriage to be vndissoluble. Again Christ Math. 5 reuoking the bill of
diuorcement, that God had granted to the Jews during the old law, because of
the hardness of their hearts, and reducing marriage to the institution, it had
in the beginning of creation, said to the Pharisees, Whosoever shall put away
his wife except for Nomine adulterij sieve formeationis intelligitur omnis
copula illicita violans sidem matrimonij per diuisione^ carnis, co^tra illud.
and eru^t duo in carne vna.
fornication, causes her to commit adultery, and whosoever shall mary her,
that is divorced does commit adultery: and it matters not, that Christ insertes
that exception: except for fornication; for it has reference only to the first
part of the sentence viz. Whosoever shall put away his wife, Christ signifying
thereby, that it is lawful for an husband S. Austin con. Adamant. cap. 3. and
Theophilac expounding that Chapter of S. Matthew, teach that whosoever puts
his wife away otherwise if afterward she commit adultery he is the cause of it:
and doubtless Christ in the Chapter set down speak's of a Husband, that shall
put his wife away, as to dwelling, and bedding with him which kind of divorce
according to the Council of Trent sess. 24. can. 8; may be done lawfully when a
just cause interuem's, for example fornication, eminent danger of some great
evil, whether spiritual, or temporal, or enormious crime etc. and indeed
Christ in that Chapter speaks not at all of dissoluing the bond of marriage,
for that kind of putting away, is a deuorce giving power toeach of both to
marry again without waiting till the one, or the other chance to dye.
to depart from an adulteres wife, or for a wife to depart from an husband,
that is an adulterer, which is, it is lawful for an innocent husband not to
bed, or live together with a wife that committes adultery: and doubtless Christ
intent was not to inuolue the said exception in the latter part of the
sentence: for so Christ's meaning should be this, viz: whosoever shall marry
her, that is divorced, except for fornication, committed adultery, and
consequently should signify thereby fornication to be a sufficient lawful
ground to dissolve the very bond of marriage unto giving leave to a wife put
away for adultery, to marry again; which sense carries an extreme absurdity;
for so the condition of an adulteress wife were better, then that of an
innocent wife, the adulteress being made free in regard of her adultery to take
a new husband, in consequence of which if that were the true sense of Christ's
words, every married woman, that is weary of her husband might easily commit
adultery to get liberty to marry an other, if adultery could dissolve the bond
of marriage. Besides S. Mark cap. 1. and S. Luke cap. 16. relating this
forementioned passage, and the sentence Christ pronounced Math. 5. d^e clearly,
and absolutely assert (putting no exception at all) that whosoever shall marry
her, that is divorced, commits adultery: wherefore though after consummation
of marriage a wife may lawfully depart from her husband that commits
adultery, and a husband may lawfully depart from his wife, that commits
dultery, as to bedding, and living together: nevertheless neither of them is
at liberty to mary again, as long, as both do live.

As to administering the Sacrament of christian marriage albeit, that the
Council of Trent requires the presence of the parish Priest unto the
celebration thereof in all places, and Countries, wherein their ordinance is
promulgated: yet he is no Minister of the Sacrament, that is, According to the
Council of Florence the efficient cause of marriage is the mutual consent of
the parties, that marry expres'd in words of the present Tense. For example:
the man faith, I Thomas, take thee Anna, for my vvedded wife; and again, I
Anne take thee Thomas for my vvedded Husband.
no efficient cause of it, since in order to such as marry together he applies
neither matter, nor form in the administration thereof, these consisting in a
reciprocal delivering up, and a reciprocal accepting of bodies by mutual
codescention expressed in words of the present sense, which is the true
efficient cause of marriage: in consequence of which those, that contract are
the proper ministers of the Sacrament, they yielding their bodies to each other
with an unanimous consent reciprocally, in so much, that it is not absolutely
According to the holy congregations of Cardinals (that expounded that first
Chapter of the 24. session in the Council of Trent, which requires to the
validity of marriage the presence of the parish Priest) it is not necessary
that the parish. Priest assisting at a marriage utter any words, his presence,
and his knowledge of the transaction, is sufficient, though he should forbid
and dissent from it.
necessary, that a Parish Priest assisting at a marriage utter any words at
all, his presence together with his notice of what is done there, being
sufficient enough: and though he should dissent from the doing of it, the
validity of the Sacrament would receive no prejudice thereby: for Christ
instituting marriage a Sacrament changed nothing of the civil contract, which
necessarily it includes, but only elevated the said contract in as much, as it
is performed by persons baptized, unto the dignity of a Sacrament. Wherefore
seeing, that in all other civil contracts the parties, that do contract are
the efficient causes thereof, it plainly follows, that a Christian man, and a
christian woman marrying together are efficient causes, or ministers of the
Sacrament of marriage. Neither is the validity of the Sacrament prejudiced,
though both parties while they administer, stand liable to mortal sin: for the
unworthiness of the minister does not destroy the essence of a Sacrament:
Baptism administered by a Pagan, that applies the true matter, and form with an
intention conform to Christ's intention, is a Sacrament taken in the proper
sense, howeuer no man can participate the fruits of any Sacrament, that
ieceiues it unworthily.

CHAR. XVIIJ. OF EXTREM-VNCTION.
THE CONTENTS.
Holy unction which Christ instituted after his resurrection, and S. James the
Apostle promulgated, ought to be ministered to the faithful in extremity of
sickness only, and thence is called Extrom-vnction: The Sacrament of holy
unction is made, and perfected in as much as a Priest anointeth the sick (in
the room of Christ) with oil of Olive blessed, and consecrated by a Bishop,
and prays over him: The guirt of healing by anointing, or laying on of hands
practiced in the primitive Church, was not the holy unction, that S. James
prescribes in his catholic Epistle, saying, If any be sick among you, let him
bring in the Priest's of the church. and let them pray over him anointing him
with oil in the name of our lord: Priest's in the administering of
sacramental unction anointe the Organs of the sieve senses using the form of
words prescribed by the Roman Church, which doubtless is the best.

EXtrem-vnction is a According to the Councils of Floren in the Decree of
Eugenius, and of Trent. sess. 14. Extrem-vnction is a Sacrament of the new law,
and the greek Church even after their fall into deadly shism fell not from the
definition of the Councils set down, as to Extrem-vnction, for their Patriarch
Jeremy reckons it amongst the Sacraments of the new law.
proper Sacrament of the new law whereby a christian belieuer constituted in
eminent Habetur in Concilio Floren. quod Sacrameutu^ sacrae vnctionis dari non
debeat nisi infirmo de cuius morte timetur. and ideo Patres Trident. vocant
sacram vnctionem exeuntium Sacrameutu^.
danger of death in respect of extreme sickness, or other inward infirmity is
strengthened through holy unction against the assaults of devils, and purged of
venial sin's together with mortal offenses unwittingly forgotten before: and
therefore named Extrem-vnction, being administered only in extremity of sickness.
Albeit that the common enemy seeks occasion at all times to devour our souls:
yet then especially he employeth his greatest subtilities, and craftiest
dealings to bring us into despair of Gods saving mercy, when he sees us at
the point of drawing our last breath of life. Christ after his Resurrection
instituted, and S. James his Apostle promulgated this Sacrament to the
catholic Church in the fist Chapter of his catholic epistle, saying; If any
be sick among you, let him bring in the Priests of the Church, and let them
pray over him anointing him with Nomine olei absoluse and simpliciter positi
se^per intelli gitut oleum oliuarum, id est liquor ex baccis oliuarum
expressus, alij autam humores pingues, vt nucum, and id genus alij, no^ nisi
eum addito dicu^tur osea.
oil in the name of our lord, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and
our lord shall raise him up, and if he has committed sins, they shall be
forgiven him; whereby he expresses the necessary requisit's to a Sacrament of
the new law. First the outward sign, or ceremony is signified by the words,
anointing with oil, which declare the proper sensible matter of
Extrem-vnction. viz: oil made of Olives: for that only challenges the name of
oil taken in the proper sense, as wine of the vine, the name of wine. Secondly
the sensible sacramental form According to S. Austin the making up of a
Sacrament is the putting together of the sacramental word, and the
sacramental element, or matter. Accedit (says he) Verbum ad clementum and fit
Sacramentum. And the sacramental word trac. 8. in Joan. he calls the word of
faith.
uttered together with unction is expressed by the words: Let them pray over
him anointing him with oil: which in as much, as they be joined together with
the matter do make the Sacrament. Thirdly, divine institution is plainly
declared by the particles in the name of our lord: for the true meaning of
these words: let them pray over him anointing him with oil in the name of our
lord, is this: let them pronounce over him the form of this Sacrament, which is
after the manner of a prayer, and anoint him with oil A Priest in dispensing
the Sacraments supplies the room of Christ. The Sacrament of Extrem-vnction is
dispensable only in order to the faithful of Christ; wherefore the Apostle
uses the particles: (if any be sick amongst you) that is, among you faithful
baptized, for he direct's his Epistle to the faithful only, in regard whereof
it is called the Catholic Epistle of S. James.
in the room of Christ, that is, in virtue of the power, and authority derived
unto them from Christ, which import's divine institution: and doubtless the
Apostle meant, that the whole entire action, to wit, unction together with
prayer of faith, ought to be performed by a Priest, as the rightful Minister
of Christ. For in that sense he used the said particles, In the name of our
lord, in the same Chapter speaking of the Prophets, who have spoken (says he)
in the name of our lord: that is, which were invested with power, and authority
to speak in the room of our lord, and indeed the holy Prophets were our lord's
Minister's prophesying in virtue of his special inspiration, and commission.
In the same sense the Apostle. S. Paul 1. Cor. 5. uses the particles, in the
name of our lord, to signify, that he excommunicated the incestuous Corinthian
in the person of our lord, Jesus Christ: saying I have judged him, in the name
of our lord Jesus Christ, to be delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the
flesh etc. Fourthly the effect of this Sacrament, viz: sanctifying grace, these
words do clearly express, And our lord shall raise him up, and if he has
committed sins they shall be forgiven him: for sins are not remitted but by the
infusion of sanctifying grace, whereby also the divine institution of this
Sacrament is evident enough, because Christ only in the new law by his special
institution has clothed outward sensible rites, or ceremonies with power to
produce grace, and remission of sins effectually: And it matters not that the
Apostle adds to unction the particles, and the prayer of faith shall save the
sick: for he does not ascribe the effect of that ceremony to the prayer, as if
it alone were sufficient enough to cause it: for thereby it would evidently
follow, that he mentions, and requires unction in vain, and to no purpose
at all: besid's he makes use of no particle, that excludes unction, but
plainly signifie's (by saying) let them praey over him (the sick) anointing him
with oil, that he attribute's grace, and remission of sins to the whole entire
action, as it consists of unction, and orall prayer proceeding from, and
relying on the faith, if not of the Minister himself (which is not necessary to
the effect of the Sacrament) at least of the Church, whose person the minister
supplyeth in the administration thereof: and truly in the Sacraments of the new
law the verbal form does more plainly, and determinatly express the
sacramental effect, then does the sacramental matter, and therefore the
Apostle by adding, and the prayer of faith etc. will signify only, that the
sacramental form of this Sacrament lies claim to the best, and noblest part of
causality in the production of sanctifying grace, but not to all the parts
thereof. Fifthly by these words let him bring in the S. James in the Chapter set
down uses the name (Presbyter.) S. Luke Act. 15. S. Peter cap. 5. and S. John
Epis. 1.2.3. use the name (Senior) but both the names carry the same meaning;
they signify those, which by holy ordination are invested with priestly
dignity, and authority unto dispensing the mysteries of God: for as S. Hierom
assert's Epis. 85. and Euag. in the scripture-Text's set down those are meant,
which are Priests as to office, dignity, and function. Besid's the Fathers in
the Council of Trent, and all catholic writers understand per presbyteros
Ecclesiae, such only as are Priests rightly ordained, whether they be Bishops,
or mere Priests: and according to the scripture custom in the name
(Presbyteri) Bishops are comprehended.
Priests, the ministers of the Sacrament are declared, and determinated, namely
such only as are actually promoted, in virtue of holy ordination, unto
Episcopal, or Priestly function: and truly the new Testament when (speaking of
Church Ministers) uses the word Presbyter, or Senior means thereby one
invested with Priestly dignity: besides the Apostle could not mean by Priests
of the Church lay. Elders, because they are not Church-ministers taken in the
proper sense: neither is it their office to pray over the sick, and to
administer holy unction unto remission of sins: and it matters not, that the
Apostle says, let them bring in Priests, whereas the practice of the catholic
Church, is to employ one sole Priest in the administration of Extrem-vnction:
for the true meaning thereof is, let him bring in some one of the Priests: the
Apostle uses the signre, which Gramarians call Enallogy, putting the plural,
for the singular number. After the same manner Mat. 1. the Angel of our lord
appearing to Joseph says, Take the Babe, and his Mother, and go into the land
of Israel: for they are dead, that sought the Babes life; notwithstanding he
mentions only Herod, saying, when Herod was dead etc. Lastly in as much, as
the Apostle asserteth absolutely, putting no limitation of time, If any be sick
among you: he plainly shows Extrem-vnction Since all the other precepts S.
James inioyn's in his catholic Epistle concern christians in all ages, it is
not as to reason probable, that the sole precept of anointing the sick should
be given for a short time only, and according to Calvin scarcely for the space
of one age: but this his interpretation the Council of Trent has condemned
sess. 14. doct. de Sacram. Extr. vnct. and can. 2.
to be of perpetual use in the catholic Church to the worlds end, which is
essential to a Sacrament of the new law: wherefore sundry ancient Fathers, that
lived in the subsequent ages, when they speak of christian belieuers reduced
through sickness to eminent danger of death, recommend to them holy unction,
as a Sacrament of the new law, and allege for it, the authority of S. James
set down: Hieron. Epis. 65. ad Pamach. and oceanum de erroribus Originis in
simili re ad fidem spectu^te, de qua tamen prima concilia nihil definierant,
sic scribit. Confessi sunt quod negabatur; tacuerunt de quo nemo quarebat.
and though the first general Councill's make no mention of Extremvnction,
neuertheless no man ought to infer from that negative authority an argument to
the prejudice of so warrantable a doctrine; for they declared, and defined such
point's of christian faith as were questioned, and impugned by the Heretics of
those times respectively: but then no controversy arose concerning
Extrem-vnction.

By the premises is plainly euidenced, that the gift of healing through
unction, or laying on of hands S. Mark mentions sick persons, whom the
anointing with oil cured. And in the last Chapter of S. Mark it is promised
that the imposition of hands shall heal the sick.
mentioned by S. Mark, and practiced in the primitive times, was not this holy
unction, that s. James prescribes in the forenamed catholic Epistle; for that
was a miraculous end owment, and no gifts of doing miracles did confer
sanctifying grace unto remission of sins, which is proper to a Sacrament of the
new law, and truly that particular gift, Often times such as were not Priests
heald the sick by anointing them, namely, according to S. Hierom, S. Hilarion,
that had not received the Sacrament of holy Order and according to Tertull. ad
scap c. 4. A certain lay-christian named Proculus anointed with oil Seuerus
the Emperor, and recovered him thereby.
called the gift of healing, was extended only to corporal infirmities, it
could cure the body, but not the soul. Besides one and the same spirit
distributed that, and all other gifts of doing miracles severally according to
his own free will, 1. Cor. 12 wherefore neither such only, as by ordination were
promoted to Priestly ordination, nor all those had the gift of healing; but to
the administering of Extrem-vnction is necessary Priestly ordination: for the
Apostle says expressly, If any be sick among you, let him bring in Priests of
the Church. Also our Extrem-vnction requires oil of Olives blessed The
Councils of Flor. in the Decree of Eugenius and of Trent sess. 14. cap. 1.
declare that the oil, that is applied in, and is proper to the Sacrament of
Extream-vnction ought to be blessed, and consecrated by a Bishop, which usage
is conform to the general practice of the catholic Church.
and consecrated by a Bishop; neither is it applied to every sick person, but
to such only, as be incorporated into Christ by faith, hope, and charity, nor
to every part of the sick body, but to the Organs of the five senses, which be
the windows, that let in sin into the house of the soul; and although our
Extrem-vnction be endowed with virtue, even as to the healing corporal
infirmities, when the supreme providence thinks it expedient for the sick:
yet the cure of these, is the secundary effect thereof only, being instituted
specially to heal the soul. Furthermore to the forementioned healing unction,
no determinat form of prayer was annexed, as is to our Extrem-vnction; for
example the Roman Church uses this form ( Council. Trid. express docet ritum,
and vsu^ Extremaevnctionis, quem obseruat Romana Ecclesia, esse optimum, idque
patet ex decreto Eugenij ad calcem Concilij Florentini.
which doubtless is the best) our Lord in virtue of that holy unction, and his
most benign mercy grant unto thee Indulgence of all thy offenses committed by
seeing, hearing smelling tasting and touching; and indeed the Priest, that
ministers Extrem-vnction The necessity of the precept requires, that the form
of sacramental unction (which consistes of these word's) Per istam sanctam
vnctionem, and pijssimam suam misericordiam indulgeat tibi Dominus quicquid
deliquisti per visum, auditum etc. ought to be repeated five several times in
five several anoyntings of the five senses; I say the precept of necessity
requires this ceremony: though perhaps neither a five fold repeating of the
formal words, nor a sieve fold anointing of the sick, can lay claim to the
essence of the Sacrament.
is bound to anointe the Organs of every sense, and express the name of each
one particularly together with a repetition of the said form, unless he shall
observe, that the sick person is seized with pangs of present death: for then
one sole unction, and the naming of all the outward senses respectively, is
sufficient enough, as to the essence of the Sacrament, and unto obtaining the
fruits thereof; for example it suffices, if anointing one Organ only, the
Priest say, our Lord through that holy unction, and his most benign mercy
grant unto thee Indulgence of all thy offenses committed by seeing, hearing,
smelling, tasting, and touching; As to the anointing reins, breasts, and feet,
though these unctions have nothing of the essential matter, yet as to them, a
Priest ought to observe the custom of that particular Church, whereunto he is
subject: howeuer decency requires, that he omit to anointe the reins, and
breasts of sick women.

CHAR. XIX. OF THE CHVRCH MILITANT
THE CONTENTS.
God has given to his Church on earth the keeping of all truth, that we may
not be as children wavering, carried about with every wind of doctrine: by
divine institution pastoral functio^s are of necessary, and perpetual use in
the Church unto teaching christian faith, and deciding controversies pertaining
thereto without being liable to error: God has invested Church-Gouernours
with authority to make laws, and ordinances, and exact obedience unto them: the
Church cannot lie hid: private spirits have nothing of power to interpret
scriptures, or to judge matters in debate concerning faith, and religion: the
outward testimony, of the Church is the ordinary expedient necessary to the
receiving of christian faith: answers to sundry objections urged by sectaries
in favor of a private revealing spirit: holy scriptures were neither primarily
intended, nor primaryly delivered as supreme Judges of controversies in order
to christian faith, and religion: profoundnes' of mysteries, plenteousnes, and
shortness of sentences render the scriptures obscure, and intricate; to infer
the Churches infallibility from the authority of scriptures, and scriptutes
infallible authority from the infallible testimony of the Church implies no
circle of error: faith as to the assent thereof, is resolved into the Church,
and not into the scriptures: the four principal marks of the true Church taken
jointly, agree with the Roman Church only, which is the one, holy, catholic,
and Apostolic Church, that never deuiated from truth.

THe Church militant is the grownd, and pillar of truth 1. Tim. 3. as the
foundation of an house supporteth, and hinders it from falling. So the Church
of God sustaineth, and preserves truth, that is the doctrine of christian
faith from perishing; wherefore whosoever desires to find out truth unto
salvation must seek it in the Church, which is the certain keeper, and
faithful Guardian thereof, the supreme providence having put therein Some
Apostles, and some Prophets; and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and
Teachers for the consummation of the Saints, for the work of the ministry,
and for the edification of the body of Christ until we all meet together in
the unity of faith, and the knowledge of the son of God unto a perfect man, and
unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, that we henceforth be no
more children wavering, and carried about with every wind of doctrine by the
wickedness of men, and crastines of Satan, whereby they lie in wait to bring
us into error. Ephesians. 4. where the Apostle plainly asserteth pastoral
function together with the office of teaching christian faith to be of
necessary, and perpetual use in the Church for the administering of Sacraments,
avoiding of errors, and the confirming of such, as shall waver in religion:
and truly it cannot be conceived, as to reason probable, that Christ coming
into the world to be Governor of souls, and to make unto himself a glorious
Church without spot, or wrinckle Ephesians. 5. should not, departing out of the
world leave necessary helps to preserve it in holiness. god instituted in the
old law (Deuteronomy. 17.) a supreme Tribunal consisting of Priests for the deciding
of matters in debate in order to his people, to the end, that if inferior
Judges should differ in judgment or deuiate from the truth, they might recur to
the Council of Priests where one chief Judge, that is the high Priest, was
appointed to prouounce sentence, and all others bound to give obedience thereto,
the law condemning those of pride, which resisted, or refused the high Priests
decision, in matters of controversy; again God so specially assisted the said
Council with his spirit of truth, that the high Priests sentence was
infallible, though himself might err as a private person. Wherefore Christ
Mat. 23. commanded the people to do what the Scribs, and Pharisees said in
regard they sat in the Chair of Moses And S. John cap. 11. ascribes not the
truth of Caiphas prophesing, that Christ ought to die, for the safety of that
nation unto his speaking, as of himself, but to his speaking, as high Priest
of that same year, which rendered him infallible in speaking: in consequence
of which seeing, that God so directed the high Priest in the old law, that he
could not speak an untruth from the Chair of Moses, it follows of necessity,
that Christ in his own new law of grace so specially assistes the high Priest
his grand Vicar, and supreme head of the Church (which he built on his beloved
Apostle S. Peter, that he cannot tell a lie from the Chair of the same S.
Peter) the first high Priest of the new law after Christ. Wherefore the
Churches supreme Governor that succeds in that Chair cannot err in his
decrees, that concern matters of faith, or general manners, notwithstanding
that he were as wicked as Caiphas. From hence plainly appears the manifest
weakness of sundry sectaries, which will have the supreme Priests sentence no
longer to bind, then, he pronounces sentence in conformity to the word of God:
for there is no warrantable authority save that of the supreme Pastors
Tribunal, which can assure us of the divine word: for the scripture would not
be believed, if it were not warranted from the infallible Chair of S. Peter.
Moreover sundry sectaries say unadvisedly, that in the old law the sentence of
the high Priests concerned only civil matters in debate, and not controversies
pertaning to faith and religion, for as to this point both the second book of
paralipomenon, and the 24. Chapter of Exodus give clear evidence against them.
Besides God has not used lose care in instituting the christrian Church
established in a law of grace, then in forming the Synagogue of the Jews
established in a law of bondage: wherefore Deus cum primum instituit Cathedra^
Moysis in Deutro. promisit omnes, and singulas eius definitiones fore veritatis
infallibilis: ideo Aug. l. 4. de doct. chris. ait Pharisaeos, and scribas, id
est Po^tisices Mosaicos iudicantes ex Cathedra Moysis non pot uisse male
definire quamuis mali essent, quia ad been definiendum cogebantur a Deo.
since this had divine authority, and assistance to interpret, and teach the
old law of Moses, as likewise to decide all controversies concerning the
Jewish religion, Deuteronomy. 17. doubtless he has not provided in a lesser measure
for the Church of Christ, in order to teaching, and interpreting the new law,
and determining all matters, that might be in debate about christian religion.
Again Christ being about to leave this Church in order to his visible presence,
for as many ages, as the world shall endure, was as provident, and careful to
preserve it pure from schism, and heresy, as was Moses to preserve his, when
he was to absent himself from it for a shorter time: but Moses being to go
up unto Mount Sinai, and there to abide forty days, and forty nights only,
constituted Exodus 24. exspectate hic, inquit, Moses, donec reuertamur ad vos:
habetis Aaron, and Hurvobiscum, si quid natum fuerit quaestionis referetis ad
eos.
Aaron, and Hur Judges for the deciding all differences which might arise in
the congregation during his absence Exodus 24 wherefore Christ infallibly has
ordained, and appointed spiritual Governors of necessary and perpetual use in
his Church for the deciding all controversies of faith, and religion, and for
the preserving of it in holiness to the world's end; this doctrine is plainly
euidenced by sundry most clear prophesies uttered by Christ himself, viz.
Math. 16. the gates of hell shall never prevail against it. Math. 18. if he
refuse to hear the Church let him be unto thee, as an heathen man, and a
publican, and Ioa. 16. the holy Ghost shall teach you all truth. Whereby
clearly appears, that the very office of supreme Judge in order to deciding
matters concerning faith, and religion is proper to the Church: and truly the
Church, and no other thing distinct from it can rightfully challenge the full
essential proprietys, or conditions here unto required. For example, In
supremo iudice co^trouersiaru^ requiri veritatem infallibilem in definiendo,
non tantum catholici, sed and illoru^ aduersarij fatentur; v. g. vvhittakerus
contro. 10 de scrip. quas. 5. can. 8. in 3. suo argumento, and alij qua^do de
hac re agunt. Vnd. Ang. l. 1. de moribus Ecclesiae catholicae, ait, illam esse
magistram totius sapientiae christianorum and magistram castissimam.
not to be liable to error at all in defining controversies of faith, and
religion, is one essential property, in fallible verity being of necessity
joined to the authority of a supreme Judge, that declares sentence of judgment
in matters relating to faith, which is inconsistent with error, and falsehood.
God by a special, and supernatural providence has constituted this Judge in
his place, and appointed him, as his immediate Ambassador to propound to all
christians the verity of faith, least they be carried about with every wind of
doctrine by the craftiness of Satan: which office, or employment he could not
execute, if he were fallible in the execution thereof: neither should
christians acquiess in his proposalls, and definitive sentences unless they
knew, or supposed him infallible, that is, not liable to error, matters of
faith depending of divine revelation, which is not seen.

An other necessary propriety required in the supreme Judge, is authority to
exact obedience unto his ordinances: which essential propriety Christ
declared, when speaking of the scribes, and Pharisees sitting in Moses chair.
Math. 23. he said, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe,
and do: where the particles whatsoever they bid you observe, importe power,
and authority to propound unto the Jews, what they were to believe: and the
particles: that observe, and do: import an obligation to admit, and receive
their ordinances: and indeed every commonwealth has a supreme Judge, or
magistrate, that propounds laws, and ordinances unto subjects, and commands
their compliance thereunto.

A third necessary propriety, or condition required in this supreme Judge is to
be visible, and a clear speaker. Moses visible, and living said of himself,
as supreme Judge of the faithful in those times Exodus 18. When they have a
matter of controversy they come unto me, and I judge between one, and another,
and declare the ordinances of God, and the laws; also this necessary condition
appears by the command given to the people of Israel Deuteronomy. 17. thou shall
come unto the Priests of the Levites; and to the Judge, that shall be in those
days, and ask and they shall show thee the sentence of judgment: besides
Christ's own words Math. 23. whatsoever they bid you, observe, do sufficiently
manifest, that the head Priests, which sat in Moses seat were visible living
Judges: and indeed there is no civil nation, that has not a visible, living,
and speaking law, that is to say, a supreme Judge, or magistrate visible living,
and speaking: for an vnliud, and mute Judge: namely a mere written law cannot
Judge between one, and another, pronounce sentence of judgment to the punishing
of perverse offenders, or to declare ordinances to the suppressing of
controversies.

That the proprieties of this supreme Judge thus explaned be proper to the By
the Church is meant the high tribunal of faithful Priests whereof the Chief
visible head is the Bishop of Rome seated in the Chair of S. Peter; and as he
is the Chief and supreme head so he is supreme Judge, in consequence of which
whosoever is afraid to be circumuented by the hardness of a question he ought
to recur to him.
Church of Christ taken in the proper sense (for a congregation of believing
Christians including the supreme visible Pastor) it is plainly demonstrable,
for example: that this Church is not liable at all to error, which is the
first propriety appears by Christ's testimony alleged before Math. 16. the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it: which imports an absolute
infallibility in defining, propounding, and teaching matters of faith, for if
the power of Satan, that consists in crafty dealings to draw men into error,
could overcome the Church, by making it teach any one false doctrine, it would
follow evidently, that the gates of hell might prevail against it, in
consequence of which Christ should not be faithful in his promises. Besides
Christ saying Joan. 19. the holy Ghost shall teach you all truth; meant, that
the Church should teach nothing of error to the worlds end; and indeed that
promise was made to the Apostles, and their successors in the ministry, and
Government of the Church: because Christ before Ioa. 14. had said expressly that
the spirit of truth should abide with them for ever; wherefore Aug. l. de mor.
Ecclesia catholica, ait, si quis metuit falli difficult ate alicuius
quaestionis ad Ecclesia^ esse recurrendu^. Jtem ait Christu^ habere Ecclesia^
loco Synagogae. Et Tom. 6. con. Epis. Manichaeoru^. Non crederem, inquit,
Euangelio, nisi Ecclesiae catholicae authoritas me co^moueret.
whosoever is afraid least he may be deceived through the difficulty of a hard
question he ought to recur to the Church established in the room of the
Synagogue, for as the Pharisees, and Scribes teaching in the Chair of Moses
could not deuiate from the truth: so neither can the pastors of our Christian
Church sitting in the Chair of S. Peter. Secondly that the Church is invested
with power, and authority to exact from the faithful, obedience to her
ordinances (which is the second propriety of this supreme Judge) Christ Math.
18. plainly declares, saying, if he refuse to hear the Church, let him be
unto thee, as a heathen man, and a publican, that is, let him be
excommunicated, as appears by Christ's words immediately following; Verba illa
Christi quaecunque alligaueritis super terram, intelligenda sunt de censuris
ecclesiasticis; id etiam fatetur Call. l. 4. insti.
Whatsoever re shall hind upon earth shall be bound in Heaven, which is meant
of ecclesiastical Censures, the greatest of which is excommunication. Again
Act. 15. when the new christians, referred their controversy concerning
circumcision, and other ceremonies of the law of Moses to the Apostles at
Jerusalem, sentence of judgment was declared by one accord thus, It seemed good
to the holy Ghost, and to us, to lay no more burden upon you, then these
necessary things etc. Whereby it is clear, that the Apostles (then the
representative Church) were invested with authority to make ordinances, It
appears plainly by the sacred text Act. It seems good to the holy Ghost, and
to us to lay no more burden upon you then these, that the Apostles had
authority to command, and exact obedience to their ordinances: For the
particles it seems good to us to lay no more burden. Show evidently that they
were superiors invested with authority to command and exact obedience from
the people who were bound to obey them. But here is obseruable that as to the
matter in debate mentioned in the Chapter set down (viz. whether the converted
Gentiles were obliged to observe the law of Moses.) S. Peter in that Council
called to determine it, was supreme Judge, for it is written, that after much
dispute Peter rose up, and as head of all spoke first, and decided the
controversy in favor of the said converted Gentiles delivering them from the
bondage of the old law, and all the multitude, says S. Hierom Tom. 2. Epis 89.
Augus. cap. 2. kept silence, and into Peter's sentence or definition the
Apostles S. James, and all the Priests past with one accord and ever since the
Popes of Rome as S. Peter's lawful successors have had precedence, and the
deciding suffrage in all Councils, which are of credit, and authority in the
Church of God.
and to oblige the faithful in the observation of them: for the words; It
seemed good to us, to lay no more burden upon you, do signify the authority of
superiors to command inferiors, and the obligation of inferiors to obey
their superiors. Thirdly that the Church is living, visible, and speaking
(which is the third propriety of this Judge) is clearly expressed Act. 20. take
heed to your selves, and the flock, whereof the holy Ghost has made you Bishops
to rule the Church of god, which he has purchased with his own blood; and
Again Math. 5. According to S. Aug. trac. in 1. epis. Joan. those are blind
which cannot fee so great a mountain, and shut their eyes against the clear
light put on a candlestick which is the Church of God.
the Church is styled a City, that is set on a mountain which cannot be bid:
but no man can conceive how Bishops can govern a Church which they see not, or
how a City set on a high mountain can lie hid: Besides all the Church offices
joint, and separate do declare it visible, living, ad speaking: neither matters
it, that the Church is known by faith, which is of things not seen: for the
Apostles, when they conuersed with Christ upon earth they both saw, and
believed him to be Christ. As the Apostles saw Christ to be aman, and believed
him to be God: so we do see the Church to be a congregation of men outwardly
professing the faith of Christ, and do believe, that it is directed by the
infallible assistance of the holy Ghost; and as it cannot be euinced, that a
man is invisible because an invisible soul governs him: so neither can it be
euinced, that the Church is invisible because the supernatural gifts of the
holy Ghost, namly, faith, hope, and charity (whereby the Church is governed,
and men made children thereof) be invisible.

From the premises is evidently deducible, S. Austin li. 10. de doct. christ.
disputing against such as pretended to the knowledge of holy scriptures by
special revelations dissuades every man from so proud, and dangerous a
tentation, as to presume that he is taught of God and not of men, and this
caveat he urges by many examples.
that the private spirit, which is to say, the particular revealing spirit
(whereby, as many sectaries conceive, every private belieuer is enabled to
interpret scriptures, and judge all matters concerning faith, and religion)
has no good claim to the office of this suprem Judge being neither seen, nor
heard to speak clearly, nor known certainly to be infallible in what it
reuealeth to each particular belieuer in private; for it may prudently be
doubted whether it be a good spirit, or not, since false ministers can
transform themselves into Apostles of Christ, and Satan himself into an Angel
of light 2. Cor. 11. in consequence of which no wise, and judicious man can
rely his eternity on such a private revealing spirit. Again God according to his
ordinary way does not immediately himself reveal verities of faith to every
one in particular, or judge himself between party, and party: from the
beginning of the creation down to these times his providence has ordained men
to declare his ordinances unto men, appointed men to teach men, and constituted
men suprem Judges of men for the determining of all hard matters in debate
concerning faith and religion. In the law of nature Abraham was made Teacher of
men: I know (speaking of Abraham) that he will command his son, and family
after him, that they keep the way of our lord: Genesis 18. In the written law
Moses was constituted to teach the people of God the divine ordinances, and to
show unto them the way wherein they were to walk, and the work they were to
do. Exodus 18. and Deuteronomy. 17. the Priests of the Leuits were deputed supreme
Judges of controversies, which might rise about religion: also Malac. 2. it is
written, the Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and they shall seek the law
from his mouth. In our new law of grace the Apostles were sent into diverse
parts of the world to preach christian religion. Mar. vltime. Act. 8. God
appointed Saint Philip to teach the Eunuch of Ethiopia. Act. 9. Christ sent
Saul to be instructed of Ananias: and Act. 10. Cornelius the Centurion was
admonished by an Angel to repair unto Saint Peter, that he might learn of him
matters of c^ristian faith: wherefore Saint Paul says Romans 10. Faith is by
heating, and hearing by the word of God and how shall they hear without a
preacher: because ordinarily God teaches men by men the verities of faith: and
Gal. 1. the same Apostle doubted not to prefer the doctrine he preached before
the doctrine of an Angel from Heaven, that should preach otherwise: and truly
if it were lawful for every man to follow, and adhere to his own private
spirit, there would rise almost as many contrary religions, as there are men
living upon the earth; and consequently in room of that peace, that Christ has
promised to the Church, nothing but disorder, and confusion would happen:
wherefore both in the old, and new law this prinat spirit is condemned, for
example, in the old law, Numb. 12. God was angry with Mary, Moses Sister, and
Aaron because they had detracted from Moses, she saying; has our lord spoken
only by Moses? has be not spoken also by us? and Ierem. 23. Hear not the
words S. Hieron. ait falsos illos prophetas refer baereticos qui sequuntur
spiritu^ suu^, quia nequaquam, inquit, diuino instinctu sed proprio cord
vaticinantur.
of the Prophets, that prophecy unto you, and deceive you: they speak the
visions of their own hearts, and not out of the mouth of our lord: and Ezech.
13. God says thus: woe unto the foolish prophets that follow their own spirit:
yet say the lord says it, albeit I have not spoken: likewise in the new law
this private spirit is condemned: for in the primary age of the Church, Eusebius
l. 3. hist. Eccles. cap. 12. attests that Cherintus, besides his other profane
novelties fained subtle delusions as revealed unto him by the ministry of
Angels: and according to the same Eusebius l. 5. cap. 15. Montanus and
Maximilla were carried away with delusions of the like nature; for among the
reasons why they were cut of from the Church of God one was, because they
pretended unto special revelations, and the Church declared, that it was a
thing contrary to the custom, and practice down from the Apostles till those
times, that any particular person should presume to have a private spirit
revealing unto him matters pertaning to christian faith.
Cherintus was counted an Heretic for pretending unto private revelations in
the spreading of sundry absurd doctrines: and in as much as he asserted that
Jesus Christ was not come in the flesh: Saint Joan. Apostle Epis. 1. cap. 4.
writes to the faithful against him thus: Dearly beloved believe not every
spirit but try the spirits whether they are of God: for many false prophets
are gone out into this world: hereby you shall know the spirit of God; every
spirit which confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God, and
every spirit, that confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is
not of God. Yet althought the Apostle used that analogy in order to this true
article of faith (Jesus Christ is come in the flesh) as a certain sign to show
the falsehood of Cherintus assertion: neuertheless he did not mean to establish
it for a general rule to distinguish every good, from every ill spirit, or
every true, from every false doctrine; for the Pelagians, and sundry ancient
sectaries are counted Heretics both by Lutherans, and Caluinists, albeit they
acknowleged the mystery of the Incarnation. But the general rule for the
trying of spirits Saint John clearly expresses a very little after in his same
Epistle; saying We (Apostles) are of God; he that knows God, hears us, he
that is not of god hears us not: hereby know we the spirit of truth and the
spirit of error. In regard his first particular rule was not sufficient enough
to discern between every true, and false doctrine; that is to say between all
true and false Teachers, therefore he adds this general rule, viz. To hear,
or not to hear us Apostles Governors of the Church, alluding to Christ's own
words set down I uc. 10. He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises
you despises me, Saint John spoke in the person of all the Apostles, and their
successors in Church Government with whom is deposited christian doctrine
received from the mouth of Christ: and truly it is very probable, that no one
of the other Apostles, was alive, when Saint John writ his Epistle: yet what
Christ promised Mat. 28. behold I am with you always until the end of the
world, remained then in him, and even now in the Prelates of the Church that
succeed the Apostles in the administration thereof: whereby it is clear that the
office of supreme Judge of controversies in debate concerning faith, and
religion, is proper to ecclesiastical authority only: howeuer in as much, as
no man can come unto Christ except the Father, which has sent him draw him
Ioa. 6. inward grace of the holy Ghost is necessarily required to believe in,
and love God aright unto the observation of his ordinances, and law, of which
is meant the prophesies Ierem. 31. I will put my law, says our lord, in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they
shall be my people, Isa. 50. and all thy children shall be taught of our lord,
to wit: by inward grace, which excludes not outward Teachers for faith is by
heareing, and hearing imports outward Teachers. Moses, and the Prophets of
those days taught the people in as much as they declared unto them outwardly
the laws of God affording nothing of inward help to the seeking of them: but
Christ truly God clothed with human flesh taught by himself in our new law
both outwardly preaching the doctrine of faith, and inwardly instilling into
the hearts of his people inward grace for the embracing of it: and afterward
before his ascension into heaven appointed outward visible Teachers, and
promised withal his own inward invisible concurrence with them to the end of
the world. Wherefore doubtless the alleged scripturs will show only the
maiority of Christ, compared to Moses, and the Prophets in order to teaching
matters of faith and religion together According to holy scripture Io. 1. the
law was given by Moses, but grace, and truth came by Jesus Christ. The old law
pointed at sin only, and made it known: but the new law furnishes grace to
fulfill it, and purge out of our souls the leaven of sin.
with the plenteous measure of grace especially annexed to the new law in
respect whereof, it is styled the law of grace, neither is this necessity of
outward Teachers excluded by the saying of Saint Paul 1. Cor. 2. he that is
spiritual discerns all things, and he himself is judged of noe man. Ioa. 1.
Eps. cap. 2. ye need not that any man teach you: but as his unction teaches
you all things, and it is true, and is notlying: and Saint Ioa. 1. Eps. cap. 5.
he that belieueth in the son of God has the testimony of God in himself; for
as to the first text. Saint Paul spoke of the spiritual man only, that is to
say, of such beliuers, as were perfect, and knowing of christian doctrine and
thereby apt to discern false opinions, and conceive the high mysteries of faith
declared by word of mouth, or writing, which is not to exclude outward
Teachers: and that this is the true meaning appears by the Apostle himself:
because he says in the very same Chapter set down, We speak wisdom among them
that are perfect, and we speak wisdom in a mystery, whereby he se^teth the
spiritual man against the natural man, that is versed only in the wisdom of
the world, or in the knowledge of natural things; and in the third Chapter of
the same Epistle he says thus: And I would not speak unto you Brethren as
unto spiritual mem but as unto carnal men, even as to Babes in Christ I give
you milk to drink, and not meat, for you were not yet able to bear it: where
he lays the spiritual man against the carnal man, that in regard of carnal
affection perceives not the things of the spirit of God, wherefore it seems a
strange thing, that Sectaries should infer from this text of scripture that
every belieuer has a private S. Irenaeus l. 3. cap. 2. con. haer. sharply
rebuks Valentinus for leaving tradition, and following the private spirit
thereby constituting himself sole judge, and rule of faith.
revealing spirit of truth; whereby he is enabled with authority to discern
matters of faith, and judge all controversies, and to be judged of no man
himself unto the excluding of all outward Teachers. As to the second Text, the
true meaning of it, is not that his unction only does teach, but that the
doctrines of christian religion, which men teach outwardly by speaking Aug.
trac. 3. in Epis. Joan. magisteria, inquit, forensecus adiutoria quaedam sunt
and admonitiones, cathedram autem in caelo habet qui corda dotet.
his unction teaches inwardly by inspiring grace, whereby men are made apt to
harken to what the Church ministers teach: and indeed this docility, or aptness
to harken to the word of God is a special prerogative given by the spirit of
grace unto the children of the new law, and prophesied of in the old law by
Jeremy, and Isaias. As concerning the third Text set down, the true sense is
this, that whosoever beliueth in the son of God aright has in himself inward
faith, which is a divine gift, and therefore called the testimony of God, in as
much as it witnesses that no man can Mat. tues Christus Filius Dei viui: caro
and sanguis non reuelauit tibi, sed pater meus.
come unto the son Jesus Christ except it be given unto him by the Father: and
albeit that the inward testimony of God has been the Iole cause to draw some
men unto the marvelous light of faith; for example, Saint Peter beliued the
mystery of the incarnation in virtue of an inward inspiration proceeding from
God immediately: neuertheless the outward testimony of the Church is the
ordinary necessary requisite to the conceiving of christian faith according to
the ordinance of Christ that has constituted outward Teachers to be of
necessary and perpetual use in his Church to the worlds end, that we be not
carried about with every wind of doctrine, which has been extreme needless if
he had thought it expedient to supply every particular belieuer with a private
revealing spirit. Furthermore from the premises is clearly deducible, that the
holy scripture cannot lay clame to the dignity of a supreme Judge: because the
office thereof (which is a primary end intended of necessity Plato in libris
quos de repub. scripsit, and Aristoteles in policicis docent in constitutione
and formatione alicuius reipub. vnum ex ijs quae debent 1. and per se
intentendi, esse ipsum Iudice^ pro dirimendis litibus ciuium ad pacem in rep.
seruandam.
in the forming of every common wealth) is to declare laws punish perverse
offenders, and pronounce sentence of judgment for the determining all matter in
debate, that thereby unity, and peace may be preserved: but the scripturs can
chaleng nothing of iuridicall power in order to judging, defining, and deciding
controversies of faith, these actions importing life, hearing, and speaking,
which the scripturs cannot exercise, being vnliud things, that neither hear,
nor speak clearly, and consequently unfit to Judge matters in debate between
one, and another; besides these were not intended in ^he forming of the Church,
as requisits absolutely necessary to the Government of it, for Christ during the
time he conuersed on earth, writ nothing himself nor commanded his Apostles,
or disciples to writ: and indeed of themselves they were not much According to
Eusebius l. 3. hist. Eccles. cap. 18. the Apoles, and disciples of Christ were
not greatly solicitous to put down in writing the mysteries of christian faith,
being the employment enjoined them, was to preach the Gospel, in so much, that
according to the same Eusebius it was a tradition of those days, that they were
after a manner necessitated to write and according to S. Hierom de viris illus.
S. John writ his Gospel in regard of Cherintus, and Ebion, which denied the
divinity of Christ. And indeed it is evident, that the Apostles did not write
down the principles of christian religion, having received command, ad
commission from Christ to preach, without any commission to write.
set upon writing, because of their engagement in an higher employment; namely
preaching of the Gospel: and it seems, that those few, which have written were
urged, or necessitated thereunto, as was Saint John, that writ his Gospel to
confute the heretics Cherintus, and Ebion, who denied the divinity of Christ.
Again among the twelve Apostles Saint Matthew, and Saint John only, and among
the 62. Disciples Saint Luke only only, writ the Gospel even diverse years
after Christ's Ascension into Heaven, insomuch, that the christian Church had
institution, exercised iuridicall authority, made laws, exacted obedience unto
them along while before the new scripturs were in being, and contrary to the
old scripture, pronounced sentence of judgment to the anulling of Circumcision,
which was a controversy of faith. Wherefore doubtless scripturs were neither
primarly intended, nor primarly given as suprem judges of all matters in debate
concerning faith, and religion: moreover Saint Irenaeus who flourished in the
year of our lord 160. expressly Irenaeus l. 3. con. haer. cap. 4. denies
expressly that christian faith had perished if the Apostles had not left us the
scriptures.
asserteth, that the people of sundry countries without the help of paper, or
inck had preserved christian faith down from the Apostles to his time, the
unwritten supplying the room of the written word: for this ancient Father
writes, and ascribes that preservation unto apostolical tradition observed
by the ancient Churches together with the help of inward grace proceeding from
the holy Ghost. Wherefore as those primative Churches did perseruer in the
profession of the christian faith for the space of many years without
scripturs: so the present Church assisted with the like means might continue
pure without spot, or wrinckle, although it had nothing of written doctrine,
and consequently the primary end for which scripturs were intended was not to
do the office of suprem Judge: howeuer all things which were written were
written for our learning, that we through patience, L. 1. Machabae. cap. 11
Ionathas summus Sacerdos scribens spartiatis dicit se, and suos in rebus
aduersis pro solatio habere libros sacros quod ostendit vsum in quem datae sunt
nobis scripturae.
and comfort of the scripturs may have hope. Romans 15. although they do not
define, and judge all matters of faith, and religion: yet they The Apostle 2.
Timot. 3. Says that all scripture is given by inspiration from God and is
profitable to teach, argue, correct, and instruct in justice. That is according
to the ancient Fathers, to resist, convince, and condemn false doctrines.
Wherefore according to the same Apostle ad Tit. l. a Bishop must be
unreprovable embracing the faithful word, and sound doctrine, that he may be
able to exhort, and convince those, which say against it.
conduce mainly thereunto tending specially to christian instruction, and
erudition: besides they stir us up to join virtue with faith, and with virtue
knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and with temperance patience, and with
patience godliness, and with godliness love 2. Epis 2. Pet. which is the
consistency, and plenitude of the law.

Scripturs are liud S. Ambros. Epis. 19. vocat sacras scripturas fontes viuos,
qui saliunt in vitam aeternam.
fountains springing up unto everlasting life: but the keeping and dressing of
them is committed only to the Church of Christ that was the rock, whence they
spra^g: it is the christian catholic Church taught of the holy Ghost, that
co^prehe^deth the breadth, lenght, depth, and hight of these heavenly
fountains: which is to say, it is a special prerogative given to the Church
of Christ to interpret infallibly, and iuridically the holy scripturs According
to S. Hierom Epis. ad Paulum. S Chrysostom. hom. 40. in Ioa. S. Austin l. 4. de
doct. christ. cap. 3. the hardness of holy scrpitures proceeds from the
profoundnes, copiousnes, compendiousnes, thereof: in consequence of which a
right understanding of sundry passages of necessary depends of tradition, as
well observes S. Austiu l. de fide and oper. and S. Hierom in his scripture
prologue ingeniously confesses; that he could not vnderstandand the holy
Prophets Isaias, Jeremy, and Daniel, again S. Irenaeus l. 3. cap. 7. Orig. in
explic. Epis. ad Romans and S. Austin l. de fide and oper. cap. 14. confess with
one accord that S. Paul is hard to be understood, and especially in regard he
uses frequent hyperboles, which proceeded from the vehemence of the spirit
that guided his pen.
which profoundness of mysteries, plenteousness of senses, shortness of
sentences have rendered obscure, hard, and intricate; as plainly appears by
the holy writers of the old law namely Isay, Jeremy, Ezechiel, Daniel, and of
the new law Saint Paul especially according to the testimony of Saint Peter, 2.
Pet. 3. wherein he speaks of his writings thus, S. Irenaue l. 3. cap. 7.
scribens de Haereticis testatur Paulu^ hyperbolis vti frequenter propter impetu
spiritus qui in ipso fuit. Ide^ sentiu^t Origines explicat. Epistolae ad Ro^.
and Aug. de fide and operibus cap. 14. 15.
our Brother Paul in all his Epis mentions things in which (Epistles) some
things are hard to be understood, which they, that are unlearned, and unstable
wrest, as they do also others scripturs unto their own perdition: for further
proof of this catholic assertion may be alleged the perpetual contention
between one sectary, and an other concerning the interpretation of scripture
Texts in reference to controversies of faith: for example from the words This
is my body Luc. 22. Lutherans do argue the true, and real presence of Christ's
body in the Sacrament together with the substance of bread: contrariwise
Caluinists infer a mere figure of Christ's body; Anabaptists deduce out of the
commission Christ gave unto his Apostles Math. 18. go, and teach all nations
baptizing them in the name of the Father etc. That baptism ought not to be
administrated, but to such, as are de facto apt to receive instruction. And the
Arians misinterpreting that saying of Christ Io. Apud S. Joan. dicit Christus
Pater mayor me est: and alibi ego and Pater vnum sumus. Posterior textus
explicatur ab Arianis de vnitate consensus, and conformitate voluntatu^.
My Father is greater then I: denied his Godhead: the holy scriptures are a
great light of christian doctrine: for they are the dictates of the holy Ghost:
yet not sufficient enough to let us see the way to everlasting life unless they
be set on the ca^dlestick of the Vt luceat omnibus qui in domo su^t. Mat. 5.
Church; it is not the same thing to be a light, and to enlighten: a light
under a bushel is a light, and shines there: howeuer it does not give light
to all that are in the house, but when it is put on the candlestick. Math. 5.
even so the scripturs light put under a bushel, that is, under the
interpretation of private wits continues a shining light in it self;
neuertheless does not enlighten, unto everlasting life, but when it is put on
the candlestick of infallible authority proper to the Church of Christ. Again
the scripture is a book written within, and on the backside Apoc. 5. the
outward writing is the letter, that kills: the inward, the spirit, that
gives life. 2. Cor. 3. as the soul quickneth the body, S. Austin ser. 70. de
tempore expounding the sacred Text Epis. ad Cor. the letter kills the spirit
quikneth. If, says he, thou follow the true sense of scripture, which is the
spirit, that gives life to the soul, it will bring thee unto salvation, but if
thou shall neglect the true sense adhering to the outward letter, presuming the
true sense to be therein, it will often times lead thee into error. And
according to Tertul. l. de resur. carnis. Heresies spring up in regard the
scriptures are misinterpreted. And he speaking of S. Paul's Epistles affirms,
that it ought not to seem a hard thing, or any way strange, that from thence
errors should arise, since heresies must be 1. Cor. 11. which notwithstanding
would not be, if the scriptures were interpreted aright. Heresies must be; not
because God has appointed, that they should be, but because he permitted that
they might be, and man's free will together with pride and malice makes them to
be against Gods positive will: howeuer the supreme providence from evil
heresies draws good things.
so the spirit, or sense of the scriptures quickneth the letter; but to come
unto the spirit, of necessity there is required the opening of the book, which
the Church only can do, trusted with the key of authority, that opens it;
wherefore in as much, as many men down from the beginning of christianity to
these times have adhered rather to the letter, then to the sense of scripture,
and thence cut out vnauthorized interpretations of their own, many heresies
have sprung up to the destruction of infinite souls, whereof Christ prophesying
said: heresies must be. He fore saw, that even of such as were incorporated
into his Church would men rise S. Cypri. Epis. 55. ad Cornelium. Nec aliunde,
inquit, haereses obortae sunt, aut nata su^t schismata quam quod Sacerdoti Dei
non obtemperatur, nec vnus in Ecclesia ad te^ pus Sacerdos and Iudex vice
Christi cogitatur.
teaching perverse things to draw disciples after them; whereby is euidenced
that no private man is an infallible interpreter of holy scriptures, neither can
know certainly, that scriptures are the word of God laying aside the Churches
authority. For example credence is not given to the canon, or caralogue of
scriptures, because of scripture testimony, which no where attestes that
catalogue: in so much, that Luther, and Calvin down from the beginning of their
defection, to the departure out of the world contended about the number of
canonical scriptures, and their adherents of these days respectively continue
in the pursuance of the same dispute. Moreover there is greater reason, that
the christian faith should rely rather on the Church, which S. Cypri. in trac.
de vnitate Ecclesiae, adulterari, inquit, no^ potest sponsae Christi,
incorrupta est, and pudicae.
is an infallible ground and pillar of truth, then of sole scriptures, which
are liable to mutations, corruptions, and false interpretations: howeuer
scriptures considered in themselves precisely do chaleng equal authority with
the Church, the same divine spirit, that directs the tongues of the supreme
pastors in speaking God by his absolute, and extrrordinary power can himself
alone, or by an Angel instruct men, and reveal matters of faith, and christian
religion without the ministry of the Church. And doubtless the Apostles had
noe other master but God himself, as to sundry mysteries of christian faith;
and Christ himself confesses that S. Peter came to the knowledge of his
divine nature by revelation from God the Father. Caro and Sanguic non reuelauit
tibi sed Pater meus.
guided the pens of the Apostles, and Evangelists in writing: and as the
Church bears witness of the scriptures infallible doctrine: so the
scriptures do witness the Churches infalible authority: yet so, as that faith
in order to its act of assent, is resolved into the Church, and not into the
scriptures: for noe man can prudently believe any scripture to be the word of
God, if the Church, that is the ground, and pillar of truth should not declare
it for such: howeuer Catholics who do infer the Churches infallibility from
the testimony of scripture, and the authority of scripture from the testimony
of the Church, are noe more guilty of committing, According to Euclide a
mathematical circle taken in the proper sense is the passing of one, and the
same line from, and the repassing unto the same point, and by the same way.
a circle of error, then are Philosophers, that assert mutual causalities, or
do argue from a cause its proper effect, and from an effect its proper cause:
for example from the rising of the sun is proved the existence of the day, and
again the existence of the day proves the risiing of the sun, wherein there is
noe circle of error, which properly consists in the coming again of the same
thing unto the same thing, from whence it came, and by the same way it came:
but the way of one cause is not the way of an other cause: nor the way of an
effect is the way of the cause, whereof it is the effect: in like manner the way
of the Church, which is a clear speaking Judge, is not the way of the
scriptures, which consiste in mute elements of characters: and although we
believe, that the Church is an infallible proposer of all matters pertaining to
faith because of the scripture testimony, neuertheless, if the scriptures had
borne noe witness thereof; there is evidence of credibility enough to induce us
prudently to believe the Churches infallibility, which even before the writing
of scriptures was beliued: neither do we recur to scriptures to prove it, In
disputs, or conferences with such, as deny holy scriptures, motives of
credibility have weight with them: and that one which S. Austin uses l. con.
Epis. Faus. cap. 4. seems of greattest moment; Many things, says he, keep me
fast in the bosom of the Catholic Church, for example the unanimous accord of
people, and nations, authority confirmed by miracles....by antiquity
strengthened, and the succession of Bishops down from S. Peter the Apostle (to
whom our lord committed the feeding of his sheep) unto the present Episcopacy.
but when we have to do with such as admit them, and even then we do not
allege scriptures as the formal cause the Churches infallibility is known by:
for that is divine revelation, but as witness of it only; for we do not
believe precisely, that the Church is infallible because the scripturs do say
it: but in regard of many other motives which do move us to give our assent
thereto: neither was the church intended for the use of the scriptures; but
scriptures for the use of the Church: besides no man without manifesting
extreme weakness can except against the mutual testimony, that Christ, and S.
John Baptist gave of one another, or against the disciples of both, who
believed their masters to be such, as their masters reciprocally had declared
themselves to be.

The principal marks, or tokens of the true Church Quatuor illa signa dilucide
constant ex sacra scriptura, and ex symbolis Apostolorum Nicae. and S.
Athanasij and express habentur in sym. Consta^tinop. cuius Patres voce
apostolicam diuinitus addiderunt.
are four, set douwn in that Article of christian faith viz; I believe one,
holy catholic, and apostolic Church. Albeit; that the true Church consists
of many members yet it is but one body (1. Cor. 12.) of Christ in unity of
faith, and baptism: One lord, one faith, one baptism Ep. 4. nor can Christ be
an author of division, that is a God of union. Likewise it is holy for as much,
as it is the body of Christ, that is the fountain of all holiness, and enioyes
a sacrifice, and Sacraments which confer sanctity: neither matters it that
sundry members of his body are guilty of mortal transgressions. For as such,
as profess any art are counted artificers, though they do not act according to
the principalls, or rules thereof: so the said members in regard they put on
Christ According to S. Austin in psalm. 85. if all christians, and true
belieuers are baptized in Christ, they have put on Christ, as the Apostle
reaches Gal. 3. and if they be made members of his body, and say they are not
holy, they do an injury to the head, whose members are holy.
by Baptism, and become the chosen people of God by faith, are called holy
although they do not observe the ordinances, and laws of either. For example
1. Cor. 1. the Corinthians are said to be sanctified in Christ JESUS and holy:
neuertheless there were among them both the natural, and carnal men. The true
Church militant is, According to the Evangelist S. Mat. cap. 24. the Church of
God bears the name of the kingdom of Heaven. And S. Hierom styles the Church
the ark of Noah, that contained Leopards, kids, wolfes and lambs: that is to
say, both good, and wicked men dwell in the Church of God; and though she is
faid Ephesians. 4. to have no spot, or wrinckle, yet that is meant in relation to
faith, and doctrine, which are holy, and without blame. Howeuer S. Austin l. de
perfec. iustorum expounds the sacred Text set down also in order to the Church
triumphant, which is without spot, or wrinckle.
the great house of God, wherein are not only vessels of gold, and silver: but
also of wood, and of earth, and some for honor, and some for dishonor 2. Tim.
2. howeuer no man is so irreuocably a vessel unto dishonor, but that he may
be translated into a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for our lord
JESUS, if he will cast from him all his transgressions (committed after baptism
whereby he was incorporated into this great house) which made him a vessel unto
dishonor. The Church is called catholic that is, universal, in as much, as
it sends forth the marvelous light of christian faith from the rising of the
sun unto the goeing douwn thereof. For Christ, that redeemed us to God by his
blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation Apoc. 5. has
not confined the knowledge of his faith Aug. ser. 13. Ecclesia, inquit, a solis
ortu vsque ad occasum vnius fidei splendore enititur.
within the bounds of one kingdom. Moreover the Church is rightly named
catholic, or universal in respect of time, that is to say: of perpetual
succession of pastors, and Teachers: for the providence of God toward man of
necessity preserves the Church from perishing, himself having prouidently
instituted it as the common ordinary way to lead man unto his kingdom. Again
its universal, because of the obligation every man has to embrace it, that
will aspire to eternal life. As out of the ark of Noah there was no
deliverance from the general deluge, According to S. Cyprian trac. de unit.
Eccle. whosoever has not the Church for his Mother, shall not have God for his
Father, And according to S. Fulgentius (who was contemporary with S. Austin) l.
de fide. Such, as are not incorporated into the Church, how charitable soever
they be, cannot be saved: and this Catholic assertion S. Austin professes
likewise li. 4. de baptismo: besides according to the holy scriptures no man,
that is not within the Churches bosom, can obtain heavenly benediction, in
consequence of which to rebel against, or fall from her, is execrable, and
damnable.
so out of the true Church there is no salvation: and indeed the Church is the
sole Mother, that conceiueth, brings forth, and nourishes children unto
heavenly blessedness. Lastly the true Church is called apostolical, because it
has, does, and shall preach in all times to the end of the world; christian
religion planted by the Apostles, upon whom as the foundation it was built Ephesians.
2. By the forementioned marks, or tokens jointly the Church of Christ is
showed, and distinguished from every false congregation. The Synagogue of Jews,
and Mahometans cannot challeng Apostolical foundation (where of Christ
himself is the Chief corner stone) nor catholic propagation from the rising
of the sun to the goeing down thereof: for their religion is neither christian,
nor spread in all parts of the world: and the false Churches of sectaries,
though they carry the name of christian: neuertheless they have nothing of
unity; as to the faith of Christ, nor of perpetual succession, as to pastors,
and Teachers down from the Apostles to these present times: for they set up a
new mystical body of Christ composed of reformed members, saying that Christ
in regard of sundry great scandalls, and errors has elected the old mystical
body whereof he was head before: that is the Roman Church, which seems a strange
thing, because that Church according to their own confession was once in
possession of the true faith, and true religion Ad Romans 5. gratias ago Domino
Deo quod fides vestra (Romana) annunciata. Est in vniuerso mundo.
and the Apostle witnesses, as much writing to the Romans, I thank my God
through Jesus Christ for you all, because your faith (Roman) is published
through out the whole world, and no one express scripture testimony can be
alleged to show that the Roman Church has deuiated from that true faith, in
consequence of which sectaries, that will believe nothing without express
scripture ought not to believe, that the Roman Church is deuested of the true
faith, which it was once in possession of, and thereby deserted: and truly it is
not to reason credible, that Christ after being married to the Roman Church for
sundry ages should repudiate her, especially having promised by the mouth of
his holy Prophet that Sponsabo te mihi in aeternum.
he will never chang the spouse of the new law, saying I will espouse thee for
ever: it is not as to reason credible, that Christ, that cast out the bill of
deuorce practiced in the old law should be the first to bring it again into
practice: nor is it as to reason credible that the spouse, which Christ chose
without sport, or wrinckle, and put under the conduct of the holy Ghost should
cast away her spousall innocence, integrity, and fidelity, and turn to
vncleaness, fornication, and idolatry. Wherefore it is plainly evident, that the
Roman Church is not repudiated, or deserted; wherefore she, and no other, is
the true Church of Christ, that since the first age for 1660. years has not
deuiated from one, holy catholic, and Apostolic faith; neither is Apostolus
scribens ad Romans dicit fidem vestram and meam sed fides S. Pau. erat
vniuersalis and catholica.
Roman Church, and catholic or universal Church less consistent together,
then christian Church, and catholic Church, or apostolical, and catholic
Church: for Christ was a singular person whence the word Christian is derived,
and the Apostles were particular men, whence the word Apostolical comes: and
as the catholic Church is named christian, because of Christ, that is the
supreme invisible head thereof: and as the catholic Church is called
apostolical in respect of the Apostles which were the foundation of it: so the
Catholic Church is called Roman from the Bishop of Rome, that is the visible
head thereof; subordinate to Christ: Council. Alexand. loquens de Roma Eccl.
sacer, inquit, vertex, inquo omnis Ecclesia vertitur.
and indeed the Roman Church taken properly does not signify precisely, and
only that Church, which is at Rome but co^prehendeth every Church through out
the whole world that professes the same faith with it, and acknowledges
obedience to the same, According to S. Anaclete S. Anaclete S. Peter's disciple,
and his third successor in the Pontificate, can. sacro-sancta the Apostolical
sea did not receive supremacy, and preeminence from the Apostles, but from our
Savior himself: and indeed Christ founded and built his Church upon S. Peter
Mat. 16. Thou art Peter, and on this rock I will build my Church....and J
will give unto the the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Again Christ praid
especially for S. Peter, and after his resurrection, appointed him to feed all
his sheep, and lambs. Moreover S. Peter as head, and Prince of the other
Apostles called the first Council, which was celebrated between the Ascension,
and Pentecost. And in the second Council mentioned act. 15. spoke first, and
decided the matter in debate.
Bishop of Rome, as lawful successor of S. Peter in suprem authority: and
there is not any except the Roman Church, that has published, and planted the
one holy apostolical faith from the rising of the sun to the goeing down
thereof, which denotes its universality an order to place: there is not any
except the Roman Church that can rockon pastors, and Teachers in a continual
line of succession down from S. Peter to the present times, which shows its
universality in order to time: there is not any Church-Gouernour, save the
Bishop of Rome to whose definitive sentence of judgment, S. Anaclete Epis. 1.
commanded that every hard question should be referd to the sea Apostolic,
because says he the Apostles so appointed by special command from Christ.
Wherefore Tertullian calls the Pope king of the world, and styles Rome the
Chief and Apostolical seat, whether, says he, we ought to recur in all
doubtful matters relating to faith. Besides S. Austin that was a member of the
African Church Epis. 9. addressing himself to Pope Innocent in order to the
Pelagians whom he impugned writes thus...that error, and impiety (of the
Pelagians) the authority of the sea apostolic must anathematize. Again the
Council of Alexandria calls Pope Felix prophanarum haresium depositor: the
deposer of prophan heresies.
hard controversies of faith have been referred in all ages. Furthermore it is
essential to the true Church to begett children in Jesus Christ through the
Gospel 1. Cor. 4 that is to say, to bring whole countries out of darkness of
infidelity into the marvelous light of Christian faith, which not any except
the Roman Church has performed, Sectaries like partriges have gathered
children, Ieremiae cap. 17. perdix fouet seu congregat quae non peperit. Vnde
S. Aug. assimilat haereticos perdici.
which they have not brought forth: but the Roman Church has begotten unto
Christ a world of children both in the primative times for the first 500.
years and since. For Germans, Bauarians, Vandals, Polans, Sweds, Danes,
Noruegians, Hungarians, Normans, English, and sundry other Countries since the
year 600. were begotten in Jesus Christ through the Gospel by Priests, and
Bishops of the Roman Church, as plainly appears by the ancient, and modern
histories written of each people respectively. And as touching our country of
England that embraced the catholic faith through the preaching of S. Austin a
Priest, and Bishop of the Roman Church, after its conversion, which happened in
the reign of S. Ethelbert for near a thousand years continued obedient to the
Bishop of Rome, and constant in the profession of the catholic religion, as do
evidence our ancient Cronicles, laws, common laws, ordinances Records
foundations of Bishoprics, Cathedral Churches universities colleges and
hospitalls which remain monuments of these days to bear clear witness of
catholic religion: wherefore it is a wonder how English Magistrates come to look
with so envious an eye upon their catholic subjects as to persecute them for
conforming their conscience to the full, and constant profession of all their
christian progenitors.

CHAR. XX. OF TRADITIONS
THE CONTENTS.
Down from the Apostles to these times the true Church of God has been
directed and gouernd by the written, and unwritten word, as by laws, and
customs: doctrines necessary to salvation, which the Apostles received either
from the mouth of Christ, or from the holy Ghost by inspiration were delivered
to the faithful of those days partly in written, and partly in vnritten
traditions: if the Churches authority, and unwritten traditions were laid a
side, scriptures would have nothing of weight with them unto euincing christian
religion: Answers unto several objections propounded against the Churches
traditions.

TRaditions are vnwrtten doctrines delivered by the mouth of Christ, or his
Apostles, and committed unto the keeping of the Church 1. Cor. 11. as I have
delivered unto you, says S. Paul, keep my precepts. From this sacred Text
Theophilact infers, that both S. Paul and the other Apostles delivered many
things (which they did not set down in writing) called traditions, not because
they are not at all written, but in regard there is no express mention thereof
in the holy scriptures: for it is certain that the traditions received from the
Apostles, and delivered as it were from hand, to hand for sundry ages, are now
written.
as precepts of faith and general manners necessary unto salvation. Though the
whole scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to
convince, to correct, and to instruct in justice. 2. Tim. 3. Yet it is not the
same thing to be a profitable guide in the way of iustce, and salvation, and to
be the sole expedient necessary thereunto; for a head is both profitable, and
necessary to preserve a man alive: neuertheless it alone without the society,
and ministry of the body, is not sufficient enough to continue him alive:
likewise the Sacrament of Eucharist conduces to the purchase of eternal
blessedness: yet cannot effect it without the help of baptism, and faith: and
the Chapter set down expressly asserteth, that even the old scriptures instruct
to salvation; and notwithstanding the Apostle requires of Timothy perseverance
in the doctrines which he had heard of him, besides what he had learned from
them, wherein he had been versed from By the particles from his infancy
evidently appears, that the Apostle spoke of these scriptures, which Timothy
had learned in his youth, that is he meant the old testament, being the new
scriptures were not written, when Timothy was a youth. Wherefore when the
Apostle writ unto him that all scripture is profitable etc. he could not
understand the whole body thereof as some sectaries unadvisedly interpret him
translating whole for all. And indeed when the Apostle writ that Epistle to
Timothy, the whole body of scripture was not composed. S. John had not then put
forth his Gosple, and his Apocallps he writ after the death of S. Paul.
him infancy; again albeit the scriptures be a great light, neuertheless they
do not give light to all a en within the house of God, whose written doctrines
they are, unless they be put upon the candlestick of the Churches definitions,
and unwritten traditions: for setting these aside scriptures are but a light
shining in a dark place 2. Pet. 10. in order to many divine ordinances, in
regard they do not show plainly, clearly, and evidently all the mysterious
precepts of Christian faith, that require necessary observance: wherefore it is
an extreme weakness to infer from the light of the written, a negation of light
in the unwritten word of God, as to instruction in justice, and salvation: and
indeed down from the beginning of the Church, christian religion has in all
times Trid sess. 4. cap. 1. declarat veritatem, and disciplina Ecclesiae
contineri in libris scriptis, and sine scripto traditionibus qua ex ipsius
Christi ore ab Apostolic acceptae aut ab ipsis Apostolis Spiritu sancto
dicta^te quasi per manus traditae ad nos vsque perueneru^t, and huiusmodi
traditionu^ contemptoros anathemati subiecit. Sectarij vero communiter
reijciuns eruditiones apostolicas affirmantes omnia qua sine dispendio sulutis
possunt ignorari, aperte contineri in scripturis.
been directed, and governed by both of the said lights, that is by the
written, and unwritten word, as by laws and customs, which kind of government is
common alike to every common wealth instituted aright. That this double light
According to S. Irenaens p. 3. con. haer. c. 3. and 4. Tertull. l. de coro.
militum. cap. 3. S. Basil. l. ad Amphilochium de Spiritu sancto cap. 29. S.
Austin Epis. ad Janua. there is full parity between traditions, ad scriptures,
warrantable authority being common alike to the one, and the other. Wherefore
S. Chrysostom. hom. 4. in 2. ad These. says, Est traditio nihil quaras amplius.
It Is tradition seek no further.
of written, and unwritten Traditions is of necessary, and perpetual use in
the Church appears by the second Epistie to the Thesalonians, where S. Paul
enioyneth the keeping of both: saying stand fast, and keep the Traditions
which you have been taught either by word, or our Epistle. All the doctrines
necessary to salvation, which the Apostles received either from the mouth of
Jesus Christ, or by inspiration of the holy Ghost, they delivered to the
faithful of those days partly in written, and partly in unwritten traditions,
which down from the primative Church to the present times have passed, as from
hand to hand in a continual line of priestly succession. Moreover it appears
clearly by the second Chapter of S. John's canonical Epistle, that the Apostles
thought it not expedient to set forth in writing all matters of christian
religion necessary to salvation: for he expressly says although I had many
things to write unto you, yet would I not write with paper, and inck: for I
trust to come unto you, and speak mouth to mouth, that your joy may be full,
which he repeateth in the end of his third canonical Epistle, saying: I have
many things to write, but I will not with ynck, and pen write unto thee: and
doubtless as Christ when he said to his Disciples Io. 16. I have yet many
things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now, meant of many mysteries
of faith distinct from those he had already taught them: so S. John's meaning
was, that he had other doctrines of christian faith, or manners to deliver by
word of mouth, then those he had written with ynck, and pen: and truly the
particles: That your joy may be full, do import as much, being meant of
spiritual joy, such as faithful christians commonly receive when they are
instructed in things pertaining to justice, and salvation: and it is not in
reason probable, that S. John should understand temperall joy in order to
wordly advantages the intent of his Epistle being to stir up a Mother, and her
son unto a virtuous life in Jesus Christ; neither is it, as to reason,
credible, that so many things which S. John purposely omitted to write were set
down in writing either by himself afterward, or by the other Apostles before,
there being no scripture testimony whereon to ground those conjectures invented
merely by the adversaries of unwritten traditions: Besides it is plainly evident
that sundry unwritten doctrines of christian religion, which are not contained
expressly in any part of the new, or old Testament are of necessary credence.
For example we must believe with divine faith the received catalogue, or canon
of both Testaments to be the true, and uncorrupted word of God. For otherwise
those holy writings would have nothing of weight with us, as thereon to rely
our salvation: notwithstanding not any part of either Testament expresses the
received catalogue; or canon: for example we must believe that the true sense
of the written letter is a necessary, and essential requisite to faith, because
in the sense, that gives life, and not in the letter, that brings death, the
true word of God consists: but the true sense of the written letter that is to
say how The Caluinists in a public disputation with the Antytrinitarians in
the presence of John the second elected king of Hungary engaged to prove by
scripture the mystery of the B. Trinity, but failing in their engagement the
king of a Caluinist became an Anti-trinitarian.
the written letter ought to be taken whether in a proper, or figurative
signification, is not known but by the interpretation, and tradition of the
Church. Again we must believe, that in one God there is a Trinity of divine
persons, which be really distinct one from an other, and no more: yet not any
writing of the Apostles or Evangelists, According to S. Chrysostom. hom. 4. operum
imperf. as in Heaven so in scripture God lies hid unseen. Wherefore as all men
behold this corporal Heaven, and not God that dwells within it: so though many
read the holy scriptures: neuertheless they perceive not the God of truth, that
lies hid in the inward seuse thereof.
expressly assertes a real distinction, or excludes expressly a quaternity of
persons: and truly though S. John says in his canonical Epistle cap. 4. that
there be three, which bear testimony in Heaven, the Father, the word, and the
holy Ghost, neuertheless he does not say expressly Simplex affirmatio ternarij
in aliquo non excludit, vel negat ibi esse aliquod quartum cu^ in quaternario
includatur ternarium, and qui asserit esse tres, vbi sun^ quatuor non falsum
dicit.
three only, or that these three are really distinct one from an other; for he
adds these three are one: in so much, that the great Sabellian heretic
Praxeas taught that God was but one sole person, that carried three distinct
names in order to three several effects, naming him Father in as much, as he
creates all things: son because be was borne of the Virgin Mary, invested with
human nature, and holy Ghost in regard he sanctifies all creatures: Wherefore
if the Apostles had not delivered to the faithful of those days by word of
mouth a real distinction in God as to personality, and a real identity, as to
nature, and substance, and the Church likewise defined that unwritten Tradition,
the faithful of these days might have been S. Basil. dicit Sabellianismum
esse que^dam Iudaismum. Sabellius voro qui omnibus hareticis impietate
antecelluit eirca annum 260. haresim Trinitatis propagauit, quod Pr^xeas omniu^
primus humo Romanae inuexit and proxime accessit ad errorem Iudaeorum.
Sabellians, or Jews, as for any clear speaking scripture to hinder them.
Again we believe, that the holy Ghost is not the son of God, nor that his
procession is generation taken in the proper sense: notwithstanding without
tradition, and interpretation of the holy Church it cannot be proved
sufficiently, that is to say, by express scripture-testimony: nor matters it,
that the Evangelists do name the second person of the blessed Trinity, the
only begotten son, for hence it follows not by necessary consequence, that the
holy Ghost is no son: for Solomon is styled the only begotten son Proverb. 4.
Howeuer it plainly appears by the first book of Paralipomenon, or cronicles,
that he had many brothers, yet he was named the only begotten son in regard he
was beloved, as if he had been the only begotten. We must believe that such,
The Council of Nice has defined, that such as are baptized by heretics must
not be rebaptized. And in regard the Donatists impugned this assertion, which
is grounded upon tradition and the Churches definition they were counted
heretics and S. Aust. I. de vtilitate credendi cap. 22. expressly affirms, that
the said assertion is not contained in any express scripture, and indeed
practice and tradition of the Church only was objected against S. Cypri. that
asserted rebaptizing of such, as were baptized by heretics as appears by his
own Epistle ad Iubaian 74. ad Pompeium, he conceiving that he had scripture
authority on his side, left the Churches tradition and practice: yet S. Austin
in sundry places of his writings excuses him from heresy, because he was not
obstinate in defending of his opinion neither did he break union with the
Church: Besid, that controversy rose before any general Council defined
validity of baptism conferred by Heretics.
as are baptized by heretics ought not to be baptized again: we must believe
that we are bound to keep holy our lords day which is sunday, and we must
believe, that there is a necessary obligation to receive the Apostles Creed:
yet for as much as none of all these doctrines be contained expressly in, or can
be deduced out of the holy scriptures by immodiate necessary, and evident
consequences they would have nothing of weight with us in the conuincing of our
understanding, if the tradition, and definition of the Church were laid a side.
Moreover the Lutherans, and Caluinists in regard they reject Church tradition
adhering to the mere letter of scripture, and their own interpretations thereof
cannot as yet after frequent disputes euince against the Anabaptists, that the
Sacrament of Baptism ought to be administered unto infants; where they allege
the words of Christ set down Math. 19. suffer little children, and forbid them
not to come to me, for of such is the kingdom of Heaven: as also the practice
of the Apostles, that baptized whole households, Act. 19. it is plainly evident
that from neither of these testimonies they can as much, as deduce by any
necessary consequence what they assert as a doctrine of their faith, namely
that baptism ought to be applied to young children, that want the use of
reason, especially supposing Calvin l. 4. insti. c. 16. and the whole sect of
Lutherans though they denied baptism to be a requisite necessary to the
salvation of children neuertheless in their conferences with Anabaptists
ingeniously confessed, that baptism might lawfully, and indeed ought to be
ministered unto children.
what Lutherans, and Caluinists hold as an other article of their reformed
religion viz. that baptism is not absolutely necessary to salvation, for as to
the first testimony though by little children Christ meant not such only, as can
go, and speak: but also infants sucking their Mothers breasts: neuertheless
the words of Christ declare them only capable of blessedness without mentioning
baptism at all. Since then Lutherans, and Caluinists do teach, that baptism is
not an expedient absolutely necessary to blessedness they can infer nothing of
moment, and efficacy from these words of Christ to convince the Anabaptists:
because the blessedness that is to say, the kingdom of Heaven whereof Infants
are declared capable may be obtained without baptisin according to Lutherans,
Caluinists and Anabaptists: yet for as much, as catholic faith teaches
absolute necessity of baptism out of S. John Cap. 3. that except a man be borne
again of water he cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven, Catholics can by a
clear inference from the said words of Christ prove, that Baptism ought even of
necessity to be administered to children: because Christ's words declare the^
capable of the kingdom of Heaven, and consequently of baptism, that being an
expedient absolutely necessary unto the obtaining of it; whosoever is capable of
any end, is likewise capable of the expedient, or medium which is of absolute
necessity in order to the purchasing of it. As touching the latter scripture
testimony though it contains a most pregnant conjecture, or presumption, that
the Apostles, when they baptized whole families baptized children with all:
neuertheless it is not sufficient enough to the grounding of an evident, and
necessary consequence unto proving, that de facto they did so, because
experience shows, that many whole households have no children at all.
Wherefore it is clear, that neither of the scripture testimonies do prove
effectually the baptism of Infants, laying aside the tradition, and definition
of the Church. And truly Lutherans, and Caluinists have only mere conjectures,
and remote inferences drawn from the interpretation of their own private spirits
(which is the Mother of heresies) to euince the foundamentall, and essential
doctrines of their reformed religion, namly, that faith alone justifies, that
there are but two Sacraments: that no addresses of intercession ought to be
made unto Saints, or prayers offered for the benefit of souls departed etc.
and it is a foundamentall article of Caluinism, that the Sacrament of the
Eucharist signifies only the body of Christ, being a mere figure thereof:
contrary wise it is a foundamentall article of Lutherans, that the body of
Christ is really contained in the Sacrament together with the substance of
bread: and though both Caluinists, and Lutherans teach, that the scriptures
speak, and propounde clearly doctrines of faith; howeuer they have not as yet
reconciled that controversy, which, notwithstanding the many conferences, and
disputes held about it, continues in debate: Caluinists impute to the
Lutherans an heresy, or error in faith for admitting, and the Lutherans
ascribe heresy unto the Caluinists for denying the real presence of Christ's
body, and blood in the Eucharist: whereby appears plainly the necessity of
Church tradition, and interpretation for the deciding all hard controversies in
debate, for as much as they relate to faith. Furthermore God, who is not an
accepter of persons. Romans 15. who is not God of men only, but of women also,
and who desires to save all of each sex, doubtless instituted a remedy against
original sin in favor of men, and women, for as much, as the expiation
thereof is absolutely necessary unto salvation; wherefore in regard circumcision
was the remedy proper to men, and could not be applied to women, some other
expedient was ordained for their cure, and although no express mention thereof
be made in any part of the old Testament; neuertheless that God instituted a
remedy for the deliverance of women Quod, qualeue fuerit illud remedium a Deo
institutum ad subuenie^dum faeminis quae nascebantur in peccato originali
nullibi explicatur in sacris litteris nec porest deduci ex illis.
from the guilt of original sin the Jews believed, as an article of faith
necessary to salvation: and indeed so it was, as appears from the necessity
of it, and from the providence God has over both men and women: and truly to
auerre, that God was defective then in necessary requisits to the salvation of
women is a manifest blasphemy: whereby it is clear, that even the Jews in the
old law held unwritten, besides written tradition as necessary unto salvation:
neither is the said unwritten tradition prejudiced by the reply of some
sectaries, saying that the oblation of women in the Temple according to the law
of Moses did free them of original sin. For that legal offering was common
alike to women, and men, and Christ was both circumcised, and offered in the
Temple: nor by recurring for this deliverance unto the circumcision of Parents,
there being not any passage in the whole Testament of the old law, that
carries the least sound that way, or that has relation to the deliverance of
women from original sin in virtue of their parents circumcision: besides S.
Austin, and other ancient Fathers expressly teach, that baptism is to
Christians, as circumcision was to the Jews: but no Christian sectary will say
that women are sanctified, and consecrated to God through their parents
baptism; for if it were enough for the purging out of original sin to baptize
the male, there would be no need at all to baptize the female sex; hereby it is
clear again that the Jews of the old law allowed, and professed unwritten,
besides written traditions, as necessary to salvation.

From the premises appears, that the word of God taken precisely
comprehends both unwritten, and written traditions: in consequence of which
unwritten traditions are not additions to the word of God, they being a part
thereof. Wherefore neither Moses Deuteronomy. 4. saying to the people of Israel: Ye
shall add nothing to the word, which I speak to you, neither shall ye take
ought from it. Nor S. Paul Gal. 1. saying to the Galatians though, that we, or
an Angel from Heaven preach unto you According to S. Austin tom. 7. con. liter.
petiliani l. 3. cap. 6. and tom. 9. trac. 98. in Io. the particle praeterquam,
besides, in the cited Text, imports the particle contra, against, or contrary;
so that, the meaning is, that nothing must be preached against, or contrary to
the holy scripture. And truly this explication appears evidently by the
Apostles arguing against those, that asserted Judaism to be consistent with
christianism, which assertion because it was contrary to the law of Christ the
Apostle added the curse set down in the same sentence of the Text. Moreover the
Greek (...), which the Latin Interpreter translateth praeterquam, is used by
the Apostle for contra not only in the Epistle alleged ad Gal. but also Romans 4.
besides what we have preached unto you, let him be accursed: condemn unwritten
traditions, as sectaries do calumniate the Catholic Church: besides sectaries
very vnhandsomly, and weakly do infer from these two scripture testimonies,
that no doctrines of faith ought to be received, save such, as be contained
expressly in, or by evident consequence deduced from the written word of God:
for neither of both do mention the written word of God. The word, says Moses,
which I speak unto you, and that we have preached unto you, says the Apostle:
but if it were granted unto them what they cannot prove viz: that Moses then
spoke what he had written before, notwithstanding they could not overthrow
thereby unwritten traditions, unless they could prove (which they can never do)
that they be additions destructive of, or contrary to the written word of God:
for such additions only he meant, and excluded by the cited scriptures: and
indeed if S. Paul had meant otherwise, he should have cursed S. John the
Evangelist, that many years after his martyrdom writ revelations, which S.
Paul had not preached to the Galatians; likewise the Anathema had touched S.
Paul himself, that delivered sundry passages in the acts of the Apostles,
which happened after his preaching to the Galatians. Howeuer catholics do not
deny, but that traditions, which are the unwritten word be contained implicitly
in the written word of God: that is to say, as in a general principle from
whence they are deducible: and the whole word of God is contained in
scriptutes, yea in this sole Article of the Apostles Creed I believe in the
holy Catholic Church: in as much as all the matters pertaining to faith and
general manners, and not clearly expressed in holy scriptures are contained
expressly in the doctrine of the Church, which the scriptures, commend unto us
as infallible; and indeed the whole word of God is expounded unto us in Christ's
command Math. 18. If he refuse to hear the Church let him be unto thee as an
heathen man, and publican: in regard whereof ancient Fathers do auerre all
doctrines of faith to be contained in scriptures; that is as in a general
principle, from whence they can be deduced.

CHAR. XXJ. OF THE CHVRCH TRIVMPHANT
THE CONTENTS.
Souls, that remove out of their earthly habitations cleansd from all uncleanness
are instantly translated into Heaven: the clear sight of God, wherein
consists heavenly beatitude is not deferd till the general Resurrection:
though the office of mediation, aduocation, and intercession is proper to
Christ alone, as to the noblest manner thereof; neuertheless according to the
Catholic Church all the Saints mediate, and intercede in the sight of God for
the faithful on earth in subordination to Christ: the Church of god does not,
nor never did teach, that the faithful on earth ought to mediate, and
intercede for the blessed in Heaven: S. Paul did not mediate, or intercede for
Onesiphorus, that he might obtain mercy after his soul was beatifyed: the
ancient Liturgies of the Church approve not of prayers unto helping of the
blessed.

THe Church triumphant is a holy Congregation of blessed Saints reigning with
Jesus Christ; innocent souls not liable to any guilt of sin, as soon, 2. Cor.
5. we know faith The Apostle that if our earthly house of this habitation be
destroyed we have a building given of God...eternal in heaven. From this
sacred Text S. Anselme infers, that good souls, as soon as they are deuested of
their bodies have full enjoyment of heavenly blessedness; and according to Saint
Austin l. 2. de ciuit. cap. 15. martyrs as soon, as they be delivered from
their earthly tabernacles reign in Heaven with Christ. And Christ himself
according to the Apostle Ephesians. 4. led captivity captive in the day of his
glorious ascension, that is, then the just souls, that were detained, as
captives in the lower parts of the earth (namely lymbus, called Abraham's bosom)
were translated into Heaven. And S. Hierom Epis. de obitu letae. Now she for a
small labor has the enioyment of eternal blessedness.
as the earthly house of their habitation is destroyed are translated into an
other building given of God their Creator, that is, an house not made with
hands, but eternal in Heaven: and as now every creature is a dark glass,
whereby God is seen in part, so in the next life Verbum diuinum propter
repraesentandi perfectione^ vocatur speculum fine macula.
God himself is a clear glass wherein creatures see him fully, as he is, that
is, perfectly, if nothing of sin interuene to obstruct their passage to Heaven.
Now says the Apostle 2. Cor. 5. mu^c videmus per speculum in anigmate, sed
tu^c videbimus facie ad faciem Aug. in illud Aposto. Philip. 1. sic scribit,
inde incipit requies, quae non interrumpitur resurrectione, sed clarificatur,
quae nunt fide retinetur.
we see through a glass darkely but then shall we see face to face. 2. Cor.
5. the Apostle teaches, that while we are in the body we are absent from our
lord, for we walk by faith, and not by sight. Wherefore he coueteth to remove
out of the body, and dwell with Christ: in consequence of which good souls
enjoy the clear vision of God before the general resurrection: for otherwise
the Apostles earnest desire to remove out of his body, and dwell with Christ
had been vain and impertinent, since he might not enjoy thereby blessedness
(which consists in the clear vision of God) before the general resurrection;
besides according to S. Aus. l. 14. de Trinit. cap. 2. to be present, and dwell
with Christ includs sight, and excludes faith.
2. Cor. 5. which words plainly show, that then * begineth the eternal, when
the transitory life ends: in consequence of which pure souls without offense,
after they be delivered from their earthly tabernacles, do not expect the
general resurrection to put them in possession of the clear vision of God; and
truly the desire of S. Paul expressed Philip. 1. and Ephesians. 5. to be removed
out of the body, and to be present with Christ, had been very unprofitable, and
impertinent, if the clear sight of God wherein consists the souls blessedness
were to be differred for so long a series of years: and it matters not, that
to be present with Christ does not include of necessity a clear sight of his
divinity: for it appears by the words of the Text, that the Apostle desired a
full clear sight of Christ unto blessedness, in regard he speaks of that
presence with him, which excludes faith, saying We know while we are at home
in the body, that we are absent from Christ: for we walk by faith, and not by
sight, signifying thereby, that when we are removed out of the body we walk by
sight, and not by faith: but it is the clear sight of God that abolisheth faith
according to the doctrine of all ancient Fathers: besides it is in reason
conuincing, that Christ has not appointed prisons to keep the Saints of the
new Testament out of Heaven, having in his ascension translated thither the
Saints of the old Testament, which were detained before, as prisoners in the
lowest parts of the earth. Again God is far more inclined to reward the just
then to punish the wicked: for his mercyes Psalm. 144. miserationes eius super
omnia opera eius.
exceed all his other works: but his divine Justice According to the Council
of Florence God punishes wicked souls with eternal sensible pains as soon,
as they remove out of their bodies.
inflicteth eternal sensible pain upon wicked men sudainly after their
remouall out of their bodies: wherefore doubtless just men do quickly after
their death receive their blessed rewards, nothing of offense interuening to
obstruct their passage to Heaven; moreover God is more just in giving laborers
their hire, then any man whosoever: but a just man does not suffer the
workemans hire to abide with him till morning Leuit. 19. Wherefore. Since
eternal blessedness, that consists in the clear vision of God, is the hire
of good laborers in the divine vineyard According to the Council of Florence
in the decree of Eugenius, and of Treat sess. 25. in decret. de inuocatione
sanct. the souls of the faithful, that remove out of their bodies cleansed
from all sin, and uncleanness see immediately the essence of God. And S. Gregory
Nyss. ora. funebri in pulcheriam writes thus. The plant (pulcheria) is plucked
from us, but transplanted in paradise: she is translated out of one kingdom
into an other: She has put of her purple robe, and put on the clothing of
Heavens kingdom. And all the ancient Fathers assert this Catholic truth, namly
S. Austin trac. 128. in Joan. S. Cyp. li. de exhort. ad martyrs cap. vltimo.
payment of it is made quickly after the finishing of their work; that is,
suddenly after their death, wherewith ends all meritorious working: but there
be two kinds of blessedness the one complete, and full, in order to both body,
and soul: the other, which is the principal, and essential blessedness is not
perfect, as to the whole man: but in respect of the soul only. Now when the
holy scriptures declare, that blessedness, or reward for good works is to be
given after the general resurrection they mean only of the consummation
thereof, which is full blessedness, named the double stole of felicity in order
to both body, and soul: and indeed Christ in the general judgment, as
appears by the 25. Chapter of S. Matthew, will say after the same manner, to
the blessed. Come ye blessed of my Father take the inheritance of the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world: as he will say to the damned
depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire which is prepared for the
devil, and his Angels: but Christ by this latter saying means, that after
sentence of universal judgment is pronounced the damned whose souls were
punished before shall suffer everlasting torments of fire in order both to the
body, and soul for the co^summating of their misery; wherefore by the other
saying addressed to the blessed is meant, that in the general resurrection,
those, whose souls likewise must be allowed to have esse^tiall blessedness before,
shall receive full blessedness: that is, shall be invested with a double stole
of glory whereof one regards the body, and the other the soul. Of this
consummate, and perfect felicity speaks S. Mat. cap. 20. and the Apostle 2.
ad Tit. 4. whereby the hire, or reward there mentioned is signified full
blessedness given to all the good laborers together, when the evening was
come, that is to say, to all the Saints at the day of the general
resurrection: for though all of them were approved by the testimony of faith,
and translated into the kingdom of Heaven, as to their souls; neuertheless as
the same Apostle teaches Heb. 11. they received not the promiss; God
providing, that they without us shall not be consummate that is S. Aug. ser. 4.
de festo Innocent. names the full reward of the blessed, which imports the
glorification of soul, and body, the felicity of the general resurrection. And
Epis. 66. he calls it the whole man's complete immortality, and Epis. 99. he
expounds the sacred Text Heb 11. of consummate blessedness, and the particles,
When evening was come Mat. 20. of the general judgment.
shall not have the enioyment of full, and perfect felicity till the general
resurrection: and indeed S. Paul does not say, that they should not be crowned
without us; but that they should not be consummate without us, that is, should
not receive the whole promised reward consisting in the blessedness of the
soul, together with the glory of the body, which is S. Chris. observation
expressed in his 28. hom. upon the Epistle to the Hebrews: and noe man can say
that there the Apostle means by promise, blessedness, as to the soul only,
without having him contradict himself; for he says in the same Chapter that
David, Samuel, and the other Prophets had obtained promises, or promised
blessedness without us, which is meant of the souls blessedness obtained at
Christ's Ascension into Heaven: and truly seeing, that a pure soul removed out
of the body is capable of beatificall vision, as the reward of its merits, in
reason it is fitting, that it should be beatified before the resurrection of
the body: whereof Christ is our example, whose soul was blessed before his
resurrection: and it matters not that S. John says Apoc. 6. that he saw the
souls of martyrs under the Altar: for by the word Altar he cannot mean an
Lutherus in genesis ex Staphilo 2. p. de tripartita eius Theologia, Et Call. li. 3.
Insti. cap. 25. docent sanctos homines ta^tum esse in Atrio paradisi, ibique
exspectare diem vniuersalis iudicij
outward Court, or porch of Heaven, where some sectaries will needs have all
the Saints to abide without knowing god unto blessedness till the general
resurrection: because the Apostle says immediately after in the same Chapter,
that white stoles were given to every one, which signifies the clear vision of
God. Besides in the following Chapter he expressly affirms, that they were in
the presence of the throne of God, and served him day, and night: in
consequence of which it is plain, that souls are not banished Heaven, and
deprived of the crown of justice, which is the clear sight of God till the day
of general resurrection. Wherefore of necessity the Apostle S. John meant by
the word Altar so ne secret intellectual room unknown to us (and in the house
of God are many lodgings Io. 14.) where those blessed souls offer continually
sweet in cense of praises to their Creator: notwithstanding all this, the holy
Church had not declared this catholic doctrine, as an express article of faith
before the time of Pope Bennet the twelth, who was the first that defined it:
which is noe strange thing: for though the present Church lays no claim to new
revelations, neuertheless all revealed doctrines were not at once propounded:
if the Church had defined the validity of baptism administrated by Heretics
before, or in that age S. Cyprian lived, he would never have asserted an
opinion contrary there to, as witnesses S. Aus. who often excuses him in
regard that controversy arose before the definition of a general Council, and
the same may be said of sundry other controversies pertaining to faith, or
general manners, which the authority of the Church guided by the holy Ghost
has determined according to the occurring exigence thereof in all times
respectively: in consequence of the premises such ancient Fathers (if any such
were) as denied the enioyment of the clear sight of God before the general
resurrection in any age preceding the definition of the Catholic Church in
reference thereunto, are excusable: yet it is certain that even all Fathers
generally do declare in their writings the doctrine, which the Church now
propounds in her definitions in order to the said controversy, as do plainly
prove Coxius, Egid., Bellar. etc. and the common unanimous consent of Fathers
ought to be preferred before the private opinion of a few only; howeuer truly,
no man can say, that even S. Irenaeus, and S. Bernard (which seem to speak
darkly, and as it were doubtfully in relation to the said catholic assertion)
S. Irenaeus li. 5. aduersus haereses cap. 31. S. Bern. ser. 4. de omnibus
sanctis, did exclude Saints from the clear sight of God, or did confine them to
an outward Court, or porch of Heaven till the general resurrection without
haueing them Albeit S. Irenaeus in some part of his writings may seem to
exclud from heavenly blessedness good souls till the day of general
resurrection: neuertheless. l. 1. con. Haer. cap. 29. and l. 2. cap. 63. and in
sundry other places he asserts the enioyment of beatificall vision in order to
just souls cleansed from all uncleanness before the reassumption of their bodies
the same teaches S. Bernard Epis. ad Fratres de Hyber. ser. de obitu Humberti
Monachi and Epis. 229. notwithstanding that in some places of his writings he
may seem to incline to the contrary opinion. Wherefore Sixtus Senensis l. 6.
Biblio. sanct. annota. 348. piously advises every man to expound the sayings
of these Fathers in order to the fulness of glory, that blessed souls receive in
the general resurrection, when their resumed bodies are glorified.
contradict themselves in other places of their writings, and as to Pope John
22. if it was his private opinion, that the Saints do not see God face to face
till the general resurrection: yet he proceeded not to a definition in
reference thereto Benedictus 12. in extra. quae incipit benedictus Deus ait
Ioannem 22. morte praeuentum nil potuisse definire circa illam difficultatem.
as witnesses Pope Bennet 12. his successor in the Pope dome, Besides Ocamus
2. par. sui dialogi cap. 8.
Ocham that was a professed enemy of John 22. writes, that in a consistory of
Cardinals this Pope declared, that as to that matter of controversy no
definition was past, and that upon notice of any he should be most ready to
embrace the sense, and defend the sentence of the Church: which testimony
gives evidence enough to believe, that Pope John never defined the said
controversy.

As the Catholic Church guided by the holy Ghost asserteth the Saints reigning
with Christ to have actual enioyment of blessedness: so likewise declares them
to be our Aduocats, mediators, and intercessours in the sight of God. Although
the office of aduocation, mediation, and intercession Although Romans S. Christ
is said to make intercession for us: neuertheless the Churches custom is not to
say, Christ pray for us: but Christ have mercy of us. Thereby preferring his
divine before his human nature, that is we pray unto him, as God, and not as
man, and this Church practice takes away the occasion of erring with the
Arians, which denied the divinity of our Savior Christ.
is proper to Christ alone, as to the most excellent manner thereof: for as
much as he only without the help of man, or of any Angel through the proper
merits of his own passion, and death on the crosle paid the full ransom, or
price of all sins, whereby he reconciled us to God in respect of which the
Apostle calls him the Est vnicus mediator Christus, ratione scilicet ac medio
redemptionis, qui proprio sanguine in cruce effuso nos ab inferno, a diabolo,
and ira Dei Patris redemit, and eidem nos reconciliauit^^^ est aut^ (...), and
solus mediator ratioue, and medio intercessionis and precum.
only mediator between God, and man. 1. Cor. 2. that is the sole singular
mediator taken in the singular sense of redemption, after which sort also he
is our sole Advocate, and Patron, that by himself alone procured for us mercy
in the sight of his divine Father: and truly noe Christian asks, or obtains
grace in this life or glory in the next, but in virtue of his merits:
neuertheless the Apostles, and Saints in Heaven, and the faithful on earth,
that deal with God by intercession, and mediate with Christ by prayer also
unto procuring for us salvation, lay clame rightly to the office of an
Advocate, and mediator taken in a more large sense according to the common
usage of speech, and the scriptures evidence as much, which attribute the name
of mediator to Moses, Jeremy, the Apostles, and others, as clearly proves S.
Cytill. l. 12. Thom. cap. 10. also they give the name of Savior, and redemer
to mere creatures. Iud. 3.92. S. Bernard ser. that begins Signum magnum
apparuit. Teaches, that there is need of a mediator to the mediator Christ
neither is there any better, or more profitable, then the Virgin Mary, The
obedient Virgin Mary (says he) is made the advocate of the inobedient Virgin
Eve; wherefore the holy Church calls the Virgin Mary our Advocate: besides S.
Greg. Nazian. ora. ad Grego. Nysse asserts, that Martyrs are mediators between
us, and God, and so teaches also. S. Chrysostom in psalm. 50. and S. Hierom
Epis. ad Vigilant. cap. 3. if the Apostles, says this great Doctor of the
Church, and Martyrs invested with their bodies did pray for others when they
ought to have been solicitous for themselves, they pray rather for us now being
delivered from their bodies after their victories, crowns, and triumphs. Again
S. Austin Epis. ad Paulinum calls Bishops the peoples Advocates in as much,
as they give them their benediction.
Esdras. 9.27. Act. 7.35. Wherefore Christ is our Advocate after a far nobler
manner, then the Saints are. Christ makes intercession for us, in as much, as
he represents to his divine Father his own merits in our favor. The Saints
in as much, as they offer for us their prayers through the merits of Christ.
Christ exhibiteth for us what is his own: Saints offer for us what is Christ's:
and therefore are but inferior, and secundary intercessours which never ask, or
obtain any grace for us but through Christ our lord, which is the close of all
Church prayers addressed to the blessed Saints: in consequence of which the
greatness of Christ's glory suffers nothing of prejudice, but rather is
illustrated thereby, since through the immensity of his merits he did not
procure only, that his own prayers should be graciously heard, and accepted in
the sight of his divine Father, but likewise the prayers of every one offered in
his name aright, in regard whereof the Apostles, Martyrs, and other Saints, that
reign in Heaven (having here on earth S. Cypria. magnus charoru^ numerus nos
in coelo exspectant....de sua salute securi, pro nostra soliciti.
espoused the general interests of their neighbors, and after the imitation
of Christ their head promote by intercession the spiritual advantages of all,
notwithstanding, that their own concernments, might have exacted of them their
whole employment in the behalf of themselves, being not then certain of
heavenly blessedness) doubtless whereas now they enjoy a full assurance of the
crowns of justice, which their victories have merited, their desires to
advance the spiritual interests of their friends on earth abound more, and
their charity soliciteth more for our admittance into Heaven to be partakers of
their inheritance in the light of glory Coloss. 1. Tom. 1. Conciliorum Epis. 1.
S. Clemens in initio.
S. Clement in his Epistle to S. James (called the brother of our lord,)
auerreth, that S. Peter encouraging him to accept after his death the government
of the Church, promised, that after his departure he would not cease to make
intercession for him, and his flock, thereby to ease him of his pastoral
charge. Likewise Ser. 3. in anniuersario die assumptionis.
S. Leo the great, that succeeded in the Church-gouerment ascribes the good
administration thereof to the prayers of S. Peter, to whom Christ said before
his passion: and thou being converted, confirm thy brethren, and after his
resurrection, feed my sheep, my lambs. And indeed S. Peter himself says in
the first Chap. of his second Epistle, that he would endeavor after his
decease, that the Christians of those days might have frequent remembrance of
the things, which he had taught them, whereby it is evident enough, that the
Saints departed, have S. Grego l. 4. dial. ca. 33. quid est quod ibi nesciunt,
vbi scientem omnia sciunt. Loquitur de sanctis in caelo Deum clare intuentibus.
understanding, and memory: and in earnest otherwise the comparison Christ made
Math. 22. to wit, the Saints are, as the angels in Heaven, had been very
impertinent: for Eusebius. l. 6. cap. 4. refert Potamiena cum iret ad maatyrium
promisisse se post mortem suam impetraturam a Deo misericordiam pro Basilide,
qui fuit vnus ex militibus qui ducebant illa^ ad locu^ supplicij
the heavenly Angels It appears evidently by Christ's own words Luc. 15. how
carefully heavenly Angels endeavor to bring mortals unto eternal
blessedness: being they rejoice in the repentance of a sinner. Wherefore Orig.
hom. 1. in Ezech. prays his Angel to receive him converted from his former
error.
rejoice at the conversion of a sinner Luc. 15. Besides according to the common
usage of the primative Church one believing christian bargained with an other,
that he, who went first to Heaven should pray for him, that abided on earth.
Let us (says S. Cyprian Epis. 57.) pray mutually, one for an other, and
whether of us two shall through the divine mercy be first called for, let his
love continue, and his prayers not cease for his brethren, and sisters in the
world. In like manner S. Hierome spoke to Heliodorus Epis. 1. cap. 2. saying,
that when he is once in Heaven he will pray for him, that exhorted and
encouraged him to embrace a monastical state of life. Moreover in the law of
nature Abraham made intercession to an Angel for his sons, Joseph, Ephraim, and
Manasse, Genesis 48. the Angel, which has delivered me from all evil bless these
children. And albeit it cannot be proved, that in any time during the old
Testament the people of God prayed directly to the holy Patriarchs, and
Prophets after their decease, in regard then the Saints departed were not
translated into Heaven, and invested with while clothes of glory, their
habitation being under the earth, as in a prison. 1. Petri 2. neuertheless they
made intercession to God, humbly asking of him mercy and grace through the
merits of the said Patriarchs and Prophets. Psalm. 131. meme^to Domini David,
and omnis mansuetudinis eius: propter David seruum tuu^ non auertas faciem
Christi tui.
Solomon asked of God meet help in regard of his Father David's great merits
Exodus recordare Domine Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob scruoru^ tuum.
and Moses in respect of the good works of Abraham, Isack, and Israel the
faithful servants of God. Likewise the ancient Jews made intercession to God
through the prayers of their progenitors departed; And the holy Prophet Jeremy
Baruch cap. 3. prays thus. O lord omnipotent God of Jsra. Hear the prayer of
the dead of Israel: and though some sectaries count Baruch, as apocryphal:
neuertheless the ancient Fathers, and Councills have ranked that book with
divine scripture both under the name of Jeremy Baruchs uncle, and under the
inscription of Baruch, which is more proper. Again the Council of Laodicea in
the last canon mentions Baruchs lamentations, and Ieremyes Epistles. Moreover
the Councils of Florence, and Trent have defined this catholic truth.
after his death praid much for the people of Israel. 2. Match. 75. Neither does
the Prophet Isaias prejudice this catholic truth, saying cap. 63. Abraham knew
us not, and Israel was ignorant of us: for he meant only, that Abraham, and
Jacob did not acknowledge the Jews of those days for their children, because of
their greiuous sins, and iniquities, as the ancient Fathers interpret that
scripture. Nor Ecclesiastes, when he says, the dead know noe more, and have
reward noe more. For his meaning is not to take all understanding, and
knowledge from souls removed out of their bodies: but to inculcate unto us,
that it is impossible after our departure out of this world to merit a reward,
the time of this life being a necessary requisite there to, according to
Christ's own testimony Io. 9. the night comes when noe man can work.

But now the engagement mentioned in the character of Purgatory calls for an
answer unto the Digbean White; that has studied divinity 40. years; who as
to the contents of this character mainly resists the constant Mr. White in
the third account of the middle state of souls boldly asserts, that though to
pray for the blessed be against the common practice of the Church: neuertheless
he is not of so vveake a stomach, as not to digest that morsel; so that he
maks not only the Church liable to error, as to manners and doctrines
universally received, approved, and practiced, which is a manifest heresy; but
himself the Churches Reformer.
and universal practice of the Catholic Church agreeing with so large, and
evident testimony of scriptures, Councills, and Fathers, as are set down; for
example in the third account of his middle state of souls, to prove, that the
ancient practice of the Church was to pray for the dead even after their souls
were beatified. He alleged the 2. Epis. and 1. cap. to Timothy, where the
Apostle thus prays for Onesiphorus: Our lord grant him (Onesiphorus) to find
mercy from our lord in that day: by which words this knowing Master, that has
studied 40. years to build a Theology on Digbean peripateticks, will of
necessity prove, that S. Paul prayed, that Onefiphorus might find mercy after
he was beatified. Shall I deny (says he) the Apostle prayed, that Onesiphorus
might find mercy even after his soul was beatified? the Text on all sides
confessed for bids me: what then? will our adversaries say this was not to pray
for the blessed? common sense permit's them not. S. Paul did it. But doubtless
no knowing man in Theology, or ecclesiastical history (that is, impartial)
dare say for his credits sake, that Mr. White does clearly prove against the
whole practice of the Church, that the faithful on earth must pray for the
blessed, because the Apostle prayed for Onesiphorus saying Our lord grant unto
him, that he may find mercy of our lord in illo die in that day: for
Onesiphorus was not dead when S. Paul prayed, that he might find mercy of our
lord in illo die. In consequence of which Mr. Whites inference from the words
alleged carries no weight with it at all, being grounded upon a very false
supposall: Howeuer the good prayer of the Apostle was not in vain for according
to the martyrologes both Latin, and Greek Onesiphorus was honored afterward
with a crown of martyrdom in Hellespont; in consequence whereof doubtless he
found mercy of our lord in that day, that is, in the day of particular judgment
after his death, for it is the constant Tenet of the Catholic Church Apoc. 14.
Beati mortui qui in Domino moriuntur a modo iam dicit spiritus vt requiescant a
laboribus suis. Hic sacer textus oste^dit beatos morientes, id est, martyrs,
aliosque fideles decedentes perfect iustos sine omni macula and reatu poenae,
id est obligatione ad poenam no^ expectaturos universal iudicium, vt accipia^t
beatitudinem, ita explicat S. Aug. l. 20. de ciuit. cap. 9.
that martyrs by their death suffered for the confessing of Christ's faith be
perfectly purged of sin both in order to the guilt and pains thereof, and
immediately possess their glorious crowns which is the beatificall vision, as S.
Austin lib. de peccatorum meritis. expressly teaches, saying, he that prays
for a martyr does an injury to a martyr. The same doctrine the Council of
Trent ses. 5. asserteth touching children, that die immediately after baptism;
notwithstanding they will receive advantages in order to their bodies in the
day of general resurrection. But as to Onesiphorus Mr. White perhaps will
answer that the Apostle supposes him dead, because in the same Chapter it is
said Our lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus. Yet that form of speech
does not make him dead: for the Apostle says Romans 10. salute them, which are
of Aristobulus his house: and Mr. White cannot make it appear by any orthodox
writer, that then Aristobulus was dead; again the same Apostle 1. Cor. 10.
writes thus, now brethren I beseech you, ye know the house of Stephanus, and
Fortunatus: be you obedient unto such, and yet it is certain, that Stephanus,
and Fortunatus were living at that time: for the Apostle says in the same
Chapter. I am glad of the coming, or presence of Stephanus and Fortunatus.
Howeuer the Latin, and Greek Martyrologes ought to carry more weight with
wise, and judicious men then Mr. Whites mere asserting the contrary. But let
his supposall be admitted gratis: what does he infer thence. Mary that the soul
of Onesiphorus bath not already found, that mercy the Apo^stle prayed our lord
might grant unto him, because the Apostle praid that Onesiphorus might find it,
in illo die: in that day. In earnest a manifest weak inference, in regard it
relies on a false supposall, as the former did, viz. that of necessity by illo
die: they day, is meant the day of general judgment: neither does Mr. White
produce any proof besides his own bare assertion to show, that to be the
Apostles meaning; nor indeed can he produce any; for both the words, that day,
as likewise even the words the day of our lord do commonly signify in
scripture, and namly 1. Cor. 5. 2. Cor. 1. Philip. 1. 1. These. 2. as do
Doctores Rhemenses in Annot a. super cap. 3. Epis. 1. ad Cor.
observe Catholic writers either the particular, or general judgment. And
doubtless the mentioned Text of the Apostle is truly very fied in respect of
particular judgment, where unto every man is liable immediately after his death:
because every one shall be judged in the general judgment, according to the
account he gives after his death at the particular tribunal of divine Justice:
and not only the favor, that a soul finds in the general judgment, but also
the favor, that it finds at the particular judgment is called in the scripture
mercy; both the one and the other being shown upon the score of good works,
which proceed from the merciful grace of God through the merits of our lord
Jesus Christ. Hereby plainly appears the unquietness of Mr. Whits hawty
spirit for as much, as through a sacrilegious ambition he endeauours to wrest
the Apostles words to overthrow the common practice of the whole Church of God.
Moreover in persuance of his unquiet ambition he passes from this
scripture-text unto Church Lyturgies bearing himself confident to evidence
thereby, that the unanimous consent of antiquity witness plainly on his side.

Let S. James be our first witness (says he) in his lyturgy of the
Hierosolymitan Church; be mindful lord God of the spirits and their bodies
whom we have commemorated, or not commemorated, who were orthodox from the just
Abell to this present day. Thou grant them there to rest in the region of the
living in thy kingdom, in the delights of paradise. And to assure the reader
that the Hierosolymitan Church (which by origin is the Chief) in as much as
she begun from the just Abell, could not exclude any, he produces S. Cyrills
testimony (for which he cites his first catechesis) next, faith S. Cyril; for
the holy Fathers, and Bishops departed, and of all universally, who are dead
from amongst us.

The second witness S. Basils Mass, or lyturgy, Be mindful also of all who
have slept in hope of resurrection unto life everlasting.

The third witness S. Chrysostom. Mass, or lyturgy. For the memory, and remission of
their sins, who were the founders of this habitation worthy of eternal memory,
and all who have slept in thy communion in the hope of resurrection, and life
eternal, our orthodox Fathers, and brethren.

The fourth witness. S. Marks Mass, or lyturgy. Give rest our lord, our God to
the souls of our Fathers, and brethren who have slept in the faith of Christ,
mindful of our Ancestors from the beginning of the world, Fathers, Patriarks,
Prophets, Apostles Martyrs Confessors, Bishops, Saints, and just men, all the
souls of Those who departed in the faith of Christ, and moreover of those whose
memory this day we celebrate, and our holy Father Mark the Evangelist: to the
souls of all these give rest our supreme lord and God in thy holy Tabernacle
etc. and he concludes (says Mr. White) to their souls grant rest, and admit
them to the kingdom of Heaven.

The fifth witness S. Greg. the great his lyturgy. Remember also o lord thy
servants, who have gone before us with the sign of faith, and now rest in the
sleep of peace. To them our lord, and all that rest in Christ we beseech the
grant a place of ease, and light, and peace.

From the witnesses set down Mr. White argues thus. So many Patriarchall
Churches continually in their public lyturgyes beseech God in general terms
to give salvation to all the faithful departed assigning them a place of ease,
light, and peace: and where none is excepted all are included: and in our case
eminent Saints particularly named: we cannot therefore doubt, but that prayer
was anciently offered for the blessed; that is to say, we cannot doubt, but
that the ancient Churches offered prayers for such as departed in the faith of
Christ, that they might find mercy, salvation, place of ease, light, and peace
even after their souls were beatified; these advantages according to Mr. White
being the motives on which ancient Churches grounded their prayers, suffrages,
and sacrifices, which they offered for such, as were already blessed, that they
might find mercy, place of ease, light, and peace, which implies manifest
weakness: for he contradicts himself, since blessedness is a clear sight of
God importing of necessity salvation mercy, place of ease, light, and peace.
Wherefore it seems a strange thing, that upon such premises he should conclude
with so much confidence, as if the point were evidently clear, that the
ancient lyturgyes acknowleged prayers for the blessed, as to procuring them
mercy, salvation, place of ease, light, and peace: besides its not as to reason
consonant, that the said lyturgyes should require the prayers, and sacrifices
of the faithful on earth for the advantages of the blessed in Heaven, since
these, As to the Churches lyturgyes it is obseruable 1. That in Saint James
lyturgy these words are set down. Let us celebrate the memory of the most holy
immaculate, most glorious Mother of God and ever Virgin Mary, and of all the
Saints that through their prayers we may obtain mercy. Whereby it is evident
that the Apostle did not conceive that our prayers might benefit the Saints
unto the obtaining of mercy, or an increase of glory, but that we might be
saved, and glorified through their prayers. 2. S. Basil in his lyturgy prays
thus. O lord let none of us receive the holy body, and blood of thy Christ unto
judgment, or condemnation but unto finding of mercy, and grace in the society
of all the Saints, which have been pleasing in thy sight, Patriarcks,
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors....specially the holy
Immaculate Virgin blessed lady Mother of God, through whose intercession visit
us, o God. After the same manner S. Chrysostom. prays in his lyturgy: but Mr.
White conceals these parts of the lyturgyes, as all modern sectaries have done
before, altering the lyturgyes, as he does, to prove, that souls departed are
not translated into Heaven before the general resurrection. Nicolaus Cabasalas
a Greek Author, who about 300. years ago set forth an exposition of the Greek
lyturgy affirms, cap. 33. that to offer sacrifice for the Saints is to give God
thanks for them: For the Saints (says he) the Church offers this rational
worship, and honor as a thanks giving to God, and especially for the blessed
Mother of God, who exceeds all others in sanctity, from whence he infers that
a Priest prays not for the Saints, but prays them, that he may be assisted by
them in his prayers. And cap. 49. says expressly, that if a Priest should
properly pray in the Mass for the Saints it would follow, that he should pray
for the blessed Virgin, who is above all intercession, and more holy by many
degrees, then the Apostles themselves. Besides in the whole Chapter 49. he
impugnes those who taught that a Priest prays in the Mass for Saints, and
shows clearly that the Latin praeposition pro. in Greek (...), and in English
for. is not always a token of intercession, but sometimes of thanksgiving,
which he proves evidently enough from the words of the lyturgy. Again (...)
sometimes signifies (...) that is in the room of an other, so that to offer
sacrifice for the Saints, may signify to give thanks to God in the name, or
room of the Saints in order to the many graces, and benefits, which his divine
goodness has conferred upon them. And though this Author was a schismatic:
neuertheless he delivered plainly the sense of the Greek Church, and his
authority is warrantable being put with the ancient Fathers.
lyturgies give clear evidence of prayers, and intercessions made to the
blessed Saints for the releife of all the faithful (both liueing, and dead)
that stand charged with any guilt, or defiled with any uncleanness. Again to show
the extreme wantonness of Mr. Whites wit in order to singularity; it is
certain, that down from the first age of the Church to these times he cannot
produce one amongst all the ancient, and modern orthodox writers, that
interprets the said Masses, or liturgyes in his sense to wit of prayers, and
sacrifices offered for the advantage of the blessed, these having noe need, in
regard they are satiated with the plenty of the house of God, satisfied with
the fountain of life, conforted with the son of light, and inebriated with
everlasting pleasurs Psalm. 35. whereby it is evidently manifest, that although
blessed Saints be commemorated in the lyturgyes of the Church, and the August
sacrifice of Christ's precious body, and blood is said to be offered for them.
Neuertheless it is never said, or meant, that such commemorations, and
offerings were done to benefit them; and indeed to offer the Churches
sacrifices for the ancient Fathers Patriarcks, Prophets. Apostles, Evangelists,
Martyrs according to the approved interpretation of all orthodox writers, is
thereby to celebrate their memory unto honoring, and reuerencing them, and to
beseech God, that through their prayers, and intercessions he will hear our
prayers, and supplications. We all, says S. Cyrill Hierosoll. (catechesi 5.
mystigogica, where he explaines the words of the Greek lyturgy) beseech thee
and offer unto thee this sacrifice in commemoration, even of those who are dead
from amongst us. First of the Patriarcks, Apostles Martyrs, that God, through
their intercessions, may receive our prayers. After the same manner speaks S.
Austin in his 17. Sermon upon the words of the Apostle. It Is says he, the
practice, and custom of the Church, which the faithful know, that when
martyrs are commemorated at the Altar of God, we pray not for them, but for the
rest commemorated, which are dead from amongst us, we do pray: because it is
an injury to pray for a Martyr, to whose prayers we ought to be recommended.
Hereby is further euidenced, that albeit the lyturgyes especially some of
those, which Mr. White alleges on his side seem to direct the suffrages of the
Church (whereof the sacrifice of the Altar is Chief) even to the helping of
such, as be departed in the faith of Christ, rest in peace, and are counted for
eminent Saints already: Howeuer that seeming appearance ought to be ascribed to
the intricacy of the lyturgyes (wherein words, and sentences are obscurly set
down) and the meaning of the Church thereby is to be understood in order only
to such faithful departed, as have need of help. Wherefore S. Tho. supp. q.
71. art. 8. teaches, that the blessed Saints in regard they have full
enioyment of all things in as much, as they are satisfied with the fatnes of
the house of God, have noe need of the Churches suffrages: and S. Cyrill
Cateches. before mentioned, where he explicats the words of the Greek lyturgy,
writes thus: We pray to God for the common peace of the Church, for the
tranquillity of the whole world, for kings, for soldiers for the sick, for the
afflicted: in sum for all, which have need of help. Which shows evidently
enough that the ancient Churches never offered their suffrages for the helping
of the blessed Saints, that suffer nothing of want.

But lord God what crafty dealings Mr. White uses to bring the stream of
Church lyturgyes to run on his side, some words he cuts of, others cites amiss,
and especially omits what concerns the B. Mother of God; as likewise the ad
dresses the Church maks to the Saints of God for help through their
supplications, and intercessions: besides to prove more particularly that S.
James lyturgy of the Hierosolomitan Church allows of prayer for the benefit of
the dead universally, in as much, as it says be mindful, lord God, of the
spirits, and their bodies, whom we have commemorated, or not commemorated, who
were orthodox from the just Abell to this present day. Mr. White adds these
words. But let us consider more particularly (the point of praying for the
blessed) the Hierosolymitan Church is by origin the Chief; the beginning from
the just Abell, cannot certainly be supposed to exclude any; and S. Cyril. the
Heir of S. lames in his first Catechesis will assure us she did not: adding
next (Cyrillus) for the holy Fathers, and Bishops departed, and of all
universally which are dead from amongst us. Where is obseruable Mr. Whites
crafty dealing, for in the fifth catechesis of S. Cyril. the words set down by
him appear not, that catechesis containing only an explication of faith in
order to its definition, which is substance of things hoped for, and a
conviction of things unseen: Howeuer the said words cited by him are extant in
the first mystigogicall catechesis of S. Cyril. who before he coms at those
words set down by Mr. White to prove, that the Hierosolymitan Church prayed for
the blessed writes thus, when we offer this sacrifice, afterward we make
commemoration of those also, who are dead before; first of the Patriarchs
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, that God by their prayers, and intercessions may
receive our prayers. But Mr. White leaves out these words, which shows his
crafty, and subtle dealing. Again the words of S. Cyril. that Uerba
subseque^tia hac sunt: maximu^ est animarum iuuamen pro quibus offertur
obsecratio sancti illius and tremendi, quod in altari positum est sacrificii,
quod exemplo demonstrare volumus; scio enim multos dicere quid iuuat animam in
peccatis ex hoc mundo decedentem etiamsi in hoc sacrificio mentio fiat illius?
Ansi rex aliquis eos a quibus offensus est in exilium pepulerit postea vero
illorum propinqui coronam aliquam conficientes pro his, qui in supplicio sunt,
exulibus eidem (regi) offerrent, nonne condonationem aliquam suppliciorum
dederit? ad eu^dem medu^ and nos pro defunctis precationes adhibemus.
follow the words set down by Mr. White do prejudice his doctrine of the middle
state of souls; and therefore on purpose he omits those likewise. The same
crafty dealing he employes about S. Marks lyturgy, that is of Alexandria for
there he omits mentioning the precedent, of which the subsequent words depend,
and ioynes words together, which have nothing of connection. For example: the
words, Of our Fathers and brethren, who have slept in the says of Christ,
down to the words, and moreover of those whose memory this day we celebrate,
and our holy Father Mark who taught us the way of salvation, do not contain
a prayer for the Saints, because the Evangelist says expressly grant unto them
rest, mindful of the Saints, that is mindful of them; through the
intercession of the Saints; but truly the subsequent words to wit, To thesoules
of all those give rest have no relation to the precedent commemoration. Neither
do the particles of all those give rest comprehend the Saints commemorated
before in regard, that both before, and after those words is recited the
angelical salutation Aue Maria, and after this is expressed in the lyturgy,
that the Deacon reads (...): that is the holy tables containing a Catalogue
of all the faithful departed: afterward (says the lyturgy) the Priest
decently bows his body and prays, uttering the words set down, viz, To the
souls of all those give rest, our supreme lord, that is, to the souls of all
those, which be contained in the said Catalogue, the names whereof the Deacon
had read: and whereas S. Mark concluds saying To their souls, I say, grant
rest, and admit them to the kingdom of Heaven, that conclusion is only a
repetition of the precedent prayer To the souls of all these give rest our
supreme lord, and God, and consequently did not relate unto the blessed Saints,
that had no need of such a prayer, but to those named in the Deacons (...),
that received help. After the like manner Mr. White deals in citing the
Roman, or S. Gregory the greats lyturgy, which is thus. Remember also, O lord
thy servants N.N. that is, such as I name, or intend to pray for, who have gone
before us with the sign of faith, and now rest in the sleep of peace. After
which words the Priest according to the rubricke there set down ioynes his
hands together and prays during a little while for the said. N.N. which he
names, or intends to pray for Innocentius and Alexaner Su^mi Pontifices item
Gabriel and Albertus diserte doce^t post verba illa dormiunt in somno pacis,
debere fieri memoriam speciale^ (non vniuersalem vt perperam dicit Albius)
defunctorum pare^tum, and coru^ quibus missam specialster applicare voluerit
sacerdos: his potius credendum est, qua^ Albio.
and afterward only it follows To them O lord, and all the rest in Christ we
beseech thee grant a place of ease, and light, and peace; whereby it is manifest
that Mr. White weakly, if not craftily goes about to prove from those words,
that S. Gregory prayed for all, who were baptized, and departed in the
communion of the Church. And indeed so it should follow that he prayed for the
most blessed Virgin, that is above intercession, exceeding all the Angels in
sanctity. But it is great pity, that the extreme wantoness of Mr. Whits wit
should so carry him away, and so harden his mouth, and fortify his stomach as
to digest a morsel of doctrine, that by his own confession contradicts the
general practice of the whole Church. Furthermore to clear more amply all
these, and other objections which sectaries commonly draw from uncertainties,
and intricacies of Church lyturgyes to prejudice Catholic verities, there is
nothing of absurdity, or inconueniency if we answer them, that the holy church
represents therein the departure of Saints out of the world, that is the exact
time, when their souls were removing out of their bodies: for example in the
Mass for the dead, when it is celebrated for such as died some hundred years
before, the Church in that prayer of the offertory (Our lord Jesus Christ
deliver the souls of all the faithful departed from the pains of hell, from
the deep lake, from the lions mouth: let not bell swallow them up) represe^ts
those souls unto Christ, as if even then they were departing, and considers
them as if even then they were in the agony of death, and thereby noe lie is
committed: for a Priest celebrating the Mass of the fourth sunday in Aduent
does truly say without lying (Drop down ye Heavens from above, and let the
clouds rain the just. Send down the lamb, the ruler of the earth.) Because
the Church thereby only represents the humble supplications of the ancient
Patriarks and Prophets for the accelerating of Christ's preordained coming into
the world, as if they were present in that moment of time, when those holy
Fathers so prayed. And truly that glorious Emperor Charles the first by the
advice of his Ghostly Father commanded, that his funeral should be celebrated,
and the office, and the Mass likewise of the dead sung for him, as if he had
been dead indeed, when he was alive.

The premises evidence enough the true sense and meaning of the Churches
lyturgyes against all heretical interpretations. Howeuer an answer shall of
Mr. Whits proofs. To wit: nor is it, says he, infrequent among the pious when
they name a Saint, or Martyr to add; whose glory God increase. Hereby Mr.
white either means essential, or accidental glory, if he understand an
increase of essential glory in order to the intensnes thereof, he teaches an
heresy for the Church of God ascribes such an increase of blessedness Council.
Flor. in dee. vnionis desinit animas beatoru^ videre clare Deum sicut^ est sed
alian^ alia perfectius pro diuersitate meritorum. Et definitum est sess. 6.
can. 32. iustificatum bonis operibus augme^tum gratiae mereri, and ita profit
entur veteres Patres. Et ratio distributiua iustitiae exigit, vt plus merenti
mayor reddatur morces.
to the Saints own merits and not to the prayers of their friends according to
that saying of the Apostle 2. Cor. 9. He that sows sparingly, reapes also
sparingly: and he that sows liberally shall reap also liberally: and indeed
it is the propriety of distributive justice to better the reward in order to
such as deserve better: and God compenseth the merits of his faithful
according to destributiue justice; but if Mr. White understand an increase of
accidental glory either in order to special revelations of mysteries whereof
the Saints were ignorant before, or in order to a greater measure of honor, and
reverence from the faithful alive, that makes nothing to his purpose, and in
that sense may be meant that saying: According to the Roman Catholic Church a
Priest preparing himself to say Mass prays thus: I will say Muss, and offer
in saecrifice the body, and blood of our lord Jesus Christ to the praise of
God, and the whole triumphant Court. Now if by praying so he prays for the
blessed, he prays for God also, being he promises thereby to offer sacrifice
to the praise of both: in cosequence of which S. Paul likewise 1. Tim. 1. prayed
for God, when he said unto the king of worlds, immortal, invisible sole God,
be bonour, and glory for ever and ever amen. But were it not an extreme madness
to think, that S. Paul by praying so, conceived that he might bring unto God an
increase of glory. Howeuer Mr. White will needs have the words of the prayers
set down in the Roman lyturgie after the offertorie. Receive what we offer to
the honor of thy Saints etc. to prove it lawful to pray for Saints, that
thereby they may find mercy, and increase of glory. But S. Thomas 3. p. q. 71.
art. 8. in resp. ad 1. obiec. says, that when we celebrate the feasts of
Saints their glory is not augmented by that solemnity, but we receive great
benefit thereby: and even so says he, when we give praise to God, we, and not
God receive benefit thereby: from the premises clearly appears how unadvisedly
Mr. White in the 3. account of the middle state of souls alleges S. Greg. to
prove, that the blessed receive increase of glory through the prayers of the
faithful living. Sed mira sunt, qua docet. Albius, noua sunt, mira stupemus,
noua cauemus. Aug. l. 3. con. Iulia.
Whose glory God increase: and after that sense Christians pray. Glory be to
the Father to the son and to the holy Ghost. Amen.

CHAR. XXIJ. OF FOVNDAMENTALL, AND NOT foundamentall Articles of faith.
It Is a modern distinction, that was ingeniously contrived by Mark Anthony de
Dominis Archbishop of Spalatto became an Apostate, fled out of Italy into
England in the Reign of king James of happy memory and taught that a Christian
might be saved in any sect professing the foundamentall Articles of Christian
faith: as for example (said he) every one may attain unto salvation either by
adhering to S. Thomas doctrine, or the doctrine of Scotus.
Mark Anthony de Dominis Arsh-Bishop of Spalatto, and brought into the
Protestant Church in order to the said Churches claim unto, as to
foundamentall, and disclaim from the Roman Church, as to not foundamentall
Articles of faith, that is, as to errors in order to such Articles of faith,
as may be denied without hurt of faith, and loss of salvation, though
sufficiently propounded, in regard whereof they bear the name of not
foundamentall, Protesta^tes communiter constituunt hocdiscrimen inter
fundamentales, and non fundamentales, (quod scilicet damnabile sit ab illis
dissentire, cu^ sufficienter proponu^tur, non item dissentire a no^
fundamentalibus, dum sufficienter proponu^tur) vt vniuersalitatem, and
amplitudine^ suae Ecclesiae estendant.
as disinct from foundame^tals, which ca^ not be rejected without incurring
both loss of faith, and salvation: in consequence whereof Protestans of theses
days commonly represent the Roman Church, as a natural body, that is partly
sound, and partly unsound, infected with sundry soars and ulcers which is to
say, that although the Roman Church has continued always sound at heart
having never deuiated from the true doctrine of Christ, as to foundamentall
requisits unto salvation: neuertheless she still retains sundry errors in
order to not foundamentall requisits, which they pretend to have purged away,
and thereby make their Church to be the same with the Roman Church, as to the
sound part thereof.

Mark Antony de Dominis saw a necessity of inuesting the Protestant Church
with visible existence, least it might appear to have perished before, and with
perpetual succession of Pastors, and Teachers, these being of necessary use in
the government thereof, for as much as they be essentially required to the
professing of faith, preaching the divine word, instructing the illiterat, and
administering the Sacraments, which functions could never have been performed,
if the Church of God, (whereof these be necessary marks) had been invisible,
and thereby destitute of Pastors for the work of the ministry: wherefore to fit
unto the Protestant Church visible existence, and a series of Pastors, and
Teachers, in a continual line of succession down from the Apostls, he aduiced
such as carried on the Protestant Reformation not to quitte all claim to the
Roman Church, without which, visible existence, and perpetual succession of
their Church had been impossible, since no one society of Christian belieuers
appeared upon earth (when the Protestant Reformation begun) that was separated
from the Church of Rome. Again he saw, that by asserting the Roman Church to
have in all times reserved necessary requisits unto salvation, that is,
foundamentall Articles of faith, it might seem, as to reason consonant, that
the Protestants departure from it, had been without cause, and thereby they, as
to reason might be counted guilty Secundum Aug. l. 1. con. Epis. Parm. cap. 4.
schisma omnia scelera supergreditur.
of deadly schism for going out from, and breaking unity, and communion with a
Church, wherein, if they had continued, they might have attained unto salvation;
therefore to escape this rock, he aduiced again that Protestants should
represent the Roman Church, as infected with errors crept into it, in order to
not foundamentall Articles of faith and to assert the quitting of these, and
not the Roman Church, as to the sound part thereof; in consequence of which
Protestants infer the now Roman Catholics who persevere in, not themselves that
rooted out the errors, that were crept into the Roman Church, to bear the
infamous bra^d of schism; thus the distinction of foundamentall and not
foundamentall Articles of faith serves the Protestant Reformation, and might
have weight with it, if any example could be produced from any Christian Church
preceding the Protestant Reformation, that so distinguished between
foundamentall, and not foundamentall Articles of faith, making it damnable to
dissent from those, and not damnable to dissent from these, sufficiently
proposed: and indeed the going of the Children of Israel on dry ground through
the mids of the sea, the raising of Lazarus unto life by Christ, and sundry
other Articles of faith, which according to Protesta^s are not foundamentall,
neuertheless cannot be denied without hurt of faith, and loss of salvation.
Wherefore the primitive Church taught, that all Articles of faith sufficiently
propounded ought of necessity to be believed; for the first Council of Nice
condemned several Heretics even for asserting errors, which were not against
foundamentall Articles of faith, namely the Quartadecimani for celebrating the
solemnity of Easter at an undue time, and Can. 8 made an ordinance forbidding
the receiving of certain heretics called Cathari, into communion with the
Catholic Church, unless first they promised in writing, that they would
embrace, and keep all the doctrines thereof without making any exception, as to
foundamentall, and not foundamentall Articles of faith. Aug. l. de haeresibus
vbi enumerasset multas haereses, quarum plures non erant co^tra Articulos
fundamentales, in fine tamen, vniuersaliter de omnibus ait, christianus
Catholicus ista non debet credere.
Besides not one scripture testimony, or one authority of ancient Father; can
be alleged to prove, that divine faith is consistent, with one sole error,
that is against any S. Chrysos. in Gal. 1. ad illud and volunt subuertere.
Quemadmodum, inquit, in moneta Regia qui parum aliquid amputauerit de impressa
imagine totum nunisma reddit adulterinu^: ita quisquis sacrae fid ei vel
minima^ particulam suhuerterit, in totu^ corrumpisur; idem docet Theodor. l. 4.
his. cap. 16. and 5. Prosper Epis. ad Virginem Demetr. alienus, inquit, est a
numero fidelium and a sort sanctorum, qui in aliquo a Catholica veritate
dissentit.
one Article thereof. For indeed every error against an Article of faith is an
error against faith: in consequence of which one act of heretical infidelity
expels faith as darkness dissipateth light, and as one sole mortal sin
drives away christian charity: and although natural habits, as they are got
leasurly by frequent acts of the same liknes, and so lost at leisure by sundry
acts of contrary likeness; neuertheless faith, that is a divine habit
supernaturally infused, is wholly lost Io. 2. qui offendit in vno factus est
omniumreus, prasertion quoad incturam totius habitus gratiae and charitatis,
qui habitus tam facile vno peccato mortali, quam pluribus deperditur. 1. Cor.
6. and Romans 6. stipendium peccati mors, vbl dicitur peccati, in numere
Tingulaeri.
by any one act of error, that importes a voluntary dissent from any
whatsoever Article of faith sufficiently propounded; and the reason hereof is
manifest, because whosoever so dissenteth rejects divine revelation together
with the veracity of God, which is the indivisible object, and consistency of
divine faith, and regards all the Articles thereof alike: whereby is plainly
evident, that it is unadvisedly, and in vain conceived that the Roman Church is
one individual body, partly sound, and partly exulcerated, or one individual
field, that in part is filled with thistles and netles, and in part purged of
all evil herbs by the industry of a careful husband man, seeing that the true
Church of God is inconsistent with errors against Articles of faith, as
appears by the reasons alleged; and indeed the true Church is the spouse of
Christ without spot, or wrinckle, and so shall continue to the end of the world
under the the infallible conduct of the holy Ghost, who will never suffer the
gates of hell to preuail against her: Mat. 18. in consequence of which she
shall never lose her spousall innocence, integrity, and fide lity; wherefore if
we will auerre that the Roman Church was once the true Church of God of
necessity she ought to continue so, and if we will co^fess, that the present
Church of Rome contains all foundamentals, that is, all necessary requisits
unto salvation, of necessity the opinion of errors crept in, in order to not
foundamentall Articles of faith, ought to be laid aside.

But to whom shall it belong to distinguish the foundamentall Articles from not
foundamentall, and mere arbitrary? not to the Pope surely and such Christians
as yield obedience to his Holiness because these acknowledge for foundamentall
Articles, what the Council of Trent has defined: nor to the ancient Church, in
regard, that from time to time, she has condemned, and excommunicated those,
which dissented from any point of the general faith, or from general
Councils: for though the Pelagians, Donatists, and other sectaries confessed
the mysteries of the Trinity, and Incarnanation, and other foundamentall
Articles of Christian faith: neuertheless they were not tolerated, but
anathematised by the ancient Church, and by the Fathers execrated, as Heretics.
Yet perhaps it will be answered that the determination belong's to the
unanimous accord of all those which in any manner confess, and worship Christ.
But if the universal consent of these were required for the making, or
appointing foundamentall Articles necessary to the obtaining of salvation, this
should be none, viz: The Divinity of the son of God. Because the Arians denied
it: nor The Divinity of the holy Ghost. Being the Macedonians denied it, nor
The blessed Trinity because the Sabellians denied it. Nor the union between the
divine, and human nature in one divine Person, for Nestorius denied that union:
whereby evidently appears that it is not possible for Protestants to determinate
which Articles of faith be fou^dame^tall, and which be not fou^dame^tall. That
is, to set down precisely such Articles of faith as can not be denied without
loss of salvation, and such again as to deny, is not damnable. Howeuer it is
evident enough, that Protestants, (haueing neither union, as to divine faith,
nor communion as to the ministry of Sacraments with the Roman Church) cannot
make a good claim to a visible existence, and perpetual succession of Pastors,
as derived from her. Again their going out from that Church, which they confess
to have been once the true Church of God, and still to retain requisits
necessary unto salvation, argues them guilty of deadly schism, caused by
themselves, that departed from, and not by Catholics, that abided in her. In
every civil state such as dissobey, not such as obey authority, such as
abrogate, not such, as conserve the ancient laws, and ordinances, such as
reject, not such as keep the settled customs thereof, bear the infimous brand to
all posterity, of being the men, that rent, and divided the common wealth: but
Protestants have dissobeyed, not obeyed, abrogated, not preserved: rejected,
not observed the authority, laws, and Customs of the Roman Church, having by
their own power only, under a specious color of reformation introduced novel
doctrines, laws, and rites, contrary to the usage, and practice thereof:
wherefore they of necessity bear the guilt of deadly schism, and not Catholics,
that have altered nothing. Besides Protestants went out of the Roman Church
without cause, for at the time of their departure, the Roman Church retained
all requisits necessary unto salvation for then was there no Christian Church
upon earth. Separated from her, so that, when the Protestants reformation
begun, the Roman Church or none was the true Church of God, in consequence of
which their departure was without cause. Aug. l. 3. de baptis. con. Donat. c.
2. in fine, ait, si Ecclesia Romanae sit verae Dei Ecclesia in qua salus haberi
potest, non habent (Donatista) sua pracisionis aliquam defonsionem, sed
exeundo, and communionem Ecclesiae relinqu^^do in quae potera^t saluari,
irrucrunt in sacrilegium schismatis.
For whosoever goes out from a Church, wherein he might attain to salvation
goes out without cause, and commits sacrilege of damnable schism, as the great
Doctor S. Austin teaches in his third book of baptism against the Donatists.
Moreover this asserted truth appears evidently by the foundamentall doctrines
of Protestant Religion which are as opposite to the faith of the Roman Church,
as the ends of a Diameter are ouerwhart, and cross. For example Protestants
commonly teach that good works proceeding from divine grace can neither
justify, nor merit salvation, these being prerogatives of faith only, in regard
whereof it bears the name of justifying faith: but all ancient and modern
Pastors and Doctors of the Roman Church assert that good works exercised in,
and by divine grace do bring unto justification of life, and that they are in
order to merit, causes of everlasting salvation, as wicked works in order to
demerit, are causes of perpetual damnation: Protestants commonly teach, that
the sacrifice of Mass wherein Catholic Priests offer the body, and blood of
Christ for the living, and dead; is a blasphemous tale, and a dangerous devise.
Protestants commonly teach, that confirmation, Penance, Order, Extream-vnction,
and Matrimony want requisits necessary to an Evangelical Sacrament.
Protestants commonly teach that the doctrines of Purgatory, Indulgences,
religious veneration of holy Reliks pertaining unto, and invocation of Saints
are idle fancies, and trifles, crept into the Church without warrantable
authority of scripture testimony. Protestants commonly teach sundry other
doctrines as foundamentall requisits to their religion clean contrary to the
faith of the Roman Church, as is manifestly demonstrated in the Characters
concerning the outward Sacrifice of Mass, Confirmation, Penance, Order,
Extrem-vnction, Matrimony, Purgatory, Indulgences, and Adoration. From the
premises is inferred, that the Protestant. Reformation cannot borrow of the
Roman Church visible existence together with continual succession of Pastors
unto perpetuating that Church in foundamentall Articles of faith unto excusing
from schism. Howeuer it cannot be denied but that Protestants can show clearly,
that the whole body of doctrines foundamentall to Protestanism has been
asserted by sundry learned men, that lived in sundry ages respectively long
before their reformation began: namly Simon Magus taught, that faith alone was
an expedient, sufficient unto salvation, as witnesses S. Irenaeus, and
rejected good works, as unnecessary thereto, as does attest Clemens Romanus:
Manichaeus despised the Sacrifice of Mass, spoiling Christ's Church of all
outward sacrifice, as witnesses S. Austin: Nouatus impugned the Sacraments of
Confirmation, Eucharist Extrem-vnction, and Matrimony, as S. Cyprian affirms:
Vigilantius detested the invocation of Saints, and the veneration of their
Relics, and likewise single life of Priests, as S. Hierom relates: Julian
the Apostat had in detestation the cross of Christ, and demolished his statue,
as Eusebius writes: Aerius condemned prayers and sacrifices offered for the
souls departed, as S. Austin, and S. Epiphanius auerre. But that which is
exacted of the Protestants, is to show from the first age for 1500. years a
settled company of Christians, and the place, country, town, or village where
they lived, that taught and preached the whole body of their foundamentall
doctrines; it is not enough to produce the example of such, as at different
times, and in different places agreed with them in two, or three of their
Articles, for that is not sufficient unto constituting a society of true
belieuers, because so Turks, and Jews might be lifted for Protestants, these
agreeing with them, as to sundry Articles, namely they deny the Popes
supremacy, transubstantiation, invocation of Saints, and the sacrifice of the
Mass. Again the fore named sectaries themselves were destitute of visible
existence and perpetual succession, and consequently could not derive either
of both unto the Protestant Church. Besides Simon Magus, Manichaeus, Nouatus,
Vigilantius etc. bear the infamous brand of being condemned Heretics before
the Protestants reformation begun. Howeuer some Protestants there be that
endeavor to prove their visible existe^ce in a long line of succession from the
Albigenses but unadvisedly, first because this seed of sectaries knows not to
derive the Genealogy of their own Religion down from the Apostles, which is the
question in debate wherein satisfaction is expected: secondly the Albigenses are
condemned Heretics, that taught doctrine impious, and blasphemous, for
example, they asserted a good, and an evil God, denied original sin, rejected
baptism, and impugned the resurrection of bodies. By the premises plainly
appears that Mark Antony de Dominis Bishop of Spalatto his distinction
between foundamentall, and not foundamentall Articles of faith carries nothing
of weight with it; it is like a specious building, that wantes a good foundation
to support it. And truly it is as impossible an enterprise to prove the visible
existence, and perpetual succession of Protestant Pastors, from the Roman
Church, as it is for Caluinists to show that the true Church of God laid hid
for sundry ages invisible without perishing; which is impossible also: for the
marks of a lived Church are professing of faith, preaching of the divine word,
instructing of the illiterate, and administering of the Sacraments, which
functions can noe more be executed in a Church, that is invisible, then in a
Church that is perished.

FINIS.
Laus Deo, eiusque Matri Sanctissimae and omnibus Sanctis.
Omnia Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae subiecta sunt.

