A LETTER WRITTEN BY G. L. TO M.R AND. KINGH. AND M.R THO. MED.
MVCH HONORED SIRS.
I cannot sufficiently express how heartily I do rejoice to understand, that
neither of you have concurred by vote, or consent to the publishing of M.r
Thomas Blacloe his printed Pamphlett. For undoubtedly all good, virtuous, and
Religious Catholics will judge those that engaged in so foul a business, to
have contracted a stayne or blemish which to wipe away lies not now with in
their reach. For abstracting from the reproaches of Sycophant, Madman, hissinge
serpent, etc. beseeming Luthers Satyrs. the doctrine conceyned in the said
Pamphlett is scandalous, and perniciouse: insoemuch, that it will necessarily
reflecte upon those, who have countenanced it with their votes, and render
their proceeding as unworthy as the said doctrine is odious and worthy to be
abhorred: In regard that it teaches.

1.0 Against the Popes infallibility in so spightfull a manner, as not any
heretic writer has used expressions of a more Satyricall bitterness against
it: viz that it is not defensible but by force of command and power,
scandalizeth Catholics, and auerteth those who otherwise were near
conversion. And to these expressions may be added an other out of the said M.r
Blacloes reproachful magazine, which is, that to maintain the Popes
Infallibility, is as great a sin, as is the defloureing of a Sacred Virgin
upon an altar.

Now I do appeal to you, whether this doctrine delivered by M.r Blacloe in in
the said Pamphlett, auerring that to defend the Popes Infallibility, (which is
the Assertion mainteyned in all times by the whole Current of Catholic
Doctors) is scandalous, destructive of souls, and as great a sin as is the
deflouring of Sacred Virgins upon an altar. whether I say this unworthy
doctrine will not necessarly render those unworthy, who have voted for the
publishing of it. how ever I do firmly believe, that the divine providence
has permitted this foul proceeding far vnbeeseeming Apostolical Missioners,
to the end that our brethren dispersed in diverse Provinces, may not hereafter
be abused by the now London Consult that is set at the helm of Affairs.

2.0 Teaches, that to auerre the inlargment of faithful souls out of
Purgatory before the day of judgment through the assistance of Suffrages etc.
is contrary to piety, charge god with irrational Justice, and exposes
heaven to auction, that who can give most shall soonest come thither. wherefore
I do appeal to you, whether this doctrine damning a Catholic verity
defined by Pope Eugenius the ^ in the Council of Florence, as also by Pope
Benedict the 12. established by the constant practice of the universal Church,
and mainteyn'd by all Catholic writers will not infallibly blemishe the
reputation of those, who have voted in Countenance of it.

3.0 Teaches visions, and apparitions of souls relating to Purgatory to be
Old wifes tales. Where again I do appeal to you, whether mocking at
Apparitions of that nature, related by S. Augustine, S. Gregory, S. Bid, and
others, will not prejudice the honor of those, who consented to the scandalous
calling of them old wifes tales.

This is all: only I dare say that not any heretic writer has shown
himself so pernicious in impugning the Popes Infallibility, as M.r Blacloe:
nor any Catholic writer has manifested himself so violent an enemy to the
universal practice of Gods Church as M.r Blacloe: nor so rigid to the souls
in Purgatory, as M.r Blacloe: nor so civil to devils and damned in hell, as
M.r Blacloe: who ascribes unto them, noe other punishment then what their own
pure volitions shall inflicte. And in such a manner, that he neither excludes
delight in their pains, nor a possibility of being happy, if they will them
selves: as it apears by my answer to his Letter: where is obseruable
flexibility in Angels. From which profane Novelties, sweet JESUS deliver us,
and give us grace to Sapere ad sobrietatem, whith shall be the constant prayer of

Much honored Sirs Your most assured friend and most humble servant. G. L.


