AN EPISTLE DECLARATORIE, OR MANIFEST WRITTEN BY G. L. TO HIS BRETHREN RESIDING
IN ENGLAND.

Non plus sapere quam oportet sapere sed sapere ad sobrietatem. Ad Romans 12.

Apud Christianos non qui patitur, sed qui facit contumeliam, miserest. S.
Hier. ad Marcum.

By the Widdowe of MARK WYON, 1657.

SVPERIORVM PERMISSV.

AN EPISTLE DECLARATORIE, OR MANIFEST WRITTEN BY G. L. TO HIS BRETHREN RESIDING
IN ENGLAND.
MY MVCH HONORED BRETHREN
Having been certainly informed, that M.r Tho. Blacloe has lately published
in print a certain Letter containing diverse unhandsome, bitter, and
uncharitable expressio^s against my own person: as also that a slender
consult of his London friends has ordered that the said Letter shall be only
communicated to those amongst you who are constituted in Chief Power and
Authority: with design undoubtedly (for in prudence I cannot harbor an
interpretation more favorable of a proceeding so unbeseeming persons of their
charge and function) to lessen me in their esteem, and by degrees to hurt my
integrity, and wound my reputation in the opinion of all my Brethren: In this
respect purely I have thought fitting, notwithstanding that the said letter is
kept from me (which is an argument of foul play) to direct unto you all in
General this Declaratory Epistle or Manifest, which I do assure me shall
afford you sufficient evidence, whereby to be confirmed in my Innocence, and to
be convinced in M.r Blacloes unreasonable animosity.

I said in this respect purely, for the only motive that inviteth me to
imbarcke my self in a Manifest, is the vnhansone result of the above mentioned
Consult; if that had not occurred, I should in this occasion have been as
abstemious in the employing of my pen, as in other former occasions, when I was
sufficiently provoked, as will appear in the series of my Manifest. However a
remiss heat of Charity is capable to digest intense injuries and calumnies:
and it their engaged in Christ's Militia I did not decline manum percutientis,
here, as it weere miles emeritus I shall joy to suffer linguam detrectantis.
Since I was not worthy to represent my divine Master in the effusion of his
blood, I will strive to imitate him in his flagello lingue, that is in his
injurious reproaches: Samaritanus es, demoniuns babes, potator vinies,
seductores, blasphenouses, non amicus Caesa^^s es, etc. and as S. Hierome says,
Christ^ miles per bonam and malam famam a (...) and a sinistris graditur. And I
dare say to M.r Blacloe as S. Austin. said to his Adversary a Manichaean, senti
dit Ley but no) quicquid libet, sola me in oculis Dei conscientia non acceset.
Neque debet (says S. Ambrose) plus ponderis esse in alieno convitio quam in
suae conscientiae testimonio. Besides if our heavenly Father be so infinitely
good, that super omnes impios and inimicos suos solemn facit oriri, and nubes
pluere: I weere an unworthy child of that Father if I should hate or hurt my
enemies, especially there bring hopes of their Conversion as long as they are
viatores. Wherefore I will say and pray with Blessed S Austine, vtinam cui nos
modo exercent, con vertantur, and nobiscum exerceantur: tamen quam diu ita sunt
vt exerceant, non eos oderimus, quia in eo quod malus est quis eorum, an vsque
in finem perse veraturus sit, ignoramus: and plerumque cum tibi videris odisse
mimicum, fratrem odisti and nescis. And this was one of that glorious Martyr
Sir Thomas Moore his pious instruction and meditation when imprisoned in the
Tower of London his persecutors saught his life.

Thus much incidently, to show unto you that I do stand so fixt't on these
Christian principles, commanding love toward our enemies, that only my own
desire to prevent those, that shall go about to foment division betwix't me
and my Brethren, and not M.r Blacloes provocation has occasioned my engagement
in this declaratory Epistle: and accordingly as I shall make appear my own
integrity and his inordinate animosity, let me stand or fall in your
judgments. Wherefore to prosecute my design.

S. Austine relates that Julian the Pelagian Bishop was in great esteem with
all the Catholic Clergy of Afric, before he became an enemy to Catholic
doctrine, ascribing sais the same S. Austine to bonae voluntati orantis what
was due to gratiae Dei miserenti^; which Error S. Prosper describes in these
verses Tam bona quemque docet sectari posse suopte
Ingenio, qua posse subest cuique in mala ferri.


I can say the same of M.r Blacloe, he was in high vogue with all our Clergy,
and in great respect wheresoever his Conversation made him known, before
unhappily he espoused erroneous and dangerous doctrines. The first beginning of
his decrease in the good opinion that our Bishop and his Clergy had ha^^onted
of his conceived extraordinary parts and merits, happened, when having approved
with his own subscription diverse sca^dalous opinions, he could not be induced
to recall his inco^siderate act for any entreaty, or reason his Brethren could
use. And since, by occasion of his own writings published in print, and
Chiefly his new divinity, he is absolutely vanished and lost in the opinion,
that was formerly conceived of his worth. For our Blessed Bishop of happy
memory out of his religious zeal, tender Care, and affection toward his
flock did enjoin me his Grand Vicar then residing in London to suppress the
said new Divinity: signifying that it contained diverse naughty, erroneous, and
scandalous doctrines, contradicting holy Scriptures, Counsels, and contrary to
the universal practice of the Catholic Church. Wherefore in obedience to my
Pastors command, and in performance of my own charge, I acquainted our chief
Brethren, particular superiors in particular districts: as also advised them
of the great danger that might proceed from profane Novelties, which like
Cancers or Gangreenes do usually spread, (if not opportunely prevented and
remedied) to the ruin of many souls.

But this performance of my Pastoral duty, this execution of my obligation,
this discharge of my Conscience, did so extremely irritate and incense M.r
Blacloe, and amongst his adherents particularly M.r Harrington, that these two
thought it fitting to decry me in diverse companyes, imagining perhaps, that to
cry down my parts, was to cry up the new divinity which my Cry before had
cross't in its intended cariere.

The ordinary Character they were pleased to bestow on me was an illiterate man,
not capable to say bo to a Goose: which I do profess unto you did noe more
startle or trouble me then would have done the eating of a Goose if statu'd
with hunger. However I writ a civil letter to M.r Blacloe taking notice of
his incivilities toward me, and concluded it with the same words with which
Great S. Austine does end his book, de dono perseuerantiae. Ego (inquit) cum
per eos, qui meos labores legunt non solum doctior verum etiam emendatior fio,
propitium mihi Deum agnosco, and hoc per Ecclesiae Doctores maxim expecto, si
and in ipsorum manus venit, dignentur nosse quod scribo. And in another place
speaking of his own writings he expresses his humility in a perfecter manner:
quicumque, (inquit) ista lecturi sunt, non me imitentur erranteni, sed in
melius proficientem. And I wish him to take into his serious consideration his
own and S. Austines spirit, and to compare the one with the other: and being
it is certain that S. Austines spirit was a gallant spirit and proceeded from
God, it would necessarily follow that spirit not to be inspired by God, which
should be opposite to S. Austines spirit. However my counsel and advice made
so little impression, and produced so little fruit, that it rather
encouraged M.r Blacloes animosity against me.

For soon after I being forced in a manner out of England to engage in the
government of our old Mothers affairs, one half year was hardly expired,
when I was summoned to encounter with a little Army of false accusations
(forged by him and his adherents) and presented against me to the Popes Nuncio
residing at Paris. But in regard I was in another Territory, they were remitted
to the Nuncio residing at Brussells, to whose Jurisdiction I was subject. And
bis Lordshippe after a mature examination of my Answers to all the said
accusations, was evidently convinced of the indirect proceedings used by my
Adversaries, insomuch that he was pleased to style the accusations exhibited
against me the bows of the wicked, and called my adversaries malicious men, as
appears by his said Lordshipps letter written to my self, which is as
follows.

EXIMIE AC ADMODVM R.de DOMINE.
Tam ex candida, prudenti, atque benigna Dominationis Vestrae Responsione, quam
optimis aliorum relationibus Innocentiam eius perspectam habeo; cumque diuino
Tribunali causam suam probasse videatur, non officient hominum iudicia, multo
minus maleuolorum criminationes. Vnum hoc periculorum est quae se passum fuisse
narrat S. Paulus Apostolus, nimirum in falsis fratribus: vnde nouum non est
proborum famam perperam sugillari. Sed patientiae clypeo ad sustinendum, non
minus quam brachio forti ad agendum Dominationem Vestram munitam gaudeo,
aduersus retribuentes mala pro bonis, and detrabentes ei, quia secuta est
bonitatem. Porro non omittam Innocentiam Dominationis Vestrae vbi opus fuerit
propalare, and iniquorum arcus confringere, illam solum bortando, vt
quemadmodum tanta laud inceperit, ita in posterum malum in bono vincere
alacriter pergat; dum rogo Dominum Deum, vt condigna mentis praemia Dominationi
Vestrae retribuat in hac vita, and in futura. Bruxellis 10. Februarij 1654.

Eximiae ac admodum R.dae D.o^is Vestrae. Addictissimus seruus ANDREAS A^BAS S.
ANGELI.


In this Conflict or Combat my Innocence obtained a considerable victory,
which invited me to sing cheerfully with S. Chrysostom, Gaude Innocentia and
exulta, vbique illaesaes, vbique se^ura; si humiliaris erigeris, si pugnas
vincis, si occideris coronaris.

The before mentioned accusations as I do probably conjecture had their rise
from a particular indignation occasioned by a certain Letter that D.r Daniel
and my self jointly writ (some Months before the said accusations weere
exhibited) to our Brethren assembled in London, out of most parts of England,
and is as follows.

MOST HONORED BRETHREN
We cannot sufficiently express the joy and comfort, that we have received,
understanding of an appointed meeting for the better settleme^t of your
affairs, not doubting but that you will assemble as the Children of Israel
did, when they sought God in their pr^^sing neces^ities, quasi vir vnus, or as
the Apostle says, solliciti servare vnitatem spiritus in vinculo pacis, that
under Christ the head, in your unanimous resolutio^s, every member of our
Clergy may prosper. We heartily wish it that might lie within our reach to
afford you our personal assistance in the accomplishment of your pious and
holy designs, howsoever we have thought fitting at this distance to inculcate
unto you what we conceive to be most conducing to the purchasing of the
divine blessing therein, which are our joint and earnest desires. 1. That a
firm and happy correspondence may be established betwixt you, and your old
Mother, to whom you owe what you enjoy of happiness in that Kingdom. That you
are now vnum corpus in Christo, is to be ascribed to her care, and vigilance,
whose glorious Martyrs blood has been the seed of your church. 2. That per
omnia you obey your Ordinary, whom the holy Ghost has constituted to govern
you: we say per omnia, making him sole Vmpire in your Controversies or
differences, and such obedience undoubtedly will make us a glorious body, and
Masters of our Adversaries who are emulous of our dignity: vir obediens
loquetur victoriam. 3. That whereas our Clergies purity and integrity in points
of doctrine for which formerly it was much renowned, has been greatly stained
both there, and in foreign Countries, through the late writings of M.r Thomas
Blacloe Balchelour of Divinity, and of M.r Henry Holden Doctor of Paris
(against whom are great clamours of Regulars and others to our unspeakable
prejudice, and dishonor, being both members of our said Clergy) you will
protest against the said writings, and disauowe them as in noe wise allowed or
countenanced by you. And thus wishing you as much happiness in all your affairs
as you own hearts can desire, we rest.

4. Iulii 1653. Your most affectionate and most Humble servants. G. L. EDWARD
DANYEL.


The only motive of inserting the last clause, concerning M.r Blacloe and D.r
Holden, was our joint zeal for the Clergies honor and reputation, which in
foreign parts, and principally in the Court of Rome, was extremely
eclipsed, by the temetarious writings of those two Chief members: from thence
being inferred, that the whole English Clergy root and branch was addicted to
scandalous Novelties, and infected with dangerous doctrines, according to the
Common report spread both in France, and Flanders, as also intimated in
diverse letters written from Rome to our Bishop, my self, and others. Howeuer
this eminent danger of ruin to the Clergy's honor, was so little resented by
M.r Harrington, and the rest of M.r Blacloes party present in the said
Assembly, that the Letter had been absolutely rejected, if the Mayor part had
not resisted, as can witness the Members of that Assembly, July 1653. But when
the said Letter and the effects it had wrought in the said Assembly came to M.r
Blacloes notice, how passionately he was moved, is evidently gathered from his
dedicatory Epistle to his condemned Book, entitled So^us Buccinae, which is
thus.

ODOARDO DANIELL, etc.
Oportet ergo, vt ad te proficiscatur iste libellus, etiam talem? fuerunt anni
in quibus honoris and amicitiae inter nos sigillum depangi potuisset. Inuidit
laeuus aliquis genius: and in lapsum impegisti; grauem illum, sed humanum.
Diuturno conuictu and consensu consolidatam amicitiam, and ipsam publicae
honestatis erubescentiam vno actu perrupisti: ignaro and tibimet impari
obsecutus viro. Credo grandiloquentia vanitatis ipsius, Patronorum gratiam
gloriose iactantis perterrefactus. Et paulo post, propterea hunc innocentiae
mea and tuae perfidiae publicum qui vbique occurset, and te contrate statuat
^btestatorem emitto: quem sieve in bibliopolijs prostantem aspexeris, etc.
horrescas infamiae tuae proditorem. etc.


In this Epistle dedicatory M.r Blacloe abuses D.r Daniel openly, my self
covertly, without naming me, judging it not fitting to name whom he had
sufficiently described to be known. But unfeignedly he does perform the
flagellum linguae with so great dexterity, that it seems natural unto him.
And his animosity ended not here; for some weeks after he writ a quarreling
Letter to our Bishop, and his Lordship recommended unto me his answer to the
said Letter, in the Close of which his Lordship addresseth himself to M.r
Blacloe in these express words, bestowing on him a Fatherly admonition.

Only for your souls sake I request you, to leave those naughty reproaches,
which you give to One equal to your self in all things, but you name him not
(you know why) that he is a lying and perjured sycophant, a wre^hed sycophant,
aboute-s^au, who cares not what disorder he breeds, so he nourishes
discord for his own ambition. And young M.r Leyburne whom M.r Clifford here
says is beloved of all, you say, if you meet him you will tell him that he is
a saucy Boy. To omit the taunts of Paramount Bishop, and domineering ways,
and such others which you bestow upon my self: it seems you have forgotten
your solemn promise which you made at your ordination to give reverence and
obedience to your Ordinary, and the prayer of the Church, which she makes in
the ordination of a Bishop, Qui maledixerit tibi, fit ille maledictus, and qui
benedixerit tibi, benedictionibus repleatur. But I pray you forget not the
words of the Apostle maledici regnum Dei non consequentur: nor of our savior:
qui dixerit fratri suo fatue reus erit gehennae ignis. Such reproachful words
as you use in your Letter beseem neither Christian nor Priest, but discover
too too great passion.

When our Bishop sent me his Answer to M.r Blacloe, wherein the mentioned
reproaches are comprehended, his Lordship intimated that I was meant by
sycophant, lying sycophant, etc. howeuer, One equal in all things, was
intended. What strange fancy, humor, or genious possesses him! how
unproportionable are his exterior garments to his interior spirit! that makes
him abuse his superior, equals, and whomsoever he conceives to abhor from
his exorbitant learning. Vtinam didicisset ad humilitatem and saperet ad
sobrietatem. I profess faithfully I have an extreme compassion toward him,
so far I am from hating his person. Also in his letter to our Bishop he
vncivilly treats a worthy Irish Bishop residing in London, to whom his
Lordship had conferred power to exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction, for he
calls him Factions and counsels his Lordship to recall his power. Neither
here did his unquiet genious suffer him to rest. For he writ another
unhandsome letter to the Nuncio residing at Paris, iniuring both our Bishop and
my self: and here I have thought fitting to insert it, to consummate his
animosity.

ILLVSTRISSIME AC RD.me DOMINE.
Increbuit apud nos rumor ab aliquot mensibus quod Illustrissima Dominatio
vestra Episcopo Calcedonensi ex monda^^ Summi Domini illi iam a biennio
intimato interdixerit vsum omnis potestatis in Anglos, quamdiu Parisijs
residet. Timentur autem apud nos de praefati Episcopi authoritate oriturae ex
hac suspicione dissensiones, quoniam ipse Episcopus toto hoc biennio pristinam
potestatem rigicius quam prius exercuit: ex instigatione cuiusdam ambitiosi
Clerici qui hodie praesidet Collegio Nostratium Daaci: sed and ipsum decretum
interpretatione quadam quasi ad solos Hibernos pertineat eludere comatus est
Propterca humilime ^u^plico Illus^^^samae Dominationi vestre, vt dignetur
sensum suae Sanctitatis (quantum spectat ad ^^^^^^ntiam n^stram dicto Praejuli^
exhibendum) per scipturam publicationis legitimae capacem, hoc est, vel suo,
vel Secretarij ^riregrapho, iu^^u Illustrissimae Dominationis vestrae signatam
ad nos mandare, vt impe^^^^ (...) sanctitatis, and pax Ecclesiae possint apud
nos conseruant.

Londini 23 Martii illo veteri. Illustrissimae Reuerendissimae Dominationis
vestrae seruus humillimus. THOMAS WHITE.


Here it is observable that M.r Blacloe refused formerly to father this
Letter, pretending that the Clergies Adversaries had forged it to foment
dissension: and so his friends persuaded our Bishop. However I do protest
unto you seriously, that he and noe other alive did write the said letter: for
this copy I received from a noble Person, who offered me the Original, with
some others written by M.r Blacloe to D.r Holden: and the said Original is yet
within my reach The ground or motive whefore he thought fitting not to Father
the said Letter was, because there had been a difference about the same time,
betwixt his friend M.r Harrington, and his Lordship, who was informed, that the
said M.r Harrington with some others, had a design to deprive him of his
Episcopal authority, which this Letter would have sufficiently confirmed.

As concerning the esteem that some of M.r Blacloes adherents may imagine his
works to have purchased in foreign parts, I do assure you faithfully, that
they have neither found credit, nor entertainment. In this University my self
have conferred with the principal Readers of Divinity concerning his opinions:
and their Judgment is that they ought to be detested, cane and angue peius. And
when I was at Lovaine M.r Richard Johnson his singular friend, and formerly a
great adorer of his Learning, assured me that he had communicated one of his
books with the Chiefest Doctor of that University, a lansenist, desiring his
opinion of it: who after that he had perused the said Book, professed
ingeniously that he was astonished, that such learning should be spread abroad,
and not censured. And in the Court of Rome his writings have found so little
favor, that in part they are already condemned.

Notwithstanding all this M.r Blacloe persevereth inflexibly obstinate in his
fancied opinions, which weere easily confuted, if time and leisure from more
serious affairs would permit. However thus much obiter I dare make good, that
in his Learning he is injurious to holy Scripture, to Counsels, and to the
universal practice of the Catholic Church: which thus briefly I will
demonstrate.

1. He is injurious to holy Scripture speaking irreverently of it. For S. Paul
2. ad Tim. 3. styles holy Scripture Doctrina diuinitus inspirata, ^tilis ad
docendum, and arguendum, that is as holy Fathers interpret, ad refellenda and
coarguenda falsa dogmata: But M.r Blacloe sais expressly in one of his works,
that holy Scripture is noe more proper ad refellenda falsa dogmata, then is a
beetle, to cut Which irreverent comparison I have heard our Bishop term a
blasphemy. Ergo in his Learning he is injurious to holy Scripture.

2. He is injurious to Counsels, for the Council of Florence in Decreto
Eugenij defines animas illoru^ qui post Baptismum. susceptum nullam omnino
peccati maculam contraxerunt, illas etiam quae post contractam peccati maculam,
vel in suis corporibus, velijsdem exutae corporibus, sunt purgatae, in caelum
mox recipi, and inturri ipsum Deum Vnum and Trinum. Where is observable, that
the Council uses the particle Mox that is forthwith, by and by, and
consequently not to be extended to the day of Judgment. The same verity is
contained in the Counsel of Trent. But M.r Blacloe maintains imprisonment of
the faithful souls in Purgatory, until the day of Judgment. Ergo he is
injurious to Counsels.

Also I shall add to the said Counsels Pope Benedict the 12. who Decreto,
Benedictus Deus in donis suis, more particularly does illustrate this undoubted
verity. Definimus (says he) quod secundum communem Dei ordinationem, animae
Sanctorum omnium qui de hoc mundo ante Domini nostri IESV Christi passionem
decesserunt, noc non Sanctorum Martyrum, Confessorum, Virginum, and aliorum
fidelium defunctorum post sacrum abijs Christi Baptisma susceptum in quibus
nihil purgabile fuit quando decesserunt; nec erit quando decedent etiam in
futurum, vel si tam fuerit aut crit aliquid purgabile in ijsdem cum post mortem
suam fuerint purgatae: ac quod anima puerorum eodem Christi baptismate
renatorum, and baptizandorum cum fuerint baptizati ante vsum liberi arbitrij
decedentium, mox post mortem suam and purgationem prafatam in illis qui
purgatione huiusmodi indigebant, etiam ante resumptionem suorum corporum and
iudicium generale, post Ascensionem Saluatoris nostris IESV Christian Celu^,
surrunt, sunt, and erunt in calo, caelorum regno, and Paradiso calesti cum
Christo, Sanctorum Angelorum consortio aggregata. Et infra sic habetur.
Quicunque deinceps pr^dictarum nostrarum definitionum sea determinatronum, ac
singularum ipsarum contrarium scienter, and pertinaciter, tenere, asseeere,
praedicare, docere, aut defendere verbo vel scripto praesumpserit, contra
cuntsicut contra hareticum modo debito procedatur.

Here is observable that Pope Benedict above mentioned succeeded John the 22.
which I think fitting to inculcate, in regard that I do well remember, that a
certain friend of mine being in conference with M.r Harrington, modestly
reprehended M.r Blacloe for his doctrine, concerning the detention in Purgatory
of souls departed until the day of Judgment, alleging that never any
Catholic Divine owned that opinion. To which Mr Harrington replied saying, yes
a Pope of Rome John the 22. Where again is observable, that a certain learned
Friar, called Occham or Occhamus, native of England being much disgusted with
the said Pope John, insinuated himself into the Emperors favor, that was in
actual hostility with his Holiness, and by him protected, and countenanced,
published abroad a scandalous writing, entitled Errores Ioannis 1. 2. amongst
which he mentions a definition made by his Holiness, that excludes from the
Kingdom of heaven the faithful departed till the day of Judgment. But in this
Controversy Benedictus the 12.th a renowned Prelate and immediate Successor to
John the 22. ought rather to be credited than Occham, that was a professed
enemy to John the 22. And doubtless if any such definition had passed, his
immediate successor Benedict the 12. would have taken notice of it. And it is
Theologically evident, that noe Pope (since the first erection of the Popedom)
has erred defining as Pastor Vniuersalis Ecclesiae: which verity is
maintained by the whole Current of Catholic Doctors grounded in our Saviors
words to S. Peter, ego autem rogavi pro te, (Petre) vt non deficiat fides tua;
the efficacy of which prayer, both S. Thomas, and S. Bonaventure do exte^d to
all the successors in S. Peter's chair. And for this respect only I do
appeal unto you all, whither M.r Blacloe has either prudently, or
Catholically compotted himself in his book that he dedicates to Alexander 7.
now Pope: wherein audaciously he impugnes his infallibility. But let it be
supposed that John the 22. was author of the above mentioned definition, it
will nothing avail or advantage M.r Blacloe, who will not prefer a
definition of a Pope to which he ascribes fallibility, before the Decree of
Eugenius in the General Council of Florence, as also before the universal
practice of the Catholic Church where he must admit infallibility, if he
will carry the name of a Catholic But unfeignedly M.r Harrington is reduced to
some extremity, when he is forced to fly to the Sanctuary of Authority, which
M.r Blacloe is not accustomed to make use of, not so much as of the holy
Scripture it self, as is apparent to those who have perused his writings.

3. M. Blacloe is iniutious to the Universal practice of the Catholic Church,
in the foresaid imprisoning of the faithful souls in Purgatory until the day
of Judgment; whereas the Catholic Church does erect Privileged Altars, offer
Masses, apply suffrages for their speedy delivery. Moreover he is notably
iniutious to the practice of the Catholic Church, in that he calls those
Priests who live by the Altar, homines triobulares.

M.r Blacloes erroneous imprisonment of souls in Purgatory, proceed; from a
misunderstanding of the inflexibility attributed by some Thomists to the
Angels, transferring that immobility to the souls departed. For the Said
Thomists do only teach Daemone^ esse in malo obstinatos, quia voluntas Angeli
adhaeret fix, and immobiliter obiecto quod libere elegit, perinde ac facultas
apprehensiua rei quam cognouit: but the faithful souls in Purgatory non
elegerunt propria voluntate tormenta temporalia qua patiuntur, sed iustissimo
Dei iudicio puniuntur. Neither is there any Thomist or Divine that will make
use of that inflexibility, to prove the detention of the souls in Purgatory,
till the day of Judgment: and therefore I do wonder how this fancy could
occur unto him. Morover the Mayor part of Catholic Doctors do deny that
the obstinacy of the Devils in malo proceeds from their inflexibility, but
rather from the wretched Condition of their state, certainly knowing that out
of it there is noe Redemption: and upon that score conceive an intense hatred
against God, the inflictor of their torments, greater then can be expressed.
Besides it is evident out of S. Luke cap. 11 that diabolus mutat aliquando
sententiam. Cum immundus spiritus (sais this holy Evangelist) exierii de homine
perambulat per loca inaquosa quaerens requiem: and non inueniens dicit,
reuertar in domum meam, vnde exiui.

And did noth the Devil mutare sententiam when he persuaded Judas to betray
Christ, and a little while after, indeavored to hinder his sentence of Death,
suggesting to Pilates wife in her sleep to divert Pilate from giveing
sentence? ergo the Devils are not so immutable or inflexible, but that they
can change their opinion. To Conclude, natural reason does demonstrate
mutability and flexibility in Angels: for noe object can introduce a necessity
in their will, unless it has rationem summi boni vel summi mali: but there are
noe objects which have rationem summi boni vel summi mali, respectu tum
intellectus, tum voluntatis Angelorum, as is clear, and Confessed by both
Philosophers and Divines. Ergo, etc.

Out of the Premises I do evidently conclude M.r Blacloe in his Learning to
be injurious to holy Scripture, to the Catholic Church, and to natural
reason, and consequently that his spirit is neither sober, nor Christian like,
nor peacable: for S. Austine sais lib. 4. de Trin. cap. 6. Contra rationem nemo
sobrius, contra Scripturam nemo Christianus, contra Ecclesiam nemo pacificus
senserit.

I do remember when I was Superior in England, that the foresaid detention of
the souls in Purgatory, begott so great a scandal amongst Catholics, that
some weere resolved to bestow noe charities upon the secular Clergy, imagining
them to be infected with M.r Blacloes exorbitant doctrine. And some 2. or 3.
years agone, one of our Chiefest Brethren for learning, and other great
parts, being on his death bed, and leaving by will a considerable Charity to
the secular Clergy, that his soul might receive benefit by their prayers, made
a prouiso, or express order, that noe part of the said Charity should be
distributed to M.r Blacloe or his adherents. Now how great a disgrace, how
odious a scandal, how considerable a prejudice M.r Blacloes new Divinity has
brought to the secular Clergy, I appeal to your Judgments.

I could enlarge my self in this declaratory Epistle, if I thought it either
necessary, or that I were furnis'hd with convenient leisure from my other
Engagements. However I have thought it fit to inculcate unto you, two special
instructions, conducing to your own advantage, and to the advancement of your
Religion.

The first is the Excellency of your vocation, in which the divine goodness
has promoted you to the highest dignity upon earth, to wit, the office or
charge of spiritual Pastors, importing zelus animarum, which, according to
holy Scripture, is omnium diuinorum diuinissimum: for it does render you
perfect imitators of God, and Coadiutors of Christ in the conversion of
Sinners. And S. Chrysostom affirms in or: de S. Philog. that there is not any
thing in this mortal life, that can afford a more ample, and evident testimony
of perfect Charity toward God, then to procure the salvation of souls, pro
quibus mortuus est Christus.

The most divine propriety of that divine zeal consists in the Sacrifice of
our lives, Holy David was inflamed with zeal relating to that propriety, when
he said, Quis mihi tribuat, vt ego moriar pro te, Fili mi Absalon, fili mi? as
also S. Paul 2. Cor. 12. Ego autem libentissime impendam, and super impendar
ipse pro anibus vestris: and 1. Cor. 15. quotidie morior propter vestram
gloriam fratres. But to search noe farther for examples of this nature, the
Sons of your old Mother, your own Brethren and Predecessors, in this last
age, have excelled in this attribute of zelus animarum, willingly embracing
ignominious deaths proper to dogs, and Thieves for the defense of Catholic
faith. As the Children of Israel possessed the land of promise in funiculo
distributionis; even so they purchased the heavenly Paradise, prefigur'd by
the land of promise, in funiculo or laqueo suspendij. To execute Christ their
Maister's Counsel, to wit, estore prudentes sicut serpents, like wise
serpents transeuntes per angustum foramen, that is, the narrow noze of a Rope,
they vnvested themselves of their old garment of mortality, and assumed a new
habit of Immortal glory. And their blood was the first seed that preserved
Religion, in your Country, that continued it, that increased it They were
principally the foundation stones of your rebuilded Church, cemented in their
own blood, next unto the angular stone Christ JESUS. Therefore the inheritance
of this Church chiefly belongs to you, who are the true successors of your
Brethren, who with the effusion of their blood founded it, and raised it anew:
and this inheritance you will ever enjoy, unless unfortunately you shall sell it
for a mess of Pottage, that is, for an inordinate appetite of profane
doctrines.

There is another propriety belonging to that divine zeal of souls, and more
essentially, and necessarily annexed to your spiritual charge, then the former
above mentioned. This is a prudent and careful conduct in your government,
which S. Peter in his first Epistle expresses in these few words, sobrii
estote and vigilate. And S. Paul Romans 12. shows evidently that pastoral
government has a necessary depe^dance of sobriety, when he sais, non plus
sapere quam oportet sapere, sed saperead sobrietatem: the meaning of which
sentence in the 1. Tim. he particularly declare^h, commanding Timothy deuitare
profanas vocum nouitates, and oppositiones falsi nomini^ scientia. And the
reason is, for if Pastors do entertain false doctrines, or do suffer them to
take root in their Territories on districts, they will bring, infallible ruin
to many souls. For doctrine being the Spiritual food, if sound, good, and
incorrupted, it nourishes, and preserves life; if unsound, and corrupted, it
poysoneth and causes death. Atrius, says S. Hierome, vna scintilla fuit, sed
quia non statim oppressa, totu^ orbem depopulata est.

The difference betwixt profane Novelties and sober doctrine, is, that this is
grounded in Universality, the others in singularity: this relyeth on vnitas,
Doctorum, profane Novelties on vnus Doctor which how dangerous and pernicious
a thing it is, clearly expresses the golden sentence of Martianus the
Emperor, delivered in the Counsel of Chalcedon, qui (inquit) post veritatem
repertam, (...) Doctorum vnitatestabilitam, aliquid vl^erius discutit,
mendacium quaerit.

The like censure is usually inflicted on ill profane Novelties descending from
Vnus Doctor, or singularity, by the ancient Fathers S. Austine, S. Hylatius,
S. Hierom, Tertullian, etc. They zealously resisted by their writings new
doctrines in their bud, or first springing up, before they weere presented to
the touchstone of Christ's Vicar, to be marked with Anathema. And it is evident
out of the Roman Breviarie die 26. Novembris, that S. Peter Bishop of
Alexandria excommunicated Atrius for favoring Melesius, who according to S.
Epiph. Sectam dumtaxat fecerat, and non a fide discesserat. I wish that you
weere furnished with convenient opportunity to peruse the gallant works of
these old Champions of Catholic faith, that thereby you might be moved and
encouraged to imitate their zeal and conduct in pastoral government; and to
learn from them, sapere ad sobrietatem.

But sapere ad sobrietatem is not only sapere ad sanam doctrinam, it also
imports sapere ad obedientiam The obedience of S. Peter Christ's first Vicar,
did recover the Keys of heaven which disobedience had lost: tibi dabo claues
regni caelorum, Mat. 16. and if you shall exhibit obedience to his lawful
successor, infallibly you will regaine the authority, power, and Jurisdiction,
which you weere deprived of by the Death of your Blessed Bishop. For as great
S. Gregory says, si obedientes fuerimus Praepositis nostris, obediet Dominus
orationibus nostris. But how obedient M.r Blacloe has been to his Praepositi,
I leave it to your selves to form a Judgment, out of the above mentioned
passages. And how obediently M.r Harrington has exercised his pretended office
of Sub-Deanship, I will remitt you to the Close of your Bishops letter, dated
11. October, 1653. and directed to Mark Harrington, William Harrison, Peter
Peterson, Thomas Ashton, Andrew Knightley, where concerning the said
Sub-Deanship as follows.

And as for M.r Harringtons Sub-Deanship, I answer that I never instituted
such an office, nor would make him Sub-Deane, though M.r Fitton did desire me;
nor ever assuredly knew, that ever he usurped such an office, until I read
your first letter. Wherefore I command him to give it over, till he show me,
both that M.r Fitton had authority to make him Sub-Deane, and also legally made
him such. Pacem and veritatem diligite, and Deus pacis erit vobiscum. Farewell.

Yours assuredly RIC. CALC.


Here is observable, that M.r Harrington, notwithstanding his Lordships
command, did not desist from the execution of the said Sub-Deanship. And if M.r
Fitton could not institute him Sub-Deane, how can it be imagined, that in
articulo mortis, he left him a Deanship for a Legacy. These are proceedings
without any president: and therefore I can say with S. Austine in his 3. book
against Julian above mentioned, mira sunt quae dicitis, noua sunt quae dicitis:
mira stupemus, noua cauemus. I confess ingeniously I understand not this way
of mannaging your affairs. Vir obediens loquetur victorias. And upon this
score only you can be a flourishing Clergy.

The second instruction, conducing to your own, and your Religions
advancement, is Christian patience in your present persecution. It conduces to
your own advantage, because as fire does give an addition of luster to Gold
tried in the furnace: even so affliction renders the afflicted more
illustrious, afflictio afflictos multum nobilitat. Also it conduces to the
advancement of your Religion; for as Camamile the more it is trod on, and
suppressed, the more it spreads, and flourishe^h: in like manner your Religion
the more it is persecuted, the more ground it winnes, non resistendo se
patiendo cres it.

These advantages undoubtedly will afford you comfort, encouragement, and
constancy in your sharp encounter with tribulation, for seeing that the
propriety of affliction propter iustitiam, is afflictos nobilitare, that is,
to dignifie, and make glorious: it justly challenges from you esteem,
respect, and honor. Holy Job (says S. Chrysostom hom. 15. ad Pop. Antioch)
Non tam splendidus fuit in tribunali Rex sedens, quam insignis and illustris in
fimo. His dunghill of affliction did more dignifie him, then his throne of
Majesty, his ulcers did more beautify him, than before the integrity of his
body. Job without his ulcers we less reverence: Job with his ulcers we
regard, admire, and honor, as the only miracle of patience. And therefore Job
had never obtained so excellent a prerogative of honor, and worship, if on
his dunghill he had not sustained contradiction, and affliction. The holy
Apostles knowing the benefit of tribulation propter iustitiam, cheerfully
endured stripes, prisons, bannishments, gibbetts, sword's, lances, knives, and
all sorts of cruel torments: but after their Death, the same world that
sentenced them to dye, did, and does still celebrate their memories with
Religious worship. S. Austine in psalm. 44 sais thus, ostendatur mihi Romae in
honor tanto templum Romuli, in quanto ibi ostendo memoriam Petri. And in psalm.
65. he relates, how the Emperor diademate deposito plorauit ad memoriam
piscatoris. And experience evidently shows, that the Catholic church in all
times, and ages, has celebrated the memory of other Saint's, Confessors,
Martyrs, Doctors, and Virgins with much joy, with great solemnity, with
singular honor, and with Religious reverence. And your last Blessed Martyr, if
the syer of tribulation had not tried, and dignified him in the furnace of
Tyburne, he would have wanted the honor that is exhibited unto him, and the
honorable Tomb that he now enjoys. Neither did the golden chains shine so
bright on the shoulders of his Persecutors, as did the Rope about his neck.

But tribulation gave not luster to Job only as he sat on his dunghill, or to
the Apostles, and other Saint's in the encounter with their cruel torments: for
after death it procured a splendor of: far higher nature: Momentaneum hoc
(sais the Apostle, 2. Cor. 4.) tribulationis nostrae aeternum gloriae pondus
operatur in caelis. after the finishing of their tortures, it wrought a glory
above it self, according to the same Apostie, non sunt condignae passiones
huius temporis ad futuram gloriam.

Out of the premises you may tightly conclude that tribulation propter
iustitiam is ingens bonum. Bonum, because it does benefit, and dignifie the
afflicted. Moreover Christ himself bids us take joy in it, according to the
holy text, Cum persecuti vos fuerint homines, propter me, gaudete, and
exultate. And therefore it is bonum; for to express gladness for a thing that
is not good, is against the light of reason. And that it is ingens bonum, is
clearly gathered, from the excellency of the reward, that is due unto it,
merces copiosa in caelis. Moreover it is not only hominis bonum, but also Dei
donum. Vobis (sais the Apostle to the Hebrews) datur non solum in eum
(Christum) credere, sed etiam rapinam bonorum pati, as if credere in Christum,
without pati pro Christo, weere insufficient. And upon this score, S. Hierome
in his Epistle ad Ascl. rendereth thanks to God, for his affliction. And S
Cyprian, when his persecuting Judge pronounced sentence of death against him,
replied only Deo gratias. Wherefore persecution propter iustitiam, is both
donum, and bonum; donum in that it proceeds from God: bonum in regard it
honors the giver, enricheth, and dignifieth the receiver.

Yet that which more evidently does manifest tribulation, to be both bonum, and
donum, is the appatent exhibition of Gods presence, and special assistance,
toward all those who suffer for his sake. God was present with Joseph in
Egypt, with the Israelites in the red sea, with the three Children in the
burning furnace, with Jonas in the bottom of the sea, with S. Peter in prison,
whom he miraculously enlarged, with S. Agatha in the torture of her breast,
which he restored, with S. Catherine on the wheel, which he Broke in pieces,
with S. Agnes in the fire, which he extinguished, and with several Legions of
other Saints, in their several afflictions and torments.

Now I could extremely desire, that this bonum, and donum tribulationis
propter iustitiam, weere not only imprinted in your minds, but in the hearts
of all your English Lay Catholics, who, at this instant, do groan, under the
burden of as heavy a persecution, as has happened (perhaps) since the change
of Religion to the end, that settled in a Christian Confidence of the divine
presence, and assistance in their afflictions, and encouraged with a Christian
expectation of their great reward, merces copiosa in caelis, they may have joy
in their furnaces, delight in their prisons, content in their penalties, and
comfort in their rapina omnium bonorum. And it is an infallible argument, that
those Christians do begin to live eternally in Christ, who endure temporal
persecution for Christ. For to begin to live in Christ eternally, is to make a
lively profession of their faith in Christ: and to make a lively profession of
their faith in Christ, is to espouse the Cross of Christ, on which in his own
person he destroyed death, and restored life. And to espouse the Cross of
Christ, is to undergo the torcular; for the Cross of Christ, is vere
torcular, in which the first pressed botrus, or bunch of grapes was Christ
himself, a botrus I say, that was not empty but full of generous, pleasant,
and most rich wine, from which proceeded praeclarus Calix inebrians, that is,
the most August price of our Redemption.

These premises, like a pure glass, do reflect, and clearly show the
necessary, and essential connection that interceedes betwit credere in
Christum, and pati pro Christo: and consequently do illustrat that orthodoxe
verity inculcated to the Hebrew's, vobis datur non solum in eum credere, sed
etiam rapinam bonorum pati. Wherefore, if credere in Christum, shall justly
challenge from you respect, esteem, and obedience, the same honor reverence,
and submission is due to pati pro Christo. That you may be armed with Christian
constancy, and Christian perseverance, both credere in Christum, and pati pro
Christo, I shall daily offer to Christ my best employments, and say with the
Blessed Apostle, quotidie morior propter vestram gloriam fratres; Who am.

Your most obedient brother in Christ JESUS, and most humble servant. G. L.
Postscript

I do profess before God, and his blessed Angels, that my design, in
publishing this declaratory Epistle, has been purely to conserve our Clergies
honor, to prevent farther spreading of dangerous doctrines, and to vindicate
my own Innocence.

As concerning difference betwixt my self, and M.r Blacloe, in the time of my
acquaintance with him, that is, in the space of above thirty years, to my best
remembrance, I never gave him the least occasion of offense, more than showing
my aversion from his profane Novelties, in which I did adheere to all our
ancient Clergy: as also by expressing my dislike of his perverseness, and
disobedience, to Authority.



FIN.

