THE SVMME OF DOCTOR LEYBVRNES ANSWER TO A LETTER PRINTED AGAINST HIM BY M.R
BLACLOE.

By The Widdowe of MARK WYON, 1657.

SVPERIORVM PERMISSV.

THE SVMME OF DOCTOR LEYBVRNES ANSWER TO A LETTER PRINTED AGAINST HIM BY M.R
BLACLOE.
MOST HONORED SIR.
Some few days ago, having received a copy of a very bitter, and (in my
judgment) most scandalous Letter, published in Print by M.r Blacloe, against
D.r Leyburne, I was impatient, until I had fish't from him, what he could
answer to the uncharitable, and injurious contents of the said Letter, that
accordingly I might acquaint you, in regard of your eminent place amongst our
Brethren. Wherefore, be pleased to know the sum of what I heard from his
own mouth.

1.o Doctor Leyburne does own the Letter, from which M.r Blacloes quarrel
takes its rise, but ingeniously professes, that in communicating the
scandalous reports spread of his profane Novelties, to the great prejudice of
your Clergy, and his own family, his only pure design was, therebie to
awaken M.r Blacloe out of his long, and deep lethargy, and to put before his
opened eyes the considerable inconveniences, that unfortunately he had procured
to himself, and to all his Brethren, piously hoping, that so deplorable a
spectacle might have drawn from him reason, compunction, and amendment, and
consequently some heroical exterior act, in satisfaction of his former
proceedings, at least might have invited him to exercise a laudable act of
Charity, either after the example of the Apostle S. Paul: si esca scandalizat
fratrem meum, non manducabo carnem in aeternum, ne fratrem meum scandalizem: or
in imitation of the holy Prophet Jonas, tollite me, and mittite in mare,
quoniam propter me tempestas haec grandis venit super vos: casting himself
into the sea of an humble submission to Authority.

2.o To the unbeseeming, and reproachful language uttered by M.r Blacloe in
the said printed Letter, to wit, mad man, sycophant, etc. D.r Leyburne only
replied with gratias ago Deo meo, quod sim dignus quem oderint homines, quoniam
illi magis quam his studeo placere.

3.o As concerning the Regulars report, viz. that the doctrine of M.r Blacloe
was destructive of Religion, and of Morality, teaching that a man, for
example, fornicating every day, may be saved, if he reserve in that, or any
other sin a love to God. Also as concerning the proposition that M.r Blacloe
does pick out of the said doctrine, and acknowledges for his own assertion,
to wit, that one who should committ an exterior sin still remaining in
charity, should nevertheless go to heaven, which he styles the substance of
the spread doctrine, or body, without the vesture, which he calls a calumny
forged and fostered in the breast of Doctor Leyburne. As concerning I say these
particulars, Doctor Leyburne replied, saying, that he could not but extremely
admire the distemper of M.r Blacloes conscience, quae semper praesumit saeua,
Sap. 17. imitating therein the spider, that whatsoever it suck's turns into
poison, whereas it were more for his own advantage to resemble the be, that
co^verteth the bitter juice of the worst flowers into sweet, and odoriferous
honey: cave (says S. Bernard) esse curiosus alienae vitae explorator, and
iudex temerarius: and protested withal, that he had not made the least
addition to the Regulars report, and consequently that M.r Blacloe did somnia
fingere, imagining that the Regular would have been so irregular, as to have
spit in his face, for venting a report, that the Regular himself had spread.
And Doctor Leyburne added, saying, but to show you now the distemper of M.r
Blacloes understanding, as well as the disorder of his conscience, it shall
clearly appear, that the assertion above mentioned, and acknowledged for his
own (viz if one should committ an external sin still remaining in charity,
nevertheless might go to heaven, which assertion he calls the body of the
report) does necessarily require the circumstances ( destructive of Religion
and morality, which he calls the vesture to the said body, forged and
fostered in the breast of Doctor Leyburne) which is proved thus. The said
assertion imports so sweet an agreement betwixt charity, and exterior sin,
that exterior sin does not exclude charity from the soul, nor the soul is
excluded from the Kingdom of heaven by exterior sin, and therefore the said
vesture (destructive of Religion and morality) is essentially included in the
body, as M.r Blacloe has molded it: for that excellent harmony, betwixt
charity, and exterior sin, shall infallibly inuit frail nature to sin
exteriorly, presuming, that, notwithstanding the exterior sin, for example
drunkenness, fornication, adultery, the love retained toward God shall bring
him to heaven; which vnchristned doctrine contradicts Christ's Apostle, who
says, quod neque ebrij, neque fornicatores neque adulteri regnum Dei
possidebunt.

Doctor Leyburne added, that M.r Blacloe would never undo this argument, unless
first he should undo his body (I mean his above mentioned assertion) and
mould it anew, at which play he is so dexterous, that he may rightly be styled
coluber Britannicus, or lubricus anguis, propter sinuosos flexus, quos in
singulis suis scriptis exercet.

Here I put Doctor Leyburne in mind, that M.r Blacloe had made use of the
Scripture to prove his said assertion, instancing in Lot, and his daughters,
for a confirmation of it: to which Doctor Leyburne answered, that the holy
Scripture would afford him no protection in its Sanctuary, to wit, in no one
place affirming, that if one should commit an exterior sin still remaining
in charity, nevertheless might go to heaven. And that, as for his instance, it
did not avail him a button. For Lot lost his charity in his exterior sin
of drunkenness, at least, at the second boute, according to the whole current
of Doctors in the Catholic Church, to say nothing of his daughters, concerning
whose incest Doctores alij, and alij, aliter, and aliter sentiunt. Howeuer, the
holy Scripture does not say that Lot had charity with his exterior sin,
and M.r Blacloe goes fondly about to prove it, because God did bless the
progeny, that proceeded from him and his daughters. For God did bless the
issue of Judas and Thamar, and in a far higher nature (Christ as man
descending from it) notwithstanding, that in their incestuous copula, neither
had the virtue of charity: Judas committing voluntarily the sin of simple
fornication, and Thamar the flagitium of incest. Moreover S. Austine says that
God did extend the territories of the Roman Empire, for the moral virtues
practiced by the ancient Romans, who notwithstanding were not endued with
divine charity. To conclude God built the Obstetrices Hebraearum houses, who
made use of a lie to save the male children of the Hebrews, contrary to the
command of the King of Egypt. Of whom S. Austin speaks thus: Deus remunerauit
benignitatem mentis, non iniquitatem mentientis. Doctor Leyburne ended with an
Epiphonema, is this sapere ad aedificationem?

4.o Doctor Leyburne said, that M.r Blacloe in his Answer to the second
accusation, uses much Club-law, employing all his Clubs against him, viz
Club-sycophant, Club-calumniator, Club-hissing serpent, etc. and gloriously
acts Thomas Albionum Trinobantum, a bragging captain, indeavoring to
possess the world, that he has subdued the Doctor, and brought him under the
lash of his sacred Institutions, (for so he Christnes his profane Novelties)
and that he holds him fast condemned therein, which he proves thus. The Doctor
says, that M.r Blacloe teaches, that the happiness of the Damned does surpass
the happiness of the happiest Emperors that ever were, and that he is sure,
that those words are verbatim in his writings. But there are no such words in
his writings. Ergo the Doctor is condemned. The minor M.r Blacloe shows out of
the second tome of his Institutions, Lect. 16. where as follows, Sequitur
aeternitatis status, beatis animae, corporisque bonis refertissimus, damnatis
ex sua ipsorum peruersitate infaelix. Summa enim bona temporaria non possunt
comparari minimis bonis cuiusuis damnati, a Deo in ipsos pene inuitos, ipsa
causarum a Deo institutarum serie collatis. Illi puta eminentiae aenimae, and
plenitudini scientiae, and immortalitati corporis, and immutabilitati; quibus,
si frui, ipsis ab illorum peruersitate copia daretur, etsi non statui beatorum
comparandus, tamen respectu huius mundi faelicissimus foret eorum status.

Doctor Leyburne, before he would engage in the solution of this M.r Blacloes
Achilles, thought fitting to inculcate one observation, to wit, that he knew
not how faithfully M.r Blacloe had recited his words in the Mayor proposition,
because he is assured, that in another place there is corruption in the
citation. Howeuer, he could not mean by the particle verbatim, that his words,
written in English, were to be found in M.r Blacloes Latin writings, but
only, that the sense of the words was therein expressed. This presupposed, the
Doctor admitted the mayor, and denied the minor, saying, that Lectio 16. of the
said Institutions contained the express sense of the words, with which he had
charged M.r Blacloe. For the same Lectio says thus, summa bona temporaria non
possunt comparari minimis bonis cuiusuis damnati, a Deo in ipsos pene inuitos,
ipsa causarum a Deo institutarum serie collatis. And the Doctor said, that he
never fathered more on M.r Blacloe, then the express sense of the foresaid
words, they importing, that the happiness of the damned does surpass the
happiness of the happiest Emperors that ever were. But perhaps M.r Blacloe will
object, that the Doctor should have considered the precedent and subsequent
words of what is above cited out of Lect. 16. To which objection it is
answered, that albeit, both the precedent, and subsequent words include a
restriction, or limitation; yet it is sufficient to preserve the Doctors
reputation, and to defend him from M.r Blacloes Club. law, that the middle
words betwixt the precedent, and subsequent, did bear the express sense,
especially M.r Blacloe having made punctums betwixt the precedent, and the
middle words, and betwixt the middle, and subsequent words.

Doctor Leyburne added, that the foresaid restriction contained in the
precedent, and subsequent words, would bring prejudice to M.r Blacloe, giving
an occasion to the Doctor to club his opinion into an heresy, as also to
eleuate the happiness of the damned, above the happiness of this world, if Mr
Blacloe shall stand to his principles. The latter the Doctor proved thus.
Diogenes, and his fellow Philosophers were happy in respect of this world,
upon the score of knowledge, in which they did excel. Or thus, to use his own
words again, the greatest temporal goods cannot be compared to the least
goods of any one of the damned: as for example, to the fulness of knowlegde, if
permitted to use it. But the damned, notwithstanding their perverseness, enjoy
a full knowledge, that far surpasses the knowledge of Diogenes, and all his
fellow Philosophers. Ergo the damned, notwithstanding their perverseness, are
happy. The mayor, according to M.r Blacloes grounds, is warrantable, and the
minor demonstrable thus. A full knowledge of all natural things is natural to
all the damned, men, and Angels, their understanding not being diminished in
its entitie, and force, in order to speculation of natural things. Ergo the
damned, notwithstanding their perverseness, enjoy, etc. The consequence is
evident, and the antecedent is asserted by S. Dion. lib. de diu. nom. cap. 4.
to whom S. Thomas, and all schoolmen do subscribe, teaching, omnia naturalia
mansisse integra in daemonibus, and even in this age, divines call the damned
Angels, daemones that is, scientes, derin'd from that excellent science, and
knowledge, which they enjoy of all natural things, and the same may be said of
the other natural proprieties appertaining to the damned. Wherefore, according
to M.r Blacloes principles, that ascribes no other infelicitie to the damned,
then their pure perverseness, the naturalia manentia integra, notwithstanding
the said perverseness, it follows evidently, that their happiness is elevated
above all the happiness, that is to be found in the goods of this world, still
remaining in their perverseness. Howeuer, M.r Blacloe shall never make it
appear to any understanding man, that purely perverseness does render the
damned unhappy, especially he teaching in the third book of his Institutions,
Lec. 9. damnatos suas ipsorum paenas diligere, and ijs carere nolle. Where is
obseruable, that, in this assertion, he contradicts the holy Scripture. For
Apoc. 6. the damned say to the mountains, and the rocks, cadite super nos. And
again he says in the said book Lect. 16. damnatos posse, etiamnum, si
vellent, esse beatos. And it is little to the present purpose, or to his
advantage, the example he brings of Antiochus, who (as it is reported in the
Macchabees, said to his friends, in quantam tribulationem deueni, and in quos
fluctus tristitiae, in qua nunc sum: who (says M.r Blacloe) iucundus erat and
dilectus in potestare. For in 2. Macchab. cap. 9. it is related, that Dominus
Deus Israel percusserat eum insanabili plaga, quodque apprehendit eum dolor
viscerum, and amara internorum tormenta. Which clearly shows, that his
tristitiae was no more, then an effect of his unhappiness, proceeding ab
extrinseco, to wit dolor viscerum, and amara internorum tormenta. But M.r
Blacloe does constitute the unhappiness of the damned in a pure perverseness in
their will, expressly teaching in Lec. 6. of his Institutions above mentioned,
damnatorum paenas non esse extrinsecus inflictas, sed and voluntarias, and
puras volitiones esse: and the same and no other pains he acknowledges in the
afflictions of the faithful souls in Purgatory, as appears in his book de
medio animarum statu, Demenso. 11.

The Doctor added, that M.r Blacloes doctrine should here be club'd into an
heresy, which he demonstrated out of holy Scripture, Mat. 25. Ite maledicti
in ignem aeternum: and Luc. 16. dives epulo cries out crucior in haec fiamma.
And therefore M.r Blacloe is in an heresy, ascribing the affliction of the
damned to pure volitions, that is, to intentionall acts of the will, which
holy Scripture attributes to the efficiencie of fire.

The Doctor added again, that perhaps M.r Blacloe will answer, that by fire,
expressed in holy Scripture, are understood his intentionall acts of a
perverse will, and that, ite in ignem aeternum, and, ite in puras volitiones
peruersas, are synonima; and consequently, seeing that the perverse volitions of
the damned be sins, Christ by saying, ite in ignem aeternum, shall be made
author of sin, which is a greater blasphemy, then the heresy is a flagitium.

Moreover the Doctor said, it is here obseruable, that contrary to M.r
Blacloes learning, all the Fathers in the Council of Florence did maintain
against the Grecians, the fire of Purgatory (and the same is to be understood
of the fire of hell) to be true material fire. To whose doctrine, in this age,
does subscribe the whole current of Doctors in the Catholic Church,
unanimously teaching, the contrary to be temerarious, or next to heresy, if
not heretical, interpreting the holy Scripture above mentioned, according to
the rule of S. Austine, that is, literally, cum fieri possit sine fidei and
morum praeiudicio, and consequently understanding the said place of Scripture
of true material fire, conceiving no such prejudice to arise from that
interpretation. And therefore it is great impudence, and madness in M.r Blacloe
to explicate the said Scripture as expressly he does 3. Instit. lect. 11.
contrary to the unanimous sense of the holy, and learned Fathers in the
Council of Florence, and the now current of Doctors in the Catholic Church.

Howeuer, it seems that M.r Blacloes ambition is to teach the holy Church of
God, and all learned schoolmen, a doctrine they knew not before. And, in this
respect, the Doctor made an apostrophe to M.r Blacloe, as S. Hierome did to
Ruffinus, in the like case of ambition: Deus bone, caelesti numini profecto
gratulamur, quod post tot annos and Doctorum series, vnus aduenerit, (Thomas
Albiorum Trinobantum) qui scholasticos excitet tantae veritati indormientes.
Doctor Leyburne ended with an epiphonema, is this sapere ad sobrietatem?

After that Doctor Leyburne had thus finished his second encounter, I was
transported with a curiosity, to know of him, if M.r Blacloes Institutions
did conteyne any more dangerous, and disedifying doctrines: and he answered,
that they had within their bowels, a whole Army of profane novelties, and
withal did instance in these following.

The first lect. 16. page 357. M.r Blacloe teaches ex vi, and serie naturae
non potuisse damnatis melius contingere, neque omnibus, neque singulis: sed and
natura, and Deus futuri fuissent deteriores, si aliter cum ijs actum foret. The
sense in English is, that, considering the force, and series of nature (he
means connection of natural causes) the damned could not have been better
provided for either in general, or in particular; nay, both God and nature
would have been worse, (that is, would have suffered prejudice) if the damned
had not been damned. Which is adeo aperta blasphemia, vt eam prodere sit
confutare. But I should be glad to know of M.r Blacloe, whither before the
creation of natures force, and series, the Eminency of Gods perfection was not
in it self complete, and independent of the existence, the said series enioys.
He dares not answer negative, wherefore he is obliged to answer affirmative,
and consequently to confess, that it is yet within the reach of the divine
Omnipotency, to annihilate the said series of nature, and all the damned in
hell, without preiudicing himself in the divine eminency of his perfection.
Howeuer this doctrine maintained by M.r Blacloe imports a great impiety, to
wit, that God never had a will, or desire to save the damned, for otherwise the
fulfilling of the said will could never have brought prejudice to Gods
excellent goodness, and perfection. And, that God had an antecedent will to save
the very damned, is an undoubted verity, revealed in the holy Scriptures S.
Paul 1. ad Tim. 2. Deus, (inquit) vult omnes homines saluos fieri: and the
Prophet Ezechiel, who expresses Gods will, or desire to save all sinners in
these words, viuo ego, dicit Dominus Deus, nolo mortem impij, sed vt
conuertatur impius a via sua, and viuat. And Tertullian in his commentary upon
that place, jurat Deus (says he) vt sibi credatur: O beatos nos, quorum causa
Deus jurat, sed o miseros nos, si Deo iuranti non credamus. Wherefore it is
evident, that God had a will, notwithstanding that series, or connection of
nature, to have saved those who are damned, and consequently God would not be
now in a worse condition, if his said will had been fulfilled. Doctor Leyburne
ended with an Epiphonema, is this sapere ad Christianismum?

The second profane Novelty page 328. where he affirms Christum non esse
mortuum pro re, vel persona non concessa: the sense in English is that, Christ
did not dye for all, which is the doctrine of Calvin 4. Instit. 24. and
condemned by Pope Innocent the 10.th for temerarious, scandalous, impious,
derogating to the divine piety, and heretical. And, how contrary this
doctrine is to holy Scriptures, I leave to the judgment of those, who shall
piously consider the sacred texts. 1. Cor. 8. peribie infirmus in tua scie^tia
frater, pro quo Christus mortuus est: in English, through thy knowledge (or
Learning) shall perish thy weak brother, for whom Christ died. Romans 14. noli
cibo tuo illum perdere, pro quo Christus mortuus est: destroy not him with thy
meat, for whom Christ died. Out of which Authorities may be argued thus. One
can perish, and be destroyed for whom Christ died: but the concessi or, electi,
or praedestinati do never perish, or are destroyed: ergo Christ did not only
dye pro re, vel persona concessa. Moreover 1. Tim. 4. the Apostle calls
Christ Saluator omnium hominum, maxim fidelium: the savior of all men,
chiefly of the faithful. Where is obseruable that Christ is not named absolute
and simpliciter the savior of the faithful, but with this restriction maxim,
chiefly, or principally. And S. John in his first Epistle, cap. 2. ipse est
(Christus) propitiatio pro peccatis nostris, non pro nostris tantum, sed and
pro peccatis totius mundi. In which place are not meant only the elect, but
also the reprobate, according to the interpretation of the Council of Trent,
sess. 6. cap. 3. which from thence gathers, that not all those for whom
Christ died have received the benefit of his death. But omnes personae
concessae (to use M.r Blacloes own words) have or will receive the benefit of
Christ's death. And therefore Christ died pro persona non concessa. Doctor
Leyburne ended with an Epiphonema, is this sapere ad veram and germanam sacrae
Scripturae intelligentiam?

The third profane Novelty Lec. 9. page 81. M.r Blacloe auerreth sententiam
asserentem Sacramenta nouae legis causare gratiam, ex opere operato, vitam, and
perfectionem Christianam, quae in cultura animae, and in bonis actibus
consistit, transfer in ritus, and superstitionem Paganam, qua credantur certa
opera externa placere Deo, and efficere (vi quasi magica) bonitatem, non nisi
violentia intensi affectus capiendam: 'quare euidens est hanc sententiam magis
facibus abolendam esse, quam argumentis confutandam. Thus he. the meaning is,
that outward works, as are the Sacraments, exercise no efficiencie in the
production of sanctifying Grace, which is the opinion of Luther, lib. de
Captiu. Babylon. And of all the sectaries in this age. But seeing that M.r
Blacloe does brand the common doctrine mantained by the current of learned men
in Gods Church, and audaciously affirms nullum esse istius profanitatis (so he
styles the said common doctrine) verbulum, vel similitudinem in Concilio
Tridentino (as is evident out of his own words of the same lection page 78.)
it will be expedient to allege the words of the said Council, thereby to come
to a judgment. The Council sess. 7. can. 6. defines thus, si quis dixerit
Sacramenta nouae legis non continere gratiam quam significant, aut gratiam
ipsam non ponentibus obicem non confer, quasi signa tantum externa sint, etc.
anathema sit. Et can. 8. si quis dixerit per ipsa nouae legis Sacrementa ex
opere operato non conferri gratiam, etc. anathema sit. But M.r Blacloe answers,
that albeit the Council does define, that the Sacraments of the new law do
conteyne, and confer grace, yet it means not, that Sacraments, which are
outward works, exercise any causalltie, or efficiencie, as schoolmen
unanimously teach; for that were, says he, to transfer life, and Christian
perfection, into a Pagan superstition: and to begert a belief, that outward
works (as it were by a magic force) do effect goodness, or sanctity. And
thence concludes, that the opinion of Doctors teaching that Sacraments do
confer Grace ex opere operato, est facibus abolenda. And upon the same score
he must condemn to the fire S Austine saying, vnde tanta virtus aquae, vt
corpus rangat, cor vero abluat, to wit, ascribing the purgation, or
sanctification of the soul to the outward, or extrinsecall water of Baptism.
The Doctor ended with an Epiphonema Quam imprudenter noster Thomas Albiorum
Trinobantum Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata rotundis?

5.o Whereas M.r Blacloe in his answer to the third objection pretend's, that
his whole scope, in writing rules of Government, was to highten, and commend
the exemptions from any written Law, or custom of the Common wealth, which
the dignity of a supreme Prince, or Magistrate gives him: and imediately after
subiect's the said supreme Magistrate to a rational law, or law of reason
(figmentum antea inauditum) by virtue of which his whole scope is, to vnhighten
the dignity of the said supreme Magistrate, and to bring him to Judgment, and
punishment, as often as the law of reason shall require, from which no supreme
Magistrate is exempt more then from Club law. only according to M.r Blacloe
the punnishing of an offending supreme Magistrate by the law of reason is a
rational action proceeding from a rational nature: and the punnishing of him
by Club-law is an unreasonable act proceeding from an irrational and brutish
nature. The Doctor only answered with an Epiphonema, is this sapere ad
discretionem?

6.o M.r Blacloe having liberally bestowed on Doctor Leyburne the Characters of
sycophant, madman, calumniator, hissing serpent etc. proceeded farther to prove
him an ignorant man, which he performs thus. 1. (says he) his letter shows him
ignorant. 2. his life may prove the same, he having spent his time generally in
a practical way: true it is, he studied some time before his suing for his
Doctorship, but with such success, as I am assured he understood not his
Theses after he had defended them; and being brought under the glorious name of
a Doctor to confer with some of a different Religion he came of with the shame
of those who brought him to it.

Doctor Leyburne answered, that albeit he has hitherto endeavored to free
himself, from the Characters of sycophant, Calumniator, hissing serpent, etc.
yet he takes to the title of ignorant man, and professes ingeniously that he
never had the ambition to be esteemed learned: howeuer he vowed, that M.r
Blacloe had done him wrong in the proofs of his ignorance. For 1. (said he)
only two days after he had defended the said Theses in the University of
Rhemes, the Chief Doctor, and Chaire-man of the said University came unto
him, in the name of their whole body, desiring him to compose new Theses, and
to prepare himself to defend them, in the name of the said University, before
a Provincial Council, which, by Order of their Archbishop, was to assemble in
the said City of Rhemes, within fifteen days, which is a considerable
argument, that the said University was persuaded, that the Doctor understood
his Theses. 2. The Doctor composed his Theses himself, which was a sign that
he understood them. Moreover they contained neither false Latin, or dangerous
opinion, as did the Theses, made by M.r Blacloe, for his friend the Doctor at
Paris, some eighteen years ago. 3. Doctor Leyburne said, that he had
moderated, and defended more Theses in Divinity, then ever M.r Blacloe had. 4.
Doctor Leyburnes Theses, which he composed, and defended three years ago, in
the University of Doway, were honored with the title of pulchrae Theses, and
presented by some of the said University to the Popes Nuncio at Brussells,
with a request, that they might be exhibited to the Pope, to acquaint his
Holiness, with the sound, and sober doctrine, professed in the said Vniuesitie.
But M.r Blacloe teaching Divinity at Lisbo, no sooner had printed his first
Theses, then they were put into the Inquisition, as containing dangerous
opinions: in so much that, he terrifi'de at the proceeding, sodeinly quitted
Portugal, returning into England. By which is apparent, that although, as M.r
Blacloe says, the Doctor has spent little time in studies, yet it seems,
that the divine providence has been more favorable to the Doctor, than to M.r
Blacloe, who has employed the whole course of his life, for the purchase of
knowledge, that has brought prejudice to himself, and to all his Brethren. As
Concerning the Doctors being brought to confer with some of a different
Religion, etc. it is one of M.r Blacloes dreams, without any ground of
verity. But the Doctor does well remember M.r Blacloes conference with
Chillingworth, who triumphed over him, to the great disadvantage of his Cause.
The Doctor ended with an Epiphonema, is this sapere ad veritatem?

7.o After that M.r Blacloe had finished his charge of calumnies against Doctor
Leyburne, and their goodly proofs, it seems his great Counselor and
secretary M.r Holland (according to their contrived plot) thought it now a fit
time (presuming that the precedent Calumnies would have sufficiently lessened
the Doctors esteem, in the opinion of the Clergy) to inculcate, and insinuate
into the hearts of our Brethren, and Lay-Catholicks, the two chief opinions
amongst M.r Blacloes profane Novelties, to wit, concerning the Popes
infallibility, and the imprisonment of souls in Purgatory until the day of
judgment. And as touching the first, M.r Blacloe opens his breast thus to his
said Secretary. I told you, said he, I heard it (his book written against the
Popes infallibility) would not be meddled with at Rome; nay there want not
those who say it will be well accepted, it bringing the Popes infallibility
into a rational Thesis, whereas the contrary was not defensible, but by force
of command, and power, and scandalized Catholics who sought for reason, and
auerted those, who otherwise were near conversion, until they met with
Catholics of another opinion. Doctor Leyburne answered with a zealous
exclamation, saying, o God how this poor man acts the serpent, that hissed
poison to Eve in Paradise! how he is blown up with the dreams of his own
troubled fancy! how ambitious he is to execute his law of reason, that is his
Club-law, for the knocking down of the Popes infallibility, pretending that
it is a mutherer of souls, hindering their conversion: and (to use his own
words) a greater sin, them to destoure a virgin upon an altar. Doctor
Leyburne added, can any man, though only half witted, conceive, that
Alexander 7.th now Pope of Rome is well satisfied with M.r Blacloe, for
impugning his infallibility, which Catholic Doctors, in all ages, have
ascribed unto him: or can it be rationally conceived, that any one that is
compos mentis should be auerted from the Catholic Religion, upon that score of
Infallibility, which rather should be a motive to embrace it? For who would
not sooner adhere to that Church, whose Chief Pastor is esteemed infallible,
and cannot tell a lie for a truth defining as chief Pastor, then to a Church,
whose chief Pastor is subject to fallibilitie? therefore he cannot believe but
that M.r Blacloe did dream this frivolous pretense, that the Popes
infallibility should dissuade from the Catholic faith. But this poor man
has the ambition, to be esteemed, amongst all Christians, the Christian
rational, imitating in that piece of pride the Donatists, who made clear
reason to march before their belief, against whom S. Austine writes thus,
credimus vt cognoscamus, non cognoscimus vt credamus: and again, says he,
Christianus fidelis, non rationalis nominatur, Doctor Leyburne ended, with an
Epiphonema. is this sapere ad fide^ Christianam?

As touching the second, his durance of Purgatory, M.r Blacloe thus hisseth
poisoned words to his Brethren. My friend Macedo, says he, would not touch it,
auerring it to be the opinion of diverse Fathers, particularly S. Austine;
others of my Adversaries, that it was hard to answer, what I had said. Further
consider, how contrary it is to piety, charging God with an irrational
justice taking away the privilege of charity, by affirming that souls perfect
in charity are yet deprived of the sight of God, and exposing heaven to
auction, that who can give most shall soonest come thither. Add what slight
grounds they go upon, certain visions, etc. The Doctor said that with horror
and indignation he read the impious and blasphemous doctrine contained in the
recited words. Withal answered.

1.o That M.r Blacloe was to be commended for stiling Macedo his friend, for he
procured at Rome the condemning of one of his books: and it was the part of a
true friend, to seek his conversion to pure doctrine, and to the obedience of
the Church. But how happened it, that his said friend Macedo, auerring S.
Austine particulary to hold with M.r Blacloe in the detention of souls in
Purgatory, until the day of Judgment, has not mentioned the Book, and Page,
where the said S. Austine teaches that opinion. And how happens it now, that
our all-knowing Thomas Albiorum Trinobantum. etc. (so vainly he subscribes his
name to his printed writings) does not supply that defect of his friend
Macedo. Howeuer I my self shall help in this buisnesse, and cite S. Austine
for him lib. 15. de Trin. cap. 25. constituuntur autem purgati, ab omni
cogitatione corruptionis, in placidis sedibus, donec recipiant corpora sua.
See, how favorable S. Austine is to M.r Blacloes opinion, who places souls in
heaven, to expect their bodies after their purgation in the next life: as will
clearly appear to him, that shall peruse the cited chapter. Again S. Austine
hom. 16. writes thus, quanta fuerit peccati materia, tanta and pertranseundi
mura. Where see again, how favorable S. Austine is to M.r Blacloes opinion,
speaking of souls passing the river of fire (Purgatory) says, by how much
more the matter of sin is, so much longer the souls shall stay in their
passage, whence is clearly inferred, that some souls do pass sooner then
others.

2.o Doctor Leyburne answered, that M.r Blacloe in condemning the doctrine,
that teaches the deliverance of souls out of Purgatory before the day of
Judgment, as contrary to Piety, commit's an impiety, aduersus Spiritum
sanctum, which S. Matthew calls impardonable in hoc seculo, and in futuro: in
condemning the said doctrine, as charging God with an irrational justice
commit's blasphemy, quod est peccatum ad mortem, and non habet remissionem in
aeternum: and in condemning the said doctrine as exposing heaven to auction, or
open sale, that who can give most shall soonest come thither, comit's flagitium
profanitatis. But, at what a hight of impudency and impiety is this poor man
arrived, affirming an orthodoxe verity, defined by Pope Engenius in the
general Counsel of Florence, as also by Pope Benedict the 12.th auer'd by
ancient Fathers, approved by the universal practice of Gods Church, and
confirmed and taught by the whole current of Catholic Doctors, to be contrary
to piety, to charge God with an irrational justice, and to expose heaven to
open sale, that who shall give most money shall carry it! Blasphema dicit
Blaclous, profana dicit, falsa dicit: blasphema stupemus, profana cauemus,
falsa conuincimus.

3.o Doctor Leyburne answered, that M.r Blacloe in auerring that the said
Catholic Tenet relieth on certain visions, which he calls old wives tales,
commits an injurious falsitie seeing that the said doctrine is protected with
the authority of an infallible Council, fortified with an universal practice
of the Church, and armed with an unanimous consent of all Catholic Doctors.
Yet albeit our Catholic doctrine of the durance of Purgatory does not rely
on visions: howeuer our vnus Doctor M.r Blacloe profanely calls apparitions
of holy souls old owiues tales, seeing that they have always been numbered
amongst divine miracles, and besides they are grounded on authority of holy
Scripture, Samuel 1. Reg. 2. Sauli vere apparuit, according to the common
opinion: and it is an undoubted truth, that Moses appeared in Christ's
Transfiguration: and S. Matthew cap. 17. and 27. mentions diverse apparitions
in Christ his Resurrection: and S. Austine lib. de cura pro more. cap. 10.
affirms the souls of the departed to have oftentimes appeared, si falsa esse,
inquit, responderimus (to wit, that souls have often appeared) contra
quorundam scripta fidelium, and contra eorum sensus, qui talia sibi accidisse
confirmant, impudenter venire videbimur. Whence is inferred that according to S.
Austines judgment, M.r Blacloes opinion is branded with impudency.

Here Doctor Leyburne gave over the conflict, expressing only a zealous desire
to imprint in the hearts of his Brethren, what S. Austine did inculcate to all
Christian people, who in his second book written against Julian, who had
broach't profane novelties, to the prejudice of souls, uses these words: hos
(the holy Fathers, who flourished in the precedent ages) oportet, vt Christiani
populi vestris profanis nouitatibus anteponant, cisque potius, quam vobis,
eligant adhaerere. And wished, that our Brethren, at the example of this great
Doctor, would prefer the holy Fathers in a general Council assembled,
before M.r Blacloes profane novelties, and to adhere rather to the universal
practice of the Catholic Church, then to his singularity.

AN ADVERTISMENT.
WHereas a certain Decree has been made by the Holy Congregation, de
propaganda fide, prohibiting all Apostolical Missionaries to print an Opus,
without the express leave of the said Congregation, Doctor Leyburne did
confer with some Professors of Divinity, whither the printing of an Epistle
were comprehended in that Decree, and it was judged negative. Howeuer, seeing
that through the dispersing of M.r Blacloes printed Letter, by Order from a
Consult, Doctor Leyburne had just ground to apprehend prejudice to his own
reputation, and ruin to many souls, if not prevented by some present remedy,
it was thought lawful for him, in so urgent a necessity, to use
interpretation per epikiam, in case his Epistle had been comprehended in the
said Decree. Thus much Doctor Leyburne judged fitting to signify, least some
weak brother might esteem him disobedient to the said Decree. Moreover Doctor
Leyburne will use expedition to acquaint both the Cardinal Protector, and the
said Holy Congregation with his proceeding, to whom he submit's his present
writings. In the interim he desires his Brethren to excuse what they find
defective either in this Answer or his Declaratorie Epistle, having in a
manner been constrained to finish both, in the space of two Posts out of
England.

FIN.

