The ART of NUMBERING BY SPEAKING-RODS: Vulgarly termed Nepeirs Bones.

By which The most difficult Parts of ARITHMETIC, As Multiplication, Division,
and Extracting of Roots both Square and Cube, Are performed with incredible
Celerity and Exactness (without any charge to the Memory) by Addition and
Substraction only.

Published by W. L.

LONDON; Printed for G. Sawbridge, and are to be sold at his House on
Clerkenwell-Green, 1667.

THE ARGUMENT TO THE READER.
THe Right Honorable John Lord Nepeir, Baron of Merchiston in Scotland; In the
Composure of those ever to be admired Tables of his Invention called
Logarithms, finding his Calculations so laborious in long and tedious
Multiplications, Divisions, and Extracting of Roots, that his Invention to him
must needs render it self very unpleasant, had he not known that the Labor
when finished will crown both Him and his Work. He advised with diverse Learned
men studious in the Sciences Mathematical, and to them (and amongst them)
especially to Mr. Henry Briggs, who (by a Learned and able Divine) was styled
(and not without due respect) our English Archimedes, to him, I say, this
honorable Lord imparted his Invention, who joining issue with him in this
Herculean Labor, brought them to that perfection to which they are now (to the
admiration of all Europe) arrived.

In the tedious calculation of these Numbers, the Author finding his Work to go
on but very slowly, at length studying out for some help by Art to assist him
in this his Noble Enterprise, thinking upon several helps; at last (by the
blessing of God) he happened to find out this which I here intend to describe
and show the use of, with some Additions and variation, from what he has
himself done in his Treatise in Latin, Published and Printed at Edinburgh in
Scotland, in Anno 1617, Entitled Rabdologiae seu Numerationis per Virgulas.
The uses whereof I shall in the following Tractate endeavor to render so plain
and easy, that he that can but Add and Substract shall be made able in a days
time and less to Multiply and Divide any great Numbers, nay, and to Extract
both the Square and Cube Roots.

I have begun this Treatise with the Fabric and Inscription of these Rods
according to the Authors Description, which being not so convenient either for
Portability or Practice, as some others which I have seen and used, I have
described them (I think) in the best manner they possible can be contrived.

For their Use, I am sure I have done more than hitherto I have seen done, and
(if I mistake not) to as good and effectual purpose. I do not publish it as a
Novelty, neither do I attribute much in it to my self, besides the Method, for
had I not been desired, I should hardly have thought upon it; however it being
done, Accept it and Use it, till I direct something else to thee which may be
more acceptable, till when, I bid thee heartily

Farewell.
Place this Figure at the beginning of the Book
Fig: 2.
Fig: 3.
Fig: 4.
Square. Cube.


CHAP. I. Concerning the Fabric and Inscription Of these RODS.
IN the foregoing Argument I told you, That the Author and Inventer of this
kind of Instrument, of which I intend to show the Use, called it RABDOLOGIA,
and the Word he thus defines:

RABDOLOGIA est Ars Computandi per Virgulas numeratrices. That is, RABDOLOGIE
is the Art of Counting by Numbering Rods.

I. Of the Fabric of these Rods according to the Inventors Description of them.
These Rods may be made either o^ Silver, Brass, Box, Ebony, or Ivory of which
last substance I suppose the^ were at first made, for that they ar^ (for the
most part) by all that know or use them, called NEPAIRSBONES.

But let the matter of which they are made be what it will, their form
(according to this description) i^ exactly a square Parallelepipedon (...) the
length being about three Inches* and the breadth of them about One* tenth part
of the length. But the length of these Rods are not confined to three Inches,
but let the length be what it will, the breadth must be a tenth part thereof,
but that may be accounted a competent breadth that is capable of receiving of
two numerical Figures, for there is never upon one Rod required more to be set
on the breadth thereof.

The breadth of these Rods being exactly One tenth part of the length thereof,
when 10 of these are laid together they do exactly make a Geometrical square,
and if 20 of them be tabulated or laid together, they will make a right-angled
Parallelogram, whose length is double to its breadth. If 30 be tabulated, the
Figure will be still a Parallelogram, whose length will be three times the
breadth, and so if 40, four times the length 65, si^ 650.

The Rods being thus prepared of exact length and breadth, let each of them be
divided into 10 equal parts, with this Proviso, that Nine of the Ten parts
stand in the middle of each Rod, and the other tenth part must be divided into
two parts, half whereof must be set at the one end and the other half at the
other end o^ the same Rod. Then from side t^ side draw right Lines from
division ^^ division, so is your Rod divided into Squares on every side thereof
Lastly, from corner to corner of ever^ of these Squares draw a Diagona^ Line,
and that will divide ever^ Square into two Triangles. The Rods being thus
prepared and line^ first into Squares, and then into Triangles, they are then
fit to be numbered.

The Figure (...) at the beginning of the Book shows the Form of one of these
Rods lined as it ought to be.

CHAP. II. How these Rods are to be Numbered.
IN the two half Squares which are at the ends of each Rod on every side, there
are set one single Figure, on each side of every Rod one, in the division at
the end thereof, so every Rod containing four sides, Ten Rods will contain 40
sides, and so consequently will have 40 single Figures at the ends of every of
them; that is, there will be upon the ten Rods amongst them four Figures of
each kind, that is, four Ones, 1111. four twos, 2222. four threes, 3333. four
fours, 4444. four fives, 5555. four sixes, 6666. four sevens, 7777. four
eights, 8888. four nines, 9999. four Ciphers, 0000.

And here it is to be noted, That what Figure soever it be that stands at the
top of the Rod alone, the Figure that stands alone on the other side of the
same Rod, makes that figure up the number 9. As for example; If 1 stand on one
side, 8 will stand on the other side, so 2 and 7 be: As in this Table, where,
If 1 stands alone at the top of any side of any of the Rods, then 8 stands on
the other side of the same Rod. 2 7 3 stands alone 6 stands on 4 at the top
of 5 the other If 5 any side of 4 side of the 6 any of the 3 same Rod. 7 Rods,
then 2 8 1 9 9 0 This also is to be observed in the figuring of every Rod, that
what figure soever stands alone at the top or superior part of the Rod, the
figure or figures that stand in the two Triangles next underneath it, is double
to the figure which stands at the top. And the figures which stand in the
next two Triangles below, that is three times as much as the figure above. And
that in the fourth place, or Triangles, is four times as much as the figure
above 650, till you come to the lowest Triangles in that Rod, and then the
figure or figures that stand in those Triangles are nine times as much as the
figure which stands at the top of the Rod.

So if a Rod have 4 at the top thereof, in the two Triangles which are just and
next under it, has only 4 in them, which is equal to 4; in the next two
Triangles below, there is 8, which is double to 4; in the two Triangles below
them, is 1 and 2, which together make 12, which is three times as much as the 4
at the top; the next Triangles have in them 16, which is four times as much;
the next 20, which is five times as much; the sixth has 24, which is six times
as much. The next Triangles have in them 28, which is seven times 4; the next
has 32, which is eight times as much: And the last Triangles at the bottom
they have 36 in them, which is nine times as much. All which is visible by the
Figure 2 at the beginning of the Book.

And is evident enough by this little Table following, which is the Table of
Multiplication, commonly called Pythagoras his Table.

Figures at the top of each Rod.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 The figures in the First 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Square which
are 1 Times as much as the Figure at the top. Second 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 2
Third 0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 3 Fourth 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 4 Fifth 0 5
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 5 Sixth 0 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 6 Seventh 0 7 14 21
28 35 42 49 56 63 7 Eighth 0 8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72 8 Ninth. 0 9 18 27 36 45
54 63 72 81 9

Thus have you the Fabric, Inseription and Numbering of these Rods, according
to the Inventor contrivance of them: He make mention of Ten of them, and has
in his Book set the figure of the says Ten, of one of which Ten I have given
you a Scheme at the beginning of the Book, which is Figure 2. will now proceed
to give you the description of these Rods in another more commodious form.

CHAP. III. A Description of these Rods according to their best and latest
Contrivance.
THe Description which I shall here give of these Rods, varies not at all from
that before delivered in the matter of which they are made, for these may be
made either in Silver, Brass, Wood, Ivory, etc. Neither do they differ in their
dividing, nor yet in their numbering: Only whereas my Lord Nepair makes them
square, each Rod to contain four sides, these are made flat, consulting each
Rod but of two sides, and contain in length about 2 inches 2/10. and in breadth
1/2 of an inch. and in thickness 1/12 of an inch.

One set of these Rods consists of five pieces, and therefore has but ten
Faces or sides, whereas those of the Lord Nepairs consisted of 40 Plains or
sides.

Upon one of these five pieces (a Figure whereof is at the beginning of the
Book, noted with Figure 3) you have a Cipher at the head of the first piece,
and 9 at the bottom thereof. Upon the second of them you have at the head, and
8 at the bottom: upon the third you have 2 at the head and 7 at the bottom;
upon the fourth 3 at top and 6 at bottom; and upon the fifth you have 4 at the
top, and 5 at the bottom. Every of the two Figures at the top and bottom
together make 9; as 0 and 9 is 9, 1 and 8, 2 and 7, 3 and 6, 4 and 5. And her^
observe, that the Figures 9 8 7 6 5 which stand at the bottom of the Scheme
stand with their heels upwards, in this manner, 9 8 7 6 5, and so do all the
other figures under them till you come to the double Line which is in the
middle of the Scheme noted with A and B, at which Line if the Scheme were cut
into two pieces, and folded or pasted on the backside of the other half, so
that the 9 at the bottom were placed upon the Cipher at the top, and so 8 upon
1 7 upon 2, 6 upon 3, and 5 upon 4, and then the Scheme cut again into five
little slippers by the downright Lines; these five slippets would exactly
represent one set of these Rods, for upon one side of one of these pieces, you
should have a Cipher upon one side, and 9 on the other: Upon the next 1 and 8,
upon another 2 and 7, on another 3 and 6, and on the other 5 and 4; both the
Figures on either side making 9, as before was described.

These five slippets do now contain the whole Table of Pythagoras before
mentioned, but for so few are not of sufficient use, neither are the Ten before
mentioned of the Lord Nepair's order; for there can be but four Figures of one
kind, which in all cases is not sufficient.

Therefore as these Rods are made now a days, they do commonly make six sets of
them, that is, 30 pieces, which contain 60 faces, and these will be of good
use, and there will seldom be found a want, which in those of the Inventors
there will often be, except you have a great quantity, which will be far more
cumbersom than these here described, for there is required as much Metal or
Wood in one of his, as in four of these, and then for his Four sides we have
here Eight.

Concerning a Case for these Rods.
For the orderly keeping and ready finding of these Rods, I have often (for my
self and others) had a Box made of Walnut-tree or Pear Tree, with five
partitions in it, each partition to hold five or six sets of these Rods, or
more if more Rods were required. Every of these partitions being figured on the
side thereof next the Eye, with such figures as the Rods in such a partition
had figures at the top, so that the party that was to use them, could take them
as readily out of his partition, as a Printer can take his Letters out of his
respective Boxes to make any Word.

In this Box there is also convenient room made for one other Rod, double in
breadth to these here described, but of the same length and thickness; upon the
one side whereof there is a Table or Plate useful in the Extracting of the
Square Root, and on the other side another for the Extracting of the Cube Root,
the Figure whereof is at the beginning of the Book, noted with Figure, But I
shall forbear to say any thing of them, till I come to show you how to Extract
the Square and Cube Roots by the help of them and the Rods.

Of a Board with a Frame, upon which to lay your Rods, when any Operation is to
be wrought by them, known by the name of a TABULAT.
In the using of these Rods, care is to be had first of the orderly laying of
them, and then secondly, for the keeping of them in that position till your
work be ended. For the effecting whereof, both neatly and certainly, there is a
little Table or Frame contrived, containing in breadth 1/20 of an Inch more
than the length of the Rods, and in length at pleasure, but it may well be
about once and a half the length of the breadth.

It ought to be made of a thin piece of Pear or Walnut-tree, or of such matter
as your Box or Case is made of, and it may very commodiously be contrived to be
put into the Box as I ever had them made to do, for that I found it
inconvenient to carry loose.

Upon the Superficies of this Board, close to one of the edges thereof, must be
glewed, or otherwise fastened with Pins, a small piece of the same matter and
also of the same length, breadth, and thickness of one of your Rods, which must
be divided into 9 equal parts, and Lines drawn cross the piece, so will there
be 9 Squares, in which you must Grave or stamp the nine Digits, beginning with
1 at the top, and so descending by 2 3 4 to 9 at the bottom thereof: And it
were necessary that these Figures (as also those which are at the head of every
of your Rods) were graven or stamped of something a bigger Figure then the
other figures of your Rods are.

Under the end of this ledge beginning at the Figures, and so continuing the
whole length of the Board, must another ledge of the same matter and thickness
as the other, be glewed or pinned, and then is your Tabulat finished. A Figure
whereof you have at the beginning of the Book, noted with Figure 4, it is
called a Tabulat, for that when the Rods are laid thereon, for any Operation to
be wrought by them, we usually say, the Rods are Tabulated.

Being thus prepared with Rods and Tabulat, you are ready for the work intended
by them, and for which chiefly they were invented.

Thus much for the Fabric, Inscription, and Numbering of these Rods; let us
now come to show the Uses of them.

CHAP. IV. To what Use these Rods generally serve.
THe chief Uses to which these small Rods serve unto, I in part intimated at
the beginning, to which effect I shall repeat it again -- for by them all
manner of Multiplications and Divisions, as also of the Extraction of both the
Roots either Square or Cube, are so facilly and expeditiously performed, and
that by the help of Addition and Substraction only, that it is (as I may well
say) inconceivable, for here is no charge at all required of the Memory, and
you shall assuredly take your Quotient Figure in Division always certain;
neither too great nor to little, an inconvenience so prejudicial, that I leave
it to the censure of such as have found it, to their great loss of time, and
other vexation which it has put them to. But ceasing to say more of their
properties, I will now come to show their Use.

CHAP. V. How to apply or lay down any Numbers by the Rods.
PROP. I. Any Number being given, how to Tabulate or lay down the same by the
Rods.
LEt it be required to Tabulate or lay down this Number 3 4 9 6.

First, From among your Sets of Rods, (or out of your Case) take four of them,
of which let one of them have the Figure 3 at the top thereof, and lay it upon
your Tabulat close to the edge thereof,; then,

Secondly, Take another Rod from your Case, which has the Figure 4 at the top
of it, and lay that also upon your Tabulat close by the side of the other.

Thirdly, Take another Rod which has the Figure 9 at the top of it, and lay
that upon your Tabulat close by the other two.

And lastly, take a fourth Rod, having the figure 6 at the head thereof, and
lay that also upon your Tabulat close by the rest.

These four Rods thus taken, and laid upon the Tabulat, you shall see in the
uppermost Row (which stands against the Figure 1 on the side of your Tabulat)
these four Figures, 3 4 9 6, that is 3496, equal to your given Number. In the
second Row (against the figure 2 of your Tabulat) you shall find the double
thereof. In the third (against the figure 3) you shall find the triple
thereof. In the fourth the Quadruple thereof. In the fifth the Quintuple; and
so on the ninth and last, in which you shall find the Noncuple of the Number
given.

PROP. II. How these Rods will appear when Tabulated, and being Tabulated, how
to read the Multiplication of that Number so Tabulated, by any of the Nine
Digits.
The Four Rods being Tabulated according to the Precepts delivered in the
preceding Proposition, they will appear exactly as they are represented in
Figure 4 at the beginning of the Book, which Figure lively represents the four
Rods lying upon the Tabulat, which mind well, for upon the true tabulating,
and right reading of the Rods so tabulated, depends the whole Work.

The Rods thus Tabulated, and as you see them in the Figure 4, do to the eye
appear in the form of a Glass-window, every Pane thereof representing a
Rhomboyades or Diamond form: In the reading of the Figures which are in these
several Rhomboyades or Diamond form, observe these few Directions following,
which will fully illustrate the whole business intended, and therefore
especially to be minded.

Note,
I. That the Figures upon the Rods are to be read beginning at the right hand
and reading toward the left; which is contrary to our common course of reading
and writing, which is from the left hand toward the right.

II. That in every Rhomboyades or Diamond, there are either One Figure, or Two
Figures, but never more then Two.

III. If there be but one Figure in a Rhombus, then that Figure is the Figure
to be set down alone (be it either a Figure or a Cipher) but if there be two
Figures in a Rhomboyades (as for the most part there is) then add them two
Figures together, and set down their sum in one Figure.

IV. But if the sum of the two Figures in one Rhomboyades or Diamond do exceed
Ten, then you must set down the overplus above Ten, and keep One in mind,
which One you must carry to the next Rhomboyades.

V. Note that the first toward your right hand, and the last toward your left
hand are but half Rhomboyades or Diamonds, and never have in them more then one
Figure only, but all between them are whole ones, and for the most part have
two Figures in them.

VI. If in either Rhomboyades or half Rhomboyades, you find no Figures but
Ciphers, you must not neglect but set them down as if they were Figures.

These Rules being rightly understood, all that follows will be familiar and
easy, and these I shall explain by Example following.

Example.
For the illustration of the preceding Rules, we will make use of those Rods
which were before tabulated, therefore have recourse to Figure 4 at the
beginning of the Book, where this Number 3496 is tabulated.

The Figures at the top of the Four Rods are these 3, 4, 9, 6. which signify
the former given number 3496, and this number stands against the figure 1 on
the side of the Tabulat. Then I say, that the figures in the next row standing
against the figure ^ of the Tabulat and double thereunto, which I thus prove.

Repair to the Rods as they lie upon the Tabulat, and in that row which lies
against the figure 2, you shall find in the first half Rhomboyades toward
your right hand (where by Rule 1 you must begin) the figure 2, wherefore set
down with your Pen upon Paper the figure 2. In the next Rhomboyades, in the
same row you shall find 8 and 1, which added make 9, set down 9 on the left
hand of 2: In the next Rhombus you shall find 8 and 1 again, which is 9 also,
set down 9 on the left hand of the other, and in the last Rhomboyades you shall
find only 6, wherefore set down 6 on the left hand of 9, so have you in all
6992, which is double to 3496.

Again, the figures in the row which stands against the figure 3 in the
Tabulat, are triple to 3496; for in the first half Rhomboyades toward your
right hand, you have 8, set down 8. -- In the next Rhom. you have 7 and 1,
which is 8, set down 8 again. -- In the next you have 2 and 2, which is 4, set
down 4. -- In the next Rhom. you have 9 and 1, which makes 10, set down 0 and
carry 1, but it is the last Rhom. and because there is never another to carry
the 1 unto, you must therefore set it down, so have you this number 10488,
which is triple to 3496.

Again, the figures standing against 4 in the Tabulat, are Quadruple to 3496,
-- for in the half Rhom. you have 4, set it down: in the next 6 and 2, which is
8, set that down. In the next 6 and 3 which is 9, set that down: In the next 2
and 1, which is 3, set that down: and in the last half Rhom. you have 1, which
also set down: so have you 13984 which is Quadruple to 3496.

Also, the figures against 5 in the Tabulat: the first is a Cipher therefore
put down 0; the next is 5 and 3 which is 8, set down 8; the next is 0 and 4,
set down 4; the next is 5 and 2, that is 7, set down 7; and the last is 1,
therefore set down 1, so have you in all 17480, which is Quintuple to 3496.

Against 6 in the Tabulat, you have in the first place 6, set it down; then in
the next 4 and 3, that is 7, set that down; in the next 4 and 5, that is 9, set
9 down; in the next you have 8 and 2, that is 10, set down 0 and carry 1 to the
next Rhom. where you find only 1, to which add the 1, which you carried from
the Rhom. before, and it makes 2, set down 2: so have you 20976, which is six
times 3496.

Against 7 in the Tabulat, you have first 2, set it down; then 3 and 4, which
is 7, set 7 down; in the next 8 and 6, which is 14, which being above 10, set
down 4, and carry 1 to the next Rhom. where you have 2 and 1, which is 3, and
1, which you carried makes 4, set down 4; then in the last place you have only
2, which set down, so have you in all 24472, which is Septuple to 3496, or
seven times as much.

Against 8 in the Tabulat, you have first 8, which set down; then 2 and 4,
which is 6, set 6 down; then 2 and 7, which is 9, set 9 down; then 4 and 3,
which is 7, set 7 down; and lastly 2, set that down, so have you 27968, which
is Octuple to 3496, or eight times as much.

Lastly, against 9 in the Tabulat, you have in the first place 4, set that
down,; in the next you have 1 and 5, which is 6, set 6 down; in the next place
you have 6 and 8, which is 14, set down 4, and carry 1 to the next Rhom. where
you find 7 and 3, that is 10, which with 1 which you carried makes 11, set
down 1, and carry 1 to the next Rhom. where you find only 2 and the 1 carried
makes 3, therefore set down 3, and so you have 31464, which is Noncuple to
3496, or nine times as much as the tabulated number.

Thus have I given you Examples, in showing you how the Numbers upon the Rods
are to be read and written down, and in the delivery of this Example, I have
made the whole work which is to follow so plain and easy, that the meanest
capacity (I think) if he can but tell his figures, and add any two figures
together, he may by this here delivered, read or write down any number that can
be tabulated; and that you may thoroughly understand this Chapter before you
proceed further, I will give you the Products of 7009078 multiplied by all the
nine Digits which I would have your self to tabulate, and see if you find your
working by your Rods to agree with those which are here written, which numbers
if they do, you need not scruple at the most difficult that can be proposed to
you, therefore study it, and try it.

7009078 being multiplied by 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

Produces 7009078 14018156 21027234 28036312 35045390 42054468 49063546
56072624 63081702

Thus have I sufficiently described these Rods and the manner of Numbering upon
them; and now I think it time to apply them to that use for which they were
intended, namely, the more difficult parts of Arithmetic, as Multiplication,
Division, and Extraction of Roots, but first let me give you

An Admonition concerning Addition and Substraction.
Whereas it was the difficult operarations of Arithmetic, which by the benefit
of these Rods, the Inventor chiefly aimed at (of which kind he esteemed
Multiplication, Division, and Extraction of the Square and Cube Roots) he
omitted to say any thing concerning Addition and Substraction in things obvious
to every Tyro, he therefore omitting them, begins to show the use of his Rods
in Multiplication, whose Method I shall here follow.

CHAP. VI. Multiplication by the Rods.
IN Multiplying by the Rods, you are to consider (as in vulgar Arithmetic)
three Terms, Things, or Numbers, viz.

1. The Multiplicand, which is the Number to be multiplied.

2. The Multiplier, which is the Number by which the Multiplicand is multiplied.

3. The Product, which is the sum produced by the multiplying of the two former
together.

And here note, that the Product does contain the Multiplicand, so many times
as there be Unites in the Multiplier.

Thus for the definition of Multiplication, now for the working thereof by the
Rods, for which this is.

THE RULE:
First, set down upon your Paper the Multiplicand, and orderly under it the
Multiplier. It matters not greatly which of the two given Numbers be made
Multiplicand or Multiplier, but it is usual and best to make the greatest
Number Multiplicand, and the lesser Multiplier. Then draw a Line with your Pen
under them, and having Tabulated your Multiplicand (or greater number) look
what Numbers in your Rods stand against the first Figure toward your right
hand, and that Number which you shall find upon your Rods standing against
that first Figure found in your Tabulat, set down under your Line which you
formerly drew under your Multiplicand and Multiplier: And having so done with
the first Figure of your Multiplier, do so with the rest, setting them down one
under another, removing every Figure one place more toward the left hand, then
that which went before it, as is done in common Multiplication, and as you see
in the following Example.

Example 1. Let it be required to multiply 3496, by 489. As if it were required
to know how much 489 times 3496 would amount unto.

First, Set down your given Number 3496, and 489, one under another, and draw
your Line under them, as here you see done.

Secondly, 3496 your Multiplicand being Tabulated, and 9 being ^ the first
Figure to the right hand in your Multiplier, look upon your Rods, what sum
there stands against 9 in the side of your Tabulat, and you shall find (as by
the Rules in the second Prop. of the Fifth Chap. you were directed) 31464,
which is the Product of 3496 multiplied by 9, wherefore set down this number
31464 under your Line, as you see in the Example.

Thirdly, Look what sum upon the Rods stands against 8, which is the second
Figure of your Multiplier, and you shall find 27968, set this number under the
former, moving it one place forward toward the left hand.

Fourthly, Look what sum upon the Rods stands against 4 which is the third
Figure in your Multiplier, and you shall find 13984, which set down under the
other, one place more to the left hand.

Lastly, Under these three Sums draw a Line and add the three sums together,
and they make 1709544, which is the Product of 3496 multiplied by 489, and this
1709544 the Product, contains 3496 the Multiplicand, 489 times.

Practice well this first Example, and compare it with the Rods as they are
Tabulated in Figure 4 at the beginning of the Book, as also with the Rules in
the Fifth Chapter, and you may perform any Multiplication. However I will give
you one or two more Examples, and some other ways of Multiplication.

Example 2. Let it be required to multiply the same sum 3496 by 261.

^

Set the Numbers down as here is done, then look upon the Rods for the Product
of 3496 by 1, and you shall find it to be the same, wherefore set down 3496
under the Line -- then look upon the Rods for the Product of 3496 by 6, and you
shall find it to be 20976, which set down under the other number one place
more toward the left hand. -- Again, look in the Rods for the Product of 3496
multiplied by 2, and you shall find it to be 6992, which set down under the
other two.

Lastly, Draw a Line under them, and add the three numbers together in order as
they stand, and the sum of them will be 912456, which is the Product of 3496
multiplied by 261.

Example 3. Let it be required to multiply the same number 3496 by 520.

Set down your Numbers as here you see done -- Then because the first Figure ^
of your Multiplier toward your right hand is a Cipher, wholly omit it, and
multiply 3496 by 52 only, so shall you find the Product of 3496 by 2 to be
6992, which set down: Also the Product by 5 will be 17480, which set down under
the other one place further, Then draw a Line -- and add these two sums
together, and they make 181792, to the which if you add a Cipher for the Cipher
which you omitted in your Multiplier, the sum will be 1817920, which is the
Product of 3496 by 520.

Example 4. Let it be required to multiply the same 3496 by 7003 --

Set down your Numbers as before, and as you see here done, Then having ^
Tabulated 3496, see what the Product thereof is upon the Rods being multiplied
by 3 the first Figure in your Multiplier, and you shall find it to be 10488,
which set down under the Line -- Then the two next places of your Multiplier
being Ciphers, make two pricks under the former number, one under 8, the other
under 4, as you see in the Example, or instead of 2 pricks you may make two
Ciphers, -- Then look in the Rods for the Product of 3496 by 7, and you shall
find it to be 24472, which set down under the other sum, beginning your number
at the fourth place, or beyond the two Pricks or Ciphers. Lastly, draw a Line
and add these two sums together, and their sum is 24482488, which is the
Product of 3496 multiplied by 7003.

Thus have you four Examples in Multiplication, in which are included all the
Varieties that may at any time happen in that Rule, viz. Two where the
Multiplier consisted all of Figures, as in the first and second Example they
did. -- Another where the latter place of the Multiplier consisted of a Cipher
-- And this last Example where Ciphers were intermixed among the Figures.

And thus much for this kind of Multiplication, but before I leave, I will
show you

Another Form of MULTIPLICATION.
Whereas in the foregoing Form of Multiplication, which is the best and most
usual, (only I insert this following for variety.) You began (your Rods being
Tabulated) with that Figure of your Multiplier which stands next your right
hand, but there is no necessity for that, for you may begin with that Figure
which stands next to your left hand, and by so doing, and placing your
several Products one place more to the right hand, as you did before place them
to the left hand, those Products added together in the Form they then stand,
shall produce a Product equal to the former.

Example, For our Example we will take the first Example before-going at the
beginning of this Chapter, where it was required to multiply 3496 by 489. Set
the Numbers down as before in that first Example, and as you see here done -- ^
Then 3496 being Tabulated, look upon your Rods for the Product thereof
multiplied by 4, (which is the first Figure of your Multiplier toward your
left hand) and you shall find the Product thereof to be 13984, which set down.
-- Secondly, look the Product of 3496 by 8 (your second Figure) and you shall
find it to be 27968, which must not be set down as in the other first Example
but as you see it in this, 8 the first Figure thereof must be set one place
forwards toward the right hand, as in the other it was set a place backward
toward the left. -- Lastly, seek in your Rods for the Product of 3496 by 9
your last Figure, and you shall find it to be 13984, which set under the other
two Numbers yet one place more to the right hand. -- So a Line being drawn
under, and these three Numbers added together produce 1709544 equal to that in
the first Example: And that you may the better see the difference of the work,
I have set them one by the other.

As in the first Example, ^

As in this Example, ^

One Example more in Multiplication, which shall be for Advertisement and
direction, I will give, and so conclude Multiplication.

I said in the general Rule for working of Multiplication (at the beginning of
this Chapter) that it mattered not which of your Numbers were made the
Multiplicand, or which the Multiplier, of which I will here give you a
President where the lesser Number shall be Tabulated, and the greater Number
only set down; and I will work it here according to this last way of
Multiplication, and the Example shall be as follows.

Example, Let it be required to multiply 868437 by 3496, and let 3496 (the
lesser Number) be Tabulated.

Let the Numbers be set as you here see, then 3496 being Tabulated, begin with
the first Figure toward ^ the left hand of your Multiplier, which here is 8,
and upon your Rods find the Product of 3496 multiplied by 8, which is 27968,
set that down under the Line -- then find the Product of 3496 by 6 the second
Figure of your Multiplier, and you shall find that to be 20976, set this
number under the former one place more toward the right hand. -- Again the
third Figure of your Product is 8 whose Product is 27968 as before, set that
under the other still one place more to the right hand. -- In this manner do
with the other Figures of the Multiplier, as 4 the next Figure, whose Product
is 13984, which also set down a place forward. -- So also the Product of 3
which is 10488, which set down. -- And lastly, of 7, which is 24472. -- All
these Products being set down in the order as you see them in the Margent, if
you add them together, the sum of them will be 3036055752, which is the Product
of 3496 multiplied by 868437, the lesser number being Tabulated.

Other ways of Multiplication I could have added, but these I esteem
sufficient.

CHAP. VII. DIVISION By the Rods.
AS in Multiplication, so in Division there are three Numbers, Terms, or Things
required, viz.

1. The Dividend or Number to be divided.

2. The Divisor or Number by which the Dividend is divided, and

3. The Quotient, which is the Number issuing from the Dividends being divided
by the Divisor; And this Quotient does always consist of so many Unites as the
Divisor is times contained in the Dividend.

Thus much for the Definition of Division, now let us come to the Practice of
it by the Rods, to perform which, this is

THE RULE
Tabulate the Divisor, (which is always the lesser Number of the two given) and
set down the Dividend, and set the Divisor on the left hand, and draw a crooked
Line on the right hand for your Quotient, as in common Arithmetic. Then look
upon your Tabulated Rods (always) for the Number, less then the Number in the
first Figures of your Dividend, and what Figure stands against that Number on
the edge of your Tabulat must be the Figure you must put in your Quotient, and
that Number you must always substract from the Figures of your Dividend, and to
the remainder add another Figure, so proceeding from Figure to Figure till your
Division be wholly ended.

Example, Let it be required to divide 1709544, by 3496. Having tabulated 3496,
set down your Dividend, your Divisor on the left hand thereof, and a crooked
Line for the Quotient on the right hand thereof, as by the Rule preceding you
were directed, and as you see done in the Example adjoining.

And because at your first setting down of your Divisor 3496, it would reach
(if it were set under your Dividend 1709544) as far as the Figure 5, therefore
under the Figure 5 make a Prick to intimate how far you are gone on in your
work, and under this Prick draw a Line quite under your Dividend, then is your
Sum set down ready for work, and will appear as here you see; ^

Your Sum thus prepared, ask how often can you have 3496 in 17095, look in your
Tabulated Rods for 17095, which you cannot there find, but the nearest number
thereunto amongst the Rods, which is less then 17095 (for you must always take
a less number) is 13984, which number stands against the Figure 4 in the
Tabulat, wherefore set 4 in your Quotient, and 13984 under the Line, and
substract 13984 from 17095, and there will remain 3111, so is the first part of
your Division ended and your work will stand thus; ^ Then make another Prick
under 4 the next Figure of your Dividend, so will the remaining number be
31114, -- Then look among your Rods for the number 31114 (or the nearest less
then it) and the nearest less you shall find to be 27968, which stands against
8 in your Tabulat, put 8 in your Quotient, and set 27968 under 31114, and
substract 27968 from 31114, so will there remain 3146, which set over head, so
is the second part of your Division ended, and your work will appear thus; ^

Lastly, Make another Prick under the next Figure of your Dividend, which is 4
also, making the remaining number to be 31464, seek among your Tabulated Rods
for this number (or the nearest less) but looking you shall find the very
number, against which stands on your Tabulat the Figure 9, set 9 in the
Quotient, and the number 31464 under the Line, and substract it from 31464 the
remainder which stands above the Line, and nothing remains, and being there is
never another Figure in your Dividend, your Division is ended, and your work
will stand thus, and 3496 is contained in 1709544 489 times.

^

Another Example, and by another way of Division.

Let it be required to divide 912456 by 3496, set down your Dividend and
Divisor, draw a crooked Line for your Quotient, and also make a Prick under the
fourth Figure of your Dividend, and draw a Line under your Dividend, so is your
Sum prepared to be divided, and will stand thus; ^ Then your Divisor 3496 being
Tabulated, look amongst your Rods for the nearest number to 9124 which is less,
and you shall find it to be 6992, against which stands on your Tabulat the
Figure 2, set 2 in the Quotient, and this Number under the Line, and substract
it from 9124, and there will remain 2132, to which number add the next Figure
of your Dividend, namely 5, and it makes 21325, under which number draw a Line,
then will your Sum stand thus, ^ Then among your Rods seek the nearest number
to 21325 and you shall find 20976 to be the nearest number less, against which
in your Tabulat stands 6, set 6 in the Quotient, and 20976 under the Line,
substracting it from 21325, which when you have done, there will remain 349, to
349 add the next Figure in your Dividend, which is 6 your last Figure, and it
makes 3496, under which draw a Line, and your work will stand as here you see,
^ This done, look amongst your Rods for the nearest number to 3496, and you
shall find the exact number at the top of the Rods, against which stands the
Figure 1 on the Tabulat, set 1 in the Quotient, and substract 3496 from 3496,
the remainder is nothing, and so is your Division ended, the work standing
thus, and 3496 the Divisor is contained in 912456 the Dividend, 261 times.

^

A third Example ready wrought by the last and best way of Division. I will
only set it down ready wrought, leaving the practice of it to your self.

Let it be required to divide 73020506 by 3496.

^ This Sum thus divided, produces in the Quotient 20886, and 3050 remaining,
so that the Quotient with Fraction and all is, ^ Which shows that 3496 the
Divisor is contained in 73020506 the Dividend, 20886 times, and 3050 remaining.

This Example well practiced, together with them before-going, are sufficient
instruction for any Student whatever, and he that can perform these need not
despair of the most difficult that can be proposed. And so I conclude with
Division.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Rule of Three OR Golden Rule, Both Direct and
Reverse, or Reciprocal.
TO Discourse of this Rule at large were to run into a Labyrinth, for it was
the performance of working Multiplication and Division by the Rods that was
here aimed at, and he that can Multiply and Divide may command this Golden
Rule, wherefore I will show you the nature or order of placing the Numbers, and
also the manner of working an Example in either of them.

The Rule of Three is that Rule which teaches by having three Numbers in
proportion one to another given, to find a fourth, which shall be in
proportion to them also.

In this Rule direct the fourth Number which is sought, is to have the same
proportion to the third, as the second Number has to the first: As if the
three Numbers given were 2-4 -- and 8, say, as 2 is to 4, so is 8- to what?
multiply 4 by 8 (that is the second Number by the third) and the Product will
be 32, which divide by 2 (the first Number) the Quotient will be 16, which is
the fourth Number in proportion to the third, as the second is to the first;
for as 4 the second Number, contains 2 the first Number twice, so 16 the fourth
Number contains 8 the third Number twice also.

But in the Reciprocal Rule of Three, there the proportion is not as the first
to the second, so the third to the fourth: But as the First is to the Third, so
is the second to the Fourth. As if the Numbers were 3, 4, and 6, say, As 3 the
first Number, is to 6 the third Number, so is 4 the second Number; to what?
Multiply 4 the second Number by 3 the first Number, the Product is 12, which
divideby 6 the third Number, and the Quotient will be 2: for as 6 the third
Number, contains 3 the first Number twice, so 4 the second Number contains 2
the fourth Number twice also: And in this consists the difference between the
Direct and Reciprocal Rule of Three.

A Question in each Rule,

1. In the Direct Rule;

If four Men eat two Pecks of Corn in one week, how many Pecks will serve an
hundred Men the same time? Men Pecks Men. 4 2 100. Multiply 2 the second Number
by 100 the third Number, the Product will be 200, which divide by 4 the first
Number, and the Quotient will be 50, and so many Pecks will suffice 100 men the
same time.

2. In the Reciprocal,

If twelve men do any piece of work in 8 days, how many men must be employed to
do the same piece of work in 2 days? Days Men Days. 8 12 2. Multiply 8 the
first Number, by 12 the second, their Product is 96, which divide by 2 the
third Number, the Quotient will be 48, and so many men will do the same work in
2 days, for as 8 days is to 2 days, so are 12 men to 48 men, etc.

CHAP. IX. Of the Extraction of ROOTS.
THe Extraction of Roots, which is the difficultest part of Multiplication and
Division, is expeditiously and certainly performed by the Rods, for the easy
and expedite performance of which, there are two Rods on purpose, one for the
Square, the other for the Cube Root, of which I will speak; first, Of their
Fabric: secondly, of their Use.

Of the Fabric of the Rods for Extracting of Roots.
Of the same matter, and of the same length and thickness of your other Rods,
let there be made another Rod but three times the breadth of the former, the
Inscription on one side serving to extract the Square, and that on the other
side for the Cube Root, each of which are divided into three Rows or Columes.

That which serves for the Square Root, has in the top or uppermost Square
between the Diagonal thereof, these Figures 0-1, in the second 0-4, in the
third 0-9, in the fourth 1-6, in the fifth 2-5, in the sixth 3-6, in the
seventh 4-9, in the eighth 6-4, and in the ninth or lowermost 8-^, which are
the Square Numbers belonging to the nine Digits. --

In the second Colume of the same Rod, in the first Square is inscribed 2, in
the second 4, in the third 6, in the fourth 8, in the fifth 10, in the sixth
12, in the seventh 14, in the eighth 16, and in the ninth 18.

In the last or third, Colume there are the nine Digits orderly descending,
namely, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. This Rod thus made is fitted for the Square
Root.

That which serves for the Cube Root, has in the top or uppermost Square of
the first Colume toward the left hand between the Diagonal thereof, these
Figures, 0-01, in the second 0-08, in the third 0-27, in the fourth 0-64, in
the fifth 1-25, in the sixth 2-16, in the seventh 3-43, in the eighth 5-12, and
in the ninth 7-29, which are Cube Numbers orderly descending -- The second
Colume of this Rod contains these square Numbers, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64,
81, orderly descending. -- The third and last Colume of this Rod has in it the
nine Digits, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, orderly descending also.

This Rod thus prepared and inscribed, is fit for extracting of the Square and
Cube Roots, a Figure of either side whereof you have at the beginning of the
Book: That which serves for the Square Root having the word Square written
over head, that for the Cube Root, has Cube written over head.

Thus having given you the Fabric and Inscription of these Rods, I will now
show you their use; And first,

Concerning the Extracting of the Square-Root.
In Extracting of the Square-Root, you must as in common Arithmetic, when you
have set down your Number, make a Prick under the first Figure toward your
right hand, and so successively under every second Figure, then under those
Pricks, draw two Lines parallel whereinto set the Figures of your Root as you
find them: Your Number being thus placed and pricked as before is directed,
and as in the following Example you see done, you may proceed to Extract the
Root thereof as follows.

Example 1. Let it be required to find the Square-Root of this Number
12418576, first, make a Prick under 6, another under 5, another under 1, and
another under 2, under which Points draw two Lines, in which you must place
your Root, and then will your Number stand thus, ^

Take the Rod for Extracting of the Square-Root, and look in the first row or
Colume thereof for the nearest Number you can there find less then 12 (which
is as far as the first Prick in your Number reaches) and you shall find 9,
against which in the third Colume you shall find 3, set 3 under the first
point between the Lines, and 9 under the Line, and substracting 9 from 12,
there will remain 3, which set over 12, so will your Number stand thus;

^ Then in the middle Colume of your Rod between 9 and 3 there stands 6, take
therefore one of your Rods which has 6 at the top thereof, and lay it upon
your Tabulat by the left side of your square Rod, then being there is 341 to
the next Prick, seek the nearest Number less upon your two Rods, and you shall
find the next less to be 325, against which in the last Colume of your Square
Rod stands 5, therefore place 5 under your second Prick, and set 325 under 341,
and substracting it from 341, there will remain 16, which set over head, then
will the Sum appear thus;

^ And in the middle Colume of your Square Rod against this 5 there stands 10,
for this 10 you should take a Rod that has 10 at the top, but being there is
no such, take therefore one that has a Cipher, and place that between your
Square Rod and your Rod of 6, and change your Rod 6 for one of 7, then shall
you have upon your Tabulat one Rod of 7, another of 0, and your Square Rod.

Thus must you always do when the Number in the middle Colume exceeds 10.

Then looking upon your Sum you shall find 1685 to your third Prick; look
therefore upon your Rods for the nearest less Number, which you shall find to
be 1404, against which stands 2 in the last Colume, set 2 between the Lines
under the third Prick, and 1404 under 1685, and substracting it from 1685, and
there will remain 281, which place above, so will your Sum stand thus;

^ And because the Number standing against in the middle Colume of your Square
Rod between 1404 and 2 was 4, set 4 under your last Prick, and take a Rod of 4,
and put it between your square Rod and your Rod of 0; and because 28176 remains
upon your Sum to the last Prick. Look upon your Rods for the nearest Number
thereunto, and you shall find the very Number it self to stand against the
Figure 4, set therefore 28176 below, and substract it from that above, and
there will remain nothing, which denotes the Number 12418576 to be a square
Number, and the Root thereof to be 3524, and the work finished will stand thus;
^

This Sum had it been wrought by that second way of Division, which I showed in
Chapter 7, it would stand as follows;

Square ^ Root.

Caution.
If at any time you look for the remainder upon your Rods, and you cannot find
it there, you must then place a Cipher between the Lines, and proceed to the
next Figure, as by trying this other Example which I have inserted for practice
will appear.

Another Example added for Practice.
^

CHAP. X. Concerning the Extraction of the Cube Root.
THere is somewhat more difficulty in Extracting of the Cube, then of the
Square Root. Wherefore (before I come to Example) I will deliver the manner of
the Operation, together with such Cautions as are to be observed in the
performance thereof; All which immediately follow in this

GENERAL RULE.
Write down the Number whose Cube Root you are to Extract, and under the first
Figure toward the right hand make a Prick or Point, and so under every third
Figure toward the left hand, till you come to the end of your Number. Under
these Pricks draw two Parallel Lines, (as you did in Extracting the Square
Root) between which Lines you are to place the Figures of your Root as you
find them; -- Then beginning at the Figure (or Figures) of the left hand
Prick, and going forward toward the right hand, Extract (by help of the Rod
for Extracting tracting the Cube Root) their Root, (or if the true Number be
not on the Plate, then the nearest less, and placing this Root, (which never
exceeds one Figure) between the Lines, and under its Point, and take its Cube
from the uppermost Figures, which stand before (or leftwards) of the first
Point, and note the Remainder above.

Secondly, Keep the Triple of this Root sound, in the head or top of the Rods,
and triple the Square of the same Root, and set this Triple on the head of the
Rods, and apply it leftwards of the Cubick Rod, and the reserved Rod (or Rods)
right-wards, the Cubick Rod being in the midst between them, and out of the
left hand Rods and the Cubick Rod together, pick or find out the Multiple, (or
next less Number) then the Figures preceding the second Point, which write
apart in a Pater, and note its Quotume over its utmost right hand Figure, and
write the Square of that Quotume left-wards from the Quotume it self, even in
that order as you find them in your Cubick Rod, and under every several Figure
of this Square, write their Multiples found right-wards, even such as the
Figures themselves do show. So that every Multiple may end under its Figure or
Quotume; then add together these Multiples cross-wise, and take their sum from
the Figures foregoing the second Point, and write the Remainder over them, but
write the right hand Quotume before noted under the second Point between the
Lines, for the second Figure or Quotume of the Root: And so is performed the
Operation of the second Point, which you must repeat through the several
Points, even to the last.

But in the practice by this Rule, you may sometimes be at a stand, wherefore
to this GENERAL RULE (that there may be no obstacle) I will add these two
CALLTIONS.

1. CAUTION.
But in all Operations and Points it must be observed, That if no Multiple (no
not the least of all) found in the left Rods, and the plate, may be subtracted
from the foregoing Remains, then a Cipher [o] must be put under that Point for
the Quotume, the Remains being untouched, and abiding as before.

II. CAUTION.
And if the aforesaid Sum to be taken away, cannot be taken from the Figures
going before its Point, the smaller Multiples must be added, which the next
upper Quotumes in the Cubick Rod do show in the Rods, whose Sum may be tuken
away therefrom.

EXAMPLE Of the Cubick Extraction.
Let 22022635627 be a Number given, whose Cube Root you desire: Set down your
Number, and point it, (beginning at 7 the last Figure toward the right hand,
and so under every third Figure) and draw two Parallel Lines under it, and it
will stand in this manner; ^

Look in your Rod for the Extracting the Cube Root, for the nearest Cube Root
of the Figures of your given Number standing before the first Point toward
your left hand, namely for the nearest Cube Root of the Number less then 22,
which you shall find to be 2, which set between the two Lines just under the
first Point, and its Cube (which is 8) set under the Line, and substract it
from the Figures above the Line, namely from 22, and there will remain 14,
which place orderly above, then will your work stand thus, and the work of your
first Point finished.

^

Secondly, For the finding of the Root belonging to the second Prick, triple
the Quotume or Figure which is under the first Prick (namely 2) and it is 6,
find therefore a Rod which has 6 at the head thereof, and lay that Rod by the
side of your Cubick Rod toward the right hand, then triple the Square of 2
(which is 4) and it makes 12, which found among the Rods, place by the side of
the Cubick Rod toward the left hand.

Then from the Rods which lie on the left hand of the Cubick Rod, and the
Cubick Rod it self, find the nearest lesser Number then the Figures standing
before the second Prick, namely, less then 14022, and in the ninth place you
shall find 11529, which write by it self as ^ in the Margin, and over 9 the
last Figure toward the right hand (drawing first a Line between) set its
Quotume, and by it its Square 81, in the same order as you find them stand in
your Cubick Rod.

Then write under 1, its Multiple, which is showed right-wards against 1 in the
Cubick Rod, and is the single Figure 6, and under 8 write the Multiple that it
shows right-ward against 8 in the Cubick Rod, which is 48, and these three
Multiples so written cross-wise below the Line, and added together (as in the
Margin) do produce 16389, which, because they cannot be taken from the upper
Figures standing before the second Point, namely from 14022, the Number 9
(before taken) is to be rejected, as being too great, and instead of 819 (by
the second Caution) the next higher Notes in the Plate are to be taken, which
are 648, and the Multiples that these do show, namely the Octuple among the
left Rods, which is 10112, and the Quadruple among the right Rods which is ^
24, and the Sextuple among the right Rods, which is 36, being added cross-wise
(as in the Margin) do produce 13952, which subtracted from 14022, (the
Figures standing before the second Prick) there remains 70 for the remain of
the second Prick, and let there be taken for the Quotume of the second Prick,
the right-most of the chosen Figures 648, which is 8, which place under the
second Point between the Lines; so is the second Figure of your Root found, and
your work will stand thus, ^

Thirdly, Put the Triple of the precedent Quotumes ( viz. 28 between the Lines)
which is 84, being taken out of the Rods, and put them on the right-side of the
Cubick Rod, and get the Triple of the Squate of the same 28, which may be found
to be^ 2352, which taken out of the Rods and place on the left-side of the
Cubick Rod: And of the Multiples on the lefthand Rods, and the simple single
Figures upon the Cubick Rod (the least of which being 235201) there is none so
little that may be subtracted from the Figures belonging to the third Point,
namely from 70635; Therefore (by the first Caution) the Remains abiding, or
continuing as they are, you must put a Cipher under the third Point, for the
third Quotume belonging to the third Point: And thus the Operation of the third
Point is accomplished, and the work will stand as follows;^

Fourthly, Set the Triple of the foregoing Quotumes ( viz. 280) which is 840 on
the right hand, and the Triple of the Square of the same 280, which is 225200^
on the left hand, and the Cubick Rod between them; Then out of the left-most
Multiples, choose that which is next less then the Figures belonging to the
fourth Point, namely 70635627, which is this 70560027, which stands against 3
on the Tabulat, wherefore write this Number 70560027 upon Paper as in the
Margin, with a Line over it, and set ^ over the Line the Quotient 3, over its
right-most Figure, and the Square of the said Quotume 3, which is 9, left-ward
thereof, and the Noncuple found in the righthand Rods, which is 7560 write
under 9, let these two Multiples be added as in the Margin, and the Sum will
be 70625627, which subtracted from the Figures foregoing the fourth Prick, and
there will nothing remain; therefore let the right-most of the Figures of 93,
viz. 3, be placed under the fourth and last Point, for the fourth and last
Quotume of the Root, and so the whole and perfect Cubick Root of the given
Number 22022635627, is 2803, and being nothing remained, it is a perfect Cubick
Number. The like is to be done in other Numbers, but I shall forbear to give
you any more Examples, there falling out in this all the variety that at any
time may happen for the General Rule and the two Cautions before premised are
here made applicable to Practice; wherefore to this Treatise for the present I
will put

An End.

