A CASE OF CONSCIENCE, CONCERNING THE SACRAMENT OF THE Lords Supper: WHEN
EITHER THE BREAD OR WINE IS wanting, or when there is a desire, yet with an
Antipathy to them, or debilitie to receive them.

Proposed to JOHN LEY, Pastor of Great Budworth, and by him resolved.

LONDON: Printed by R. H. for GEORGE LATHUM, at the Bishops head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, AND WORTHILY HONORED Gentleman, PHILIP MAINWARING,
ESQUIRE.
RIGHT WORTHY SIR,
THis short discourse ensuing (though long enough I hope to resolve the
Question proposed) is Yours by right of Dedication (now it is public) since it
was Yours before by causality of production (as a private manuscript) for your
letter to your Reverend Uncle (my honored Friend) and his to me, have been
unto it, as a Grandfather and father, from whose motion and solicitation it is
lineally descended. Accept it then (good Sir) as your own: and me with it,
whom Your immanent merit in your self, and transient benignity to me, have long
and deeply obliged to remain

Yours, to love, and serve You, with affection and fidelity. JOHN LEY.
From my lodging at the Fountain in S. Paul's Churchyard. Febr. 24. 1640.
A Case of Conscience Resolved, touching the Sacramental Elements, when both
cannot be had, or not Received: Or a discussion of the doubt, in several
cases, what is to be done when either of the Elements of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, cannot be had, or (through infirmity or Antipathy) cannot be
taken: occasioned by the particular case ensuing.
Dr. EDMUND MAINWARING (the Chancellor of Chester) his Letter concerning the
Case.
Mr. LEY,
I Entreat your opinion and resolution (in case of necessity) what is to be
done, where a Person is so weak, and infirm, as not able to swallow a crum of
bread, and yet with much earnestness desires to receive the Communion?

12o Jan. 1636. Your true friend to serve you, EDM. MAINWARING.


SIR, The case of conscience (as in your Nephews Letter it is put to you, and
in yours to me) concerning the young woman, I conceive to be this, A young
woman has forborne to eat bread for these two or three years, and now being
of age, she has a great desire to receive the Sacrament, but cannot swallow
the least crum of bread (as trial has been made of her for a whole week
together) whereupon she desired to receive in something else, her Minist. was
advised to deliver it to her in a thing called Manus Christi, but did not.

Hereupon, you require my resolution, what is to be done? concerning which I
say, First it is a very rare thing for one (borne and bread where bread is
daily food) not by infirmity, but by Antipathy, to be so indisposed to make
use of that fundamental nourishment, as not to be able to take so much as a
crumme, though it were to receive the Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord: I
have read only of Ego profiteor vidisse puerum annorum cireiter 10, cui nunquam
quicquam gustatum panis, nec carnium. Chamier. de Euchar. lib. 8. cap. 3. tom.
4. page 422. col. 2.56.
one before now, whose dislike of bread was like unto hers.

Secondly, taking the case as it is, deliberation is requisite concerning three
opinions especially.

The first of those who hold, that if the Sacrament cannot be administered, and
received in both kinds (according to the institution of our Savior) it is
wholly to be Bish. Lake in his Sermon. on Mat. 26. v. 26, 27. par. 3.165. So hold
also some of the Doctors of the reformed Churches.
forborne: the learned Bishop of Bath and Wells expresses his opinion to that
purpose thus, Seeing the Sacraments have necessitatem, non medij, sed
praecepti, as it is a foul fault to contemn the Elements (when they may be
had:) So when they may not be had, it were better to want the Sacrament, then
to use Elements of our own choice: God can supply to our use (says he) rem
Sacramenti, sine Sacramento, in case of necessity, who happily will not be so
gracious, if we be so presumptuous as to prescribe.

The second opinion is of those, who think that in defect of the Elements,
prescribed and used by our Savior at his last Supper, others which are
analogical to them may be taken, as for bread (which they would have to be
rather Panis triticeus, conveniens est Sacramenti Eucharistiae materia. Aquin.
3. part 974. art. 3. conclus.
of Wheat then Non panis ordeaceus. Ibid.
Barley, or of any other grain, but by no mean of Cur non meminit in Scotia,
plebem avena victitare, ex qua non liceat consecrandum panem fieri. Chamier.
tom. 4. lib. 9. cap. 12. page 524. col. 2.
Oats, against which there is an especial prohibition, that with bread of
Oats, there be no Consecration) they allow not only that which is made of
corn, but of other materials; of which (in diverse Authors) we meet with many
sorts of Panis ex Amygdalis and Sacc^are Cel. Rhodiginus Antique lect. l. 9.
cap. 15. col. 408.
bread made of Almonds and sugar, Panis ex melle, Wis passis, and alijs
aromatices confect. Ibid.
bread made of honey and raysons, and of aromaticall ingredients, Bread of
millet and Turnepseede pounded, is the bread of the Alarbians, and Cammells and
Ostrages their meat. Lud. Regius in Arist. Polit. l. 1. chap. 5. page 40.
bread of Turnips, bread of Purch. Pil. l. 5. c. 13. page 436.
Battara roots, used in the Islands of Moratay, Tho. Walsingh. hist. Hen. 5.
page 438.
bread of Wall-nuts; but the most of these for necessity, where bread of corn
is either not at all, or not in a competent quantity to be had, and if this
opinion admit of other materials, as far as necessity suggesteth supply,
it may proceed to the approbation of Arcadian Arcades glandibus vesci docuit
eorum Rex Pelasgus. caelius Rhodig. Antiq. Lart. l. 16. c. 13. col. 716. and
lib. 18. col. 836.
bread, made of Acorns, which would little beseem the Lords Table: for as
Pearls must not be cast before Swine (as our Savior says) so of that which
is fittest to be cast before them, as Acorns, none should (as I conceive) offer
to make such pearls, as is the bread of that holy banquet.

The like we say, of the poor and miserable bread (at the Serres French Invent
in Charles the 9. page 799.
siege of Sancerre in France) made of flaxseed, nut-shells and straw, so much
more unmeet for such a service as it is more unworthy then the other. And as
for bread, so if there be no wine to be had, they hold it lawful to use other
liquor, as Methegline (so Philippus Melanct. (in libro de usu integri
Sacramenti) Soripsit Ruthenos (ob vini inopiam) recte facturos, si pro vino
uterentur, aqua mellita, seu medone. Bellar. de Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 24.
tom. 3. page 295.
Melancthon resolved for the Russian Church) or the Juice of Raysons (as for
India upon the like defect) others have concluded, and as there the Communion
of the Nestorian Christians is administered, Mr. Brerew. Inquire of Lang. and
Relig. page 147.
or any other liquor, of familiar use, though it be water: so Vt pro vine aliud
in jis regionibus, usitate potionis, genus usurparent, vel aqua, vel alia sibi
familiari potione utantur? Beza epist. 25. page 167, 168.
Beza (putting the question touching America) makes Answer; and he does it,
in the name of Hoc domini Calvini responsum, ut optima ratione nixum and
Christi consilio consentaneum, noster caetus adeo comprobavit, ut eos
superstitiose facere censuerimus, qui a vini Symbolo, usque adeo penderent ut
alteram coenae partem omittere mallent, quam Analogon aliud Symbolum (ita
cogente necessitate) usurpare. Ibid.
Calvin, and others of the Presbytery of the Church of Geneva, as consonant
both to very good reason, and to the counsel of Christ, which he delivers
with such confidence of the sufficiency of such a supply, that he charge
those with superstition, who so depend upon the Symbol of wine, that if they
may not have it, they will deprive themselves of the other part of the
Sacrament: and he assures the receiver, that there is no doubt of it, but by
such an Administration of the Sacrament, Neque dubitet tam sibi sub hoc potu,
quam sub vino, sanguine Christi communicare. Ibid.
he receives the blood of Christ, as well as if the Sacrament were with wine
delivered unto him. But this liberty without great caution might prove very
scandalous: for

First, by receding so far from the Institution, some might take occasion of
such a presumption, as is condemned in Audivimus quosdam schismatica
presumptione detentos, contra divinos ordines, and Apostolicas institutiones,
hoc pro vino etc. Botro (i.) de unarum granis, populo communicare. Council.
Brac. 3. can. 1. fol. 310.
the third Counsel of Bracara, anno 669. which was to bring milk for wine to
the Communion, or clusters of grapes, which is wine vertually, and materially
somewhat else, which should not be be added to the Institution, as Vvae
integrae non debent huic Sacramento misceri, quia jam aliud esset ibi, preter
vinum. Aquin. 3. part. que. 74. art. 5. ad tertium.
Aquinas well enough has resolved: and there were some so fond, or rather mad,
as to bring bread and cheese into the mysteries of Religion: who therefore are
worthily branded with a name and note of heresy, by Artotyritas appellunt, eo
quod in mysterijs suis, apponunt panem and caseum, and sic mysteria sua
faciunt. Epipha. contra Here Is. lib. 2. tom. 1. p. 99. col. 2.
Epiphanius, and Artotyritae (quibus oblatio, eorum hoc nomen dedit) offernnt
panem, and caseum, dicentes, a primis hominibus, oblationes de fructibus
terrae, and ovium fuisse celebratas. Aug. de Here Is. Her. 28. tom. 6. page 21.
Augustine many hundred years agone.

Secondly, for the limitation, or rather limited allowance of Beza in case of
necessity, as (according to the degree of it) it makes as much variation in
bread, as is between Almonds and Acorns; so for drink, some necessities have
come down as low as from wine to urine. Rabshekah threatened the Jews. Esaias
36.12. That he would bring them to such an extremity, but he did but threaten
it, but it fell out so indeed, among the Cretenses, upon the siege of Cecilius
Metellus, for they were driven to drink both their own, and the urine of
their beasts: and so (as Sua, Jumentorumque suorum, urina, sitim torserunt
verius quam sustentarunt. Valor. Max. lib. 7. cap. 6.
Valerius Maximus said) did rather torture then satisfy their appetites, if
the case of necessity be such, as degrades a man's appetite to the Aliment of
beasts, or (as in this case) below it, doubtless it is much better to forbear
the Sacrament, then to administer it in such Elements, as suite neither with
the sweetness, nor with the dignity of such an excellent mystery.

For Beza his allowance of water, in case of necessity, I like it the worse,
not only for that (as it is a kind of drink, it is fitter for beasts then
for men) but for that, such as anciently did administer in water, in stead of
wine, were branded as heretics, (by the orthodox Doctors) under the name of
Aquarij dicti sunt, quod aquam offerunt, in poculo Sacramenti. Aug. de Here Is.
here is. 64. tom. 6. page 32.
Aquarij: though they did it not of schismatic presumption (as those whom
the Council of Bracara condemned for their innovation) but in their zeal to
Sobrietatem adeo diligebant, ut (ejus conservandae causa) etiampro calicis
consecratione, vinum evitandum putent. Alph. a Castr. Advers. Here Is. lib. 6.
fol. 181. page 6.
sobriety. Against these, St. Cyprian. Epist. 63. page 85. 86.
Cyprian pleads very earnestly, in his epistle to Cecilius. I deny not, but
that there is difference, betwixt using water (without necessity, as they did)
and of necessity, when wine could not be had, which is the case wherein Beza,
and his brethren did allow it: whose opinion is since taken up by Polan Syntag.
lib. 6. cap. 56. col. 12.13.12.14.
Polanus, and set down (almost in the same words) though he name him not. Yet
their great affection to sobriety, was somewhat to excuse them, and perhaps
very near as much, as the mere want of wine might excuse some others, if they
should follow Calvinus, Beza and Polanus their indifferency, for using water
in stead thereof: for though wine could not be had, other liquor (of nearer
operation to it) in most places may be had. And albeit ordinarily, those
Countries which have no vines, might be provided of wine enough for the
Sacrament as Potest verum vinum ad terras illas deferri, in quibus vites non
crescunt, quantu^ sufficit ad hoc sacramentum Aq. 3. p. Q. 74. art. 5. ad prim.
Aquinas confesses (which we take not only for the Priests, as he has it, and
so no necessity to dispense with the Bellar. de Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 24. t^m.
3 page 295.
Priests of Norway, to consecrate in one kind only, as Pope Innocentius the
VIII. is said to have done, but for the Laity also) yet if there should be
such want of wine, as in the year Magdeburg. Cent. 13. cap. 13. col. 2.
1237. there was in Alsatia, when a quart of wine was 16. times dearer then it
was, but the year before, especially such a want, as was in the year Centur.
7. cap. 13. col. 559, 560.
604. which was general almost throughout the world, when with the coldness
of the winter that went before, their Vines were killed, I conceive (with
humble submission to the judgment of the Church) that rather then we of
England should generally want the Sacrament, until new Vines had brought forth
new increase, we might well receive the Sacrament, in some of the better sort
of our usual drinks, but not in water only: though that were mingled in the
sacred Cup, at the consecration (as Neque aliud fiat a nobis, quam quod pro
nobis dominus prior feceret, ut calix (qui in illius commemorationem offertur)
mixtus vino offeratur. Cypr. Epist. 63. page 85. col. 1. and aqua p. 86. col. 1.
Cyprian confidently affirms) and Probabiliter creditur, quod dominus
Sacramentum hoc instituerit, in vino aqua permisto. Aquin. part. 3. Quest. 74.
art. and corp. Artic. so also Chemnit says, verisimile est Christum vinum, non
merum, sed temperatum bibisse. Chemnit. exam. Trid. part 2. page 170. col. 1.
others more warily deliver, upon probable conjecture, and that for these two
reasons.

First, because (as Calix tuus inebriat. Ps. 22. aqua non inebriat. Cyp. ep.
63. p. 86. c. 1.
St. Cyprian shows) the drink of the Sacrament must be a drink of some
vigor, as able (as water is not) to inebriate, though not in so small a
quantity, as is commonly taken by every single receiver.

Secondly, our Savior consecrated the Sacrament not simply in wine (as it was
wine) but in wine and water (as the usual drink of that Country (as Beer or
Ale is with us) as Dominus Sacramentum hoc instituebat, in vino aqua permista,
secundum morem istius terrae. Aquin. part. 3. Q. 74. Art. 6. Corp. Artic.
Aquinas conceives (and no man contradicts him in it, nor do I know any
reason why any one should do so.) And upon these reasons, it might (if the
Church gave way unto it) be warantable enough rather to make a supply, where
there is an unexpected failing of wine, at a great Communion, with some other
liquor analogicall to it, then to send many away with half the Sacrament.

If it be said, that in case of want of wine, Conference at Hampton Court. p.
95. Answ.
conference at Hampton Court.

It may be answered first, that no such ill effect, has been observed, in the
places where wine is (by custom) the common drink of the Country: as in
Judea, France, etc.

Secondly, That the Sacrament of Baptism,

Thirdly,

It consisted chiefly in this, that the Minister Ibid.
suffered (as in the Conference is said) each man, to put his hand into the
basket, and to take his own part of the bread.

In that (being but a private Minister) he made an Innovation for the worse,
and withal a kind of schism from other Churches. But if there had been
Authority for carrying the bread in such a basket, it had been no prejudice to
the dignity of the Sacrament, nor to his discretion that so used it, nor had
such scandal ensued upon it: Saint Hierome highly commends Sanctus Exuperius
Tholosae Episcopus, viduae saraptensis imitator, Esuriens pascit alios, and ore
pallente Jejunijs, fame torquetur aliorum, omnemque Substantiam Christi
pauperibus erogavit, nihil illo ditius, qui corpus domini, Canistro vimineo,
sanguinem portat in vitro. Hieron. ad Rustic. Monach. de vivendi fama. tom. 1
page 49. prope finem. Epist. and page
Exuperius (Bishop of Toulouse) for his great charity, and mortification, and
for his great estate also, and yet (says he) he carried the Lords body in a
wicker basket, and his blood in a glass. Meaning the materials of the
sacrament, bread and wine. The reason why this good man carried the Sacrament,
in such mean vessels (whereof the Reader may have some scruple by the way)
was not out of any contempt, or disrespect of it; but that thereby he might the
better drive the sin of covetousness out of the Church (as Hierom implies)
when he Sanguinem portat in vitro, qui avaritiam ejecit e templo. Hieron. Ibid.
says (in the same place, and the next words after) that he excommunicated
avarice out of the Church, but this but by the way.

Yet I confess (though I thus plead) when I was once unhappily put to a Non
plus for Wine in the administration of the Sacrament (by the Churchwardens
default) I durst not piece up the defect, with any ordinary drink, because I
wanted the direction of Authority to induce me unto it: so that I incline to
conform to a third opinion, which is a kind of Medium betwixt those two, Viz.
neither to substitute other elements (as Calvine, Beza, Polanus and others
would have it:) nor wholly to forbear or debar others from the receipt of
the Sacrament, as Indeed some Doctors of the reformed Churches, have conceived
that such as cannot receive so much as a drop of wine (by their Antipathy to
wine) should altogether abstain from the orall receiving of the Sacrament,
because they cannot receive it in both kinds. Dr. Featly, in his conference
with Mr. Everard. page 268. marg. out of Jacob Rhemig.
some other Protestants have conceived most convenient, when bread and wine, or
either of them, cannot be had: but if there be either an Antipathy against
either kind, or want of either, to be content with that which may be had and
taken: and this is the Judgment, not only of Papists, as of Multi abhorrent a
vino, and vel natura abstemij sunt, vel educatione in calidioribus regionibus:
assuescunt enim pueri and puellae (etiam nobiles) aquae potui, unde multipostea
(etiam in matura aetate) non possunt absque nausea vinum gustare. Quid ergo
isti facturi sunt? abstinebunt a communione perpetuo! at id non licet, per
divinas leges. Bellar. tom. 3. l. 4. de Euchar. chap. 24. page 295.
Bellarmine (besides many more) concluding so, in the case of such as are
abstemious, and cannot abide the taste of wine: but of many Protestants also,
of whom he names Brent. in confessione Wittenburge. 2. part. 2. pericopes apud
Bellar. Ibid.
Brentius only, and blames Quis dedit Philippo, authoritatem mutandi
Sacramentorum materiam? Bellar. ubi supra.
Melancton for too much boldness, in resolving on the contrary part, for the
Russians, that (wanting wine) they might have the Communion in Methegline,
asking who gave him Authority to change the matter of the Sacrament. But it
would be a harder question, able to pose the learned Pope, to ask who gave
him, or the Council of Constance or Trent authority, to rob all the Laity of
the Christian world of half their right in the holy Sacrament: But besides
Brentius, there be many more that so resolve; for as the reformed Churches in
France, in twenty several Synods have confirmed this Canon for the Communion.

So in the Ecclesiastical Discipline of the Reformed Churchches. Chapter 12. Art.
7. Ms.
Pastors ought to Administer the bread of the holy Supper, unto them that are
not able to drinkwine, they having made a Protestation, that they do it not in
contempt, and framing themselves to drink (so far as they shall be able)
Namely, they shall take the cup in their hand, to prevent scandal.

Which Constitution, I account of more weight, because it is not like they did
either not know, or not consider the decisions of Geneva, before mentioned: and
it is worthy our observation in two points especially.

That the Communion may be received in one kind, in case of necessity, when
both cannot be had or not received: for then to take the one in deed, the other
in desire, may suffice, which seems to be the Judgment of Bishop Andrews
(who since his death has been styled a stupendous oracle) in his Answer to
Cardinal Bellarmine, as Doctor Feately in his conference with M. Evarard page
268.
Doctor Feately understands him: though (to mine apprehension) he Si qui in
extremis viaticum, petant ab hac autem, velilla specie abhorreant, quaeri
potest porro, an (eo casu) dispensari possit, ut altera tantum specie
communicent? and an necessitate id cogente immutari possit quid in Euchar.
(gratiae divina lonmanum desectum supplente) cum sacramentum propter bominem
factum sit, non homo propter Sacramentum: verum casus ille in legem trahendus
non est, sed Cessante ferrea necessitate, de reliquo redeundum mox ad Christi
Institutum. Bishop Andrews respo. ad Card. Bellar. cap. 8. page 192.
carries his conceit indifferently, betwixt receiving in one kind, and
supplying the defect of one Element with some other thing, in case of
Antipathy, or other extreme necessity, which he calls an Iron necessity.
In which case, he says the Sacrament was made for man, not man for the
Sacrament: So that when the man cannot yield to the Sacrament, that should (in
some sort) yield to him: and that may be meant two ways:

Either by supplying one kind by some other thing analogicall unto it, of
which we have spoken before: Or,

Secondly, by tempering one kind so with another, as to make it fit to be
relished, and swallowed: as by soaking the bread in liquor, as in case of old
Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. chap. 43. page 118.
Serapion, who could not let down dry bread: which soaking (by the Council
of Bellar. cites this out of Burchard. Bellar. lib. 4. de Euchar. c. 26. tom.
3. page 300. col. 2. though in the Counsels I can find no such Canon.
Towers) was allowed to sick Communicants: but afterward, when (out of case of
necessity) it was used by some; it was severely condemned by a Canon, in the 3.
Council. Bracarens. 3. fol. 310. princip. Council.
Council of Bracara. anno 669. and as Gratian. de consecr. di. 2. cap. cumomne
Crimen. fol. 315. page 1. col. 1.
Gratian cites it by a decree of Pope Julius, Anno 340.

Or thirdly, by taking the one kind Re, the other Voto, the one kind in deed,
the other in desire: which I most approve of: for First, in such a case, he
that receives one kind, receives Christ, and with Christ, both his body and
blood, so that though he have not the Integrity of the Sacrament (for the
outward Elements) he may have the essence and efficacy of it: and though it be
imperfect in respect of the sensible materials, yet it is better to have it
imperfect, then not at all: as it is better to have a piece of a book, of
Canonical Scripture, or but a verse, if he can have no more, then none at all.
Besides it seems hard measure, to debar any from their participation of
both parts of the Sacrament, because God has enabled them to partake but of
one, especially if they much desire it, and be inclined to scruples and
discomforts, if they be kept without it.

If it be objected, that Aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris
arceantur, quod divisio unius ejusdemque mysterij, sine grandi sacrilegio non
potest pervenire. Gelas. apud Gratian de consecrat. did. 2. cap. comperimus.
fol. 315. page 2. col. 1.
Gelasius (who was one of the better sort of the Bishops of Rome, for he lived
about the year 492) required either an entire Communion in both kinds, or a
forbearance of both, and held the division of the one from the other, no less
then a grand sacreledge: I answer, he speaks this, of such as (by A calice
Sacrati cruoris abstinent, nescio qua superstitione docentur astringi. Ibid.
Superstition) refused the Communion of the Cup, not of such as would, but
could not have both, or receive both. It seems rather sacreledge to withhold
from them their Sacred right in one part of the Sacrament, because they are
deprived of means to enjoy the other.

But Saint Detrabe verbum, and quid est aqua nisi aqua? accedat verbum ad
elementum, and fit Sacramentum. Aug. tract. 8. in Joh. tom. 9. p. 547.
Augustine said, the word and the element must make up the Sacrament; without
the element then no Sacrament: but he said it not in the Plural number
[Elements] but in the singular: and he speaks it particularly, of the
Sacrament of Baptism, in his Eighth tractate upon Saint John.

The second observable point in that Canon of the French Church is, that when
it is so received, all scandal and offense must be carefully declined: for if
the party cannot drink wine, he must yet take the Cup into his hand (as
before has been said) and profess a willingness to do it, and thereby he
professes his judgment, and consent with the Church, against several
heresies, condemning and denying the lawful use of wine, as the Alphons de
Castr. advers here is. lib. 14. fol. 173. page 6.
Severeani, who held that Satan and the Earth were the Parents of wine: and of
the De hoc loco, here is. suam Tatianus (Encratitarum princeps) struere mititur,
vinum asserens non bibendum. Hieron. in Amos. 2. and the 12. tom. 6. page 94.
col. 2.
Tatiani, who (because the Lord finds fault with the people, by the Prophet
Amos, that gave the Nazarites wine to drink) thence conceived that he
condemned wine altogether: as Hierome observes upon that text. Amos 2. verse.
12 and of the Manachei vinum non bibunt, dicentes esse principium tenebrarum:
cum vescuntur uvis. Magdeburge Centur. 3. cap. 5. col. 115.
Manachees, who accounted wine the beginning of darkness, yet forbear not to
eat the grapes from whence it was pressed: of the Erant Angeli duo (Aror and
Maror) missi a Deo de caelis in terram, tribue his interdictis: ne occiderent,
ne injuste vindicarent, nec vinum biberent. Centur. 7. cap. 15. col. 613.30.
Turks, who pretended a prohibition from heaven, by an Angel, against the
drinking of wine, of the Aquarij, who refused it upon pretense of more
sobriety, and especially of the Papists, who deny the necessary use of it to
the Laity, by virtue of Christ's Institution. Lastly, hereby they profess
against scandal or offense unto the congregation; by doing otherwise then
they do.

An application of the Precedent Observations to the particular Case proposed,
concerning the Party that cannot take the bread of the Sacrament.
IN this discussion of the different opinions, concerning the receiving of the
Sacrament, where either the matter (wherein it was at the Institution first
Administered) cannot be had, or the means of orall eating or drinking is
denied; I have been the more large: because all that I have met withal (who
have meddled with the doubt) I have found too short, to give an inquisitive
mind, or a scrupulous conscience, due satisfaction: and for that (besides the
particular Quaere, touching the Maid that can take no bread) there be other
difficulties, concerning imperfect Communion, which may perplexe others, as
much as this does her, and which (being cleared) prepare the way of resolution
for the point in hand: touching which, the resultancie of the precedent
discourse, drawn up in particular observations may be this,

That though there be most dispute betwixt us and the Papists, upon the
withholding of the Cup of the holy Communion, in the thing it self, there is
no more necessity held (by either side) of the use of the one element, then of
the other: nor is Christ less present to the faithful, in the one, then in
the other, though methinks (besides other advantages on our part) this is of no
small moment, that they have made choice of the bread rather then the wine in
their half Communion: whereas (with more probability of reason) they might
have pleaded for an half communion in wine, then in bread, both because,

Our Savior said expressly, Mat. 26.27.
Drink ye all of this, and said not so of the bread, Eat ye all of this,
(though he meant no less.)

Because that the Blood of Christ (not so much as it is in the body, as let out
of the Veins, and made potable liquor) is the proper means of the remission
of our sins, Heb. 9.22.
without which there is no remission.

Because in the blood, is the life of the creature, yea, it is called life it
self, and is diffused all over the body, being the purer part of the
nourishment (which we receive) whereof are produced the Spirits, which quicken
the whole man in the motion and operation of all his parts, and faculties: so
that (in this respect) her case is in my conceit more comfortable (who can take
no bread, if she can drink the wine) then theirs, who (contrariwise) are
disposed to a dry Communion, and not to a moist, who can eat the bread, but
cannot drink the wine of the Sacrament.

That what is resolved to be lawfully done, in the want of either bread, or
wine, the same may be done by way of relief to those whose Antipathy or
disabilitie to receive, makes it all one to them, as if it could not be had at
all.

That if the party cannot take ordinary Sacramental bread, but can take
Almond bread (which is the best of those things that are Analoga to bread of
Corn, and is composed of fewest simples, and which (as in quantity, so in
use) is many times made like our usual bread, and presented with wine for
present entertainment of guests or friends: and Lastly, which is for the chief
matter of it: the Almonds are of good temperature, for heat and moisture, and
of wholesome and pure juice. Venner, via recta, ad vitam longam. page 136.
Almond is much commended by the Physician, or ordinary Communion bread
moistened with wine (as in the Communion of the sick, has been anciently
allowed, as before I have showed) I make no great doubt, but that kind of
bread, and the wine of the Communion Cup, would become sufficient materials
for both a lawful and comfortable Sacrament to the receiver.

But that, wherein I am more confident (upon serious pensitation of all
particulars) is, that it were best for her (if indeed she be so averse from all
use of bread) to take and taste of the Cup only, and to take the bread into
her hand, and thereby, and therewithal to testify, that nothing but her
Antipathy to bread, keeps her from conformity with the present Church: which
answers the second part of the Canon of the French Church, concerning this
matter. But it will not be safe for the Minister to take up such a new manner
of Administration of the Sacrament, without consulting with the Bishop of the
Diocese, who is to give leave and order, for that I have conceived to be
convenient in this case, if he approve it, which I conceive he will.

Because (as before has been observed) to debar any from the Communion
wholly (who earnestly desire it) because they can take it, but in part, seems
not to suite with the charity of the Church.

I suppose, he will not be forward to substitute an other Element, in stead of
that which cannot be had, or cannot be taken, and if neither of these, the
third will follow.

For such receiving in one kind only, I think he will resolve the rather,
because though the Communion be a common union of the faithful, with Christ,
and of Christians, with one another, and so necessarily require a number, to
Communicate with the minister, that except there be four, or three (at the
least) to join with him, there must be no communion, by the direction of the
Rubric: yet (in case of necessity) the Church dispenses with the defect of
that (indeed too) small number, and thus resolves in the Communion of the
sick, In time of Plague, sweat, or such other like contagious times of
Sickness, or Diseases, when none of the parish, or neighbors can be gotten, to
Communicate with the sick, in their houses (for fear of infection) upon
special request of the diseased, the Minister may be a lonely Communicant with
him: and as by a necessary defect of number, one Minister (in this case) stands
for three others, so by the like necessity, one element may stand for two: and
this rather then that, because whole Christ is present to the faithful, in
receiving either of the Elements, but three Laie-men are not, nor can be
present in one person, whether Minister, or any other.

But if for all this, upon some especial reason (which my shallowness does
not conceive) all participation of the Sacrament should be forbidden, or
denied, to such a one as cannot entirely take it in both Elements, as others
do: yet the party needs not be troubled, since our Church her self has
resolved in the Communion of the Sick, that if any person, by extremity of
sickness, or for want of warning to the Curate in due time, or for lack of
company to receive with him, or by any other just impediment, do not receive
the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, if he truly repent him of all his
sins, and steadfastly believe that Christ suffered for him: he does eat and
drink the body and blood of Christ profitably to his souls health, although he
do not receive the Sacrament with his mouth.

Of Manus Christi.
THerefore no need of Manus Christi for Corpus Christi, and as I conceive,
there is no warrant for it, because it is compounded of many Ingredients (none
of which is either bread, or any thing that is Analogicall to it, as Sugar,
Rosewater, prepared Pearl, and leaf Gold) Christ's Word, any his Churches word
is better warrant, Manus Christi.
then Christ's hand (in this sense) to resolve the conscience of such as doubt:
to the satisfaction whereof, if that I have said do any service, let praise be
given to God; and a prayer put up for him whom he is pleased to use (though a
weak and unworthy instrument:) to such a purpose.

Chester: Monday 16. of January. 1636. Yours much obliged in love and
observance. J. L.

Feb. 9. 1640.
Imprimatur,

THO. WYKES.


