Imprimatur.

December 12. 1693.

Carolus Alston.

A SERMON Preached at the Anniversary Meeting Of the SONS of CLERGYMEN In the
Church of St Mary-le-Bow, ON Thursday, December the 7th. 1693.

Printed at the Request of the Stewards of the Feast; to whom it is humbly
Presented.

By EDWARD LAKE, D. D. Rector of the United Parishes of St. Mary at Hill, and
St. Andrew Hubbard.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1694.

Dr. LAKE's SERMON Before the Sons of the CLERGY. December the 7th. 1693.

HEBREWS xiij. 7. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken
to you the word of God: whose faith follow, considering the end of their
conversation.


WE do not doubt to assert this Epistle Canonical Scripture, and assign it to
St. Paul, as the Amanuensis or Penman of it; though controverted of old by
Marcion, and the Arians in Opposition to the Divinity of Christ, herein plainly
evinced; and by Cajetan of late. St. Peter's Intimation in his Second Epistle,
an Epistle written Six Years after this, does, methinks, put it quite out of
doubt: 2 Pet. 3.15.
Our beloved Brother Paul also, according to the Wisdom given unto him, 1 Pet.
1.1.
has written to you, viz. To you Jews, then Strangers scattered throughout
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia: For we know of no other Epistle
but this, directed by our Apostle to them. If any will not rest satisfied with
this, let him look upon the token or seal, 2 These. 3.17.
which he sets to every Epistle, as he did to this, viz. The Grace of Jesus
Christ; whereas the Jews did usually conclude their Addresses with a
Valediction of Peace, 1 Pet. 5.14. 2 John 14.
as did St. Peter and St. John afterward.

And though he prefixes not his Name to it, as he did to the rest of his
Epistles, for some good Reasons, which would take up too much of your Time and
Patience to hear; yet the Sentences thereof so grave and weighty, and
expressive, breath the Spirit and Majesty of this Apostle. Add hereunto the
Prosecution of his Design herein, which renders it highly probable; for,
according to his wonted Method, he first lays the Doctrine of Faith as a
Foundation, and upon it raises Precepts of good Manners, and Directions to an
holy Life, as the Building. And as by Faith, we are united to our Head Christ
Jesus; so by Love we are knit together, and united among our selves; therefore
to the Doctrine of Faith, treated of at large in the Twelve First Chapters, he
does immediately subjoin an Exhortation to brotherly Love in the beginning of
this, specifying two sorts of Persons, to whom more especially we are obliged
to direct it, viz. Strangers and Captives. Strangers driven from their Homes,
and forced to take up Deserts, Dens, and Caves for their Habitation; Captives,
who were housed indeed, but to their greater Affliction, detained in their
Bonds and Prison for their Profession of Christianity.

This Profession he does very earnestly exhort them in this Epistle, to hold
fast without wavering, Heb. 10.23.
maugre those grievous Persecutions, which from Jews and Gentiles did now press
hard upon them on every side; 2.1.
to give earnest heed to the things which they had heard; 3.6.
to hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end;
10.^9.
not to be of them who draw back unto perdition, but of them who believe, to
the saving of the soul. Lastly, Not to be slothful, but to be followers of
them, 6.12.
who through faith and patience inherit the promises. The very Argument which
my Text offers, Remember them, etc.

The Persons mentioned therein are presented with a double Character, they are
such as rule over them, and have spoken to them the Word of God: The Duties
which referr to them are two; they must remember and imitate them; and this in
two things here particularly taken Notice of, as 1. Their Faith. 2. Their
Perseverance and Constancy, even to the end of their Conversation. I will (by
God's Help) very plainly, and expeditely speak to these particulars, and then
give them a Review, and adapt the whole to the Design of our present Solemnity.

And for the better understanding of what I have to say, I premise,

1. That the Apostle cannot be supposed to mean here, those who were then
living, but who had been for some time deceased. It is true, we read it in the
present Tense, those who have the Rule; but the Word (...), may be well rendered
in a past one, as will appear by comparing it with the following Words, and
have spoken to you the Word of God, and the Apostle calls on them to remember
them, which supposes them absent from them, viz. in the Body, and present with
the Lord; as also to consider the End of their Conversation, (...), i. e. their
Decease, their Exit, or Departure out of the World.

2. This was the last of St. Paul's Epistles, and written by him, as it is
guessed, about the Eighth Year of the Emperor Nero, and presently after
Timothy's Enlargement from Prison: After which, we hear no more of our Apostle;
nothing indeed of him but Conjecture. So that before the writing of this
Epistle, not only St. Stephen the Protomartyr, but St. James the Great, the
Brother of John; and also very probably, St. James the Less, the Brother of our
Lord, and Constituted by him Bishop of Jerusalem, were put to Death; and
perhaps some others, whom neither Holy Scriptures, nor Ecclesiastical Writings,
give us any Account of. Only Baronius out of Dositheus, tells us of Silas,
Narcissus, and others, whose Memories the Hebrews were obliged to Regard and
Preserve, whose Faith to Follow, whose Conversations to Imitate. And,

1. Them who rule over you, viz. chiefly and principally the Bishops; as also,
though in an inferior Sense, Presbyters: For thus, both among Profane and
Sacred Authors, the Word imports Prefects or Governors, whether in Church or
State.

We find the Title Applied to Christ as Ruler or Governor in Israel; Mat. 2.7.
to his Apostles, (...), Let him that is chief, Luke 22.26.
or who rules among you, be as he that does serve; and particularly to Silas
and Judas, Act. 15.22.
Chief men or rulers among the people.

This Notion of the Word we have from the last Words of this Chapter and
Epistle; Salute all them that have the rule over you, viz. the Bishops and
Pastors of your Churches, (for such there were, at this time, constituted over
the Churches of the believing Jews, especially in Syria and Judaea) and all the
Saints, viz. the Flock committed to their charge: Rulers and Saints being the
Two Words made use of to comprehend all the Christian Hebrews, to whom this
Epistle is directed.

If Mr. Mede's Thought be right in his Exposition of that Text of the Apostle,
Mede on 1 Timothy 5.17. pa^. 71.
Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, and
especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine; where he distinguishes Two
sort of Elders, viz. Residentiaries, and such as were affixed to certain
Churches, whose business was praesidere gregi, to govern and Instruct their
Flocks, who are elsewhere called Prophets and Doctors; and others who had no
fixed Station or Charge over any certain Church, but traveled up and down to
Preach the Gospel where it was not, and to Establish it where it was. Their
Diocese was the whole World, as it was St. Paul's; (...), says he, Heb. 15.10.
I have labored, or, I have traveled up and down more than they all; and they
are elsewhere known by the Name of Evangelists: I say, If this Observation be
genuine, why may not we too distinguish in my Text, those that ruled well among
the Hebrews, from others who had spoken to them the Word of God?

The First of these, under what Name soever they pass among Divines, whether we
call them Ministers of the Word, or Apostles, or Governors, or Pastors, or
Doctors, or Conductors and Guides of Faith, or Highpriests, or Prelates and
Bishops of the Church, this is obvious, that their Work is to rule over, and
govern their Flocks.

What Society can subsist without Order, without Government? This is the very
Soul that animates and influences it: Neither Church nor Kingdom can live and
breath without it.

Look over the several Appellations given to our Lord in Holy Scripture, as
Lord, Shepherd, King, Husband, the Head of his Church, and do they not all
imply a Precedence or Authority? Read over the Titles with which he has graced
his beloved Church, stiling her his Body, his Spouse, his Flock, his Household
or Family, and do they not all import an orderly and regular Submission?

But Christ has now left the World, and ascended up on high; and when he did
so, he gave Gifts unto Men; Ephesians. 4.11.
He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. And thus particularly did he
authorize his Apostles, this Commission did he give them, and in them their
Successors, not only to speak the Word of God unto his Saints, but to rule over
them; a Power really communicated to them, with other Gifts and Graces, on the
Day of Pentecost: Act. 1.4.
Ye shall receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you; a Power
which has been ever since exercised in the Church of Christ, by Christian
Bishops and Priests, but with respect to their different Station and Order.

Aaron of Old, had, you know, his Rod, as the Bishop his Pastoral Staff, Number.
17.8.
an Emblem of Authority, an Ensign of Jurisdiction, a Rod to support the Weak
and Innocent, to chastise the Wicked and Impenitent, to mete out Reward and
Punishment respectively unto all. This Rod of his St. Austin calls Sacramentum
Sacerdotale, and Isidore Pelusiote, (...), the Type of the Priesthood, a
significant Hieroglyphick of his Duty.

It instructs him to be courageous and vigilant in his Office, and to Rebuke
with all Authority, to Admonish, to Reprove, and that with Sharpness too, as
occasion offers, according to the Power which the Lord has given to
Edification, and not unto Destruction. And to reject those Counsels and
Reproofs, is to offer Violence to the Authority which God has erected in his
Church: In this case, He that despises, 1 Thessalonians. 4.8.
despises not Man but God.

The highest Acts of this Authority are the admission of Persons to the
Communion of the Church by Baptism, and excluding them from it by
Excommunication: When Men once contemn Discipline, and despise Order, and
become Refractary and Obstinate, Resolution and Severity, are then the proper
Virtues of these Rulers, and Justice it self is their Mercy; they must then
with David, condescend to be Door-keepers in the house of God, to shut out all
Profaneness, and debar such Offenders from invading her Communion and Offices,
from hearing the Word of God spoken to them.

This is the other Character of the Persons recommended to our Remembrance and
Imitation; who have spoken to you the Word of God, who have instructed you in
the Knowledge of Christ, the proper Food and Nourishment of the Soul, with
which his Sheep, his Lambs are fed; and by Virtue of which, they advance and
grow up unto a full Stature in Christ Jesus: Joh. 17.3.
This is life eternal to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent.

And this is a Work, that none is too great or too high for; for it is a Work
of Charity, and Charity is the Work of Heaven; nay, of the highest and most
eminent Charity, to give Alms to the Souls of Men, to cloth the Nakedness of
their Understandings, and supply the Wants of their impoverished Reason. And
for this Purpose, has God appointed and separated an Order of Men, whose
business should be to devote themselves to the Service of Religion, the Study
of the Scriptures, and the Work of the Ministry; to instruct men in those
things they know not, to re-mind them of those things they already know, to
reprove them for what they do amiss, to inspect diligently the Lives and
Manners of Men, to apply seasonable Encouragements to fearful, and Comforts to
distressed, Consciences. This is indeed, speaking the Word of God; it is not
properly a flow of Words, nor the draining of an Hourglass, but an effectual
procuring that men be taught their Duty, and urged to the performance of it.
And this is effected more particularly and publicly by Catechizing and
Preaching.

As to Catechizing, you cannot but know the great import and Advantages of it;
how necessary it is, that a good Foundation be first laid before a firm
Superstructure can be raised, how needful it is, that the first Principles
should be well understood before the greater mysteries can be thoroughly
apprehended; What a most excellent Expedient it is to prevent Schism and
Heresy, Atheism and Profaneness; What Benefits would hence accrue both to
Church and State; I suppose it needless to enlarge on it in this knowing
Assembly. Nor is this Office of Catechizing below the Dignity of the greatest
Minister of God: The Primitive Fathers generally were (...); nay, very probably
the holy Apostles themselves were so.

As to Preaching, it is a Duty too of infinite consequence and advantage, even
the Power of God unto Salvation, when rightly and plainly dispensed: I say,
plainly, for what have the ignorant Vulgar to do with controversy? Why should
their Heads be filled with perplexed Notions and foolish Questions which
engender Strifes? Such things as are of daily Use and Practice, such as are all
earnest and zealous Inculcations of Obedience to God, and to man for God's
Sake, of Humility and Sobriety, of Love and Charity, of common Justice and
Honesty, of Faith and Repentance and good Works, etc. If thou put them in
remembrance of these things, 1 Timothy 4.6.
thou shall be (...), a faithful Minister of Jesus Christ; and as such, worthy
hereafter to be remembered, which directs me to consider the Duties here
recommended to us, and, 1. Remember,

Men naturally desire to be remembered though dead and gone, to have their Names
perpetuated to after-Ages; nor has there been wanting among the Heathen, such,
who, though not inspired with the Hopes of a future Reward, yet have taken care
to have their memories conveyed to Posterity. Witness the Egyptian Pyramids, as
also certain Statues among the Greeks, with the Names of their Founders
inscribed on them. This they impetrated as a Favor from their Gods; this they
accounted a Blessi^g to have themselves remembered after Death.

And indeed so it is; for otherwise God would never have assured it to
righteous men, That they should be had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112.
That their righteousness should remain for ever; and their memories never
perish. Our Savior has said it of Mary Magdalen, Mat. 26.13.
That wheresoever his Gospel should be preached, that which she had done should
be spoken of for a memorial of her. Whereas God has threatened the Wicked with
Excision, even of their very Names, that their memory should perish; or, if it
did outlive them, it should rot, and (as we say) stink above ground; or like
Lot's Wife's Pillar, which remained to Posterity, a Spectacle of Divine
Vengeance for many Generations; so that they who passed by wagged their Heads
at it.

But the memory of the Just shall be blessed, i. e. so far as known; and God
calls on us, who survive them, to take care, that it be so. Remember them;
recollect those Gifts and Graces, with which God had so remarkably endowed
them; Acknowledge to his Glory, what good they have done us; remember them as
our spiritual Parents and Benefactours; as those who labored and watched for
the good of our Souls; think of them with Delight, who have put off their
Flesh, and are passed this Stage of sin and sorrow to their everlasting Homes;
speak of them to their praise, for which God did so eminently qualify them.

This has been the Practice of all Ages, even of such as never heard of
Christ. Let us now praise famous Men, Ecclus. 44.1.
(said the wise Syracides) and our fathers that begat us: The Lord has wrought
glory on them through his great Power from the beginning; such as did bear Rule
in their Kingdoms, men renowned for their Power; Leaders of the People: By
their Counsels and by their Knowledge of Learning meet for the People; wise and
eloquent in their Instructions. And again, 7. v.
All these were honored in their Generations, and were the Glory of the times;
There be of them that have left a Name behind them, that their Praises might be
reported. And again, 10. v.
Mereisul men, whose righteousness has not been forgotten; Their seed shall
remain for ever, and their glory shall not be blotted out. And again, Their
bodies are buried in Peace, 13. v.
but their Name lives for evermore; The people will tell of their wisdom, and
the Congregation will show forth their praise.

How very exact too were the Primitive Christians, in honoring the memories of
their Martyrs and deceased Bishops? For this were the Diptychs read in the
Church, which were two Leaves or Tables, on the one whereof were written the
Names of those pious Men and Confessors who were yet alive; and on the other
those who had died in the Lord, and were at rest. For this were Altars erected
over their Graves; For this were their Pictures hung up in their private Shops
and Houses; For this were Churches, though dedicated to God, made to bear the
Names of Saints to preserve their Memories; For this were their Feast-days
celebrated, Panegyricks made on them, and their Lives written. St. Basil wrote
the Life of Barlaam, who was but a poor Shepherd; Nazianzen, of Basil and
others, which, he says, he left to Posterity, (...), as a common Table of
Virtue for all the World to look on.

We do not read of any Worship in those times addressed to them (this were to
dishonor not only that God who crowned them, but themselves also; for Honor,
where it is not due, is a kind of contumely:) we do not read of any Prayers for
them to be delivered out of Purgatory, nor of adoring their Relics, nor of
Prostration to their Images, nor of Pilgrimages to their Shrines, nor of saying
Masses, nor of making Vows or Oblations unto them, as Cornelius a Lapide, and
others, urge even from this very Text. No, they only prayed, as we do, for a
glorious Resurrection, for their perfect Consummation and Bliss both in Body
and Soul, in his eternal and everlasting Kingdom. But the greatest Honor which
they did them, was to follow or imitate them; which is the second Duty
inculcated in the Text.

The very Remembrance of good men is a Degree, an Approach to Holiness;
otherwise St. Paul would not, as in our Text, have required it: as he did in
another place of this Epistle call upon his Hebrews, Heb. 10.24.
to consider, (...), narrowly to mark and observe, and study one another,
(...), to whet and sharpen each others Affections, now, perhaps, dulled with
vain and impertinent Speculations, to provoke unto love and to good works.

By Virtue of this Imitation it is, that we become influenced, nay, ecstafied
with the Spirits of those who are gone before us; that we become meek with
Moses, patient with Job, chaste with Joseph, devout with David, that with our
Apostle, Phil. 3.13.
we forget those things which are behind, and press forward to those things
which are before; 2 Timothy 4.6.
that with him we are ready to be offered up; yea, are at the Stake, or on the
Rack, or at the Block with the Holy Martyrs. Thus when in the course of
Christianity we doubt or dispute with our selves which way to take, we then
deliberate and advise, what Paths they trod, who have already departed this
Life in the Faith and Fear of God, and especially they who have had the rule
over us, Holy Bishops, or our good Fathers; would they have turned their Backs
in the Day of Battle, and been Cowards at the sight of a glittering Spear?
Would they have struck Sail at every Pyrate's Threat? Would they have basely
and unworthily betrayed their Holy Faith? With what Courage, with what
Resolution, with what Patience were they Endowed?

And indeed, as I intimated even now, this is the highest Honor we can do
them, to propound them to our selves as our Patterns, and to follow them in
their constant Love to God, to Religion, and to all Mankind, whatsoever we
suffer for it.

This was the due Practice of Holy Men of Old; Laudamus, Glorificamus,
Admiramur, etc. (to use the Words of St. Austin, or whoever he was that wrote
the Book de Excidio urbis) We Praise, we Glorify, we Admire the Blessed
Martyrs, we Celebrate their Days with a pious Solemnity, we Venerate their
Worth, and, as far as we can, we Follow them, and endeavor to do as they did.

By this we raise them as 'twere, from the Dead to Life again, we revive their
Memories, we personate them in this World, and act their Parts: Our Actions are
the Resultances of theirs, our Praises the Echo's of their Songs, and our
Selves the living Images of them. And those, who do thus Honor God's Saints
and Friends, God himself will Honor everlastingly.

Here are Two Graces expressed in the Text, in which especially we are obliged
to follow them. 1. Their Faith. 2. Their Perseverance and Constancy even unto
the end of their Conversation.

As to Faith, we here understand by it, the Grace rather than the Rule of
Faith; and by it, we mean a constant Dependence upon God for the Performance of
his Promises; a being convinced of the truth of those things, of which we have
no ocular or sensible Demonstration. We have an Account of it thus understood
throughout the whole Eleventh Chapter of this Epistle, and of those brave
Exploits, which by Virtue hereof, the Fathers of the Old Testament had wrought,
and therefore obtained a good report, viz. a Testimony of God's Approbation of,
and Respect unto them.

But here, as the Apostle spoke in the Close of that Chapter, Heb. 11.32.
The time would fail me to speak of Abel, and Enoch, and Noah, and Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, and Moses, and those other Worthies; who through Faith,
subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained Promises, etc.

And no less Eminent for this Grace, were those Holy Men under the New
Testament, whose Faith these Hebrews here are bid to follow; whom they had
observed depending on God's Strength and Blessing, constantly and fearlessly
discharging their Duties. And though there were as yet but few, but Three or
Four of them that we know of, beside private Christians; not such a Cloud as
was under the Jewish Economy; yet they ought to lay aside every weight, Heb.
12.2.
and the sin which does so easily beset them, and to run with patience the race
which was set before them; Looking unto Jesus, as also unto those, who through
Faith and Patience inherit the Promises, considering the end of their
Conversation.

Intuentes, Looking upon seriously, and diligently, again and again, their
(...), their Exit or Catastrophe, their End or going out of the World. Revolve
with your selves, how holily they adorned their Faith, how constantly they
persevered in the Profession of it, how gloriously they attested and signed it
with their Blood! Faithful they were unto Death, or, as Clemens Alexandrinus
expresses it, (...), to the very last Gasp; as they did run the race set
before them, Rev. 2.10.
so they did it (...), with Patience and Perseverance.

Nor shall the Crown of Heaven be consigned to those that contend, but to those
that overcome; St. Paul himself, that noble Champion of Christianity,
Triumphs not when he put on his Armor, but when about to put it off; He knew
there is laid up for him a Crown of Righteousness, but de reliquo, henceforth
only, when he was now a Veterane in the Christian Warfare, had already worn out
a long Life, and had nothing now to do, but to die in it. He was ready,
prepared, not only to be bound, (as the Sacrifices under the Law were wont) but
to die for the Name of the Lord Jesus: Acts 21.13.
And he is most unworthy of that high and honorable Name, who will not take up
the most painful and ignominious Cross, which wears upon it, the Inscription
of JESUS of NAZARETH: Jesus, who has ever wrought in his own, both to will and
to do, and to suffer too for doing well; who, as he has ever supported them
under whatever Sufferings they have at any time labored, so will continue to
do so; for he is Yesterday, to Day, and the same for ever.

And now passing from my Text as it lies in it self, unto the Application of it
unto this present Solemnity, I will introduce it with those Words of St. Peter
to the Jews, with a little Variation; Men, Fathers, and Brethren, Act. 2.26.
Let me freely speak unto you, not of the Patriarch David, but of your own
Progenitors, your Parents both in the Flesh and in Christ too, your Spiritual
as well as your natural ones, who have had the rule over you, who have spoken
to you the word of God, who, many, most of them, are dead and buried, and their
sepulchers are with us unto this day: But withal, with their Characters and
Inscriptions, their good Instructions and Examples, which we should endeavor
to Transcribe and Copy out in our own Converfations: For Solomon is therefore
Commended, that he walked in the Steps of his Father David.

I am willing to believe this of the Parents of us all here present, That they
took Care to have us Nursed up and Imbibed with early Sentiments of Religion;
to have our Minds, before they could be filled with Vanity, infused with the
Knowledge of God and of Christ; to have our Wills, whilst they were yet
flexible, formed to the Love of Virtue and Piety, that it is in a manner become
natural to you. Ye are the Children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant which
God made with your Fathers; of such Fathers, who have not only with the most
tender and affectionate Words that Love could dictate, directed you in the Ways
of Holiness, but walked before you in those Ways; who have not only by
Admonitions showed it to be most rational, but also by their constant Practice,
evidene'd it to be most Pleasant and Delightful.

Unto whom then can the Duties in my Text be more properly applied? How can we
choose but remember and follow them, our venerable Guides? Revolve with our
selves their grave Advices, their remarkable Sayings, and their wise and worthy
Actions, remember with what good Admonitions and Instructions they pursued and
pressed you from time to time, and particularly when they emancipated, and
discharged you out of their Government into the World, and to the Practice of
those Professions and Conditions of Life you are now advanced to.

So that now Wickedness in us is a direct Rep^oach unto them; all Sin and
Iniquity in us a manifest Scorn and Contempt of their Sanctity, as if it had
been nothing else but a foolish Strictness of those who understood not their
own Liberty. O let not us then disparage our Extraction! Let us not degenerate
from the Credit and Honor of it! But Let our light so shine before men, Mat.
^.16.
that they seeing those good works, with which we adorn our Original, may be
induced to Glorify God our Heavenly Father, nay, our Earthly Fathers too, who
are now in Heaven. Let us adhere to that Faith which they owned, some of them
with the loss of their Liberty, their Estates, and perhaps too their Lives;
Malign'd, Persecuted for their Loyalty to the best of Kings; Dragged from their
Homes into Gaols and Prisons, there to Languish through the Cruelty of the
Malevolent and Implacable Roundhead.

Si deest tyrannus, si spoliator, etc. (as St. Austin speaks) though there be
no Tryrant (blessed be God for it!) no Sequestrator, no Plunderer abroad; yet,
forasmuch as our Religion is a suffering Religion; and we, of all others, are
taught, upon Occasion, to exert a Passive Obedience, that noble, that heroic,
that peculiar Doctrine and Glory too of our Church, let us all be resolved, and
prepared to do so, whenever God shall call us thereunto, and by so doing follow
their Faith considering the end of their Conversation.

Lastly, Because Faith without Works is dead, or, no Faith at all, let us
proceed, and add unto it Brotherly-kindness, and unto Brotherlykindness
Charity. Above all things put on Charity; nay, let it influence our minds, and
excite us to that Beneficence, which both the Hopes and Necessities of our poor
Brethren exact from us.

And here I must crave Leave to beg a raised Attention (though it has been
tired sufficiently;) for Time commands me to crowd my Materials into a narrow
Compass.

My Brethren, we are met together this Day in an Holy Assembly, upon a Design
of relieving those of the same Descent with our selves, those I mean, who do
now mourn in secret, and dwell in the low Tabernacles of Smoke and desolate
Want; who themselves also would have made a part of this Solemnity, had not God
in his Providence disposed them to a sadder Entertainment. Remember the
Fatherless and Widows, whose Cries come up to Heaven, even now whilst we are
paying our Devotions toward it; who sustain the Necessities and Hardships, the
Cold and Hunger of the whole Year, upon the Hopes of being comforted by the
Bounty and Charity, which this Day may, through God's Grace, Occasion.

To you therefore, who have acquired Estates by God's Blessing, whether on your
own, or the Industry of your Ancestors; To you, in what State or Condition you
are, in the Church, or in the State, in the City or in the Country, in the
Court or in the Camp, on the Bench or at the Bar, I address my self
indifferently to you all, I charge and exhort, I adjure and obtest you by the
Bowels of Christ, by your Sacred Charter, by whatever other Obligation, in the
Words of the Apostle, to do good, to be rich in good Works, to be ready to
distribute, willing to communicate.

Remember, That Charity is so great a Duty, that it renders men like God
himself, who gives liberally and upbraideth not; like his Son and our Savior,
who went about doing good; this brought him down from Heaven, this nailed him
to the Cross: That it is the only means we have, by which, as we are able, we
can make Returns to God for what we are and have. By this means, we increase
our Estates on Earth, and lay up Treasures in Heaven.

Plead not the Number of your Children or Dependants; say not, as the wise said
to the foolish Virgins, we have not enough for us and you; but know, that God
will provide for and bless your Offspring, how numerous soever; and you will
oblige him to take Care of them by your continued Charities, to those
especially who are of the Household of Faith, of the same Extraction with your
selves; for such are the Sacrifices under the Gospel, and with such God is well
pleased.

I have done, adding only those Words of Nehemiah, Neh. 8.10.
or rather Ezra, Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send
portions to them for whom nothing is prepared: And then, as it follows, This
day shall be holy unto our Lord, neither shall ye be sorry, for the Joy of the
Lord will be your Strength.

FINIS.

