A COMPARISON OF THE PARLIAMENTARY PROTESTATION with the late Canonical Oath;
and the difference betwixt them.

As also THE OPPOSITION BETWIXT THE Doctrine of the Church of England, and that
of Rome.

So cleared, That they who made scruple of the Oath, may cheerfully and without
doubt address themselves to take the PROTESTATION.

As also A FVRTHER DISCVSSION OF THE Case of CONSCIENCE, touching receiving the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, when either Bread or Wine is wanting, or when by
antipathy or impotence, the party that desires it cannot take it.

Wherein The Impiety, Injury and Absurdity of the Popish half Communion is
more fully declared and confuted.

Both which Discourses were occasioned by a Letter of a Lay-Gentle-man, lately
written to the Author, for his satisfaction touching the matters
forementioned.

By JOHN LEY Pastor of great Budworth in Cheshire:

Ezekiel. 44. 23. They shall teach my people the difference between the holy and
profane; and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean.

London, Printed by G. M for Thomas Underhill at the sign of the Bible in
Wood-street, near the Counter, M.DC.XLI.

To the much and worthily Honored Sr. ROBERT HARLEY Knight of the Honorable
Order of the Bath, and Knight of the Honorable House of Commons for the County
of He^eford.
THe desire I had to profess my devoted Service to the pious designs of your
honorable Senate, disposed me to a boldness of offering this ensuing
Discourse by a general Dedication to your whole House. But my judgment (upon
second cogitations) gave check to that conceit, as making too near an
approach, toward some presumption, and directed me to value it, below the rate
of a competent Present, for so many, so worthy persons of your Assembly, and to
select some Patron among you for a singular inscription. Thence were my
thoughts conducted to your Self (noble Sir) to whom (for your prudent and
constant Zeal, to advance all just and conscionable causes, and your many
affectionate expressions of respect to me both present and absent) I held my
self obliged to take this opportunity, to tender a token of a grateful memory
of such favor as (without the guilt of ungratitude) I can neither forget nor
forbear to acknowledge. And I should be as ungodly as ungrateful, if
(considering your intentive incumbency upon the common cares of the Church and
Sta^e) I should not (both in Church and Closet) address my heartiest devotions
to the Lord Almighty, to preserve your person (with the rest of your venerable
Associates) and to prosper your consultations with such happy success, as may
occasion an exchange of prayers into praises. In both which sacred Services
(with reference to you and yours, in nearest relations) none shall be more
sincere and serious then he who will never be wanting,

Great Budworth, Septem. 20. 1641. Unfeignedly to honor and faithfully to serve
you JOHN LEY.

A COMPARISON OF THE PARLIAmentary Protestation with the late Canonical Oath,
and the difference betwixt them.
SIR,

I Have received a long and elabourate Letter from you, wherein you give me a
double character of your self. The one notes you for a man very observant of
(that, which is of^ most moment) matter of Religion: The other shows you to be
of an ingenuous disposition, for in your discourse with me you personate rather
a doubting disciple, then (as some of less learning then your self would have
done) a peremptory dogmatist; both which make me desirous to be a graduate in
your knowledge, and good will, and from a mere stranger (as until of late I
was unto you) to become an acquaintance, and from an acquaintance to proceed to
the acceptance of a friend, and there to settle. You begin (as by good order
you may) with the occasion which induced you to write unto me thus.

Sir, you may please to remember, that casually in Mr. Lathur^s Shop in Paul's
Churchyard, there happening some little discourse betwixt us, you invited me
(according to mine own present intent) to read over your book treating of
doubts upon the Oath of the sixth Canon: and you also moved me, that if any
thing in it should stick with me, I would represent it to you. In pursuance
whereof, I have perused the book throughout: minding not to take any exceptions
at all, or to become a^y way quarrelsome, intending with my self, either (by
just approbation of your better judgment) to assent, or else to be quietly
silent, which a man may the more safely do, because the book does wisely
consist for the most part of Qua^res, ba^kt with reasons thereto conducent. But
afterward perusing over a short Tract (annexed to the end of the book)
concerning a case of Conscience about the receiving of the Eucharist in one
kind in case of necessity, I lighted on a block, at which I have taken a
stumble.

I supposed (good Sir) your sight is too clear to suffer you to dash upon a
block before you discern it: and your footing too firm, and fixed to stumble
at a straw, nor will I think (since you profess your self so well disposed to
peace) that you have set your self Proverbium [ nodum in Scyrpo quaerere] in
an^^ium dicebatur, nimisque diligentem aut me^i^ulosu^^, qui illic scrupulum
mover^t ubi nihil esset ad dubi. ^andum. E^asm. Ch^liad. p. 158 Col. 1.
to seek a knot in a rush, my discretion and charity divert my mind from such
conjectures, and direct it to conceive (but pardon me good Sir, if I mistake
you, as you seem to have mistaken me) that you took a small appearance of a
doubt, rather to initiate my notice of you with a Scholasticall Treatise (for
which I thank you) then that you need any satisfaction from me to your
conscience, as scrupled by that passage, which you have noted for ambiguous in
my book.

That is more considerable (me thinks) which you have said by way of doubt,
concerning some conformity betwixt the Oath of the sixth Canon, and the late
Protestation framed in the Commons House of Parliament; whereof you make a
Quere, and to which I will first give answer; and then clear the case of
Conscience from just cause of offense. I choose to begin with that, though you
end with it. Because,

1. It is meet in good manners, that I give that Honorable Assembly precedence
of Apology before my self.

2. Because my doubts of the Oath are placed, in order of my tractates, before
the case of conscience, where you have either found, or made an occasion of
scruple.

Touching the former, your words are these, See I pray you the That is the
Protestation, dated the third of May, 1641^
enclosed, and then consider if your doubts published do not stand up against
it also, as to the matter of it, and of the Oath you fight against, insomuch if
the Queres raised against the one, be not an invitation unto scruples, against
the other also.

Your doubt, and mine Answer, will be better understood on both sides, if,
first we consider the Protestation, and declaration upon it, as it is set down
interminis thus,

I A. B. do in the presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow and protest, to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power and
estate, the true reformed Protestant Religion expressed in the doctrine of the
Church of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations, within this
Realm, contrary to the same doctrine, and according to the duty of my
Allegiance, His Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate: As also the power
and privileges of Parliaments: The lawful Rights and Liberties of the
Subjects, and every person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he
shall do in the lawful pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far
as lawfully I may, I will oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to
bring to condign punishment all such as shall either by force, practice,
counsels, plots, conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of
any thing in this present Protestation contained: And further that I shall in
all just and honorable ways endeavor to preserve the union and peace betwixt
the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland: And neither for hope,
fear, nor other respect shall relinquish this Promise, Vow and Protestation.

Whereas some doubts have been raised by several persons out of this House,
concerning the meaning of these words, contained in the Protestation lately
made by the members of this House; [viz. the true reformed p^otestant Religion,
expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, against all Popery and
Popish Innovations within this Realm, contrary to the same Doctrine] This House
does declare that by those words, was, and is meant, only the public Doctrine
professed in the said Church, so far as it is opposite to Popery and Popish
Innovations: and that the said words are not to be extended to the maintaining
of any firm of worship, discipline or Government, nor of any Rites or
Ceremonies of the said Church of England.

If it were so, that the doubts of the Oath stood up (as your Quere has it)
against the Protestation, or that they were an invitation of scruples against
it, it were not my fault; for my book of doubts was made (though not printed)
before there was any intimation or expectation of a Parliament, especially by
those whose mansion is so remote from the mysteries of State, so far below
the orb of the highest Intelligence as mine is.

2. I doubt not to make it plain, that the differencies betwixt the
Parliamentary Protestation, and the Canonical Oath are so many and so weighty;
that a man may with good conscience and discretion suspect much peril in
taking the Oath, and be well assured of the safety in taking the Protestation
composed in the Parliament.

Real differencies betwixt the Protestation of the Parliament, and the Oath of
the Canon: first in the matter of them both, the Doctrine established.
THe differences betwixt the Protestation of the Parliament, and Oath of the
Synod are Real and Personal.

The Real are such as concern the matter and form of them both. The matter,
(whereon you ground the chief cause of your doubting) I shall distinguish into
that which is common to them both and that which is peculiar to either.

That which is common to both is, the asserting of the Doctrine established in
the Church of England, especially as in opposition to Popish Doctrine: whereof
(as it is set down in the Canon) there be three doubts, 1. 2. Parti^. doubt p.
16.
What is meant by the Church of England? 2. 4. Parti^. doubt. p. 32.
What is meant by Popish Doctrine? 3. 5 Parti^. doubt. p. 37.
What establishment of Doctrine is here m^ant, and how far it may be said to
be established? which doubts with their reasons, whosoever reads with an
impartial and unprejudiced apprehension, will never apply to the Protestation
of the Parliament.

And in what sense we may well understand these words in the printed
Protestation (though I will not take upon me to interpret it, except for
satisfaction to my self, and to such as require my Judgment of it) in my
conceit is very clear, especially by the Declaration annexed to many printed
copies of that Protestation (though that which you sent me came forth without
it) in this tenor; by these words: [The true reformed Protestant Religion,
expressed in the Doctrine of the church of England against all Popery and
Popish Innovations within this Realm, contrary to the same Doctrine, was and
is meant only the public Doctrine professed in the church of England; so far
as it is opposite to Popery and Popish Innovations] And that is (as I take it
without taking upon me the Authority of an Interpreter of it, save as before I
have said) the Doctrine contained in the 39. Articles. For,

First, that is the most public Doctrine of the Church; because in the Church
of every Parish, all that are admitted into Benefices must publi^ly read the
39. Articles unto the people within the first month of their admission to them,
upon peril of loosing their livings by falling into lapse.

2. That Doctrine is most professedly the Doctrine of the Church of England; for
all Doctors and teachers of the Church are bound, so far to profess it, as
to subscribe unto those Articles, without which subscription, they are not to
be allowed for public Preachers, or teachers, at least not admitted into
pastoral charges, in the Church of England.

3. The Doctrine of those Articles is most opposite to Popery, and popish
Innovations; for they were framed and tempered of purpose for an Antidote to
Popery, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, about four years after her coming to
the Crown, for she began her Stow^ Annals p. 1074.
reign, November 17. 1558. and in 1562. were these Articles concluded on, to
be the public and professed Doctrine of the Church of England. This Doctrine
and these Articles are in congruity of right Reason, to be intended in this
Protestation.

Yet not all of them neither (though none of them be denied or renounced) but
only those which are opposite to Popery and popish Innovation: as these that
follow.

The Protestant Doctrine of the Church of England. The Popish Doctrine opposite
unto it. Art. 6. 2 Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation.
Per suos Apostolos tanquam fontem, omnis salutaris veritatis and morum
disciplinae omni creaturae praedicari iussit, perspiciensque hanc veritatem,
and disciplinam contineri in libris Scriptis and sine Scripto traditionibus
quae and ipsius Christi ore ab Apostolis acceptae, aut ab ipsis Apostolis S. S.
dictante quasi per manus traditae ad nosusque pervenerunt, Council. Trid. Ses.
4. Tom. 9. Council. page 354. col. 1. a. Edit. Bin. Paris. 1636.
The Papists join traditions unwritten, as of equal authority with the
written word. In the name of the holy Scriptures we do understand, those
canonical books of the old and new Testament: of whose authority was never
any doubt in the Church (i. e.) all the books of the old Testament, from Genesis
to Malachy: as they are placed in our ordinary English Bibles, and all the new
Testament. And the other Books (as Hierom says) the Church does read for
example of life, and instruction of manners, but does not apply them, to
establish any Doctrine, and those are they which in many English Bibles begin
after Malachy and end with the Maccabees. Ne cui dubitatio suboriri possit,
quinam libri sint, qui ab ipsa Synodo suscipiuntur, sunt infra, scripti
Testamenti veteris 5. libri Mosis, Genesis Exodus Levit. Numb. Deuteronomy. Jos. Judge.
Ruth 4. Regum. 2 Paralipon, Esdr. 1. and 2. qui and Nehemias, Tobias, Judith,
Esther, Job, Psalterium Davidicum 150. Psalmorum, Parabolae, Ecclesiastes,
Cantic. Canticor, Sapientiae, Ecclesiasticus, Esias. Jerem. cum Baruch, Ezech.
Dan. Prophetae minores (prout in nostris codicibus) and post eos 2 Maccab. Lib.
Council. Trid. Ses. 4. Tom. 9. p. 354. Col. 1.
The Papists mingle Apochryphall books with the Canonical, as of the same
authority with them thus, lest any one should doubt what books of Scripture are
to be received, they are these underwritten, the five books of Moses, Genes.
Exodus Levit. Number. Deuteronomy. Ios. Judge. Ruth, four books of Kings, (accounting the
two books of Samuel for two of the four) two books of the Chr. Esd. 1. and 2.
called Nehemias, Tobit, Judith, Esther, Job, David's Psalter, consisting of 150.
Psalms, the Parables or Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the Canticles, the books of
Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Esaias, Ierem. with Baruch, Ezech. Daniel, then follow
the minor Prophets, as in our Bibles, and after them 2. books of Maccabees.
Siquis autem hos libros integros cum omnibus suis partibus (prout in Ecclesia
catholica legi consueverun^, and in veteri vulgata latina editione habentur)
pro sacris, and canonicis non susceperit, and traditiones praedictas sciens and
prudens contempserit, Anathema sit. ibid.
And require them to be received, as of equal authority with the Canonical
Scripture, with a curse upon such as refuse to take them for ^uch. Art. 9.
Original sin is the fault and corruption of every man, that naturally is
engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is far gone from original
Righteousness; and therefore in every person borne into this world, it
deserves Gods wrath and damnation, though there be no condemnation for them
that believe: and are baptized, yet the Apostle does confess, that
concupiscence ^ lust has of it self, the nature of sin. See the letters f.
g.
The Papists except the Virgin Mary from all taint of original sin, or
natural corruption, and touching concupiscence, contradict the Doctrine of our
Church, and with us the blessed Apostle in these words.

Hanc co^cupiscentiam quam aliquando Apostolus [dicit non quando, ut supra, sed
aliquando] Caranza Sum. Con. Council. Trid. S^s. 4. fol. 480 b. and 487. b.
This concupiscence, when the Apostle calls it sin, the holy Synod
declares that the Catholic Church never understood, that it was called sin
truly and properly in the regenerate, but because it comes from sin and
inclines to sin.

Art. 11. We are accounted righteous before God, only for the merits of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by ^aith, and not for our own works, or
deservings; wherefore that we are justified by faith only, is a most wholesome
Doctrine, and very full of comfort. Siquis dixerit sola fide impium
iustificari, ita ut intelligat, nihil aliud* requiri, quod ad iustificationis
gratiam cooperetur, anathema sit. Council. Trid. Ses. 6. Can. 9. Tom. 9. page
362. col. 2.
If any say that a sinner is justified by faith only, understanding that
nothing is required, which does cooperate to the obtainment of the grace of
justification, let him be accursed. This Canon will appear more repugnant to
the doctrine of the Apostle S. Paul, Romans 3. 28, and to our Article of
Justification by faith only, by comparing it with the 11. and 12. Canons in the
same Session, and with the 7. chapter, page 359. and the 10. page 360. Art. 14.
Uol^ntary works, besides or over and above Gods commandments, (which they
call works of supererogation) cannot be taught without arrogance and impiety.
Concilium perfectionis vocamus* opus bonum a Christo nobis non imperatum sed
demonstratum, non mandatum sed commendatum. Bell. de Mon. l. 2. c. 7. tom. 2. p.
146.
We call a counsel of perfection a good work of God, which is not prescribed
us by Christ, but proposed, not commanded, but commended.

Rhemists Annot. in 2 ad Corinth. 8. 14.

See also their* Annot. on 2 Cor. 2. 10.


The fastings and satisfactory deeds of one man be available to others, yea and
holy Saints and other virtuous persons may (in measure and proportion of other
men's necessities) allot unto them as well the superogation of their spiritual
works, as those that abound in worldly goods, may give alms of their
superfluities to them which are in necessity.

Art. 15. Of Christ alone without sinn^, Christ in the truth of his humane
nature was made like unto us, in all things, sin only excepted, but all we the
rest (i.e) al mankind besides) although baptized, and borne again in Christ
offend in many things. Gloriosam Virginem Dei genetricem Mariam, perveniente
and operante divini numinis gratia singulari, nunquam actualiter subiacuisse
originali peccato, sed immunemsemper fuisse ab omni originali and actuali
culpa. Council. Basil. oecumen. Ses. 36. Tom. 8. p. 97. col. 1. prope finem.
Mary the glorious Virgin, a mother of God, by singular preventing grace, was
kept free from all original, and actual sin. Declarat haec sancta Synodus
non esse suae intentionis comprehendere in hoc decreto (ubi de pe^cato
originali agitur) beatam and immaculatam Virginem Mariam D^i genetricem.
Council. Trid. Sess 5. Tom. 9. page 357. col. 1.
This holy Synod ( id est, the Council of Trent) does declare, that it is not
their intention to comprehend in this Decree (of general guilt of original
sin) the blessed and immaculate Virgin Mary the mother of God. Art. 21.
General counsels may ^rre, and sometimes have erred, even in things pertaining
unto God. Bell. de Council. l. 2. ca. 2. Tom. 2. page 22. Col. 1.
Counsels confirmed by the Pope cannot err.

Romanae Ecclesiae fides per Petrum super petron aedificata, nec hactenus
defecit, nec deficiet in secula. Epist. Leon. pap. 9. c. 32. Tom. 7. Conc. par.
1. p. 239. col. 2.
The faith of the Church of Rome founded by Peter on a rock has not yet
failed, nor shall fail for ever.

Romana Ecclesia nunquam erravit nec in perpetuum* errabit. Epist. Gregor. 7.
ibid. page 362.
The Roman Church never erred, nor for ever shall err.

Papa non potest ^llo modo definire aliquid haereticuma tota ecclesia
^redendum. Bell. de To. po. l. 4. cap. 2. page 311.
The Pope cannot possible decree any heresy to be believed of the whole Church.

Art. 22. The Romish Doctrine concerning Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping and
Adoration, as well of Images, as of Relics; and also invocation of Saints is
a fond thing, vainly invented and grounded upon no warrant of Scripture, but
repugnant to the Word of God. Purgatorium esse animasque ibi detentas fidelium
suffragijs i^vari. Conc. Trid. Ses. 25. Tom* 9. p. 419. col. 2.
Purgatory. Purgatorium esse animasque ibi detentas fidelium suffragijs i^vari.
Conc. Trid. Ses. 25. Tom* 9. p. 419. col. 2.
There is a Purgatory, and there the souls detained, are helped with the
prayers of the faithful. Sacra sancta Syn^dus indulgentiarum usum Christiano
pop^do maxim salutarem in Ecclesia retinendum esse docet, eosque anathemate
damnat qui inutiles esse asserunt. Ibid. page 433. col. 1. See Bell. de Jud.
lib. 1. cap. 2. Tom. 2. page 438.
Pardons. Sacra sancta Syn^dus indulgentiarum usum Christiano pop^do maxim
salutarem in Ecclesia retinendum esse docet, eosque anathemate damnat qui
inutiles esse asserunt. Ibid. page 433. col. 1. See Bell. de Jud. lib. 1. cap.
2. Tom. 2. page 438.
Indulgences or Pardons are very healthful to Christian people; and so to be
retained in the Church, and they that hold them unprofitable are accursed by
the Council of Trent. Imagines Christi and sanctorum venerandae sunt non solum
per accidens, vel improprie, sed per se, and proprie, ita ut ipsae terminent
venerationem. Bellar. de Imag. Sanct. lib. 2. cap. 21. Tom. 2. p. 328. princip.
cap.
Images. Imagines Christi and sanctorum venerandae sunt non solum per accidens,
vel improprie, sed per se, and proprie, ita ut ipsae terminent venerationem.
Bellar. de Imag. Sanct. lib. 2. cap. 21. Tom. 2. p. 328. princip. cap.
The Images of Christ, and the Saints are to be worshipped, not only by
accident, or improperly; but properly and by themselves, so that they terminate
the worship presented to them. Imagines porro Christi, Deiparae Virginis, and
aliorum sanctorum, in Templis praesertim habendas, and retinendas, eisque
debitum honorem, and venerationem impertiendum. Council. Trid. Ses. 25. page
420. Col. 1.
Images. Imagines porro Christi, Deiparae Virginis, and aliorum sanctorum, in
Templis praesertim habendas, and retinendas, eisque debitum honorem, and
venerationem impertiendum. Council. Trid. Ses. 25. page 420. Col. 1.
The Images of Christ, of the Virgin Mary and of other Saints are to be had and
retained in Temples, and due honor and reverence done unto them. Ex omnibus
sacris imaginibus magnum fructum percipi, ibid.
Images. Ex omnibus sacris imaginibus magnum fructum percipi, ibid.
There is great fruit and benefit to be received by the use of all holy Images.
Art. Mandat sancta Synodus Episcopis, etc, de Reliquiarium honor and legitimo
Imaginum usu fideles diligenter instruant. Council. Trid. Ses. 25. Tom. 9. p.
419. col. 2.
Relics. Mandat sancta Synodus Episcopis, etc, de Reliquiarium honor and
legitimo Imaginum usu fideles diligenter instruant. Council. Trid. Ses. 25. Tom.
9. p. 419. col. 2.
Let Bishops and others (to whom it belongs to teach the people) instruct
them touching the honor due unto Relics. Imprimis de sanctorum Intercessione
and Invocatione, Ibid. Item. Bell. de Sanctor. beatitud. lib. 1. cap. 19. Tom.
2. p. 294.
Invocation Bonum atque utile est suppliciter eos invocare, Council. Trid. ubi
supra.
of Saints. Imprimis de sanctorum Intercessione and Invocatione, Ibid. Item.
Bell. de Sanctor. beatitud. lib. 1. cap. 19. Tom. 2. p. 294.
And touching the Invocation of Saints. Bonum atque utile est suppliciter eos
invocare, Council. Trid. ubi supra.
It is good and profitable to use humble Invocation of the Saints. Art. 24. It
is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and to the custom of the
Primitive Church, to have public Prayer in the Church, or to administer the
Sacraments in a tongue not understood of the people. Etsi missa magnam
contineat populi fidelis eruditionem, non tamen expedire visum est Patribus, ut
lingua vulgari celebraretur. Council. Trid. Ses. 22. c. 8. Tom. 9. p. 402. Col.
2.
Although the Mass (which is the Popish service) have in it much instruction
profitable to faithful people, yet it seems not expedient unto the Fathers
of the Council, that it be celebrated in a vulgar tongue. Art. 25. There be
two Sacraments ordained of Christ in the Gospel, that is to far, Baptism and
the Supper of the Lord; those five commonly called Sacraments, Confirmation,
Penance, Orders, Matrimony and extreme Unction, have grown partly of the
corrupt following of the Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the
Scripture, but yet have not like nature of a Sacrament with Baptism, and the
Lords Supper; for that they have not any visible sign, or ceremony, ordained
of God. Catholicae Ecclesiae Sacramenta septenario numero definita sunt.
Catechis. Council. Trid. ad Parochos p. 173. Conc. Trid. Ses. 23. c. 3. Tom. 9.
page 406. col. 1.
The Sacraments of the Church are reduced to a septinary number.

Prim. est Baptismus, deinde confirmatio, tum Eucharistia 4^0. loco
paenitentia, postea vero extrema unctio, sequitur ^rdo, postremo additur,
matrimonium. Catech. Council. Trid. p. 174.
Baptism, Confirmation, the Sacrament of the Eucharist, Penance, extreme
unction, Order and Matrimony.

Art. 28. Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of the bread and
wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by holy writ, but is
repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, and overthrows the nature of a
Sacrament. Nunc denuo sancta haec Synodus declarat post consecrationem panis
and vini conversionem fieri totius substantiae panis in substantiam corporis
Christi, and totius substantiae vini, in substantiam sanguinis, eiusque
conversio convenienter and proprie a sancta Catholica Ecclesia
transubstantiatio est appellata, Council. Trid. Sess. 13. cap. 4. Tom. 9. p.
380. Col. 2.
Now this sacred Synod does declare again, that by consecration of the Bread
and Wine, there is a conversion of the whole substance of Bread into Christ's
body, and of the whole substance of the wine, into the substance of his blood,
and this conversion is conveniently and properly by the holy Catholic Church
called Transubstantiation. The body of Christ is given, taken and eaten in the
Supper only after an heavenly and spiritual manner, and the mean whereby it
is received and eaten in the Supper is Faith. Panem and vinum (quae in Altari
ponuntur) post consecrationem, non solum Sacramentum, sed etiam verum corpus
and sanguinem Christi esse, and sensualiter, non solum Sacramento, sed in
veritate manibus Sacerdotum tractari and frangi and fidelium dentibus atteri,
jurans per sanctum and homousion Trinitatem and per haec sacra sancta Dei
Evangelia. Council. To. Sub. Nicol. Pap. 2. Tom. 7. Council. par. 1. p. 274. Col.
2.
The Bread and wine which are placed on the Altar after consecration, are not
only a Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, but the very body and blood
of Christ indeed, which is sensually and indeed handled by the hands of the
Priest, broken and chewed by the teeth of the faithful, so in the recantation
of Berengarius made to Pope Nicolas, and sealed with a solemn Oath. The
Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not by Christ's ordinance reserved. Deferri
ipsam Sacram Eucharistiam ad infirmos, and in hunc usum diligenter in Ecclesia
conservari, cum summa equitate et ratione conjunctum est -- quare sancta haec
Synodus retinendum omnino falutarem hunc morem statuit. Council. Trid. Ses. 13.
cap. 8. Tom. 9. page 381. Col. 1.
That the holy Eucharist be carri^d to the sick, and to that purpose,
diligently to be reserved in the Church is joined with great equity and reason,
and therefore the holy Synod ordaines that this healthful and necessary manner
is to be observed. Declarat praeterea sancta Synodus pie and religios^, admodum
in Dei Ecclesiam inductum fuisse morem, and singulis annis peculiari quodam,
and festo die precelsum hoc and venerabile Sacramentum si^gulari veneratione
and solemnitate celebreretur, atque in Processionibus reverenter and honorifice
per vias and loca publica circumferretur. Council. Trid. Sess. 13. cap. 5. Tom.
9. page 381. Col. 1.
Nor carried about. Declarat praeterea sancta Synodus pie and religios^,
admodum in Dei Ecclesiam inductum fuisse morem, and singulis annis peculiari
quodam, and festo die precelsum hoc and venerabile Sacramentum si^gulari
veneratione and solemnitate celebreretur, atque in Processionibus reverenter
and honorifice per vias and loca publica circumferretur. Council. Trid. Sess.
13. cap. 5. Tom. 9. page 381. Col. 1.
The holy Synod declares, that it is a pious and religious manner, taken up in
the Church, that every year on a set day, the high and venerable Sacrament,
with singular reverence be carried about the streets and highways in solemn
Procession. Nullus dubitandi locus relinquitur quin omnes Christi fideles
promore in Catholica Ecclesia semper recepta latriae cultum (qui vero Deo
debetur) huic sanctissimo Sacramento cum veneratione exhibeant, Ibid. c. 5. p.
380. Col. 2. fine.
Nor worshipped. Nullus dubitandi locus relinquitur quin omnes Christi fideles
promore in Catholica Ecclesia semper recepta latriae cultum (qui vero Deo
debetur) huic sanctissimo Sacramento cum veneratione exhibeant, Ibid. c. 5. p.
380. Col. 2. fine.
There is no doubt to be made, but that all the faithful (after the accustomed
manner in the Catholic Church) must give to this most holy Sacrament the
highest worship (called Latria) due unto God. Art. 29. The wicked and such as
be void of ^aith, although they do carnally and visibly press with their
teeth (as S. Aug. says) the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, yet in
no wise are they partakers of Christ, but rather to their condemnation, do
eat, and drink the sign or Sacrament of so great a thing. So the Rhemists
^in 1* Cor. c. 11. ver. 27. Sect. 10. page 526.
First* hereupon mark well, that all men receive the body and blood of Christ,
be they Infidels or evil livers, which invincibly proves against the
Heretics, that Christ is really present. Art. 30. The cup of the Lord is not
to be denied to the Lay people for both parts of the Lords Sacrament by Christ's
ordinance and commandment ought to be ministered to all Christian men alike.
Cum in nonnullis mundi partibus quidam temerarie asserere praesumant populum
Christianum debere sacrum Eucharistiae Sacramentum sub utraque panis and vini
specie suscipere, et non solum sub specie panis, sed etiam sub specie vini
populum laicum passim communicent ( tum sepuitur decretum Concilij hisce verbis
sequentibus) Quod nullus Presbyter sub poena excommunicationis communicet
populum sub utraque specie panis and vini. Conc. Constant. Sess. 13. Tom. 7.
Council. p. 1042. Col. 1. and Col. 2.
Since in many parts of the world, there are diverse who presume rashly to
affirm, that Christian people ought to receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist
under both kinds ( scil.) of bread and wine ( therefore it is decreed) that no
Presbyter under pain of Excommunication do administer to the people the
Communion under both kinds of bread and wine.

Laudabilis quoque cons^etudo communicandi Laicum populum sub una specie, ab
Ecclesia and sanctis patribus rationabiliter introducta -- pro lege habenda
est, nec alicui licitum est eam reprobare aut sine authoritate Ecclesiae ipsam
immutare. Council. Basil. Oecum. Sess. 30. Tom. 8. p. 85. col. 2. et p. 86. col.
1
The laudable custom of ministering the Communion to the Lay People, in one
kind only, reasonably introduced by the Church and the holy Fathers, is to be
held for a law: nor is it lawful for any one to reject it or without the
authority of the Church to change it.

Si quis dixerit ex praecepto Dei vel necessitate salutis, omnes and singulos
Christi fideles u^^amque speciem sanctissimae Eucharistiae Sacramenti sumere
debere, anathema sit. Council. Trid. Sess. 21. Can. 1. Tom. 9. p. 399.
If any one affirm that by the commandment of God, or of necessity to
salvation all the faithful ought to receive the Sacrament in both kinds, let
him be accursed.

Si quis dixerit sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam non justice causis and
rationalibus adductam fuisse, ut Laicos atque Clericos non conficientes, sub
panis tantummodo specie communicaret, aut in eo errasse, anathema sit. Ibid.
Can. 2. p. 399.
If any say that the holy Catholic Church (i.e. in their Dialect the Roman
Church) was not induced by just and reasonable causes, that the Laity and
Clergy, which do not consecrate, should communicate but in one kind, or therein
to have erred, let him be accursed.



An Advertisement touching the wine which in some places is allowed to the
Laity after the taking of the bread.
SOme (to excuse the sacrilege of the Romanists) have said, the people are not
deprived of the Communion Cup, as we pretend, for that they have a little wine
allowed them after the receipt of the wafer.

The truth is, some times, and in some places, the people have so, to In
quibusdum locis po^^^gunt vinum non ^onsecratum; solet apud Gallos ^ieri, and
ex eo prejudicio creadebam ego quidem ap^d omnes, nunc primu^ audivi, apud
quosdam and aliunde didici, in Hispania aquam ^ari, sed our non apud omnes? nam
foliola illa ^arinacia non sunt facilius deglubenda alibi, quam apud nos Cham
de Euchar. l. 9. c 6. Tom. 4. de Sacr. p. 496.
wash the wafer down their throats, which otherwise might be like to stick in
their mouths; yet it must not be consecrated wine, least it should be received
as the other part of the Sacrament: and where Claret wine is more dear (as in
Spain) they give the people water instead of wine: To that purpose, the
French-Priests were (as Itaque nostrotes* Sacerdotes pudor aliquis tenuit,
apudquos vili^s est vinum. Chamier. de Eucharist. l. 9. c. 6. Tom. 4. de Sacr.
p. 496. Col. 2.
Chamier notes) more bashful, then to be so base, where that kind of wine
(which would come nearest the complexion of Transubstantiation, if it were
true) is more cheap then in other places. But both the French and the Spanish
(what difference so ever is betwixt their Nations or Churches) agree in the
violation of the Lords ordinance, and an injurious detention of the peoples
allowance, since the French-wine, is not more Sacramental then the
Spanish-water, though that seem more heretical, as carrying an appearance of
the Doctrine and practice of the Aquarij loco vini aqua ^si sunt, ne odore vini
Christianit atis judicio proderentur. Cyprian. Ep. 63. ad Caelium. Vide et
Baron. Annal. ad an. 257. (...). 9, 10, 11.
Aquarij, who held it not unlawful to administer the Sacrament in mere water,
and so forbore the use of wine, though as Cyprian gives the reason, their
practice did partake of policy, as well as of heresy, for they did it lest the
smell of wine should bewray them to their enemies, to be Christian Communicants.

Art. 31. The Offering of Christonce made is that perfect Redemption,
propitiation and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both
original and actual, and there is none other satisfaction for sin, but that
alone; wherefore the Sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was commonly said,
that the Priests did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have
remission of pain and guilt, were blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits. In
divino hoc Sacrificio quod in missa peragitur, idem ille Christu^ continetur
and in-cruente immolatur qui in ^^a crucis semel seipsum cruente obtulit --
cujus oblationis (cruentae inquam) fructus per hanc incruentam uberrime
percipiuntur, quare non solum profidelium virorum peccatis, poenis,
satisfactionibus and alijs necessitatibus, sed and pro defunctis in Christo,
nondum ad plenum purgatis, rite, juxta Apostolorum traditio^^m offertur.
Council. Trid. Sess. 22. c. 3. Tom. 9. p. 402. Col. 1.
In the divine Sacrifice which is made in the Mass, Christ is contained, and
is unbloodily offered up in Sacrifice, who on the Altar of the Cross offered
himself up a bloody Sacrifice -- the fruit of which bloody offering by this
unbloody is most plentifully received; wherefore it is offered, not only for
the sins, pains, satisfactions, and other necessities, of the living, but
for the dead in Christ, who yet are not purged to the full.

Qui dixerit missae Sacrificium soli prodesse sumenti, neque pro vivis and
defunctis pro peccatis, poenis satisfactionibus atque necessitatibus offerri
debere, anathema sit. Ib. Can. 3. p. 403. Col. 1.
And they that deny this are accursed by the Council of Trent.

Art. 32. Bishops, Priests and (...) are not commanded by Gods ^aw, either to
vow the estate of single life, or to ^bstain from marriage; therefore it is
lawful also for them, as for all other Christian men, to marry at their own
discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve better to godliness. Si quis
dixerit Clericos in sacris ordinibus constitutos (vel regulares castitatem
solemniter professos) posse matrimonium contrahere, contractumque validum esse,
non obstante lege Ecclesiastica vel voto anathema sit. Council. Trid. Sess. 24.
Can. 9. Tom. 9. Council. p. 411. Col. 1. fine. See also Bell. de Cleric. l. 1. c.
18. p. 112. Col. 2.
If any one say that Clerks that are in holy orders (or Regulars that have
taken the profession of chastity upon them) may contract matrimony, and that
such a contract by them made is valid and of force, notwithstanding the Law of
the Church, or the vow of single life, let him be accursed. Art. 37. The Bishop
of Rome has no ^urisdiction in this Realm of England. Papa gravi maerore de
consilio Cardinalium, Episcoporum and aliorum virorum prudentum sententialiter
definivit, ut Rex Anglorum Johannes a solio Regni deponeretur, and alius, Papa
procurante, succederet qui dignior esset. Math. Paris Histor. major. in Ioh. p.
310.
King John was condemned by a sentence in the Court of Rome, to be deposed from
all title to this Realm. Nonne Rex Anglorum noster est Vassalus, and ut plus
dicam mancipium? possumus eum nuto nostro incarcerare and ignomi^iae mancipare.
Ib. in Hen. 3. page 1160.
Pope Innocent the fourth took upon so much power in England as to call the
king of England his Vassal or bondman, and to say he could with a beck or a
nod commit him to prison and shamefully confound him.

S. N. D. Pij Papae 5. sententia declaratoria contra Eliz. (pretensam Angliae
Reginam) qua declaratur absoluti omnes subditi a iuramento fidelitatis, and
quocunque alio debito, and deinceps obedientes anathemate illaqueantur. Bull.
Pij 5. San. de Schis. Angl. page 182.
Pope Pius the fifth declared Queen Elizabeth and all her adherents to be
Heretics, absolved her Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance, and accursed all
that performed obedience unto her.

Non regnum hoc Angliae solum sed and reliqua omnia quae per Europam sunt regna
(nec vel unum excipio) omnia inquam sunt pontificis; constat hoc ex Registro
Greg. 7. apud Steuchum 2. lib. contra Vallam pro donatione Constantini. Regnum
Arragoniae, Sardiniae, Hispaniae, Hungariae, Danorum, Russiae, Portugaliae,
Boemiae, Sueciae, Norvegiae, Galliae, Poloniae. Vide Tort. Torti. p. 217, 218.
The same power he takes upon him in many other Kingdoms, but his hatred to
England, which he takes for an heretical and Apostaticall Kingdom above
others, gives just cause of special caution (for the Church and State of
England) against his usurpation.



TO these particulars, I might add other Protestant tenets of our Church, out
of the Books of Homilies, wherein, though there be some things doubtful, there
are many very true and Orthodox Doctrines, very soundly stated and proved, and
zealously pressed against the Heresies of Popery; and among these thirty-nine
Articles there are some others opposite to Popery, which I have not mentioned,
as the tenth of Freewill; and the thirteenth of works done before
Justification, because the Antithesis betwixt the Protestant and Popish
Doctrine, by the subtle and ambiguous forms of expression (on the
Popish-side) is made more intricate and problematicall, then in the rest, and
in these we have expressed, there are some other which are necessarily implied as
by mutual relation, defending or destroying one another. So it is betwixt
H^retici omnes tum recentiores, tum antiquiores, qui purgatorium negarunt,
consequenter etiam suffragia and indulgentias mortuis prodesse negaverunt.
Bellar. de Indulg. lib. 1. c. 14 Tom. 2 p. 456. col. 1.
Purgatory and prayers for the dead; for if there be a Purgatory (as Papists
affirm) prayers for the dead will be needful, and profitable offices of the
living on their behalf: if no Purgatory (as our 22. Article orthodoxally
determines) prayers for the dead are frivolous, and fruitless services; for
if there be only two places for receipt of souls after death, Heaven and Hell,
to pray for those in Heaven is needless, for them in Hell bootlesse: To them
no good thing is wanting, See also Bell. de purg. l. 1 c. 15. Tom: 2. p: 250.
Suffragia Ecclesiae defunctis prodesse. Ibid: l: 2. de purg. ca. 15. Tom. 2. p
264. col. 2.
for these no good thing will be obtained, not so much refreshing, as a drop of
water from the tip of the finger, Luk* 16. 24.

These then may be sufficient both to inform such as make this Protestation,
what Doctrine of our Church is opposite to Popery: and to assure those that do
propound it, of their minds to the Religion established, who willingly present
themselv^ to promise, vow and protest, in the form forementioned, for they
that are Protestants and Antipapists in these points, will never side with the
Popish-party, against the Religion established, or the Parliament assembled.

Thus much of matter of Doctrine, mentioned both in the Oath of the sixth Canon,
and the late Protestation: Wherein though they materially agree, yet considering
what has been said by way of In my book against the Oath, D^ubt. 2. page 16.
and Doubt. 4. p* 32. and Doubt. 5. p. 37.
doubt aganist the meaning of the Canon (which has no place in this
Protestation.) They that were afraid of the former (in this respect) have no
cause to make scruple of the latter.

Of that wherein the Oath of the sixth Canon and the Protestation do differ, in
respect of the matter contained in either, which the other has not.
THe most doubts for number, and the most perplexing for difficulty, for the
Oath of the Canon, are in that part of it, which concerns discipline and
government, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, with that boundless
etc. beyond which we can find no shore, and wherein our line and plummet can
reach no bottom, especially if rites and Ceremonies, be reduced to discipline,
as I have observed in^ my My book of Doubts and Hopes, p. 15, 16.
first particular doubt of the Oath, from all this perplexity (wherewith the
Canon entangleth a timorous conscience) the Protestation gives very good, and
undoubted Security, expressly declaring, that these words [The true reformed
Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against all Popery and Popish Innovations, within this Realm, contrary to the
same Doctrine] are not to be extended to the maintaining of any form of
worship, discipline or government, nor of any rites or Ceremonies of the said
Church of England; wherein, as they do not require the ratification of any such
particulars, so neither do they disa^ow them, but leave them (as controversed
points) to such a decision as is due unto them.

This Declaration was not in that Protestation you sent unto me, if it had, it
may be, you had not moved the doubt (as you did) Whether my doubts against the
Oath, did not stand up, and invite to scruples against the present Protestation.

But though all this doubtful matter be discarded from it (which was the most
dangerous part of the charge of the Canon) yet there is other matter of much
doubt and great moment within the Protestation, which the Canon contains not,
as the Power and Privileges of Parliaments, the rites and liberties of
Subjects, which are points of too high a pitch for common capacities; and it
may be difficult enough for the wiser sort, well, and truly to understand.

I will not (as I said before) take upon me to expound the meaning of these
terms (for general satisfaction, for so it belongs to them that made the
Text to make the Comment) the Authors are the best, and most Authenticke
Interpreters of their own words; who alone can make the one as general as the
other: but for the guiding of mine own conscience (touching the sense of these
words) I have this to say.

First, for the Power and Privileges of Parliaments K. James in his Speech in
Starr-chamb^r. 1^16. Op^^. p. 552.
King James taught me to take them in a very large extent, where he repeated
and approoved the Speech of that old wise man (as he calls him) the Treasurer
Burleigh, who was wont to say, he knew not what an Act of Parliam^nt could not
do in England, doubtless it may do any thing, but what is contrary to his
Acts or Statutes, whose least word has more right to rule in all Lands, then
any Laws that are made by men, in any one Country or Kingdom whatsoever.

2. For the Rights and liberties of Subjects, I find no cause to doubt of them
in the general, since the word [ lawfull] is added unto them, and indeed
(throughout the whole Protestation) here are such words of Caution and
limitation, as may serve for prevention of all scruples, in this respect, for
though the length of it be not fully twelve lines, there are thus many clauses
to give it a relish of regular construction: [ as far as lawfully I may, lin.
2. lawful rites, lin. 6. lawful pursuance, and as far as lawfully I may,
lin. 7. by all good ways, lib. 8. in^ all just and honorable ways, lin. 10.]
there are no such words of caution to the conscience in the Canonical Oath.

There is one clause in it which seems to limit one part of it to the rule of
right, for it requires a ratification of the Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc. [ as of right in ought to stand] which words
are like a Picture in a ^urrowed Table, equivocally varying the aspect,
according to the site or placing of him that looks toward it.

These limitations are none such: but very plain, and they are so placed as to
diffuse an influence of fidelity and Justice the Protestation throughout, and
that may suffice for assent unto it in general terms, and when any particular
is singled out for approbation or pursuit, I doubt not but it will come forth
so plainly declared, by the same authority that proposes it, that we may both
conceive it well, and conceive well of it, and so address our selves to
conformity to it. Thus much for comparison of the Oath of the Canon and
Protestation in respect of the matter of them both.

The difference in form betwixt the Parliamentary Protestation and the
Canonical Oath may induce us to the one, and withold us from the other.
IF we consider them in their form; we shall find that difference betwixt
them, which may make us more willing to he Protestants then Canonists: For the
Protestation goes no further then to vow, promise and protest, but the sixth
Canon requires a solemn Oath.

Now though a^vow lawfully made, (and we may say the same of a Promise and
Protestation) must be carefully kept, Numb. 30. 22. Deuteronomy. 23. 21. Psalm. 50.
14. Ps. 76. 11. Esa. 19. 21. Eccles. 5. 4 and though made unto men the
performance of it (as of conscience to God) be a religious duty: and albeit a
vow in Votum quodammodo ad ^uramen^um promissarium referri debet. Rivet. in
Dec^ l. p 146. M Whateley his Prototypes* part ^ p. 51.
some sort be referred to a premissary Oath, and sometimes be a part of divine
worship as well as an Oath (in which respect the Papists are justly charged
with Idolatry, for their vows made unto Saints) and though as Vovens and non
solvens quid nisi perjuro. Bern* de praecept* and dispensat c. 20. col: 930.
Bernard says, he that breaks a vow is perjured, yet there is great
difference betwixt a Promise, vow, Protestation, and an Oath; for an oath is
more then a Promise (though promises only have served in former times for
consent and ratification of Haec itaque legalia statuta vel decreta in nostro
conventu Synedali edicta ^uncti tunc temporis optimates se observaturos
fideliter spondebant Conc. Aenham. Can 7. Tom 1. Con^ D. Spelm p. 527.
Canonical Decrees) for that is but a simple expression of a purpose, for
somewhat to come: A vow is that and somewhat more. viz. Votum est testificatio
quaedam promissionis spontaneae, quae Deo and de^is que Dei sunt proprie fieri
debet, Lumbard. l 4. did. 38. a. fol. 423. page 1.
a religious engagement of man with reference to God, and Per^ins vol^ page 111.
col. ^.
with intention to bind the conscience to the thing vowed, but an Oath goes
beyond all this, and so it gives vigor and obligation to a vow, whence it is
Gravissimum vovendi (...) fuit cum juramentum adhi^^batur, M^^don. in M^th. 15.
v. 6. col. 315.
that the Jews when they meant to give their vows the strongest degree of
Asseveration and assurance added an Oath unto them; and an Oath is more then a
Protestation; Votum est actus religiosus soli Deo debitus. Bell. de cul^u
Sanct. l. 1. c. 9. Tom. 2 p. 355.
for that (as Al^^at defines it) is no more Protestatio est animi nostri
declaratio juris acquirendi vel conservandi, vel damni depellendi causa acta
Andr. Alceat. de verbor. signif. Comment. in Vlp. l. 6. leg. 40. p^g. 89.
but a declaration of the mind made for the acquiring or preserving of some
Right, or for depulsion, or driving away of some damage.

And because it is made (many times) with vehemence and vigor of spirit, Votum
est aelicujus faciendi vel non saciendi versu^ Deum deliberata and justa
promissio. Andr. Alc^at. de verbor. signif Commentar. p. 474.
it is defined by some, to be a loud, Protestationem quidam defiaiu^r clamosam
esse Testationem, quae in obtestantis ipsius cantionem i^venta ^it. Ibid. page
88*
or shouting testification, for Caution to him that makes i^.

But an Oath (as we see by that which but now I noted of the Jews) engages
the conscience, more deeply then a single promise, ^ow, or protestation does,
and the breach of it binds over the forsworn man to the peril of a greater
punishment: Votum est promissio and sponsio Deo ^acta. Azor. Instit. l. 11. c.
12 p. 754 Quod inter homines dicitur promissio id Dei respectu votum
appellatur. Z^nch. Tom. 7. p. 707. col. 2.
And of Oaths there be diverse kinds in respect of the different Formalities and
Ceremonies, wherewith they are taken.

Some Oaths are called verbal, some corporal: D. Cous. Apol. for
Ecclesiastical proceedings c. 3. p. 23.
a corporal Oath is that which has an outward gesture annexed to it, as the
verbal has not: and of these gestures or Ceremonies there is much variety.
The manner of old (even as old as to Abraham's time) was by lifting up the hand,
Genesis 14. 22. The like we read of the Angel, who lifted up his hand to Heaven
and swore by him who lives for ever and ever, Rev. 10. 5. upon which place,
Hic erat gestus jurantium (...) ^^iamnum body. Beza Annot. in R^v. 10. 5.
Bezaes note is, That it was the gesture accustomed to accompany an Oath; as at
this day in Rivet. exercit 81. in Genesis p. 390.
France, the Judges use to say to him that is to take an Oath (as in England is
said by the Clerk of the Assize, to the Prisoner at the bar) hold up thy
hand, but an Ecclesiastical person is bidden, to ^ay his hand on his breast.
In the Pa^aeus Genesis 24. c. 2.
Palatinate Paraeus observes the manner of taking of an Oath to be, by lifting
up three fingers, with reference to the blessed Trinity attested in it.

There is a difference also in regard of the dignity of the person who is to
swear, so in the sixth Council of Millan, a Quid ab Episcopis Prelatisve ob
dignitatem qua praecellunt ex instituto fieri decet, ut manu ad pectus admota,
si quando oportet jusjurandum prestent. Council. Mediol. Tom. 9. page 676. col.
2.
Bishop or a Prelate, was (for reverence of his place or dignity) to be put to
no more (when he was to swear) then to lay his hand upon his breast, whereas
the Inferior Clergy were to use another Ceremony (as I shall show anon)
Sometimes the Inferiores sub superiorum ^emore manum ponebant. Genesis 24. 2. and
34 7. and 47. 29. Dud. Fenneri The^^. l. 5. c. 3. fol. 53. pa. 2.
Superior, caused the Inferior, to put his hand under his thigh, to whom he
swore; so did Abraham, when he sent, and swore his servant to make choice of a
wife for his son, Genesis 24. 2. So also did Jacob swear his son Joseph for
his burial out of Egypt. In which Ceremony Aug. de C. D. l. 16. c. 33. page
608.
St. Augustine imagined a great mystery, viz. a prophecy of the promised Seed,
to be derived from the loins of Abraham, and so of Isaac his son, and of
Jacob his Grandchild, etc.

The most received Ceremony, (since the Gospel had the protection of Christian
Princes) has bin to lay the hand upon some part of Holy-Writ: this was
required of Reliqui Ecclesiastici bomines subdiacon^ Diaconi, Presbyteri, si
jura re necesse habent, id tactis sacri^ litteris aga^t. Council. medio l^n. 6.
Tom. 9. page 676 col 2.
sub (...), Deacons and Presbyters by the Council of Millan, when Bishops were
only to lay their hands upon their breast; but with this difference, that in
In causis vero levibus, ubipo (...) est, jurent manu pectori almota s^ modo
superior praesen^ no^ adest, quo praese^te contactis Scripturis jusjurandum
prestent. Ibid page 676. col. 2. 677. col. 1.
lesser matters it would suffice inferior Clerks (unless a Prelate were
present) to use the same Ceremony, but in greater matters they were to take
their Oath with touching of the Bible.

Of this formality the first instance I meet withal, is the Homil. 44. op^r
Imper^. in Math.
imperfect work ( which goes in Chrysostomes name) upon S. Matthew: But I
find not the express manner of it until the sixth Council of Constantinople,
where Georgius Deo a nabilis, and Charta^^ylax dixit hi sunt duo Codices qui
continet Acta Sanctae Synodi -- tangens igitur proposita sa^ro sanct ^ Dei
eloquia, dixit per is it as sanct as virtutes and D^um (...) est per eas, cum
(...) libri, etc. Sext. Synod. Constantinop. Art. 14. Tom 5. page 231. 232.
Georgius Chartaphylax a Deacon, gave testimony to two parchment books,
touching the holy Oracles of God, saying, by these holy virtues, and by him who
has spoken by them in truth and verity, these are the two books which contain
the acts of the fif^ general Synod* which the Centu^. 7. col. 227. 20.
Magdeburgenses note upon the seventh Century, and about the ninth Centur. 9.
col 287. 40.
Century I find first mention of kissing of the Book. Afterward ( about the
eleventh Century) the form of an Oath was varied thus: ( as may be seen in an
example of Arnulpus giving an Oath to a Bishop in this manner) He gave him one
hand, and laying the other hand upon the Gospel, averred the truth of his
words, with this conclusive clause, Sic me Deus adsuve^ and ista sancta
Evangelia. Centur. 11. col. 131. 20.
so help me God, and these holy Gospels.

The manner of an Oath among us is commonly known to be this: he that swears
lays his hand upon the Bible, or some part of it (especially the Gospel) and
having delivered the matter to be assured by swearing, concludes it with these
words, so help me God in Jesus, Christ, sealing up all with kissing the Book.

In the form of the Oath required by the sixth Canon, are all the ingredients,
which (with so much doubtful matter) may make it formidable to a scrupulous
and timorous conscience, for it is concluded thus: This I do heartily,
willingly and truly, upon the Faith of a Christian, so help me God in Jesus
Christ, whereto the final Why do they not as well challenge us that we give
the book to touch and kiss in taking an oath. The defense of the Humble
Remonstrance,. 11. p 81.
kiss must be added, though it be not mentioned, which, taking it according to
the exposition of Doctor Cousins a late famous Civilian, makes it, is as full
of danger, as of doubting; D. R Cousins Apology for proceeding in
Ecclesiastical Courts, part. 3. c 4.
We renounce, says he, in taking a Corporal oath, all the Promises of the
Bible, and call upon us all the curses therein contained, if we swear not truly.

A man may be willing to promise, vow and protest, and he is bound in
conscience to make good his word, whether it be promise, vow or protestation,
if it be of a matter lawful, and within his power to perform: For instance, a
godfather promising and vowing for a child at Baptism, but he would be loath
to be engaged to performance of what he so says, with a pawn or forfeiture of
goods and lands, of wife, and children, and friends, and whatever else (wherein
he takes comfort) and to be whipped, or hanged, or burnt, or torn in pieces, if
he keep not touch for what he undertaketh: and yet all this is nothing, to
laying Jesus Christ and his merits to pawn, renouncing all right and interest
to him and them: and imprecating all the curses and comminations in the word of
God against himself, as in this Oath he does who takes it, if his sincerity
and constancy be not answerable to what he professes.

There is no such danger in making the Protestation forementioned: Nay, no
danger at all, unless a man take no heed how he takes it, or make no
conscience how he keeps it.

Personal considerations, which may induce to the making of the Protestation,
and discouragement from taking of the Oath.
ANd yet (besides this real difference) we are in the next place to note, that
which is personal; and therein to observe the different condition betwixt
those that proposed the Protestation, and the composers of the Canon, and that
is observable in four particulars.

1. In their Authority. 2. In their Liberty. 3. In their Integrity. 4. In their
Benignity. For the first.

They who sent forth the Protestation were undoubtedly endowed with sufficient
Authority, 1. Authority.
for what they did: we cannot say so of the Ecclesiastics of that Synod,
wherein the late Canons were decreed since their Assembly, and Acts done in it
have been questioned, and disallowed by the Parliament.

2. For Liberty, 2. Liberty.
they who composed the Protestation, and commended it with general publication
and proposal to all throughout the Land were free and independent, none
subordinate to another (howsoever diversified by the titles of Lords, Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses) and so their consent therein being unanimous is (in
congruity of reason) to be taken for a dictate of free Judgment, and good
conscience: See the Preface pr^fixed before the doubts of the Oath. fol. 2. p.
2.
It was not so with those that decreed the Oath of the sixth Canon, as elsewhere
has bin observed.

3. For Integrity, 3. Integrity.
the Protestation came from those, who give undoubted evidence of their dislike
of all, both black and blanched Popery, opposing, not only the grosser Tenets
and superstitions of the Romish-Religion, but the Arminian-fallacies which are
devised to ensnare the subtler, as the other to deceive the simpler sort, and
they show therein a sincere and uniforme affection and forecast to the welfare
of the King and his Subjects of all sorts, and to the establishment of
Religion, Justice and Peace, throughout all the Kingdoms of his Majesty's
Dominions. I am sorry we cannot say nor think so of some, who had too great a
sway in composing of the Canons; and who are probably suspected of a partial
intent to maintain their own interests, and to support their Ecclesiastical
Prelation, with little regard of the good of the inferior Clergy, how good
soever, or of the Churches committed to their particular charges.

4. For Benignity; 4. Benignity.
our Protestant leaders of the Commons-House, give leave to private persons out
of their House, to make doubts concerning the meaning of some words, contained
in their Protestation.

But some of our Canonical Lords (who would have us rather their sworne-men,
then the Churches free Ministers; and would have us give our assent to their
dictates, with an implicit faith) much disliked our doubting of their new
devised Oath, notwithstanding it be of much more perilous importance to us,
then this Protestation can be to any; and therefore some have bin called in
question, and strictly examined (as if they had been suspected of some heinous
crime) concerning the showing or communicating of the London Ministers Quaeries
of the Oath to the reading of others.

2. The Composers of this Protestation were so facile and favorable to those
that doubted of it, that what did scruple them, they expressly discharged and
excluded out of the compass of their Protestation, and that with such
readiness and expedition, that to many, if not to most, the doubt was rather
prevented then removed, the Protestation and explanation coming both at once
unto their hands.

But the doubts of the Oath were not so tenderly taken to heart by some of our
Ecclesiastical Governors, though their title Fathers obliged them to more
mildness and pity to their perplexed sons: for some were so far from a
compassionate complying with us, by with-drawment of that which was so full of
ambiguity and danger in our apprehension, that for moving doubts unto them
(though with as much meekness and moderation of spirit as the cause would well
bear) some of us were noted as adversaries to them, and so accounted not only
incapable of their fatherly indulgence, but unworthy the good will and
acceptance of our Brethren: And if they had still been as predominant as of
late they were, we might have expected rather punishment, See the Defense of
the Humble Remonstrance, p. 162.
as for some high presumption against our Superiors, then any satisfaction of
our scruples, or removal of the scandals that did offend us.

This may suffice to manifest such disparity betwixt the Oath and Protestation,
that he that is afraid to take the one, may have a good heart to take the
other. By that which has bin said you will well perceive that the doubts in my
book are blocks lying at the door of the Convocation house (where the Oath
was framed) none of them will be found in the way of the House of Parliament,
from whence this promise, ^ow and protesta^n proceeded.

An Answer to your doubt of the ^ase of Conscience, wherein the opposition
betwixt your Seminary and me is clearly demonstrated.
NOw for your scruple, at some part of my resolution of the Case of Conscience,
(I presume you will not blame mine answer to it in this place, as an hysteron
proteron, if you forget not my reasons before delivered, for departing from the
order of your proposals) having promised your first motive of writing unto me,
you begin your matter of exception against me, with that which I cannot but
receive with much acceptance: viz. I have heretofore endeavored tovvith^dravv
one (who had near relation to me) from the Rom^sh Religion, attempting to
work it, upon the great vvro^g the Laity did suffer in that Religion for want
of the Communion Cup M. Harlow p* 1.
Your zealeus endeavor to reduce one of near relation to you from the Romish
Religion: And I do as much approve of your prudence in making choice of the
grand Sacrilege of the Papists (in withholding the Communion Cup from the
Laity) as a ground of persuasion to return to that Church where the Laity
receive their full right in both kinds, as well as the Clergy.

But then you tell me that having thereupon received an escript from a Romish
Priest, (about Christmas, 1639.) who, as you say, stated the point to the same
effect as I have done, whereto you returned an answer, which be took with him
to Rome, where he has, as it seems, ever since been resident, your endeavor
will prove f^uitlesse, If you and the Seminary do mean, etc. ^ Ibid.
if the truth be as I have condescended unto. Afterward you Because neither
you nor the Seminary have declared what kind of presence, etc. p. 6.
twice join me and the Seminary together, as if we two were at better accord
about their fraudulent detention of half the Sacrament, then you and I.

Truly, Sir, I am so far from all guilt of that Sacrilegious guile of the
Romish Church, that I conceive if any had suspected me for it heretofore, my
book which you have read, might have served for a complete Apology and
purgation from it; but I see, by your conceit, the saying of Cicero verified
betwixt you and me; Non tam interest quo animo s^ribatur, quam quo accip^atur,
Cic. Ep. f^^. l. 6. p 65. nu 26.
It is not of so much moment, with what mind one writes, as with what mind
another reads.

I suppose you set your self so affectionately against the Seminaries
sacrilegious tenet, that the heat of your zeal warped your misconceipt to a
degree of excess; which has bin an occasion of error to Ardebant veteres
tanto syncerae pietatis ardore, ut dum unum errorem omni virium conatu destru.
ere annituntur, s^epe in alterum oppositum errorem, vel deciderint, vel
quoda^^^odo decidisse videantur, Sixth. Senens. Prefat. in lib. ^. Biblioth.
Sanct. p. 1. and 2.
some of the greatest Clerks, as King James has observed of St. Augustine in
particular, giving some rules for reading of the Fathers, he advises to
distinguish D. Featley Cygnea ca^tio, p. 31.
their positive Doctrine from that which they write in heat of opposition,
wherein, says he, sometimes (through too much vehemence) they over-straine in
their Polemicke Tractates against Heretics; for instance, S. Augustine in his
worthy Treatises extant in the seventh Tome of his works, in vehemently
oppugning those Heretics that agree with our Arminians, to wit, the Pelagians,
who denied Original sin in Infants, and consequently held Baptism needless,
was so far transported to urge the necessity thereof, that he excludes all
Infants (dying unbaptized) from all hope of Salvation.

In application of this to your Case, you may see my disposition to return you
better coin, then I received from you; for you join me with a Romish
Seminary, in society of Sacrilege: I join you with a most renowned Doctor of
the Church, in an exube^ancy of zeal, easily capable of pardon, and not
altogether incapable of some commendation: and if either you or any one else had
convinced me of any error, whether of this or any other kind, I would learn
of him a better lesson then this example shows, which is Secundas babeat mod
estiae, qui primas non po^uit ba^ere sa^ientiae. Aug. Ep 7. Marc^llino. Tom. 2.
p. 32.
f^r want of wisdom before hand to make amends by modest confession of a
fault afterward. But (as yet I conceive my cause) I must stand upon my just
defense against a threefold charge in your Letter.

1. Of Popish conformity with the Seminary Priest.

2. Of ambiguity in mine own Tenet, without reference to him.

3. Of scandal and offense, which you conceive some may take (as your self
have done) at that passage, whereat, you say, you have taken a stumble.

For the first, you first set down my words, then the Seminaries; my words (as
you rightly set them down, though you take them in a wrong sense) are these;
M. Ley his Case of Conscience. p. 17.
Though there be most dispute betwixt us and the Papists, upon the withholding
of the Cup of the holy Communion, in the thing it self, there is no more
necessity held (by either side) of the use of the one Element then of the
other, nor is Christ less present to the faithful in the one then in the
other.

The Seminaries Tenet you deliver more largely, but I will note only so much
of it, as is most pertinent to clear the point of consent or difference
betwixt us; and this it is: I affirm, says the Seminary, that by one of the
Elem^nts alone, the whole thing is both signified, and the efficacy produced,
for by the one we receive whole Christ, who is as really present by receiving
one, as by both. Hereupon you address this demand unto me. Now Sir, if it be
true, as to the thing it self, that there is no other necessity of the use of
one Element then of the other; ^r that the whole benefit may be received by
one; and that Christ is no less present to the faithful in the one element
then in the other, or in both together; then me thinks it is not well done by
any of our side, to foment or cherish so great a controversy, as is maintained
betwixt us Protestants and the Papists, concerning the obolition of the
Communion Cup.

Answ.
If your Seminary had seen this part of your Letter he would perhaps have taxed
you for ^^andering his Church; since though the Communion Cup be withheld from
the Laity, it is not abolished: for you know (and you show it afterward out of
Popish Authors) that they consecrate the Sacrament, and the consecrating
Priests and Princes receive it, in both kinds: but (though I would be so just,
as to give the Devil his due, and therefore would not make any point of Popery
(which is bad enough) worse then it is) I answer for my self touching your
conceit of my conformity with the Seminary Priest, that we differ in two main
Points (which are noted by your self) besides diverse others.

First, that the Seminary equals one Element with both, I comp^re the one with
the other, the Cup with the bread, and say there is no more necessity of the
one then of the other: neither necessitate med^^ (for the one is not either
more or less needful to a Christian then the other) nor necessitate precepti
(for both were alike, and together prescribed by the same precept) if you hold
otherwise, you must show that the bread is more necessary then the Cup, or the
Cup more necessary then the bread; and that the one was prescribed, the other
but permitted, or wholly omitted in Christ's institution.

2. The Seminary holds one as sufficient as both, both for efficacy, and for
signification. I compare the one with the other, but for efficacy (as your self
confess) and if you hold that the faithful receiving of the one is not as
effectual as the faithful receiving of the other, show which of the two has
the pre-eminence of efficacy, and your reason why.

3. Your Seminary Priest (especially if commorant at Rome (as you note he was,
and it may be yet is) holds himself bound to belief and practice of the
decrees of the Councels of Constance, Basil and Trent (as I have set them down
in the Popish contradiction to our 30. Article) which not only forbid the use
of the Communion Cup to the Laity in common, but excommunicateth and
anathematizeth those that contradict their decree: I hold it is most soundly
determined (in our thirtieth) That the Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to
the Lay People, for both parts of the Lords Sacrament (by Christ's ordinance and
commandment) ought to be administered to all Christian men alike; and I take it
for no less then I rank the Papists with gross Heretics for taking the
Communion Cup from the Laity. In my case of conscience, p. 15, 16.
Heresy and a most impious presumption, and damnable Sacrilege of the Popish
Prelates, so to cross our Saviors express prescription and practice, an^ to
defraud so many thousands, of half that holy portion of the Sacramen^ which
his beneficence bequeathed to them when he left this world.

Therefore (Sir) there is certainly very good cause (though you seem to doubt
of it) why you and I should contest in this controversy against the Seminaries
Tenet; Yea why the Protestant Church should be for ever at unreconcilable odds
and opposition with the Church of Rome.

I shall not need much to insist on that you say (by way of Because neither you
nor the Semina^y have decl^red what kind of pr^sence you intend, etc. p. 6.
And again if you and the Seminary due mean, etc ^b. As before is noted.
comparison) betwixt the Seminary and me, touching the manner of the presence
of Christ in the Sacrament: since,

First, my words gave you no cause to suspect me, as either unsound or
ambiguous in that point: For they are these [nor is Christ less present to the
faithful in the one then in the other] whereby you may well enough perceive, I
mean (as a true Protestant should do) such a presence as is determined in the
15. Article of our Religion, viz. the body of Christ (and the same must
necessarily be conceived of his blood) is given, taken and eaten in the Supper
only after an heavenly and spiritual manner, and the means whereby it is
received and eaten in the Supper is faith.

And supposing your Seminary Priest (as in congruity of reason you must) to be
a Papist, you need not doubt but he holds such a presence as you set down, for
the Ibid.
second member of your fourfold distinction of presence, a corporeal presence
by transubstantiation, which (according to the 38. Article of our Church) I
condemn, as repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, and destructive of the
nature of a Sacrament.

This is enough to make me an Heretic to Papists, and that Papists for their
Sacramental Sacrilege are Heretics to me, you might have observed in the
next leaf of my Case of Conscience Page 15, 16.
before the words, whereon you ground your comparison betwixt the Seminary and
me; so that your joining of him and me together (in this sacrilegious
Synecdoche, of a part for the whole) whom Religion has put a sunder at further
distance then Rome (where the Seminary resided, and London where my Book was
printed) is a match as unmeet as their divorce is unjust and unlawful, who
sever the Sacramental Elements (with a Canonical curse) which our Savior
joined together with a blessing in the first Institution.

My words which you take for the ground of your doubt cleared of ambiguity, and
the truth declare^, how Christ may be said to be received with one kind, how
with both.
HAving purged my self, I hope, from all appearance of participation with your
Romish Seminary, I shall now clear my words from your three demands which you
raise upon them; and shall further declare, how Christ may be said to be
received with one, how with both the parts of the Sacrament. Your first demand
is what I mean 1. Demand*
by these words [There is no more necessity of the use of the one Element then
of the other] whereupon Page 1.
your words are, I cannot tell certainly what to understand, whether you mean
comparatively for dimension or number.

If I have pusled you in that I have said, you have cried quittance with me in
your distinction of [comparatively for dimension or number] for I cannot
understand with any congruity to the point in hand, what you mean by the
difference betwixt dimension and number, if you had said [for degree or number]
the terms of your distinction (being lodged in diverse predicaments) might have
been more easily conceived, and then I should have taken your doubt to be,
whether the necessity be as binding for the one as for the other, and no more
binding for both, but that one alone might serve for both kinds?

If you enquire of the comparison of one single Element with the other, I have
answered you to that already: if of one with both, my words give you none
occasion of such a doubt: for I compare but one with one, not one with both,
yet the Case of Conscience, being moved upon the inability of one to receive
the bread of the Communion, I conceived it most probable, that in such a case
it is better to receive the Sacrament in See the case of conscience, p. 13, 14,
18, 19
Wine only, as for them that have an Su^t qui sine animi deliquio (...) n^n
possunt. Calv. Ep inter Ep. Bez Ep. 15. p. 167.
Antipathy to Wine to receive it in Bread only, then either to forbear both,
or to make use of some other thing instead of that which they cannot have, or
cannot take, which I propound (as in a problem) but by way of probability, not
meaning to bind any one to this resolution, nor to contend with any for it,
who is otherwise minded, which, you may perceive by that Case of conscience,
pa. 8.
I say of substituting some other matter analogicall to bread or wine in some
cases of extreme and extraordinary necessity. And for mine opinion in that
point conformable to the judgment and practice of the Ibid. p. 10.
reformed Church in France, confirmed in twenty several Synods, I Ibid. p.
13, 14.
rendered two reasons, which have had the approbation of as learned and
judicious Divines as any I know. The one is that by receiving the one kind
[re] the other [^oto] the one Element in deed, the other in desire (when it
cannot really be had, or not so received) the party receives Christ, and with
Christ both his body and blood. The other is, that it seems hard measure to
debar any from both parts of the Sacrament, because God has enabled them to
partake but of one, especially if they much desire it, and be inclined to
scruples and discomforts if they should want it.

The latter Reason is obvious to a mean understanding.

Of the former an intelligent Citizen (accustomed both to reading and reasoning
more then ordinary Tradesmen) made some question, but he was not more
scrupulous in his doubt, then ingenuous in receiving satisfaction by mine
answer unto it.

And because others may happily be scrupled (as well as either you or he (though
I be not made acquainted with it, as I am with your doubts) I will briefly
deliver how I conceive Christ may be said to be received with one kind, how
with both.

It is the constant and Totum and integrum Christum a^ verum S^cramentum
subqualibet specie sumi. Conc. Trid. Sess. 21. c 3. Tom. 9. pa. 399. Bin. euit.
1636.
common Doctrine of the Papists, that whole and entire Christ is wholly and
entirely under each kind, and that as whole Christ, and a true Sacrament is
received in one kind, so as tou^hing the f^uit they are defrauded of no grace
necessary to salvation that receive only one kind: and that not only Nec
Vllatenus ambigendum est quod non sub specie panis caro tantum, nec sub specie
vini sanguis tantum, sed sub qualibet specie est integer and totus Christi^s.
Basil Conc^^. Oecumen. Sess. 30. Tom. 8. p. 85. col 2.

Totus Christus continetur sub specie panis, and totus sub specie vini, and sub
qualibet qu^que part host^ae consecratae, and vini consc^rati. Council.
Floren^^. 3. sub Eugen. 4. Decret. super unione Jacobinorum and Atmenorum. Tom.
8. Conc^l p 866. col 1.

Lumbard. l. 4. did. 11. fol. 354 b

Bell. l 4 de ^uchar. cap. 21. Tom. 3 page 287. Col 2.

Ruardus Tapperun. act. 15 notat. post page 402. Tom. 1.

Hard apud Jewel. Act. 2. page 75.

Ecciu^ in locis suis dicit in una specie tantumesse quantum sub utraque, ideo
quod sub qualibet specie totus fit Christus. Musc. loc. com. de caena. Dom. p.
373.


whole Christ is contained under the species of bread, and under the species of
wine, but under every part of the consecrated host, and consecrated wine.

And this so commonly held and pleaded (by the Romanists) that it comes in
continually like the Cuckoes note, as In utraque specie totu^^ Christus (...)
perpetu^^. Chami^r de Euch. l. 9. c. 10. Tom. 4. p. 510. col. 1.
Chamier observes, and gives it a name accordingly.

Wherein though the Popish expression have a tang of Transubstantiation, saying,
[in each kind and under each kind is whole Christ] and that in such an
advancing of the value of one Element only, their craft and drift is, to make
the people contented to be cousened of the other; yet in a case of necessity
(such as that I resolved) where both Elements cannot be had, or cannot be
taken, it is no Popish, but a protestant Doctrine, That he that faithfully
receives one kind with an affection to both, receives whole Christ both body
and blood. This position in express or equivalent terms, you might have read
before my book came forth, in the discourses of diverse They (as we) also hold
that whole Christ is received in either kind, for Christ is not d^vided. Bishop
Morton. instit. Sacr lib. 1. c. 3. Sect. ^ p. 58 So also says D. Willet.
Synops. Papis. 13 Genesis controv. q. 8. pa. 640.

As touching the use of the Eucharist, though we do not deny that whole Christ
is distributed, as well in the bread as in the wine, yet we teach the use of
both parts to be common to the whole Church. Confess. Wittenburg. Harm.
Confess. Sect 14. c 9. p 459.

And the note of other Protestant D^vines upon it is, notwithstanding the
signs be severally distributed, nothing is divided in the humanity of Christ.
Observe. in Harm. Observe. 41. 42.

He that receives in one kind being not qualified to receive the other,
receives the whole substance of the Sacrament, as it is taken for the thing
signified. Dr. Featly in his conference with Mr. Everard, page 267. Idem. page
201.

The same confession of whole Christ received with either element. Dr Fr. White
makes, as his words are cited afterward at the letter ^. See also to the same
purpose Fest. Hommij dis. 648 p. 263.


Protestant Divines, who have approoved themselves very zealous Antipapists in
the controversy of the Eucharist for both kinds.

Here I may fitly return you an answer to your second demand, viz. what I mean
by the thing it self? wherein I may well admit of your distinction of Mr.
Harlow. pa. 2.
res Sacramentalis and res Sacramenti, the Sacramental signs or elements, and
the thing of the Sacrament, that is, Christ which is signified and represented
by them.

In application of which distinction, I say first, that on both sides it is
held, as At the letter^.
I have showed, that he that rightly receives but one element only, may
receive rem Sacramenti, that is Christ, and whole Christ.

2. For res Sacramentalis, or the Sacramental signs, there is no difference
for the things themselves, but on both sides it is held that Christ is no less
present to the faithful receiver, when he receives the one sign then when he
receives the other, which is all one as if we should say, that the bread has
no pre-eminence over the wine, nor the wine over the bread, as to a
Sacramental either ordinance or operation, and therefore, D. Willet Synops
Papis. 13. Genesis controv. q. 8. p. 644.
as Dr. Willet rightly observes, the Papists might as well have kept back the
bread, and have given the Cup without bread, as bread without the Cup.

But if the Sacrament be received but in one kind, though in such a case as
that I discussed, you seem to deny participation of Christ and Sacramental
efficacy; otherwise your professed pleading against mine assertion were very
impertinent, and if that be your mind, I shall desire your further
consideration upon the sayings of sundry Orthodox Divines, forenoted in the
margin at the letter ^
, consenting that whole Christ is received with either Element. Of the same
Judgment with them is learned Chamier, who, when the Papists urge the
receiving of whole Christ, though but with half the visible Sacrament, grants
Concedo quod ad rem significatam, idem else edere corpus and bil ere sanguinem.
Chamier. de Euchar. l. 9. c. 10. Tom. 4. p. 511. col. 1.
that for the thing signified by the Sacrament, that is all one to eat the
body and drink the blood of Christ; and that De re significata non est quod
agane prolixius, quia bujus ratio long est diversa a ratione signorum, certe
res significata, neque editur, neque bibitur, cujus ^ei illud argumentum est
quod vere Bell^^minus asserit non distirgui, sci l. in ie significata cilum and
potum. Ibid. p. 508. col 2.
there is great difference betwixt that, and the signs by which it is
signified, for the thing signified, says he, is neither eaten nor drunken; and
hereto he applies and approves the saying of Bellarmine, that for the thing
signified there is no distinction betwixt meat and drink, and we have, says I
am saepius protestati sumus non disputari de re significata, Itaque hoc sensu
argumentum est extra Thesi^. Cham. de Euchar l. 9. c. 10. Tom 4. p. 510. col. 2.
he, often protested unto you that we dispute not of the thing signified by the
Sacramental signs, but of the signs themselves; therefore in this sense your
argument is an Alien from the Thesis in Question. Whence we may infer a
spiritual concomitancy and aver it too, though we deny the c^rnall
concomitancy of the Papists, as D. Francis White has done in his answer to
Fisher the Jesuit, his words are these.

D Ft. White ans^er to Fisher, p. 4^6.
The ob^ection, to wit, if the soul and blood were not in Christ's body by
concomitancy (s^il. according to the Popish tenet, which teaches that the
bread is turned into flesh, and the wine into blood) communicants should
receive the body of Christ, but not truly Christ is inconsequent, because by
receiving the (...), they receive the other: So in this kind of spiritual
concommitancy, neither the Fathers, nor Calvin, nor we, nor you, need to be at
any difference: which differs so much from the carnal concomitancy of the
Papists, that the one is most abs^rd and contradictory both to Religion, and
Reason, and common sense; the other, though too high a mystery to be perceived
by a sensual apprehension, yet very consonant to sound and religious reason,
according to the prec^dent distinction betwixt the signs, and the thing
signified.

For the Popish concomitancy dasheth upon this horrible absurdity, To this
absu^dity (...) M. E^erar^ driv^^ by D Featly in his disput. page 268, 269.
That the flesh and bones of Christ without any alteration of them at all are
drunk out of the Challice.

In which respect with other such like suitable absurdities, which are
concomitant with transubstantiation and concomitancy, (...) illu^ ^^rrendum,
and qua^e nu^qu^m (...) in (...), vel (...) vel (...), nullum no^ (...), sed
^eque, i^ Tur^ismo, out etia^ (...) de Euc^ar. l. 9. c. 6. Tom. 4 de S^cr. p.
497. c^l. ^.
Chamier calls Transubstantiation the most horrid monster that in the whole
world was ev^r fained or formed, not only among the Haeresies, but in Turcisme
or He^^henis^e.

But of the spiritual concomitance, that is of receiving whole Christ in
spiritual manner, though but one element be received, as in the case of
necessity forementioned and presupposed in my resolution of the case of
conscience, there is good reason very agreeable to Orthodox Doctrine; as

First, because the means of receiving Christ spiritually is by faith,
according to our fifteenth Article, and faith so lays hold upon Christ, as to
be partaker of whole Christ, according to the spiritual concomitancy
forementioned, and acknowledged by our Protestant Authors.

2. Though the manner of signification of Christ be diverse betwixt the
Sacrament of Baptism and the Lords Supper, yet Christ the thing signified is
as fully exhibited to those that are fit to receive it by the use of one
element (though but water) as by the use of both those of the Eucharist, bread
and wine; and therefore it is true which In baptism^ proponitur Jesus Christus
conceptus, ^atus, crucifixus, ut omnibus credentibus fiat sapientia. justitia,
sanctificatio and redemptio, Sic Beza confess. c. 4. Act. 50.
Beza delivers, That in Baptism Jesus Christ is proposed as conceived,
borne, crucified, dead, buried, raised up, and ascended into Heaven, that to
all believers he may become wisdom, justification, sanctification and
redemption, and though in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper the signs and
significations be diverse, the thing signified, that is whole Christ is the same
to the faithful receiver: and though the signs be severed, the thing signified
is not so, the body and blood of Christ are not divided, as out of our
Protestant Writers I have observed.

3. Then if one have received the bread (faithfully believing that he receives
whole Christ, according to the Protestant concomitancy forementioned) should
by some extraordinary hap be disappointed of the other part of the Sacrament
(as sometimes it has, and too often may fall out in Congregations of the
Country, where there may be an unexpected failing of wine, and no timely supply
from Vintners to be expected, does that failing which was none of the receivers
fault, make his faith to fail, which was his duty and virtue rightly exercised
upon the right object, if it do not in a case of such necessity, as I
discussed, the faithful receiver may receive whole Christ, though for the
outward element he receive but one part of the Sacrament. 3. Demand.


Upon your second demand you presently make a third, viz. wh^t I mean by
necessity? To which I need not make a particular reply in this place, for I
have made answer to it already under the first part of your charge, wherein you
would have chain^d your Seminary and me together in an heinous breach of the
Sacramental combination. And yet even the word necessity makes a maine and
material diff^rence betwixt the half Communion of the Papists, and that which
I propound and plead for in my Case of Conscience, viz. the lawfulness and
sufficiency of one Element alone in case of necessity where both cannot be had,
or cannot be taken, which is Extraordin^ry cases ought not to ju^tle
outordinary laws and customs; ^or that command of Christ to his Apostles, Go
(...) every crea^ure of man, stood good in the general, albeit many men happened
to b^^ deaf -- every one by S Peter is to give an answer of his faith, to
every one that asks, which precept was not therefore alterable because of
multitudes of men that were du^b Bish. Morton of the Instit. of the Sacr. l 1.
c. 3.. ^0 p. 61.
extraordinary and rare. But the Popish parting of the Sacrament and putting a
part for the whole (saving a few exceptions of conficient or consecrating
Priests or Princes) is general and ordinary, and that by Canon discharged with
a dreadful curse, as has before been observed; so that when you profess to
hold, That the Eucharist ought to be communicated by such as are able and fit,
both Priests and people in both Elements, and not in one of them indifferently.
You hold nothing against me for your limitation [of able and fit] makes for
such indulgence as I defend; otherwise and out of such cases of exception, I
hold (as you do) that all both Pastors and people ought to receive in both
Elements, and not in one of them indifferently.

Though the faithful receive whole Christ with on^ part of the Sacrament, yet
it is utterly ^nlawfull, either to administer the Sacrament in the Popish
Church with (...) kind^, or so to receive it, though none other exception were
to be taken at the Religion then their broken communion, with the inducements
to it, and consequences upon it.
FRom that which has been said of receiving whole Christ by or with one
element only, it will not follow that either the Popish Doctrine, and practice
(concerning the dismembered administration of the Eucharist) is not to be
^^ndemned as unlawful, and no less then sacrilegious and heretical, nor that
any one may lawfully receive the Sacrament in one kind only in their Church,
though nothing else were amiss in it then their maiming and mangling this holy
Sacrament. And for their pretense of whole Christ under one kind to defraud the
people of the other, it is easily answered.

First, that Christ knew that much better then they, and yet he did institute
the Sacraments in both kinds, and so delivered it to his Disciples, as is
confessed in the Council of Licet Christ^^ post caenam i^stituerit and suis
Disci^^li^ a^ministraverit sub utraque specie ven^rabile (...) Sacramentum,
tamen hoc non o^sta^te, etc. Council. Constant. Self 13. Tom. 7. part. 2. page
1042. col ^.
Constance and Insuper declarat (...) Redemptor n^ster ut antedict^m est in
suprema illa cae^a h^c Sacramentum in (...) speci^bus instituerit and Apostolis
tradiderit, tamen fatendum esse etiam su^ altera tantum specie totum atque
integrum Christum (...) Sacramentum s^mi. Council. Trid. Sess. 21. Tom. 9. c. 3.
p. 399. Col. 1. and 2.
Trent, and so it was accustomed to be from the beginning of Christian
Religion, as is likewise confessed by many learned See Dr. Featley, Grand
Sacrilege. c. 1^. p. 143, etc.
Papists and the constant practice of it for Praxis Ecclesi^ per 1200. secula
^ro cal^ce. (...). Tom. 4 l. 9. ^. 10. p. 512 col. 2.
twelve hundred years is averred by Protestant Divines, and the Papists
themselves in part confor^e to the original rule and example in consecrating
the Sacrament in both kinds (as in the Priests and Princes receivin^ in both
kinds) to which purpose you have ^ Harlow, p. 10.
cited sundry testimonies of Romish Writers which make much against their
withholding of the consecrated Cup from the Lay Communicants. But what matter
is it, says (...) facia^us ((...)) legatum (...) sibi ess^ and totum in (...)
scriptum co^tineri, etc. (...) Chamier. Tom 4. de Sacrament. Euch: l. 9. c. 7.
p. 498. col. 2.
Beca^us, if they have whole Christ, though they have but one half of the
Sacrament? Suppose, says he, that a (...) a lega^y of a thousand Florens
bequeathed to him in two codicills or wills, each containing the same sum, it
is s^fficient for him to have the one of them, which will be as beneficial as
both.

But he is well answered by Ibid.
Chamier, that the Testator in this case appoints as well both the codicils to
be delivered, as the legacy it self; for it was instituted by our Savior at
the first, and so delivered over in his name to the Church by the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 11. Nay to say the truth, he trusts the Ministers of the Church only
with the codicils or outward evidences of this legacy, the gift of himself, he
reserveth to himself, and he gives himself to those only whom he, and he
alone knows, by faith to be meetly qualified to receive him.

They then who are trusted with two tokens of Christ's love, and charged to
deliver them both to his people, and keep back one half, do prove
themselves both disobedient and unfaithful to their Lord, and injurious unto
men.

Ob. But while they administer in one kind, and in that kind whole Christ unto
the people, though they may have some wrong, they have neither damage nor
danger, by keeping back the other part of ^he Sacrament.

Sol. The answer to this will require a second reason against their half
Communion, and it is that which you have touched in your Letter to me, as well
as the former, yet in both you will, I hope, give me leave (if you give me not
thanks) to express mine exception^ against this Popish Sacrilege in mine own
way: and for that I say, that if we consider either the significancy of the
signs, or energy of effect where both may be had* there is a double maime in
that single administration without the Cup of the Sacrament.

For the first, where there is but one Element the signification is defective,
and that two ways.

1. In regard of fulness. 2. Of clearness.
For the former. Our Savior meant by the^e outward signs to signify a By.
Morton in his Institut. of the Sacrament. l. 1. Sect. 8 p. 57.
perfect refection to the soul of the faithful by m^at and drink, which
makes up a full and complete repast, so that whatsoever is needful for our
nourishment is reduced to one of them, this we may call a real f^ll^esse, and
there is a personal also, whereto the Elements must in their use and
application be extended, so that they must signify such a full refreshing to
the Laity as well as to the Clergy, since as it is well said in the Dat^^
Laicis utraque pars Sacramenti, quia Sacra^entum institutum est non solum pr^
part Eccle^^ scil^pro Presbyteris, sed etia^ pro reliqua Ecclesia Confess.
Aug. Syn^ag. confess. p. 36.
Augustan Conf^ssion, the Sacrament was instituted not for a part of the
Church, but for the whole Church both Priests and people.

2. For clearness; as this is more fully, so it is more clearly signified in
two distinct ^lements, which must be received in a distinct and several
manner, according to their kind: as bread by it self in the manner of eating
and wine by it self in the manner of drinking, not according to the confused
concomitancy of the Papists, whereby they fancy the b^dy of Christ to be drun^e
in the Cup, and his blood (...) in the (...).

2. For efficacy where both may be had, and either is refused, there may be a
question, whether there be any gracious efficacy at all, and more li^e that
there is not, for me thinks that sounds to good reason, which Dr. Francis White
has delivered against Fisher the Jesuit. D. Fr. White against Fisher, p. 479.
The Church (says he) cannot expect that Christ should fulfill his promise in
giving his flesh and his blood, unless she observe his ordinance, and do that
which he has appointed. But if there be any benefit by such a receiving, it is
like to be less ( Cham. Tom. 4 l. 9. c 9 p ^06. D. Willet. synops Papis. 13.
Genesis contr. q. 8. page 64^.

Bish. White answer to Fisher, p. 463. and 479. and 480.

D. Featly in the grand Impost. p. 205.


according to our Protestant Tenet) then might be expected by both.

For first, Christ blessed both Elements severally, and they that so take them
as he ordained them, take them not with a single, but a double blessing.

2. The double representation works more upon the apprehension and affections
(in one that comes duly prepared to receive the Sacrament) and so makes them
fitter to receive Sacramental grace with the Sacramental signs, and when men
are more fitted for grace, they are like to be more furnished with grace: and
as there is a twofold act of faith on their part who rightly receive the
Sacrament in both kinds: So no doubt there is an answerable operation of grace
on Gods part, where the words of Solomon (though spoken in another sense) may
be verified, Two is better then one, for they have a good reward for their
labor, Eccles. 4. 9. two Sacramental ^ignes, two faithful receivings are
better then one, for they have not only a good reward but a better reward, viz.
two gracious refreshings from the Author of the Sacrament, and a stronger
union with him then is made by one sign or one act of receiving of the
Sacrament, Sumpto hoc Sacramento dign^ (...), specie major est affectus unionis
corporis mystici cum capite quam sumptio sub altera. Alex Hal. 4, q. 10. in 4.
act. 1.. 1.
as by this entire receiving of the Sacrament there is a str^nger union betwixt
the mystical body and the head, then where the Sacrament is received in one
kind only. And that there is less benefit by one Element then by both (as has
been said) is implicitly confessed in the Tridentine Council, where the
Step-Fathers of Trent, decreeing the defra^ding of their children, of half the
portion of their heavenly fathers provision for their souls, say Quod ad
frustum attinet nulla gratia ^ecessaria ad salutem eos defraudari qui unam
speciem solum accipi^n^ Council. Trid. Sess 21. c 3. Tom. ^ p. 399. col. 1 and 2.
That by keeping the Cup from them, they are not deprived of any grace that is
necessary to salvation. Of some grace then they are deprived, but not of any
without which they cannot be saved. But it is more plainly acknowledged by
Vasquez, where he says, Concedimus Laicos quibus altera species negatur,
gratia aliqua defra^dart, non tamen necessaria ad salutem. Vasq. in 3 c. 4.
dis. 215
We grant that the Lay People (who are not allowed the Communion Cup) are
defrauded of some grace, but none of that, without which they may not be saved.
By the same reason they might take from them the other part of the Sacrament,
and so let them have no Sacrament at all, for Nec sane conclusimus unqua^
necessitatem Eucharistiae; quomodo ergo utrius^, speciei? Sed tantum
necessitatem utri^sque specieiposito usu Eu^^ar. Cham. Tom 4 l. 9 c. 10. p.
508. col. 2
though it be necessary, that when the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is
administered, it be done according to his institution, except in such cases of
necessity (as I have partly here, and partly in the resolution of the Case of
Conscience observed) yet there is no such simple necessity of it, but that a
man may be saved without it, which the Papists themselves will not deny, and
though they hold a greater necessity (for salvation) of the Sacrament of
Baptism then of the Eucharist, yet they will not gainsay the saying of
Quicurque e^tam non percepto regenerationis lavacro pro Christi confessione,
moriun^ur ta^^um, eis valet ad demittenda peccata, qua^tum si abluerentur sacro
font Baptismatis. Aug. de Civ. Deid. 13. c. 7.
S. Aug. that those who have not been washed in the Laver of Regeneration, if
they die for confession of the Christian faith, that is as availeable for
remission of their sins, as if they had been washed in the fountain of
Baptism.

And why should they confine the comforts of a Christian within the narrow
lists of necessity to ^alvation? when the Lord has been liberal in his
allowance of sweet and gracious refreshings, a man may be saved and yet be
distressed and tro^bled in conscience (as Perkins open. vol. 1. p. 417. col. 2.
b.
Luther was for three years together) and it may be the want of an entire
Sacrament (according to the Lords ordinance) may be cause of much discontent to
a well affected and scrupulous Christian, will it stand then with the charity
of those who (above others) affect the name of Fathers, and of that Church
which usurps and glories in the title of a common mother to b^ so hard-hearted
to their children, as not to care how uncomfortable their condition be upon
earth, so they go not to Hell for lack of necessaries to salvation? Their
doctrine and practice proclaims them such unkind, u^naturall Parents as
uncharitable to their children in withholding from them their spiritual
aliment, in an entire receipt of the blessed Sacrament, as they are undutifull
and disobedient to their Lord and master in breaking his commandment in their
broken Communion.

Upon these premises it will necessarily follow that if there were nothing to be
blamed in the Service or Lit^rgy of the Romish Church, but this violation of
the Lords ordinance, as they make it in decree and practice (notwithstanding
that whole Christ may be, as we have showed, received with one kind) it is
utterly unlawful to receive the Sacrament, as the Romanists administer it in
one Element only, for that were to consent unto, and (for his part that so
does) to confirm their sinful separation of those things, which God for the
good of man, has (by express both institution and practice) joined together.

The third p^rticul^^ of scandal answered.
Toward the conclusion of your Treatise (whereto I may now address my self
after full satisfaction (I trust you will take it for no less) to the two
former particulars) you profess a fear of M Harlow p. 11 I pray God that on
our side it ca^se not many among us to become changed in opinion, or at least
o^^e^ded thereby, and that on the Romish Party, this confession of yours be not
vouched against us for indifferency of communion in one kind, as the
concessions of their learned men for communion in both kind^ are cited against
the practice of the Romish Church the^in.
scandal to many among us (you mean Protestants) who may be changed in opinion
or at least offended by that passage of my case of conscience, which you have
selected, as most worthy of exception, and to the Romish-party who may vouch
this concession of mine, for indifferency of Communion in one kind, for which
cause you heartily wish, that that piece of my book had been obliterated before
it came to the Press.

Sir, I will not blame you for being chary of scandals, it is too common a
fault, and more common in these times then in any (within the compass of mine
observation) to be too much addicted in self satisfaction, with too little
respect of others whether they stumble or stand at our sayings or doings. And
if you concived my words so offensive as you say, you could not wish any less
unto them then the dash of a pen, which mine own hand should have made, if I
had conceived any suspicion that they did deserve it.

But I hope by this time you well understand, that you were more afraid, then
any could be hurt by that I have written: Yet I deny not but there be some, who
are either so incapable of religious reason, especially in problematicall
discussion^, or so captiously perverse as to turn most saving truths into
matter of scandal, else Alphonsu^ a Castro (...) 13. H^res de Eucharisti^. l.
6. a ^ol. 169. (...). 190.
Alphonsus a Castro could not have counted thirteen Heresies concerning the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, as he has done.

And for the Papists in particular, they are the less to be heeded, because
they are known to make no conscience of corrupting, wresting and misapplying
of the writings of the Protestants: Wherein they seem sometimes to take the
Divel^ practice for their ^^tterne, who alleging a Text of angelical
protection out of the 91. Psalm (when he tempted our Savio^r to cast himself
down from the Pinnacle of the Temple) [In all thy wa^es, Ps. 91. 11.
left out the words which were most pe^^nent to repel his temptation. So do
Quirinus Cn^gler. in his book called Symbola tria Act 1. Symbol Call p 25. a.
Quirinus Cnoglerus, Petrus Lud^^mius de desperata Calv ni (...) S^ct 5. p 64.
Pe^rus Ludsemius and Fr^nci^c. Lon prelu^ in sum. Council. p. 91.
Franciscus Longus deal with Calvine, where they cite him as such an enemy to
the sacred Trinity, that he could not endure the words Trinity, person, (...),
and therefore wished they were buried: and they quote for proof, lib. 1.
I^stit. c. 13. Sect. 5. whereas there he reproves the perverseness of the Arrian
spirit in their distaste and detestation of those words, yet shows his own
indisposition to a logomachy or strife of words, so far that he wishes that
those words were buried, but upon this condition (which these Popish, yea
divellish slanderers conceal) that the ^aith of the Trinity were soundly
asserted, as I have more lagely showed in the fourth Chapter of mine Apology
for the Geneva annotations, against the ^mputation of Iudaisme and Arri^^isme.

And your self in your M. Harlow his detection of papisticall fraud. Sect. 3.
p. 24.
late detection of papisticall fraud observe how forward they were to falsify
Sir Humphry Linds words touching the number of Sacraments, and most absurdly to
make him to dispute against himself and the Church of England; and your self
perhaps may be abused by them in the like kind, for they may say you plead for
the use of the (much abused) terms Ibid. p ^5.
Priest, Altar, Sacrifice with an affectionate relish of the Romish-Religion,
and from your tenet of Episcopacy by Ibid. p^ 40.
divine Right, they may (...) that you condemn all the reformed Churches that
(...) ^ot under the government of Episcopal Authority.

And some on the quite contrary side, may (...) use of your words in favor to
the Lay-Presbytery, in that Ibid p. 8.
you all^adge such instances of Laymen made Bishops, as Gerso^ B^cer
dissertat. de gubernat. Eccles. p 27.
Gersom Bucer brings in for establishment of Laicall Presbyters: and if a man
will set himself to cavil at your words, it may be he may impose upon you that
which is as far from your purpose, as Popery from mine, viz, M. Har. p. 38.
that making Timothy a Bishop, and ordained and consecrated to that office by
the office of the Presbytery, (which you say may be done by one) then a
Presbyter may ordain a Bishop, and so Presbytery shall be superior to
Episcopacy.

But for my Tenet touching comm^nicating in one kind (as I have stated it) I
fear no just occasion of offense, since D. ^eatly in his confer. with Everard
added to his grand Imposture, page ^67.
D. Featly delivered the same in disputation with M. Everard; and the In my
case of conscience, p. 10. the like is proposed by D. Featly in his grand
Imposture, p. 200.
French-Church has both decreed, and as occasion required, administered the
Sacrament accordingly, and yet no scandal has been given, no advantage taken
thereof by the Papists, so far as I have either read or heard.

So much for your charge and my clearing, or (if you like better) for your
doubts, and my resolution: wherein if the truth be further cleared and confirmed
(as I doubt not but you will acknowledge upon your unpartiall peru^all of what
I have written) neither you nor I shall have cause to wish that those lines had
bin obliterated, which you took for the ground of this intercourse betwixt us.
Which I trust for my part you will take as a testimony both of my love to the
truth, and of my respect to your self, and that you will be no more displeased
with me for my reply, Si culpa est respondi^^e, qu^so ut patienter a^dias mul^o
maj^^ est prov^casse Aug. ^p. ^^ter op^ra. Hier. Tom. ^. p. 257.
then I am with you, for your provocation unto it: since I strive not Non de
aduersario victoria^, sed de mendacio (...) veritate^ D^^l inter Aug. and Hier.
Tom. 4. oper H^er. p. ^97.
as with an adversary for victory, but for the prevailing of truth above
error, which may be a contestation not incompatible with the affections of
very good friends: and such a one I shall be glad upon all good occasions to
approve my self on your behalf that you may account me,

(...) ^^dworth in (...) Ju^^ 26. 1641. Yours as power and opportunity enable
me to do you Service, John Ley.


