Divine Meditations: OR, A Honeycomb To Refresh Weary Travelers. BEING A
Collection of Divine Sayings out of the Holy Scriptures of Truth.

Gathered by G. L.

The Second Edition Corrected.

Psalm. 19.10, 11. Thy Statutes are more to be desired than much fine Gold, and
sweeter also than Honey from the Honeycomb; and in keeping of them there is a
great Reward.

LONDON: Printed for John Marshall at the Bible in Grace Church Street. 1700.
Where you may be supplied with most of Dr. Owen's, Mr. Mead's, and Mr. Bunyan's
Work and Effigies.

Books Newly Printed and Sold by John Marshall, at the Bible in
Grace Church Street.
GOod Company; or, Sudden Thoughts on Things past, present, and to come. Price
2 d.

A Funeral Sermon Preached at the Merchants Lecture at Pinners-Hall,
Broad-street, upon the Death of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Gouge, who Deceased
Jan. 8. 1699. By John Nesbitt. Price 6 d.

The Young Man's Remembrancer, and Youth's Best Choice; in Two Anniversary
Discourses. By M. M. Price Bound 1 s.

An Elegiack Essay on the Pious Memory of Mr. Matthew Mead, Minister at
Stepney, etc. also most of his Works, and his Effigies Engraved, etc.

The Regular Architect; or, The general Rule of the Five Orders, with a New
Addition, by John Leake, for the Benefit of Free Masons, Carpenters, Joiners,
Carvers, Painters, Bricklayers, and Plaisterers, in general for all Ingenious
Persons in the Art of Building.

The Art of Defense, in which the Guards, Passes, Enclosures and Disarms are
Represented by proper Figures.

The Pens Dexterity; or, Mr. Rich's Shorthand Improved; or the Readiest Way to
attain the Art of Short-writing; as also Mr. Rich's Testament and Psalms in the
same Character.

England's Golden Treasure; or, The Complete Miner; or, A Discovery of Rich
Mines; laying on of Hands proved a Gospel Ordinance.

The Bands of Love and Peace; or, The Duties of Christians one to another;
together with their Duty to their Pastor or Minister, and his Duty to them.

A Honeycomb, etc.
CHAP. I.
1 O That great and glorious Work of God in Conversion of a Sinner! Angels and
Saints Rejoices to have the number of their Heavenly Company increase.

2 The Enjoyment of God experimentally is the Life of all our Joys; whatever
our Condition be, that is our good Cheer and Welfare.

3 For no less will satisfy a Gracious Heart, than that either God may be with
him on Earth, or he may be with God in Heaven.

4 O then let us Labor to see and enjoy God in all things, and all things in
God!

5 It Is no Sin to show our Righteousness, but it is a Sin to have nothing but a
show of Righteousness.

6 Though God has promised to give to them that ask him, yet many ask and
miss, because they ask amiss.

7 Wicked Men are Dead while they Live, but the Godly Live while they are Dead.

8 The Tie of the Covenant is sure, where Christ is the Surety of the Covenant.

9 They who Glory in their shame without Repentance, will be ashamed of their
Glory hereafter.

10 To be very Great and very Good, is a very great Goodness.

11 Men we Try before we Trust, but God we may Trust before we Try.

12 Nothing engages a Saint to love God so much as this, that God loves him so
much.

13 The Saints shall not be tempted above what they are able, or at most not
above what God will enable them to.

14 The Saints fare better, yea, are far better for one another Prayers.

15 If Men did consider that the Milk of the Word is the Food of the Soul, they
would rather their Bodies be without Soul's than their Churches without
faithful Preachers.

16 No Man is more hated of God than the Hypocrite, for a counterfeit Religion
shall find a real Hell.

17 The greatest earthly Pleasures are but Pains in their Loss.

18 some Men find the Want of Comforts, and some find Comforts in Wants.

19 The means of Grace is but a mean thing in Comparison of Grace, which is the
main thing.

20 The great Good and Means which God affords his People here, is but little
to what he minds to give them hereafter.

21 Satan knows not the Thoughts of a Man Heart, for it is God's peculiar
Treasure.

22 Afflictions are the Touch stone and great Discoverer of Sincerity. David.

23 It fills the Soul with unspeakable Joy, to Remember whilst it suffers the
Will of God is a doing.

24 Men are not happy in having more Good than others, but in doing more Good
than others.

25 Some go a Fishing with Holiness, and when they have their Ends there is an
end of their Profession.

26 When Religion and Profession goes together, it is hard to say which a Man
follows, but when separate, the true Professor's Mettle is shown.

27 It Is not always a Token of God's Love to have one's desires granted, for we
may ask amiss.

28 Satan, nor none of his Instruments, can meddle with the Person or the
Estates of Men, without God's Permission. Job.

29 It Is the Part of a good Man to Reprove Vice, though his Reproof should not
be taken in good Part.

30 God may as soon cease to be God as cease to be Good: As Soon cease to Live
as cease to Love.

31 By Reason of our Sins we have Cause to be Sorrowful in the midst of our
Prayers, but by Reason of God's Mercy we have Reason to Rejoice in the midst of
our Sorrow.

32 Carnal Men love the God's they make, and forsakes the God that made them.

33 It Is a Christian's Comfort though he have a fearful and unruly Heart, yet
he has a faithful God to flee to, to rule it.

34 They that have no true Grace in their Life, can have no true Peace in their
Death.

35 The things of this Life have not the Promise of Godliness, but Godliness
has the Promise of the things of this Life.

36 What we are afraid to do before Men, we should be afraid to think before
God.

37 Riches, Honors, and Pleasures, cannot give one Christ, but Christ can give
one Riches, Honors, and Pleasures.

38 Death has nothing Terrible in it, but what our Lives has made so by Sin.

39 They who have no Tr^asures in Heaven, cannot but be enraged when the Hope
of their Gain is gone on Earth.

40 A Christian that has his Faith awake, cannot Sin without a Check in his
Conscience.

41 There is more of the Power of God seen in bringing us into the World, than
in bringing us out of any Trouble in the World.

42 The Study of the Vanity of the Creatures, is of an excellent use to bring
us to the Knowledge of the Creator.

43 Wicked Men thrive often, but seldom blessed, their Prosperity proves often
their Curse.

44 Men may put their Riches in the Grave with them, but their Riches cannot
keep them one Moment out of it.

45 The Favor of God goes out for nothing in Man, but the Wrath of God goes
out for some Rebellion in Man.

46 A Saint does not only look for Heaven from Christ, but also for Christ from
Heaven.

47 God will give a Saint better Content without Heaven, than Heaven without
God.

48 God's Faithfulness does more for us than our Faith is able.

49 A Saint would not give that which he gains by his Sins for a World, yet he
would not commit one Sin willingly for all the World.

50 Scarlet Sinners may by Grace be made Milk-white Saints. Saul and Manassah.

51 The vilest Sinners once converted become the strictest Saints. Mary
Magdalen.

52 Grace makes a Man more a Man, and more than a Man.

53 God expects that Saints should do more for him than others, because he has
done more for them than all the World.

54 We should use that for God's Glory, which God gives us to use for our Good.

55 Though a Saint is sad he is not better, yet he is glad he is not worse.

56 All worldly Troubles cannot overcome a true Heavenly Peace.

57 It Is a Mercy to have a Portion in the World, but to have the World for our
Portion is a Misery.

58 Grace is Glory begun here, and Glory is Grace perfected hereafter.

59 In Prayer, when Men are on the Knee, then the mind ought to be on the Wing.

60 Nature teaches a Man to Value his Life above the World, and Grace teaches
him to Value his Soul above his Natural Life.

61 The best of Men are but Men at the best, and they find it so.

62 A Prayerless Man is a Token of a Godless Man.

63 He that Reproves other Men's Faults, and not his own, is a Hypocrite.

64 When a Saint comes to Die, his greatest Grief is, that he is done no more
for God, and his greatest Joy, is that God has done so much for him.

65 The Sin of Man fills the Creature with Vanity, and the Vanity of the
Creature fills the Man with Vexation of Spirit.

66 There are many Poor in this World, Rich in Faith, and many Rich in this
World, Poor in Faith.

67 Christ by drawing near to the Saints, draws them nearer to himself.

68 To be Sick of Love for God is Soul-saving Health, but to be Sick of Love
for the Creatures, does often destroy the Health both of Body and Soul.

69 Saints should labor to please God in all they do; and to be pleased with
God in all he does.

70 The World sees not a Saint though they look him in the Face, for the
Saints, the hidden Man of the Heart, or the Man in the Spirit.

71 Success is the Blessing of God in a good Cause, and his Curse on a bad.

72 The Wicked in the fullness of their Plenty are in Straights, but the Godly
in the fullness of their Straights has Sufficiency.

73 The Joy of the Holy Ghost is so, that there is Want in Words and of Words
to express it; for it is Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory.

74 There are many Convictions without Conversion, but there is no Conversion
without Convictions.

75 Men that make gain their Godliness, will never gain Godliness, unless they
make Godliness their greatest Gain.

76 God made Man his own Image, and Man should not rest till he be holy, or
partake of the divine Nature.

77 A Saint has the Law of God in his Heart, and a hearty Willingness to obey
the Law of God.

78 It Is an unspeakable Mercy to be one of Christ's, though of his little ones.

79 Man turns natural Food into his Nature, but spiritual Food turns Man into
its Nature.

80 In the World the Body was made first, and then the Soul, but in Heaven the
Soul is first, and then the Body.

81 Some Men instead of acting godlity in this World, acts rather like the God
of this World.

82 Though we may pray God to glorify himself in our Deliverance from Trouble,
yet we should be very Submissive, unless he get Glory by it, but rather beg
Grace to bear it.

83 God in this World has glorified Faith above all other Graces, and above
all other Graces Faith glorifies God in this World.

84 Let us not love any earthly thing too much, for too much affection causes
too much affliction at parting.

85 None feel more Experience of God's-Providence, than those that are resolute
in their Obedience.

86 To have a thankful Heart for all God's Blessings, is a great Blessing.

87 The worst of Men have the best earthly Things, and yet miserable; the best
of Men may want them, and yet happy.

88 Many use to frequent the Ordinances that makes not good use of them, for
all the Gain and Sweetness is in using them aright.

89 It Is a good part of the Comfort of our Lives to be much amongst the Society
of the Godly and good Friends.

90 Hell being such a Night that shall never see Day, is a double Torment to
the damned.

91 In things that we cannot understand, let us adore God's unsearchable
Wisdom, for his Paths are in the deep Waters.

92 One that labors by Faith and Patience to bear his Cross, has the height
of Affection, and the deep of Submission to Christ.

93 We see it commonly the Character of a wicked Man to be a troubler of the
People and Place where he lives.

94 The only Way to have our Will, is to bring it to God's Will.

95 If we would learn of Patient bearing trouble, let us keep closs to our Duty
and Calling, and commit the Success to God.

96 A good Christian under Trouble has a God, a Promise, a former Experience,
to run to for Support of Relief.

97 There will be no end of a Christian's Desires till he come to the end of
his Desire, and that is Heaven.

98 None should despair, because God can help; none should presume, because he
can cross.

99 When the Godly Dies he leaves all his Bad behind him, when the Wicked Dies
he leaves all his Good behind him.

100 He does not enjoy much of God who walks not much with God, nor can he walk
much with God, who does not enjoy much of him.

CHAP. II.
1 THE Groans of an humble and contrite Heart are more Love-forceable in the
Eyes of the Lord, than all the shoutings of Baal's Priests, though gathered in
one.

2 It Is Wisdom and Prudence to prepare for Adversity in time of Prosperity,
for Showers may come after Sun Blinks.

3 Rejoice Believers, God is your Father, Christ your Head, Husband and
Brother, Heaven your Inheritance, Angels your Guard, to minister to the Heirs
of Salvation.

4 We must not mingle our Passions with our Crosses, like foolish Patients
showing the Pill when they should swallow it whole.

5 It Is much better to have Crosses, and Grace to bear them, than to be without
both, which is the Fate of many Worldlings.

6 For a Believer in the State of Grace for all his Crosses, is in a fafer
Condition than Adam was in Innocence, for he fell, or the unconfirmed Angels
was in Heaven, for they fell, but he stands on the Foundation of God, being
confirmed by the Blood of Christ, which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail
against.

7 God's Thoughts is, and has been, Thoughts of Peace to his own from all
Eternity, and in sending the only Begotten Son of his Bosom to to work out the
Work of our Redemption.

8 O how Delightful are those spiritual and eternal Embraces which Saints have,
and shall have, in the Arms of God's Everlasting Love!

9 It Is a Joy next unto the Joys of Heaven, for one to know that he is within
the Covenant of Grace; Devils and Men may sooner pull the Sun out of the
Firmament at Noonday, than him from his God, for he is kept by his Power to
Salvation.

10 It Is to be afraid, that those that Loves not the Company of Saints on
Earth, shall not be admitted to their Company in Heaven.

11 A Saint will part with any thing for Christ, but will not part with him for
all things.

12 When our Affections and Conversations are in Heaven, we enjoy Heaven upon
Earth.

13 Nothing Disgraces a Man so much as Sin, and nothing Honors him so much as
Grace.

14 They that think as Hypocrites do, to deceive God, will find they deceive
themselves at the last.

15 Let Christians do their Best in drawing near unto God, and let the Devil
and the World do their Worst, no matter.

16 A gracious Heart desires not only to Walk holily, but also so wholly with
God.

17 He that is Prayerful before Mercy is received, it is a Token he shall be
Praiseful when received.

18 A Saint's Care is to keep himself in God's Way, yet he leaves the Care of
himself and his Ways to God.

19 Believers are all for Christ, and Christ is all for Believers.

20 Means without God can do nothing, but God without means can do any thing.

21 Some Men make their Lusts their Gods on Earth, but they will be their Devils
in Hell without Repentance.

22 He is not so much a Fool that has no Wit to use, as he that abuses the Wit
he has by playing the Fool.

23 Christ's Voice is Sweet to Saints, and their Voices is Sweet to him.

24 Our Sins delivered Christ to Death for us, and his Death delivers us from
Sin.

25 Faith is like the Neck, Knits the Head and the Body together in time of
Persecution: That Is Christ and a Believer.

26 The holiest Christians has some Stains and evitable Failings, which does
not deface nor disessence them.

27 The great Love that Christ had to us from Eternity, made him not mind the
Wounds of the Cross, for his Delight was and is with the Sons of Men.

28 All the World is but a Wilderness in Comparison of the Church of God, which
is as a Garden enclosed full of Flowers and Fruits.

29 The Excellency of God, and the Sweetness of his Ways, are the Ways and Joys
of the dear Saints.

30 The more Spiritual and Temporal Blessings we receive, the more Thanks and
Service God's looks for at our Hands.

31 If thou thinks God be better to others nor thee, yet since he is better to
thee nor thou deserves, thou has no Cause to complain.

32 It Is a greater Virtue to forgive one an Injury, than to do many Courtesies;
for it goes harder against Nature; and many will do for their Friends, but will
not suffer for them.

33 Corn, Wine, and Oil, is the Worldlings Happiness, and when they are at an
End, their Happiness is Eat up.

34 Let none despair, for the Depths of our Miseries are far from the Depths of
God's Mercies.

35 The glorious Sun has its Morning of Resurrection, how much more the Sons of
Glory?

36 That Man's full of Grace who is composed in Word and Thought under
Affliction; and to be Good and Patient when we suffer Evil is the height of
Goodness.

37 It Is a Woeful Thing to put off Repentance and a good Life, till a Death Bed
and Pained Body, for then there is enough ado with it self to disquiet the Mind.

38 Yet wicked Men thinks Death is an end to all their Troubles, when indeed it
only begins.

39 That Man is never thankful to God, who is unthankful to or for the Means of
Grace.

40 Great is the Affection of a Convert to a Minister who has been the Means
of his Conversion.

41 Our Love to God is best known by our Respect to his Ambassadors, and Love
to the Brethren.

42 Some Friends are like the Swallow, to come, and sit, and sing with us in
the Summer of Prosperity, but when the Winter of Affliction comes they seek for
a hotter Climate.

43 A good suitable End is the Grace and Beauty of all our Undertakings.

44 If God give thee Grace, there is presently a Chain leading thee to Triumph
and Glory to all Eternity, which I am persuaded Devils and Men cannot Break.
Romans 8.

45 The Inward Peace which Saints feel is not in Freedom from Trouble, but in
Freeness with God in the midst of Troubles.

46 A Fool's Heart is in his Tongue, but a Wise Man's Tongue is in his Heart.

47 They who are most full of Faith, have most Experience of God's Faithfulness
to them.

48 As there is a Vanity lies hid in the best worldly Good, so there is a
Blessing lies hid in the worst worldly Evil to his own.

49 God usually brings sudden Destruction upon Surfeiting and Drunkenness,
Palate-pleasers and Belly-Gods, as on the old World, on Sodom, and Job's
Children, and Belshazar and Nabal.

50 Oh it is much more glorious to serve God who made the World, and will Crown
his Servants with Glory, than your slavish Lusts, which will bring Torment in
the End.

51 A faithful Christian can Trust and Rejoice in his God, when all Worldly
Things not only crosses him, but flies in his Face to destroy him. Moses at the
Red Sea, Daniel in the Den, David at Zilphag.

52 Christ was made like unto us, Sin excepted, that he might be tempted, and
he permits us to be tempted, that we may fly unto, and be like unto him.

53 Heaven is the only place of Joy and Rest, Hell is the only place of Sorrow
and Torment: on Earth we have weary Toil by Sin.

54 He that is tender of his Conscience will not be Prodigal of his Credit, for
a good Conscience cheers his Heart and Countenance.

55 Worldly Men are Demetrius-like, crying great is the Goddess Diana, whom
Asia and all the World worshipped, and brings us all our Gain.

56 We should fear none but God, and be afraid of nothing but Sin: But blessed
is he that fears him always.

57 Ministers may teach us as a Prophet, but it is God only that teaches us
only to Profit.

58 The Tongue blessing God without the Heart, is like a tinkling Symbol and
sounding Brass, but both together is delightful to Heaven and Earth.

59 When there is no Doctrine in a Man's Life, it is a Token there is but little
Life in his Doctrine.

60 A Christian should be Watchful to and in Prayer, seeing his Enemy watched
him where and when he prays.

61 They that follow Sin and Wickedness serves hard Masters, and bad Wages;
Death and Damnation without Repentance.

62 It Is a great deal better for one to be prepared, and expect Death when it
comes not, than to have Death come when we expect it not.

63 Labor to fit a Promise to every Condition thou art in, and Milk forth, and
be satisfied with the Breasts of its Consolation; for thou can be in no
Condition but there is a Promise suitable in the Bible.

64 No Banishment is Sweet, but that of a Righteous Soul from the Prison of a
Worldly VVearied Body.

65 A Saint should deny himself, to be little at all, that Christ may be all to
him, and in all.

66 There may be Grace where is no Assurance, but there cannot be Assurance
where there is no Grace.

67 In this Life the Glory of Heaven is revealed to us, but in the Life to come
it shall be reveal^^ in us.

68 The best Policy is to prefer Duty before Liberty, or any earthly Joy, for
the Peace of Conscience, and a good Issue, as Daniel and the three Children
found.

69 God is the Father of all Mercies, and mercifully sent the Son of his Bosom
to Redeem his Elect, makes Heaven and Earth Rejoice.

70 Take heed of Passion for doing any thing in it, lest in calm Blood you be
put to the Trouble to Repent, wishing it had not been done.

71 It Is to be our Prayer and Care not only to receive Mercy from God, but to
improve them for him; for what is got by Prayer is commonly worn by Praise.

72 If we belong to God, and be not thankful for great Mercies, it is a Means to
take them away from us, to make us value and be thankful for the least of his
Mercies.

73 It Is as clear by Scripture Light that Christ is God, as it is by Natures
Light there is a God.

74 We should be very careful to behave our selves so as to give all Persons
Occasion to Love us, at least to give them no Occasion to Hate us.

75 The Work of Creation is called the Work of God's Fingers, but the Work of
Redemption the Work of his Arm.

76 The proud Man has not God, the implacable Man has no Neighbor, the
distrustful Man has no Friend, the discontented Man has not himself.

77 It Is an evil Sign not to be Chastened for Sin, it is a worse not to bear
Chastisements; a Token of Bastards, not Sons.

78 There be three great Helps to make a powerful Minister, Grace, Learning,
and Temptations.

79 It Is a heavy Burden, and requires great Faith to bear, when God's Promises
and Providence seem to be against us; yet Abraham went through with it.

80 Say under Trouble, God in very Faithfulness does afflict me here for my
Sins, that he may spare me out of Hell, and this will ease thy Burden, and
make thee fear Sin more.

81 Let Salvation be never so plentiful, yet, under God, if we Labor not to
make it our own by Faith, we are rather worse than better for it.

82 It Is to God chiefly we must pour out our Hearts under Trouble, who can make
our Bitter Water Sweet.

83 A Saint had rather Live at God's Determination, than at his own Choice; his
Prayer is, Lord, Choose my Heritage for me.

84 As Riches are the Mother of Pleasure and Delight to the Worldly, so Poverty
is the Nurse of Sorrow and Calamity.

85 Prayer is like Jonathan's Bow which sent out the Arrows, but Faith is like
the Boy which fetched them back again.

86 Faith, Hope and Patience, are great Supports to a perplexed Mind.

87 None but holy Ones shall see the Holy One; for without Holiness no Man
shall see the Lord.

88 Troubles in the Flesh, though Sanctified, are Troubles; even sweet Briars
and holy Thistles have their prickles. Paul.

89 Reason cannot show it self more reasonable than to leave off Reasoning
about matter above our Reason.

90 I look upon that Man that says he never erred, to be in a great Error;
for if we say we have no Sin we deceive our selves, and the Truth of God is not
in us.

91 Saints ought to look to God not only for supplying their Wants, but for
chastising their Wantonness; for his Rod is in the Covenant, and his Rebukes
from his Love in Faithfulness he afflicts them.

92 Woes makes short Time seem long, and Joys makes long Time seem short. O
Eternity, Eternity, is that which makes Woes Woes, and Joys Joys indeed.

93 They that would have their Affliction short and easy, must submit their
Will unto God's Will, and that is better than if they had their own.

94 Christ is the Saint's Crown and Glory, and will reprove Kings for their
sakes; for he keeps them as the Apple of his Eye.

95 The breathing of God's Spirit glads the Souls of the Saints, and lets them
see the Heavens clear, and the Bosom of God in Christ ready to receive them.

96 All our Grace is from God, who is the God of all Grace, and the Author,
Preserver, and Finisher of it.

97 There is but one Way to go to Heaven, but as many Ways to go Hell, as we
have Sins; and it is all one to the Devil if we come thither, either in the Road
of Profaneness, or the Walk of Hypocrisy.

98 One would wonder to see the Folly ^f worldly wise Men, Achitophel or Human,
to unde themselves; but no better can be expected till Men feat God, for that is
the Beginning of Wisdom.

99 It Is as great a Mercy to want that patiently which God denies us, as to use
that cheerfully which God gives us.

100 The Blood of Christ is precious in the Sight of Saints, and his Saints
Blood is precious in his Sight.

CHAP. III.
1 GOd's Love to his own will not suffer him to depart from them, and their
Fear and Love to him will not suffer them to depart from him; so nothing shall
separate them from the Love of God in Christ.

2 All Saints are Excellent; though some excel others, yet the highest is not
so far above the lowest, as the lowest Saint is above the highest natural Man.

3 When others are Passionate toward Saints, they should be Compassionate
toward them; for who made thee differ, O Man.

4 God is lovely in his Creatures, more lovely in his Ordinances, but most in
Christ, who is altogether lovely.

5 No Man is safe amongst his Friends without God, and with God he is safe
amongst his Enemies. Elisha.

6 God made Man to serve him; and he that serves God is a made Man; for
Godliness is the Making, Exalting, and Enriching of a Man; and he is made for
ever that is born again.

7 If the Word of God slay not the Sin in Man, yet it will slay the Man of
Sin, and the Man that goes on in Sin without Repentance.

8 There is a great many that hates both the Doctor and the Doctrine
foretelling them their Faults; as Achab said to Micaiah, I hate him, for he
never spoke Good of me.

9 By our good moral Life and Conversation, Man may choose us into the Church
Membership, but let us not rest on that; so was Judas; but upon God only, who
chooses us to Eternal Life.

10 He has all things who has God; and he that has not God, though he has
all other things, has but Shadows.

11 One Grain of Grace is more worth than many Pounds of Gifts, or Gifts of
Pounds. Peter's answer to Simon Magus.

12 In Creation God gave us to our selves, but in Redemption he gave himself to
us.

13 Though Christians sit in Darkness, and have no Light, yet Job and
Heman-like, let them trust God on the Faith of Adherance; for God may withdraw
his Communion from his People for a time, but never his Union; for Heaven is
the only Place of eternal Comfort, not Earth.

14 The Toil of getting, the Care of keeping, and the Fear of losing, takes
away a great deal of the Comfort of Riches; and yet for all that they often
take the Mornings Wings, like Job's.

15 There be many People that looks not on a Bible, or bows not a Knee to God,
from one Sabbath to another, but at the Church for fashion; I would have such
to mind that Word, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid from them that are lost;
the God of this World has blinded their Eyes.

16 To have a broken Heart for Sin, and a broken Christ meet in the Sacarament,
is Joy unspeakable; none can tell but them that tastes.

17 Life is a tempestuous Sea-voyage, but Death brings a Believer to his
Harbor of Rest.

18 Every Step of our Life stands in need of a Step of God's Protection and
Mercy to us.

19 Commonly Men Choose the poorest Ground for the richest Mines, so does God
the Poor of this World rich in Faith.

20 Afflictors and Afflictions are grievous for the present to People of God;
as the sweetest Roses has their Prickles, so the best of Christians has their
Afflictions.

21 A Dog may bark at a Sheep, but a Sheep cannot bark again. Shemi to David,
Tobias and Sanballat to Nehemiah.

22 O let us press forward, and launch forth, till we drown our selves in God's
bottomless Ocean of Love to all Eternity.

23 Let us learn Wisdom from the Birds of the Air; the Eagle, Falcon, and
Raven, are so quick-sighted as to build upon such Rocks as they scorn the Horse
and his Rider; ought we not much more to build upon our Rock Christ, that the
Gates of Hell cannot prevail against?

24 Whatever our Guiltiness be, yet when it falls into the Sea of God's
Mercy, it is but like a drop of Blood into the great Ocean.

25 They that would be Christ's Ambassadors, must set their Faces as Flint
against the Devil's Bagagers; as Paul going to Jerusalem, Daniel facing the
Lions, the three Children the Fiery the Furnace, and Luther going to Worms.

26 O how Pleasant is it to the Earth to have the Sun rising on it? But how
much more Pleasant and Sweet is it to us to feel the Son of Righteousness
shining on our Souls?

27 When I do see the Birds of the Air, the Beasts of the Field, the Fish of
the Sea, all as they were Finger-fed from God, what needs me then mistrust that
has an Immortal Soul?

28 God is that great Rock that supporteth Heaven and Earth, and the Godly are
Pillars hewn out of that Rock for Support to the Earth; and at their removal
down it comes. Witness when Noah went into the Ark, and Lot out of Sodom.

29 The Palm Tree and the Camomile, the more they are pressed the richer they
grow; so Christians, the more sanctified Afflictions on Earth, the richer Crown
of Glory in Heaven.

30 Behold the Larks by the dawning of the Day sings Praise to their Maker; O
how much more should Christians, that has the Day Star from high arisen on
their Hearts?

31 God's tender Love and Kindness never fails in giving us, and our tender
Love and Kindness ought not to fail in giving to his.

32 Regeneration is a greater and glorious Work than the whole Creation; for
many that were created are in Hell, but all regenerate are and shall be in
Heaven.

33 It Is good to call upon God in the Day of Trouble; as Jacob did when Laban
was behind him to Rob him, and Esau before him to Kill; yet God made the one to
Bless him, and the other to Kiss him.

34 A good Wife and Children are the best earthly Blessings; as Jacob said to
Esau, these are Wives and Children God has Blessed me with.

35 O how becoming it is to see Christians kind to one another! It Is like the
dew of Heaven; and Christ shows a Pattern of it to his Disciples, desiring them
to Love one another.

36 It Is good to be in Company with the kind Godly, and to desire them to be in
yours; as the two sorrowful Disciples sound going to Emaus, they constrained
Christ to stay, with them, and he opened their Eyes.

37 We may safely expect God in his Way of Mercy to us, when we are in his Ways
of Obedience.

38 O let us give God our Morning Thoughts! For the Comfort and Success of
every Day depends on the Blessing of God.

39 O let us not weary in Well doing! For Religion's Wages is above its Work,
and its Pay above its Pains; Heaven for ever.

40 The Gospel of Peace is a great Blessing, but the Peace of the Gospel is a
greater Blessing.

41 The Way to have any earthly Thing taken from us, and not Blessed, is to set
our Hearts too much on it.

42 The only Way to have our own Wills fulfilled, is to submit to God's Will;
say, Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.

43 He that repelleth the Temptation of unlawful Gain, Gains by that Temptation.

44 Many time God suffers his own to mourn, cry and reflect on themselves, not
finding Rest till they come back, like Noah's Dove, to the Ark of Refuge.

45 Saints are many times least alone when most alone; when Jacob was left
alone he wrestled with God.

46 When we are weak we see what we are in our selves, when we are strong in
Faith we see what we are in God.

47 Nothing deforms a Man so much as Sin, and nothing reforms and adorns so
much as Grace.

48 Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, nor yet is a Christian's Happiness.

49 Since the Fall it has been our Fault not to VVeep; yet too much weeping may
be turned into Sin, in not looking to our Savior for Comfort.

50 Natural Men are Earthly in the use of Heavenly Things, but Spiritual Men
are Heavenly in the use of Earthly Things.

51 Any that would Ride the Post-road to Hell, then let them venture upon the
Bosses of his Bucklers, by Persecuting the People of God. O then haste Human,
mount your Gallows of 50 Cubits! O haste Achitophel and Judas to your Halters!
Haste Ahab and Jezebel to your hungry Dogs! Haste Pharaoh and Herod to the
hungry Worms and Fishes!

52 God is good to us many Times in sending us Crosses, because he makes them
work together for our good.

53 It is the Fate of many Christians to be troubled with vain Thoughts, but
let them beg Grace to drive them away, as Abraham did the Fowls from the
Sacrifice.

54 Believers must Labor to keep themselves from Sin unspotted of the World,
for Heaven it a holy Place, unto which no unclean Thing can enter.

55 To Sin is Heathen-like, to Grieve and Forsake is Saint-like, to Persevere
and Boast is Devillike.

56 A Man may conceive in his Mind Rocks of Diamonds, Mountains of Gold, Heaps
of Pearl, in a Moment, but none is able to conceive the good Things that God
will give to them that Love and Fear him.

This finishes 1000 Proverbs, and 500 Songs, by G. Liddell.

FINIS.

