Lex Talionis. Neque est lex justior ulla Quam necis Artificis art perire sua.
Poor ROBIN turned ROBIN the DEVIL: Being his Exact CHARACTER.
Written by one that had his Friend, formerly twice most egregiously abused by
him, to his great Disparagement, and greater Prejudice:
Now Published upon his Second Attempt to appear again in Print, after he had
been once suppressed by Authority, for his intolerable Abuses, especially, to
one of eminent Quality. And may be very satisfactory to all those that have
been formerly abused: and for diversion of others that detest his wicked
Practices.
The words of a Talebearer are as wounds that go down into the innermost parts
of the Belly, Prove. 18. 8.
HE is a Medler of those things that does not concern him, an Harkner after
other men's faults, a Forgetter of his own; One that endeavors to make a
Laughing Stock of the ill Accidents or Misfortunes of others by Proclaiming,
Printing and Publishing them to the world; he is a Discoverer of his ill
Nature, one that delights in nothing more than in Mischief, an Eves droper, an
Incourager of Tale-bearers, and a prodigious teller of Lies; and, rather than
his story shall want something to make his Reader laugh, to a Molehill of
Truth, he will add a Mountain of lies: He Is the Scab of a Commonwealth, that
many men's fingers itch to pull off and throw in the dirt; he is an Abuser of
men in Authority, especially Constables and their watchmen, upon all occasions
rendering them ridiculous upon the least apprehension of a mistake; a Scoffer at
the Authority he lives under; a Need-not in a Commonwealth, an unnecessary and
troublesome member of the place he lives in, a mere Make bate, an Accuser of the
Brethren, an Advancer of Untruths of the Town, a Padler in the Excrements of
men's Imperfections, a Wounder of Men's Credits, a Robber of persons Reputations;
an Agent for the Devil, the Foreman of his Shop, one that thinks the Devils
work is never well done unless he has the finishing of it; one that would seem
to out-doe him in his own way, who was a Liar from the Beginning; a mere
Rake-shame, one that is never more studious than when he endeavors to set
people together by the ears, and is never better pleased than when he has
wickedly disgraced a man most: one that has more ears than Nature gave him, he
is the Cujus Contrarium to all manner of good, one that Nolens Volens will have
an Oar in another man's Boat; one that will be down right sick if there be no
ill News stirring in the Town, and though he be never so bad, yet the first sad
Disaster, makes him perk up his ears and mend apace, and if the tidings of some
sad misfortune chance to beat upon the Drum of his Ear, he is presently
restored to his former health, and then with the Devils Ho, Ho, Ho, laughs so
loud and so heartily, that then you may easily guess he is pleased to the very
guts. He is the Devils terrestrial Register, an Ingrosser of men's M^sdeeds, the
Herald of Misfortune, Ill Fame, and Shames Chief, the Sower of Sedition, an
Hinderer of Peacemaking, a false Commentator upon men's Actions, an
uncharitable Constructor of things and Accidents, a Perverter of things good in
themselves, into those that are bad; a Tongue-pad, a Town-fop a Common Buffoon,
a Jack-pudding in print, a Fellow made up of Canting and Bumbast, a Coyner of
new words to do the Devils old Work; a Nick-namer of Places, a Miscaller of
Men, a Mis-interpreter of their Actions, an Imposer of Falsities on men's
Belief. One that is any thing but what he should be; so far from a Christian
that he is not a good Moral man; He is the Antipodes to Love, for that covers a
multitude of faults, but he discovers more than all, and makes Proclamation of
it when he has done* a bold and saucy Rascal, a scribbling and impertinent
Fellow: a shame to his Company wherever he is, being an Upholder of such like
himself who march both City and Suburbs to harken after and bring him the
Intelligence of ill News, to supply his great Necessity: an Abuser of his
Betters, worse natured than himself none can be; he is the Opposite to good
manners and good Behavior; an Exalter of Sawciness, a fit Usher, for disorder;
the Offspring of a Rebellion-promoter, an evil speaker of dignified Persons,
as well as the Communalty; Death's Cosin-German, spares none; a Destroyer of
White Paper, an Increaser of Bum-fodder, and the Licensers Income; one that
deserves public Punishment as well as Suppression; or privately to be
Bastinadoed into better Manners, if Ketch the Hangman do not catch him, and
hang him out of the way, to the ease and quiet of the Commonwealth; a Fate, I
am apt to believe has befallen many an honester man than himself, for many of
them rob men but of their Silver, but he robs them of that which is more
precious than Gold. Pro. 22. 1. A good name is rather to be chosen than great
riches: But he acts contrary to the Dictates of Nature it self:

Vnum Os, Natura duas formavit and aures,
Vt plus audiret quam loqueretur homo.
Since of Ills thou act'st the Devil and all,
We Will thee henceforth Robin the Devil call.
Another CHARACTER of Poor Robin.
Written by another Hand, upon the same Occasion, some time before the other;
and now, both sent forth together, to inform the World what kind of Person he
is; and also that there might not be a double Trouble with so inconsiderable a
Fellow.
POOR ROBIN the Devils Secretary, is a little, silly, idle, impertinent lying,
poor hungry Fellow; a miserable Ballad-maker and Character-Monger; a constant
haunter of Tap-houses and Scandalous Places, hatched out of the Spawn of Meriton
Lateroon, a mere Wanderer, having no known or certain habitation; One of Satan's
Secret Council, a Member of the Hellish Cabal, a Promoter of Wicked Designs,
who living by ungodly Gains, is the very Author and Fomenter of Strife,
bringing fresh Coals to put out the fire, Rabshaka and Judas in folo, limned to
the Life. He is a News-monger, an Incendary, One that writes and invents Lies,
to supply his own pinching Necessities: His life is Prophanness, his Belief
Atheism, his Religion Villainy, and his Soul a Tabernacle or Habitation of
Infernal Legions: A grand Contriver and Assistant in Managing of Hells Decrees,
One without whom the Devil would be ill able to carry on his Designs; and who
always takes him into Council when he has any great matter in agitation: he is
a mere ranting Rodomontade, a Vagabond, a Changling, a Detractor from other
men's worth; a Minter of Calumnies and Slanders, a Forger of Abuses, a fellow
made up of nothing but Deceit and Falsehood, Lucifer's Intimate, Secretary and
Spoke's-man to Beelzebub's Council: one having neither Faith or Truth,
ungrateful to his Benefafactors, and a Traitor to his Confederates and Friends,
having neither Credit or Reputation, not caring for, or fearing either God or
Man; An absolute Bundle of Abuses and Villainies, a Shameless Rascal, a a very
Pitiful and sharking fellow, a light-finger'd Animal, a Petty-fogger, a
mercenary Scribler, and Desperate Hector of the Quil, being beholding to
Charity for the Stuffing his Paunch, and filling of his empty Belly, whose
otherwise starved, forlorn, wretched and miserable Carcass must have inevitably
perished. The reward of his Villainies is generally a little Bread and Drink, to
stuff his thin, lean Jaws withal. This his sad course of Living prompts him to
act the greatest Villainies: He, for half a Crown, made a Ballad of his own
Father, as his Mother says (for she was whore enough.) And takes all unlawful
Course for bread to still and quiet the croaking of his ungodly guts, not
valuing who he abuses provided he can get but a meals meat by it. See the
Anabaptist's Champion, their Zeal and their Religion! The Devil, or the worst
of his servants they will entertain into pay, provided that with Tooth and Nail
they will stick to them, in helping them out at a dead lift.

London, Printed in the Year, 1680.


