DEFENSIVE DOUBTS, HOPES, AND REASONS, For refusal of the Oath, imposed by the
sixth Canon of the late Synod. With important Considerations, both for the
penning and publishing of them at this time.

By JOHN LEY, Pastor of Great Budworth in Cheshire.

-- Above all things, my Brethren, swear not,

Jam. 5.12. Falsa Juratio exitiosa est, vera Juratio periculosa est, nulla
Juratio secura est.

August. sermon. 28. de verbis Apostoli. Hereunto is added by the same Author, A
Letter against the erection of an Altar, written above five years ago: And a
case of conscience, touching the receiving of the Sacrament, resolved.

LONDON, Printed by R. Young, for G. Lathum, at the sign of the Bishops head
in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

To the right Worshipful Sir William Brereton, Baronet. Peter Venables,
Esquire, Baron of Kinderton
Knights of the Shire for the County Palatine of Chester. Sir Thomas Smith. And
To the Worshipful Francis Gamull, Esquire.
Burgesses for the City of Chester. John Ley wishes the welfare of this, and
the other World.
Right Worll. and worthy Sirs,
AS the good providence of God, and the good will of your Country have sorted
you together, in the design of public service of the Church and State; so
your united Interests in the cause and composer of this Book, have jointly
rather claimed as a duty, then invited as a courtesy, that I should present
it to public view under all your names. It proposes and pursues many (as I
hope a judicious Reader will upon serious perusal find them) just and weighty
exceptions against the late Oath of the sixth Canon; wherein it waits upon
the wisdom and justice of your Honorable House of Commons, who have voted it,
to vanish like the smoke of a Canon, without a Bullet (making a great sound,
but doing no hurt) to avow your righteous and religious Act therein, against
the mis-conceit of such as, either partially or perversely, misdeeme the
deserved doom which you have passed upon it. And if now (by your hands) it may
come to the eyes of your venerable Associates, it may happily find such
acceptance in their sight, that by your common favor it may have the honor to
appear before the right Honorable Lords of the Upper House of Parliament, and
to represent us (who were most exposed to the peril of the Canonical Decree)
the more capable of the concurrent Grace of you all, in the full and final
abrogation thereof.

And for my self (besides my general engagements, with thousands who owe you
the affectionate observance of public Patriots and Patrons, in the places to
which you are called) the particular favors which I have received from you in
several, oblige me this or any other way (wherein I may do you any
acceptable service) to express my self

Yours, most ready to attend you with humble observance, JOHN LEY.
From my Lodging at the Fountain in Paul's Churchyard, Febr. 22, 1640.
A Letter, declaring the occasion of beginning a manner of proceeding for the
penning and publishing of the Discourse ensuing.
TO The Right Worshipful, and Worshipful, my very reverend and worthy Friends
and Brethren, Mr. Th. M. D. of Chapter Dr. D. D. of R. Mr. R. H. W. of M. and Mr.
Chapter H. R. of W.
and with them, to the rest of my venerable Brethren of the Diocese of
Chester.
My worthy and well beloved Brethren and Friends,
BEsides the Doubts of the Oath proposed in this Book (whereof we must wait
for resolution from our Superiors) there may be some Doubts of the Book it
self, to which it most belongs to me to make answer: and therein, partly to
give satisfaction to you; and partly, to require testification from you, since
to many of you a good part of what I shall say is very well known: and that
with the rest I shall reduce to these four particulars; whereof, most as yet
have either none, or at least but a doubtful apprehension: and wherein it is
meet they should be rightly informed.

1. Concerning the occasion of the discourse ensuing.

2. The presenting of it at first to you; and then to him, to whom it is
inscribed.

3. The addition made in this (I may say) second edition, though It was then
not intended for the Press.
yet but a manuscript.

4. The Reasons, why now I am willing to communicate Copies of it, which before
I was not.

First, for the Occasion, it was this: Some of you, and diverse others (my self
for one) met at W. at the monthly Exercise set up, or upheld (as is
confidently delivered by diverse persons of unquestionable credit) with the good
liking and allowance of our late learned Sovereign, as a godly and grateful
memorial of his Majesty's, and the Kingdoms deliverance from the Powder
Treason.

At one of the Assemblies there, the Bishop of Chester that now is, not long
before he was advanced to the Episcopal Chair, bestowed his pains in the
Pulpit one part of the day, and I mine the other. At our premised meeting,
which was August 18. last past, the service of the day was divided betwixt you
(Mr. Chapter H.) and me, and our minds and tongues united in pressing Peace and
Charity, most needful Themes for these crazie and distracted times.

Our Sermons ended, and some of us invited to a place of convenient repose, the
rest of our Tribe (who were a part of that Congregation) resorted unto us,
every man accompanying his acquaintance, and so making, as it were, a whole
chain of many linkes; and withal, it is not unlike, but that the most that
there met in person, met also in perplexity of mind, by reason of the late
Canonical Oath, and in their desires to be resolved of their Doubts: and they
might have so much more hope thereof, as there were the more at that time, with
whom, in such cases of conscience they might consult.

Howsoever, being so met, that which was the common talk of the Laity, and the
particular trouble of the Clergy, could not but be a principal part of our
discourse at that time; and of that, the most that was said, was the proposal
of a Doubt, Whether the Oath were doubtful, or no? and all of us expressing
but the same conceit (as I verily believe) which every one brought with him,
unanimously consented in an Affirmative answer.

Our next Quaere was, what course should be taken, either that we might not
take it, or that it might be so cleared and qualified unto us, that our
consciences might not be entangled by it; and for that, we resolved to propose
our Doubts of the Oath to the Bishop of the Diocese, and by him to advance
higher (though in the low and humble way of Petition) if there were cause. Then
the Question was, Who should draw up our desires and doubts in writing; and the
company assembled, presently agreed to put that task upon me, which I then
undertook.

This was the worst of that days work, which some (whose place and profession
promised more charity and discretion) have slandered, as a Schismatic
Conventicle, and a seditious Assembly; and have added to their calumnies of us,
comminations of the highest displeasure, and danger against us.

To what height would they have raised their indignation toward us, if we
should have met of purpose to make a common purse to maintain our cause, as
the Bish. Godwins Catal. of Bishops p. 116.
Clergy in Henry the thirds time did, against Boniface Archbishop of
Canterbury: or, should have burnt the new book of Canons, as Hist. of the
Council of Trent. l. 1. p. 12
Luther did the Popes Bull and Decretalls; when a meeting, in it self so
faultlesse and inoffensive, is racked, to make it reach to the height of an
heinous crime.

2. The second particular is the presenting of that, which upon the request of
my Brethren I had performed: first, unto them; which I did the next Exercise
after: (notwithstanding my burden of other business betwixt them both) and
received from them such an attestation and acceptance, upon the reading
thereof, as I may well take for a recompense of greater pains then it cost
me; and which may embolden me to adventure it upon the view of other eyes,
then of professed friends. From my Brethren of the Presbytery, it was next to
be a graduate to the Bishop of Chester: But while that was in deliberation
[when, and by whom to be done] I was informed, that a Letter was written by the
Archbishop of Canterbury to other Bishops, both of this, and the other
Province, not to press the Oath upon any, until the 13. of October: and for
that time it was resolved by some of us (to whose discretion such
considerations were referred) it should be reserved.

Mean while, we had assured news of a Parliament shortly to ensue: That (as
many of us then conceived) so varied the case, that it invited us to betake our
selves to another course then we intended before; and then it was thought fit,
neither so to solicit the Bishop, as if we did principally depend upon his
favor for our freedom from the Oath; nor yet so to pass by him, as to give
cause of suspicion, that he was slighted by us: and therefore about the 14. of
October I brought him the Book at first, especially prepared for his reading;
which I told him, I tendered not to him then as an Agent for the Clergy, but as
of mine own private and particular respect unto my Diocesan: which was such,
that I would not consent (though much importuned) that any should have a Copy
of what I had composed, until it were first offered to his perusal, for which
it was at first intended, and by joint consent concluded among us.

Thirdly, for the addition now made to it, I may say truly, and some of my
Brethren can testify with me, that the most of it was penned before any part
of it was sent to the sight and censure of the Ministers at W. and I therefore
kept back diverse sheets of it of purpose, that it might not be too long for
their leisure, at their first meeting (after it was finished) to read it
together.

And now, since upon notice of more they will not rest content with a part,
lest they should sort me to Act 5.3.
Ananias and Saphyra (for a sacrilegious detention) I am resolved to
communicate the whole first unto you, and then by you unto others.

And for this I am now in the fourth place to render some Reasons; and they are
chiefly these:

First, to gratify my Brethren and Friends, who importunately press me, to
make them partakers of my private Dictates concerning the Oath.

Secondly, to justify our refusal of it, which some have superciliously
censured, as proceeding of simplicity; and some uncharitably, as savouring of
contumacy, or of hypocrisy: as if we did but pretend a tenderness of
conscience; and therefore that we would be sure to take it, rather then suffer
any thing for standing out against it.

Thirdly, to rectify the mistaking of diverse transcripts of my Book from the
first Copy (which are spread abroad in many places, either without my
knowledge, or against my will) some whereof I have seen, and by them have found
out a double falsehood: the one of theft, in stealing of Copies (without my
consent) the other of lying, in putting their ignorant or cursory slips upon
mine account, as if I had made them.

Fourthly, to clear the doubt of some, and to confute the mis-report of
others, who give out, that I am the Author of a Book entitled, Englands
complaint to Jesus Christ against the Bishops Canons; wherein I was a mere
stranger, for the matter of it (until I saw it in print) and am yet for the
maker of it now it is printed; and though such as well know me, will no more
believe it to be mine, then mine Mr. E. B.
ingenuous friend would do (who with his advertisement of that mis-taking,
wrote thus unto me: I am confident, you never wrote it: for, it savours
nothing either of your style, spirit, or judgment. Whereupon, I have made bold
in your name to disavow it) yet for prevention of misprision in others, it will
do well, that this Book be extant as well as that; and so may such, as will
be pleased to compare them, see more difference betwixt them, then betwixt
Menander fecit Andriam and Perinthiam, qui utramvis recte norit, ambas noverit;
non ita sunt dissimili argumento. Terent. in Prolog. in Andr.
Menanders Andria and Perinthia, which, though they were composed in a various
phrase and style, were yet so like, both in their argument and genius of the
Poet, that he that knew the one, must know them both, as sister-births of the
same Authors brain, which I dare confidently aver, no well advised Reader
will suspect of the Book, which modestly discourses of the Doubts of one
Canon, and that Book, which peremptorily condemns them all: and yet, if not
only private fancy, but public fame should father it upon me, I should not
take the matter much to heart, since the other day, The most reverend father
(and for his rare learning, constant preaching, and consonant living, the most
renowned Archbishop of Armagh) told me of an egregious imposture, putting his
name to a late Pamphlet (whereof not so much as one line was his) which passed
abroad a while as a Manuscript, but was presently by printing to proceed to
more public notice, if he had not opportunely procured an Order (from the
Honorable House of Commons in Parliament) to the Master and Company of
Stationers to prevent the impression; whereof (giving me some According to the
Tenor set down, as hereafter follows.
printed Copies of it) he willed me, to give an Advertisement thereof to the
Readers of my Book, that neither himself nor others might be any more abused
by such a fraudulent forgery, and I might say impudent also: for, what
impudence was it to impose such a discourse upon his Fatherhood, a person so
well, so generally known, and not more known, then honored throughout the
Christian world, and yet not by death translated to another life, but alive and
lively, in very good health, nor (for the present) at a remote distance in
Ireland, but in England, in London, where he might be sure to be soon
informed of the wrong, and find a ready way to right himself? Which may be a
considerable occasion and motive, to all men of eminent Abilities (of whose
worth the world has taken notice by their works) to leave a perfect Register
of the legitimate issue of their ingenious and studious conceptions (intended
and prepared for public use) that when they are dead, no suppositious brats
may be thrust in among them, to claim a childs part of their fathers
reputation.

To conclude (for, this short digression ended) I have done with this
Introductory Discourse: If while I endeavor to avoid the inconveniences
forementioned, I expose my self (by a more general view of this discussion
of the Oath) to more variety of censures, which from some are like to be
severe enough (for such as have thought us worthy to be undone, if we dare not
swear, no doubt will entertain these Doubts and Reasons with distaste) I
shall not need any other cordial against their mis-conceits, then to reflect
first upon the integrity of mine intentions, and the fidelity of my performance
of this service; and then upon the considerate subscriptions of such unto it,
as for their quickness of conceit, and soundness of judgment (so far as I
can judge) are as well qualified for the Vocabantur Critici quidam docti, qui
de scriptis aliorum judicabant reponendane effent in Templo Apollinis, an
rejicienda. Er^sio in Epist. Hieron. ad Rustic. tom. 1. page 52.
Critical Chair, as I can conceive them to be, who with a dash of their pen
would cancel what you and many others have confirmed with your hands. To whom,
with the rest of my reverend Brethren, I most willingly remain

A most entire and affectionate Brother, to love and serve you, JOHN LEY.
From my Lodging at the Fountain in Paul's Churchyard, Febr. 23. 1640.
Die Martis, 9. Febr. 1640.
WHereas complaint has been made unto us by James Lord Archbishop of Armagh,
and Primate of all Ireland, that a certain Pamphlet has been lately most
injuriously fathered upon him, and spread abroad under the false title of The
Bishop of Armagh's direction to the house of Parliament, concerning the
Liturgy and Episcopal Government: It is this day ordered in the Commons House
of Parliament, that the Master and Company of Stationers, and all others whom
it may concern, shall take such course for suppressing of the said Book, that
they shall not suffer it to be put in print, or if it be already printed, not
permit the same to be divulged. And if any shall presume to print or publish
the Book abovementioned, That he, or they, shall be then liable to the
censure of the said House.

H. Elsynge Cler. Domus Comm.

A Preface to the READER, written by N. E.
Showing that the Book (concerning the Oath, decreed in the sixth Canon of the
late Synod) as it was penned in good season; so it is now published not out of
season: since it is yet of good use, to diverse purposes, of great and permanent
importance, when both the Oath and Penalty be wholly suppressed.

WHen the Author of this ensuing Treatise composed it, there was (by reason of
the new enjoined Oath) much doubt and distraction among many godly and learned
Ministers; and (for their sakes) among the people also, whereto these Doubts,
and Hopes, and Reasons ministered a seasonable remedy: for, the Doubts put many
out of doubt, that the Oath, as it was framed, was to be refused: the Hopes
(for all that) upheld the heart against despair of safety, from the
commination of the Canon; and the Reasons gave support unto them both: and all
together (with the learned ingenuity and pious modesty, diffused through the
whole frame and style of the work) have so taken the hearts of diverse Divines
of eminent note (for their good parts and great pains in their holy callings,
among whom were some, whose dignity in the Church was by the Canon to be
secured from alteration) as to obtain their hands, for subscription unto it;
and to cause both them and many more to importune the publication of the Book
(though the Oath it self, and Penalty annexed to it, were disanulled) since
the matter and manner of it are both of that kind, which may at any time
entertain a discreet and religious Reader with profit and delight.

For first, albeit the Oath gave the motive to it, yet it is not the Oath that
makes the measure of it: for (besides that) it compriseth many very observable
matters, concerning the purity of Religion (without mixture of Idolatry) the
duties of Christianity, the predominance of Prelates, and privileges of
Presbyters, with many other particulars of moment, worthy of the public view,
if that so offensive, and (in respect of some I may say) formidable Canon, had
never been made.

And for the Oath it self, this Book will present unto the Reader very many
considerable advertisements, which no distance of time will put out of date:
Concerning

First, the Synod of Divines, by whom the Canon was decreed.

Secondly, those by whom it was disliked, when it was known.

Thirdly, their freedom from it, who were in danger by it.

First, for the Synod of Divines, the many and weighty exceptions against the
Oath, give just reason to suspect, that it was not framed by common
consultation among them, but devised by some one, or some few (at the most) who
overawed the rest, and so obtruded it upon them, without their good liking;
though great fear of opposing, and little hope of prevailing; which held them
from making any open resistance against it.

To this purpose has something been said on both sides: for, on the one, it
was told by a Favorite of a man of great power in the Synod (as in praise of
his prudence) that he composed the Canons before the Clergy assembled: and on
the other side (which belongs to the second particular, and leads us to it)
some of the Synod have professed so much dislike of that Canon of the Oath,
that had it been in their power to suppress it, it should never have proceeded
beyond the breath that first put it forth.

And for the learned and pious Composer of these animadversions upon it, though
he were a Clerk of the Convocation at York, he never heard of it, until it
had obtained its final approbation, both in that and the other Province;
wherein yet he was not wanting for the use of fit means, for his due
information: for knowing that the Assembly at London was the Dial, that at
York but the Clock, which was usually set and regulated by it: presently
after his return from the first Session at York, he addressed himself
toward London for intelligence at the first hand, that when the Canons were
transmitted thither, he might be sufficiently instructed (upon good grounds)
to give or deny his assent unto them: and so to do either, that he might not
be alone in that choice, whereto his conscience did incline him.

But being on his journie, he was confidently certified (by the way) that the
Parliament was dissolved, and with that he conceived, both the Convocation and
his Clerkship were expired: and therefore that he was discharged of further
care and pains for such a purpose; and if the cause had not been carried more
by the power of some few, then the approbation of most, it might be matter of
very great marvel, that so many, so great Clerks should give their assents to
a thing (to be assured upon Oath) which is so many ways subject to doubtful
construction.

And this may be a just ground to all judicious and conscionable Divines, to
desire a Synod of another Constitution; wherein there may be more freedom, for
discussion and determination of Ecclesiastical matters, then was in that, or
can be expected in any of that kind.

Besides such as were members of Provincial meetings, there were many more who
were offended at the Oath, not only those who were affrighted with the penalty
(especially the most conscionable Clergy) but many of the Laity (of the best
sort and highest rank) have petitioned, pleaded, and, as it is now commonly
reported, the Honorable House of Commons have voted it down (though the right
Honorable Lords of the Upper House have not yet so far declared their
judgments against it.)

To these this book may do some acceptable service, as a just and complete
Apology against that Canon, which decrees for it, and so severely threatens the
refusal of it) and against them, who so far favor it, as to refer all the
Doubts and Quaeres about it, and Reasons against it, rather to perverse
prejudice of those that find fault with it, then to any just cause of exception
in the Oath it self: adding with great confidence in it, and no less contempt
of such as condemned it, that, If any of the Apostles, yea, or Christ himself
had penned it (a supposition of mere impossibility) such men would yet have
been cavilling against it.

I can name the man that said it, and some what else (not much better to the
same effect) and it may be an Apology likewise for such as dislike it, against
those who have taken upon them by writing to defend it, as containing nothing
in it, that may offend the conscience (if the judgment be not too weak, or
the passion too strong) whose papers have been too passent, and too much
prevailed with some, who have not seen this discourse, wherein the Author
discovers their glosses upon it to be but as the gildings of a rotten Nutmeg,
though he forbear their names, out of respect unto the common peace, and to
their reputations in particular, who must needs suffer with it, so far as they
are opposed as Apologists for it: since as one of them acknowledged (in the
beginning of his answer to the Quaeres of the Ministers of London) that the
noise against the Oath grew every day louder and louder, and that it was loaded
with public and popular infamy: and so it is like he should have more need
of pardon (as for a presumptuous undertaking in that cause, being but a private
person) then that he could bring sufficient aid to justify the Oath, which
(not without just cause) had incurred so much condemnation.

Thirdly, if we consider their freedom from it, who were in danger by it and
they were many good Ministers, who (if the swearing Canon had continued in
force) must have suffered loss of their liberty, and livelihood; and very many
good people, who were like to be deprived of their loving and laborious
Ministers) this Book may be of very good use, as a ready memorial of such a
mercy to them all, as cannot be forgotten, without wicked ingratitude: first
to God, and next to those worthy and honorable persons, who have been the
patrons of their present comfort, and protectours of them from the pressure of
this rigorous innovation: and unworthy were they (surely) of so great a favor,
if they should think, that when the Oath is condemned, they are forthwith
discharged from any farther thought or consideration upon it.

For mine own part, said a worthy Divine (and I am of his mind) I shall
endeavor always to keep such an impression both of the peril and
disappointment of the project, for which the Canon was contrived, that the All
Souls day, a day of high estimation with the Papists; which festivity would
(no doubt) have advance^ to a higher degree of jollity if it had been (as it
was like to be) a day (...) distress to the best Minister^ whom they account as
their worst enemie^
second of November (the day designed for the execution of the decree of that
Canon) shall be to me as one of the days of Purim, for hearty thanksgiving for
deliverance from it; and this Book shall supply me with proper lessons for the
service of that day.

Whereto, as for the matter it is very pertinent; so for the style and manner
of writing, it cannot but be pleasing to an ingenuous and well composed
spirit, since it runs (with an equitable temper of judicious moderation)
without all mixture of humor or passion, and neither mounts too high, with any
strain of presumption, nor coucheth too low by any servile insinuation.

It may be, some will conceive it has too many relishes of reverence to
Bishops, because the tenure of their Authority is therein questioned, and the
abuse of it deservedly disliked by the best of all sorts; but that will be no
matter of exception, if they consider

1. That when the book was first penned, and openly avowed by the Author,
those Canonical Dictators (who composed the Oath, and propounded it to the
rest for their ratification) were at the highest pitch of Ecclesiastical
Prelation: and that their power came forth armed with a new plantation of
terrible Canons.

2. That they have long enjoyed, and yet are possessed of an awful pre-eminence
over their Brethren.

3. That however their callings be accounted of, the persons of many of them,
in respect of many excellent endowments in them, are in good manners and
accustomed civility, to be entertained with respective terms, which have been
allowed even to those who have been thought bad enough to be deposed from
their Episcopal dignities; as by this learned Author, out of the Council of
Calcedon upon another occasionis observed in another work (which, I hope, ere
long will come to light.) The words of the Council, as we have them delivered
by Evagr. Scho^st ^ 2. c. 4.
Evagrius, are these: It seems good to us, and no doubt God approves the
same, that Dioscorus the most reverend Bishop of Alexandria (if so please our
Lord the Emperor) Juvenalis the most reverend Bishop of Jerusalem, Tealassius
the most reverend Bishop of Armenia, should be punished, and alike deposed from
their Bishoprics, by the sentence and judgment of the Council, and be at
the Emperors pleasure.

To conclude (for this Book) if there were any need to commend it to common
acceptance, by especial approbation, I could (had I the Authors consent to
this purpose) produce many Letters of such as have read it, and are best able
to judge of it; but that would be in this case a superfluous service; and it
will be enough to take notice of one of them, which is as follows:

Reverend Sir,
YOur Treatise of the Oath is a very excellent Comment upon a bad Text, fit to
be made public for the common good, not only for the present, but for after
times. And as was said (by one) of Adams fall, that it was foelix culpa, in
that it gave occasion to the manifestation of so great a mercy to mankind as
followed thereupon; so may I say of the unhappy Oath (unhappy in respect of it
self) that it was foelix Juramentum, an happy Oath, in respect it induced the
production of such a profitable discourse upon it; very profitable doubtless,
if it may become as universal as it is useful, which is the humble and hearty
desire of him that professes himself

Yours in all offices of a friend and servant, G.J.


Having had opportunity to peruse many such Letters, I have made choice of the
shortest, because I would not (any longer) withhold the Reader from the
principal provision prepared for him: whereto I now shall willingly dismiss
him.

N.E.

CAN. 6. An Oath enjoined for the preventing of all Innovations in Doctrine and
Government.
THis present Synod (being desirous to declare their sincerity and constancy in
the profession of the Doctrine and Discipline already established in the Church
of England; and to secure all men against any suspicion of revolt to Popery, or
any other superstition) decrees, that all Archbishops, Bishops, and all other
Priests, and Deacons, in places exempt, or not exempt, shall before the second
of November next ensuing, take this Oath following, against all Innovation of
Doctrine or Discipline; and this Oath shall be tendered them, and every of them,
and all others named after this Canon, by the Bishop in person, or his
Chancellor, or some grave Divines named and appointed by the Bishop under his
Seal; and the said Oath shall be taken in the presence of a public Notary,
who is hereby required to make an Act of it, leaving the Universities to the
provision which follows.

The OATH is,
I A. B. do swear, that I do approve the Doctrine and Discipline or
Government, established in the Church of England, as containing all things
necessary to salvation: And that I will not endeavor by my self, or any
other, directly or indirectly, to bring in any popish Doctrine, contrary to
that which is so established: Nor will I ever give my consent to alter the
Government of this Church, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes and Archdeacons,
etc. as it stands now established, and as by right it ought to stand; nor yet
ever to subject it to the usurpations and superstition of the Sea of Rome. And
all these things I do plainly, and sincerely acknowledge, and swear,
according to the plain and common sense, and understanding of the same words,
without any equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever.
And this I do heartily, willingly and truly upon the faith of a Christian. So
help me God in Jesus Christ.

Concerning the Oath, and Penalty thereof, imposed by the sixth Canon of the
late Synod.
DOubts, and Hopes, with the Reasons of them both, for the most part delivered
into the hands, and intended wholly to be presented to the prudent and religious
consideration of the reverend Father, John L. Bishop of Chester, in the names
of the Divines, Physicians, and Schoolmasters of his Diocese. page 1.

1. General DOUBT.
1. Doubts in General.
Whether this Oath (if it be tendered and taken) be not a taking of the Name of
God in vain, against the third Commandment. page 3. 2. Whether this Oath may
be taken in faith, without which, the taking is sin, Romans 14.23. page 11. 3.
Whether the sixth Canon, as it is charged with this Oath, and Penalty, be not
like to cross the chief end, whereat his Majesty aimed, in granting his
Commission for a Convocation or Synod. page 11.
1. Particular DOUBT.
1. Doubts in Particular.
What is meant by Discipline and Government, whether the same things, or no;
and, if the same, what they be. page 14. 2. What is meant by the Church of
England. page 16. 3. Why the Discipline is linked with the Doctrine of the
Church of England, for necessity of salvation. page 18. 4. What is meant by
Popish Doctrine. page 32. 5. What establishment of Doctrine is here meant; and
how far it may be said to be established. page 39. 6. whether the degrees
here specified, be propounded to be allowed in the same, or in a different
degree of assent and approbation. page 43. 7. What Deanes are here meant. page
44. 8. What is the Authority or Government of a Cathedral Deane. page 45. 9.
What is the Authority or Government of a Deane Rural. page 48. 10. What is the
Authority or Government of Archdeacons. page 51. 11. Whether we may safely take
a new Oath, with an etc. page 55. 12. How far the etc. is to be extended,
when it is expressly declared. page 56. 13. What Governors are included in the
etc. whether the King, as Supreme, be altogether omitted, or implicitly
contained in it. page 56. 14. Who, and what Governors they be. page 59. 15.
Whether the establishment of the Adjuncts, or the not necessary appendences of
Bishops be to be sworn unto in this Oath. page 62. 16. What the Right is, by
which the Government is meant to stand. page 65. Of Archbishops and Patriarchs.
page 71. 17. How far this perpetuity propounded is to be applied to the
Discipline or Government of the Church. page 79. 18. Why we should swear
against consent, to alter the Government of the Church. page 84. 19. Whether,
if we should thus swear, we should not be entangled with contradiction to our
Governors, and to our selves. page 85. 20. Why in this part of the Oath
mention is made rather of the Sea of Rome, then of the Church of Rome. page 92.
21. How we can swear to a plain and common sense and understanding of the
Oath. page 94. 22. What willingness is required in the taking of this Oath.
page 95. 23. How the Doubts of the Oath may be resolved and cleared. page 96.
24. Why the sons of Noblemen are excepted and privileged from taking this
Oath, when they take the degrees of Masters of Arts. page 103. 25. Concerning
the difference, betwixt the command and commination of the Canon. page 106.
Our HOPES.
Our Reasons, and Grounds of them are four: 1. Reason grounded on Piety. page
112. 2. The second on Charity. page 116. 3. On Equity. page 120. 4. On
Policy. page 122.


Concerning the Oath and penalty thereof, imposed by the sixth Canon of the
late Synod.
Doubts, and Hopes, with the Reasons of them both, for the most part delivered
into the hands, and wholly intended to be presented to the prudent and
religious consideration of the reverend Father, John L. Bishop of Chester, in
the names of the Divines, Physicians, and Schoolmasters of his Diocese.

THe imposition of an Oath (being regularly made to be a seal of faith to
those that impose it) does reasonably presuppose as much satisfaction and
confidence in him, that does take it (touching the manner and meaning thereof)
as by such a sacred attestation, may be set upon the mind of him that does
tender it. For, as the imposer expects thereby to be assured of the
intention and integrity of the taker of the oath; so he that takes it (that
he may the better imprint that persuasion in him) should first be assured
himself, that with a safe conscience it may be taken. An hypocritical oath
(we confess) may beget a belief, but it is not lawfully begotten by any that
does not swear in sincerity.

The due consideration hereof has taken up our most intentive thoughts, which
in their issue have arrived at this resolution of our reverend brethren the
Professors of Aberdene: The general demands of the Ministers and Professors
of Aberdene, p. 37.
We ought (say they) to judge of those things we are to swear to, with the
strict and inquisitive judgment of verity, and to ponder duly, and to propound
particularly and fully to others (especially to those who require our oath) to
satisfy our consciences there anent, and to answer all the Doubts and Reasons,
which make us unwilling and afraid to give our assent thereto.

And for this purpose especially, we are to make our address to your
Lordship, by direction of our late Conference at Hampton Court, p. 57.
learned Sovereign, and of the Fathers of our Church, in these words, The
Preface to the book of Common Prayer, page 2. printed 1625.
For as much as nothing can almost be so plainly set forth, but doubts may
arise in the use and practice of the same, to appease all such diversity (if
any such arise) and for Resolution of all doubts concerning the manner how to
understand, do, and execute this book (scil. the book of Common Prayer) the
parties that so doubt, or diversely take any thing, shall resort to the Bishop
of the Diocese, who by his discretion shall take order for the quieting and
appeasing the same -- and if the Bishop himself be in doubt, he may send for
resolution thereof to the Archbishop.

What is here expressly prescribed (touching the explanation and practice of
that book) we conceive does vertually belong to our present case, concerning
the Oath by the sixth Canon lately imposed: and thereof we make bold to
present to your Lordship these doubts ensuing; which if you please not to
answer your self, we humbly beseech you to transmit them to an higher Judge,
with your favorable testimony of us that move them, as of men (for a good
part) well known to you to be studious of the public peace, and no way
affected to faction or novelty, which you may charitably conceive of the rest,
whom you know not; since all of us agree (not only as brethren among our
selves, but as sons to the reverend Fathers of the Church) to keep both the
Kings and the Churches highway, in a graduall promotion of our scruples
toward due satisfaction; which thus we propound, beginning first with the
general doubts, and so proceeding to doubts in particular.

THE OATH. I A.B. do swear, that I do approve, etc.
1. General Doubt. Whether this Oath (if it be tendered and taken) be not a
taking the Name of God in vain, 1. General Doubt.
against the third Commandment?

THE REASON.
BEcause, as we suppose, there is no need of it (in respect of Ministers
especially) for security either of Doctrine or Discipline against Innovation:
for Doctrine (as against the Papists, the principal enemies unto it) the Laws
of the Land, and Constitutions of the Church (without this Oath) sufficiently
provide, if they be answerably executed: and for such, if they be conscionable,
they will not take it; if unconscionable, (though they take it) they will not
keep it: for they will easily be persuaded to slight this Oath, as they do
the oath of Videre non potuit, si Pontifex juramentum dissolverit, omnes illius
nexus, sive de fidelitate Regi praestanda, sive de dispensatione non admittenda
diffolutos fore. -- Imo juramentum injustum neminem obligat, sed ipso facto
nullum est. Lysim. Nican. page 54. ex Pascenio.
Allegiance, whereof some of them show how the cautions of it against
equivocation, mental reservation, and Papal dispensations may be eluded, and
say, that the Oath, as unjust (so soon as it is taken) is presently nullified
ipso facto.

But for Ministers especially, it seems unto us to be altogether needless;
since they, having according to the Can. 36. and 37.
Canons of the year 1603. subscribed to the Kings Supremacy, the Articles of
Religion, and the Book of Common Prayer, and of Ordination, with all their
contents (wherein the order of Bishops, and degree of Archbishops is contained;
and which is compass enough for a well composed conscience) are Can. 38. see
also Can. 8.
sentenced (if they revolt from their subscription) first, to Suspension;
secondly, to Excommunication; thirdly, to Deposition from the Ministry. Rigor
enough for verbal commination, and (in respect of some degrees of offense
recorded in the Canon) somewhat too much for real execution; so that there is
no need of more security by assent to the things required, then the
subscription to the three Articles of the 36. Canon, and the severity of the
38. Canon against such as revolt from that ratification.

And, by that we read in the Archbishops late reply to A.C. it seems
confession and subscription are enough (for that we profess in point of faith)
to give satisfaction and assurance of our sincerity, even to a professed
adversary; for, when A.C. had said, Archb. Laud in his relation of his
conference with Fisher, p. 326.
that it is not fufficient to beget a confidence, in this case to say we
believe the Scriptures, and the Creeds, he returns him this answer:

But if we say it, you are bound in charity to believe us; for I know no other
proof of faith, but confession of it, and subscription to it: and for these
particulars, we have made the one, and done the other; so it is no bare
saying, but you have all the proof that can be had, or that ever any Church
required.

If his Lordship had remembered this, at the late Synod, it may be he would not
have thought it meet to require us to swear beyond our confession and
subscription formerly made; for why should he, or the rest of the Synod, have
less faith and charity to entertain our testification, then we may justly
expect from our Popish opposites, or require more of us then any Church ever
did hitherto?

Long before these Canons were set forth, and Queen Elisabeth began her reign
November. 17. an. 1558. and these were published ann. 1561.
soon after the reformation of Religion by Queen Elisabeth, there were (we
confess) certain protestations to be made, promised, and subscribed by them
that were afterward to be admitted to any office, room, or cure in any
Church, or other place Ecclesiastical.

But we conceive (besides other differences to be touched under another title)
that neither these protestations are equivalent to such a solemn oath, as now
is required of us, nor that there is such need of it now, as there was of them
at that time.

Object. If it be said, that in these times there is such division and
distraction among us, that there is need to fasten us together by such a sacred
bond as that of the Canon:

Answ. We think it reasonable to reply, That neither the want of such an oath
was the cause of the distemper of the times, nor that the urging of it will be
a convenient cure thereof; but rather the contrary: since there is more
agreement betwixt peace and love, which may best be preserved where offensive
things are not urged; then betwixt love and compulsion, especially, if (as of
this oath it is conceived) it incroach upon the conscience, without any great
need (as from them that require it) or without sufficient ground to satisfy
such as should receive it.

And we see by the operation of it already, daily producing more and more
dislike of it, that it is not like to be a remedy against any malady already
discovered; but rather a means to exasperate the disease (though this be
besides the intention of them that propound it) whereof there was the less
need: because, as our learned and religious brethren the Divines of Aberdene
have observed, General Demands of the Ministers and Professors of Aberdene,
page 29.
There be other means more effectual for holding out of Popery (and so of
any other unlawful Innovation) in which we ought to confide more then in all
the vows and promises of men: yea also, more then in all the united forces of
all the subjects of this Land: to wit, diligent preaching and teaching of the
word, frequent prayer to God, humbling of our selves before him, and amendment
of our lives and conversations, and arming our selves against our adversaries,
by diligent searching of the Scriptures, whereby we may increase in the
knowledge of the truth, and in ability to defend it against the enemies of it.

These have been the chief means to advance both the Doctrine of truth, and
the Discipline of manners; and they will be the best means to hold them up
still: with them there will be no need, without them none aid by oaths of this
kind.

There be some that say, This Oath was framed for trial how men stand affected
to the present government, and whether they be inclined to such a change in the
Ecclesiastical state for Doctrine or Discipline, as tends to disturbance of
the civil government also, especially to derogation from his Majesty's
Authority: this is partly employed in the Preface of the Oath, which begins
thus; This present Synod, being desirous to declare their sincerity and
constancy in the profession of the Doctrine and Discipline established in the
Church of England, and to secure all men against suspicion of revolt to Popery,
or any other superstition, decrees, etc. -- and in this respect they conceive
the Oath is of necessary use. To such as thus plead for it, we think it meet
to make this answer,

1. Concerning the venerable Synod, that though some persons in it, being
suspected of unsound Doctrine, of a Popish strain, might do very well to give
all due and probable satisfaction, to acquit themselves of that imputation
(wherein we are persuaded of some that they have been untruly traduced) yet we
conceive this Oath not so pertinent to that purpose, as is alleged; because
the third Canon, which insisteth much in the discovery and pursuit of Papists,
and none else, imports more opposition to Popery then this sixth Canon does,
which requires the Oath; since (as we shall manifest in another place) it
comes with a deeper charge against those who are the greatest Adversaries of
Popery, then against Papists themselves.

Secondly, for the other part of the Oath concerning Discipline, or the
government by Archbishops, etc. we apprehend no need of an Oath, to declare the
sincerity and constancy of the Synod in that respect; for who makes doubt, but
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, and Archdeacons (who carry most sway in all our
Synods) are willing enough to maintain their dignity and authority, and
unwilling to subject either of them to Papal usurpations. He is a man of
little faith who will not take their bare word for that, without an Oath, or
will require so much; for no reasonable man can think otherwise of them,
though they say nothing.

For we cannot imagine, if it were but for the Archbishops own sake, that he
(sitting as President of the Synod) would ever submit to any usurpations of the Sea of Rome; since he knows, and would have others know from him (for he
has published it in print) that the Pope has acknowledged Pope Urbane the
second, accounted my worthy Predecessor Saint Anselme, as his own Compeere;
and said he was the Apostle and Patriarch of the other world. So Archbish. Laud
in his relation of his conference with Fisher, p. 171.
Anselme, a worthy Predecessor of his in the Sea of Cant. for his own
compeere, the Apostle and Patriarch of the other world.

And he shows himself willing enough to take his Holiness at his word, and
to keep him out from all command over the Britain Church, alleging Ibid. ex
Guide. Pancirol.
that it was never subject to the Sea of Rome, having a Primate of its own;
and that Primate for the present is himself.

Thirdly, for others, this Oath can be no good Criterion, to try men's sincerity
to either Doctrine or Discipline; for many things by diverse may be believed,
liked, and preferred, before any other of that kind (so that they would be
loath to change them) and yet may they be unwilling to take an Oath for
constancy to them.

For instance, we believe kneeling at prayer to be lawful, laudable, and the
best gesture wherein to present our devotions to God; yet we would not be put
to swear never to consent to a constitution for standing at prayer, since for
it there is, first, Mar. 11.25 Luke 18.11.
Scripture; secondly, a Decree in the first Consona and conveniens per omnes
Ecclesias custodienda constitutio est, ut stantes ad orationem vota Domino
reddamus. Council. Nicen. 1. Can. 20.
Nicen Council; thirdly, a continued practice of it in the Church for From
before Tertullians time, until Anselme Archbish. of Cant.
many hundred of years together.

Fourthly, many of those who, in regard of the manifold doubts involved in the
Oath, are afraid to take it, have given better evidence of their sincerity
concerning the state, both ecclesiastical and civil, then can be expected of
most that take the oath (without any doubt or examination at all) and if yet
there be doubt of them, they may be put to the trial of the first Canon
concerning the Kings Authority, and the eight made for preaching for
conformity, both decreed by this last Synod, which may be sufficient for full
satisfaction without an Oath; and yet they that dare not be peremptory in
every particular (in those Canons determined) may for all that be as far
from all disposition to trouble either Church or State with any Innovation, as
they who would set the seal of an Oath to every line of them.

Fifthly, though we doubt not, but diverse who have taken the Oath be very
learned, grave, and godly persons, and have done it (as they conceive) with due
consideration, and good conscience; yet it cannot be denied, but many may be
too forward to swear, without any care or use of either: either out of hope to
be held very heartily affected to those who have means to promote them (the
hope whereof, as Aeneas Silvius observed, made more to adhere to the Pope, who
gave preferments, then to the Council, who had none to give) or out of fear
of their dis-favour, who have power to lay heavy pressures upon them.

And in respect of such the Oath is of no use or force, since the same
affections (not regulated by Reason and Religion) will incline (with the
alteration of times) to quite contrary effects.

Lastly, so many of all sorts, both of the Clergy and Laity; yea, many of
those who hold Episcopal imparity the best government of the Church, and are
no way addicted to the Presbyterian Discipline, dislike this Oath so much, that
howsoever this Canon may discover some difference betwixt those, whose lot the
wise man shows may be alike ( viz. betwixt him that swears, and him that
fears an oath, Eccles. 9.2.) yet not that difference which may be cause
either of assurance of them that take it, to the doctrine or government of the
Church, or of just jealousy or suspicion of them that refuse it.

2. General Doubt.
Whether this Oath may be taken in faith, 2. General Doubt.
without which the taking is sin. Romans 14.23.

THE REASON.
BEcause it comprehends so many things of several kinds (and diverse of them
unknown unto most of us) that though we be ready to believe, and receive some
of them fingle, our faith cannot fadome them altogether; and so we cannot
swear without doubting: and if doubtful swearing be as dangerous as
doubtful eating (as we conceive it is, and so may fear we may be damned for
it by the doom of the Apostle in the forecited place) we can neither with
confidence nor safety take this Oath, until we be better resolved of the true
meaning thereof; and so (as it seems to us) a superfluous Oath, it may prove
to the takers a perilous Oath.

3. General Doubt.
Whether the sixth Canon, 3. General Doubt.
as it is charged with this Oath and penalty, be not like to cross the chief
end whereat his Majesty aimed in granting his Commission for a Convocation or
Synod.

THE REASON.
BEcause in his Royal Declaration (which he was pleased to prefixe before the
late Canons) he faith he gives leave for Ecclesiastics to assemble, and
being assembled, The Kings Declaration prefixed before the Canons. page 8.
to confer, treat, debate, consider, consult, and agree of, and upon Canons,
Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions, as they should think necessary and
convenient to this end, viz. for the honor and service of Almighty God, and
for the good and quiet of the Church, the Ibid. page 10.
end and purpose by his Majesty limited and prescribed to the Convocation or
Synod; and how this Oath sorteth to this end, we appeal to the public report
of most Counties in the Kingdom, wherein (besides the Ministry) the people
neither of the worst sort for condition, nor for conversation; nor the fewest
for number, express much discontent and trouble of mind at the proposal of it.

Hereby we impute no disobedience to the reverend Prelates and Clergy
assembled; for we conceive they had no thought of opposition therein, to the
pious purpose of his sacred Majesty; nor any imprudence, since, as they
believed themselves of the Oath, they might probably hope of acceptance with
others, and (if generally accepted) that such effects might follow as they
projected.

But if they do not, their discretion will direct them to vary their course as
times and occasions require. For, if the Church in this world be like unto a
ship upon the sea (in which respect it is likened to Arcam fuisse Ecclesiae
imaginem certum est, test Petro. 1 Pet. 3. Calv. in Genes. 6.
Noah's Arc) their Acts, and aims of Government of it, may be sometimes
disappointed by the indisposition of the people to comply with them; as the
purpose of the Pilot by the distemper of the weather, who, when he reasonably
thinks it meet to hoise up sail, may be soon after induced to strike sail,
for the avoidance of inconvenience or danger: of this prudent accommodation of
the Acts of Authority to the times, and their uncertain inclinations and
events, we find manifold examples, both in the Civil and Ecclesiastical
estate. Thus much of the Doubts in general.

Our Doubts in particular.

The Doubts hitherto proposed touch not upon any branch of the Oath in
several, Doubts in particular.
or of the appurtenances to it, but reach to the whole, as taken together;
those that follow arise out of particular consideration, first, of the parts of
the Oath; secondly, of the explication of it; thirdly, of the persons that are
to take it; fourthly, of the penalty attending upon it.

1. Of the first part of the Oath.
I A.B. do swear, 1. Of the parts of the Oath.
that I do approve of the Doctrine, Discipline, or Government of the Church of
England, as containing all things necessary to salvation.

WE are not desirous, without just ground ministered unto us, to multiply Doubts
upon the Text of the Oath; and therefore we take it for the present, that by
Doctrine is meant that to which the Clergy are required to subscribe by the 36.
Canon, especially the 39. Articles of Religion. But for Discipline or
Government, our Doubt may be

THE DOUBT.
What is meant by Discipline or Government, 1. Particular Doubt.
whether the same things, or no; and, if the same, what they be?

THE REASON.
BEcause in diverse Authors we find them many times distinguished; but there
they seem to be the same. The word The points of Discipline, Government, and
Policy of the Church, etc. The Kings large Declaration, p. 330.
Policy is taken with them into society of the same signification by his
Majesty, in his late large Declaration.

And all three signify (with reference to the Church) Ecclesiastical
callings, ordinances, and the exercise and application of them, to such as are
subject to them both: wherefore they that are best acquainted with them all,
style their books of them indifferently, of Mr. Travers or Udals Eccles.
Discipline.
Ecclesiastical Discipline, Dr. Bridges his defense of the government of the
Church.
Church Government, and Mr. Hookers Eccles. Policy.
Ecclesiastical Policy: and in a large sense the term Discipline contains
them The dispute against English Popish Ceremonies, c. 8. sect. 8. as it is
cited in the Scottish Duplies. p. 93.
all. And so it is taken by Archbishop Whitgifts Reply to T.C. page 372. So
also in the History of the Council of Trent, l. 2. p. 135. And Bishop Hall of
Episcopacy, part. 3. p. 4.
Archbishop Whitgift, where he reduces all that concerns Religion to
Doctrine and Discipline; and so it seems they do who composed the Oath, as
appears by their entrance into it.

And though sometimes that word be strictly taken for the censure of manners,
or correction of offenders (as in the Preface of the Communion Book usually
read upon Ashwednesdaies) yet in a large sense (and that very familiar) it is
put for the whole policy or government of the Church: whether -- of which
Discipline the maine and principal parts were these; a standing
Ecclesiastical Court to be established, perpetual Judges in that Court to be
their Ministers: others of the people, twice so many in number as they,
annually chosen to be Judges with them in the same Court. Master Hooker,
Praefat. of Eccles. Polit. page 5. Master Cartwr. Archbish Whitgist. Rep. p. 2.
Presbyteriall, as in Geneva; or Episcopal, as with us; a principal part
whereof is Hierarchicall Imparity: in that sense it was said by Master Master
Mountag. Appello Caesarem, p. 108.
Mountague, That the Synod at Dort in some points condemns the Discipline of
the Church of England, meaning especially the Government by Bishops; and so
also did the Dominus Episcopus Landavensis -- de Disciplina paucis monet,
nunquam in Ecclesia obtinuisse Ministrorum paritatem non tempore Christi
ipsius, etc. sic Synod. Dord. sessione 145. April. 30. Antemerid.
Bishop of Landaffe take it, when in answer to him, and confutation of him, he
repeated the defense made by himself, for the Hierarchy of the English Church,
in that Synod, noting in few words, concerning the Discipline, That the Church
never had a parity of Ministers, no not in Christ's time, wherein there were the
twelve Apostles, superiors to the 72. Disciples, which he shows was not
contradicted by that Synod. In the same sense it is used by Patres non
volentes, sed nescientes, non per Apostasiam aut contemptum, sed per
infirmitatem and ignorantiam lapsi sunt, qui in Disciplina aberrarunt. Parker
de Polit Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 8. where by Discipline must be understood the
Government by Bishops.
others, who are not of the same mind in the point of Episcopacie.

The observation of this imparity, in giving precedence to Superiors, is
called Discipline, in the Scimus inviolate permansisse Ecclesiae Disciplinam,
ut nullus fratrum prioribus suis se auderet anteponere. Council. Milevitan. Can.
13.
thirteenth Canon of the Milevitan Council: the Ceremonies also in rule and
practice, are reduced to Discipline in the prefatory Declaration before the
Communion Book, under this title [Of Ceremonies, why some abolished, some
retained] where it is said, that some of them do serve to decent order, and
godly discipline: and again, without some ceremoni^s it is not possible to
keep any order, or quiet discipline in the Church; which implies both the
constitution and observation of them: and to this acception of the words
Discipline and Government in this Oath we rather incline; but cannot of our
selves so certainly resolve it, as that we dare swear it.

DOUBT 2.
What is meant by the Church of England? 2. Particular Doubt.


THE REASON.
BEcause of the ambiguity of the term Church, which is variously See Doctor
Downham in the defense of his Sermon. lib. 2. c. I. p. 4. Master Jacob in his
book of the necessity of Reform. the Minist. and Cerem. Assert. 1. page 6. with
others.
distinguished; but especially, because the new Canons bring in a new acception
of that word (new in respect of the language of Protestant Divines) for in the
fourteenth Canon, where caution is given concerning commutation of penance, by
the Bishop, or his Chancellor, there is this proviso, That if the crime be
publicly complained of, and do appear notorious, that then the office shall
signify to the place from whence the complaint came, that the Delinquent has
satisfied the Church for his offense.

The satisfaction is by the payment of a pecuniary mulct, that is made to the
Bishop, or his Chancellor; either of them then, or both together seems to
be called the Church in that Canon: and that contraction of a word of such a
large comprehension (as the right acception of it requires) might breed some
suspicion of symbolizing with the Popish Dialect (though the sense be not
Popish) wherein by an intensive Synecdoche, that which is most extensive, and
diffused all over the world, is shrunk up into the person of one man, the
Pope. But because the matter of commutation in that Canon, is of a narrower
compass then either Doctrine or Discipline in this, we may take the word
Church in a larger acception; and that may be either for the Clergy in
general, when it is used by way of distinction from the Laity, or as the 139.
Canon decrees it [The Church representative in a Synod which Episcopi sunt
Ecclesia representativa, ut nostri loquuntur. Bellar. l. 3. de Eccles. c. 14.
Archbishop Laud seems to take the word Church for the Bishops, in the Epistle
Dedicatory before his Star Chamber Speech, where he makes request in the
Churches name, that it may be resolved by the reverend Judges, that keeping of
Courts, and issuing of process in the Bishops names -- are not against the
laws of the Realm. fol. penult. p. 1.
Papists restrain to Episcopal Prelates] Or as the 19. Article takes it, A
visible congregation of faithful men, in which the pure Word of God is
preached, and the Sacraments duly administered: Or as in the 35. Article, it may
stand for the place where the people are assembled, and holy offices performed;
but which of these, or whether any other sense of the word [Church] be meant
in this place, we leave it to those, who have authority to interpret the Oath,
to resolve.

DOUBT 3.
Why the Discipline is linked with the Doctrine of the Church of England for
necessity of salvation. 3. Particular Doubt.


THE REASON.
BEcause it seems to us, to coast somewhat toward the conceit of Franciscus
a Sancta Clara, Provincial of the minorite Friars, who holds, Ubi nulli
praeesse solent Episcopi, deesse debent Presbyteri; hos si domas quam
miserenda, quaeso, and horrenda sunt quae necessario subsequentur: nam ubi
nulli sunt Presbyteri, nulla erunt and Sacramenta, nisi forte Matrimonium, and
Baptismus. Franc. a Sancta Clara Apolog. Episcop. page 151.
That where Bishops do not rule, there are no Presbyters: where no Presbyters,
no Sacraments. He excepteth (according to the tenet of his Church) Matrimony
and Baptism; the former as a Sacrament, the later as a Sacrament, and (more
then that in the Popish opinion) as necessary to salvation; and he so far
enforces this necessity, as to say, Episcoporum necessitatem inficiari nihil
aliud est quam Dominicae pas^ionis irritationem subintroducere, nostrumque
redemptionis piaculum evacuare, Ibid. page 152.
That to deny the necessity of Episcopacy, is nothing else, but to bring in the
irritation of the passion of our Lord, and to evacuate the virtue of his
redemption; which is in effect (as Doctor du Moulin wrote to Bishop Andrews)
Hoc asserere nihil aliud esset, quam omnes nostras Ecclesias addicere Tartaro.
Pet. du Moulin. cpist. 2. Episc. Wintonien. page 173. opusc.
to damn the Reformed Churches of France and other Countries, to the pit of
Hell: which being brought in (as a consequence of the Bishops Tenet of the
Authority of Bishops) that reverend Prelate very wisely and religiously
shunneth, saying, Caecus sit, qui non videat stantes sine ea Ecclesias; ferreus
sit, qui salutem iis neget. Episc. Winton. Resp. ad epist. 2. Pet. du Moulin.
page 176. opusc.
He wants his sight, that sees not Churches standing without that Discipline:
and has an iron heart, that consents not that they may be saved: and
therefore our late learned Sovereign King James, (lest he should be mistaken in
some of his speeches, of some of those, who had no good conceit of the
Discipline of the English Church) when his monitory Preface (wherein he
touches most upon such matters) was published in Latin, that he might not
be thought to condemn the Churches, whose Discipline is different from ours:
he expressly professed, Puritanorum nomine -- Ecclesias apud exteros reformatas,
earumveregimen non designari -- mihi est decretissimum rebus alienis me non
immiscere, sed illas reformatae Religionis libertati permittere, sic ad fin.
Praefat. monitor. in 8o. printed Land. 1609.
That by that he had said, therein he intended neither reproach nor reproof
to the Reformed Churches, or to their form of Government -- but left them free
to their Christian liberty: And when the Bishop of Landaffe asserted the
Ecclesiastical Imparity of the Church of England (at the Synod of Dort) he
did not seek to obtrude it as necessary to salvation; but used this caution in
the conclusion of his speech, Haec non ad harum Ecclesiarum offensionem, sed ad
nostrae Anglicanae defensionem. The joint attestation, that the Discipline of
the Church of England was not impeached at the Synod at Dort. page 17.
This I say (said he) not to give offense to these Churches (scil. those whose
Clergy assembled at that Synod) but for the defense of our Church, the Church
of England. And the Church of England surely at that time was far from the
conceit of the Franciscan Friar forementioned, when he and other learned
Divines were sent to that Synod (the most general Synod of the Reformed side,
that has been held since the reformation of Religion) to assist with their
consultations, and to confirm with their suffrages and subscriptions, the
Decrees of that Synod, wherein (among many Presbyters) there was but one
Bishop, and he not President of that Assembly. And when he who has pleaded
for Episcopacy, not only as a pinnacle of honor, but as a pillar of support
to the Church, wrote thus against the Brownists, I So Bishop Hall in his
Apology against the Brownists. sect. 19. p. 588.
reverence from my soul (so does our Church, their dear Sister) those worthy
foreign Churches, which have chosen and followed those forms of outward
government, that are every way fittest for their own condition. It is enough
for you to censure them, I touch nothing common to them with you; which we
allege not against the government of Bishops, In a meet and moderate imparity
(as the same Bishop Hall his prop of Church government, added to his Irrefrag.
prop. page 6.
Author stateth their pre-eminence) but only against the necessity of their
superiority to salvation, which is the point we have now in hand.

Whereto agrees that of Epiphanius, who conceived more necessity of a Deacon
to a Bishop, then of a Bishop to a Church, saying, Ubi non est inventus quis
dignus Episcopatu, permansit locus sine Episcopo, verum sine Diacono
impossible est esse Episcopum. Epiphan. haeres. 75. l. 3. tom. 1. page 215.
That where there was not a man of sufficient worth to be a Bishop, the place
might be without one; but it is impossible (said he) that a Bishop should be
without a Deacon. And the fifth Canon of the second Council of Carthage
decrees, Placuit ut Dioceses quae nunquam Episcopos acceperunt, non habeant;
and quae aliquando habuerunt, habeant. Council. Carth. 2. Can. 5.
That those places which never had Bishops, shall have none at all; and those
that had them, should have them still: which they would not have done, if they
had conceived Episcopacy to be of necessity to salvation, or of necessity to
the being of a Church.

Quest. But is there any cause to conceive, that any of the late Synod imagined
a necessity of Bishops, either to save a Chrisian, or to constitute a Church?

Answ. We take not upon us, confidently to impute that opinion to any, nor can
we acquit the chiefest of them from such a conceit: for the Archb. Laud in
his relat. of his conference with Fisher, page 176. marg.
Archbish. in his reply to A.C. having brought in a sentence out of Saint
Hierome, which is this [ Ubi non est sacerdos, non est Ecclesia. Hieron.
advers. Lucifer.
where there is no Priest, there is no Church] he takes the word Sacerdos, for
one who has the power of ordaining: which in Hieromes own judgment, is no
mere Priest, but a Bishop only; and thence concludes so, even with him [no
Bishop, no Church] which he so approves, as if some, who profess more good
will to Bishops, then Hierome See Doubt 16 page 80. and in the conference at
Hampton Court, page 34. are these words, Hierome no friend to Bishops, by
reason of a quarrel betwixt the Bishop of Jerusalem and him.
elsewhere does, should say somewhat more, or the same that he did with more
confidence; which to us seems little less, and not much better, then that we
have noted of the Minorite Friar. For the saying of Hierome, That it is not a
Church that has not Sacerdotem, we that are Presbyters may as well conceive,
that he means a Presbyter, as he (a Bishop) that he means a Bishop; and
Hierome a Presbyter, as we are, if he were alive, would (as we verily
believe) give sentence on our side: For,

First, it cannot be denied, that though there be more dignity in a Bishop,
the is more necessity of a Presbyter; that is, of one to officiate in preaching
the Word, and administration of the Sacraments (whereof there is continual
use) then of a Bishop to ordain (if none could do it but a Bishop) which is
required but sometimes: and though a Bishop perform the same acts, yet he
does them not as a Bishop, but as a Presbyter.

Secondly, if Hierome meant that there is no Church without an ordaining
Bishop, and that is his opinion (as his Lordship expounds him) it is his
error, an uncharitable error; which casts not particular Christians only,
but many Orthodox Churches out of the communion of Saints, and consequently out
of the state of salvation; whereas, if some Bishops had been as remote
non-residents from their Bishoprics, as the Pope from Rome, when he resided
at Avinion in France: or had meddled no more with the Churches under their
charges, then the Italian Priests did when they had Benefices in England, and
knew only the names of them, and received tithes from them; but did nothing
for them, or in them: yet there might for all that be true Churches, and
salvation in them well enough. For, of what use is such a Bishop, or such a
Priest either to the being of a Church, or the well being or salvation of a
Christian?

Thirdly, if his words were true in that sense (wherein his Lordship takes
them) it would be necessary there should be as many Bishops as Churches; and
so, that Bishops should be rather Parochial, then Diocesan.

Fourthly, if the place in Hierome be unpartially perused, it will not make
much for the necessity of Bishops: for Hierome (in his Dialogue against the
Luciferians (whence the quotation is taken) speaks of one Hilarious cum
Diaconus de Ecclesia recesserit -- cum homo mortuus sit, cum homine pariter
interiit and secta: quia post se nullum clericum potuit ordinare. Hieron.
advers. Luciferian. Dialog. tom. 2. fol. 49. col. 2.
Hilarious (a schismatic Deacon) who dyed in the schism, and his sect with
him: because being but a Deacon, he could not ordain a Clerk to succeed him;
upon this, says Hierome, Ecclesia autem non est, quae non habet Sacerdotem.
Ibid.
It is not a Church, which has not a Priest.

The word is [Sacerdotem] which seems to be of the same sense with the word
Clericum (a little before) and that is there meant of him who is next above a
Deacon; and he is a Presbyter (not a Bishop) whose office in administration of
the Sacraments is there particularly noted, which belongs to a Presbyter, ut
sic, as he is a Presbyter, not to a Bishop as he is a Bishop.

Object. But he speaks of ordaining, and that in Hieromes judgment was
proper to a Bishop.

Answ. 1. Hierome knew well enough, that of old (though it were otherwise in
his time) Bishops alone did not ordain Church Ministers, but the Presbytery
with them, 1 Timoth. 4.14. if not without them; for many hold, that at that
time there were no Prelaticall Bishops above their brethren; and even to this
day there is a shadow of that sociable power (in ordination of Ministers of the
Church of England) retained in practice, by the imposition of the hands of
Presbyters with the Bishop; and required by constitution in the 35. Canon of
the year 1603. And some learned Papists are of opinion (though it come too
near the truth, to be common among them) that Bishops may delegate their
power, both of Episcopum in sua provincia posse committere simplici sacerdoti,
quod conferat sacramentum Confirmationis. Martin. Ledesma prima 4ti. qu. 13. a.
11.
Confirmation and of Episcopos posse delegare potestatem sacerdoti ordinandi
sacerdotes, aeque ac Papam. Novariens. tract. 1. part. 2.13. apud Fran. a
Sancta Clara Apolog. Episcop. page 249.
Ordination, to Presbyters or Priests.

Secondly, though (where there were Bishops anciently and usually) ordination
was not conferred without them; yet where there were none, without them it
might be lawfully and effectually done (as we shall note in another place) and
therefore no such necessity either of them, or of ordination by them, as is
pretended. And though the over-high exaltation of Prelates has depressed
Presbyters so far below the right and power of their order, that it is made
(in some men's conceits) a strange thing, and a kind of presumption in any case
to take upon them the ordination of Ministers; yet Hierome surely was not of
their mind, when he gave them the honor (which some Episcopal parasites
appropriate to Bishops) to be accounted the successors of the holy Apostles;
as he does in the first of all his Epistles, which is written to Heliodorus.

Thirdly, from Hieromes words in this place we may rather collect, that a
Presbyter as well as a Bishop may ordain, since he denies that faculty but
to a Deacon; then that by the word Priest, a Bishop must be meant, and
ordination peculiarly derived from him.

Fourthly, howsoever where he says, that it is not a Church that has not a
Priest, he is in reason to be understood not of one that has power to make a
Priest, but of a Priest already made: for, such a one a particular Church
cannot want; but of a Bishop unto it there is no such need.

Fifthly, if Hierome in this place, being zealous against schism, spoke
somewhat too freely in favor of Bishops, which yet is doubtful (though more
probable that he spoke on the Presbyters side, then of the Bishops.) It is
certain, that in other places (which we shall observe afterward) he
expresses himself far from such fondness of affection to Bishops, as his
Lordship deduceth out of his words. So much for the Testimonies of Hierome,
wherein we crave his Lordships patience and pardon for our boldness, since
his explication and application thereof for the necessity of Bishops, to the
being of a Church; and so (by consequence) to salvation, has put a necessity
upon us, seriously to examine what he said and meant.

Object. There be some who, to assert a necessity of Discipline, say, that
Discipline comprehends a preaching Ministry, and that is necessary to
salvation.

Answ. 1. There is nearer affinity betwixt Preaching and Doctrine, then betwixt
Preaching and Discipline, which is exercised more in matter of Quid prodesset
disciplinam habere in conversatione, scientiam in praedicatione, nisi ad sit
bonitas in intention. Sermo ad pastores in Synodo congregatis. Inter opera
Bernardi. col. 1730.
conversation and practice, then of preaching: and therefore a preaching
Ministry is comprehended rather under the head of Doctrine, then of Discipline.

Secondly, the necessity of Discipline here meant, is not in respect of a
preaching Ministry, but of a ruling Episcopacy; as is evident by that we now
observed of the Speech of the now Archbishop of Canterbury, the most
authenticke Interpreter, because the most Architechtonicall (if not the only)
composer of the late Canons.

But for the Adjuncts and Appendences to the calling of Bishops, which Bishop
Hall calls Distinguish betwixt the substance of their callings, and the not
necessary appendences. Bishop Hall in the Corollary of his seven Irrefragable
propos. page 7.
not necessary, for many particular Canons and Ceremonies, in constitution or
practice (which yet come under the name of Discipline or Government, as has
been showed) they stand at a far greater distance from necessity to
salvation: and therefore they are denied by the Artic. 34.
Doctrine and In the Preface of the Communion book concerning Cerem. why some
are retained, and some abolished, printed 1625.
Liturgy of our Church, to be necessary to be in all places, and at all
times, one and utterly alike: and if General Counsels shall decree things to
be necessary to salvation, which cannot be so declared by Scriptures, the
Artic. 21.
same Doctrine teaches, that they are not to be received: for that would
conclude damnation on such Churches as are without them.

There be degrees of necessity we grant, as where it is said in the Catechism
of the Communion book, That there be two Sacraments as generally necessary to
salvation; Baptism, and the Lords Supper [onely two] Sacraments in a proper
sense, though in a large acception there may be (as the Papists say) five
more; as one says, Dr. Meyer his explanat. of the Catechism. q. 181. p. 494.
seventeen; as another, Dr. Reynold in his confer. with Heart. page 523.
twenty seven [generally necessary] that is, necessary for the state of the
Church in general; without which it cannot be a true saving Church; not
necessary for every member of it in particular, or necessary for particular
persons, if God give convenient opportunity for them: not that God cannot, or
will not save without them, where his ordinance is by himself denied, not by
men despised or slighted. Thus we avoid the In Catechismo duo Sacramenta
necessaria ad salutem. Quid, suntne alia Sacramenta, quae non sunt generalia,
and omnibus communia, ut Ordinatio; alia generalia, sed non necessaria, ut
Confirmatio? Didoclau. Altar Damascen. p. 357. The other five (though commonly
called Sacraments) are not to be accounted Sacraments of the Gospel, being such
as have grown partly of the corrupt imitation of the Apost. Confer. at Hampt.
Court. p. 31.
acception against our Catechism, made by some mistaken (though wellminded)
brethren; and so also shun the Popish necessity of that Sacrament which is
injurious to the salvation of little children, departing this life before they
have received the Sacrament of Baptism. But thus we cannot salve the
necessity of Discipline: for, though Discipline be necessary for the Church,
yet the particular Discipline of our Church is not necessary to salvation; so
that they cannot be true Churches, and salvation in them, which have it not.
Adversarii nullam per Presbyteros ordinationem esse validam, nisi in casu
necessitatis: i quando desunt omnino Episcopi, aut deficiunt a fide. Ibid. p.
220.
For where there is a defect of Bishops, or Bishops make a defection from the
faith, there an ordination by Presbyters is confessed to be valid, by those
who are no friends unto the Presbytery: an Ordination not only of Presbyters,
but of Bishops, as Dr. Field of the Church. lib. 5. c. 56. page 704.
Doctor Field has determined: For (says he) in cases of necessity, as in
revolt from the faith, or where Bishops will not ordain, but such as consent
to their Heresies; when there is no hope of better, Presbyters may choose out
one among themselves to be chief, and so add others to their numbers, by the
imposition of his and their hands; which gives us occasion rather to admire,
then to believe, That Priests made at Rome or Rhemes, revolting from their
Popish Religion, should be admitted to Benefices in our Church, without a new
ordination: and that they who were made Ministers in Transmarine Churches,
should not be admitted, unless first they were by Bishops ordained Deacons and
Presbyters, as Sacerdotibus Pontificiis ordinatis regna^te Maria, sive Romae,
sive Rhemis, non opus erat nova ordinatione; sed Mariani Sacerdotes retenti in
hunc usque diem, Terellus, Tytherus, etc. Contra, qui erant legitimi in
Ecclesiis Transmarinis Ministri, non sunt capaces Beneficiorum, donec prius
creati fuerint Diaconi Presbyteri, per Praelatos, ut oftendit exemplis
Whitingami, Traversi, etc. Didoclau. Altar Damascen. page 220.
Didoclavius reports out of Johnson the Brownist. And some of us remember,
that some of those who preferred Episcopacy above the Presbytery, as gold above
silver, did yet allow it to be maintained in the Divinity School, Ordinatio
Ministrorum in Ecclesiis Reformatis est legitima. This was publicly held in
Doctor Hollands time, who in the Act, July 9. an. 1608. concluded, Quod
Episcopatus non est ordo distinctus a Presbyteratu, coque superior jure divino.
That the ordination of Ministers in Outlandish Churches is lawful, though
without Bishops. There was then no necessity, that they should be ordained
again, to make them capable of Benefices (unless some positive Constitution
of our Church required it) much less was it necessary to salvation, either
their own or others, that Bishops should confer any new orders upon them.
Doctor Doct. Willet Synop. Papism. 5. Genesis controv. append. ad. 3. quaest. p.
274.
Willet mentions another necessity of the distinction of Bishops and Priests,
and so of Episcopal Government, or Ecclesiastical Discipline; and that is for
the avoiding of Schisms: for else (as Tot essent Schismata, quot Sacerdotes.
Hieron. advers. Luciserian.
Hierome says) there would be as many Schisms as Priests; but this necessity
will not serve to make the Crosier-staffe of Discipline equal to the Marble
Pillar of Doctrine, for support of salvation.

There is yet another necessity conceived of a contrary Discipline: The Kings
large. Declarat. page 351.
For (in Scotland) a parity of Ministers is preferred (as Gods ordinance) to
Episcopacy, an humane consuetude: and this ordinance of Discipline (without
Bishops) was conceived by the Divines of Mr. Hookers prefat. page 4.
Geneva as everlastingly required by the Law of the Lord of lords, against
whose Statutes there is no exception to be taken: and of this we may suppose
Master Cartwright spoke, when he said, Mr. Cartwrig. see Archbish. Whitgif.
Reply, page 44.
The things that he and his party stood for were such, as that if every hair
of their head were a life, they should lay all down for the defense thereof:
And there are some so rigid to such Churches as want it, as to hold, they want
a principal means of their salvation.

In opposition to these, it may be the meaning of the Oath is, That as for
Doctrine, so for Discipline, our Church wants nothing that is needful to
salvation; but because (by such an expression) the Composers of the Canon may
seem to assume that necessity of Episcopal pre-eminence (such as it is in
England and Ireland) which they condemn in the Discipline of Geneva, and other
Reformed Churches, we fear a snare in these words of the Oath.

Object. But did not an Apostolical Council decree forbearance of things of
different natures; as of meat offered to Idols, of things strangled, of blood,
and of fornication, calling the abstinence from them all necessary thing? Act.
15.28, 29. yet was there more necessity of forbearance of the last, then of all
the rest: for, to abstain from them, was not necessary, but in respect of the
state of that time, that the Gentiles and the Jews might live more peaceably
together, with less occasion of quarrel: but to forbear fornication, was and
will be always necessary to salvation.

Answ. All this is true, yet many ways different from our case: For,

First, we are bound to embrace the Decrees of an Apostolical Council,
without all doubt or suspicion of error; but we are not so to entertain any
Constitutions of men, since their time, whether single, or assembled in Synods
Diocesan, Provincial, National, or Oecumenicall; since, as our Church
resolves in the 21. Article, they may err, and have erred in things
pertaining to God: which the Apostles never did, nor could do in any thing
they taught, or decreed, to be received by the Church.

Secondly, the Apostles leave the word [necessary] at large, to be distributed
by distinction and due application (according to the different nature of the
things contained in their Apostolical Decree.) Of which, though they say they
are necessary, yet do they not say, they are necessary to salvation, as this
Oath has it, both concerning Doctrine and Discipline.

Thirdly, the Apostles by their Decree required no Oath of such as were subject
unto them, as the sixth Canon does.

Fourthly, they laid no new burden on the consciences of Christians, but
rather took off a great part of the old, Ver. 28. but this Oath is a new
burden, and (if it should be urged) the heaviest (in respect of imposition and
penalty to some) that ever was laid on the English Church, since it left off to
be Romish: which the Imposers (though prudent) might the less apprehend, and
take to heart, then their inferiors (in place and policy) because it was not
like to be their own case, to be troubled at the taking, or to be censured,
even to undoing, for the refusal of the Oath; since they liked it so well
themselves, as to propound it to others.

If to mollify the rigor of this combination of Doctrine and Discipline for
necessity to salvation, there be found out other distinctions, then such as
have been touched, either concerning Discipline, or salvificall necessity, they
may happily serve to salve an objection in Scholasticall dispute, rather then to
satisfy the conscience against all doubt, so as is necessary to the due and
safe taking of an Oath; though Discipline in particular (as has been showed)
be not necessary to salvation: and if it be not, it seems to be set in the
Oath as an Associat with the Doctrine (as to that effect) like Bibulus with
Caesar in the Consulship, when Non Bibulo quidquam nuper, sed Caesare factum
est: Nam Bibulo fieri Consule nil memini. Sueton. in Jul. Caes. nu. 20. p. 16
Bibulus, as a single Cipher (standing for nothing) did nothing as a Consul,
but Caesar did all; so that the saying was, Julius and Caesar were Consuls, not
Caesar and Bibulus. And if so, it is too near a nonens, and so a kind of
trifling, unmeet (as we think) for so serious and sacred a matter as an Oath.

THE OATH.
And that I will not endeavor by my self, or any other, directly, or
indirectly, to bring in any Popish Doctrine, contrary to that which is so
established.

DOUBT 4.
What is meant by Popish Doctrine? 4. Patricular Doubt.


THE REASON.
BEcause it is not yet determined in any satisfactory way (at least not so
determined, that we may swear to it) what opinions are to be esteemed
Popish, either for Doctrine or Discipline. Luther (as some report of him) was
wont to say, Master Chil. his answer to Charity maintained, c. 2. page 82.
That himself, and almost every man else, had a Pope in his belly, yet few
have it in their heads, to tell what Popery is.

Many hold, that diverse of the Arminians Tenets are nothing else but Popery,
blanched over with a specious The Kings large Declaration. page 319.
subtlety; and for holding them, have some been publicly censured as Popish:
and Peltius in Harmon. Remonstrantium and Socinianorum, Excus. Lugd. Bat. 1633.
Archb. Laud calls the Socinian Heresy an horrid and mighty monster of
Heresies, in his relat. of his confer. with Fisher. p. 310.
there are, that make the Arminians brothers to the Socinians, in diverse
dangerous and damnable positions. On the contrary, it is affirmed by far
higher Authority, The Kings large Declaration. page 320.
That their Tenets could not be accounted Popish, concerning which (or the
chief of which) as learned Papists as any in the world (viz. The Dominicans
and Jesuits) did as much differ, as the Protestants did; and that those, who
adhere to the Augustan confession, did hold that side of these Tenets, which
the Arminians do hold: and therefore far from being Papists, being the first
Protestants: and therefore it was against all sense, to condemn that for
Popery, which was held by many Protestant Churches, and rejected by many
learned Papists. And whereas the Socinians are severely, and that deservedly
condemned by a particular Canon 4.
Canon, there is nothing at all decreed against the Arminians, either in that
or any other Canon of that late Synod: whereof they that make conjecture of the
causes, bring in such as these:

It may be the Synod thought that it was a better way, for preservation of the
Churches peace, to make no Decree concerning Arminian opinions; or that they
were slandered, and made worse then they are, though the Socinian be not: or
that enough was done against the Arminians at the Synod at Dort; and (if any
thing at all) a great deal too little against the Socinians: or that it was
not for the honor of a Synod of Bishops, etc. to come after a Synod of mere
Presbyters (one Bishop only excepted) and by their own Canons, as it were, to
subscribe to Presbyteriall determinations.

And this last Reason happily prevails most with some Episcopal Divines, who
(conceiving the summoning, presiding, and voting in Synods by Presbyters, to be
a presumptuous usurpation of the peculiar privileges) have in deep indignation
and disdain called that Synod not the Synod of Dort, but the Synod of Dirt, as
some of us have heard: which in part may give answer to the doubt, how it
comes to pass that, King James having been so zealous in the procuring and
promoting the happy proceeding of that Synod, for the suppression of
Arminianisme, it has for all that prevailed and advanced higher in England,
then it did before that Synod had condemned it: which may be, because
dis-affection disposes many to contradictory Tenets, as we see in Non nego me
hujus interpretationis auctorem neminem habere, sed hanc eo magis probo, quam
illam alteram Augustini caeterarum alioqui probabilissimam, quod haec cum
Calvinistarum sensu magis pugnet. Maldonat. in Jo. cap. 6. ver. 62. tom. 2.
col. 652, 653.
Maldonate the Jesuit, who takes up a new Interpretation of his own (against
another, which he confesses to consist with most probability, and Saint
Augustines Authority) because it is more contrary to the sense of the
Calvinists. But this by the way.

Proceeding directly forwards, we may further observe, that the Compilers of
the pious The Homily of the peril of Idolatry.
Homilies (prescribed to be read to the people in the room of Sermons, when
they are wanting) condemn pictures in Churches, as Popish and perilous: And
in our days there be many of another mind, who profess the contrary, and
would take it very ill to be taken for Papists. Our chief Protestants (with
our English Solomon, King James) have held the Pope to be Antichrist; and the
principal Papists endeavor to defend the contrary; and their Apology is
esteemed, by most, a maine point of Popery.

But of late there have been some, who make themselves the Popes Compurgators
against that criminal charge, and yet with many go for very good Protestants;
and in diverse other particulars (reputed Popish) Papists glory in our
approaches toward them, and stick not to say of our Church, So in the Book
called, Mercy and Truth, or Charity maintained. See Master Chillin. Preface in
answer to it. page 12.
That Protestantism waxes weary of it self, Ibid.
and that Calvinisme is accounted Heresy, and little less (and if we believe
a late (...), or the vocal Forest, at the beginning whereof the Author has
these Verses: Sometimes the Father differs from the Son,
As does the Gospel from the Alcaron;
Or Loyola from Calvin, which two brands
In strange combustions burle fair Europes lands.
But Bishop Andrews says he was, Illustris vir, and nunquam sine summi
honoris praefatione nominandus. By. Andr. Theol. determinat. de usura. p. 115.
Author of some note, nothing less) then treason. In sum, these points of
Master Chil. loco citat.
Images, and Antichrist, with others, as the lawfulness of some kind of
prayers for the dead, the estate of the Fathers soul before Christ's ascension,
free will, predestination, universal grace, the possibility of keeping Gods
Commanments, which (for the most part of them) have been held as a partition
wall betwixt Protestants and Papists, are taken by some (who show themselves in
print as opposite to Popery) but for adiaphorall Problemes, disputed without
breach of charity among Protestants themselves. And, as some of our learned
Doct. Morton in his Catholic appeal. Bishop Hall his Treatise, called, The
peace of Rome.
Divines have showed, that diverse of our Protestant Doctrines have been taught
by some writers of the Romish Church: So on the contrary, have some Brerely his
Protest. Apology.
Papists endeavored to retaliate, and to quit the objection, by bringing in a
list of Doctrines accounted Popish; yet held by such as are reputed and
acknowledged (by some Antipapists) for Protestants; and as of Doctrine, so
concerning Discipline, there is doubt, what opinion may be reputed Popish: For
Archbish. Archb. Whitgifts reply to T. C. p. 299. 559
Whitgift, Bishop Bishop Hall of Episcopacy. part. 3. page 34.
and Bishop Bish. Downhams Defense of his Sermon. ^. 1. c. 8. p. 139.
Downham conclude Popery upon the Presbytery; and the In the Kings large
Declaration. page 351.
Presbyterian Disciplinarians on the contrary condemn all Episcopal
Jurisdiction as Papisticall.

Here, though we conceive, that that should be held a Protestant or Popish
Doctrine, which is carried by the common consent of allowed Divines of each
Church, rather then the particular opinions of private men (which are to the
other but as whisperings in the care, to a loud cry in the air) we cannot
resolve of our selves what they, who composed the Oath, did intend to discard
as Papisticall Doctrine.

Object. But the abjuration of Popery in the Oath is general, and so the
fitter for such as are zealous Protestants to take it.

Answ. It is true, if zeal without knowledge were sufficient; but it is
necessary, they should first know what Popery is, and what is not, before they
renounce it by swearing: and the forswearing it, without knowing it, has made
some to abjure all Episcopacy, as taking (and therein mistaking) it, (as we
conceive) to be no other then the Government of Popery.

Object. But do not the next words clearly discover what Doctrine is meant,
viz. [contrary to that which is so established?]

Answ. We make no question but by these words, the mind of them who made the
Canon, was to bring our Protestant Doctrine within the verge of the Sanctuary,
and the circle of subscription; so that nothing should be received as
Protestant, or not as ours, or not as necessary to salvation, which is not
either expressly, or by consequence contained in that compass: And also to
leave a latitude sufficient for particular opinions, wherein men might use
freedom of judgment, without infringing of charity; and we think it a meet
means to preserve the Churches peace, that the Doctrines be not too many,
which are to be received and believed of all: and that these Doctrines are
established in the Church; but what Tenets are rejected as properly Popish,
does not as yet appear unto us, and withal, we doubt.

DOUBT 5.
What establishment of Doctrine is here meant, 5. Particular Doubt.
and how far it may be said to be established.

THE REASON.
BEcause we conceive that the 35. Article, at least vertually, establishes the
Doctrine of the two Books of Homilies (the one set forth in King Edwards the
sixth, the other in Queen Elizabeth's reign) as godly, wholesome, and necessary
Doctrine; and as fit to be preached to the people in a Sermon, as read to them
in an Homily.

But on the contrary, he that has taken upon him to analyze the Articles into
several propositions, and to confirm them by Scripture, and otherwise ( and
this by allowance of public Authority, as the title page of his book does
testify) sets this Note upon that Article, Touching this Article, the
greatest matter (says Mast. Rogers on the 35. Article of Relig. page 193.
he) is not, Whether these Homilies meant and mentioned, do contain Doctrine,
both godly, wholesome, and necessary: but whether Homilies, or any Apocrypha
writings at all, may be read in the open Church, and before the Congregation:
Whereof (in reason) there needs no more refutation then the reading of the
Article, and the several Titles and Contents of the Homilies annexed to it.

And though we like it well enough, that his Testimony is sometimes excepted
against, as By the Archbishop of Cant. in his answer to A. C. p. 47, 48.
proceeding from a private man; yet since his gloss upon that authenticke
Text, has commonly passed in the name, and without the note of dislike of
Authority, it induces us to doubt, what Doctrine in those Books may be said
to be established in our Church; and we are the more unsettled in our
conceit thereof, because we see the Homily of the peril of Idolatry so
little heeded, and so much liberty of late taken to control it, with new
Pictures in Churches, that if the Homily were read in some of them, it might be
doubted (by such as consider no more then what is presented to their senses)
whether there were not one Religion for the ears, another for the eyes: or
whether the Laymens books, or the Clergy men's were published with greater
privilege: which has been an occasion of Papists bragging, Charity
maintained, see Master Chil. Preface in answer to it. p. 12.
That our Churches begin to look with a new face, and their walls to speak a
new language; the face out-facing, and the language contradicting the Doctrine
of the Homilies.

We do not mean hereby to charge those with Idolatry, who have made it their
care, and have been at great cost, to add the beauty of henour in the walls
and windows of Gods house, to the beauty of holiness in the Communion of
Saints (who resort unto it, and perform their solemn devotions in it) we
doubt not but they are too wise to worship the work of the pensill, or any
work of man's hand: yet we beseech their wisdom to consider, that the world
grows old, and with age (according to the Proverb) becomes childish; and
children delight more to look upon Babies, then on the letters of their
books, or to learn their lessons: and so that which by them was meant but for
adorning, the illiterate (with the mutilation of a letter) may turn to
adoring; and what was intended but to be a memorandum of History, may be turned
by some, and taken by others, as a memorial of the mystery of Iniquity:
whereby the subtle may draw the simple from spiritual piety, to sensual
superstition; which was the evil effect feared by those grave and godly
Divines, who composed the Homily: and for which cause they so zealously
contested against all Images in Churches: They had read, no doubt (with due
regard) the saying of St. Male vos parietum amor cepit, male Ecclesiam Dei in
tectis, aedificiisque veneramini -- Anne ambiguum est in his Antichristum esse
sessurum. Hilarious contra Auxent. page 216. and 217.
Hilary against Auxentius, Your love is fondly set upon fair walls; you do
ill to make your respect of the Church, by the outward splendor or
stateliness of structure: know you not that Antichrist will set his Throne in
such as these? But this is his Quaere, none of ours; we go on.

We had thought, it had been the established Doctrine of the Church of England
(in the Homily of the time and place of prayer) that it is a necessary and
perpetual duty (by the fourth Commandment) to celebrate one day in seven with
religious observances; but we find that Doctrine publicly gainsaid by
diverse, and the Doctrine of the Popish Schoolmen as publicly maintained
against it, in diverse Treatises in print. And for the Articles of Religion
themselves (wherein chiefly we conceive the Doctrine of our Church to be
contained, and by Authority, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, to be
established) they are much impeached in the power and vigor of their
stability, by leaving such liberty for the points of free will, predestination,
and possibility of keeping Gods Commandments (as before has been noted) which
by the 10.15. and 17. Articles are resolved, against the opinions of the
Papists: and much more are they wronged by him, who has written a Fran. a San.
Clara his book called Deus, natura and gratia, printed Lugdun. 1634.
Book, and therein has labored with much subtlety and diligence, so to mince
them by manifold distinctions; and to wrench them from their proper, to a
Popish construction; as if the Convocation that concluded them, had had no mind
or meaning to contradict the Council of Trent: and that now our 39. Articles
were patient, yea ambitious of some sense, wherein they may seem Catholic (i.
in their sense, Popish) as a late See Master Chil. his Preface in answer to the
Author of Charity maintained. page 12.
Papist with great boasting has upbraided unto us: So in the book called
Charity maintained.

By expounding and applying of these Articles in a new way, has Franc. a
Sanct. Clara trodden out a new tracke (though with many intricate turnings and
windings) in which men of equivocall consciences may send their faith to Rome,
while their affections keep close to their Interests in England; and has
taught them to play fast and loose (as to their Orthodox and Protestant sense)
so that as Plutarch in the life of Alexander. p. 110
Aristotle said to Alexander concerning his Physics, they were published, and
not published; their words being read, and their meanings not rought; the
Articles might be said to be established, and not established: established as a
sacred Text, but not established by means of an ambiguous Comment, turning the
Interpretation (like a nose of wax) as easily to the left hand, as to the
right: And how far this cunning stratagem has prevailed with some, we cannot
tell; but, as in charity we hope well of those of whom we know no ill; so in
godly discretion, we dare not be so confident in our good opinion, as to
swear what we but think, and wish to be true.

But, though we cannot make faith upon Oath, how far our Doctrine is
established, as in opposition to Popery, we do not deny but that our reverend
Fathers and Brethren of the Synod might intend hereby, more firmly to establish
that Doctrine, which is most repugnant to such opinions as they believed to be
properly Popish: and the rather, because we have been credibly informed, that
the Oath was first proposed, and so passed in the house of Convocation, as an
abjuration of Popery only.

But a second time tendered (as in a second edition) it was augmented, but (as
we conceive) not amended, when the Discipline or Government was intwisted in
it, as it follows in the next words.

THE OATH
-- Nor will I ever give my consent to alter the Government of this Church, by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, etc. as it stands now established,
and as by right it ought to stand.

WHerein are observable many particulars, and each of them questionable; which
we will propose in that order, which may best conduce to make our Doubts
capable both of right understanding, and due satisfaction; it is this: 1. The
degrees of Government, 1. Expressed. 2. Concealed under the etc.
2. Their state, as it now stands. 3. Their right, as it ought to stand. 4.
Their perpetuity not to be changed. 5. Our Constancy, that though they should
be changed, we should not consent.


1. Of the degrees of Governors expressed, viz. Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes,
and Archdeacons.

DOUBT 6.
Whether the degrees here specified be propounded to be allowed in the same,
6. Particular Doubt.
or in a different degree of assent and approbation.

THE REASON.
BEcause there is no distinction of them in the Oath, but in title and order;
and yet there is so much difference betwixt them (in respect of approbation)
that Deanes and Archdeacons (before now) were never by attestation, or
subscription so far approved, as Archbishops (but especially as Bishops) have
been: how then can we be so certain of them, as now to give them (as it were
per saltum) the highest degree of ratification at once, viz. a solemn Oath,
when hitherto we were never required to give our hands, or pass our words on
their behalf: and if the assent be intended in a different degree, how can we
compose our consciences in one and the same act of swearing, to approve further
of the one, then of the other, the words of the Oath sounding the same degree
of assurance to them both? If then we take them together, we cannot find how
we should avow their approbation, in one joint and indistinct asseveration;
especially upon Oath. But for Deanes and Archdeacons we have particular Doubts.

First, of Deanes The DOUBT is,
7. Particular Doubt.
What Deanes are here meant.

THE REASON.
BEcause in the whole Canon law there is no title of the degree of a Deane
(says Azor. Inflit. tom. 2. l. 3. c. 17. page 360.
Azorius) and in diverse Authors we find the name Deane of a different
acception; for (besides the Military sense, wherein it signifies a Captain of
ten men, as Decanus dicitur, qui december militibus praeest, Lindw. constit. lib.
2. fol. 58. p. 1. col. 1
Lindwood has it: the Monastical sense, as it is taken and explained by Saint
Aug. de morib. Eccles. c. 31.
Augustine for him, who has the Government of ten Monks: the Academicall
sense, whereby it signifies the same, in some Colleges, which the word Censor
does in some others) there is an Ecclesiastical Deane, and ambiguity also in
the word, with that restriction: for (as Duaren. de minist. l. 1. c. 8.
Duarenus, and others from him do distinguish) there is one sort which are
called urban, another Vican: to speak in the phrase of the present age, the
Urban we may call Cathedral Deans; the Vican, Deanes Rural: the more In
process of time Archipresbyters were called Decani. Bish. Downh. li. 1. page
188. of the defense of his sermon.
ancient name of such was Council. Turon. 2. Can. 6. an. 566. and Council.
Antinodor. Can. 40. an. 615.
Archipresbyter, that is, as the word imports (and Presbyterorum dicitur, ut
Archidiaconus, and Archisubdiaconus, Diaconorum and Subdiaconorum primi, and
principes. Onuphr. interpret. vocum eccles. addit. vitis Pontif. Romans page 61.
Onuphrius expounds it) the chief or principal Presbyter: and such a one is
the Cathedral Deane, among the City Presbyters; and a Rural Deane, among the
Presbyters of the Country.

Whether Cathedral, or Rural Deanes, or both be intended in this Oath, is
somewhat doubtful: That Cathedral Deanes are meant, it is probable; because
they are placed next after Bishops, and So by the name of Archipresbyter is he
called, and put before the Archdeacon. Council. Carthag. 4. can. 17.
before Archdeacons: and though the Archdeacon Archidiaconus sit proximus post
Episcopum, and ejus Vicarium, salvo tamen jure Decani, quod ad Cathedralem
Ecclesiam spectat. Reform. leg. Ecclesiastic. de Ecclesia and Minist. c. 6.
fol. 48. b.
be said to be next after the Bishop, and his Vicar (i. General,) it is with
reservation of the right of the Deane, in respect of the Cathedral Church: And
that Rural Deanes should not be excluded, is probable also; because Bishop
The Government and Discipline of our Church by Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons, Rural Deanes, etc. established. Reformat. leg. Eccles. Tit. de
Eccles. Bish. Downh. in his answer to the Preface of the Refuters of his
consec. Sermon. page 6.
Downham brings them in as Church Governors, with those that are named in this
Oath: and for that they are called Archipresbyteris sive Decanis Ruralibus.
Ibid. c. 5. fol. 48. a.
Archipresbyters (which is a title above Archdeacons) and in some places have
had more jurisdiction (as in this Diocese) until a very few years last past,
then the Archdeacons have had. And if both be here meant, then first
concerning the former sort.

DOUBT 8.
What is the Authority and Government of Cathedral Deanes. 8. Particular Doubt.


THE REASON.
1. BEcause Deanes Cathedral and Rural (being both comprehended under the
title of Archipresbyters) their office is so described by Lindw. prove. constit.
a fol. 39. ad 46. inclusive Spalat. de Repub. Eccles. li. 4. c. 5. page 590.
Lindwood and others, that it is difficult to discern what is proper or
peculiar to them in several.

Secondly, where they are more distinctly set down, the Decani Cathedrales'
Ecclesias juxta illarum constitutiones regant, Collegiorum Canonicorum, tum
aliorum Clericorum Ecclesiae praesint -- ut Archidiaconi for as, sic illi domi,
hoc est, in Ecclesia Cathedrali Episcopo sint adjumento. Reform. leg. Eccles.
etc. de Eccles. and Minist. c. 8. fol. 94. p. 21.
Cathedral Deane is brought in as President of the Canonical College, for
the government of the Cathedral Church, according to the Constitutions of
their foundation; and so is said to be an assistant to the Bishop at home (that
is, in the Cathedral City, as the Archdeacon is abroad in the Country;) but
there comes in much doubt and ambiguity, what Government is meant: for the
Bishops and Deanes are often at difference about their Authority; which is more
or less, according as the Charters of their foundation do vary: which to some
give a larger, some a lesser power and pre-eminence. For the Deanes of
Westminster and Windsor (as By the Bish. of Chest. that now is.
we have heard) have Episcopal Jurisdiction, which other Cathedralls (for the
most part) have not. Some have Statutes, by which they govern; and some (as
the Deane and Canons of Christ Church in Oxford) are leges loquentes, speaking
laws; and therefore are very fitly called Canons, or Rules, governing according
to the dictate of their own discretion and conscience; and so we cannot (in
respect of such) apply Bishop Bishop Halls Corollary added to his Irrefrag.
propos. page 7.
Halls distinction betwixt Rules of government, and Errors of execution, to
accept the one, and reject the other; nor can we swear to their Government,
though with distinction (for that is uncertain to us both for rule and
practice) much less with confusion, as in the Canon it is contained.

Thirdly, the Jurisdiction of Deanes and Chapters may be much augmented by
Synodicall Constitutions: for in the late The Grant of the Benevolence by the
Province of York. p. 18, 19.
Grant of the Benevolence to his Majesty by the Provincial Synod at York
(and we doubt not, but it is so also in that of the Province of Canterbury,
though yet we have not seen it) during the vacancie of any Bishopric, they
have granted unto them Authority to exercise the Ecclesiastical censures of
suspension, excommunication, interdicts, and sequestration against such as
deny, or delay to make payment of the Benevolence there concluded.

Fourthly, some Deanes and Chapters have had so much Authority within
themselves, as to be out of the reach of Archiepiscopall power; and therefore
have refused to be visited by the Archbishop.

It was so betwixt the Master Fox his Marryrolog. tom. 1. p. 458.
Deane and Chapter of Durham, and the Archbishop of York many years ago,
which exemption (by some reluctant contestation of the Clerk sent from them to
the last Convocation) seemed neither forgotten, nor forsaken by that Deane and
Chapter.

Fifthly, in the Book of Reformation of Ecclesiastical Laws, made by King
Henry the eighth, and King Edward the sixth (which appears to be yet in
force, and was very lately reprinted for better Information touching the
Government of the Church) there is this rule set down for Cathedral Churches,
Reform. leg. de Eccles. and Minist. cap. 7. fol. 49. p. b.
They shall keep their Statutes of their foundation pure and entire, so far
as they shall not be found adverse to the Word of God, nor to our Constitutions
of Religion, either already published, or hereafter to be published.

Where (to conclude this Doubt) we see so much diversity, and in some respects
contradiction, touching the Government of Cathedral Deanes and Churches (for
some have Episcopal Jurisdiction, some have not, some have Statutes, some have
none;) and besides all, the doubt of that which already is in use, so much
uncertainty of what may be hereafter (according to this Constitution) that we
can find here no solid ground for a sacred Oath.

Of Deanes Rural. The 9. DOUBT is
What is the Authority or Government of a Deane Rural. 9. Particular Doubt.


THE REASON.
BEcause (under the name and title of Archpresbyters) they have had much
Authority in Government of the Church in former times; whereof the most
observable particulars are collected by a very learned Doct. Field of the
Church l. 5. c. 29. p. 507, 508, 509.
Doctor of our Church, and they are chiefly these:

These Archpresbyters, or Deanes Rural, were to be chosen by the Clergy, and
Episcopus nec Abbatem, nec Archipresbyterum sine omnium suorum compresbyterorum
and Abbatum consilio de loco suo praesumat ejicere. Conc. Turon. 2. Can. 6.
Caranz fol. 239.
not to be deposed by the Bishop; without the consent of those that chose
them; they were to assist the Bishop in Government, and that of such
necessity, that he must not be without them: Their office was to admonish
both Laity and Clergy of their duty; and to see that they did it: They were
to visit the Churches of their Precincts twice a year; and if any of the Si
quis ex Secularibus institutionem aut comminationem Archipresbyteri sui
contumacia faciente audire distulerit, tam diu a limitibus Ecclesiae habeatur
extraneus, quam diu tam salutarem institutionem adimplere distulerit. Council.
Antisiod. Can. 40. Ibid. fol. 267.
Laity were wilfully minded against their admonitions, they were so long to be
excommunicated out of the Church, until they were reformed. They were to have
a Chapter of Parish Ministers, who (within a year after they were possessed of
their Livings) were to swear to the Deane, and so to be admitted as brethren,
to sit in the Chapter with him and to be bound to come to the yearly Chapter,
and otherwise also, when upon urgent cause the Deane should call a Chapter
(which was ordinarily four times in the year) and to bear part of the
charge. In these Chapiters, the Archipresbyters were to publish the Decrees of
Provincial and Episcopal Synods; and to urge the execution of the same. The
limits of their power in Government were, to suspend Laymen from the Sacrament,
and Clergy men from execution of their office: hitherto they might proceed,
but no further.

But in practice, partly by the connivence, partly by the corruption of the
Bishop, they lashed out beyond their line: for, as a zealous Preacher
complained in the Council of Rhemes, The Archipresbyter circuit obedientiam
sibi creditam, vendit Homicidia, Adulteria, Incestus, Fornicationes,
Sacrilegia, Perjuria; ad summum, implet manticam suam, fama volante innotescit
Episcopo talis quaestus, etc. Sermon. cujusdam ad Cler. in Council. Rhem. in
operib. Bernard. col. 1736
Archipresbyter went about in visiting of his circuit, selling all sorts of
sins, Murder, Adultery, Incest, Sacrilege, Perjury, and thereby filling his
purse, the fame whereof coming to the ear of the Bishop, he sends for him,
that he may have a share with him; upon demand he denies, upon denial they
wrangle: but at the last, he knowing that if the Bishop be against him, he must
forgo his gain; he yields him a part: and so, says that Preacher, are
Herod and Pilate reconciled against Christ.

In later times, especially in most Diocesses of England they have had less to
do, and done less evil; Doctor Cousins the Civilian, setting down the Deane
Ruralls office, makes it to consist in little else, then in calling Decanos
Rurales vocant, atque plerumque ad hibentur ad convocandum suam classem, ad
significandum iis non nihil ab ordinario, ut fit per literas ad inducendum in
Beneficia vice Archidiaconi remotius agentis. Doct. Cous. de Polit. Eccles.
Angl. c. 7.
Classical Assemblies (that is, those who are to assemble within his Deanery)
to signify the mind of the Ordinary, according to the tenor of letters
received from him; and in absence of the Archdeacon, to induct into Benefices.

But in this Diocese, the Deanes for many years past have had a great part of
Episcopal Jurisdiction shared among them; and this by Patent for lives or
years from the Bishops, allowing sometimes larger, sometimes less Authority
unto them: Some have had power to Crimina and excessus quorumcunque Laicorum,
criminibus Adulterii and Incestus tantummodo exceptis. So in the Patent of Mr.
P. Mr. E. Mr. L. for the Deanrie of F.
censure all offenders, and offenses of the Laity; the crimes of Incest and
Adultery alone excepted. And some have been limited to the correction of some
few faults specified in their Patents; and of late, about (or not much above)
three years since, have most of the Deanries been compounded together into one
Patent, or two at the most: and assigned to the Archdeacons by your Lordship,
and by them resigned for execution to the Chancellor (as their Official) for
that Jurisdiction.

Now, if Deanes Rural be meant in the Oath (and considering what authority and
power, both in former times, and of late they have had in this Diocese, and it
may be, by the Constitutions of the Church yet in force ought to have, we know
not why they should be left out of the Government of the Church; nor why they
should not be contained under the title of Deanes) how can we, without being
over-bold with our consciences, take them into such an Oath, there being so
much diversity and uncertainty of their Authority?

Of Archdeacons The 10. DOUBT is,
What is the Authority and Government of Archdeacons. 10. Particular Doubt.


THE REASON.
BEcause Deacons are inferior to Presbyters (so far inferior) that a
Deacon, though dignified, should not presume to sit before a Presbyter, by the
Council. Constantinop. 6. Can. 7. fol. 311. Caranz.
sixth Council of Constantinople; and so an Archpresbyter (as a Deane Rural
is usually styled) should be superior to an Archdeacon: but as Doctor Doct.
Field of the Church. l. 5. c. 25. p. 492.
Field observes, notwithstanding all the Canons to the contrary (and they were
many, as we may have occasion to note elsewhere) and the violent opposition of
Hierome, and other Worthies of those times: they were lifted up, not only above
Presbyters, but above Archpresbyters also, and that came to pass (as he
observes) for diverse causes.

First, because there were fewer Deacons then Presbyters; and so Diaconos
paucitas honorabiles, Presbyteros tutba contemptibiles facit. Hier. ad Evagr.
tom. 2. page 334.
paucity made the one sort to be honorable, and multitude the other rather
contemptible.

Secondly, because Deacons had the charge of the treasure of the Church, which
kind of employment is usually much set by.

Thirdly, because they were often used by the Bishop for viewing of such parts
of his Diocese, as he could not conveniently visit himself; and we may
conceive the reason of that to be, because the Deacon was a close adherent to
the side of the Bishop, and that so necessarily, as Epiphanius conceived, that
(as 3. Partic. Doubt. page 20. lit. q.
before we have noted under another title) he said, Sine Diacono impossible
est esse Episcopum. Epiphan. Here Is. 75. l. 3. tom. 1. p. 215. col. 2.
It was impossible for a Bishop to be without a Deacon; whereupon in tract of
time, as the Cardinals by their propinquity to the Pope, overtopped the
Bishops (who at first were so far inferior to them, -- refertur multos
Episcopos praetermissos fuisse Cardinalari, ne sie dignitate minucrentur. Fulv.
Pacian. Tractat. de probationibus, lib. 2. cap. 28. fol. 94 p. 1. col. 1.
That a Bishop would not be a Cardinal, because he would not submit to a
diminution of dignity) so the Archdeacons, by their neernesse to the Bishops,
came to be exalted above the Presbyters; which (as Doctor Doct. Field of the
Church. l. 5. c. 25. p. 492
Field conceives) was in Saint Hieromes time.

But, though there were then an Archdeacon above the Deacons (who did not only
officiate himself, but prescribed unto others what they should do) yet an
Archdeacon, with allowed Jurisdiction over Presbyters, was of a later
Institution. Bishop Archidiaconatus gradus est novus. Bish. Andr^n Resp^ad 3.
Epist. Pet. Moulin. p. 191.
Andrews says, an Archdeaconship is a new degree, which (I suppose he would
not have said if it had been authorized in Saint Hieromes time; when, if it
were in use, it was without the approbation of the best, as has been noted:
we may well conceive then, that Saint Stephen the Protomartyr was not an
Archdeacon, as he is called in the Decree of Decret. Lucii Pap. an. 255.
Caranz. sum. council. fol. 28. page 1.
Pope Lucius.

For the Archdeacons Jurisdiction, it is so diversely set down in
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, that it is very hard to tell, what by rule their
Office or Government is, as will appear to him, who will take pains to peruse
the quotations in the Council. Aurel. 5. Can. 20. p. 473. decret. l. 1. de
officio Archidiac. fol. 56. p. 1. col. 1. Liadw. provinc. constit. lib. 1. de
offic. Archidiac. fol. 36. col. 2. a Reformat. leg. Eccles. de Eccles. and
Minist. c. 6. fol. 48. b. Azor. Instit. tom. 2. l. 3. cap. 43. col. 448. Doct.
Cous. de pol. Eccles. Angl. c. 6. Certain Canons containing some points of
Discipline approved in the Synod. 1571.
Margin; so that from Constitution their Authority flies for refuge to
Prescription: of which Doctor Field says thus, Doct. Field of the Church. l.
5. c 29. page 509.
The Archdeacons (which at first might not sit in the presence of a Presbyter,
but being willed by him so to do) in the end became (by reason of their
employment by the Bishop) to be greater, not only then the ordinary
Presbyters, but then the Archpresbyters themselves; and therefore it is
confessed by all, that the Archdeacon has none Authority, or power of
Jurisdiction, by virtue of his degree and order, but by prescription only: nor
can he claim more then he can prescribe for; and it may be, he may
prescribe for that which is not commendable happily, not lawful: as for that
which the Council of Challons severely condemns, Can. 15. apud Symps. of the
Church. p. 560.
It is reported by some (says the Council) that Archdeacons use domination
over the Presbyters and take tribute from them; which smells rather of
tyranny, then of order.

Prescription and Custom may prevail against Right and Truth, as many times
they do, as Tertullian says, Quicquid adversus veritatem sapit, id Haeresis
est, etiam vetus consuetudo. Tert.
Whatsoever is set up against that, is Heresy, though it be an old custom. In
this Diocese the Archdeacons have for the most part been but titular, since
the foundation of the Bishopric, into which were incorporated two
Archdeaconries; the one of Chester, the other of Richmond: and of late some
Rural Deanries (as before we have observed) were assigned unto them; and some
of us have heard your Lordship say, That their Jurisdiction is such, and so
much, as you are pleased to permit unto them: and what that is, who can tell
but your self? how then may it be safe to swear to the Government of the
Church by Archdeacons, when we cannot know what their Government is; since the
rules of that Office are very uncertain, and the prescription by practice more
uncertain to us (especially) who have had no such Jurisdiction in use among
us: and it may be, if we had, we should find more cause to except against it,
then to swear for it; which we desire may not be interpreted to the
prejudice of any worthy person of that denomination: and we doubt not, but
there are many such, and some well known to many of us, for men of very
eminent endowments, both intellectual and moral; whom we acknowledge for
such, and so desire to enjoy them, as our dear brethren and friends.

Of the etc.
Our Doubts hitherto have been of the Governors expressed; our next Inquiries
are to be made of the etc. and of such Governors as are concealed under it:
and thereof our Doubts are diverse, and so counting on, our

11. Particular DOUBT is,
Whether we may safely take a new Oath with an etc. 11. Particular Doubt.


THE REASON.
BEcause in a new Oath we cannot be certain, without some express direction
(which in this case we find not) how far the sense of the etc. reaches: and
so we cannot swear unto it in judgment (as the Prophet Jeremy directs,
Jerem. 4.2.) but at the most in opinion: There is no man would willingly seal
a Bond with a blanke for the sum, so that the Obligee might make the debt as
large as he listed; and we conceive we should be more cautelous in engaging
our souls by an Oath, then our estates by a Bond: since in this the tie is
more vigorous, the breach more dangerous, then it is in that; and we verily
think, that if we should return our deposition with some terms of the Oath,
as I A. B. do swear, that I do approve the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England, and presently break off with an etc. (though what follows
be well enough known) it would not be allowed for a lawful Oath, which yet
seems to us more warrantable, then that which by this Canon is tendered unto
us.

DOUBT 12.
How far the etc. is to be extended, 12. Particular Doubt.
when it is expressly declared.

THE REASON.
BEcause of the variety of opinions, which have been conceived of the Contents
of it; M. S. T.
some (who suppose they understand the Oath so well, as to be able to expound
it to others) have said, that the Governors of the Church are expressed before
the etc. and that under the etc. are implicitly comprised the Rules or
Constitutions of Government, especially the Book of Canons of the year 1603.
but most conceive this to be an impertinent interpretation; because the etc.
imports somewhat of the same sort that went before; and thus to expound it,
is to make a groundless transition a personis ad res; but if we agree (as most
do) that persons are meant under the etc. and those persons Governors (which
is most probable) our Doubt is, what Governors they be.

DOUBT 13.
What Governors are included in the etc. whether the King, 13. Particular
Doubt.
as Supreme, be altogether omitted, or implicitly contained in it.

THE REASON.
BEcause we do not know, why he should be wholly omitted; since he is
supreme Governor over all persons, or causes, both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, and so to be acknowledged by all Preachers in their prayers before
their Sermons, by the 55. Canon: nor can we conceive any just cause, why he
should be but covertly employed in an etc. when inferior degrees are formally
expressed.

Object. If it be said, that there is a peculiar Oath for his Supremacy to be
taken at the Ordination of Ministers, and at other times by other persons, upon
several occasions,

Answ. We conceive that should be no let to the asserting of his Sovereign
Right in this Oath; because that Oath of Supremacy is expressly made (as the
title of it shows) to shut out the usurpation of The Bishop shall cause the
Oath of the Kings Supremacy, and against the power and authority of all
foreign Potentates, to be administered to every one of them that are to be
ordained. So in the Ordinat. of Deacons.
foreign powers and Potentates; and so gives no such security against those
popular diminutions of his Ecclesiastical Authority: the jealousy whereof
occasioned the reverend Prelates of the Church in the late Synod, to propose
this Oath, as a Bond of assurance of their Episcopal pre-eminence.

They have showed themselves zealous (we confess) in pressing his Royal Right,
both ecclesiastical and civil, against all Can. 1. p. 13.
popular, as well as Papal impeachments: and have annexed a penalty against
such, as shall by word, or writing publicly maintain, or abett any position
or conclusion, in opposition to their explication of the Kings Authority.

But yet there is no Oath required, to oblige any subject to a perpetual
approbation of his Regal power, as supreme Governor of the Church, as there
is for Archbishops and Bishops: nor is the penalty for public opposition
thereof so dangerous, as for a private forbearance of the Oath (though with a
timorous and tender conscience.) For, for not taking of the Oath, a Minister
may for ever be deprived of all he has within three months; but for
public opposition against the Kings power, he shall not suffer so much,
unless he continue contumacious two years together, as they that read and
mark the Canon shall observe.

It may be his Majesty's Supremacy was left out by accidental oblivion; or if
by resolved intention, it was perhaps upon supposall, that the caution of the
first Canon made it superfluous: and it may be, there may be some secret
mystery in this omission, which (if we may not presume to know) some happily
will imagine, it is to give some better color to the Bishops proceedings, in
sending out the Processes of their Ecclesiastical Courts in their own names,
which has been often reproved by their opposites (as very prejudicial to the
Royal Prerogative) though (of late years) for that particular there has been
an award procured and published on the Bishops behalf, according to the
request of the I do humbly in the Churches name desire of your Majesty, that it
may be resolved by all the reverend Judges of England, and then published by
your Majesty, that our keeping Courts, and issuing Process in our own Names,
and the like exceptions formerly taken, and now renewed, are not against the
Laws of the Realm (as it is most certain they are not) that so the Church
Governors may go on cheerfully in their duty, and the peoples minds be
quieted by this assurance, that neither the law nor their liberty, as subjects,
is thereby infringed. L. Archb. his Epist. Dedicat. to the King before his
Speech in the Star Chamber.
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury that now is.

Object. But howsoever if the mention of his Sovereign Authority be omitted,
there is the less to swear to; and so the charge of the Oath is more light,
and may for that the more heartily be taken.

Answ. It is true, if the omission give no occasion of timorous surmise; but to
some it does, and if in charity we hope the best of it in this case, there is
cause yet to doubt of the etc. and therefore we further demand of the
subordinate Governors employed in it.

The 14. DOUBT.
Who, and what Governors they be. 14. Particular Doubt.


THE REASON.
BEcause (in the title of the seventh Canon) there is mention of Archbishops,
and Bishops, with an etc. and in the body of the Canon, Deans and Archdeacons
are added to them, and the next words are [and the rest that bear office in
the same] that is, in the Government of the Church of England. And those that
bear office, besides these that are named, are Guardians of Spiritualties,
Suffragans, Chancellours, Vicars general, Commissaries, Officials, Surrogates.
For the first:

The Kings Preface before the late Can. page 9.
Guardians of Spiritualties So in the stat. of 25. H. 8. c. 21.
are those, to whom the spiritual Jurisdiction of any Bishopric, or
Archbishopric is committed, during the vacancy of the Sea.

Episcopi Suffraganei coadjureres Episcoporum, quorum vice nonnunquam ordinant
Ministros and Diaconos, dedicant Ecclesias, confirmant pueros ante informatos
rudimentis Christianismi. Doct. Cous. de polit. Eccles. Angl. c. 7. Vide etiam
Reform. leg. Eccles. de Eccles. and Minist. c. 16. fol. 51. b.
Suffragans are titular Bishops, ordained to assist the Bishop in his function,
whose turn they supply now and then in Ordination of Ministers and Deacons,
dedication of Churches, confirmation of children, that have been instructed in
their Catechism.

Chancellours, who exercise ordinary Jurisdiction in the City of the Episcopal
See, next to the Bishop, and by Authority derived from him.

Can. 104.
Vicars general in some Diocesses are the same with the Chancellours, as we
may see by the style of their Processes; but if the office be considered of it
self (as some describe it) it is very large: for thus we find it in Azorius.

A Vicarius generalis potest excommunicare, suspendere, interdicere, Sacramenta
confer, vel conferendi facultatem concedere, confer Beneficia, visitare,
inquirere, instituere, eligere, confirmare, praesentare, corrigere, punire
votum, and jus-jurandum commutare, relaxare. Azor. Instit. tom. 2. lib. 3. cap.
43. col. 448.
Vicar general may excommunicate, suspend, interdict, confer Sacraments, or
give faculty to others for that purpose, he may collate Benefices, visit,
inquire, institute, elect, confirm, present, correct, punish, change vows,
and dispense with Oaths.

Can. 103.119.128.135. Convocat. 1603.
Commissaries See Lindw. constit provinc. l. 1. cap. 1. de accusat. verbo
mandat. Archiepisc.
are such as exercise Jurisdiction afar off, over those who cannot well come
to the Bishops Consistory in the City.

Can. 119.
Officialls are properly such as exercise Jurisdiction under Archdeacons, and
are simply called Officialls, without addition: and if the Commissary be
called by that name (as many times he is) it should not be simply, but (as in
Lind. Tit. de sequestr poss^ss. c. 1. verbo Officialis.
Lindwood) with the addition of Foraneus.

Can. 128.
Surrogates are such as are substituted by Chancellours, Commissaries, and
Officialls.

To which we may add Canons, or Prebendaries of Cathedral Churches, who are
joined in Government with their Deanes; and are with them to be a consiliis to
the Bishop, Clerks of the Convocation: and, it may be, Parsons also may be
reckoned among Ecclesiastical Governors: for they are called Rectors of their
Churches, and Vicars; and other preaching Pastors may be so called, governing
their Flocks as they do. And it may be, Registers, Proctors, and Apparitours
of the Consistory Courts, and Churchwardens, and Sworn-men in particular
Parishes may be brought into the Oath, by the Explication of the seventh
Canon. And if no Officers be comprehended in it, but Governors; no
Governors, but such as have a coercive or compulsive power, there are yet so
many several sorts of them, so much diversity among them, and so great
difficulty to know their Government what it is, and how far it reaches,
that very few, not only of the Laity, but of the Clergy also (who are not
professed Civilians with all) can tell what he swears to, when he swears to
them under their express titles, much less when under the ambiguous
Intimation of etc. These are our Doubts of the degrees of Government; the next
particular is their present state.

2. Partic. -- As it now stands.
The 15. DOUBT.
15. Particular Doubt.
Whether the establishment of the So the Archbish of Cant. disting. in his
Speech in the Starre-chamb. an. 1637. p. 6.
Adjuncts, or the So Bish. Hall calls them, in the Coroll. to his prop.
touching Govern. p. 7.
not necessary Appendences of Bishops be to be sworn unto in this Oath.

THE REASON.
BEcause with them they now stand: Episcopacy is now honored and assisted by
Baronries, and the Ecclesiastical Government by the high Commission; now there
are but two Archbishoprickes: above the Archbishops no Patriarchs, and the
Doct. Cous. de polit. Angl. cap. 3.
Archbishops (of Canterbury especially) have many privileges and prerogatives;
all which stand by the support, or fall by the weight of Royal Authority, from
which their Stat. 37. H. 8. c. 17. Stat. 1. Edw. 6. c. 2. and 25. H. 8. c. 19.
and 1 Elis. c. 1. and 5 Elis. c. 1. and 3. Jac. c. 4.
Jurisdiction is derived.

For first, as Bishop Godwin observes, when Rich. Clifford was made Bishop of
London by the Popes provision, against the Kings mind (it was King Edward the
fourth) he Bish. Godw. in his Catol. of Bish. p. 200.
denied to give him his Temporalties, and so made him desist from pursuit of
that spiritual promotion; and the same power will be (we doubt not) confessed
by all our Bishops, to be in all our Kings successively.

Secondly, for the high Commission, it was first set up (as some Lawyers have
told us) but in the beginning of Queen Elisabeths reign; and is not so
established, but that by Regal power it may be demolished.

Thirdly, there may be more Archbishops then two, if it please the King: for,
by the same right, or better, that Ibid. page 58.
Offa King of Mercia erected a new Archbishopricke in Lichfield (leaving to the
Archbishop of Canterbury for his Province only London, Winchester, Rochester,
and Sherbourne) may his Majesty that now is erect new Archbishops in what
Diocese he pleases, and may restore the old; and so not only Lincoln shall
be an Archbishopricke, but Archbish. Whitg. out of Master Fox notes, that
about the year 180. the three Archistamines of the Pagan Britain were changed
into three Archbishoprickes: the one of London, the other of York, the third
of Glamorgan, none of Cant. Archb. Whitg. reply to Master Cartwr. page 323. It
is like the most of England was under London, the rest and Scotland under
York, as Bishop Godwin writes, and under Glamorgan Wales. Godw. Catal. of
Bish. p. 181, 182.
London and Glamorgan, or See Godw. his Catal. of Bishops. page 503, 504.
Saint David's: and for London, it continued so from the year 300. or
thereabout (though Stowe say it was the same Archbishopricke with Canterbury,
only locally changed) until Gregory his time, who was Pope about the year
600. and the King may limit their Jurisdiction, as he shall conceive to be most
convenient.

Fourthly, over the Archbishops of his dominions (for the calling and governing
of a Nationale Concilium Patriarcha regni convocare debet, Provinciale
Archiepiscopus, etc. Praelud. in Caranz. sum. council. cap. 3. p. 4. edit. 1633.
National Council) he may place a Patriarch; and King James showed himself
well enough inclined to such a superiority, when he said, King James his
premonit. to free Princes and States. page 366.
Patriarchs, I know, were in the time of the Primitive Church, and among them
there was a contention for the first place: and for my self if that were yet
the Question (and Papal Innovation in Religion put down; for that is his
meaning, though he do not plainly express it) I would with all mine heart
give my consent, that the Bishop of Rome should have the first seat: I being a
Western King, would go with the Patriarch of the West, as the Churches of
great Britain of By humane Institution we suffered our selves to be ranged
under the Church of Romes Patriarchall Authority, as being the most famous
Church of the West, a matter of courtesy, no necessity, no spiritual
obligation. Bish. Hall against Brownists. sect 23. page 590.
courtesy, not of duty, in former times were wont to do.

And for each particular Prelate, whether Archbishop, or Bishop, he is to be
regulated for his Courts, and other Jurisdiction, by Royal Authority: and how
far they stand established in the Kings favor, purpose, or promise, we
cannot tell, nor dare we swear; much less dare we be so peremptory
concerning the power of Deanes, or Archdeacons: for to Deanes, which have not
Episcopal Jurisdiction, he may grant as much privilege as the Deanes of
Westminster, or Windsor do enjoy; and by the same Authority that some may have
more, may others have less.

And for Archdeacons, the doubt is more, since their establishment consists in
prescription, as before has been observed; and that prescription in some
respects may be a prevarication, fitter to be abolished, then established: as
appears by that of Spalatensis, saying, Cum Archidiaconi jam passim supra
Presbyteros collocentur, id tandem nimia little pertinacia, and Praelatorum
conniventia, eos evicisse merito possumus affirmare. Spalat. de Repub. Eccles.
lib. 7. c. 4. page 273. 58.
That the Archdeacons placing above the Archpresbyters is to be imputed to
their pertinacy, and to the Bishops connivence.

But in this Diocese (for many years past) Jurisdiction has not been so
much, as an unnecessary appendance to Archdeacons; (since all that while) it
has been no appendance at all: for until very lately they had no Jurisdiction
at all; we cannot then say, much less swear, their Government is
established, since it was but newly erected, and made up out of Rural
Deanries, which is a fabric, like a Tent or Tabernacle newly set up, and may
be quickly taken down again.

3. Partic. As by right it ought to stand.
The 16. DOUBT. What this Right is,
16. Particular Doubt.
by which the Government is meant to stand.

THE REASON.
BEcause there be some, that think these words a limitation or restriction of
the former: as if the meaning were, that we ought to approve of the
establishment of this Government, so far as of right it ought to stand, and
no further: but concerning that, they that framed the Oath, could make no doubt
of any ones dissent, and therefore in that sense would call for none assurance
upon Oath.

It is more consonant to reason to conceive, that they meant to have an
acknowledgement, not only that the Government de facto is indeed established,
but that de jure also, of right it ought to be so; but then, Quo jure will be
the Question, whether the same, or a diverse right? If the same, whether shall
Bishops come down to Deanes and Archdeacons, and claim no better warrant for
their dignity then they? or shall Deanes and Archdeacons advance the Tenure of
their Authority as high as Bishops do, to claim their pre-eminence and power
by divine right? that as in the case of the Boemians (concerning the use of the
Communion cup, at the Council of Basiliense concilium concessit Boe miae
utriusque speciei usum, modo faterentur id sibi conce di ab Ecclesia, non autem
ad hoc teneri divino jure. Bellarm. l. 1. de Sacram. in genere, c. 2. sect. 2.
Basil, but more justly then so) may be denied to them all, when under some
other title, pre-eminence may be allowed unto them.

Some conceive the word Right was left at large in favor to Deponents, that
there might be a latitude for such as are of a scrupulous conscience, to
conceive such right as they could best approve of: and especially that right
which agrees to them all, to wit, a Positive and Ecclesiastical right by
humane constitution or prescription. But those that have better means to know
the minds of the Composers of the Canons, will have the Right diversified,
according to that to which it is applied; as, that Bishops stand by divine
Right, the rest by Right Ecclesiastical.

To this purpose we may bring in the saying of our Savior, Lo, Lam with you to
the end of the world, Mat. 28.20. which is not to be understood in person, but
by assistance (for neither he, nor they his Apostles, to whom he spoke, were
to be in the world, until the worlds end) and this assistance is diverse:
infallible, as to the Apostles, but sufficient only to their successors; so the
Right may be conceived to be divine in respect of Bishops; but humane to all
the rest. But of this tenet of divine Right, though it be held by very The
Archb. that now is, in his Speech in the Star Chamber. p. 6. Bishop Hall in
his late book entitled Episcopacy by Divine right.
great Prelates of our Church, and by Bish. Andrews in his Answer to the 18.
Chapter of Perrons Reply. p. 15.
some said to be the Doctrine of our Church, such a Doctrine, and so fully
delivered by the Apostles, That there is not the tenth part of the Plea for the
Lords day from their writings, which Bishops have for their Episcopacie (which
comparison, God willing, shall be examined elsewhere) and that Bish. Hall of
Episcop. part. 2. p. 47.
there be diverse points of faith (weighty points) which have not so strong
evidence in Bish. Hall Ibid. part. 1. page 63.
Scripture; so strong evidence, that heaven may as soon fall, as that fail
the Bishops.

And though some (who have been approved for their very great and faithful
labors in the Church, and for extraordinary zeal against all Popish opinions)
have Willet Synops. Papis. contro. 5. qu. 3. p. 277.
acknowledged somewhat in the calling of Bishops to be Divine and
Apostolical; yet there is much said on the contrary side: which, if it serve
not to induce a denial of that high and holy claim, may occasion at least a
doubting thereof. And very doubtful it was (in the Council of Trent) by
reason of the diversity of opinions there proposed: for though the superiority
of Bishops over Presbyters were Hist. of the Council of Trent. l. 7. page 596.
de facto confessed, de jure it was doubted, whether it were Ibid. p. 397.
by a Divine, or by a Pontifical right; that is, whether by a right derived
from the Scripture, or from the Pope? and we may add (according to the Ibid.
p. 606.
Augustan confession) or neither: for that allows no difference betwixt a
Bishop and a Presbyter, but by custom and constitution Ecclesiastical; and so
doubtful was their Ibid. p. 597.
Tenure, that some (in that Council) were willing to avoid the discussion of
that doubt; and the chiefest of the Prelates (the Ibid. p. 638.
Cardinal of Loraine) when he discoursed of that Question, spoke still
ambiguously; and at last concluded, That the Question was boundless: and
though they made it more intricate, then with us it can be, by their erroneous
opinion of the Papal power and prelation over Bishops (whereof we conceive no
scruple at all, since we reject it, as a Paradox in our Church) yet there is
doubt for all that of the Authority of Bishops by divine right; and just ground
for that doubt: for

First, Saint Paulus in Epist. Presbyteri and Episcopi appellatione promiscue
utitur, idque Chrysostom. August. Hier. aliique annotarunt. Duaren. de minist. c.
7. fol. 8. So also Bish Downham in his defense of his consecrat. Sermon. l. 1. c.
3. p. 64. Bish. Hall in his book of Episcopacie. part. 2. p. 10, 11, 20.
Paul in his Epistles uses the words Bishop and Presbyter in a promiscuous
manner; as Chrysostom, August. Hierome, and others have observed: and all
three have spoken somewhat to bring Presbyters nearer to an equality with
Bishops, then the Tenet of such superiority (by Divine Right) as is pleaded
for, will admit: for, Chrysostom speaking of Saint Paul's naming of Bishops and
Deacons, without mention of Presbyters: as to all the Saints which are at
Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons, Phil. 1.1. gives this reason of their
omission, Because (says Quia scil. inter Episcopum and Presbyterum interest
ferme nihil; sola quippe Ordinatione superiores illi sunt. Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 3.
Hom. 11. tom. 4. col. 1485.
he) there is in a manner no difference betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter: only
in Ordination Bishops have the Not by Scripture, as is plain by 1 Timothy 4.14.
but by humane constitution, or custom.
pre-eminence: the same says Quid facit (excepta Ordinatione) Episcopus, quod
Presbyter non faciat. Hier. ad Evagr. tom. 2. page 334.
Hierome in his Epistle to Evagrius; and commenting upon S. Paul's Epistle to
Titus, Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine, quam dispositionis dominicae
veritate Presbyteris esse majores, and in commune debere Ecclesiam regere. Idem
in Tit. 1.5. tom. 9. fol. 153. page 2.
He would have Bishops to know, that they are greater then Presbyters, rather
by custom, then by truth of any constitution or disposition of the Lord; and
that they ought (in common) to govern the Church. Saint Secundum honorum
vocabula quae jam Ecclesiae usus obtinuit, Episcopatus Presbyterio major est.
Aug. epist. 19.
Augustine to the same purpose says, That the phrase of the Church makes
Episcopacy greater then Presbytery, which Bishop Jewel renders thus: Bish.
Jewel in the defense of his Apol. part. 2. c. 3. page 101.
The office of a Bishop is above the office of a Priest (not by authority of
Scriptures) but after the names of honor, which the custom of the Church has
now obtained.

The Parenthesis is his, brought in to make up the sentence of Saint Augustine;
and as now the distinction of Bishops and Priests is received, it cannot (as
Willets Synops. papis. gener. controv. 93. q. 3. p. 273.
some, who yet approve of Episcopal pre-eminence, have written) be directly
proved out of Scriptures: and whereas Archb. Whitgifts answer to T. C. p. 384,
385
Archbishop Whitgift says, the reason why Bishops and Presbyters are taken for
the same, is, because every Bishop is a Presbyter; but not on the contrary,
every Presbyter a Bishop: that reason for the Affirmative part is contradicted
by See Niceph. hist. l. 12. c. 12. Gers. Bucer. dissertat. de gubernat. Eccles.
p. 27. Franc. Long. annot. in council. p. 142.
diverse Instances; and for the Negative, it will not pass without exception,
at least for the Apostles time: of which Saint Idem erat Presbyter qui
Episcopus, antequam Diaboli instinctu studia in religione fierent. Hier. ep. ad
Tit. cap. 1.
Hierome says, that a Presbyter is the same with a Bishop, and so was taken,
until by the Devils instinct some turned Religion into faction.

And though Epiphan. haeres. 75. l. 3. tom. 1. contra haeres. p. 215. col. 1.
Aerius (when his ambitious desire to be a Bishop was disappointed) in
emulation and anger fell to contemptuous comparisons of Bishops with
Presbyters; and therefore was noted by Epiphanius in his Catalogue of
Heretics: and since him Mich. Medin. de contin. sacr. homin. l. 1. c. 5.
Michael Medina made it material heresy, to deny the distinction of Divine
Right betwixt Bishops and Presbyters, and the Si quis dixerit in Ecclesia
Catholica non esse Hierarchiam divina ordinatione institutam, quae constat ex
Episcopis and Ministris, anathema sit. Council. Trid. ses. 7. Can. 6. fol. 561.
b.
Council of Trent formally decreed it, with an Anathema to those that deny it.
Yet was not Hierome (though a vehement Advocate in the behalf of the
Presbyteriall dignity) much less Chrysostom and Augustine for such sayings as
these ever taxed for heresy. Nor is Altar Damasc. p. 276, 277, 278, 279. See
also primam Pet. Moulinaei epist. Episc. Winton. p. 161, 162.
Aerius left without a probable Apology, which may serve with some, not only
to expunge his name out of the Catalogue of One only branded Heretic (i.
Aerius) in so many hundred years opposed Episcopal government. Bishop Hall of
Episcopacy. part. 1. p. 66.
Heretics, but to enroll it in the Register of Orthodox Doctors.

And for the Tridentine Decree, it is the less to be regarded, because we may
say, as Bishop Jewel does of As for the words of Leo, his own authority in his
own cause cannot be great. Bish. Jewel defense Apol. part. 2. c. 3. page 101.
Leo, The words of the Bishops of that Council are of no great weight, because
they make a Decree in their own cause.

But Chrysostom and Augustine were Bishops though Hierome was none; and yet
they spoke of Bishops and Presbyters so equally as has been said; and if
untruly, indiscreetly also: because both against the truth, and themselves. We
may say the same of Bishop Jewel, whose judgment is plain against the opinion
of Divine Right, by his exposition of Saint Augustine fore-alledged. Besides,
Panormitanus in quaestionibus suis ex mala interpretatione. Hier. negat hanc
Divino Jure inter Episcopos and Presbyteros distinctionem. Franc. a Sancta
Clara Apol. Episc. page 64.
Panormitan and Fulv. Pacian. de probationib. l. 2. c. 28. fol 96.
Pacianus (very famous men in their faculties; the one for a Canonist, the
other for a Civilian, and diverse more, to say nothing of the Chamier. tom. 2.
l. 10. c. 6. page 350.
learned men of the Reformed Churches in foreign parts) will not admit of any
pre-eminence of a Bishop above a Presbyter by Divine Right. All which we
allege not to contest with the reverend Prelates in point of Authority, but to
show, that if an acknowledgement of Episcopal pre-eminence (as of Divine
Right) be required in this Canon (and by that we have showed, we have cause
to suppose it) it is too problematicall an opinion for such confidence as
should accompany an Oath.

Of Archbishops.
Of Archbishops, though their Authority be greater, yet as touching the Tenure
by Divine Right, our belief is lesser: for they that hold Bishops to be
superiors to Presbyters by Divine Right (as the Apostles were superiors to
the 72. Disciples) do not for the most part (unless they be Papists) allow of
Archbishops in that sacred Episcopacy; and even he, who was an Archbishop
himself, and highly advanced in print the Episcopal degree, has out of
Ignatius observed (and thereby affronted the Papal usurpation) that the twelve
were all Abunde probavi Christum suam Ecclesiam Apostolis omnibus aeque
commendasse, eosque ad hoc necessaria potestare aeque omnes adornasse
confentit. Ignat. episi. ad Philadelph. dum ad Apostolos veluti ad
Presbyterium, Ecclesiae Collegium, recurri postulat; Collegium vero
Aristocraticum nemo ignorant. Spalat. de Repub Eccles. lib. 1. c. 12. page 137.
The Archbish. that now is says the like of the Aristocraticall Government, and
equality of the Apostles, and quoteth Bellarm. de To. Po. l. 1. c. 9. to the
same purpose, making account his words are a confession of the truth against
his own side. So in relat. of his conference. page 168, 200, 202, 380. See
Bishop Hall of Episcopacy. part. 2. page 13.
equal as an Aristocraticall College, no Prince or Monarch ruling over the
rest, as the Romanists pretend and assume in the name of St. Peter; wherein
Saint Jam and illud considera, quam Petrus agit omnia ex communi Discipulorum
sententia, nihil authoritate sua, nihil cum Imperio. Chrysostom. bom. 3. in Act.
Apost. cap. 1. tom. 3. col. 459.
Chrysostom is directly opposite unto them, observing how Saint Peter, in an
assembly of the Disciples, does all by their common consent, nothing by his
own authority, nothing in a lofty or a Lordly manner. For, that Authority
(which they take up as Saint Peter's right) his Master and ours thought too much
for him, or any one man else; foreseeing, as the Archbish. of Spalato noted,
Spalat. de Repub. Eccles. l. 1. c. 12. p. 138.
That a Monarchy in a Churchman would be apt to break out into a tyranny
over the Church. And for the tenure of Archiepiscopall authority, we may
believe Bishop Bish Jewels defense of his Apolog part. 2. c. 3. divis. 5. page
110.
Jewel, where he says in answer to Master Harding, that though Primates or
Archbishops had authority over the inferior Bishops, yet they had it but by
agreement and custom, neither by Christ, nor by Peter, nor Paul, nor by any
right of Gods Word.

Object. If it be objected (as by some it has been) that though the Apostles
had no Archbishops among themselves (who had a priority of Order, and a
majority of Rule above the rest of that fundamental Function:) yet (in respect
of other Bishops constituted by them) they were all Archbishops to those that
were under them; It may be answered,

Answ. 1. That the right of Episcopacy has not been so well cleared by
Scripture, that it should be taken for an undoubted ground, whereon to erect
an Archiepiscopall power: for, there is so much difficulty and dispute about
that, as makes it to us incapable of the assurance of an Oath.

Secondly, our Protestant Divines (when the Papists plead for Peter's
Episcopal, or Archiepiscopall supremacy at Rome, to maintain the usurpations
of the Pope upon all other Churches) answered that (as we conceive, according
to the truth) that to be a Bishop, or Archbishop, and an Apostle, imports a
repugnancy: for both Bishops and Archbishops were confined to a certain
compass for their Authority; but the Apostles were of an unlimited liberty and
power, both for planting and governing Churches all over the world: wherein
they had every one of them such an equal and universal interest, that Non
erat ea facta divisio (scil. inter Apostolos) ut alter ab alterius abstineret
Apostolatu. Baron. Annal. tom. 1. an. 51. 27. col. 424.
no Apostle had any part of the world to himself, wherein the rest had not an
Apostolical and Pastoral right as well as he; which is not, nor can be so in
Episcopal, or Archiepiscopall callings.

Object. If the opinion of Estius comment. in 1 Timothy 5.19. col. 809.
Estius be interposed, viz. That Archiepiscopacy was founded, when Timothy was
made Bishop of Ephesus, the Metropolis of Asia, wherein he had Bish. Hall
reckons 36. Bishoprics under Ephesians. part. 2. p. 24.43. See Will. Synops.
papis. controv. 5. in append. ad quaest. 3. p. 273.
many Bishops under his Jurisdiction: that (to say nothing of what is said of
the unbishoping of Timothy and Titus, in a particular book of that title)
being brought in without proof, will be as readily Didoclau. Altar Damascen.
page 175.
denied by some, as it is easily affirmed by any: and if we should say, that
until Pope Zepherinus (in the third Century) named himself an Cent. 3. c. 10.
col. 275.
Archbishop, or until the reign of Constantine (as a very learned
Archiepiscopi and Patriarchae in usum abierunt, quorum ante Constantini tempora
altum silentium. Dan. Chamier. de oecumen. pontif. lib. 10. cap. 6. tom. 2.
page 353.20.
Writer has observed) there is no mention of an Archbishop: it will not be
easy (perhaps) for any (by legitimate Testimony) to bring in an instance, to
disprove the observation in the Eastern Church; and for the Western, it came
later thither, as the Sunsetting comes after the Sunrising. And Filasacus a
Divine of Paris says, Filasac. de sacr. ep. Anth. chapter 19. sect. 1. Council.
Matisc. 1. Can. 4.
It is not used in these parts, until the first Matiscon Council, scil. anno
587.

Which may be to us the more probable, because we have had experience (in our
own time of a Doct. Saravia says, the Assemblies of the Presbyterians are no
Synods but Conventicles, because he reads not of any Synod without an
Archbishop. Sarav. de Triplic. ep. q. 3. p. 90.
principal point of now-Archiepiscopall Government, the Presidentship of a
Provincial Synod) without an Archbishop. So was it in the year 1603. when the
Bishop of London was President of the Synod then assembled: Archbish. Archb.
Whitgifl in his reply to Master Cartwr. p. 310, 313, 427, 432.
Whitgift (against Master Cartwright) endeavors to maintain, That the
office of an Archbishop was in use in the Apostles time, and by their Can. 33.
(or 34. as some account) p. 470. Archb. Whitgi.
appointment in an Apostolical Canon; and that Ibid. page 400.
Titus was an Archbishop over Crete; and Page 470.
Dionysius Areopagita (the Scholar of S. Paul) Archbishop of Athens. But his
proofs (as some of us upon examination have found them) are too low, and too
flat for the height and compass of the Arch of his Asseveration, especially as
applied to the state and authority of Archbishops in the Church of England, the
prelation particularly, opposed by Master Cartwright, who (conceiving both the
authority and title of an Archbishop by Scripture to belong peculiarly to
Christ, and not finding the name The title Archbishop, is proper to Christ, as
appears by Saint Peter, where he calls him (...), which is an
Archshepheard, or Archbishop; for Bishop and Shepherd are all one. Ibid. p.
300.
Archbishop there) takes up the title Archshepheard, 1 Pet. 5.4. as equivalent
to it.

The greatest Antiquity, and best Authority that we find for that title, is
that which Archb. Whitgifts reply to Mast. Cartwr. page 323. ex Mr. Fox
Martyrol. tom. 1. p. 146.
Archbishop Whitgift cites out of Master Fox, viz. That in the time of
Eleutherius, an. 180. there were in Britain 28. head Priests, which in the
time of Paganism they called Flamines; and three Archpriests among them, which
were called Archiflamines, as Judges over the rest: these 28. Flamines (upon
the conversion of the Britains) were turned to 28. Bishops, and the three
Archiflamines to three Archbishops: which, if it be true, yet it is far below
that which is alleged for the calling of Archbishops; and yet more ancient
then honorable, for the conformity to Pagan pre-eminence.

Nor will it serve to say (as Pope Eugen. 4. Epist. ad Episcop. Cantuarien.
ait, Cardinalium nomen non fuisse in principio nascentis Eccles. expressum,
munus tamen and officium a B. Petro and ejus successoribus evidenter crat
institutum. Fran. Long. annot. in 2. Council. Romans page 201.
Eugenius the fourth said of the name Cardinal) that though it were not
expressly mentioned in the beginning of the Christian Church, yet the office was
instituted by Saint Peter, and his successors. For, not to insist upon the
name Cardinal, of which the saying of the Pope is an unprobable fiction,
superiority among Bishops is to be reduced rather to a secular, then to a
sacred Original. For our Archbishop of Canterbury that now is, says, Archb.
Laud in his relat. of his confer. page 176.
It was insinuated, if not ordered, that honors of the Church should follow
honors of the State; as appears by the Canons of the Council of Council.
Chalced. Can. 9. and Act. 16.
Chalcedon, and Antioch. It was thought fit therefore (though as Saint Cypr. de
simplic. Praelat. Episcopatus unus est.
Cyprian speaks) there be one Episcopacy, the calling of a Bishop be one and
the same; that yet among Bishops there should be a certain subor dination and
subjection: the Empire therefore being cast into several divisions ( which
they then called Diocesses) every Diocese contained several Provinces, every
Province several Bishops: the chief of a Diocese in that large sense was
called (...), and sometimes a Patriarch, the chief of the Province a
Metropolitan, next the Bishops in their several Diocesses (as we now use the
word.) Among these there was effectual subjection grounded upon Canon, and
positive Law, in their several Quarters; all the difference there was but
Honorary, not Authoritative. So far he; where, though he name the title
Bishop, Patriarch, and Metropolitan, he does not mention the title Archbishop.

And though he grant, that Archb. Laud ubi supra. page 168.
the Church of Rome has had, and has yet a more powerful principality, then
any other Church; yet he says, she has not that power from Christ. The
Roman Patriarch by Ecclesiastical constitutions (says he) might perhaps
have a primacy of order; but for principality of power they were all equal, as
the Apostles were before them: and he might have said so much as well of
Bishops, as of Patriarchs; for, except for Ecclesiastical Constitutions, and
positive Laws, they are not subordinate one to another: neither the authority
nor title then of Metropolitan or Archbishop is taken to be so ancient, or
warrantable by the Word of God, as that of the Bishops, in the judgment of
such as are the dearest friends to Prelaticall dignity. Yet, as we deny not,
but that an inequality betwixt Bishops and Presbyters is (as Inaequalitatem
inter Episcopum and Presbyterum esse vetustissimam, and vicinam Apostolorum
temporibus ultro fatemur. Fr. Chamier. de oecumen. pontif. l. 10. c. 6. tom. 2.
p. 85.3. col. 2.
Chamier confesses) most ancient, and very near the Apostles times; so we
yield it as probable, that Archbishops are very ancient also, and as certain,
that there have been, and are very many, as worthy to be Archbishops, as others
to be Bishops: and that there have been of that elevation men of as eminent
desert for learning and devotion, both in ancient and later times, as any that
have lived in the same Ages with them; but in regard of more doubt of their
Authenticke tenure, then of that of Bishops (though that also be very much
doubted of) we have the less heart to swear to Archiepiscopall pre-eminence.

Object. If it be said, that Archb. Whitgift in his defense of the answ. to
the Admon. p. 386.
Archbishops were set up for the keeping out of Schism among Bishops, as
Bishops for that end were set over Presbyters, we do not gainsay it; but say,
that our Doubt is not now of the politic end, but of the original right of
their exaltation: and withal we may note, that this Argument, drawn from the
prevention of Schism, may climb too high, and indeed it has done so; for, at
the next step, it lifts up Patriarchs above Archbishops; and at the next
after that, a Pope above Patriarchs: and all this upon the same pretense of
preventing of Schism; but the further it has advanced, the worse it has
succeeded for the welfare of the Church, both in respect of Heresy and
Schism: for Bellarmine says, Omnes Ecclesiae Patriarchales (praeter Romanam)
habuerunt per longa tempora manifestos Haereticos. Bell. de notis Eccl. 4. not.
5. c. 8. p. 74.
All the Patriarchall Churches (except the Roman) for a long time have had
Bishops which were manifest Heretics.

If his observation be as true for the most (which for a great part we may
believe, though we dare not take it upon his bare word) as his exception is
false for the Roman Patriarch: for he is the most Heretical and Schismatic
Prelate in the world, we can have no great confidence in the end [the keeping
out of Schisme] unless the means, the raising up of Bishops to that height,
be found to be warranted by the Word of God; yet we make great difference
betwixt the Popes claim of universal and unlimited Supremacy upon this
ground, and that of Archbishops and Patriarchs confined within the reach, and
under the check and restraint of a temporal Potentate.

For the other offices of Government named in the Oath, or involved in the etc.
there is none that pleads a Divine Right; and we may say of most of them, as
Bish. Downh. in the defense of his consecr. Sermon. l. 1. c. 8. page 185.
Bishop Downham does of some of them, As for ordinary Vicars (that is, Vicars
which are Ecclesiastical Judges in ordinary) Chancellours, or Commissaries
(scil. of the Laity) the Bishops in these times (i. of Saint Augustine and
Ambrose) had none, not so much as the Steward of the Church might be a
Layman. They neither did then, nor rightly could they claim a Divine and
Apostolical right for their callings: which we may the rather say, for the
saying of Anacletus, who (about the year 103. being Bishop of Rome) has in
one of his Epistles written, That there were but two orders ordained by our
Savior, viz. of Bishops and Priests, nor were any more either orders or
degrees, either appointed by God, or taught by the Apostles: whereof though
many doubt, in regard of that he affirms of the original of Bishops; yet
they will easily assent to his denial of the rest, and what their right is,
either by custom, or humane constitution, we are very doubtful: and, while we
doubt, we dare not swear.

4. Partic. Their perpetuity not to be changed.
The 17. DOUBT.
How far this perpetuity propounded is to be applied to the Discipline or
Government of the Church. 17. Particular Doubt.


THE REASON.
BEcause, as before has been observed, Discipline and Government seem (at the
beginning of the Oath) to be the same; and in this part of it, we find no
cause to divide them: and then our Doubt is, Why, a great part of the
Discipline and Government consisting in Constitutions concerning Ceremonies,
and other things of alterable nature (as The accidental points of Government
(as the manner of electing Ministers, the kind of Discipline, accidental
Ceremonies, and other such like Rites and Circumstances, may be varied
according to time, place, and persons. Archb. Whitgift in a Note of dangerous
points of the Doctrine of T.C. presently after the Preface. nu. 19. The like
has Bish. Hall in his Apology against the Brownists. p. 595, 596.
Archbish. Whitgift acknowledges) we should swear to a perpetuity: whereby
we conceive we shall cross, at least the intent of the 34. Article (to which
the Clergy have subscribed) which says, Every particular, or national Church
has authority to ordain, The like we have noted before out of the Preface of
our Service Book.
change, and abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, ordained only by man's
Authority, so that all things be done to edifying: and withal, shall much
impeach the freedom of future Synods: for they that are forestalled with an
Oath against change, cannot be so free to change (when just occasion
requires) as they should be.

It is an exception made by the Divines of Aberdene, against the Oath of the
Covenant in Scotland, The general Demands of the Ministers and Professors of
Aberdene. Deman. 10. p. 26
That it takes away all hope of a free Assembly or Parliament, to judge of the
matter presently debated: for how can those (say they) vote freely of any
matter propounded to decision, and deliberation of the Church and State, who
have already sworn to adhere to one part of the Question.

And our dread Sovereign in his large Declaration shows, The Kings Declar.
concerning the Tumults in Scotl. p. 330.
That points of Discipline, Government, and Policy of the Church (even in
Scotland) are declared by Act of Parliament, Act. 20.21. to be alterable at
the will of the Church it self, and so repealable by succeeding Acts, if the
Church shall see cause. And our Church to this day does profess a purpose and
desire of alteration of Discipline; for, in the beginning of the Commination in
our Service Book, these are her words: Brethren, in the Primitive Church,
there was a godly Discipline, that at the beginning of Lent, such persons as
were notorious sinners, were put to open penance, etc. In stead whereof, until
the said Discipline may be restored again (which thing is much to be wished) it
is thought good, etc. the same desire appears in the Synod at The Council of
Challons held an. 813. Can. 25. Symps. of the Church. p. 560, 561.
Challons, decreeing an entreaty to be presented to the Emperor, That the
ancient Discipline may be restored again; and that they who sin publicly,
may be brought to public repentance, and every man (according as he
deserves) may either be excommunicated, or reconciled.

And for Excommunication (in particular) which is a chief point of Discipline
or Government (of which 1. Whether the name might not be altered: 2. Whether in
place of it another coercion might not be invented. Conser. at Hamp. Court.
page 19.
King James propounded an alteration both for the name and thing, etc. we
conceive it not only alterable from that which is now, but (being more
frequently inflicted for nonappearance, then for the foulness of the
offense, when it does appear) meet to be altered and reformed, according to
the Sea Reform. leg. Eccles. a sol. 80. ad 90. See also the form. of the sent.
of Excomm. in certain Canons of the Synod. 1571. p. 29.30.
Constitutions and Orders published by King Henry the eighth, and King Edward
the sixth; and in the last Synod the case is much altered with Bishops in their
Government: for, whereas formerly they were free to propound what Articles they
thought good in their visitations, Can. 9.
Now (to prevent just aggrievances, which may be laid upon Churchwardens, and
other Sworn-men, by impertinent, inconvenient, or illegal inquiries) this last
Synod has caused a summary, or collection of Visitatory Articles (out of the
Rubricke of the Service Book, and the Canons, and warrantable Rules of the
Church) to be made: which Bishops, and other Ordinaries, are to follow in their
Visitations, and none other. And in diverse particulars the Authority of
Chancellours is See the Confer. at Hampt. Court, how their authority is altered
by restraint. page 77, 78. particularly for Excommunication.
altered, as may appear by the 11, 13, 14, 15, 17. Canons of the late Synod.
And why another Synod may not (if there be cause) make other alterations, we
know not, and we believe they may; and that there may be need they should do
so: and therefore that we may not take an Oath that we will not consent to
alter that, which is of an alterable nature.

Object. If it be said, that Government is here taken as distinguished from
Discipline; and that Discipline may be altered, while the Government is not:
we say,

Answ. 1. That we find no ground in the Oath for that distinction; and we have
showed before, that in the former part, they signify (as Synonyma) the same
things.

Secondly, if we take the Government for that of the Bishops pre-eminence over
the Presbyters, though Bishop Hall aver with a confidence belonging to the
Creed, Bish. Hall of Episcopacy. part. 2 sect. 2. page 129.
That the Government by Bishops is both universal and unalterable: and so was
Ibid. p. 132, 133.
intended by the Apostles in their ordinance of them; and therefore is Ibid. p.
135.
utterly indispensable, and must so continue to the worlds end: yet some, who
have been more exercised in the controversy of Episcopal Authority then he
(if we may make our comparison by what is published in print) and who think so
well of that Prelation, as to hold it as of Apostolical Institution, confess,
Bish. Downh. answ. to the Preface of the Refuter of his Sermon. p. 9.
That the Government by Bishops is not generally, perpetually, and immutably
necessary: and it may be that which the Archbishop of Canterbury that now is,
has said of Government in general, may have an application to this point in
particular (though he meant it not so) Archb. Laud in his Epist. De dic.
before his Starrechamb. Speech.
This (says he) I shall be bold to say, and your Majesty may consider of it
in your wisdom, that one way of Government is not always fit, or safe, when
the humors of the people are in a continual change.

Thirdly, there is an alteration in Government, when they that govern have
less Authority then they have had, as by the last Canons we have observed,
both of Bishops and Chancellours.

Fourthly, there may be yet a further alteration for the better, without
digression from the old way to Novelty, or from the high way (the right road
way of such as are truly religious) to Schism; which (if the reverend Fathers
will give us leave) we will undertake to show by such evidence, as in this
case is of greatest weight.

We dare not then take an Oath against alteration, lest therewith we should
forswear a meet Reformation of the Church; which any Church may need, that
has less assistance of the Spirit then the Prophets of the Old Testament, and
the Apostles of the New; and of all of them we must hold, as the The L.
Archbish. that now is, in his Answ. to A.C. page 91.
Archbishop has very well said in his answer to the Jesuit, Such an assistance
of Christ and the holy Spirit, the Prophets under the Old Testament had, and
the Apostles under the New; as neither the high Priest with his Clergy in the
Old, nor any company of Prelates or Priests in the New (since the Apostles)
ever had.

5. Partic. That though there should be an alteration, we should never give our
consent unto it. The words of the Oath. Nor will I ever give my consent, etc.
Of these words we have a double Doubt.
The one DOUBT is,
Why we should swear against consent, to alter the Government of the Church.
18. Particular Doubt.


THE REASON.
BEcause so the Government seems to be preferred before the Doctrine: for,
for the Doctrine we must swear only, that we will not bring in, or be the
Inventers or Leaders in the promoting of Popish Doctrine; but for the
Government, we must swear, that we will not consent, though but as followers,
for what others bring in: Now, as it is a less offense to be a Follower, then
a Captain in whatsoever is evil; so it seems to show a greater care of
preservation of the Government of the Church by Archbishops, etc. then of the
Doctrine of Religion; by requiring as strict an Oath, not to be second in the
change of the one, as not to be first in corrupting the other.

The other DOUBT is,
Whether, if we should thus swear, 19. Particular Doubt.
we should not be entangled with contradiction to our Governors, and to our
selves.

THE REASON.
BEcause, first, for our Governors, we are bound in duty to yield our consents
to their lawful Constitutions, though with some alteration of Government,
which we can have no heart to do, if we have sworn to the contrary.

Hereto some except and say, If they alter, we may alter with them; but this we
conceive to be too much fickleness and levity, and liker to the Gypsy play of
fast and loose, then to the grave and solid Asseveration, which belongs to an
Oath; which is neither lightly to be taken, nor to be slighted, when it is
taken: for, so it would give none assurance to those that tender it, who meant
(as we see in the Preface of the Oath) to give security by Oath for constancy
to the Doctrine and Discipline established against Innovation: but there would
be little assurance of that, if their meaning were this, That they that swear
should not change, till their superiors had changed before them.

Besides, the chiefest of them hold the Discipline and Government by Bishops
immutable; and therefore some of them have said, they would rather dye, then
yield to an alteration of Episcopal Government: but we believe it would be
more easy for a Logician to convince them, that Episcopacy is not of Divine
Right (but of an alterable nature) then for a Rhetorician to persuade them to
change life for death, this world for the next, rather then to consent to an
alteration of that Government.

There be that tell us (and we must not take their saying for a Clement the
seventh, immediately upon his oath given to Charles the fifth, for performance
of the Articles (accorded at his delivery) dispensed with his oath; and by
probable conjecture had promised to dispense with him before hand. So Sir Edw.
Sands in his relat. p. 42.
Papal dispensation, Mast. Fuller in the Holy War. l. 2. c. 37. page 93.
which opens so wide a window, that it is in vain to shut the door) of many
cases of conscience, wherein though we have sworn, we may be discharged of our
Oaths; and show us a posterne gate for an outlet of perjury: but we cannot
come to that gate, but by the wicket of inconsiderate swearing; and if we
apprehend any probable occasions of change beforehand, we must not make Let it
be written among the Laws of the Persians and of the Medes, that it be not
altered. Esth. c. 1. v. 19.
Median or Persian Protestations, that we will not change.

Object. But we have in effect done as much already (say some) in subscribing
to the Book of Common Prayer, wherein we promise to use the form in the said
Book prescribed, and none other, Can. 36.

Answ. 1. To which we may answer many ways: as,

First, that it is not put upon us, as of Divine Right; and being but humane,
it is employed to be changeable.

Secondly, the forecited Preface concerning the Ceremonies, and the 34.
Article profess a mutable condition in such Institutions.

Thirdly, experience has diverse times explained that clause: for, other forms
of prayer have been imposed upon especial occasions.

Fourthly, to leave us at more liberty, if there should be a change, our word
is taken without an Oath; for which In his Preface of the Articles of Religion.
Master Rogers commends the moderation of our Governors.

Object. But in refusing of the Oath now, for fear of future disobedience, we
disobey for the present. To which we say:

Answ. 1. That our not swearing is no present disobedience; because our
consciences cannot consent to swear; and they that require the Oath would not
have us to swear against our consciences, nor against our good wills: for, one
condition expressed in it is, That we do it heartily, and willingly: nor do we
conceive, that, the premises duly considered, they would have us to swear.

Secondly, our not swearing in this case, is rather an obedience to our
Superiors; because we have already sworn to their Authority and Power for
such alterations, both for the present, and for their heirs and successors:
and so our promissory Oath in this case (if we should take it) would be with
certain prejudice to another man's right; and consequently could not be
attended with justice: and the prejudice would be more unjust, because done to
the right of public and sovereign Authority, as Bish. Halls Irrefrag.
propos. prop. p. 3, 4.
Bishop Hall observes in his Irrefragable propositions.

And thirdly, for our selves, we doubt it is not safe to swear that we will
not consent to any alteration in Government; since we cannot but like it well
enough, if in some particulars it were more conformable to the condition of the
ancient Church: as if it should please his sacred Majesty, in the election of
Bishops, to have respect to the suffrage of the Clergy of the vacant Diocese,
as the Sacrorum Canonum non ignari, at in Dei nomine sancta Ecclesia suo
liberius potiretur honor. Baron. Annal. com. 9. nu. 21. col. 641.
Emperor Charles the Great had, when he published a Decree to that purpose,
according to the Cypr. ^p. Anton. episl. 52. page 57. col. 2. Contil. Aurelian.
9. Can. 10. Council. Parisiens. 1. Can. 6. Hieron. testatur Alexandrinos
Presbyteros spatio 140. annorum sibi ex suo numero unum cligisse, etc. Chamier.
tom. 2. lib. 10. ca 3. p. 350. nu. 3. Leo epist. 82. Spalat. de Republ.
Eccleslib. 3. c. 3. page 339, 340, 400. Bernard. de considerat. ad Eugen lib.
3. cap. 2. col. 878. Fox Martyrol. tom. 1. p. 5. col. 2. Council. Basil. sis. 3.
fol. 448.
ancient practice of the Church.

And if, when Bishops are elected, that either love, or some law of Authority
might restore Presbyters to their ancient Rights, and participation of the
Government of the Church, which they had in the Primitive times: whereof St.
Communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae regebantur. Hicron. in Tit. 1.5. tom.
9. sol. 153.
Hierome says, That the Church was governed by the common Council of the
Presbyters: which Presbyteri and Seniores pariter ad concilium admissi erant
tempore primaevo. Baron. Annal. ad an. 58. nu. 10, 11. tom. 1. col. 572.
Baronius acknowledges, and Bish. Downhams defense of his consecrat. Sermon. l.
1. c. 7. p. 142, 143. and c. 8. page 178.
Bishop Downham says, no man denies; and this, not only until there was a
Schism, and the people divided themselves, under the names of Paul, Apollo, and
Cephas; but afterward, as is plain by several testimonies of Saint Cyprian
(besides others) for he (writing to the Priests and Deacons) calls them
Brethren, and tells them, That it is his Ut quae circa Ecclesiae gubernacula
utilitas communis exposcit tractare simul, etc. Cypr. ep. 6. edit. Pamel. p. 12
desire, for those things that concern the government of the Church, that (as
the public benefit requires) they treat of them with common Counsel: and in
their absence he Nihil a me absentibus vobis novum factum est, sed quod
jampridem communi consilio, etc. Cypr. ep. 24. Presbyt. and Diac.
professes, That he did nothing, but what was concluded before by their common
advice: and A primordio Episcopatus mei statui nihil sine consilio vestro --
privata sententia gerere. Cyp. ep. 6. p. 13.
that it was his resolution from the first time of his being Bishop, to do
nothing of his own private conceit, but by their counsel.

Bishop Downham bringing in a sentence of Ambrose sounding to the same sense,
makes this answer unto it, Bish. Downhams def. of his Sermon. l. 1. cap. 7. p.
161.
Ambrose, and others thought it needful, that a Presbytery of grave and
ancient Ministers, should with their counsel, advise and assist the Bishops in
cases of doubt (as Doctor Bilson says) in cases of danger and importance; when
as yet neither Synod could assemble, nor Christian Magistrate was found to
assist the Church.

But when Synods were assembled, then Presbyters were assembled with the
Bishops; and, as Presbyters had decisive voices with them, as Doct. Field of
the Church. l. 1. c. 30. p. 514.
Doctor Field confesses: observing withal, concerning the number of Bishops,
and those that were not Bishops in such Ecclesiastical Assemblies, that in a
Ibid. cap. 49. page 647.
Council of Lateran, there were present 482. Bishops, and 800. Abbots, who
(says he) have less to do then Presbyters in the government of the Church.

Wherein he implies, that there should be many more then two Convocation
Clerks in a Diocese, to advise and vote at a Synod: And in our Diocesan
Synods, which are yearly called (according to the ancient Council. Agethen. an.
440. Can. 40. fo. 165. Caranz.
Canon and Custom) we are all summoned to appear in the Consistory, as in
the name of a Synod. But when we come thither, we have so little power and
liberty allowed us, either for discussion or determination of any matter
(wherein Presbyters, both in right and fact, have had a freedom heretofore)
that most of us appear rather as Delinquents, standing at the Consistoriall
Bar, or (at the best) as Clients, or Tenants paying a tribute of suit and
service at the Courts of their Landlord. So that we may take up the complaint
of Duarenus the famous Civilian, Olim hi conventus indicebantur, ut Episcopus
simul cum Presbyteris de disciplina cleri, de causis, etc. sed hujus
honestissimi instituti vix umbram hodie videmus. Fr. Duaren. de Min. ^. 1. c.
11. fol. 13.
O fold Synods were called, that the Bishops and Presbyters should treat of the
Discipline of the Clergy, of Ecclesiastical causes, and of divine Doctrine:
for there was no matter of any great weight, which the Bishops without that
Senate would determine: but now (says he) we can scarce discern so much as
a shadow of that most honest institution.

In the fourth Council of Carthage, about the year 401. (besides many other
Constitutions in the behalf and in honor of Presbyters) it was decreed,
Council. Carth. 4. Can. 23. page 313. edit. Fr. Longi.
That a Bishop should not determine any man's cause, but in presence of his
Clergy: Ibid. Can. 34. page 316.
That the Bishop, though in the Church, and in the Assemblies of the
Presbyters, he should sit in an higher place; yet privately should use his
Presbyters as Colleagues: and sitting himself, should not suffer a Presbyter
to stand.

And as Presbyters were not to be disdained by the Bishops, but to be taken
into a respective society with them (for the Qui Episcopatum desiderat, benum
opus desiderat: exponere voluit quid sit Episcopus, quia nomen est operis, non
honoris -- intelligat se non esse Episcopum, qui praeesse desiderat, non
prodesse. Aug. de civ. Dei, l. 19. c. 19. tom. 5. p. 1310.
name of a Bishop was anciently rather a name of labor, then of honor; rather
of duty, then of dignity;) so were they so much to be honored by the Deacons
below them (as Diaconus ita se Presbyteri, ut Episcopi ministrum esse
cognoscat. Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 17.
subordinate to them as well as to the Bishops) Nec sedere quidem licet medio
Presbyterorum Diaconos. Council. Nicen. 1. Can. 14. fol. 50. Ne Diaconus coram
Presbytero sedeat. Council. Aralat. Can. 15. Tit. Can. fol. 70. Council.
Constantinop. 6. Can. 7. Diaconus quolibet loco jubente Presbytero sedeat.
Council. Carth. 4. Can. 39.
That a Deacon might not sit among those that were Presbyters, as was decreed
in the first Council of Nice: And so it was observed at Rome (as In Ecclesia
Romae Presbyreri, sedent, and stant Diaconi, licet paulatim increbescentibus
vitiis, absente Episcopo sedere Diaconos viderim. Hieron. cpi. ad Evagr.
Hieron. tom. 2. page 334.
Hierome has noted) until vice increased; And then (says he) in the absence
of the Bishop, I have seen Deacons to sit in the presence of Presbyters.

And though in later times one Bishop has had power enough to undo many
Presbyters for small matters; yet heretofore, in a criminal cause, Causa
criminalis Episcopi a duodecim Episcopis audiatur, causa Presbyteri a sex,
causa vero Diaconi a tribus, cum proprio Episcopo. Council. Carth. 2. Can. 10.
fol. 111. a.
A Presbyter could not be condemned by fewer then six Bishops. A Bishop
indeed, as an elder brother, had a double portion to censure him; (for twelve
were requisite for a doom against a Bishop: and the Deacon (as a younger
brother to a Presbyter) had but half so many to give judgment of him as the
Presbyter had.

Now, if with security of the public peace, and the favor of our Superiors,
there should be any alteration in the Ecclesiastical Government; wherein we
might be assured to be dealt withal, if not as Brethren (as Nos omnes Episcopi
meminisse debemus Presbyteros omnes esse nostros fratres collegas in
Ministerio, non famulos, non mancipia; eosque jure divino non minorem habere in
pascendo populo Dei potestatem quam nos habemus, Spalat. de Repub. Eccles. l.
2. c. 9. page 284.
some of the Episcopal order have professed, and pleaded on our behalf) yet
rather as sons to reverend Fathers, then as servants to imperious Lords, we
dare not be such hypocrites, as to forswear a consent to that which we
conceive to be our right, and cannot but be willing to enjoy.

THE OATH. -- Nor yet ever to subject it to the usurpations and superstitions
of the Sea of Rome.
The 20. DOUBT is,
Why in this part of the Oath mention is made rather of the Sea of Rome, 20.
Particular Doubt.
then of the Church of Rome.

THE REASON.
BEcause, though an ordinary Reader observe no material difference betwixt
them, yet we are taught by a Mr. E. B. of the M. T.
judicious Lawyer, that there is as much difference betwixt the Sea of Rome,
and the Church of Rome, as betwixt treason and trespass: and he proves his
position by the 23. of Elis. cap. 1. where it is said, That to be reconciled to
the Sea of Rome is treason; but to be reconciled to the Church of Rome is not
treason: For then (says he) every Papist of the Church of Rome should be a
Traitor (being a member of that Church, and therefore reconciled to it.) Now
the Sea of Rome (says he) is nothing else but the Papacy, or Supremacy of the
Pope, whereby, by virtue of the Canon [unam Sanctam] made by Pope Boniface the
eighth, he challenges a superiority of Jurisdiction and coercion over all
Kings and Princes upon earth; and those persons which take Juramentum fidei
contained in the Council of Trent, (which acknowledges this Supremacy) are
said to be reconciled to the Sea of Rome.

But the Church of Rome is nothing else but a number of men within the Popes
Dominions, or elsewhere, professing the Religion of Popery. So the meaning of
the Oath in this clause of it, as he conceives, may be this, You must not
subject the Church of England to the Sea of Rome; but you may subject it to the
Church of Rome.

That there might be some such subtle meaning in the choice of that phrase, I
have some reason (says he) to imagine, since I find in their late Books, that
they say the Church of Rome is a true Church, and salvation to be had in it.

Because this Doubt has Law for its ground (the knowledge whereof properly
belongs to another profession) we would not take upon us to deliver it in our
own names, but in the name of that learned Lawyer, to whom we are beholding for
the distinction of those terms; and if they should not be rightly applied to
the words of the Canon, or to the meaning of those that made it (wherein he
ingageth himself no further, then probable conjecture; and so far reaches
the reason he alleges for it) yet that may be unto us a further occasion of
doubt; and the more we doubt, the less warrant we have for the taking of the
Oath.

THE OATH. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge, and
swear, according to the plain and common sense of these words, without any
equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever.
The 21. DOUBT.
How we can swear to a plain and common sense and understanding of the Oath.
21. Particular Doubt.


THE REASON.
BEcause we do not find the words plain, but very ambiguous, as is already
evident by the precedent Doubts: nor do we know, what sense or understanding of
them we can call common; since the Oath is new, and is in many particulars so
variously expounded, that yet it is not apparent to us, what construction
bears away the plurality of voices. The Oath then must be well expounded
before it can be taken, else equivocation will hardly be avoided.

THE OATH. And this I do heartily, willingly, and truly, etc.
The 22. DOUBT.
What willingness is required in the taking of this Oath. 22. Particular Doubt.


THE REASON.
BEcause the words [heartily, and willingly] in conformity to the form of
subscription, set down in the 36. Canon, import a plenary consent, without any
grudging or reluctance of the heart, or will: as, when a man has a mind to
take it, with a freedom to refuse it; according to the saying of Seneca, Si
vis scire an velim, effice ut possim nolle. Senec. de Benefic. l. 2. c. 18.
page 281.
If you would know whether I be willing or no, leave me at liberty to be
unwilling: but we conceive it cannot be so in this case, at least with many of
the Ministry, who would by no means take it, but for fear of the penalty
annexed to the not taking of it: and so their willingness is no more then such
as this, I am willing to take the Oath, because I am unwilling to be deprived
of my Ministry and Means; and so to be undone for refusal of it: As a man
casts his goods into the Sea in a Tempest, lest himself and they should perish
together.

And then, whether should we not rather be absolved from such a Juramento
meticuloso fit absolutio per Judicem Ecclesiasticum. Decret. l. 2. c. 2. fol.
157. page 2. col. 2.
timorous Oath, according to the Canon Law (if we had taken it) then pressed
to take it, when having no heart or good will unto it, we cannot say we swear
heartily and willingly in any other sense then has been said, without
hypocrisy: and consequently, not without perjury also.

Thus much of the first part proposed, which concerns the Oath it self; the
second part is of the Interpretation of the Oath.

2. Part. Of the Interpretation of the Oath. 2. Part.

The 23. DOUBT.
How the Doubts of the Oath may be resolved and cleared. 23. Particular Doubt.


THE REASON.
BEcause in this case it will not satisfy to say, as the Casuists on both
sides (we mean Protestant and Popish) resolve, That the words of an Oath must
be taken (as this Oath conformable to the Oath of In Mast. Dalton his Country
Just. page 16. edit. 3.
Allegiance has it) Eo sensu accipienda sunt verba Juramenti, quo audientes
accepturos judicamus, and quem habent in communi omnium usu, quia verborum
significatio pendet ex hominum usu. Amesius de consc. lib. 4. c. 22 page 153.
Azor. instit. vol. 1. l. 11. c. 8. col. 742
according to the plain and common sense, and understanding; for what that is,
is not yet discovered: And we believe the Divines of Aberdene said well, The
Minist. and Professors of Aberdene in their general Demands. page 14.
That the words of an Oath should be clear and plain; and if they be any way
ambiguous, the true sense of them should be so declared and manifested, that
all may know it.

As to satisfy the Doubt, which many made concerning the sign of the Cross
in Baptism: Or (as Bish. Morton in his book of Cerem.
Bishop Morton more warily writes) the Cross after Baptism was a particular
Can. 30.
Canon set forth for declaration thereof, and for removal of all such scruples
as might any way trouble the consciences of them, who are indeed rightly
religious.

In dubiis benigniora sunt praeferenda regul. Juris 55. addit libro cui tit.
est Reform. leg. Eccles. printed an. 1571.
Some think it sufficient, according to the dictate of charity, to take the
words of the Oath in the most favorable sense, which is expounded by some, as
having reference to those who impose it, of whose intention we are bound to
make the fairest, and most favorable construction.

Some take the favor to themselves, and make such a sense of them, as may most
conduce to their own Interests, whether for advantage, or for avoidance of
damage or danger: and so comes in the Collusion of the Jesuits by
equivocation, or mental reservation, to save themselves from being discovered
in their dangerous designs.

This is somewhat like that, which some say of Manna, that it was that to every
man's taste, wherewith it was most delighted. So that shall be the meaning of
the Oath, which best pleases any that is to take it.

Azorius, a famous Casuist of the Ignatian order, determines, In foro
Judiciali semper est jurandum secundum communem sensum quem reddunt verba ipsa,
and communem hominum usum. Azor. Instit. vol. 1. l. 11. c. 8. col. 742.
That in a Judicial Court an Oath must be taken according to the common sense
of the words: Ex communi hominum sententia juramentum in foro conscientiae
semper accipiendum est juxta jurantis mentem. Ibid.
but in the Court of conscience all men hold (says he) that it must be
understood according to the mind of him that swears: as if Justice and
Conscience held contrary Tribunalls in the soul, as Justice and Equity in the
state; and the same Oath might be right in the one, and wrong in the other.

An absurdity like that, which our dread Sovereign derideth in his large
Declaration, viz. The Kings large Declaration of the Tumults in Scotl. p. 176.
That the same confession of faith, consisting of the same words and syllables
sworn without Authority, if it shall be commanded by Authority, becomes a
new and different confession of the faith.

There is a third opinion (concerning the sense of an Oath) to augment the
doubt, though so much less doubtful, as it brings with it the better
Authority; and the Authority for it is no less then Royal, the sentence of a
great and gracious King (and, which is more to us, our King) who resolves,
Ibid. p. 177.
That an Oath must be either taken, or refused, according to the known
intention of him that does minister it, Ibid. p. 347.
especially, if it be a new Oath.

To the same sense, though in different words, say the The Minist. and
Professors of Aberdene in their general Demands. p. 14
Aberdene Divines: An Oath is to be given according to the mind and judgment
of him that requires it: which words [ministreth and requireth] make up the
meaning to be, That he that ministers an Oath (who may be some subordinate
Officer) must give it in that sense, which he that requires (that is, he from
whose Authority and Power it proceeds) does intend.

That construction we are taught to make, by the explanation of the Oath in
Scotland, published by the right Honorable the L Marquess Hamiltoun his
Majesty's high Commissioner there, in these words: The explanation of the Oath
in Scotl. in his Majesty's large Declar. page 328.
Oaths must be taken, according to the mind, intention, and commandment of
that Authority which exacteth the Oath: For (as we conceive) it rests not in
the power of an inferior (whether he be the taker or minister of the Oath)
to put his private conceit for the sense (which is the soul) of a public
constitution: and if he do so, we cannot but doubt of it (though it seem
never so plausible) unless it be allowed by the Authority, which charge the
Oath upon the conscience: For,

First, as Bish. Hall in his book of Christian moderation. lib. 2. sect. 10.
p. 109.
Bishop Hall well says, The Church (which makes the Canon, and by the Canon
decrees the Oath) as it is a collective body, so it has a tongue of her own,
speaking by the common voice of her Synods, Confessions, Articles,
Constitutions, Catechismes, Liturgies: a tongue not only to speak the text of
her determination; but to make a Comment (if need be) to clear it: and, if any
single person shall take upon him to be the mouth of the Church, his insolency
is justly censureable: So he.

Secondly, Oaths are imposed for matter of caution and security to those that
impose them, that they may rely upon them without doubt or distrust: and how
can that be, when we take them in another sense then they that require them do
mean, or will admit of. The old rule (which is a maxim) says, Is committit
in legem, qui legis verba complectens, contra legis nititur voluntatem. Regul.
Juris 88.
He offends against the law, who cleaving to the words of the law, leaves the
will of the law, that is, of the Lawmakers: For, the law it self is a dead
letter, and has no will at all.

There are some of our Brethren, who (in good will to themselves and us) have
undertaken to expound the Oath so as that they and we, without scruple, may
take it: and we take kindly their good intention, and, in good will to them
again, request them to consider, That a private interpretation of a public
act can give no satisfaction, unless it be either expressly, or vertually
allowed by the highest Authority that does impose it; and then it is made
public: but why they should expect such an approbation of their private
opinions, we cannot imagine; and if that would serve the turn, we could find
in our hearts (and it may be in our heads too) to make as mollifying a gloss
on the Oath, as they have done: and such a one, as might be more satisfactory
to our consciences, then theirs can be.

But the Authority of interpretation of any doubt (in such a public act)
belongs properly not to private, but to public persons, especially, if they
be Authorized by the Synod for such a purpose: as in the late Synod we see,
Quod si in posterum aliqua dubia, ambiguitates, etc. oriantur in co casu,
omnium hujusmodi dubiorum, ambiguitatum, difficultatum, etc. interpretationes
and declarationes fient per reverendissimum in Christo patrem Archiepiscopum
Eboracensem, Dominos Episcopos Dunelmensem, Caestriensem, and Carliolensem, aut
duos eorundem, quorum idem reverendissimus pater sit unus. So in the Grant of
the benevolence or contribution by the Clergy. page 25.
where the Doubts concerning the benevolence of the Clergy granted to his
Majesty, are ordered, to be determined by the Archbishop of York, the Bishop
of Durham, the Bishop of Chester, and the Bishop of Carlisle, or by two of them
at the least, whereof the Archbishop is to be one: and in other Doubts
(whereof there is no certain rule of Resolution set) it is probable, the
decision should be given by the sentence of the same, or such like Judges.

For private men, though learned, if they take upon them the Interpretation of
public Dictats, may be more like to light on mutual contradictions of each
other, then on the true and proper construction of the Text they interpret. So
did Hist. of the Council of Trent. lib. 2. page 216.
Vega and Soto, Ibid. p. 229.
Soto and Catherinus, who wrote against each other contrary Comments upon the
Council of Trent. In which respect it was a wise advice given to the Pope by
the Ibid. l. 8. p. 817.
Bishop of Bestice, viz. To appoint a Congregation for the expounding of the
Council; and well followed by him, when he forbade all sorts of persons,
Clerks, or Laics (being private men) to make any Commentaries, Glosses,
Annotations, or any Interpretation whatsoever upon the Decrees of that Council.

Doctor Burges indeed made an Interpretation of his own subscription; but
there had been no validity in it (as we conceive) unless it had been allowed
by the superior powers; and so it was: for (as he says) Doct. Burges in his
Answ. to a much applauded Pamphlet Prefat p. 26.
It was accepted by King James, and the Archbishop of Canterbury affirmed it to
be the true sense and meaning of the Church of England.

And if we should take the Oath, and a Notary public record it, unless our
exposition of it were publicly and lawfully (for favorably is not sufficient)
both allowed and recorded also, we may happily be charged with the crime of
perjury: and unable fairly and effectually to free our selves from that charge,
unless by Authority we were permitted to conclude our Oath with the ancient
clause of limitation, viz. Haec omnibus partibus servabo, quibus cum sacra
Scriptura, cum Legibus Civilibus and Ecclesiasticis hujus regni consentiunt,
and quantum vires meae patientur. Reform. leg. Eccles. de Jure, cap. 11. fol.
105. a.
so far as agrees with the sacred Scripture, with the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Laws of this Kingdom, and as far as our abilities will
afford.

The third Part. Of the Persons that must take the Oath. 3. Part.

THey are Archbishops and Bishops, and all other Priests and Deacons in places
exempt, or not exempt: So in the Prefatory Speech before the Oath, and in the
direction that follows it, it is imposed on all that are Beneficed, or
dignified in the Church, all Masters of Arts (the sons of Noblemen only
excepted) all Batchlours, and Doctors in Divinity, Law, or Physic, on all
that are licensed to practice physic, on all Registers, Actuaries, and
Proctors, all Schoolemasters, all such as being Natives, or naturalized, come
to be incorporated into the Universities here, having taken degree in any
foreign University, on all that take holy Orders at the time of their
Ordination, and all that receive collation, institution, or license to preach
or serve any cure; that is, briefly, on all who by Ecclesiastical or
Academicall subordination to the Synod, or to the chief persons assembled, are
most subject to imposition, and penalty, which answers the Doubt of some,
demanding why Judges are not to be sworn as well as the Bishops, and why not
Students of the Innes of Court as well as Students of the University. The
reason may be, because they are not in such a degree of subordination to
Bishops, or others, who are members of the Convocation or Synod, as those who
are particularly rehearsed in the Canon.

The 24. DOUBT.
Why the sons of Noblemen are excepted, 24. Particular Doubt.
and privileged from taking this Oath, when they take the degree of Masters of
Arts.

THE REASON.
BEfore we render it, we profess that we take this Doubt to be of a different
kind from those which hitherto we have proposed, since it is without the
compass both of the words and explication of the Oath, from whence all our
scruples of conscience hitherto have been derived.

Yet because we have heard this Quaere put forth by many, and not well answered
by any, we crave leave to propose it, and to deliver some probable conjectures
upon it; leaving the certain Resolution to those who are better acquainted with
the true causes thereof.

Object. That exception of the sons of Noblemen has been excepted against by
some for this reason:

Reas. Because their example in swearing to the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church, would be of great moment to the maintenance of both: and therefore
they think it more meet, that they should begin this sacred attestation (whom
others would be most ready and forward to follow) then that they should have a
particular exception to free them from it.

Object. If it be said, When others take Oath, they take none, but make their
protestations and promises in verbo honoris:

Answ. That is true, but neither is so much required of them in this case; or,
if it were, two particulars would be returned by way of reply: The one,

That Archbishops and Bishops are to take the Oath, who The Kings large
Declarat. of the Tumults in Scotl. p. 217.
take place of their right Honorable Fathers, both Earls and Lords; and so it
can be no dishonor to their sons, to do as such reverend, and so much
honored Prelates have done, especially, since Bishops have been Episcopi and
Regis verbum scu affirmatio sine juramento fit irrefragabile. Council.
Bergam-stedense, cap. 17. anno Christi 700. apud Dom. Spelman de consil. tom.
1. p. 196.
matched with Kings in the prerogative of irrefragable regard and belief of
their words without an Oath: The other,

That as the sons of Noblemen were to be believed, when they testified any
thing in verbo See page 132. seq. lit. k. in mar.
honoris; so were the Clergy to be believed, when they did the like in verbo
Sacerdotis. And by Justinians Code (if we may take it upon the word of a Popish
Priest; for we have not met with it in the original) Wats Quodlibets. page 12.
The word of a Priest was rated to the Testimonies of twelve of the Laity. But
the privilege of the Nobility yet remains, and that of the Clergy now is
lost: which may give us just occasion to examine, whether they have not been
more true to their honor, then most of us to the sincerity of our sacred
Profession; and if they have, they may be privileged from the taking of this
Oath, though we be not.

It is probable also, that they were exempted upon especial respects, both of
ingenuity and prudence: of ingenuity, by those Clergy men, who were bound to
all honorable observance of such noble Families, as had been means to
prefer them; and of prudence, in preventing a repulse to their purpose: for
it was not like that the Nobility would suffer their sons to be entangled
with such an Oath, as is prejudicial to the conscience: and (as many Lawyers
allege) to the obedience due to his most excellent Majesty, and his Royal
Successors.

That which we read in the Conference at Hampton Court, gives us just occasion
so to conceive; which is, That when there was speech of the Confer. at Hampt.
Court. page 89.
Oath ex officio, one of the Lords compared it to the course of the Spanish
Inquisition; and if the Nobility had distasted it, and renounced it, it would
have given the greater encour agement to others to stand out against it.

Howsoever, Gods providence has most wisely ordered their exemption from
swearing; for, since the Nobility are not required to take this Oath, their
desire and endeavor to have the aggrievance of it removed from others (as
their petition to his Majesty before the Parliament shows) does evidence
their noble, religious, and charitable minds toward all such, as by their
mediation may be secured from suffering in their consciences by taking, or in
their liberties and estates for refusal thereof.

For which pious compassion many thousands, especially we of the Tribe of Levi,
are deeply obliged to praise God for their Honors, and to pray to him for his
vigilant providence and potent protection, both over them and their honorable
Progeny.

The fourth or last part is, Of the penalty of the Oath.
The words of the Canon.
IF any man Beneficed, or dignified in the Church of England, or any other
Ecclesiastical person, shall refuse to take the Oath, the Bishop shall give
him a months time to inform himself: and at the months end, if he refuse to
take it, he shall be suspended ab officio, and have a second month granted;
and if then he refuse to take it, he shall be suspended ab officio and
beneficio, and have a third month granted him for his better information: but
if (at the end of that month) he refuse to take the Oath above named, he
shall by the Bishop be deprived of all his Ecclesiastical promotions
whatsoever, and execution of his Function, which he holds in the Church of
England.

Of this, our 25. DOUBT is,
Concerning the difference betwixt the command and commination of the Canon.
25. Particular Doubt.


THE REASON.
BEcause, where a law is rightly grounded, and a penalty for breach of it
imposed, there the offenders are legally censured, with an equal and
impartial justice; but here it seems to us to be much otherwise: for, of all
those persons of several callings, professions, or degrees, before rehearsed,
and required to take the Oath, only Clergy men are upon their refusal of it
to be punished: and that, though gradually, yet with as much severity as any
Ecclesiastical Authority can inflict: for, they within three months are to be
put out both of their ministry and means; while all others (though they refuse
the Oath as well as they) are by the Canon not to be the worse for their
refusal.

It may be, the Bishops may prohibit some to practice Physic, others to
teach School, that will not swear; and they that will not take the Oath,
perhaps shall take no orders at their hands: and for Registers, Actuaries, and
Proctors of their Courts, if they refuse it, it may be they will refuse them,
and put them out of their offices; but the Canon concludes nothing against any
one, but Ecclesiastics, especially Beneficed Preachers; which, whether it may
more incline such to love, or fear those who lay these heavy penalties upon
them, there is none so simple, but may soon perceive; nor is any so wise, as
in this to see either the compassion of the reverend Prelates, as their
fathers; or the charity of inferior Clerks, as their brethren: for, by this
Canon they are necessarily cast upon one part of this dangerous Dilemma:

If they take the Oath (besides the scruples of conscience before observed)
their taking of it (as we have touched before) must be recorded by a Notary
public; and then, if they do any thing, which they that are their Judges
will call a breach of the Oath they have taken, they may be called in question
for the crime of perjury.

About the year 1164. Conciliab. apud Northampton in Anglia celebrat, quo
Thomas Archiepiscopus Cant^ariensis de perjario per Regem accusatus and
condemnatus, co quod Anglicanas consuetudines quas juraverat non observasset.
Francisi. Long. de Council. page 806. col. 1.
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, was at a Council (held at Northampton)
accused and condemned of perjury; because he had sworn to the English
customs, and had not observed them. And it is an easy matter (out of an Oath
of such copious contents, as this of the sixth Canon) to frame an accusation
against him that has taken it; especially, if what lies in ambush under the
etc. be brought into the charge: hereof our fear may be the more; because
some of us have observed, how forward some of our superiors have been to lay
an imputation of perjury upon the inferior Clergy; because (having taken the
Oath of Canonical obedience) they have not been so ready (as they would have
them) to perform what they imposed by uncanonicall Commands.

On the contrary, if they take not the Oath, and thereupon the penalty of the
Canon be laid upon them, they must take leave of their Pastoral charges; and
no more be allowed to feed their Flocks, nor to be clothed with their fleece:
which is like (in respect of many Parishes) to be a great calamity both to the
Pastors and People.

Thus much for our Doubts: which if any think too much, it may be he thinks
too little of the peace of conscience, the price of our Ministry in danger to
be lost, and the pressure and misery, which by many may be felt by occasion
of that Oath: which, though we dare not take, yet we dare swear, and can do
it heartily, willingly, and truly, that (as yet we conceive of the Oath) we
cannot with sound faith, and safe conscience yield unto it.

And if most of these Doubts, before proposed, should be found to be
frivolous (which we do not conceive of any one of them) and but one of them
contain a just ground of ambiguitie, (which some that have taken the Oath, and
some that have written for the Oath, have since confessed: and not only by
speech, but by their handwriting have acknowledged) that one is enough, while
we are in suspense concerning the meaning of the Oath, to suspend our assent
from the taking thereof: For, the comparison (brought in by the prudent
Composer of the History of the Council of Trent) we take to be true, and of
much importance to this purpose, which is, Hist. Council. of Trent. 2. page 187.
As one particular makes false the contradictory universal; so one ambiguous
particular, makes the universal to be ambiguous.

If any man, but of a private condition (like unto our selves) have a mind to
make answer to our Doubts or Reasons, we wish him to consider at what he
aims in that undertaking: If to engratiate himself into the favor of those
who approve of the Oath; we desire not to cast in any prejudice to his
expectation: If to satisfy us, we fear his endeavors are like to be
fruitless; since he cannot advance his discourse above probability, and for
that we may return upon him with like topicall Arguments: and so the
consistence of the cause (at the best) will be but a problem; which will
administer but weak encouragement for a sincere, willing, and hearty taking of
an Oath.

Our HOPES, and the REASONS thereof.
First, our HOPES.
OUr Doubts and Reasons hitherto handled, we hope, will assure your Lordship,
that our not taking of the Oath, ought not to be ascribed to contumacy, but to
conscience; and then, we hope again (the case standing as it does) that you
will neither press upon us to take it, nor oppress us with the penalty, if we
take it not.

Our REASONS.
FOr this, we conceive, we have both solid Reasons, and sacred Examples; and
those such, as we presume your wisdom and goodness will not disesteeme.

Our Reasons are grounded on 1. Piety. 2. Charity. 3. Equity. 4. Policy.


1. On Piety.
For the first: As your Lordship and the rest of the reverend Prelates are men
of God, you stand especially engaged (as much as in you lies) to secure your
inferiors from the peril of sin, whether Preachers, or People: and first,
for Preachers, to take care that they do not take any dangerous Oaths.

For which cause, Saint Basil was very zealous in behalf of Bishops (as Baron.
Annal. tom. 6. an. 449. nu. 12. col. 83.
Baronius shows) that they might not be put to swear, in respect of the
peril of an Oath: and he prevailed so far as to free them from that peril.
And the Council of Challons was as respective of Presbyters, decreeing thus;
The Council of Challons. Can. 18. p. 560. Symps. of the Church.
It is reported of some, that they compel the persons who are admitted (in
time of their Ordination) to swear that they are worthy, and that they shall
do nothing repugnant to the Canons: and that they shall be obedient to the
Bishops, who ordained them; and to the Church, into which they are ordained:
which Oath, in regard it is perilous, we all inhibit, and discharge.

And the Triburiensian Council, having a respect both to their credits and
consciences, made a cautelous Constitution, Presbyter in judicio ad jurandum
cogi non debet, sed vice Sacramenti per sanctam consecrationem interrogetur.
Council. Triburiens. Can. 21. an. 895. p. 782. Caranz. edit. 1633.
That a Presbyter should not be compelled to swear; but, in stead of an Oath,
he should be questioned upon his holy consecration (i. as it is probable) in
verbo Sacerdotis; because (as the Reason is there rendered) our Lord forbade his
Disciples to swear.

Object. But say some, Did not all, both minister, and people in the City of
Geneva (which many magnify as the Metropolis of Piety) take an Oath for
shutting out of Popery, and setting up of the Presbytery without all this ado?

Answ. They did indeed swear to banish the one, and to establish the other (as
Mr. Hooker in the Preface of his Eccles. Polit.
Master Hooker observes) but

First, Is it any good Argument, that because they have sworn against the
Prelacy, that we must swear for it? men by law are not allowed to take
contradictory Oaths; and if there be any Authority in their example, it may
serve rather to make us doubtful, then resolute to swear: though we think
it might be more reasonable to require Geneva to receive some Doctrines from
us, then we Discipline from them.

As concerning the Sabbath, they of Geneva might have learned founder
Instruction from our Homilies, then we from Calv. Instit. lib. 2. chapter 8.
Calvin's Institutions (though otherwise an excellent book) or from the common
practice of that City.

Secondly, their Oath was not in ambiguity like ours, nor is ours (as theirs
was) regulated by Scripture: For,

First, they Mr. Hookers Prefat before his Eccles. Pol. fol. 5. p. 1.
swear in plain terms, never to admit of the Papacy among them again; and
among them it was not so ambiguous, what points should be reputed Popish, as
with us it is.

Secondly, to live in obedience to such orders (concerning the exercise of
their Religion, and the form of Ecclesiastical Government) as the true and
faithful Ministers of Gods Word, had, agreeably to Scripture, set down for
that end and purpose.

Thirdly, for the abandoning of Popery, they might safely and heartily swear;
and so could we (if an Oath were tendered against it, which were not otherwise
liable to exception) and for the Discipline or Government, the Clergy made no
scruple of it: for, they propounded it as a certain preservative to the purity
of Religion; and the people were induced to receive it, because it made them
partakers of a new privilege; and that a great one: for, to one Pastor were
joined two Lay Elders in the Government of the Church; and so their swearing
was (as the taking of this Oath) by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. a confirmation
of their own Interests.

Fourthly, as they made no doubt of the lawfulness of the Oath, so were they
not urged unto it by any commination of danger: and so their swearing might be
with a free will, not mixed either with reluctancie of conscience, or with
fear of penalty.

Fifthly, the Discipline of Geneva is said to be a The Lord Archb. of
Canterbury in his Speech in the Starre-chamb.
newfangled Discipline, of Calvin's devising: and it is further delivered, as
an undoubted truth, Bish. Hall in his second undoubted proposit. added to his
Irrefrag. page 6.
That no man living, no record of History, can show any Laypresbyter, that ever
was in the whole Christian Church, until this present age. But the Government
by Bishops is held (by those who propound this Oath) to be The Archb. Speech
forecited. page 6.
of divine right, and to have continued in the Church, Bish. Halls book, his
first undoubted proposit.
ever since the time of Christ, and his Apostles, until this present age.

If so, they of Geneva had need of an Oath, to give strength to their new
invented Government; and we (without an Oath) might be confident of the
continuance of ours, according to the sound resolution of the renowned Doctor
of the Law, Gamaliel, in the fifth of the Acts of the Apostles: If this
counsel, or this work (said he) be of men, it will come to naught; but if it
be of God, you cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to fight
against God, Act. 5. v. 38, 39.

Pope Clement the seventh, upon this ground (though mistaken as in application
to the Papacy) grew very confident against the fear of a future Council, as
the Author of the History of the Council of Trent reports, in these words:
Pope Clem. Hist. Trent. l. 1. p. 51.
There was a fame spread, the Pope would have no Council, for fear his
Authority should be restrained: areason which makes no impression at all in
him, having his Authority immediately from Christ, with promise, that the gates
of Hell should not prevail against it: and the experience of former times has
showed, that the Papal Authority has never been diminished by any Council;
but according to the words of our Lord, the Fathers have ever confessed it to
be absolute and unlimited, as it is indeed.

In word rather, or in conceit at the best: and it was conceit, and no more,
that upheld his heart against all oppositions of his power; And our reverend
Prelates have so much less cause to fear their state (though it be not
supported by swearing) as they have more warrant to build their hopes upon the
oraculous sentence of that famous Doctor.

The other particular more especially respects the piety of the people, whose
consciences are like to be carefully guided by such Divines, as are chary of
their own. Of whose Ministry (if they should be deprived) it is not like, that
generally there would be found a supply to countervaile the loss of their
religious labors, and exemplary practice, the two chief helps to holiness of
life: and we conceive it a point of Piety, and a case of conscience, worthy of
the grave and godly consideration of the reverend Prelates to resolve, whether,
because in this case we dare not swear, God will reject our service in his
Sanctuary; if not, why should they?

The saying of Wickliffe (though condemned as heretical in the Popish Council
of Constance) may (as we conceive, with a little correction) be made a very
Orthodox position, and pertinent to this purpose: Thus, Nullus Praelatus debet
aliquem excommunicare, nisi prius sciat excommunicatum a Deo Artic. 11. Wickl.
Imputat. in Council. Constam. fol. 437. Council. Caranz.
None should be excommunicated by any Prelate, unless he know him (or rather
thus, unless he conceive him) excommunicated by God: And if so, while God is
pleased (as we hope he is) to accept our endeavors to glorify his Name, and
edify his Flock, we trust it will not be held any part of godliness with
the Pastoral staff, to drive any faithful Pastor from the fold of Christ.

2. On Charity.
Secondly, we ground our Hopes upon your Lordships Charity, whereof the
fundamental Rule in the Affirmative part is, Mat. 7.12.
To do unto all men as we would they should do unto us: and in the Negative,
not to offer that to others, which in the like case our selves would not
suffer. And we doubt not, but your Lordship would be loath that your fear of
offense against God, and your conscience, should be so severely punished, as by
the Canon is threatened to such as are afraid to take this Oath: and if you
look but upon us without reflecting upon your Lordships, we trust that for
this, after our long and studious endeavors in the University, wherein some of
us have spent our Patrimonies (which might have maintained us in another
course, without Ecclesiastical means) after our constant and painful
employment in our Pastoral charges (even to the tyring out of our strength)
after our families are increased beyond our abilities to support them, without
the means we receive from the Church (and for many of us, we may say but
poorly with it) you will not by the discharge of this Canon upon us, put us
upon the poor refuge of the Canon of the Clericus victum and vestimentum sibi
artificiolo vel agricultura praeparet. Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 51, 52, 53.
Council of Carthage (made for inferior and single Clerks) to labor in
husbandry, or manufactures (which your Ministers shall not give themselves to
any servile labor. Can. 75.
Canons precisely prohibit) for our maintenance; swear we dare not, dig we
cannot: we were no Fishermen, nor Tent-makers, or other Artificers, before we
entered upon this holy calling, and to beg we are ashamed: and we may be also
afraid, since by the Law, The Complete Justice. p. 212. nu. 16. edit. 1638.
begging Scholars are no better then Rogues, and so to be severely punished,
rather then charitably relieved; what then shall we do?

It is a good Rule given to Visiters by Gavant (says a Bish Hall in his second
book of moderation. sect. 9. p. 65.
reverend Writer of your own rank) that they should be sparing in making
Decrees: and no less profitable to spiritual Governors, which Erasmus
relates (out of Gershon) that they should not rashly throw about the
Thunderbolts of their censures, lest they should not take time sufficient to
distinguish betwixt such as are more capable of pity, then of severity; and
those who are more worthy of the rod, then of the spirit of meekness, to spare
the one, though they punish the other: And we look for no less moderation
and mercy from your Lordship, since a The Gouncell of Challons. Can. 41.
Council advises you thus: It becomes them, who are in eminent rooms, to
deal mercifully with their inferiors, knowing that they are brethren.

And while we account you (in regard of the gravity, and eminency of your parts
and places) Fathers, we cannot but hope that you will deal with us as with
your sons, with a As for rule, if we affect any but fatherly and moderate,
and such as must necessarily be required, we do not deprecate to censure. Bish
Hall of Episcopacy. part. 2. p. 58.
fatherly moderation, and not think us worthy to be dis-inherited, or cast
off, while we desire and endeavor faithfully to hold on in our course of the
service of God, and his Church: And we doubt not, but you will remember the
godly and gracious words of your own Ordination, In the book of Ordination.
page penult.
That you have your Authority not to destroy, but to save; not to hurt, but to
help: Ibid.
And that you are to be to your Flocks shepherds, and not wolves; to be so
merciful, as not to be remiss: so to administer Discipline, as not to forget
mercy: and to be so far from oppressing of us, that if we were oppressed by
others, you should be ready to succor us. This is one end of Episcopal
Visitations, for which there is a Decree in a Council of Arles to this effect:

The Council of Arles, an. 813 Can. 17 p. 564. Patrick Sympson of the Church.
Let every Bishep visit his bounds once every ye are, and if he find the poor
to be oppressed by the violence of the mighty, then let him with wholesome
admonition exhort them to desist from such oppression: and in case they will
not desist from their violence, then let the Bishop bring the cause to the
ears of the Prince.

Nor do we conceive our different persuasion concerning this Oath, does
represent us unto you, as unworthy of your fatherly Compassion, since he that
of late has showed himself a most zealous Patron of Episcopal pre-eminence,
expresses a pitiful affection toward the Divines of the Reformed Churches
(notwithstanding many greater differences then this of the Oath) in this sort,
Bish. Hall in his Apolog. for Episcopacy. part. 1. sect. 17. page 108.
We heartily pity (says he) the incompetent provision of our foreign
brethren, whose parts are as eminent as their maintenance is poor.

He whose charity reaches so far off, in commiserating the poverty of foreign
Divines, would not surely (and we trust, many of the reverend Prelates are as
pitiful as he) be a means to make such miserable objects here at home, by
depriving of so many conscionable Ministers, as make scruple of the Oath, of
the due provision whereof they are lawfully possessed: especially, if he
remember the Canon of the Matiscon Council, which says, Episcopalis domus ad
hoc instituta est, ut, sine personarum acceptione, omnes in hospitalitate
recipiat. Council. Matisc. 2. Can. 13.
That a Bishops house is purposely appointed to afford hospitality to all that
need, without respect of persons.

And that other Canon of Charity, which goes under the name of the Apostles,
in these words: Si quis Episcopus aut Presbyter Clerico ex inopia laboranti
necessaria non suppeditaverit, a communione rejicitor; si perseveraverit,
deponitor, ut qui fratem suum necaverit. Can. Apost. 58.
If any Bishop or Presbyter do not minister to the necessities of a Clerk
that is in want, let him be debarred from the communion: and if he persevere
in his want of pity, let him be deposed as guilty of his brothers death, in
withholding from him brotherly relief. Which not only by the general duty of
Christianity, but by especial promise, the Bishops of England are bound in
conscience to consider and beware of, The book of Ordinat. p. antepen. and
penult.
since at their consecration the Archbishop asks them, Will you show your
self gentle, and be merciful for Christ's sake to poor and needy people, and
to all strangers destitute of help? and their answer is, I will so show my
self by Gods help. Wherein their bare word for beneficence to strangers is
vertually a double bond of security to their own, against such excessive
severity, as by that Apostolical Canon is condemned.

3. On Equity.
Thirdly, we are confident in the Equitable Justice of our reverend
Governors, that the Commination in the words of the Canon is more severe, then
the execution of it will be: for, if we do offend in forbearing of the Oath,
distinction must be made by the Decree of a general Non in eum est
animadvertendum, ac si voluntary hoc fecisset, and de industria: melius semper
and clementius judicandus est ex ipso hoc quod ex necessitate factum
perpetraverit. Council. Anbamen. Gener. apud Dr. Spelmande Council. an. 1009.
tom. 1. p. 516.
Council, betwixt those that of set purpose offend, and those that offend by a
kind of necessity: as, where our consciences put in exceptions as bars, at
least as demurres to obedience: and if we deserve any censure in such a case,
it is not deprivation, which our Ecclesiastical Laws call Sententia
deprivationis, quoniam cruenta est, and totum hominem conficit tam horribile
telum etc. Reform. leg Eccles. tit. de deprivat. cap. 4. fol. 79. b.
cruel, and an horrible weapon, which destroyethor undoeth the whole man: for,
that is reserved Deprivatio flagitiis atrocibus convenit. Ibid. cap. 1. fol.
79. a. Deprivatio maximis and teterrimis vitiis est reservanda. So in the
Chapt. it self.
for heinous crimes of greatest and foulest guilt: which in particular are
noted by Duarenus the De criminibus propter quae beneficia amittantur, quae
sunt ambitus Simonaicus, Incontinentia, si Concubinam habeat, nec eam rite
monitus demittere velit, Perjurium, Homicidium, Perduellio. Duaren. de benefic.
lib. 8. cap. 6. page 102.
Civilian to be these, Simonaicall ambition, Incontinency, keeping of a
Concubine so pertinaciously, that the offender being duly admonished, will not
forsake her; Perjury, Murder, Treason, or some other grievous offense (as
herefie) which is followed by infamy: where, by Quod autem de infamia diximus,
de ea accipiendum est, quae jure ac legibus irrogatur, non de ea quae ex
hominum opinione proficiscitur. Ibid. p. 103.
Infamy, he means not that, which arises from the mis-cenceipt of men, but
that which proceeds from the sentence of the Law: None of all which can (with
any color of truth) be imputed to our doubting, or final denial of the
Oath, while the dictate of our consciences induces us to do so; and, if we
should confidently affirm (which some of us believe) that a Presbyter is
equal with a Bishop by Gods Law, we could not for that incur the
condemnation of Heretics: for, though Augustine and Epiphanius accounted
Aerius an Heretic for that, yet (as Dr. Whitaker his answer to Campian his
tenth Reason. p. 317.
Dr. Whitaker says) few of the ancient Fathers (besides them) did so: and
therein (says he) was Hierome altogether of his mind.

Besides, we presume your goodness will take notice, that in Equity and
Justice they should not suffer most, who offend least against a penal law; and
they least, or rather nothing at all, who are most refractory to it: which
would come to pass, if the penalty should proceed, as in the Canon is
expressed; for, all Papists, who are adverse to our Doctrine in general
(except some few egregious Ecclesiastical hypocrites) may pass unpunished,
notwithstanding this Canon: while Protestant Ministers may be undone, for
refusing to swear to some particulars of Discipline.

But that we shall not fear, if you please to look upon the most reverend
and religious Bishops of the Primitive times, who (as your own Apologist has
testified of them) Bish. Hall in his book of Episcopacy. part. 1. sect. 18.
page 112.
were made all of meekness, humility, and patience: if you be like unto them
(and while you take them for your Ancestors, you should not be unlike them)
you will never make us feel the rigor of this ruinating Canon.

4. On Policy.
Fourthly, in religious Policy you may (with as much advantage to your selves
as to us) forbear the urging of this Oath; for, give us leave, we beseech
you, to tell you the truth (though such, as hope to help forward some ambitious
design by your favor, say otherwise) the Bishops (if they have not added to
the number of the enemies they had before) have yet lost more friends by
proposal of this Oath, and Penalty, then by any Act that is known to be
theirs: and withal, have thereby raised a suspicion, that themselves do doubt
their dignity is not set upon a sure foundation. It is cause of jealousy to
many, when such as are reputed politic, are too cautelous in their own cause;
and for that was Novatianus juramentum exegit a suis, priusquam Sacramentum
daret: sic suis utrisque manibus manus accipientis prehendens, non prius
dimisit, quam hoc jurejurando obstrinxisset: Jura mihi per corpus and sanguinem
Domini te nunquam me deserturum, nec ad Cornelium reversurum. Baron. Annal.
tom. 2. an. 254. nu. 75. col. 504.
Novatianus, the father of the Puritans (though a Bishop) the worse thought of
(for good Bishops used to exact no such unreasonable security for themselves)
because he caused his Adherents to put their hands betwixt his, and to swear
by the body and blood of the Lord, they would not forsake him, and turn to
Cornelius: And this he did, before he would give them the Sacrament; but
besides that, such a forced confederacy is but The Patriarch of Antioch, to
make sure work, bound Prince Reimund by an Oath to be true to him; but friends
unjustly gotten, are seldom comfortably retained: and of his sworn friend, he
proved his sworn enemy. Mr. Fullers holy War. l. 2. c. 20. p. 69.
frail: By this his Episcopacy was the more suspected, to be both unlawful
and schismatic. It has fallen out so (whether justly, or unjustly we will
not say) in many men's conceits of the Right and Authority of Bishops, both
since, and by occasion of this swearing Canon. And they cannot more readily
redeem their reputation, then by a speedy procuring of a repeal or revocation
thereof (as we doubt not but they may) by public Authority.

Wherein, if they appear and prevail, they need not fear any disparagement
to their prudence, by withdrawing that they have decreed, since the wisest
Statesmen, and greatest Governors have used many times, to comply so far
with popular dispositions, as to vary their own Acts with relation to their
liking, as the Pilot does his sails, to comply with the winds.

And you cannot have a more Authentic example, both to induce you to this, and
to defend you in it (from all imputations) then that of our sacred Sovereign;
who, rather then he would give any color of complaint for aggrievances to his
people, was pleased King Charles his large Declaration of the Tumults in
Scotland. p. 370. and p. 389
to dispense with the five Articles of Perths Assembly, and to discharge all
persons from urging the practice thereof upon any, either Laick, or
Ecclesiastical person whatsoever: and to free all his subjects from all
censures and pains, whether Ecclesiastical, or Secular, for not urging,
practicing, or obeying any of them: though they were established, both by a
general Assembly, and by Act of Parliament, as this Canon was not.

And for his own Acts (for these Articles of Perth were propounded and
ratified in the reign of his Royal Father) he imposed the Service book, the
book of Canons, and high Commission, upon his subjects in Scotland; and upon
their The Duplies of the Divines of Aberdene. page 54.
humble supplication, was content graciously to grant a discharge from them,
passing his Princely promise, Ibid. p. 130, 131.
that he would neither then, nor afterward press the practice of them, nor
any thing of that nature; but in such a fair and legal way, as should
satisfy all his Majesty's loving Subjects.

Wherein, wise men (who judge of Consultations and Acts by their probable
effects, and not by unexpected events) cannot but highly commend his Majesty's
mildness and clemency; which, we doubt not, would condescend to your requests,
for a removal of this great aggrievance, if you would be pleased to interpose
your mediations to so acceptable a purpose: and upon our humble suit (which in
all submissive manner we tender) to your Lordship (and, by you, to the rest of
your reverend order) we hope you will do so, since we have it upon his word
(his Royal Majesty's word) which neither in duty, nor discretion we may
distrust, The Kings large Declarat. p. 420.
That the Prelates were their greatest friends (i. of his Scottish Subjects)
their counsels were always counsels of peace, and their solicitations
vehement and earnest, for granting those unexpected favors, which we were
pleased to bestow upon our people.

Bestow (we beseech your Lordship) some of these vehement and serious
solicitations on our behalf in this cause, and you shall not more free us from
the fear of this Canon, then bind us in love, the best love (which casts out
fear) to remain

Your Lordships in all due observance


