AN INTRODUCTION TO ASTRONOMY AND GEOGRAPHY: BEING A plain and easy TREATISE
OF THE GLOBES.

In VII Parts.

Containing I. The Definitions of the Lines, Circles, etc. upon the Globe or
Sphere; and of several Terms of Art. II. The Problems in Astronomy Methodically
digested, with variety of Examples. III. The several affections, of Triangles,
and their Solution upon the Globe; with the variety of Problems which every
case contains. IV. The whole Art of Dyalling demonstrated and performed two
several ways. V. The Erection of an Astrological Figure of the Heavens,
according to the several ways of the Ancient and Modern Astrologers. VI. and
VII. The Explanation and Uses of the Terrestrial Globe, with a brief
Geographical and Hydrographical Description of the Earth and Water.


By WILLIAM LEYBOURN.

London: Printed by J. C. for Robert Morden and William Berry; at the Atlas
near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, and between York-house and the New Exchange
in the Strand, London. 1675.

THE PUBLISHERS TO THE READER.
THat nothing is at once brought forth and perfected, is an observation we may
make, as from other things, so in a more especial manner from Arts and
Sciences: but not to speak of all, which yet have had, in Succession of time,
their Accessions to perfection; we shall instance only in these of Astronomy
and Geography. And certain it is, should we either seriously compare the Works
of the Ancients, with the more accurate observations and additions of our
modern Astronomers; what just cause would appear, for that correction and
alteration which is now made? And should we compare the Geographical Tables or
Charts of the Ancients, with the more perfect discoveries of our later times;
what defects and errors shall we there discover? We hope therefore you will
not think strange, because we have so much dissented in our Globes, Maps, etc.
from those that now only are accounted excellent: for as we cannot consent to
copy those errors and abuses which the Dutch would impose upon the whole
world, so we cannot altogether pass by our English Map-makers without censuring
them for reasons which we might, and the less curious may by their own Works
themselves perceive. But as we well know no Art is at once perfected, so we
well know there are abroad in the world many Books and Instruments conducing to
the improvement of the Mathematics, whereof some are superstuous, others
burdensome. The consideration whereof was prevalent enough to have clouded this
under the opace darkness of Latencie, had it not been drawn upon the Horizon of
public view, by two irresistible Magnets.

The time and season of its undertaking was to us too disadvantagious to the
rendering a Work of this Nature so complete, and in such good order as was
requisite; being necessarily forced and confined to our daily Employment, so
that we could never have Effected it, had not Mr. Leybourn, knowing our
occasions, willingly assented to Calculate and Methodize all the Problems for
us; which Favor we cannot but thankfully acknowledge and confess. As for the
Subject of this Treatise, it being Astronomy and Geography, needs no
Commendation where there are noble Men, or noble Minds.

All therefore we shall say of Astronomy is, that, it is of such important
consequence, that without the knowledge and science thereof, how great
incertainty in times and seasons, what distracting confusion in humane affairs
must we necessarily be involved in? And for Geography, all that need to be
spoken of it is, that it is so noble a Study, and of such grand importance, as
Kings and Princes have made it their highest concern to understand. Wherefore
that the one might be the more easily apprehended, and the other most truly
represented to our view and fancy, the Ancients, with the consent of
succeeding Ages, have with much pains and industry, not only invented, but also
commended to Posterity the Sphere or Globe, which also have had their
Corrections and Admendments. And here we must say something of those New Globes
lately set forth by our selves.

True it is, we might boast of the help and assistance of the ablest
Mathematitians, not only in England and Holland, but in other parts also; yet
sure we are, that after many years experience, not only in the making and
projecting of Globes, Maps, etc. but also in examining and comparing of the
Descriptions, Discoveries, Drafts, Journals, Observations, and Writings, as
well of Ancient as Modern Geographers, Astronomers, Seamen, and others, wherein
we have spared no pains or cost, that we might deliver the delineations of the
Earth from the Ataxie and confusion of former Globes and Maps. We say, although
it is impossible we should emit and set them forth in that exactness and
perfection they ought, and we could wish; yet doubtless we have and shall
expose both Globes, Spheres, Maps, etc. more accurate and complete than some
tristing Toys, as well Foreign as Native; which have been sold at great rates
by others, and that with much Ostentation and Boasting; to the abuse of some
Gentlemen, perhaps better stored with Money, than Knowledge or Judgment in
such things. As for the excellency of the Globe or Sphere, all we shall say
is, that they have the Priority in Nature of all other Instruments, as most fit
and convenient to the Understanding and Fancy; not to speak any thing of them
as they analogically represent the Heavens and the Earth in proper genuine
Figures: for, that the Heavens are round, is not doubted by any; and for the
form of the Earth, the Opinion of its rotundity is now generally known and
received.

Our only Request therefore is, that if (in so great a Circumference as we have
run) some Lines be not truly drawn from the Center, that they may not draw an
Oblique Censure from the Reader, but rather thy Animadversion and Pardon for

ROB. MORDEN, W. BERRY.


Advertisement of Globes, Books, Maps, etc. Made and sold by Robert Morden and
William Berry.
A New Size of Globes about 15 Inches Diameter, very much Rectified and
Corrected; agreeing with the Description of this Book. Price 4 l.

Another Size of Globes about 10 Inches Diameter. Price 50 s.

A new sort of the Copernican Spheres 20 Inches Diameter, comprehending both
general and particular. Price 4 l.

Ptolomean Spheres of 10 Inches and 15 Inches Diameter, very much different
from what were formerly made. Price 3 l. and 2 s.

Concave Hemispheres about 3 Inches Diameter, which serve as a Case for the
Terrestrial Globe, and may be carried in the Pocket. Price 15 s.

A new and large Map of England, Scotland, and Ireland 6 Foot long, 4 Foot and
deep; wherein Ireland and Scotland are both new, and England much Corrected.
Price pasted upon cloth, etc. 12 s.

The Genuine Use and Effects of the Gun; showing, 1. From any shot of any
Piece, to find the greatest Randon; and to strike any place upon Ascents or
Descents within the reach of the Piece. 2. The Complication and Relation of all
Guns. 3. The Nature, Property and Use of Morter-pieces. 4. The shooting of
Granado's out of Long Guns, and many other things of great consequence to this
Art; as well Experimentally as Mathematically demonstrated, by Robert Anderson;
with Tables of Projection, etc. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Description and Use of the Planetary System, with Tables for finding the
places of the Planets, Eclipses, with all other Motions and Appearances of the
Heavens for ever. Made more easy and ready than formerly, by Thomas Street.

The Description and Use of Sutton's Large Quadrant, for finding the Hour and
Azimuth universally.

Also all sorts of Maps, Sea-plats, Mathematical Books, Projections,
Instruments, etc.

Astronomical Definitions. CONTAINING The Rudiments of Astronomy, AND
Explanation of the Sphere and Globe.
small insert between pages with illustration of globe 1



What a Sphere is.
A Sphere (omitting the Geometrical denomination) in relation to my present
purpose, I define to be, An Analogical representation of the Heavens and of the
Earth, made of several Circles so fitted together, as thereby the better to
express and represent to the Fancy the Systeme or Hypothesis of the Visible
World. Of which there are chiefly three sorts invented; viz. the Ptolomean,
Copernican, and Tychonian.

A Description of the Ptolomean Sphere.
This Systeme (which was so called from Ptolomy the Prince of Astronomers,
being indeed the very Founder of that Art and Science) supposes the Earth to
be fixed in the Center immovable, and that all the Celestial Bodies do move
round that in their Diurnal and Annual revolutions. This Sphere or Systeme of
the World the Ancients divided into two Parts or Regions; Elemental, and
Celestial. The first consists of four Parts: 1. The Earth. 2. The Water.
Which together makes one perfect Body. And above these, are the other two
Elements, viz. 3. the Air; and above that, 4. the Fire. The second consists
of many parts, viz. 1. The Moon. 2. Mercury. 3. Venus. 4. The Sun. 5. Mars. 6.
Jupiter. 7. Saturn. 8. The Orb or Sphere of the Starry Heaven: all which Orbs
or Circles are imagined to be carried about upon the Axis of the World, by the
rapture of the Primum Mobile, as is represented by this Figure.

Of the several Motions of the Planets.
Besides the Diurnal motion by which the Planets are carried round about from
East to West in 24 hours by the rapture of the Primum Mobile upon the Poles of
the World, they have also a free and proper motion of their own, from West to
East, according to the succession of the Signs upon the Poles of the
Ecliptic, each of them in a several manner and space of time: viz. The Moon,
which is the lowest of the Planets, makes her Revolution in 29 days and 8
hours. The next is Mercury, who is never far distant from the Sun, and
finisheth his motion in 88 days. Then Venus, which in her preceding the Sun is
called Lucifer, but in her following the Sun is called The Evening Star,
finisheth her revolution in 225 days. Next the Sun, who performs his
revolution in the space of a year, viz. 365 days, and about 6 hours. The next
is Mars, who finisheth his course in one year, and 321 days. Then Jupiter, who
makes his revolution in 11 years, 10 months, and 16 days. Lastly, Saturn the
highest of all the Planets, and therefore goes the greatest circuit, finisheth
his periodical course in 29 years, 5 months, 15 days. Now all these Orbs in our
large Ptolomean Spheres are placed upon the Poles of the Ecliptic, the better
to correspond with their real places, and demonstrate their true motions in the
Heavens.

Fol. 2.

small insert between pages with illustration of the Ptolemaic system Ptolomean
Sphere



A description of the Copernican Sphere.
This Hypothesis is now known to the world by this name from Copernicus a
Borussian, and Canon of the Cathedral Church of Worms, who seriously addressing
himself to the illustration of Astronomy, revived the long-neglected Systeme of
the World excogitated by Pythagoras, a Figure whereof is here inserted

Of the Motion of the Planets.
In this Systeme the rest of the Planets are mo^ed round the Sun, which is the
Center of the whole Universe, from whence he may the more equally communicate
and distribute both light and heat to the rest of the opacous Planetary Bodies
encircling him. The first next the Sun is Mercury, who finishes his Circuit
about the Sun in 88 days. The next is Venus, who moves round the Sun in 225
days. Next is the Earth, which is supposed to move with a double Motion: one
about its own Center, upon the Pole of the Equinoxial, from West to East, in 24
hours; whereby all its parts are alternately enlightened, and Day and Night
successively enjoyed: the other Motion is made upon the Poles of the Zodiac or
Ecliptic, in the space of a year; whereby all places by course enjoy Spring,
Summer, Autumn, and Winter. The Earth is encompassed with a Circle which does
not include the Sun, representing the Orb of the Moon, who in 29 days and a
half finisheth her period round the Earth. The next is Mars, who is moved above
the Earth and Moon, and ends his course round the Sun in the space of one year
and 320 days, or thereabouts; and appears far greater when he is in Opposition
of the Sun, than he does at other times; at which time he is five times nearer
the Earth, than he is in his greatest remotion. The next is Jupiter, who with
his four companions moves above Mars, and is about 12 years encompassing his
period round the Sun. The seventh is Saturn, who with his Ring and Moons is
about 30 years in finishing his revolution round the Sun. And lastly, the
Sphere of the Fixed Stars, which with their several distances encircle all the
Planetary Orbs immovable, and to us incommensurable.

I shall not now need plead for the truth of this Systeme, nor speak much of
its excellency: only this, That hereby is taken away that incredible daily
motion of the Planets, and vast Orb of the fixed Stars; which are, if the
Ancients Supputation should be true, many hundred times swifter than the Shot
out of any Gun: for the motion of the Sun in one hour must be 785715 English
miles, and in one minute 13095 miles more; and the fixed Stars must move in an
hour 135 13686 English miles, and in one minute 225228 miles. And also hereby
is annihilated all those Epicycles which the old Astronomers blindly tied to
the motion of the Sun; and all those Eccentricks, Differents, and Equants, with
the Circles of Inclination, Deviation, and Reflection. This Hypothesis, without
any absurdity or perplexity of fictitious Orbs, or impertinent motions, exactly
solves all the variety of appearances in the Heavens.

Fol. 3.

small insert between pages with illustration of the Copernican system
^^pernican Sphere



A description of the Tyohonian Sphere.
This Hypothesis derives its name from that Noble Dane, Tycho Brahe who with an
Heroical Bravery enterprised no less than the Instauration of the whole Science
of Astronomy from its very Fundamentals; laying such solid Foundations, as that
he came very near the height of his noble hopes of building the whole Theory of
Astronomy anew: but being prevented by death, he could not accomplish his noble
Design. He, I say, excogitated this Hypothesis; which all those that cannot
allow of the Pholomaick, nor adhere to the Copernican, may accept and approve
of: wherein he makes the Earth the Center to the Sun, Moon and Stars, which
also have their motion round the Earth; but the rest of the Planets to move
round the Sun as their Center: Saturn in opposition to the Sun to be nearer to
the Earth than Venus in her Apogaeum, and Mars in opposition is nearer to the
Earth than the Sun it self; as may be seen by the Figure.

But for a further illustration, or satisfaction to the more Curious, I shall
commend them to a sight of those New Spheres lately set forth by the Publishers
of this Book, being more exactly and accurately made and contrived than those
formerly done, and will be procured at a more reasonable rate; and in operation
may be applied to Practical uses, as the Globe is.

What a Globe is.
A Globe is an Artificial representation of the Starry-Heaven, or the Earth and
Water, under the form and figure of Roundness which they are supposed to have;
showing, in a just proportion and distance, every particular Constellation in
the Heavens, and each several Region or Country on the Earth.

Of the Poles.
A Globe has two Poles: the one is called the Arctick, or North Pole; the
other the Antarctick, or South-Pole; representing the Poles of the World.

Of the Axis.
From the Center of the Globe is imagined a line through both Poles, which is
called the Axis of the world, and is represented by the two Wyers in the Poles
of the Globe.

Of the Brazen Meridian.
Every Globe is hung by the Axis at both the Poles in a Brazen Meridian, which
is divided into 360 Degrees, or four times 90 equal parts. The reason why this
Circle is thus divided into four Nineties, is because the Elevation of the
Pole, or Latitude of the place, cannot be above 90 degrees.

small insert between pages with illustration of a globe

Of the Hour-circle, and Index.
Upon every Meridian is fitted a small Brass-circle, whose center is the Pole
of the Globe, and is divided into 24 equal parts, representing the hours of the
Day and Night; which in the revolution of the Globe is pointed to with an
Index, which is fitted on the Axis of the the Globe.

Of the Quadrant of Altitude.
There is also another appendant relating to the Meridian, called The Quadrant
of Altitude; which is a thin Brass-plate divided into 90 equal parts or
degrees, and fitted with a Nut and a Screw, to move to any degree upon the
Meridian.

Of the Horizon.
Besides the body of the Globe, there is also annexed a certain Frame of wood,
which is called the Horizon; in the upper Plane whereof are several Circles
delineated. The first or inner Circle is divided into equal Parts or Signs;
every Sign having its name, nature and character placed to it; and every Sign
subdivided into 30 equal parts called Degrees, and numbered with 10 20 30. Next
to the Circle of Signs is a Calendar or Almanac according to the Old Style
used by us here in England, called the Julian; which is divided into the 12
Months of the year, viz. January, February, etc. to December; every Month being
subdivided into its number of days: whereunto is annexed the Festival days.
Next is a Calendar of the New Style, now used in many foreign places,
instituted by Pope Gregory the 13; in which the Months begin 10 days sooner
than they do in the other. The last is a Circle of the Winds, divided into 32
equal parts, called Points of the Compass, according to the number of Winds
which are observed by our modern Navigators; by which they design forth the
Quarters of the Heavens, and the Coasts and Bearings of Countries.

Of the Celestial Globe.
THe Starry Heaven, that glorious Canopie embroidered with those sparkling
Diamonds which hang upon the duskie cheeks of the Night, as a rich Jewel in an
Aethiops ear, is represented unto us by the Celestial Globe, because upon its
convexity are artificially placed all the Stars and other appearances, in that
order and place as they are naturally situate in the concavity of that Orb or
Heaven.

Of the Lines, Circles, etc. upon the Celestial Globe.
And first, Of the Aequinoxial.
This is a great Line encircling the Globe, equally distant from both the
Poles, and is divided into 360 equal parts or degrees: it is the same Line with
the Equator upon the Terrestrial Globe; only that remains fixed and
unmovable, this variable or at least must be imagined to move in the Heavens.

Fol. 5

small insert between pages with illustration of the Tychonic system Tyconian
Sphere



Of the Motion of the Aequinoxial.
For one of these two must needs be granted; either the Motion of the Eighth
Sphere, or Starry Orb, from West to East upon the Poles and Axis of the
Ecliptic; or else the progress of the Equinoxial points into the precedent
Signs. Now that the first is not to be admitted, appears manifestly, because
that the Fixed Stars have not at all changed their situation in respect of
Latitude: Therefore the other must needs be granted, viz. the Motion of the
Equinoxial. Hence it comes to pass, that the Stars being fixed in their own
Orb, move not, but are by the precession of the Equinox left behind the
Equinoxial Colure; and so alter their Longitudes. For the first Star of Aries,
which in the time of Meton the Athenian (who lived about 431 years before
Christ's time) was in the very Vernal Intersection; in the year 1572, when
Tycho observed it, was found to be in 27 degrees. 37 min. of Aries; and will,
according to his Opinion, finish its revolution in 25412 years.

Of the Ecliptic.
The Equinoxial is crossed or cut in two opposite points by an oblique Circle,
called the Ecliptic; which divides the Globe into two equal parts, called
Hemispheres; the one the Northern, the other the Southern. This Circle is
divided into 12 equal parts, which are called the 12 Signs; every part being
marked with the Figure, Character, and Name of the Sign belonging to it: and
each of these Signs is divided into 30 equal parts called Degrees. Under this
Circle the Sun and the rest of the Planets finish their several Courses. It is
called Via Solis, because the Sun always goes under it in its annual course:
but the rest of the Planets have all of them their latitudes and deviations
from this Line; by reason of which their digressions and extravagancies, the
Ancients assigned the Ecliptic 12 degrees of Latitude: but modern Astronomers,
by reason of the evagations of Mars and Venus, have added to each side two
degrees more; so that the whole Latitude is confined to 16 degrees: which
breadth is also called by some the Zodiac.

Of the Poles of the Ecliptic.
As all the Meridians described upon the Globe meet in the Poles of the World;
so all the Circles of Longitude being drawn through the 12 Signs, meet in the
Poles of the Ecliptic; each Pole of the Ecliptic being distant from its
correspondent Pole of the World 23 degrees. 30 min. the one is called the
North Pole, the other the South, according to their position next the North or
South-poles of the world.

Of the Colures.
The Colures are two great Circles cutting one another at Right-angles in the
Poles of the World, the one passing by the beginning of Aries and Libra, two
Equinoxial-signes, and is therefore called the Equinoxial-Colure; the other
passing through Cancer and Capricorn, two Solstitial-signes, and is therefore
called the Solstitial Colure. This passes through the Poles of the World, and
also of the Ecliptic; but the other passes through the Poles of the World
only. The Colures divide the Ecliptic into four equal parts; viz. into Aries,
Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn; which are called the Cardinal points: for
according to the Suns approach unto any of them, the Season of the year is
altered into Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter.

Of the Tropicks.
Parallel to the Equinoxial, there are two small Circles, which are called the
Tropicks, and are 23 degrees. and a half distant from the Equinoxial, and are the
bounds of the Ecliptic. That on the North-side of the Ecliptic is called The
Tropic of Cancer, where the Sun has the greatest North-declination, and makes
our longest day and shortest night; which is about the 11 or 12 of June. The
other, on the South Side of the Equinoxial, is called The Tropic of Capricorn;
in which point the Sun has its greatest Southern declination, making our
shortest day; and longest night; which is about the 11 or 12 of December.

Of the Arctick and Antarctick Circles.
Twenty three degrees and a half from either Pole, are described two small
Circles: that near the North Pole is called The Arctick Circle, the other in
the South is called The Antarctick Circle.

Of the Number of the Stars.
Encircling the Terrestrial Orb at unmeasurable distance, sparkle the
innumerable Lights or Stars in the immense Expansion of the Firmament. And
although the Number of them for multitude seems innumerable, yet the greatest
and more visible may be numbered and named. The Number that Astronomers have at
present taken notice of, is about 1400; which we have inserted in our New
Celestial Globe, according to their Right Ascensions and Declinations, and are
sufficient for any use or purpose whatsoever.

Of the Magnitudes of the Stars.
For the better distinction of the bigness of the Stars, they are divided into
6 degrees of Magnitude. The biggest and brightest are called Stars of the first
Magnitude; those next inferior in bigness and brightness are called Stars of
the second Magnitude: and so the Stars gradually decrease to the sixth
Magnitude, which is the smallest, except some few, which are called occult, or
nebulose. And these several Magnitudes are expressed on the Globe in several
shapes, as may be seen in a small Table placed for that purpose on our
Celestial Globe.

Of the Images or Constellations described upon the Celestial Globe.
Astronomers desirous to bring the Stars into Order and Method, have reduced
many Stars into one Constellation, the better to tell where to seek them; and
being found, how to express them. The number of Constellations now drawn upon
the Globe are 64: viz.

In the Northern Hemisphere, Vrsa minor 20 Vrsa major 55 Draco 32 Cepheus 11
Boots 28 Corona Boreal. 8 Hercules 28 Lyra 11 Cygnus 27 Cassiopoeia 45 Perseus
33 Auriga 27 Serpentarius 38 Serpens 13 Sagitta 8 Aquilea 12 Antinous 7
Delphinus 10 Equuleus 4 Pegasus 23 Andromeda 23 Triangulus 4 Coma Berenice 15
In all, 472


In the 12 Signs of the Zodiac, Aries 21 Taurus 49 Gemini 29 Cancer 15 Leo 40
Virgo 39 Libra 18 Scorpio 26 Sagittarius 28 Capricornus 29 Aquarius 41 Pisces
36 In all, 371


In the Southern Hemisphere, Cete 21 Orion 62 Eridanus 42 Lepus 13 Canis major
15 Canis minor 5 Argo navis 68 Hydra 24 Crater 8 Corvus 7 Centaurns 40 Crusero
5 Lupus 25 Ara 10 Corona Austral 17 Columbus 10 Piscis Austral. 13 Grus 13
Phoenix 15 Indus 12 Pavo 23 Avis Indica 11 Musca 4 Chameleon 10 Triangulum 5
Piscis volans 7 Dorado 7 Toucan 8 Hydrus 21 In all, 510


To these is lately added, by Sir Charles Scarborough, a Constellation called
Cor Caroli Regis, figured with a Crowned Heart; being a very considerable and
notable Star of the second Magnitude, and unformed, lying between Vrsa major
and Coma Berenices: and it is well worthy the observation and notice of the more
Curious.

Of the Via Lactea, or Milkie way.
This is a broad White Circle that is seen in the Heavens, and is described
between two tracts of small pricks running through several Constellations round
the Globe. It is caused by a great number of little Stars constipated in that
part of Heaven so small and thick, that we can perceive nothing but a confused
light. About the Southern Pole are also discovered two white spots, seeming to
be only two white Clouds, being a pale assembly of very small Stars, as in the
Galaxy or Milkie way; which are more clearly discovered by the Telescope,
otherwise inconspicuous to our eyes.

An Explanation of several words of Art.
And first, Of Azimuths.
AZimuths, or Vertical Circle^, are great Circles passing through the Zenith
and Nadir: and as the Meridians cut the Equinoxial at Right-angles, so the
Azimuths cut the Horizon at Right-angles; and are numbered by degrees from the
East to the West-point, toward the North and South in the Horizon.

Almicanters.
These are Circles parallel to the Horizon, whose Poles are in the Zenith and
Nadir; and are called Circles of Altitude, because when the Sun, Moon, or any
Star is in any number of degrees above the Horizon, it is said to have so many
degrees of Altitude. And these Almicanters, or Circles of Altitude, are
numbered upon the Vertical Circle, from the Horizon upwards toward the Zenith.

Amplitude.
The Amplitude is an Arch of the Horizon, or the number of degrees contained
between the true East and West-points in the Horizon, and the rising or setting
points of the Sun, Moon, or Stars.

Ascension
Is the rising point of any Star, or any part or point of the Equinoxial above
the Horizon.

Right Ascension.
The Right Ascension of the Sun, Moon, or Star, is the number of degrees upon
the Equinoxial comprehended between the first point of Aries and the Arch of
another Meridian passing through the center of the Sun, Moon, or Star which is
upon the Meridian at the time proposed.

Oblique Ascension.
Oblique Ascension is the Arch or number of degrees of the Equinoxial, which
rises with the Sun, Moon, or any Star in an Oblique Sphere.

Oblique Descension.
Oblique Descension is the Arch or number of the degrees of the Equinoxial
which sets with the Sun, Moon, or Star.

Ascensional difference
Is the number of degrees after the substraction of the Oblique Ascension from
the Right Ascension; or the difference between the Ascension of any point of
the Ecliptic in a Right Sphere, and the Ascension of the same point in an
Oblique Sphere.

Apogaeum
Signifies that point of the Heavens where the Sun or any other Planet is
farthest from the center of the Earth.

Perigaeum
Is that point of the Heavens wherein the Sun or any Planet is nearest the
center of the Earth.

A Circle
Considered as it has some ground in the nature of the Heavens or the Earth,
at least by Application, is by Astronomers and Geographers divided into 360
parts or degrees: not because this division has any ground in Nature more than
another, but because this number is most commodious for the distinction of
Circles, and fittest for Calculation, because no number suffers more parts or
divisions than this.

Of the Compass of the Earth.
Now because the whole Circumference of a Circle is 360 degrees, therefore the
Compass of the Earth, according to this supposition, must be 21600 miles. But
this opinion seems to be taken (or rather mistaken) from Ptolomy, who allows
500 Stadiums in a degrees. and to every Stadium 600 feet: so that it being proved
that 5 Egyptian or Alexandrian feet are longer than 6 of the Italian, and the
Roman or Italian is longer than our English; it is evident that there is no
sufficient ground for this opinion, and therefore ought to be better considered
of.

A Constellation.
A Constellation or Asterism is a certain number of Stars gathered together
into one form, representing some living creature, or other thing, whereby they
are particularly known.

Complement
Is here usually taken for the remainder of the number of degrees and minutes
that any part of a Circle wants of 90 degrees. As, suppose the Latitude of a
Star be 50 degrees, that being subtracted from 90 degrees, or the fourth part
of a Circle, called a Quadrant, there remains 40 degrees for the Complement
thereof.

Of a Degree.
It Is a common Opinion, that 5 of our English Feet make a Geometrical Pace;
1000 of those Paces make an Italian or English Mile; and 60 of those Miles in
any great Circle upon the Spherical surface of the Earth or Sea, make a Degree.

So that a degree of the Heavens contains upon the surface of the Earth,
according to the Opinion of the Ancients, 60 English Miles. 60 Italian Miles.
20 French Leagues. 20 Dutch Leagues. 15 Germane Miles. 17 Spanish Leagues.


But according to several Experiments made, the quantity of a Degree is thus
variously found to be; by Alhazard the Arabian 73 English Miles. Fernlius 68
English Miles. Wilbrordus 70 English Miles. Gassendus 73 English Miles.
Oughtred 66 English Miles. Norwood 69 English Miles.


Declination
Is the number of degrees that the Sun or any Star is distant from the
Equinoxial toward either Pole; and has a double denomination, viz. North or
South-declination, according as the Sun or Star is on the North or South Side
of the Equinoxial.

Of Eclipses.
An Eclipse is a privation or want of light in an opacous or dark Body which is
beheld or aspected by a luminous Body: and these Eclipses are of two sorts.

Of the Eclipse of the Sun.
The Eclipse of the Sun is nothing else but the interposition of the Moon
between our sight and the Sun. For the Moon being of a dark, solid, and opacous
body, coming between the Sun and the Earth, does thereby hide more or less of
the Sun's bright-shining body from our sight, so that the Earth (improperly the
Sun) is Eclipsed. This Eclipse cannot be universal (as the Moon's Eclipse is)
but may appear in one Country a greater Eclipse, in another lesser, and in
other-some no Eclipse at all. For seeing the Sun far exceeds the Earth in
bigness, and the Earth far exceeds the Moon; therefore the Cone of the
Earth's shadow cannot take away or hide the whole body of the Sun from all
parts of the Earth, but one part only shall observe the same to be total, or
of a like quantity.

Of the Eclipse of the Moon.
The Moon having no light but what she receives of the Sun, can never be
Eclipsed but at the Full: yet not at every Full, but when she is diametrically
opposite to the Sun, and the Earth in the midst between them both. For the
Earth being a solid and opacous Body, casts its shadow to that point which is
opposite to the Sun. So that Conjunction and Opposition only makes an Eclipse;
which so happens, when the center of the Earth and the centres of both the Sun
and Moon shall be in the same line: which can only be, where the Moon's
Eccentrick cutteth the Sun's in that line which is called the Ecliptic. This
intersection, which can be but in two places, is called the Nodes, or Dragon's
head and tail. Nor does this intersection keep one certain place, but moving,
make a Circle of 18 years. So that Eclipses being Periodical, an Eclipse of the
Moon happening now, shall 18 years hence come to pass in the same Sign again.

Horizon
Is taken from the boundary or termination of the light; and is twofold:
Natural, and Astronomical. The Natural Horizon is that apparent Circle which
divides the visible part of Heaven from the invisible; extending it self in a
straight line from the superficies of the Earth every way round about the place
you stand upon, dividing the Heavens into two unequal parts; which is designed
out by the sight, and is sometimes greater or lesser, according to the
condition of the place.

The Astronomical Horizon is that great Circle that divides that part of Heaven
which is above is, from that part which is under us, exactly into two equal
parts, always certain and the same, passing through the Center of the Earth,
whose Poles are the Zenith and Nadir. In this Circle, the Azimuths or Vertical
Circles are numbered: and by this Circle our days and nights are measured. This
Circle is represented by the upper Plane of the Wooden Horizon.

Of the Sun's Longitude.
The Longitude of the Sun is an Arch of the Ecliptic comprehended between the
Circle of Longitude passing through the first point of Aries, and another Circle
of Longitude passing through the Center of the Sun.

Of the Longitude of a Star or Planet.
The Longitude of a Star or Planet is properly an Arch of the Ecliptic
comprehended between the Semicircle of Longitude passing through the beginning
of the Sign the Star or Planet is in, and the Semicircle of Longitude passing
through the Center of the Star or Planet.

Of the Latitude of the Moon, Star or Planet.
The Latitude of the Moon, Star or Planet, is their distance from the nearest
point of the Ecliptic either North or South, or an Arch of a Semicircle of
Longitude comprehended between the Ecliptic and the Star or point enquired
after.

Magnetical Meridian
Is an Azimuth that passes by the points of the Needle touched with the
Loadstone, or that which passes through the Poles of the Magnetical Variation.

Magnetical Azimuth of the Sun
Is an Arch of the Horizon contained between the Magnetical Meridian and the
Azimuth of the Sun.

Azimuth of the Sun
Is an Arch of the Horizon comprehended between the Azimuth passing through the
Center of the Sun, and the true Meridian.

Of the several Positions of the Globe or Sphere.
WHereas in the resolving Problemes (of what kind soever) upon the Globes,
some there are which may be performed the Globe being in any position or
situation, having no need of Rectification; as in Astronomy, the Longitude,
Place, or Declination of the Sun; the Longitude, Latitude, Declination and
Distances of Stars upon the Celestial Globe. In Geography, the Longitude,
Latitude, and Distance of places by the Terrestrial Globe. Also several
Problems may be resolved by the help of some one single Circle, either such as
is described upon the Globe it self, or is otherwise appendant unto it. As in
Geography, the difference of Longitude between Country and Country by the
Equinoxial or Hour Circle; the Latitude and difference of Latitude of Places,
by the Meridian. In Astronomy, the Declination of the Sun or Stars, by the
Meridian; the distance of Stars in the Heavens, or of Places upon the Earth or
Sea, by the Quadrant of Altitude. The day of the Month, Sun's place and
declination upon the Horizon; with diverse other the like Conclusions.

But for the resolving of most Problems, it will be requisite to have the Globe
placed or fitted according to some assigned Position or Elevation, such as the
tenor of the Question shall require. And, besides the Globe it self, and the
Circles described upon it, such also as are appendant unto it must come in use;
as the General Meridian, Horizon, Quadrant of Altitude, Hour-circle, and Circle
of Position, must be accordingly rectified.

Now there are but Three Positions in which the Globe can be said to be
rectified; of which, two are particular, and the third more general. For,

Of a Direct Sphere.
I. The Globe may be so placed in the Frame of the Horizon, that both the Poles
thereof may rest upon (or he directly in) the North and South points of the
Horizontal Circle, neither Pole having any Elevation, the Zenith-point being in
the Equinoxial Circle, and the Axis of the world directly in the plain of the
Horizon; and so the people living under that Circle have no Latitude, the Pole
having no Elevation.

The Globe or Sphere being in this position, is said to be in a Direct
position, the Zenith being directly in the Equinoxial Circle, and the Poles of
the world directly in the North and South points of the Horizon: and this
direct position of the Sphere is particular to those who live under the
Equinoxial, who have one benefit and privilege above all the inhabitants of
the world besides, for that they can see both the Poles, and behold all the
Stars (in both Hemispheres) to rise, culminate, and set.

Of a Parallel Sphere.
II. The Globe may be so placed in the Frame of the Horizon, that one of the
Poles shall be in the Zenith, and the other in the Nadir-points; that is,
either Pole shall be 90 degrees. (or one quarter of a Circle) distant from the
Horizon on either side thereof; and in this position will the Equinoxial Circle
be in the Horizon, and the Axis of the world will cut both the Equinoxial and
the Horizon at Right-angles: one Pole having 90 degrees of Elevation, and the
other as much of Depression.

The Globe or Sphere being in this position, is said to be Parallel; because
the Equinoxial, and all the Circles of Declination, (which now are Circles of
Altitude also) and the Axis of the world it self, do lie all of them Parallel
to the Horizon. And those people (if any be) that inhabit these parts of the
world, see only those Stars that are between the Equinoxial and the Elevated
Pole; that is, if the South-Pole be elevated, they see the Southern; and if the
North Pole be elevated, they see the Northern Constellations only. And those
people have but one day and one night in the whole year, and those most
miserable cold, not to be imagined: for the Sun, at his highest, never
extends to 24 degrees of Altitude; which is no more than it is with us in
London at Noon upon the 14 or 15 of February. And this position of the Sphere
is particular to these inhabitants only.

Of an Oblique Sphere.
III. The third (and most usual) position of the Sphere or Globe is more
general; for it has relation to all people living between the Equinoxial and
either of the Poles: and according as the Poles of the Globe are elevated or
depressed, accordingly are the people said to be situate: Thus, if the Globe be
placed in the Frame of the Horizon so that the Pole be elevated 10 degrees
above the Horizon; then is the Globe elevated or fitted to resolve such
Questions or Problems Astronomical as relate to those people who (have the Pole
elevated, or) do live in the Latitude of 10 degrees.

This position of the Globe or Sphere is called Oblique, because the Axis of
the World, the Equinoxial, and all the rest of the Parallels of Declination,
are cut by the Horizon at Oblique Angles; whereas in the two former positions
they cut one the other at Right Angles. Now the people which live in these
middle Latitudes, (I mean between the Arctick and Antarctick Circles) which
(yet to our knowledge) is the most habitable part of the world, do see Stars
both of the Northern and Southern Hemispheres; but yet they see not all the
Stars in either Hemisphere: for in any Oblique Latitude, the inhabitants see,
and may observe all such Stars that are of the contrary Hemisphere to them,
whose declinations are lesser than the complement of their Latitude; and all
those Stars of the contrary hemisphere, whose declination is greater than the
complement of their Latitude they never see, for they never ascend above their
Horizon: and on the contrary, those Stars of their own Hemisphere whose
declinations exceed the complement of their Latitude, do never set, but are
continually above their Horizon.

Fol. 27.

small insert between pages with illustration of a globe tilted on its axis

Of Time
Time is the measure of all our motions, and is divided by the two greater
Lights of Heaven, into Hours, Days, Weeks, Months, and Years.

Of a Year.
A Year, though it might have been as truly said of any other Star or Planet,
is now made proper to the Sun or Moon, whose Revolution in the Ecliptic is the
general definition of this part of Time; so that every Month, in the stricter
sense, should be taken for a Lunar Year.

Of a Lunar Year.
The Lunar Year is that space of time wherein the Moon measures the Zodiac
Twelve times, or makes Twelve Conjunctions with the Sun; which she finisheth
in the space of 354 days, 8 hours, and some odd minutes, 11 days or
thereabouts before the Sun.

Of the Sun's Year.
The Sun's Year is the Revolution of his motion in the Ecliptic, which if it
be accounted in the Zodiac, was called Annus Temporalis, because it
distinguished the four Times or Seasons of the year. It Is otherwise called
Annus Tropicus, because the Astronomers of old reckoned this Year from the
Tropicks. But if the Revolution of the Sun be accounted from any Fixed Star to
the same again, the Year is then called Annus Sydereus.

The precise quantity of this Year is determined of all to be 365 days: but the
surplus of hours and minutes has very much and vainly exercised the most
Curious.

Julius Caesar looking upon it as a matter no way below his great
consideration, after consultation with several Mathematicians, allotted 365 days
and 6 hours for this Revolution, reserving every year the 6 odd hours to make
a day for the Bissextile or Leap-year, being every fourth in order; so that the
three first years should consist of 365 days, and the fourth of 366; which by
infallible experience is found too much. For the motion of the Sun through the
Zodiac, from one fixed point to the same again, according to more exact
Computation, is determined to consist of 365 days, 5 hours, 49 minutes, and 4
seconds; which falls short of 6 hours by 10 minutes and 56 seconds in every
year; which must of necessity breed a difference of so many minutes and seconds
every year betwixt the Year which the Sun describes in the Zodiac, and that
which is reckoned upon in the Calendar.

Hence it comes to pass, that the Vernal Equinox, which in the Emperor's time
fell out to be upon the 24 of March, now falls about the 11 of March, twelve
days backward, and more; so that if it be let alone, it will get back to the
first of March, and so to February, till Easter falls to be upon Christmas day,
which ought also to anticipate the 25 of December in our common Julian year,
and be celebrated about thirteen days sooner.

Therefore the Pontificians do, according to the Gregorian Emendation, precede
us by ten days in their account, which is called The New Style. But why they
went no higher than the Nicene Council in the Correction of the Year, and so
fell short in the true time, the reason I must leave to them to give.

Of Civil and Natural days.
The Civil day is that space of time containing just 24 hours, reckoned from 12
of the clock on one day, to 12 of the clock the next day; in which space of
time the Equinoxial makes a diurnal revolution upon the Poles of the world.

The Natural day is that space of Time wherein the Sun moves from the Meridian
of any place to the same Meridian again.

Of an Hour.
An Hour is the twenty fourth part of a day and a night; or the space of time
that 15 degrees of the Equator takes up in the passing through the Meridian.
For the whole Equator, which contains 360 degrees, passes through the Meridian
in 24 hours, which are Mathematically divided into minutes, seconds, thirds,
etc.

Of the Zenith.
The Zenith (or Senith in the Arabic) is the Pole of the Horizon, an imaginary
point just over our heads, viz. the Vertical point, or highest toppoint of the
Heaven from our Horizon, and equidistant from it round about 90 degrees.

Nadir.
The Nadir, or Nathir, a foot-point perpendicularly imagined from our feet down
through the Center of the Earth, is that point in Heaven which is directly
under our feet.

Geographical Definitions. A Description of the Circles, Lines, etc. Drawn upon
the Superficies of the Terrestrial GLOBE.
Of the Equator.
THe Equator, or the Line under the Equinoxial, is a great Circle encompassing
the very middle of the Globe between the two Poles, dividing it into two equal
parts from North to South; and is divided, as the Equinoxial, into 360 equal
parts or degrees; and is called The Equator, either because it is equally
distant from the Poles of the World, or rather because when the Sun comes to
this Line, which is twice in a year, viz. in the beginning of Aries, which with
us is about the 10 and 11 of March; and again in Libra, which is about the 13
and 14 of September, he makes equality of days and nights throughout the world.

Of the Meridians.
The Meridians are Circles passing through the Poles of the Globe, and cut the
Equator at Right Angles: infinite in number, because all places from East to
West have several Meridians; but the number of Meridians delineated upon our
Globes are 24. The first or chief Meridian, which is as it were the Landmark
of the whole Earth in our new Globes, begins at the Island of S. Michael, one
of the Isles of the Azores; from whence is reckoned the beginning of Longitude,
and is the only Circle passing through the Poles of the Globe, which is
divided into twice 90 degrees, numbered from the Equator toward both the Poles.
The lesser Meridians are those black Circles which pass through the Poles of
the Globe, succeeding the great Meridian at 10 and 10 degrees. in most Globes, but
in ours at 15 and 15 degrees difference, and are numbered in the Equator with 15
30 etc. to 360, round the Globe.

Of the Parallels.
The Parallels are Circles running East and West round about the Globe like as
the Equator; only the Equator is a great Circle, and these are every one less
than the other, diminishing gradually, until they terminate and end in the
Pole. As the Meridians are infinite, so are the Parallels, and are delineated
through every tenth degree of the first Meridian, numbered from the Equator to
either of the Poles with 10 20 to 90.

Of the Lines under the Ecliptic, Tropicks, and Polar Circles.
Crossing the Equator obliquely in the middle, is the Ecliptic: the utmost
extent of it toward the North, notes ou^ the Tropic of Cancer; toward the
South, the Tropic of Capricorn; each of them distant from the Equator 23
degrees and a half. Parallel to the Tropicks, and at the same distance from the
Poles as they are from the Equator, are drawn the Arctick and Antarctick
Circles, offering themselves to sight by their Names, and distinctions of
Breadth and Color; being, as the Tropicks are, represented by more full Lines
than the Parallels are.

ADVETISEMENT.
AS for the Land, Seas, Islands, Rivers, Rumbs, with other Geographical
Definitions relating to the Terrestrial Globe; I shall refer you to my
following Description of Universal Maps and Charts; wherein is fully and
methodically explained the whole Rudiments of Geography; being very necessary
for the better illustration and understanding of the Terrestrial Globe.

Having thus given you a brief Account of the several Positions of the Globe or
Sphere, and of the Explanations of the Lines, Circles, etc. it will be
convenient now to show you the Uses thereof, in the Solution of Problems of
diverse kinds: in the performance whereof, I shall be both brief and plain.

And whereas I formerly said, that diverse Problems may be resolved upon either
Globe, it being in any position whatsoever (which will plainly appear
hereafter) yet it will be more convenien^ to have the Globe fitted and
accommodated with all its necessary Appendants before you make use of it. And
therefore my first business shall be, to show how to fix and set the parts of
the Globe together, fit for use in any assigned Latitude or part of the World:
and this I call Rectifying of the Globe.

How to Rectify the GLOBES, fitting them for Use In any LATITUDE or place of
the World.
BEing provided of a pair of Globes, the Meridian, Horizon and Hour-circle
truly turned and divided; also the Ball truly hung, and the Meridian and
Horizon (in all positions) cutting each other at Right Angles, the Papers truly
joined in their Pasting, etc. all which are to be performed by the Workman,
(though the Buyer ought also to have inspection thereinto) you may proceed to
Rectify them in this manner.

1. Put the Brass-Meridian into the two Notches that are in the North and
South-parts of the Horizon; the Graduated or divided part thereof toward the
East-point, and the blank or plain side of the Meridian toward the West-point
of the Horizon; and let the Meridian rest in the Notch which is in the foot or
bottom of the Horizon.

2. Place the Hour-wheel about the Pole, so that the Hour Lines of 12 and 12 do
lie directly over the East or Graduated side of the Meridian, and that the
point of the Axis do pass directly through the Center of the Hour-circle; so
shall the two Twelves, one of them represent 12 at Noon, and the other 12 at
Midnight; and the two Sixes, the one 6 in the Morning, and the other 6 at
Night. Then put the little Index or Pointer upon the Axis, so that it may move
as you turn the Globe about, and so is your Hour-wheel Rectified.

4. Elevate the Pole of your Globe (whether the North or South-pole) according
to the Latitude of that part of the world you are in: as for Example, for
London, whose Latitude is 51 degrees. 30 min. North; the Meridian being in the
Notches of the Horizon, and also in that in the foot of the Frame, as is before
directed, Move the Meridian up or down in the Notches, till you find 51 degrees.
30 min. of the Meridian justly to touch the upper part of the North-part of the
Horizon: for then is your Globe set exactly to the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 m.

4. For the Rectifying of the Quadrant of Altitude, this also must have respect
to the Latitude: Wherefore, the Latitude being 51 degrees. 30 min. count 51 degrees. 30
min. upon the South-part of the Meridian, from the Equinoxial-circle toward
the North (or elevated) Pole; and put on the Nut which is at the end of the
Quadrant, so that the edge of the divisions of the Quadrant may lie directly
under the degrees of the Latitude, viz. under 51 degrees. 30 min. and then screw
the Nut fast; and so is the Quadrant of Altitude Rectified also.

These are the four principal things that almost in all Cases must be
Rectified: for the Circle of position, that seldom comes in use but in
Dialling and Astrology; and so it is not fit to cumber the Globe with it at
other times: but when there is occasion for it, you must rectify it as
follows.

5. The two ends of the diameter of this Circle are to be placed in the North
and South-points of the Horizon; and it is to move up and down between the
Meridian and the Horizon, and there to be fixed or held at any acquired place.
And this is all the Rectifying that this Circle requires, and is (as I said
before) but seldom to be used; and therefore they are not usually made or sold
with the Globes.

Astronomical Problems.
PROB. I. The day of the Month known, either according to the Julian or
Gregorian Account, to find the Sun's place in the Ecliptic.
SEek the day of the Month (in either Account) according as you find them
placed in the Calendar, and right against it, in the innermost Circle next to
it, you shall have the degree and minute in which the Sun shall be that day at
noon.

EXAMPLE.
Let the day proposed be the 18 of October (in the Julian, or the 28 of October
in the Gregorian Account) which is S. Luke's day: Find this Month and Day in
the Calendar, and right against it (in the innermost Circle) you shall find 5
degrees. 32 min. of Scorpio, in which Sign and degree the Sun will be upon that 18
or 28 of October.

In like manner, upon the 24 of April (Julian) or the 4 of May (Gregorian)
(which is all one day) the Sun will be found to be in 14 degrees. 32 min. of
Taurus. And so of any other day, as in the following Table, which shows, that
upon Jul. Greg d. m. January 7 17 The Sun's place at Noon will be in 28 9
Capricorn Februa^y 12 22 4 38 Pisces March 23 Apr 3 13 23 Aries May 10 26 5 39
Gemini July 27 Aug. 7 14 16 Leo Sep^emb^r 3 13 21 0 Virgo November 5 15 23 41
Scorpio

PROB. II. By knowing the Place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, the day of the
Month in either of the Accounts may be obtained: As follows.
SEek the sign, degree and minute in which the Sun is, in the innermost Circle
of the Horizon; and right against it, you shall have the day of the month in
both Accounts.

EXAMPLE.
Let the Sun be in 24 degrees. of Gemini; look in the innermost Circle for the
sign Gemini, and against it in the Calendar you shall find the 4 of June
(Julian) or the 14 of June (Gregorian) which is the day of the month.

In like manner, when the Sun is in 14 degrees. 53 min. of Capricorn, the day of
the month will be found the 25 of December (Julian) or the 4 of January
(Gregorian.)

PROB. III.
The Latitude (51 degrees. 30 min.) and the Sun's place in the Ecliptic ( viz. in
29 of Taurus) being given, to find

The Sun's Declination.
THe Sun Declination is an Arch of the Meridian, comprehended between the
Equinoxial Circle, and that point of the Ecliptic in which the Sun is.

Taurus to the Brass-Meridian; then shall the degrees of the Meridian contained
between the Equinoxial and this point, be 20. So that the declination of the
Sun is 20 degrees. North, because the Sun is in a Northern Sign.

In like manner, degrees. min. degrees. min. When the Sun is in degrees. 16 00 The Sun's
declination will be found to be 15 46 North. 25 00 19 05 South. 29 00 11 52
South. 13 00 5 9 North.

PROB. IV. The Sun 's Amplitude.
THe Amplitude, is an Arch of the Horizon comprehended between the East or
West-points thereof, and that point upon which the Sun does Rise or Set.

Taurus to the Horizon, and there you shall find 33 degrees. 20 min. to be
contained between that, and the East or West-point, toward the North, because
the Sun is in a Northern sign, that is very near the North-East by East point
of the Compass, as appears by the points upon the Horizon: and that is the
Amplitude.

An in like manner, d. m. d. m. When is in degrees. 16 00 The Sun's Amplitude will
be from the East or West sound 26 28 Northward 25 00 31 41 Southward 29 00 19
17 Southward 13 00 7 34 Northward

PROB. V. The Sun's Right Ascension.
THe Right Ascension of the Sun or of a Star, is that Arch of the Equinoxial
which is contained between the beginning of Aries, and that point of the
Equinoxial which comes to the Meridian, with that point of the Ecliptic in
which the Sun or Star is.

Taurus to the Meridian; so shall you find (upon the Equinoxial) 56 degrees. 50
min. to be contained between the beginning of Aries and the Meridian: And such
is the Sun's Right Ascension when he is 29 degrees. of Taurus.

In like manner, degrees. min. degrees. min. When the Sun is in degrees. 16 00 The Sun's
Right Ascension will be 138 26 25 00 232 38 29 03 330 51 13 00 11 57

PROB. VI. The Oblique Ascension.
THe Oblique Ascension of the Sun, or of a Star, is that Arch of the Equinoxial
which is comprehended between the beginning of Aries and that point of the
Equinoxial which comes to the East-point of the Horizon, with that point of the
Ecliptic in which the Sun or Star is.

Taurus to the East Side or semicircle of the Horizon, then shall you find 20
degrees. 30 min. of the Equinoxial to be contained between the beginning of Aries
and the East-point of the Horizon; and that is the Oblique Ascension of the Sun
or Star, it being in the 29 degree of Taurus.

In the same manner, degrees. min. degrees. min. The Sun being in 16 00 The Oblique
Ascension will be found to be 117 10 25 00 258 27 29 00 346 30 13 00 005 26

PROB. VII. To find the Ascensional Difference.
THe difference of Ascension is no other than the difference of degrees between
the Right and Oblique Ascension. Wherefore substract the lesser from the
greater, and the remainer will be the Ascensional Difference, which will be
found to be 17 degrees. 14 min. Or, the Ascensional difference is that space of
time contained between 6 of the clock either in the morning or the evening, and
the time of the Sun 's Rising or Setting. Wherefore,

PROB. VIII. To find the time of the Sun's Rising and Setting.
Taurus to the Meridian, and set the Index of the Hour-wheel to 12 of the clock
Southward: then turn the body of the Globe Eastward, till 29 degrees. of Taurus
touch the East Side of the Horizon; and then with the Index of the Hour-wheel
point out 11 min. after 4 in the morning, at which time the Sun Rises. And if
you turn the body of the Globe about Westward, till the 29 degrees. of Taurus does
touch the West Side of the Horizon, then shall the Index of the Hour-circle
point at 49 min. after 7 at night, at which time the Sun sets.

PROB. IX. To find the Length of the Day and Night.
Taurus touch the East Side of the Horizon; and then set the Index of the
Hour-circle to the North (or undermost) 12. Then turn the Globe Westward, till
29 degrees. of Taurus touch the Horizon on the West Side, and then shall the Index
of the Hour-wheel point at 3 hours 38 min. more than 12 hours. So that the day
is then 15 hours and 38 min. long. And if you count the hours between the North
12 and the Hour-Index, you shall find them to be 8 hours and 22 min. which is
the length of the night, the Sun being in 29 degrees. of Taurus.

And so, being in Ascens. diff. Sun's rise Sun's set length of day length of
night d. m. d. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. 16. 00 you will find 21. 12 4. 35 7.
25 14. 50 9. 12 25. 00 25. 52 7. 43 4. 17 8. 34 15. 28 29. 00 15. 00 7. 00 5.
00 10. 00 14. 00 13. 00 6. 30 5. 34 6. 26 12. 52 11. 8

PROB. X. The Sun's Meridian-Altitude, and his depression at Midnight.
THis may be effected, by adding or substracting of the Sun's Declination to or
from the Complement of the Latitude: For,

It is an Arch of the Meridian, comprehended between the intersection of the
Meridian with the Horizon, and that part of the Meridian upon which the Sun is
at Noon or Midnight.

Taurus be just under the Meridian; then shall you find the number of degrees
of the Meridian which are comprehended between that point and the Horizon to be
58 degrees. 30 min. which is the Meridian-Altitude. And if you bring the 29 degrees. of
Scorpio, which is the opposite point of the Ecliptic in which the Sun is, to
the Meridian, the number of the degrees of the Meridian between that point and
the Horizon will be found to be 18 degrees. 30 min. which is the Sun's depression
at midnight.

In like manner, d. m. d. m. When the Sun is in 16 00 You shall find the
Meridian Altitude 54. 36 and the depres. 22. 24 25. 00 19. 25 57. 25 29. 00 26.
38 50. 22 13. 00 43. 39 33. 21

PROB. XI. When the Twilight begins and ends.
THe Twilight begins when the Sun is 18 degrees. below the Horizon before its
Rising, and it ends when the Sun comes to be 18 degrees. below the Horizon after
its Setting.

Sun in 29 degrees. of Taurus, find the opposite point thereunto, which is the 29
degrees. of Scorpio, and bring that point, as also the Quadrant of Altitude, both
of them on the West Side of the Meridian; and then move both the body of the
Globe, and the Quadrant of Altitude also, till the 29 degrees. of Scorpio lie
directly under 18 degrees. of the Quadrant of Altitude: which done, keep them both
together, and then see how many hours the Index is removed from 12, which you
shall find to be 1 hour and 8 minutes. So that Twilight begins at 8 min. after
1 in the morning. And this being taken from 4 ho. 11 min. the time of the Sun's
Rising that day, there will remain 3 ho. 3 min. which is the length or
continuance of the Twilight. Also if you double the time of the beginning of
Twilight 1 ho. 8 min. you shall have the length of dark night, which will be
but 2 ho. 16 min.

In like manner, if you would know when the Twilight ends after Sunsetting,
you must bring the 29 degrees. of Scorpio (the point opposite to the Sun) on the
East Side of the Meridian, making it and 18 degrees. of the Quadrant of Altitude to
meet, then the Index will show 10 hours 52 min. and till that time of night
does Twilight continue

And so, The Sun in Daybreak will be at Twilight last till degrees. ho. mi. aft.
midnight ho. min. at night. 29 0. 10 11. 50 8 5. 52 6. 8 2 4. 6 7. 54 0 2. 41
9. 19

And if you go about to find the time of the beginning and end of Twilight;
all the time that the Sun is passing from 2 degrees. of Gemini to 30 degrees. of
Cancer, which is from about the 12 of May to the 12 of July, you shall find
that there will be no Twilight at all, but all that time continual day for all
that space of time the Sun never descends so much as 18 degrees. under the
Horizon, in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min.

PROB. XII. What Altitude the Sun shall have at 6 of the Clock in the morning
or evening.
THe Altitude of the Sun, or of a Star, etc. is an Arch of an Azimuth or
Vertical Circle, passing through the Zenith and Nadir points and the body of
the Sun or Star, counted from the Horizon to the Sun or Star: and all such
Azimuths or Vertical Circles are represented by the Quadrant of Altitude.

Note, that this Problem is only in use when the Sun is in the six Northern
signs: for the Sun is never above the Horizon at six, when he is in Southern
signs.

Taurus to the Meridian, and set the Index of the Hour-circle to 12; then turn
the Globe about Eastward, till the Index of the Hour-circle come just to 6 a
clock: then holding the Globe there, lay the Quadrant of Altitude just over the
29 degrees. of Taurus, and there you shall find it to cut 15 degrees. 30 min. of the
Quadrant. And such Altitude shall the Sun have at 6 of the clock in the
morning, and the same at 6 at night.

And so, When the Sun is in The Sun's Altitude at 6 will be found to be degrees.
min. degrees. min. 16. 00 12. 32 13. 00 4. 2

PROB. XIII. What Azimuth the Sun shall have at 6 of the Clock.
THe Azimuth is an Arch of the Horizon comprehended between the East, West,
North or South points thereof, and the intersection of a Vertical Circle
passing through the Sun or Star whose Azimuth you seek.

Note, this Problem is of Use only when the Sun is in Northern signs.

Taurus to the Meridian, and set the Index of the Hour-wheel to 12; then move
the Globe till the Index lie upon 6; and holding the Globe there, lay the
Quadrant of Altitude just over 29 degrees. Taurus: then shall you find, that there
are 77 degrees. 14 min. of the Horizon contained between the intersection of the
North-part of the Meridian, and the Quadrant of Altitude, which is the Azimuth
from the North: or 12 degrees. 46 min. from the East, which is the Azimuth from the
East: or 102 degrees. 46 min. from the South, which is its Azimuth therefrom.

In like manner, Sun in The Sun's Azimuth at 6 will be found to be from the d.
m. d. m. d. m. d. m. North East or West South 16. 0 79.49 10.11 100.11 13. 0
86. 47 3. 13 93. 13.

PROB. XIV. At what hour the Sun shall be upon the East or West Azimuths.
This Problem is only of use when the Sun is in Northern signs.

Taurus to the Meridian, and the Index to 12 of the Clock. Also bring the
beginning of the degrees of the Quadrant of Altitude to the East-point of the
Horizon, and turn the Globe about till the 29 degree of Taurus do touch the
degrees of the Quadrant of Altitude; then shall the Index point at 7 min. past
7, at which time in the morning will the Sun be exactly upon the East Azimuth,
or point of the Compass. And if you carry the Quadrant of Altitude to the
West-point of the Horizon, and turn the Globe about till 29 degrees. of Taurus
touch the edge of degrees thereof, the Hour-IndeX will point at 4 of the clock
and 53 min. at which time in the afternoon will the Sun be upon the
West-Azimuth or point of the Compass.

In the same manner, d. m. d m. d. m. When the Sun is in 16.00 It will be due
East at 6.57 West at 5.03 13.00 6.17 5.43

PROB. XV. What Altitude the Sun shall have when he is upon the East or
West-Azimuths.
This Problem is in use only when the Sun is in Northern signs.

Taurus to the Meridian, and the Quadrant of Altitude to the East or
West-points of the Horizon: Then turn the Globe about, till the 29 degrees. of
Taurus touch the Quadrant of Altitude, and you shall find it to touch at 25
degrees. 55 min. of the Quadrant: and such Altitude has the Sun, when he is upon
the East or West-Azimuth.

In like manner, d. m. d. m. When the Sun is in 16.00 Its Altitude when East or
West will be found 20.19 13.00 6.36

PROB. XVI. What Altitude the Sun shall have at any time of the day.
Taurus to the Meridian, and set the Hour-Index to 12 a clock. Then turn about
the Globe till the Hour-Index point to the given hour (suppose 9 in the
morning, or 3 in the afternoon:) there keep the Globe; and laying the Quadrant
of Altitude over the 29 degrees. of Taurus, you shall find 43 degrees. cut thereby;
and such Altitude shall the Sun have at 9 in the morning, or 3 in the
afternoon. And by this Problem the Sun's Altitudes in any sign or degree of
the Ecliptic at all hours may be found; as in this following Synopsis or Table.

So the Sun being in the beginning of Cancer Gemin. or Leo. Taurus or Virgo.
Aries or Libra. Scorpio or Pisces. Aquar. or Sagitt. Capric. At the ho. d.m.
d.m. d.m. d.m. d m. d.m. d.m. XII. His Altitude will be 62 00 58 42 50 00 38 30
27 1 18 18 15 00 XI. I. 59 43 56 34 48 12 36 58 25 40 17 6 13 52 X. II. 53 45
50 55 13 12 32 37 21 51 13 38 10 30 IX. III. 45 42 43 ^ ^6 0 26 7 15 58 8 12 5
26 VIII. IV. 36 41 34 13 27 31 18 8 8 33 1 15 VII V. 27 17 24 56 18 18 9 17 0 6
VI. 18 11 15 40 9 0 V. VII. 9 32 6 50 IV. VIII. 1 32

This Table will be of good use to such as have occasion to make Cylinders or
Quadrants, to find the hour of the day; or Rings and other Instrumental Dyals;
and to insert the Tropicks and other Parallels of the Sun's course in fixed
Sun-Dyals, etc.

PROB. XVII. What Altitude the Sun shall have, he being upon any Azimuth.
Altitude to the Azimuth you intend to find the Altitude upon; (suppose the 30
degrees. of Azimuth from the South toward the East:) bring the Quadrant of
Altitude thither; and keeping of it there, turn the Globe about till 29 degrees. of
Taurus touch the degrees of the Quadrant of Altitude, and you shall find them
to concur at 55 degrees. 34 min. of the Quadrant: and such is the Sun's Altitude,
when he is 30 degrees. from the South-part of the Meridian either Eastward or
Westward. And by this means you may find the Azimuth at all times. An Example
of the Sun's Altitude upon every Tenth Azimuth from the South, in the beginning
of each Sign, here follows.

The Sun in the beginning of Cancer Leo or Gemin. Virgo or Taurus Libra or
Aries Scorpio or Pisces. Sagitt or Aquar. Capric d. Az d.m. d.m. d.m. d.m. d.m.
d.m. d. m. Its Altitude on hese degr. of Azimuth from the South, viz. 0 will be
found to be 62 0 58 42 50 0 38 30 27 0 28 18 15 0 10 61 43 58 24 49 38 38 4 26
30 17 45 14 25 20 60 51 57 28 48 33 36 46 25 10 16 5 12 41 30 59 52 55 52 46 40
34 34 22 27 13 15 9 45 40 57 20 53 29 43 51 31 21 18 48 9 14 5 34 50 54 3 50 12
40 11 27 5 13 58 3 57 0 6 60 49 56 45 53 35 23 21 41 8 0 70 44 40 40 25 29 27
15 13 1 0 80 28 11 33 46 21 29 7 52 90 30 38 26 10 14 25 100 22 27 18 2 6 45
110 14 14 9 58 120 6 34 2 30

This Table has the like use for the making of Cylinders, Quadrants, and other
Instruments that give the Azimuth by the height of the Sun, as the preceding
Table has for the Hour, and may be so applied.

The Latitude (51 degrees. 30 min.) the Sun's place in the Ecliptic, (29 degrees. 0
min. of Taurus) and his Altitude (12 degrees.) being given: To find
PROB. XVIII. The Sun 's Azimuth at any time.
etc. and the Quadrant of Altitude fixed, and brought to the Horizon; Turn 29
degrees. of Taurus toward the East, if in the morning; or toward the West, if in
the evening, till it come to lie just under degrees. of the Quadrant of Altitude;
and then note at what degree in the Horizon the Quadrant of Altitude rests;
which will be at 16 degrees. 8 min. from the East if in the morning, or 16 degrees. 8
min. from the West if in the afternoon Northward, which is the Azimuth from the
East or West toward the North. And this Azimuth, if reckoned by the Points of
the Compass upon the Horizon, will be E. by N. 4 degrees. 53 min. Northward, if in
the morning; or W. by N. 4 degrees. 53 min. Northward, if in the evening, when the
Sun is in 29 degrees. of Taurus, and has 12 degrees. of Altitude. Now if you count the
degrees of the Horizon between the Quadrant of Altitude and the Northpart of
the Meridian, you shall find them to be 73 degrees. 52 min. which is the Azimuth
from the North: And if you count them from the South-part of the Meridian, you
shall find them to be 106 degrees. 8 min. which is the Azimuth from the South.

In like manner; degrees. min. The Latitude being 51 30 The Sun's place 1 00
Aquarius. The Sun's Altitude 12 00 Then will the Azimuth be found to be 56 degrees.
from the East or West toward the South; which (by the Points of the Compass
upon the Horizon) will appear to be S. E. by S. if in the morning, or S. W. by
S. if in the evening.

PROB. XIX. The Hour of the day.
Taurus to the Meridian, and set the Index to 12^ clock: Then, if it be in the
forenoon, set the Quadrant of Altitude on the East Side of the Meridian* but on
the West Side, if it be in the afternoon. And turn the Globe about, till the 29
degrees. of Taur^s meet with 12 degrees. of the Quadrant of Altitude and then shall the
Index of the Hour-circle poin^ at 5 a clock and 36 min. if it be in the morning
or at 24 min. after 6 of the clock, if it be at nigh^ And that is the true hour
of the day.

In like manner, degrees. min. The Latitude being 51 30 The Sun's place 1 00
Taurus. The Altitude 36 00 Then will the hour of the day be found to be either
9 in the morning, or 3 in the afternoon. And which of these hours it is, may
best be known by a second observation of the Altitude: for if the Altitude do
increase, it is the forenoon; but if it decrease, it is the afternoon.

Again, degrees. min. The Latitude being 52 30 The Sun's place the beginning of
Taurus. The Sun's Altitude 25 56 The hour of the day would be found to be
either 8 min. past 4 in the afternoon. Or if it were in the forenoon, 52 min.
after 7 in the morning.

PROB. XX. To find the Difference of Latitude, or, to know how many degrees
the Pole must be Elevated or Depressed, to make the Longest day in any Latitude
an Hour longer, or the Shortest an Hour shorter than it is in your Latitude.
LEt it be required to find in what Latitude the Longest day shall be an hour
longer than it is at London.

London, the Index of the Hour-circle to 12, and the Solstitial Colure to the
Meridian; so shall the number of hours contained between the Brass-Meridian and
the Horizon, upon the Tropic of Cancer, be half the length of the Longest day
at London, namely, 123 degrees. which in time is 8 ho. and 13 minutes for the
Semidecimal Arch of the Artificial day at London. At this intersection of the
Tropic of Cancer with the Horizon, make a small mark upon the Tropic, and
move the Globe Westward, till the Equinoxial Circle has passed 7 degrees. 30 min.
or one half hour of time from the Meridian; and then observe where the Tropic
of Cancer intersects with the Horizon again, and there upon the Tropic make
another small mark. Then bring the Solstitial Colure back again to the
Meridian, and there fix the Ball of the Globe; and move the Brass-Meridian in
the Horizon upwards, till your second prick which you made upon the Tropic do
just touch the Horizon; then will the Globe stand at that Latitude in which the
Longest day will be an hour longer than the Longest day at London is; and that
Latitude will be found be to be 56 degrees. 27 min.

But if you would know in what Latitude the Longest day shall be one hour
shorter than at London, then having made a mark upon the Tropic at the
termination of the Longest day there, move the Globe Eastward, till 7 degrees. 30
min. have passed the Meridian; and where the Tropic and Horizon intersect,
make there a mark upon the Tropic, and bring the Solstitial Colure to the
Meridian, and fix the body of the Globe there: then depress the Meridian in the
Horizon, till your second mark do touch the Horizon; then will the Globe rest
at that Latitude wherein the Longest day will be one hour shorter than the
Longest day at London is; which Latitude will be found to be 35 degrees. 58 min.

PROB. XXI. How much must the Sun's Declination increase or decrease, to make
the Day Artificial one hour longer or shorter than it was at the time proposed.
SUppose in Latitude 51 degrees. 30 min. the Sun to have 10 degrees of
North-Declination, and I would know how much the Declination must increase
Northward, to make the day one hour longer than it is.

London, 51 degrees. 30 min. and bring the Equinoxial Colure to the Meridian, and
bring the Sun's place, or the parallel of 10 degrees. his Declination, to the
Horizon; and upon the Horizon make a small mark, to which bring the Equinoxial
Colure, and at this intersection make a mark upon the Colure. Then (if the days
lengthen, move the Globe Eastward, or Westward if they shorten) till 7 degrees. 30
min. of the Equinoxial have passed the Meridian; and then, again, where the
former Colure intersects with the Horizon, make another mark, upon the Colure.
This done, bring the Colure to the Meridian again, and see what number of
degrees of the Meridian (or degrees of the Colure it self) are contained
between the two pricks; which you shall find to be 4 degrees. and 40 min. And so
much must the Declination increase Northward, to make the day lengthen one
hour, at that time of the year.

PROB. XXII. To find what number of days are contained between the days of
Lengthening or shortning one hour, at any time of the year.
LEt the time be as in the last Example, where the Sun has 10 degrees. of
North-declination; which will be about the 5 of April.

April. Then move the Globe till the other prick touch the Horizon; which it
will do about the 19 of April, at which time the day will be one hour longer
than it was upon the 5 of April: between which two days, there are contained 13
complete days, and parts of both the two other days. So that you may conclude,
that in 14 days time (at that season of the year) the days do lengthen one
hour, and shorten as much when the Sun is in opposite signs.

PROB. XXIII. To find the length of the Longest or Shortest day in any
Latitude.
THe Longest Artificial day in any Latitude, is made by the Sun 's passing
through the Tropic of Cancer in all places that have North-Latitude, or through
the Tropic of Capricorn to all that have South-Latitude.

London, in Latitude 51 degrees. 30 min. elevate the Globe thereto, and bring the
Solstitial Colure to the Meridian, and the Hour-Index to 12. Then, count the
number of hours upon the Tropic of Cancer, that are contained thereupon
between the intersection thereof with the Horizon, on the East Side, and its
intersection on the West Side; which you will find to be 16 hours, and almost
half an hour, viz. 26 min. for the length of the Longest day. And the number of
hours contained between the East and West intersections of the Tropic of
Capricorn and the Horizon, is the length of the Shortest day, which at London
will be found to be 7 hours, and somewhat above half an hour, viz. 34 min.

Half the length of the Day is the time of the Sun's Setting, and half the
length of the Night is the time of the Sun's Rising.

PROB. XXIV. Of the Reason of the Inequality of Days Natural, and Days Civil.
Natural day is that space of time in which the Sun moves from the Meridian of
some one place or Country, to the same Meridian again. These days are not
always of an equal length, but are longer at some times of the year than at
other times, but at all times they are longer than the Civil day is. A Civil
day being that space of time containing just 24 hours, reckoned from 12 a clock
one day, unto 12 of the clock the next day; in which time the Equinoxial makes
one entire Revolution about the Axis of the world. The difference between these
two sorts of Days is but small; and there is a double cause for this small
inequality.

1. Because the Sun 's apparent motion differs from his true motion, as being
slower when he is in his Apogaeum, than in his Perigaeum; he moving scarce 58
min. in a day when he is in the one, and above 61 min. when he is in the other;
and so increases in Right Ascension.

2. The difference of Right Ascensions in several eequal parts of the
Ecliptic: for when the Sun is near either of the Tropicks, the Ascensional
Differences are greater than when the Sun is about the Equinoxial: for about
Aries or Libra, the Right Ascension of 10 degrees. is but 9 degrees. 10 min. whereas
the Right Ascension of 10 degrees. of Cancer or Capricorn is 10 degrees. and 53 min.

Now this difference being so small, in one days time it is not perceptible by
the Globe; wherefore if you would find this difference, it would be requisite
to take some number of days, as 10, 20, or 30, and in them it will be apparent.
And to effect it by the Globe, do thus.

Sun, both at the beginning and ending of those days you would compute the
difference of 2. Find the Right Ascensions answerable to each place in the
Ecliptic, as also the difference of Right Ascensions answerable to the motion
of the Sun in each respective number of days. 3. Compare the difference of the
Right Ascensions together, by substracting the lesser from the greater; and the
difference converted into time, shall be the number of minutes that the one
number of days exceeds the other.

EXAMPLE.
Let it be required to find what difference there is in the length of the
first 20 days of December, and the first 20 days of March.

d.m. d. m. d. m. d.m. Sun's place December. 1. 20.07 Its Right Ascens. is 259.01
22. 24 21 10.33 281.25 4.02 Differ. of Ascens. March 1 21.24 352.06 18. 22 21
11.11 10.28

Here by this Synopsis you may perceive that the difference of these 20 days
taken at several times of the year is 4 degrees. 2 min. which converted into time
is 16 minutes, that is, a quarter of an hour and one minute; and so much longer
are the first 20 days in December, than the first 20 days of March.

And by this means you shall find that the Month of January is longer than the
Month of June (both Months consisting of 31 days) by 1 degrees. 20 min. which is
only 4 1/^ min. in time.

d.m. d.m. d.m. d.m. Sun's place Januar. 1 21.47 Its Right Ascens. is 293.29
31. 24 31 22.17 324.53 01.20 Differ. of Ascens. June 1 20.40 79.43 30. 04 31
18.16 109.47

Thus the Month of January is longer than the Month of June by 4 minutes and
^/^ of a minute of time.

All the forementioned Problems may be performed upon either Globe; the
Horizon, Meridian, Quadrant of Altitude, Hour-circle, and most of the Circles
upon the Globes themselves, being in both Globes the same. But it is most
proper to use the Terrestrial Globe for Geographical and Nautical Problems; and
the Celestial Globe for such as concern Astronomy: and these following are
chiefly such, and therefore best to be wrought by the Celestial Globe.

PROB. XXV. To find the Longitude and Latitude of any Star.
THe Longitude of a Star is an Arch of the Ecliptic, contained between the
beginning of Aries, and the intersection of an arch of a great Circle, which
passes through both the Poles of the Ecliptic, and also through the body of
that Star.

The Latitude of a Star is that part of an arch of a great Circle which passes
through both the Poles of the Ecliptic, and through the body of the Star, and
is contained between the Ecliptick-line and that Star.

Longitude, skrew the Quadrant of Altitude over that Pole of the Ecliptic
which is nearest to the Star whose Longitude you seek. Then laying the Quadrant
just over the center of the Star, Note, that the Poles of the Ecliptic are
distant from the Poles of the world 23 degrees. on either side.
look what degrees of the Ecliptic, (counting them from the beginning of
Aries) and those degrees are the degrees of the Star's Longitude. So the
Quadrant of Altitude skrewed over the North Pole of the Ecliptic, and laid
upon the bright Star Capella, the Quadrant shall cut 77 degrees. 16 min. of the
Ecliptick-Circle, counted from the beginning of Aries; and that is that Star's
Longitude.

For the Latitude, the Quadrant fitted as before, and laid over the center of
Capella, the Star shall out 22 degrees. 50 min. of the Quadrant of Altitude, and
such is the Latitude of that Star, North, for that it lies on the North-side of
the Ecliptick-Line.

PROB. XXV. To find the Right Ascension and Declination of a Star.
THe Right Ascension of a Star is that Arch of the Equinoxial which is
contained between the beginning of Aries and that point which comes to the
Meridian with that Star.

The Declination of a Star is an Arch of the Meridian contained between the
Equinoxial and any Star.

Right Ascension, (the Globe being rectified) bring Capella to the Meridian,
and then shall you find 73 degrees. 7 min. of the Equinoxial contained between the
beginning of Aries and the Meridian; and that is the Right Ascension of Capella.

For the Declination, bring Capella to the Meridian, so shall you find 45 degrees.
37 min. of the Meridian contained between the Equinoxial and Capella; and that
is the Declination of that Star* And in this manner you may find the
Longitude, Latitude, Right Ascension, and Declination of any other Star upon
the Celestial Globe: As in this following Table of the principal Fixed Stars of
the first Magnitude, you shall find

Stars names. Longit Latit. R. Asc. Decl. d. m. d. m. d. m. d. m. Arcturus 119.
39 ^1. 2 B 210. 13 20. 58 B Lucida Lyra 280. 43 61. 47 B 276. 27 38. 30 B Algol
51. 37 22. 22 B 41. 46 39. 39 B Capella 77. 16 22 50 B 73. 7 45. 37 B Aldebaran
65. 12 5. 31 A 64. 17 15. 48 B Regulus 145. 17 0. 26 B 147. 43 13. 33 B Cauda
Leonis 167. 3 12. 18 B 173. 4 16. 25 B Spica Virgin. 199. 16 1. 59 A 196. 56 9
31 A Antares 245. 13 4. 27 A 242. 23 25. 37 A Fomahant 329. 1^ 21. 00 A 339. 46
31. 17 A Regel 72. 1^ ^1. 11 A 74. 44 8. 37 A Syrius 99. 3^ 39. 3^ A 97. 42 16.
14 A Procyon 111. 18 15 57 A 110. 34 6. 3 B

PROB. XXVI. To find the distance of two Stars.
IF the two Stars be both of them under the same Meridian, Bring them under the
General (or Brass) Meridian, and see what degrees of the Meridian are contained
between them, for that is their distance.

2. If they lie not under the same Meridian, but have the same declination, or
lie in the same Parallel, Bring one of them to the Meridian, and see what
degrees of the Equinoctial are cut thereby: then bring the other Star to the
Meridian, and count what degrees of the Equinoctial are contained between the
Meridian and the degrees before found, for that is the distance of those two
Stars.

3. If the two Stars do neither lie under the same Meridian, nor in the same
Parallel, Then lay the Quadrant of Altitude (it being loose) to both the Stars,
and the degrees of the Quadrant contained between the two Stars is their
distance. And if the Quadrant be too short, you may use the Circle of Position,
or take their distance with a pair of Calope-Compasses, and measure their
distance upon the Equinoctial, or any other great Circle.

Thus

The Right Shoulder of Auriga, and the Right Shoulder of Orion, being under the
same Meridian, their distance will be found to be 37 degrees. 38 min.

Also

Arcturus and the Lions Neck, being near in the same Parallel, their distance
will be found to be 57 degrees.

Likewise

Lyra the Harp, and Marchad in the Wing of Pegasus, will be found to be distant
63 degrees.

PROB. XXVII. To know what Stars will be upon the Meridian at any hour of the
Night.
Sun being in 29 degrees. of Taurus what Stars will be upon the Meridian at 10 a
clock and 12 min. at Night, bring 29 degrees. of Scorpio (which is the opposite
Sign to Taurus) to the Meridian, and set the Index of the Hour-Circle to 12.
then turn the Globe about Westward till the Index point at 12 min. after 10 a
clock, and there hold the Globe; and all those Stars which lie under the Brass
Meridian are then upon the Meridian, of which Arcturus is the Chief.

PROB. XXVIII. To know what day in the year any Star shall be upon the Meridian
at 12 a clock at Night.
Star to the Meridian, and mark what degree of the Ecliptic is just under the
Meridian at the same time: Then find that degree of the Ecliptic in the
Horizon, and note what day of the year stands against it, for that day of the
year will that Star be upon the South-part of the Meridian at 12 at night: and
when the Sun is in the opposite Point of the Ecliptic, the same Star will be
upon the Northpart of the Meridian at 12 at noon.

PROB. XXIX. The Sun's Place, and the Altitude of a known Star given, To find
the hour of the Night.
THe Sun being in 21 degrees. of Capricorn, the Altitude of the Great Dog 14 degrees. I
demand the hour of the Night.

etc. bring 21 degrees. of Capricorn to the Meridian, and the Index to 12 a clock.
Then move the Globe and Quadrant of Altitude so together, that the Great Dog
meet with 14 degrees. of the Quadrant; and then shall the Index point at 8 of the
clock and 22 minutes; which is the true hour of the Night.

And thus degrees. d. d.m. When the Sun is in 20 and the Altitude of The Bulls eye
39 The ho will be 7.12 20 The Bulls eye 30 9. 2 5 Arcturus 50 11.3

PROB. XXX. The Altitude of Aldebaran (or any other Star) being given in a
known Latitude; To find the Star's Azimuth.
Zenith, move it and the Globe, till the degrees of Altitude given do meet with
the center of the Star; then shall the end of the Quadrant of Altitude show you
upon the Horizon the Azimuth in which the Star then is. And thus, if you bring
the Quadrant of Altitude on the East Side of the Globe, moving it and the Globe
both, till the center of Aldebaran do meet just with 42 degrees. of the Quadrant,
you shall then find the Quadrant of Altl^ude to rest at 33 degrees. of the
Horizon, counted from the East; or at 57 degrees. if you count them from the South:
and that is the Azimuth of Aldebaran when he has 42 degrees. of Altitude; and that
is near the S. E. by E. point of the Compass.

The Latitude of the Place (51 degrees. 30 min.) and the Declination of a Star
(suppose the Bulls eye, Aldebaran) given: To find
PROB. XXXI. Its Right Ascension.
etc. bring Aldebaran to the Meridian: then count how many degrees of the
Equinoxial are contained between the Meridian and the beginning of Aries; which
will be 64 degrees. 17 min. and that is the Right Ascension of that Star; which in
time (by allowing 15 degrees. for an hour, and 1 degrees for 4 min. of time) is 4 hours
16 min. i^ s Right Ascension in time.

And in the same manner may you find d. m. h. m. The Right Ascension of
Arcturus to be 210.13 in time 14. 1 Syrius 97.42 6.30 Algol 39.39 2.38

PROB. XXXII. Its Ascensional Difference.
Ascensional Difference of Aldebaran.

In like manner, you may find d. m. h. m. The Ascensional Difference of
Arcturus to be 28 40 or in time 1.55 Syrius 21.28 1.26 Algol -- --

Algol his Declination being more than the Complement of the Latitude, never
rises nor sets, but is always above the Horizon.

PROB. XXXIII. Its Amplitude.
Aldebaran to the Horizon on either side of the Globe, and you shall find it
to touch the Horizon at 25 degrees. 56 min. from the East or West Northward; which
is the Amplitude of the Bulls eye's rising or setting. And according to the
points of the Compass it rises E.N.E. 2 degrees. 26 min. Northerly; and sets
W.N.W. 2 degrees. 26 min. Northerly.

And thus may you find d. m. That Arcturus Rises from the East or West
Northward 35. 6 Syrius Southward 26.41 Algol Never rises or sets

PROB. XXXIV. The Semidiurnal Arch, and the time that Aldebaran (or any other
Star) continues above the Horizon.
Aldebaran to the Meridian, and set the Hour-circle to 12. Then turn the Globe
Westward, till Aldebaran touch the Horizon: then shall the Hour-Index point at
7 ho. 27 min. And so long time is Aldebaran above the Horizon, before he comes
to the Meridian; and continues so many hours and minutes above the Horizon,
after he has past the Meridian, and sets in the West. And those 7 ho. and 27
min. is the Semidiurnal Arch of that Star; which doubled, is 14 ho. 54 min. And
so long does that Star continue above the Horizon after the time of his rising.

And in this manner you may find d. m. h. m. The Semidiurnal Arch of Arcturus
to be 7.55 And his continuance above the Horizon 15.50 Syrius 4.34 9. 8 Algol
12.00 24.00

PROB. XXXV. At what hour (any time of the year) Aldebaran comes to the
Meridian.
January, at which time the Sun is in 22 degrees. of Capricorn. Bring 22 degrees. of
Capricorn to the Meridian, and set the Hour-Index to 12. Then turn the Globe
about till Aldebaran be under the Meridian, and then you shall find the Index
to point at 42 min. after 8 of the clock, at which time Aldebaran will be upon
the Meridian that night.

In like manner you may find, that h m. Upon October 28 Arcturus will be upon
the Meridian at 11.10 January 21 Syrius 9 33 January 1 Algol 7.12

PROB. XXXVI. At what hour (at any time of the year) Aldebaran (or any other
Star) rises or sets.
January 1. By the last before-going, you found that Aldebaran came to the
Meridian at 8 ho. 42 min. And by the last but one, you found his Semidiurnal
Arch to be 7 ho. 27 min. This being taken from 8 ho. 42 min. the time of his
being South, leaves 1 hour 15 minutes, the time of its Rising: so that upon
the first of January Aldebaran did rise at 15 min. after 1 in the afternoon.
Again, if you add his Semidiurnal Arch 7 hours 27 min. to the time of its being
South 8 hours 42 min. the sum will be 16 hours 9 min. from which take 12 hours,
and the remainer will be 4 hours 9 min. So that Aldebaran will set at 9 min.
after 4 of the Clock the next morning. And in like manner you may find, that
h. m. h. m. Upon October 28 Arcturus Rises at 3. 8 Sets at 7. 12 January 21
Syrius 5. 3 2. 3 January 1 Algol -- --

Algol never Rises nor Sets.

PROB. XXXVII. At what Horary distance from the Meridian Aldebaran will be due
East or West: And what Altitude he shall then have.
Aldebaran to the Meridian, and the Hour-Index to 12. and the Quadrant of
Altitude to the West-point of the Horizon: then turn the Globe Eastward, till
the Center of the Star be just under the edge of the Quadrant; then shall the
Index point at 5 hours and 40 min. So that when Aldebaran is due East or West,
he will be 5 hours 40 min. of time short of, or gone beyond the Meridian.

And when the Center of Aldebaran is just under the Edge of the Quadrant of
Altitude, you shall find it to touch 20 degrees. 21 min. And such is the Altitude
of Aldebaran when he is upon the East or West Azimuth. In like manner may you
find, that h. m. d. m. Arcturus will be upon the East or West Azimuth, when he
is distant from the Meridian 4. 49 and his Altitud will be 27. 13 Syrius 5. 04
20. 56 Algol 3. 15 54. 37

PROB. XXXVIII. What Altitude and Azimuth Aldebaran (or any other Star) shall
have when six hours distant from the Meridian.
Aldebaran to the Meridian, and the Index to 12; Then turn the Globe about till
the Index point at 6: then lay the Quadrant of Altitude over the Center of the
Star, and you shall find it to lie under 12 degrees. 18 min. of the Quadrant: and
such is the Altitude of Aldebaran. At the same time look what degrees of the
Horizon are cut by the Quadrant of Altitude, and you shall find 8 degrees
between it and the East or West Points Northwards. And such is the Azimuth of
Aldebaran. And according to this Rule you shall find, that when Altit. Azim.
d. m. d. m. Arcturus is 6 hours distant from the Merid. his 16. 15 76. 36 from
the North. Algol 12. 38 79. 43

Syrius is never 6 hours distant from the Meridian, nor any other Star that
has South-declination.

PROB. XXXIX. To find what Altitude and Azimuth any Star has when he is at
any horary distance from the Meridian.
Meridian, and the Index to 12, move the Globe till it come to the designed
hour. Then the Quadrant of Altitude being laid over the Star, shall at the same
time show you both the Altitude and Azimuth thereof as before. This needs no
Example.

PROB. XL. Having the Azimuth of a Star, to find at what horary distance that
Star is from the Meridian, and what Altitude that Star then has.
Star to the Meridian, the Index to 12, and the Quadrant of Altitude to the
Given Azimuth; then turn the Globe about till the Center of the Star lie just
under the Quadrant of Altitude; the Index at that time shall give the horary
distance, and Quadrant the Altitude of the Star.

Example: Aldebaran being seen upon 80 degrees of Azimuth from the
North-Westward, that is, near upon the W. by N. Point of the Compass; the Star
brought to the Meridian, and the Quadrant of Altitude to 80 degrees, and the
Hour-Index to 12. If you bring the Star to the Quadrant of Altitude, you shall
find the Index to point at 6 hours, which is the Stars horary distance from
the Meridian. And the Quadrant of Altitude will show 12 degrees. 18 min. the
Altitude of Aldebaran at that time.

PROB. XLI. Concerning the Poetical Rising and Setting of the fixed Stars viz.
The Cosmical Acronical Heliacal
Rising and Setting.

And how to find either of them by the Globes.

1. Of the Cosmical Rising and Setting.
Rise Cosmically, wh^^ it Rises with the Sun, or with that degree of the
Ecliptic in which the Sun then is And the Cosmical Setting is, when a Star
settet^ in the Morning, or goes down under the West- Horizon in the Morning at
such time as the Sun is Rising in the East.

May, the Sun the^ being in 17 degrees of Gemini, I would know what Stars do
then Rise and Set Cosmically. Rectify the Globe to your Latitude, and bring
the 11 degree of Aquarius to the East-part of the Horizon: then look what Stars
are about the edge of the Eastern Semicircle of the Horizon, for a^^ those
Stars do that day Rise Cosmically. An^ those Stars which touch or are near the
Rim o^ the West Semicircle of the Horizon do Set at that time Cosmically. So
shall you find

May 27 { Aldebaran or the Bulls eye, with diverse other smaller Stars,} Rising,
and {The right leg of Serpentarius and several other smaller Stars} Setting
Cosmically.

2. Of the Acronical Rising and Setting of the Stars.
Acronically when it Rises in the East- Horizon, at such time as the Sun goes
down or Sets in the West- Horizon; and the Acronical Setting is when a Star
goes down under the Horizon with the Sun.

October, in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min. the Sun then being in 5 degrees. of
Scorpio, I would know what Stars do on that day Rise and Set Acronically.
Rectify the Globe to the Latitude, bringing the place of the Sun 5 degrees. of
Scorpio to the West-part of the Horizon, then shall all those Stars which you
see on the Verge of the East Side of the Horizon, be Rising Acronically. And
all those that are about the Verge of the Western part of the Horizon are then
Setting Acronically. And so upon the forementioned day, you shall find

A Star in the Whales Tail, and several other smaller Stars} Rising, and {The
Tail of the Lion, the South Balance, and several other smaller Stars} Setting
Acronically.

3. Of the Heliacal Rising and Setting of the Stars.
Rise Heliacally, when having been some time combust, (or hid under the
Sunbeams) begins now to appear, it being at greater distance from the Sun. And
a Star is said to Set Heliacally, which has some small time before been seen,
but now, by the near approach of the Sun, becomes cumbust and hidden under his
Beams. Now to know when a Star begins to become cumbust, and when to be freed
from his cumbustment of the Sunbeams, no certain Rule can be given: for the
Magnitude of the Star, the difference of the Climate, the cloudiness or
serenity of the Air may much alter. But the Opinion of the Ancient Astronomers
was, that degrees. A Star of the 1 Magnitude may be seen when the Sun is but 12
below the Horizon. 2 13 3 14 4 15 5 16 6 17

And those which are only Nebulous, cannot be seen till the Sun be 18 degrees.
under the Horizon.

Latitude, and the Quadrant of Altitude in the Zenith; then bring the given
Star (suppose Regulus, or the Lions Heart) to the East Side of the Horizon, and
the Quadrant of Altitude to the West Side; then Regulus being a Star of the
First Magnitude (by the former Rule of the Ancients) may be seen when the Sun
is but 12 degrees. below the Horizon: wherefore see what degree of the Ecliptic
does cut the Quadrant of Altitude in 12 degrees, which you shall find to be 9
degrees. of Pisces, the opposite degree to which is 9 degrees. of Virgo; to which Sign
and degree when the Sun comes, (which will be about the 23 of August,) then
will Regulus, the Lions heart, Rise Heliacally: Then for the Heliacal Setting,
bring the Star to the West Side of the Horizon, and turn the Quadrant of
Altitude to the East Side, and see what degree of the Ecliptic is elevated
upon the Quadrant, as the Magnitude of the Star you deal with does require. For
when the Sun comes to the opposite degree of the Ecliptic, that Star shall Set
Heliacally. So shall Rise Heliacally upon and Set Heliacally upon The Pleiades
June 4 April 20 Aldebaran June 26 April 22 Arcturus Sept. 26 Novem. 19

Concerning the Cosmical and Acronical Rising of the Stars, see the following
Table.

A TABLE, Showing the time of the Year when 50 eminent Stars do Rise both
Cosmically and Acronically. Calculated for the Year 1670, and may serve for
many Years past, and to come, without any considerable Error.
Names of the STARS. Their Cosmical Rising. Their Acronica^ Rising. Marchab.
Pegasi Jan. 1 March 5 Right Shoulder of Aquarius 6 Feb. 1^ Extreme Star in the
Wing of Pegasus 28 15 Following Tail of the Goat Feb. 5 Jan. 2^ Bright Star in
the Rams-head March 2 April 20 The following Horn of the Ram 5 19 The former
Horn of the Ram April 10 13 North-Tail of the Whale 12 March 15 The brightest
of the Pleiades 22 May 10 The Star in the Knot in the Net of May 1 April 29
North-Horn of the Bull 15 June 7 North-Eye of the Bull 20 May 1^ Belly of the
Whale 23 March 16 Bulls Eye, Aldebaran 27 May 11 South-Horn of the Bull June 5
June 1^ Lower Head of Gemini, Hercules 21 July 20 Bright Foot of Gemini 25 June
5 Middle Star in Orions Girdle July 2 May 4 North- Asellus 12 July 25 Presepe
14 19 South- Asellus 17 1^ Lesser Dog, Procyon July 18 June 6 Great Dog,
Palilicium 30 May 3 Lions Heart August 8 August 9 Lions Back 10 October. 19
Hydra's Heart 20 June 16 Lions Tail 22 October. 16 Hares Thigh Sept. 9 April 14
Viademiatrix 13 Novem. 8 Arcturus 15 December. 13 Virgins Girdle 19 October. 18
Bright Star of the Crown 28 Jan. 7 Virgins Spike October. 3 Sept. 24 Right
Shoulder of Hercules 6 Jan. 9 Left Shoulder of Hercules 10 21 Head of Hercules
21 8 North Balance 21 Novem. 17 South Balance 23 October. 24 Swans Bill 31 Feb.
16 Right Shoulder of Ophiucus Novem. 5 Jan. 4 Left Knee of Ophiucus 6 December. 6
Lower Wing of the Swan 4 March 11 Vultures Tail 11 Jan. 27 Right Knee of
Ophiucus 16 December. 6 Scorpions Heart 22 November. 4 The Eagle 25 December. 31
Pegasus Scheat December. 11 March 24 Adromeda's Girdle 22 April 29 Adromeda's Head
25 6 Upper Horn of the Goat 25 Jan. 14

TRIGONOMETRICAL PROBLEMS.
INTRODVCTION.
SPherical Triangles are best represented by the Circles upon, and those
appendant to, the Globes; with whose nature, affections, and uses, the
Practitioner ought thoroughly to be acquainted, before he enter upon the
Solution of such Triangles by the Canons or Tables, either of Natural or
Artificial Sines and Tangents, or by other Instruments, as Projections,
Planispheres, or the like; the Globe being the Original from whence all these
do proceed. For by the true understanding of the Uses of the Globes, it will
not be difficult to Project the Sphere in Plano upon any Circle, as I have in
some measure taught how to do upon the Plain of the Meridian, in my Geometrical
Exercises, and shall here farther illustrate by the Circles upon the Globe it
self; upon which the Sides and Angles of all Spherical Triangles, are most
Naturally represented, and most Expeditiously measured. But before I come to
the Practice hereof, give me leave to premise such general and necessary
Definitions and Affections, as do in any case belong to Spherical Triangles.
And (1) Of such Lines or (rather) Arches of Circles, of which Spherical
Triangles are framed and measured. (2) Of the Kinds, Parts and Affections of
such Triangles so constituted: how the things given or required in them are
represented upon the Globe; with the V^riety of Questions, that the solution of
every Spherical Triangle will afford. With (3) The solution of several Problems
for Practice.

Of the Definitions and Affections of Triangles.
1. ALl Triangles do consist of six parts, viz. of three Sides, and as many
Angles.

2. The three sides of a Spherical Triangle do consist of three Arches of Great
Circles of the Sphere or Globe, each A b being less than a Semicircle, or 180
degrees.

3. A Great Circle of the Globe, is that which divides the Globe into two
equal parts; such are the Meridians, Equinoctial, Ecliptic, the Colures, etc.

4. The three Angles of a Spherical Triangle, are measured by three Arches of
great Circles described upon the three angular Points of the Triangle; and are
either Right, Acute, or Obtuse.

5. A Right-angled Spherical Triangle, is that which has either One, or more
Right Angles, which contains 90 degrees. An Ac e-angled Spherical Triangle is that
whose three Angles be all of them acute; that is, each of them less than 90
degrees.

6. An Obtuse Angle is that Spherical Triangle whose Angles are all obtuse,
each exceeding 90 degrees. or else mixed, some Obtuse and some Acute.

7. The Complement of a Side or Angle to a Quadrant or 90 degrees. is so much as
that Side or Angle wants of 90 degrees.

8. The Complement of a Side or Angle to a Semicircle or 180 degrees. is so much
as that Side or Angle wants of 180 degrees.

9. All Spherical Triangles which have not One or more Right Angles, are called
Oblique angled Spherical Triangles.

Hence it follows, That

1. If two Great Circles of the Sphere shall pass by each others Poles, those
two Circles shall intersect each other at Right Angles. But

2. If two Great Circles of the Sphere do intersect each other, and do not pass
through each others Poles, those two Circles shall intersect each at other
Oblique Angles. Thus The General Meridian and the Horizon, The Colures and the
Eq inoctial The Azimuth or Vertical Circles and the Horizon, The Circle of
Latitude and the Ecliptic,
do intersect each other at Right Angles.

But The Colures and the Horizon The Vertical Circles and Equinoctial The
Circles of Longitude Horizon, and the Equinoctial

do intersect each other at Oblique Angles.

And the Angles made by these oblique intersections, are on the one side of the
intersection Acute, and on the other side Obtuse. So

3. Two Arches of Great Circles intersecting each other, shall make on both
sides the intersection, either two Right Angles or two Oblique Angles, the one
Acute, the other Obtuse; of which, both of them being taken together, shall be
equal to two Right Angles, or 180 degrees. Thus, in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30
min. d. m. The Meridian intersecting with the Horizon does make an Angle of
90.00 on the one side of the intersection, The Ecliptic 62.00 The Equinoctial
38.30 d. m. The Meridian and an Angle of 90.00 on the other side of the
intersection. The Ecliptic 118.00 The Equinoctial 141.00 And both the Angles
on either side together, are equal to two Right Angles, or 180 degrees. But
here note, That these Angles do Vary in every Latitude, and are not always the
same.

4. If a Spherical Triangle have three Right Angles, the three sides of that
Triangle shall be all Quadrants, each containing 90 degrees. So (in a Parallel
Sphere)

The Brass Meridian cutting the Horizon in the North and South-points of the
Horizon at Right Angles, and the Equinoctial Colure in the East and West-points
of the Horizon at Right Angles, and the Meridian and Colure intersecting each
other in the Poles of the World, at Right Angles also: do constitute a
Spherical Triangle with three Right Angles; and the three sides of this
Triangle, (for this Reason) shall be all of them Quadrants: for upon the
Meridian, between the Equinoctial (which is also the Horizon in a Parallel
Sphere) and the Pole, is contained 90 degrees: also upon the Colure between the
Equinoctial and the Pole is also 90 degrees, and between the East and North or
South-points of the Horizon is also contained 90 degrees: So that the three
Angles being Right Angles, the three Sides are also three Quadrants.

5. If a Spherical Triangle has two Right Angles, the Sides opposite to those
Angles shall be Quadrants; and the third side shall be the measure of the other
Angle. Such Triangles as these do seldom come in Practice, for few or no
Questions can arise out of them; but of Right angled Spherical Triangles, those
that have One Right, and Two Acute Angles, most Questions are resolvable by.

6. An Acute angled Spherical Triangle, has all its sides less than Quadrants,
or 90 degrees.

7. An Obtuse angled Triangle, having all its Angles Obtuse, has all its Sid^s
more than Quadrants: If mixed, the Side or Sides opposite to the Obtuse Angle or
Angles shall be Greater, and the Side or Sides opposite to the Acute Angle or
Angles shall be Less than Quadrants.

8. The Sides of Spherical Triangles, are of the same affeciion or kind with
their opposite Angles.

9. In Right-angled Spherical Triangles, the Side which is opposite to the
Right Angle, I call the Hypotenuse; and the other two Sides which contain the
Right Angle, I call the Sides or Legs.

10. In Oblique angled Spherical Triangles, I call the Sides Sides, and the
Angles Angles, without any other distinction.

11. In the Solution of Right-angled Spherical Triangles, there are usually 16
Cases, which will all be reduced to Five; for that by the Globe three things
are at once found. And in Oblique Angled Spherical Triangles, there are usual
12 Cases, which by the Globe will be reduced to 6; the Globe answering two at
one Position.

Thus much of the Definitions and Affections of Spherical Triangles.

Of the Solution of Spherical Triangles upon the Globe.
IN the following Scheme or Figure of the Sphere or Globe, it being in an
Oblique Position, viz. Elevated to the Latitude of London, 51 degrees. 30 min. you
have upon the Superficies thereof diverse Spherical Lines and Circles, by the
intersections whereof, are constituted diverse Spherical Triangles; some whereof
are Right-angled, and others Oblique-angled: Of which I shall make use only of
Two; one for the Five Cases of Right-angled Triangles, the other for the Six
Cases of Oblique-angled Triangles.

The Triangle which I shall make use of for the Five Cases of Right-angled
Triangles, shall be the Triangle P. O., Right-angled at O.

In which Right angled Spherical Triangle P. O..

The Side
P.. being an Arch of the Brass Meridian, we suppose to be the Latitude of
London, 51 degrees. 30 min..O. being an Arch of the Horizon, we suppose to be the
Amplitude of the Sun's Rising or Setting, from the North-part of the Meridian
56 degrees. 40 min. P.. being the Arch of another Meridian, or Hour-Circle, (which
the Equinoctial Colure will best supply or represent) we suppose to be the
Sun's distance from the Pole, or the Complement of his Declination, 70 degrees. 00
min.
The Angle.
.P.O. is the hour from midnight, whose measure is to be reckoned upon the
Equinoctial, between the Equinoctial Colure and the Brass Meridian, and will be
62 degrees. 45 min. or in time 4 hours 11 min. P..O. is the Angle of the Sun's
Position at the time of the Question, whose measure is the Arch of a Great
Circle, comprehended between the Complement of the side. O. on the Horizon, and
the Complement of the Side. P. on the Equinoctial Colure; both those Sides
being continued to Quadrants, on the contrary Side of the Brass Meridian, and
will contain 56 degrees. 39 min. P.O.. is the Right Angle, whose measure is the
degrees. of the Quadrant of Altitude contained between the East or West-points of
the Horizon and the Zenith, which is 90 degrees.
The several parts of the Triangle being thus declared, let us now proceed to
the several Cases which arise out of this, and every Right-angled Spherical
Triangle.

Of Right-angled Spherical Triangles.
CASE I. The two Sides (or Legs) P. O. 51 degrees. 30 min. and. O. 56 degrees. 40 min.
being given to find the Hypotenuse P.. and the Angles. P. O. and. P.. O.
SEeing that the Side P. O. is an Acrh of the Brass Meridian, and contains 51
degrees. 30 min. count thereupon from the Pole, 51 degrees. 30 min. and bring those
degrees to the Horizon. Then the Side. O. being an Arch of the Horizon, and
contains 56 degrees. 40 min. count upon the Horizon, from the Meridian, 56 degrees. 40
min. and turn the Globe about till the Equinoctial Colure do touch those
degrees of the Horizon, so shall you have the true Triangle perfectly described
upon the Globe it self: For from the Pole to the Horizon, upon the Meridian, is
equal to P. O. From the Horizon to the Pole, upon the Colure is equal to P..
And from the Colure to the Meridian, upon the Horizon is equal to. O. Now (1.)
P. O. being 51 degrees. 30 min. and O.. 56 degrees. 40 min. the degrees of the Colure
counted from the Pole to the Horizon, will be found 70 degrees; for the
Hypotenuse P.. which was required. (2.) For the Angle. P. O. count the degrees
of the Equinoctial which are contained between the Colure and the Brass
Meridian, and you shall find them to be 62 degrees. 45 min. or 4 hours 11 min. for
the quantity of the Angle. P. O. (3.) For the Angle P.. O. count the Complement
of. P. 20 degrees upon the Equinoctial Colure, on the other Side of the
Meridian (so shall that Point be distant from the Point. 90 degrees.) Also, count
the Complement of the Side. O. viz. 33 degrees. 20 m. upon the Horizon, on the
other Side of the Meridian, (which Point will be 90 degrees. distant from the
Point. upon the Horizon) So shall the distance between these two Points,
(measured by the Quadrant of Altitude, or by Compasses) contain, 56 degrees. 39
min. for the Angle P.. O.

Or, This Angle P.. O. may be otherwise found in the same manner as you found
the Angle. P. O. (but then you must alter the Position of the Globe) For, if
you Elevate the Globe to 56 degrees. 40 min. the Side. O. and bring the Equinoctial
Colure to 51 degrees. 30 min. of the Horizon, which is the Side P. O. (for so have
you turned the Triangle upside-down) then will the degrees of the Equinoctial
intercepted between the Equinoctial Colure and the Brass Meridian, be 56 degrees.
39 min. as before, and equal to the Angle P.. O.

Or this is the usual Way taught by others, whereby by the Globe must be often
Rectified upon every small occasion. But I embrace the first way, as being both
Exact and Natural: but having declared both ways, I leave every one at liberty
to use that which he best likes.

So by this one Data you have resolved three Problems of the Sphere: for you
have found 3
1. The Side P.. the Complement of the Suns D^clination 70 degrees. 2. The
Angle. P. O. the hour from Midnight 4 hours 11 minutes. 3. The Angle P.. O. the
Angle of the Suns position 56 degrees 39 minutes.


CASE. II. The Hypotenuse P.. 70 degrees, and the Side (or Leg) P. O. 51 degrees.
30 min. being given; to find the other Leg, O.. and the Angles. P. O. and O..P.
THis Case differs little from the former: for P. O. being an Arch of the
Meridian, and containing 51 degrees. 30 min. the Meridian being set thereto in the
Horizon, turn the Globe about till 70 degrees. of the Equinoctial Colure do touch
the Horizon. So shall you find the degrees of the Horizon intercepted between
the Colure and the Meridian to be 56 degrees. 40 min. for the Side. O. The Angles
at P. and. are to be found in all respects by their measures, as in the former
Case.

And by this one Data, you have resolved three other Problems of the Sphere,
for by it you have found 6.
1.. O. The Sun's Amplitude from the North, 56 degrees. 40 min. 2.. P. O. The hour
from midnight 62 d g. 45 min. or 4 h. 11 min. 3. P.. O. The Angle of the Sun's
position, 56 degrees. 39 min. And if instead of Leg P. O. there had been given the
Leg. O. you might have then found [by bringing 70 degrees of the Equinoctial
Colure, to meet with 56 degrees. 40 min. of the Horizon]
4. P. O. The Latitude 51 degrees. 30 min. 5.. P. O. The hour from midnight. 6. P..
O. The Angle of the Sun's position 56 degrees. 39 min.


CASE III. The Hypotenuse P.. 70 degrees. and the Angle P. 62 degrees. 45 min. at being
given, to find the two Legs P. O. and. O. and the Angle P.. O.
COunt the Angle P. 62 degrees. 45 min. upon the Equinoctial from the Colure, and
bring that point to the Brass Meridian, and there keep the Globe fast in the
Meridian; then move the Brass Meridian upwards or downwards in the Horizon,
till 70. degrees. of the Equinoctial Colure do justly touch the Horizon, then shall
the Brass Meridian rest in the Horizon; at 51 degrees. 30 min. for the Side P. O.
and the degrees of the Horizon intercepted between the Equinoctial Colure and
the Meridian will be 56 degrees. 40 min. for the Side. O. and the distance between
33 degrees. 20 min. of the Horizon, and 20 degrees of the Equinoctial Colure shall
be 56 degrees. 30 min. for the Angle P.. O.

So that by this single Data there are also three other Problems resolved, viz.
there is found 6.
1. The P. O. the Latitude 51 degrees. 30 min. 2. The Side. O. the Amplitude from
the North 56 degrees. 40 min. 3. The Angle P.. O. the Angle of the Sun's position.
And if instead of the Angle at P. the Angle at. had been given you might then
have found [by counting 20 degrees. upon the Equinoctial Colure, and to that point
apply 56 degrees. 39 min. of the Quadrant of Altitude, (or a pair of Compasses
opened to that distance.) then turn the Meridian in the Horizon, and the Globe
about his Axis, till 70 degrees. of the Colure and 00 degrees. of the Quadrant of
Altitude do touch the Horizon on either side of the Meridian: for then will the
Meridian rest in the Horizon, at 51 degrees. 30 min.]
4. The Side. O. the Amplitude from the North 56 degrees. 40 min. 5. The Side P. O.
the Latitude 51 d. 30 m. 6. The Angl^. P. O. the hour from midnight 62 degrees. 45
min.


CASE IV. One Leg. O. 56 degrees. 40 min. and one Angle P.. O. 56 degrees. 39. min.
being given; to find the Side P. O. the Hypotenuse P.. and the Angle. P. O.
COunt upon the Horizon from the Brass Meridian 56 degrees. 40 min. the given Side
(or Leg). O. also from the Brass Meridian, on the contrary side thereof, count
33 degrees. 20 min. the Complement of. O. to which degrees apply 00 degrees. of the
Quadrant of Altitude. Then move the Brass Meridian up and down in the Horizon,
till the Equinoctial Colure cuts 56 degrees. 40 min. and 56 degrees. 39 min. of the
Quadrant of Altitude do intersect the Colure. So will the Brass Meridian rest
in the Horizon at 51 degrees. 30 min. For the Side P. O. the Horizon will cut the
Equinoctial Colure in 70 degrees. For the Hypotenuse P.. and the degrees of the
Equinoctial intercepted between the Equinoctial Colure and the Brass Meridian,
will be 62 degrees. 45 min. for the quantity of the Angle. P. O. which was required.

And by this Data, there are three Problems resolved: for there is found 1^
1. The Side P. O. the Latitude 51 d. 30 m. 2. The Angle. P, O. the hour from
Midnight 62 degrees. 45 min. 3. The Side P.. the Sun's distance from the Pole 79
degrees. But if the Given Leg had been. O. and the Given Angle. P. O. [by counting
the Angle P. upon the Equinoctial, and bringing that point to the Meridian, and
moving the Meridian up and down in the Horizon, till the Equinoctial Colure did
touch 56 degrees. 40 min. of the Horizon] you should then have found
4. The Hypotenuse P.. the Sun's distance from the Pole 70 degrees. 5. The Side P.
O. the Latitude 51 d. 30 m. 6. The Angle P.. O. the Angle of the Sun's position
56 degrees. 39 min. Also, if the Hypotenuse P.. and the Angle. P. O. had been given
[by counting the Angle. P. O. upon the Equinoctial, and bringing if to the
Meridian, and moving the Meridian in the Horizon, till 70 degrees. of the
Equinoctial Colure did touch the Horizon] you might then find
7. The Side. O. the Sun's Amplitude from the North 56 degrees. 40 min. 8. The
Side. P. the Sun's distance from the Pole 70 degrees. 9. The Angle P.. O. the Angle
of the Sun's position 56 degrees. 39 min. And again, if the given Side (or Leg) had
been P. O. and the Angle O.. P. [by setting the Brass Meridian to 51 d. 30 m.
in the Horizon, and turning the Body of the Globe about till the Equinoctial
Colure and the Horizon do make an Angle of 56 degrees. 39. min.] you might then find
10. The Hypotenuse P.. the Sun's distance from the Pole 70 degrees. 11. The
Side.O. the Sun's Amplitude from the North 56 degrees. 40 min. 12. The Angle. P. O.
the hour from midnight 62 degrees. 45 min.


CASE V. The two Acute Angles. P. O. 62 degrees. 45 min, and P.. O. 56 degrees. 39 min.
being given, to find the Side P. O. P.. and. O.
COunt the quantity of the Angle. P. O. 62 degrees. 45 min. upon the Equinoctial,
from the Equinoctial Colure, bringing those degrees to the Meridian, and there
fix the Globe; then move the Meridian upward or downward in the Horizon, till
the intersection of the Equinoctial with the Horizon do make an Angle of 56
degrees. 39 min. So shall the Side P. O. be found to be 51 degrees. 30 min. the Leg. P.
56. degrees. 40 min. and the Hypotenuse P.. 70 degrees.

And from this Data, three Problems are resolved: for you have found 3.
1. The Side P. O. the Latitude 51 d. 30 m. 2. The Side. P. the Amplitude from
the North 56 degrees. 40 min. 3. The Hypotenuse P.. the Sun's distance from the
Pole 70 degrees.


This last Case may best be resolved by changing of the Angles into Sides, as
shall be hereafter taught.

These are the Five Cases of Right-angled Spherical Triangles: And here you see
that in this one Right-angled Spherical Triangle, by the several Parts given in
these Five Cases, there are 30 Spherical Problems resolved: Namely, 3 by the
First Case, 6 by the Second Case, 6 by the Third Case, 12 by the Fourth Case,
and 3 by the Fifth Case. And so many are resolvable in every Right-angled
Spherical Triangle.

Of Oblique-angled Spherical Triangles.
THe Triangle which I shall make use of for the resolving of the Six Cases of
Oblique-angled Spherical Triangles, shall be the Oblique Triangle Z. P. E.
Obtuse angled at Z.

In which Triangle The Side
Z. P. being an Arch of the Brass Meridian, we will suppose to be the
Complement of the Latitude of London, containing 38 degrees. 30 min. P. E. being an
Arch of a Meridian (or Hour-Circle) we will suppose to be the Sun's distance
from the Pole, or the Complement of the Sun's Declination Northward 70 degrees. Z.
E. being an Arch of an Azimuth (or Vertical Circle) let be the Complement of
the Sun's, or a Star's Altitude, and to contain 47 degrees. 12 min.
The Angle
Z. P. E. is the hour from Noon, whose measure is to be reckoned upon the
Equinoctial, between the Equinoctial Colure and the Brass Meridian, and will be
found to be 45 degrees. or ^3 ho. in time. E. Z. P. is the Sun's Azimuth from the
North-part of the Meridian, and is to be measured upon the Horizon between the
North-part of the Brass Meridian, and the Quadrant of Altitude, and will be
found to be 15 degrees. 25 min. Z. E. P. is the Angle of the Sun's Position at the
time of the Question, and may be measured either by turning of the Quadrant of
Altitude to the contrary side of the Meridian, and counting thereupon the
Complement of the side E. Z. 42 degrees. 48 min. and the Complement of the side Z.
P. 20 degrees. upon the Colure; and the distance of these two Points shall be the
measure of the Angle Z. E. P. which will be found to contain 36 degrees. 52 min. Or
you may turn the Triangle, and place Z. E. in the place where before Z. P. was
placed, and then may that Angle be measured upon the Equinoctial between the
Colure and the Brass Meridian, as the Angle Z. P. E. was.


The several Sides and Angles of this Triangle being discovered, I will now
come to show the several Cases which will arise out of this, and every Oblique
Spherical Triangle: But first let me show you

How to express the Triangle upon the Globe.
Elevate the Pole of the Globe to the Complement of any of the Sides of the
Triangle, as in this Example, to 51 degrees. 30 min. (which i^ the Complement of
the Side Z. P.) then count the Side Z. P. 38 degrees. 30 min. from the Pole, and
thereto screw the Quadrant of Altitude. This done, count the Side E. P. 70 degrees.
upon the Equinoctial Colure from the Pole, and the Side Z. E. upon the Quadrant
of Altitude from the Zenith downward, and so move the Globe and Quadrant of
Altitude together, till the numbers counted upon both of them concur in one
Point; and so shall you have your Triangle exactly delineated upon the Globe;
which being done, I proceed to the Six Cases of Oblique-angled Spherical
Triangles, and to show the Variety of Problems that will naturally arise out of
the solving of every such Oblique Triangle.

CASE I. The Side Z. P. 38 degrees. 30 min. The Side E. P. 70 degrees. and the Side Z.
E. 47 degrees. 12 min. being given, to find the Angles,
ELevate the Globe to the 51 degrees. 30 min. the Complement of Z. P. and count the
Side Z. P. the Complement of the Latitude 38 degrees. 30 min. from P. to Z. and
there fasten the Quadrant of Altitude. Then count the Side E. P. the Complement
of the Sun's declination 70 degrees. upon the Colure from the Pole downwards: Also
count the Complement of the Sun's Altitude 47 degrees. 12 min. The Side Z. E. upon
the Quadrant of Altitude downwards; and move the Globe and Quadrant together
till 70 degrees. of the Colure, and 47 degrees. 12 min. of the Quadrant do meet: So is
your Triangle represented upon the Globe.

Now to find the several Angles. (1.) For the Angle at Z. count the number of
degrees of the Horizon, which are contained between the North-part of the
Meridian, and the Quadrant of Altitude; and you shall find them to be 115 degrees.
35 min. and that is the quantity of the Angle E. Z. P. and is the Sun's Azimuth
from the North-part of the Meridian. (2.) For the Angle Z.P.E. count the number
of degrees of the Equinoctial, which are contained between the South-part of
the Meridian and the Colure; which you will find to be 45 degrees. and that is the
quantity of the Angle Z. P. E. which is the hour from Noon, namely 9 in the
Morning, or 3 in the Afternoon- (3.) For the Angle Z. E. P. (either change the
Triangle by elevating the Globe anew, or) count 42 degrees. 48 min. the Complement
of Z. E. upon the Quadrant of Altitude (it being brought to the other side of
the Meridian) and also count the 20 degrees. the Complement of E. P. upon the
Colure (on the other side of the Meridian) the distance between these two
points, measured by Compasses or otherwise, will be found to contain 36 degrees. 52
min. equal to the Angle Z. E. P. which is the Angle of the Sun's or Stars
position at the time of the Question.

And thus by this one Data, you have resolved three Problems: For you have
found 3.
1. The Angle E. Z. P. the Sun's Azimuth 115 degrees. 35 min. 2. The Angle Z. P. E.
the hour 45 degrees. or 9, or 3 a clock. 3. The Angle Z. E. P. the Sun's Angle of
position 36 degrees. 52. min.


CASE II. The two Sides E.Z. 47 degrees. 12 min. Z.P. 38 degrees. 30 min. and the Angle
comprehended between them being given, to find the other parts of the Triangle,
COunt P. Z. 38 degrees. 30 min. (the Globe being elevated to the Complement
thereof) upon the Meridian, from P. to Z. and there fix the Quadrant of
Altitude: Then from the North-part of the Meridian upon the Horizon, count the
quantity of the Angle E. Z. P. 115 degrees. 35 min. and thereto bring the Quadrant
of Altitude: Then count the other given Side E. Z. 47 degrees. 12 min. upon the
Quadrant of Altitude downwards; and turn the Globe about till the Equinoctial
Colure cut the Quadrant of Altitude in 47 degrees. 12 min. So is your Triangle
delineated upon the Globe.

Now to find the several Parts. (1.) The degrees of the Colure contained
between the Pole and the Quadrant being 70, is the Side E. P. (2.) The degrees
of the Horizon between the Meridian and Quadrant, being 115 degrees. 35 min. is the
Angle E. Z. P, And (3.) The distance between the Complement of E. Z. upon the
Quadrant of Altitude, and the Complement of E P. upon the Colure (they being
both continued to Quadrants, on the other Side of the Meridian) will be found
36 degrees 52 minutes, which is the Angle Z. E. P.

Thus by this Data you have found 9.
1. E. P. The Complement of the Sun's Declination. 2. E. Z. P. The Sun's
Azimuth from the North. 3. Z. E. P. The Angle of the Suns or Stars Position.
But if the Sides Z. P. P.E. and Angle Z. P. E. had been given, there would then
have been found
4. P. E. Z. The Angle of Position. 5. E. Z. The Com^^ment of the Sun's
Altitude. 6. E. Z. P. The Azimuth from the North. Or if the Sides Z. E. P. E.
and Angle Z. E. P. had been given, there would then be found
7. E. Z. P. The Sun's Azimuth from the North. 8. Z. P. The Complement of the
Latitude. 9. Z. P. E. The Hour from Noon.


CASE III. The two Angles E. Z. P. 154 degrees. 25 min. and Z.P.E. 45 degrees. with the
Side Z.P. 38 degrees. 30 min. comprehended between them, given, to find the other
parts of the Triangle,
COunt 38 degrees. 30 min. the Side Z. P. upon the Meridian from the Pole, and
thereto screw the Quadrant of Altitude; then count 45 degrees. the Angle Z. P. E.
upon the Equinoctial, (beginning at the Colure) and bring those 45 degrees. to the
South-part of the Brass Meridian. Again, count 115 degrees. 35 min. the Angle E. Z.
P. upon the Horizon, from the North-part of the Meridian, and thereto bring the
Quadrant of Altitude. And so have you represented your Triangle upon the Globe.

Now to find the other Sides, and Angle. (1.) The degrees contained between
the Pole and the Colure upon the Quadrant; namely, 47 degrees. 12 min. will be the
Side Z. E. (2.) And the degrees between the Pole and the Quadrant upon the
Colure, viz. 70, will be the Side E. P. (3.) And the distance between the
Complements of the Sides E. Z. and E. P. being continued to Quadrants on the
other Side of the Meridian; namely, 36 degrees. 52 min. will be the Angle Z. E. P.

And by this Data, you have found 9.
1. Z. E. The Complement of the Sun's Altitude. 2. E. P. The distance of the
Sun from the Pole. 3. Z. E. P. The Angle of the Sun's Position. But if the Side
E. P. and the Angle Z. E. P. and Z. P. O. had been given, there would have been
found.
4. E. Z. The Complement of the Sun or Stars Altitude. 5. E. Z. P. The Sun's or
Stars Azimuth from the North. 6. Z. P. The Complement of the Latitude. And if
the Side Z. E. and the Angles P. Z. E. and P. E. Z. had been given, you might
then find 7. Z. P. The Complement of the Latitude. 8. Z. P. E. The Hour from
Noon. 9. P. E. The Complement of the Sun's or Stars Declination.


CASE IV. The two Sides Z. P. 38 degrees. 30 min. and E. P. 70 degrees. with the Angle
Z. E. P. 36 degrees. 52 min. being given, to find the other Side and Angles.
TO resolve this Case, you may (if you please) revert the Triangle, by
elevating the Globe to 20 degrees. the Complement of the given Side P. E. then
counting 70 degrees. the Side E. P. upon the Meridian from the Pole, there screw
the Quadrant of Altitude. Then upon the Horizon, count 36 degrees. 52 min. the
given Angle E. and to them bring the Quadrant of Altitude. So have you fixed
the Angle Z. E. P. Then turn the Globe about, till 38 degrees. 30 min. the other
given Side P. Z. do touch the Quadrant, which it will do in 47 degrees. 12 min. for
the Side E. Z. And for the Angle P. the degrees of the Equinoctial between the
Meridian and the Colure, viz. 45, is the Angle at P. and for the Angle at Z. it
may be found by reverting of the Triangle again, or by the Complements of the
Sides extended on the other side of the Meridian, as has been before taught.
Lastly, for the Side E. Z. you have it upon the Quadrant 47 degrees. 12 min.

The Triangle being thus delineated, you have found (1.) the Side E. Z. 47 degrees.
12 min. (2.) the Angle P. 45 degrees. (3.) the Angle E. Z. P. 154 degrees. 25 min.

I thought good in this place to insert this manner of Change, not only for
variety, but because in this and the next Case the Triangle may be more readily
delineated upon the Globe.

And in this one Data you have found 18
1. E. Z. The Complem. of the Sun's Altitude. 2. Z. P. E. The hour from Noon.
3. E. Z. P. The Azimuth of the Sun or a Star from the North. But if the Sides
Z. P. and E. P. and the Angle E. Z. P. had been given, you would then have found
4. E. Z. The Complement of the Suns or Stars Altitude. 5. Z. E. P. The Angle
of the Suns or Stars Position. 6. Z P. E. The hour from Noon. And if there had
been given E. P. E. Z. and E.Z.P. then would have been found
7. Z P. The Complement of the Latitude. 8. Z. P. E. The hour from Noon. 9. Z.
E. P. The Angle of Position. In like manner, if P.E. E.Z. and Z.P.E. had been
given, you would have found
10. Z. P. The Complement of the Latitude. 11. E. Z. P. The Azimuth from the
North. 12. Z. E. P. The Angle of Position. Again, if there had been given E.Z.
Z.P. and Z. P. E. you might then find
13. P. E. The Sun's distance from the Pole. 14. Z.E.P. The Angle of Position.
15. E. Z. P. The Azimuth from the North. Lastly, If E. Z. and Z. P. and the
Angle Z. E. P. had been given, there would have been found
16. P. E. The Complement of the Suns or Stars declination. 17. Z. P. E. The
hour from Noon. 18. E. Z. P. The Azimuth from the North.


CASE V. The two Angles E. Z. P. 115 degrees. 35 min. Z. P. E. 45 degrees. with the
Side P. E. 70 degrees. being given, to find the rest of the Triangle,
ELevate the Globe to 20 degrees. the Complement of the Side E. P. Then count the
given Side E. P. 70 degrees. upon the Meridian, from P. to Z. and there six the
Quadrant. Then the given Angle E. P. Z. being 45 degrees. count 45 degrees. upon the
Equinoctial from the Colure, and bring that point under the Meridian: So have
you constituted the Side E. P. and the Angle E. P Z. Now for the Angle E. Z. P.
you must either revert the Triangle again, or find it by the Complements of
the Sides Z. E. and Z P. extended to Quadrants on the other side of the
Meridian, which you shall find to be 115 degrees. 35 min.

The Triangle thus constituted, (1.) For the Side Z. P. the degrees of the
Colure between the Pole and the Quadrant being 38 degrees. 30 min. is that Side.
(2.) The degrees of the Quadrant of Altitude, between the Zenith and the
Colure, being 47 degrees. 12 min. is the Side E. Z. (3.) The degrees of the Horizon
between the Meridian and the Quadrant of Altitude being 36 degrees. 52 min. is the
quantity of the Angle Z. E. P.

By which single Data, you have found 18
1. Z. P. The Complement of the Latitude. 2. E. Z. The Complement of the
Altitude. 3. Z. E. P. The Angle of Position. But if the Angles E. Z. P. Z. P.
E. and the Side Z. E. had been given, then might you find
4. Z. P. The Complement of the Latitude. 5. P. E. The Sun's distance from the
Pole. 6. Z. E. P. The Angle of Position. Or had there been given Z. P. E. Z. E.
P. and the Side E. P. you might from thence find
7. Z. P. The Complement of the Latitude. 8. E. P. The Complement of the Sun or
Stars declination. 9. E. Z. P. The Sun's Azimuth from the North. And if the
Ang^^s Z. P. E. Z. E. P. with the Side Z. P. had been given, then would have
been found
10. Z. E. The Complement of the Sun's Altitude. 11. P. E. The Sun's distance
from the Pole. 12. E. Z. P. The Sun's Azimuth from the North. But if the Angles
Z. E. P. E. Z. P. and the Side Z. P. had been given, then you might find
13. Z. E. The Suns distance from the Zenith. 14. P. E. The Suns distance from
the Pole. 15. Z. P. E. The hour from Noon. And lastly, had there been given the
Angles Z. E. P. E. Z. P. and the Side P. F. then might be found
16. Z. E. The Complement of the Suns or Stars Altitude. 17. Z. P. The
Complement of the Latitude. 18. Z. P. E. The hour from Noon.


CASE VI. The three Angles E. Z. P. 115 degrees. 35 min. the Angle E. P. Z. 45 degrees.
and the Angle Z. E. P. 36 degrees. 52 min. being given, to find the three Sides.
THis Case may best be resolved by turning the Angles of the Triangle into
Sides, as shall be taught by and by: and so by this Data, you may find 1. Z.
E. The Complement of the Suns Altitude. 2. Z. P. The Complement of the
Latitude. 3. E. P. The Complement of the Suns declination.


And thus have you out of this one Oblique Spherical Triangle, by the variety
that these Six Cases afford, no less than Threescore Problems resolved, viz. 3
in the First Case, 9 in the Second Case, 9 in the Third Case, 18 in the Fourth
Case, 18 in the Fifth Case, and 3 in the Sixth Case; in all 60. And so many
Varieties or Changes are there in every Oblique-angled Spherical Triangle. --
And besides these Varieties, this Triangle Z E P. is not peculiar only to the
appellations that I have here given them, but to other purposes also. For,

This Oblique-angled Triangle is not capable only of resolving the
forementioned Astronomical Questions, but may be applied to Geographical or
Nautical Questions also. For, 1. The Side Z P, may represent the Complement of
the Latitude of that Town or City whose Zenith-point is Z. 2. The Side E Z,
may represent the distance between those two Cities or Towns. 3. The Side P E
will be the Complement of the Latitude of that City or Town at E. 4. The Angle
E P Z, is the difference of Longitude between the two places E and Z. 5. The
Angle P Z E, the Point of the Compass leading from Z to E. 6. The Angle P E Z,
the Point of the Compass leading from E to Z.


And in this Triangle the same things being given, they may be varied as
before, and afford as many Questions in Geography or Navigation as in
Astronomy: Namely 60.

Moreover, In the same Triangle, if you imagine the Side P Z to be 23 degrees. 30
min. the distance of the Pole of the World, from the Pole of the Ecliptic:
Then will 1. The Side Z P, be the distance of the Pole of the World from the
Pole of the Ecliptic. 2. The Side P E will be the Complement of the
declination of a Star at E. 3. The Side Z E, will be the Northern Latitude of
the Star at E. 4. The Angle E P Z. will be the Complement of the Stars Right
Ascension. 5. The Angle P Z E, is the quantity of the Stars Longitude. 6. The
Angle P E Z, is the Angle of the Stars Position.


And this way it will afford 60 Varieties more, as is before intimated.

Theorem.
The Sides of any Spherical Triangle, may be turned into Angles; and contra,
the Complement of the Greatest Side, or Greatest Angle (to a Semicircle) being
taken for the Greatest Side, or Greatest Angle.

Demonstration.
LEt A B C, be a Spherical Triangle Obtuse-angled at B. And let D E be the
Measure of the Angle A H I be the Measure of the Angle C G F be the Measure of
the Angle B
viz. of its Complement, F B G, it being the Angle of the Triangle.

Now, K L is equal to D E L M is equal to F G K M is equal to H I


Because K D and L E are Quadrants, and their Common Complement is L D L G and
F M are Quadrants, and their Common Complement is L F K I and M H are
Quadrants, and their Common Complement is K H.


Therefore,

The Sides of the Triangle K L M, are equal to the Angles of the Triangle A B
C, taking for the Greatest Angle A B C, the Complement thereof F B G.

It may also be demonstrated, That the Sides of the Triangle A B C, are equal
to the Angles of the Triangle K L M, by the converse of the former. For The
side A B is equal to O P the measure of the Angle M L K. The side B C is equal
to F H the measure of the Angle L M K. The side A C is equal to D I the measure
of the Angle D K I.
of the Complement of the Obtuse Angle D K I.

For, A D and C I are Quadrants, and their Common Complement is C D A P and O B
are Quadrants, and their Common Complement is A O B F and C H are Quadrants,
and their Common Complement is C F.


Therefore, The Sides may be turned into Angles, and the contrary; which was to
be demonstrated. And by this Conversion, may the 5th Case of Right, and the 6th
Case of Oblique Spherical Triangles be resolved.

How a Perpendicular is to be let fall in any Oblique Spherical Triangle,
thereby dividing it into two Right-angled Triangles.
THis Problem is not of any Use in the Solution of Triangles by the Globe, as
is evident by what has been already delivered concerning the Solving of them:
But for that in Trigonometrical Calculations, there is a necessity for so
doing, and the doing of it no less difficult to conceive or imagine; and seeing
how naturally, and lively it is represented upon the Globe, I will therefore
here insert it. And it is grounded upon the First Theorem at the beginning of
this Tract of Trigonometry. Viz.

If two Great Circles of the Sphere shall pass through each others Poles, those
two Circles shall cut each the other at Right Angles.

In the Oblique-angled Triangle Z E P, before made use of, let there be given,
(1.) the Side P Z. (2.) The Side E Z, and (3.) The Angle E P Z. and let it be
required to find the Side P E. This Problem is done by the Globes, by the 4th
Case, as you may there see, without the help of any Perpendicular; but in
Calculation it is wholly necessary, and therefore may well deserve the place of
a Problem here.

The Triangle being described upon the Globe, let it be required to let fall a
Perpendicular from the Angle Z, upon the Side E P: The Measure of the Given
Angle P, being upon the Equinoctial, see upon the Globe where the Side P E
(being extended) cuts the Equinoctial, and from that Point count 90 degrees
upon the Equinoctial, and that Point shall be the Pole of the Circle (P E.) (
For the Poles of all Great Circles are a Quadrant, or 90 degrees distant from
their Peripheries:) wherefore the Quadrant of Altitude being fixed in Z, bring
it to this Point found in the Equinoctial, and then will it cut the Side E P in
the Point where the Perpendicular must fall, which will be at K, 29 degrees 21
minutes distant from P.

CONCLUSION.
IN the foregoing Precepts, I have made use only of two Triangles for the
Solution of the Five Cases of Right, and the Six Cases of Oblique-angled
Spherical Triangles; namely, of the Triangle P for Right-angled, and Z E P for
Oblique-angled. Yet in the Figure of the Globe by the intersection of the
several Circles thereof, there are diverse other Triangles (both Right and
Oblique) constituted, all which the foregoing Rules and Cases will sufficiently
Solve. A few of the Principal I will mark in the Globe by numerical Figures,
for distinction, and give you an account of what Circles they are composed, and
what Questions of the Globe are Resolvable thereby.

The Triangle that I have made use of for Right-angled Triangles, viz. P O, I
have marked with the Figure 1. And the Oblique Triangle Z E P, with the Figure
2; and shall say no more of them, having sufficiently dealt with them already;
but come to give you an account of such other as I have marked in the Figure.
And,

The first that I shall take notice of is, the Triangle A K M, marked with the
Figure 3. Right-angled at M, which is constituted of A K an Arch of the
Equinoctial. A M an Arch of the Ecliptic, and K M an Arch of a Circle of
Longitude passing through the Poles of the Ecliptic.


In this Triangle,

The Side A M, is the Suns or a Star's Longitude, or distance from the
Equinoctial Point A.

The side
K M is the South Latitude of a Star at M, or the Suns South declination. A K
is the Right Ascension.
The Angle
K A M is the Suns greatest declination. A K M, the Angle the Circle of
Longitude makes with the Equinoctial. A M K is a Right Angle.
The second Triangle that I shall take notice of is A B, Right-angled at B, and
marked with the Figure 4; and which is constituted of A, an Arch of the
Horizon. A B, an Arch of the Equinoctial, and B, an Arch of a Meridian or
Hour-circle.


In this Triangle, The Side
A is the Amplitude of the Suns Rising or Setting from A, the East or
West-Points of the Horizon. B is the Suns declination North. A B is the
Ascensional difference.
The Angle
B A is a Right Angle. A B is the Complement of the Latitude. A B is the Angle
of the Suns Position at his Rising.


The third Triangle that I here take notice of, is the Triangle A L F,
Right-angled at F, and marked with the Figure 5. The which is constituted of A
L, an Arch of the Equinoctial Colure. A F, an Arch of the Horizon, and L F, an
Arch of an Azimuth or Vertical-Circle.


In this Triangle The side
A F is the Suns Azimuth being East or West. A L is the Suns Declination North.
L F is the Suns Altitude at Six a clock.
The Angle
L F A is a Right Angle. L A F is the Latitude. A L F is the Angle of Position.


The fourth and last Triangle that I shall mention, is A D C, Right-angled at
C, and marked with the Figure 6, and is composed of A D, an Arch of the Prime
Vertical-Circle, or Azimuth of East or West. A C, an Arch of the Equinoctial. D
C, an Arch of a Meridian or Hour-circle.


In which Triangle, The Side
A D is the Sun's Altitude when he is due East or West. A C is the Ascensional
difference. D C is the Sun's Declination North.
The Angle
A D C is a Right Angle. C D A an Angle of Position. D A C is the Latitude.


Thus have you an account of Four other Right-angled Spherical Triangles, with
the Affections or Natures of their Respective Sides and Angles; out of each of
which, by the Varieties that will arise from the Five Cases, may be deduced 30
Problems, and in all the Four Triangles 120 Problems, all which may be
performed according to the Directions of the Five Cases of Right-angled
Spherical Triangles; the Exercising whereof I leave to the Practitioner. --
There are diverse other Triangles may be found both Right and Oblique-angled,
but these as the principal I commend to the Practice of the young Tyro.

HOROLOGIOGRAPHICAL Problems.
INTRODVCTION. Of the distinction of Plains, upon which Dials are to be made.
ALl Plains upon which Dials are made, in any Latitude or part of the World, do
either lie 1. Parallel to the Horizon, or 2. are Perpendicular to the Horizon,
or 3. do cut the Horizon at Oblique Angles: and of these sorts of Plains there
are several Varieties, excepting the first.

1. A Plain that lies Parallel to the Horizon, is said to be an Horizontal
Plain; and of this kind there is no Variety.

2. Of Plains that are Perpendicular to the Horizon there are Two Varieties:
For,

First, If the Plain which is Perpendicular to the Horizon, do stand directly
in the Azimuth, or Vertical-Circle, of East and West, the two Faces thereof
beholding one the South, and the other the North -- Or if the Perpendicular
Plain do stand in the Meridian of the Place, that is, in the Azimuth of North
and South, and so the two Faces thereof do behold the East and West -- insert
with six illustrations Fig. 1.

depiction of the geometric construction of an horizontal dial as described on
page 127

Fig. 2

depiction of the geometric construction of a vertical south dial as described
on page 130

Fig. 3.

depiction of the geometrica construction of a vertical east or west dial as
described on page 132

Fig. 4.

depiction of the geometric construction of a south vertical declining dial as
described on page 136

Fig. 5.

depiction of the geometric construction of a direct west reclining dial as
described on page 151

Fig. 6.

depiction of the geometric construction of a north or south reclining plane as
described on page 155

Such Plains are called direct Vertical Plains, because they have a direct
respect to the four Cardinal Points of Heaven, viz. the East, West, North, and
South. But

Secondly, If any such Perpendicular Plain do stand in any other Azimuth or
Vertical-Circle between the South and the East, or the North and the West, so
that one Face beholds the South-East, and its opposite the North-West; then
these Plains are called Vertical Plains declining from the North or South,
toward either the East or West.

3. Of Plains that cut the Horizon at Oblique Angles, and yet do lie directly
in the prime Vertical Circle, or Azimuth of East or West, there are six
Varieties. For

First, A plain beholding the South, may fall back, (or Recline) from the
Zenith, just into the Pole, and then will the Plain lie Parallel to the Axis of
the World, and such a Plain is called a Polar Plain.

Secondly, It may so fall back (or Recline) from the Zenith, that it may fall
between the Zenith and the Pole, or between the Pole and the Horizon; and these
three sorts are called South Reclining Plains.

Reclining equal to less than more than
the Pole or Co-Latitude of the Place.

Thirdly, A Plain beholding the North, may fall back (or Recline) from the
Zenith equal to the Equinoctial, and so the Plain will lie parallel to the
Equinoctial Circle, and is therefore called an Equinoctial Plain.

Fourthly, It may so fall back (or Recline) that it shall rest between the
Zenith and the Equinoctial, or between the Equinoctial and the Horizon; and
these three sorts are called North-reclining Plains.

Reclining equal to less than more than
the Equinoctial, or Latitude of the Place.

Fifthly, Of Plains that cut the Horizon at Oblique Angles, and do lie directly
in the Meridian or Azimuth of North and South, there is only one Variety: for
all such Plains will fall between the Zenith, and the East or West-points of
the Horizon; and so are called East or West Recliners.

Sixthly, Of Plains that cut the Horizon at Oblique Angles, and do not lie in
the prime Vertical-Circle or Azimuth of East and West, but in some other
intermediate Azimuth or Vertical-Circle between the South and the East or West;
there are also of those six Varieties: -- And of these, those that behold the
South, are called South-Recliners, declining East or West: -- And those that
behold the North, are called North-Recliners, declining either East or West.

Now of these six sorts, all Plains besides the forementioned must necessarily
be one of these following: For,

1. The South Reclining Plain, by reason of its Declination, may so chance as
to fall Just into the Pole-point, and so is called a Polar declining Plain.
Between the Zenith and the Pole. Between the Pole and the Horizon.


And these are called South Declining Plains.

Reclining equal to less than more than
the Pole.

2. The North Reclining Plain, by reason of its Declination, may so chance as
to fall Just at the Intersection of the Meridian with the Equinoctial. Between
the Zenith and Equinoctial. Between the Horizon and the Equinoctial.


And these are called North Declining Plains.

Reclining equal to less than more than
the Equinoctial.

Seventhly, All Plains that do Decline and Recline also, have their opposite
Faces, and those are called North or South Declining Inclining Plains; and the
same Dial that serves for a South Declining Reclining Plain, will serve also
for a North Declining Inclining Plain.

And Dials upon any of these Variety of Plains may be made by the Globes, as I
shall come now to show.

PROB. I. To make an Horizontal Dial in any Latitude.
I. The Operation by the Globe.
ELevate the Globe to the Latitude of the place for which you would make your
Dial, (suppose for London, in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min.) Then bring the
Vernal Equinoctial Colure (which is the first point of Aries also) to the
Meridian, and (if you will) the Index of the Hour-Circle to 12. This done,

1. Turn the Globe about Westward, till the Hour-Index points at 1 a clock, or
rather [till 15 degrees of the Equinoctial come to be just under the Meridian,]
and there keeping the Globe, look upon the Horizon how many degrees thereof are
cut by the Equinoctial Colure; which you shall d. m. Latitude 51. 30 d. m. 12
00. 00 11 1 11. 50 10 2 24. 20 9 3 38. 3 8 4 53. 35 7 5 71. 6 6 90. 0 find to
be 11 degrees. 50 min. which set down in a little Table, as you see here is done;
for this 11 degrees. 50 min. is the distance that the hour lines of 11 and 1 a
clock are distant from the Meridian upon the Dial Plain.

2. Turn the Globe more Westward, till 30 degrees of the Equinoctial comes to
the Meridian, and then see what degrees of the Horizo n are cut by the
Equinoctial Colure; which you will find to be 24 degrees. 20 min. which note down
in a Table as before, for that is the hour-distance of 10 and 2 a clock from
the Meridian.

3. Turn the Globe still more Westward, till 45 degrees of the Equinoctial come
to the Meridian, and then shall the Equinoctial Colure cut 38 degrees. 3 min. of
the Horizon counted from the Meridian, which is the distance of 9 and 3 a clock.

Do thus with the oath r hours of 8 and 4, of 7 and 5, and so shall the Colure
cut 90 degrees at 6 a clock, or when 90 degrees of the Equinoctial comes to the
Meridian. And this being done, your Dial is so far made as the Globe can assist
you. Now for

II. The Geometrical Construction of this Dial.
FIG. I.
1. Upon the Plain on which you design to draw your Dial, draw a Right line A
B, representing the Meridian of your Globe, and the Hour-line of 12 of the
clock.

2. Assign toward one end of this Line a point as C, representing the Center
of your Dial, and through that Point draw another Line at Right angles to A B,
which shall be the Hour-line of 6 a clock, as the Line H K; and upon the Point
C, describe a Semicircle D E F, according to the Radius of some Line of Chords.
Then

If you know not what a Line of Chords is, or know not how to use it, read my
Geometrical Exercises lately printed.
1. Laying your little Table (before made) before you, you find Latit. 51 degrees.
30 min. Take 51 degrees. 30 min. from your Line of Chords, and set that distance
upon the Semicircle from E to G, and draw the Line C G for the Style or Cock of
your Dial.

2. Then seeing that 11 and 1 a clock are distant from the Meridian 11 degrees. 50
min. take 11 degrees. 50 min. from your Chord, and set it upon the Semicircle from
E to 11, and from E to 1, and draw the Lines C 11, and C 1, for the Hourlines
of 11 and 1.

3. The distance of 10 and 2 a clock being 24 degrees. 20 min. take 24 degrees. 20 min.
out of your Line of Chords, and set it upon the Semicircle from E to 10, and
from E to 2, and draw the Lines C 10, and C 2, for the Hour Lines of 10 and 2.

4. Do thus with the rest of the Hour Lines of 9 and 3, 8 and 4, -- 7 and 5. So
have you all the Hour Lines between 6 in the morning and 6 at night; and for
the Hour Lines of 4 and 5 in the morning, and of 7 and 8 at night, draw the
same Hour Lines before 6 through the Center, as in the Figure, and they shall
be the true Hour Lines: And so is your Dial finished.

The Style must stand upright upon 12 of the clock, not inclining on either
side.

PROB. II. To make a Vertical South Dial.
I. The Operation by the Globe.
THe Globe being set to the Latitude, and the Quadrant of Altitude in the
Zenith,

1. Bring the Equinoctial Colure to the Meridian, and (if you will) the Index
of the Hourwheel to 12.

2. Turn the Globe about Westward, Comp. of the Latit. 38. d. 30 m. d. m. 12
00.00 11 1 9.28 10 2 19.45 9 3 31.54 8 4 47. 9 7 5 66.42 6 90.00 till 15
degrees of the Equinoctial be under the Meridian, then shall the Equinoctial
Colure cut 9 degrees. 28 min. of the Horizon counted from the Meridian; and that is
the Hour-distance of 11 and 1 a clock from 12.

3. Turn the Globe more Westerly, till 30 degrees of the Colure be under the
Meridian, then shall the Colure cut upon the Horizon 19 degrees. 45 min. which is
the distance of 10 and 2 a clock from 12.

4. Turn the Globe still Westerly, till 45 degrees. 60 degrees. and 75 degrees. come under
the Meridian; and so shall you find that the Colure will cut the Horizon in 31
degrees. 54 min. for 9 and 3 a clock, and the rest, as in this Table. And so is the
Globular work of your Dial finished.

II. The Geometrical Construction of this Dial.
FIG. II.
1. Draw a Right Line L M upon your Plain for the Meridian, and Hour-line of
12; and another Perpendicular thereto, as N P for the Hour-line of 6 and 6; and
where these Lines cross (as at O,) is the Center of your Dial.

2. Upon O, as a Center, with the Radius of a Line of Chords, describe a
Semicircle N Q P, and then taking 38 degrees. 30 min. (which is the Complement of
the Latitude of the place) out of the Line of Chords, set it from Q to R, and
draw the Line O R for the Cock or Style of your Dial.

3. Laying your Table before you against 11 and 1 of the clock, you find 9
degrees. 28 min. Take therefore 9 degrees. 28 min. out of your Chord, and set that
distance upon the Semicircle from Q to 11 and from Q to 1, and draw the Lines O
11 and O 1, for the Hour Lines of 11 and 1.

4. Also take 19 degrees. 45 min. and set them from Q to 10, and from Q to 2, and
draw O 10, and O 2, for the hours of 10 and 2.

5. Do the like for the hours of 9 and 3, 8 and 4, 7 and 5, and your Dial is
finished.

The Style must stand over 12, and must point downwards toward the South-Pole.

PROB. III. To make a Vertical direct North- Dial.
THe North Vertical Dial, is the same with the South, only the Style must point
upwards toward the North Pole, and the hours about Midnight, as 9, 10, 11, 12:
1, 2, and 3 must be left out, and 4 and 5 in the Morning; and 7 and 8 at Night
must be drawn through the Center: So is your North-Dial also finished.

PROB. IV. To make a direct Vertical East or West Dial.
I. The Operation by the Globe.
THe Globe rectified to the Latitude, the Index to 12, the Quadrant of Altitude
in the Zenith: If you turn the Quadrant of Altitude so about till the graduated
edge thereof do behold the direct East or West-points of the Horizon, you shall
find that it will lie in the very Plain of the Meridian-Circle, and so the
Pole will have no elevation over it; for turning the Globe about, the
Equinoctial Colure will not cut the Quadrant of Altitude in any particular
degree, but it will cut all the degrees thereof at the same time; wherefore the
Hour Lines of these Plains will make no Angles at the Pole, and therefore must
be parallel one to the other, which the Globe evidently demonstrates, but will
not conveniently give the parallel distance of each from other, they being
nearer or farther off of each other according as the Style is proportioned to
the Plain, which I shall now come to show in

II. The Geometrical Construction of these Dials.
FIG. III.
Let the Plain upon which you would make an East or West Dial, be A B C D.

1. Upon D (or any where toward the lower part of the Line B D, for an East
Dial, or of A C for a West) with 60 degrees of your Chord, describe an Arch F
G, upon which set the Complement of the Latitude of the place, viz. 38 degrees. 30
min. from F to G, and draw the Line D G E for the Equinoctial.

2. Toward the upper part of this Line, as at P, assume any point, and through
it draw the Line 6 P 6 perpendicular to the Equinoctial, for the Hour-line of
Six. -- Also, toward the lower part of the same Line, assume another point, as
L, and through it draw the Line 11 L 11 for the Hour-line of Eleven.

3. With 60 degrees of your Chords, upon the point L, describe a small Arch of
a Circle, as H K, and upon it (always) set 15 degrees (or one hours distance)
from H to K, and draw the Line L K M, cutting the Hour-line of Six in M.

4. Upon M as a Center, with 60 degrees of your Chord, describe an Arch of a
Circle N O, which divide into five equal parts in the points.

5. Lay a Ruler upon M, and each of these points, and the Ruler will cut the
Equinoctial-line E D in the points * * * *, through which points, if you draw
Right Lines parallel to the Hour-line of 6, they shall be the Hour Lines of 7,
8, 9, and 10 of the clock, the Hour Lines of 6 and 11 being drawn before.

6. For the Hour Lines of 4 and 5 in the Morning, before 6, they retain the
same distance from 6, as do the hours of 7 and 8; and thus is your Dial
finished.

The Style must stand upon the Hour-line of 6, and be elevated so high as is
the length of the Line M P, and may either be a pin of Wyre, or a plate of
Brass or Iron.

The West-Dyal is the same with the East, only changing the names of the hours.

For 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 in the morning, in the East-Dyal;


Must be changed to 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 in the afternoon, in the West-Dyal:


Which is all the difference.

PROB. V. To make a Vertical Dyal declining from the South, Eastward, or
Westward; 30 degrees in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min.
I. The Operation by the Globe.
THe Globe being R^ctified to the Latitude of the place, the Quadrant of
Altitude in the Zenith, the Index of the Hour-Circle at 12, and the Equinoctial
Colure brought under the Meridian;

1. Count the Declination of the Plain upon the Horizon, from the East or
West-points thereof (according as the Plain declines) toward the South:
namely, 30 degrees; and to that point of the Horizon bring the Quadrant of
Altitude, and there keep it.

2. Turn the Globe about till the Index of the Hour-wheel cuts 11 of the clock,
or rather (as I said before) till 15 degrees of the Equinoctial have passed the
Meridian, and then shall you find the Equinoctial Colure to cut the Quadrant
of Altitude at 9 degrees. 50 min. if you count the degrees from the Zenith point
downwards.

3. Turn the Globe farther about, till 30 degrees of the Equinoctial be past
the Meridian, and then shall you find the Colure to cut the Quadrant of
Altitude at 18 degrees. 14 min. counted from the Zenith downwards as before.

4. Do the like with all the Hours from Noon. Hour-distances upon the Plain d.
m. 12 00 00 11 1 09 50 10 2 13 14 9 3 26 19 8 4 34 56 7 5 44 56 6 6 57 49 5 7
75 37 rest of the hours, and you shall find that at the several 15 degrees of
the Equinoctial, the Equinoctial Colure will cut such degrees of the Quadrant
of Altitude as are expressed in this Table, if you count them from the Zenith
downwards, as is before directed.

This done;

5. Bring the Quadrant of Altitude to the other side of the Meridian, and set
it to 30 degrees, the Plains declination, counted from the East or West-points
Northward, as you did before toward the South, which will be in the just
opposite point of the Horizon to which it was before; and also, bring the
Equinoctial Colure under the Meridian. Then,

6. Turn the Globe about (the contrary way to what you did before) till 15
degrees of the Equinoctial be past the Meridian, and then shall you find the
Equinoctial Colure to cut at 12 degrees. 23 min. of the Quadrant of Altitude
counted from the Zenith.

And so continuing turning Hours from Noon. Hou^ distances on the Plain. a. m.
12 00 00 1 11 12 23 2 10 29 19 3 9 52 42 4 8 80 07 the Globe about till 30, 45,
and 60 degrees of the Equinoctial have passed the Meridian, you shall find the
Equinoctial Colure to cut the Quadrant of Altitude at such degrees as are
expressed in this Table.

The Hour-distances upon the Plain being thus attained, there are two other
requisites in all upright declining Dyals also to be found by the Globe, before
the Dyal can be finished. Namely, 1. The distance of the Substile from the
Meridian. 2. The height of the Pole above the Plain, or the height of the Style
above the Substile.


To find both which,

Bring the Equinoctial Colure to the Plains declination 30 degrees counted upon
the Horizon from the South-Eastward; and the Quadrant of Altitude to 30 degrees
counted in the Horizon from the East-Northward: So shall the Quadrant cut the
Colure at Right Angles. And

The number of degrees of the Quadrant contained between this Intersection and
the Zenith (which here is 21 degrees. 41 min.) is the distance of the Substile from
the Meridian. And the degrees of the Colure contained between this Intersection
and the Pole (which here is 32 degrees. 37 min.) is the height of the Pole above
the Plain.

II. The Geometrical Construction.
FIG. IV.
1. Draw a Line C D for the Meridian and Hour-line of 12, and at Right Angles
thereunto draw another Line, as A B, for the Horizontal-line, crossing the
former in the point C, the Center of the Dyal.

2. Upon the point C, describe the Semicircle A G B.

3. Take 21 degrees. 41 min. from your Chord, and (because the Plain declines
Eastward) set it from G to E; also, take from your Chord 32 degrees. 37 min. (which
is the height of the Pole above the Plain) and set it from E to F, and draw the
Line C E for the Substile, and C F for the Style of the Dyal.

4. Having recourse to the Tables of Hour-distances, take 9 degrees. 50 min. and
set it from G to 11; also take 18 degrees. 14 min. and set it from G to 10, and so
the rest in that Table. -- Also out of the other Table take 12 degrees. 23 min. and
set them from G to 1, etc.

5. From the Center C draw Lines through the several points 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
and 11; and also through 1, 2, 3, and 4, they shall be the true Hour Lines; and
so have you finished this Dyal.

And in the making of this Dyal, you have made four Dyals; as I have intimated
at large in my Art of Dyalling, Part 1. Chap. 7. For,

If you hold the Paper upon which the South-East declining Dyal is drawn,
against the light, then shall you discover the Style to stand on the Right hand
of the Plain, whereas it now stands on the Left hand; so the same Hour Lines,
Substile, Style and all, being drawn on the backside of the Paper, and those
that are the Forenoon-hours in the East-decliner numbered as the Afternoon-hours
in the West-decliner, that is, call 11, 1, and 10, 2, and 9, 3, etc. as in the
Tables; so shall the South-Dyal declining East 30 degrees, become a South-Dyal
declining Westward 30 degrees.

And if you turn the South-East-Dyal upside-down, so that the Style may point
upwards toward the North Pole, (and leave out the hours about 12, as 9, 10,
11, and 1, 2, and 3, which in North-Dyals represent 9, 10, and 11 at night, and
1, 2, and 3 in the morning; all which time (in those middle Latitudes) the Sun
is under the Horizon) it will become a North-Dyal declining Eastward 30 degrees.

Also if you turn the South declining West Dyal upside-down, and leave out the
hours about Midnight, as 9, 10, 11, 12, 1, 2, and 3, it will then become a
North-Dyal declining Westward 30 degrees.

Now for such South or North Dyals as do dedecline far toward the East or
West, as 60, 70, 80, or 85 degrees, there you shall find that the
hour-distances will fall so near together, that they will be of no competent
distance one from another, except they be extended very far from the Center;
and therefore the old way has been (in such Cases) to draw the Dyal upon the
Floor of a Room, extending the Substile, Style, and Hour Lines till they appear
of a competent distance from each other, and then according to the bigness of
your Dyal-plain, to cut off the Hour Lines, Style, and Substile, and so
transfer them from the Floor to the Plain upon which the Dyal is to be made:
but this way being too Mechanical for an Artist to exercise, I have in my
foresaid Art of Dyalling showed a more artificial way of performing this work
Geometrically, by which (although the Dyal should decline 80 or 88 degrees)
upon a quarter of a sheet of paper you may draw your Dyal, and have the Style
of a competent height, and all the Hour Lines at a convenient distance one from
another. And so let this suffice to be said in this place concerning Upright
declining Dyals; for I intend not here to teach the Art of Dyalling, but show
the Use of the Globes.

PROB. VI. Of direct South Reclining Dyals.
TO find the distances of the Hour Lines upon these Plains by the Globes, this
is the natural way.

The Operation by the Globe.
Having set the Globe to the Latitude, the Index of the Hour-circle to 12, the
Quadrant of Altitude to the Reclination, with the end thereof in the East o^
West points of the H^rizon, and brought the Equinoctial Colure to the Meridian,
-- Turn the Globe about, till the 1 hour, or 15 degrees of the Equinoctial has
passed the Meridian, and then see what degrees of the Quadrant of Altitude are
cut by the Equinoctial Colure; for those degrees counted from the upper part of
the Quadrant downwards, are the degrees of the first hours distance (as of XI
or I of the clock) from the Meridian, and so for all the rest of the
Hour-distances.

This I say is the natural way; but the more artificial and better way, will be
to refer such Reclining Plains to a New Latitude where they may become
Horizontal Plains; and that may be easily effected, as I shall presently show.

I formerly said, that a South-Plain may so recline, that the Reclination
thereof may be either Less than Equal to More than
the Complement of the known Latitude.

Now to refer any of these Plains to a new Latitude where they may become
Horizontal Plains, observe,

1. If the Reclination of the Plain be less than the Complement of the known
Latitude, Substract the Plains Reclination from the Complement of the Latitude,
and the Remainer shall be a New Latitude, where the Reclining Plain shall be an
Horizontal Plain; and, in this Case, the South-Pole (in North-Latitudes) is
always elevated.

2. If the Reclination be equal to the Complement of the known Latitude, then
the New Latitude is no Latitude; for the Plain lies in the very Axis of the
World, and has neither Pole elevated above it.

3. If the Reclination of the Plain be More (or Greater) than the Complement of
the known Latitude, Substract the Complement of the known Latitude from the
Plains Reclination, and the Remainer shall be the New Latitude; and in this
Case, the North Pole (in North-Latitudes) is always elevated.

Examples of these three Varieties.
I. Of a South Plain, Reclining less than the Complement of the Latitude.
d. m. Latitude 51 30 South reclin. 20 00 New Latitude 18 30 Hours
Hour-distances. d. m. 12 00 00 11 1 04 52 10 2 10 23 9 3 17 36 8 4 28 48 7 5 49
50 6 90 00 LEt a South-Plain in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min. North, recline
20 degrees: Now because 20 degrees is less than 38 degrees. 30 min. the Complement
of the known Latitude, substract 20 degrees from 38 degrees. 30 min. and there will
remain 18 degrees. 30 min. which will be the New Latitude. Wherefore i^ you
Rectify the Globe to 18 degrees. 30 min. of Latitude, and make an Horizontal Dyal
as is before taught in all respects, that Dyal shall serve for a South Dyal
reclining 20 degrees in the Latitude o^ 51 degrees. 30 min. the Hour-distances
being such as are expressed in this Table, and the heigh^ of the Style above
the 12 a clock-line (or Substile) to be equal to the New Latitude, namely, 18
degrees. 30 min.

II. Of a South Plain Reclining equal to the Complement of the Latitude.
Thus if a South Plain in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min. shall recline 38 degrees.
30 min. equal to the Complement of the Latitude, the New Latitude (as is said
before) shall be no Latitude, and so neither Pole have any Elevation; wherefore
the Dyal is to be made in all respects as an East or West-Dyal is made, only
that Hour-line which in the East or West-Dyal is the six a clock hour-line,
must in these Dyals be the Hour-line of 12, etc.

III. Of a South Plain Reclining more than the Complement of the Latitude.
Suppose a South Plain in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min. should recline from
the Zenith 60 degrees; forasmuch as 60 degrees is more than 38 degrees. 30 min. the
Complement of the known Latitude, substract 38 degrees. 30 min. from 60 degrees,
and the remainer 21 degrees. 30 min. will be the New Latitude.

d. m. Latitude 51 30 South reclin. 60 00 New Latitude 21 30 Hours
Hour-distances. d. m. 12 00 00 11 1 05 37 10 2 11 57 9 3 20 08 8 4 32 25 7 5 53
50 6 90 00 Wherefore, if you make an Horizontal Dyal for the Latitude of 21
degrees. 30 min. you shall find the Hour-distances to be such as are expressed in
this Table, and shall serve for a South-Dyal Reclining from the Zenith 60
degrees in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min. And the Style of this Dyal must be
elevated above the Substile (or Hour-line of 12) 21 degrees. 30 min. equal to the
New Latitude, and must point upwards toward the North Pole, as must the Styles
of all South-Plains which recline more than the Complement of the Latitude.

PROB. VII. Of North Reclining Dyals.
THe Natural way of finding of the Hour-distances for North Reclining Dyals is
thus.

The Operation by the Globe.
Rectify the Globe to the Latitude, set the Quadrant of Altitude to the
Reclination, and the end of it to the East or West-points of the Horizon, the
Index of the Hour-circle to 12, and the Equinoctial Colure to the Meridian --
Then turn the Globe about till 15 degrees of the Equinoctial have passed the
Meridian, and then see what degrees of the Quadrant of Altitude are cut by the
Equinoctial Colure; for those degrees (counted from the upper end of the
Quadrant of Altitude) are the first hours distance from 12, as of 11 and 1 of
the clock: and so of all the rest of the hours.

This is the natural way; but the better way will be to refer these North
Reclining Plains to a New Latitude, as before you did the South-Recliners.

Of these North Reclining Plains, there are Three Varieties, as there were of
the South-Recliners: for the Reclination may be either Less than Equal to More
than
the Latitude of the Place.

And to refer these to a New Latitude where they will be Horizontal Plains, you
must observe,

1. If the Reclination of the Plain be less than the Latitude, add the
Complement of the Latitude to the Plains Reclination, and the sum shall be the
New Latitude, and the North Pole (in North-Latitudes) shall be always elevated.

2. If the Reclination be equal to the Latitude, add the Complement of the
Latitude and the Reclination together, and the sum shall be the New Latitude,
which in this Case will always be 90 degrees.

3. If the Reclination be more than the Latitude, add the Complement of the
Reclination of the Plain, and the Latitude together, the sum of them shall be
the New Latitude, and the North Pole shall always be elevated.

Examples of these three Varieties.
I. Of a North-Plain Reclining less than the Latitude.
LEt a North-Plain in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min. recline from the Zenith
20 degrees; add 20 degrees (the Reclination) to 51 degrees. 30 min. (the Latitude)
the sum will be 71 degrees. 30 min. which is the New Latitude.

Wherefore, if you rectify the d. m. Latitude 51 30 North reclin. 20 00 New
Latitude 71 30 Hours Hour-distances. d. m. 12 00 00 11 1 14 17 10 2 28 42 9 3
43 29 8 4 58 40 7 5 74 13 6 90 00 Globe to 71 degrees. 30 min. of Latitude, and
make an Horizontal Dyal as is before taught, you shall find the Hour-distances
to be such as are expressed in this Table. And the Style must be elevated above
the Substile (or Hourline of 12) equal to the New Latitude; and so shall this
Horizontal Dyal, made for the Latitude of 71 degrees. 30 min. serve for a
North-Dyal Reclining 20 degrees in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min.

II. Of a North-Plain Reclining equal to the Latitude.
Let a North Plain in the Latitude of London 51 degrees. 30 min. recline from the
Zenith 51 degrees. 30 min. this added to the Complement of the Latitude, viz. 38
degrees. 30 min. the sum will be 90. so that 90 degrees is the New Latitude.
Wherefore, rectify the Globe to 90 degrees of Latitude, so shall the Pole be
in the Zenith, and the Equinoctial in the Horizon: then turn the Globe about
till 15 degrees of the Equinoctial Colure have passed the Meridian, and it will
rest at 15 degrees of the Horizon, which is the first Hours distance from 12.
for in these Plains the degrees of the Equinoctial and the degrees of the
Horizon being the same, there is no more in the making of this Dyal, than to
divide a Circle into 24 equal parts, and (being the New Latitude is 90 degrees)
erect a Wyre perpendicularly in the Center, and the Dyal is finished.

III. Of a North-Plain Reclining more than the Latitude.
Suppose that in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min. a North-Plain should recline
from the Zenith 60 degrees, add 51 degrees. 30 min. (the Latitude) to 30 degrees
(the Complement of the Reclination) the sum will be 81 degrees. 30 min. for the New
Latitude. --

d. m. Latitude 51 30 North reclin. 60 00 New Latitude 81 30 Hours
Hour-distances. d. m. 12 00 00 11 1 14 51 10 2 29 44 9 3 44 41 8 4 59 43 7 5 74
51 6 90 00 Wherefore, rectify the Globe to the Latitude of 81 degrees. 30 min. and
(according to former directions) make an Horizontal Dyal for that Latitude, and
you shall find the Hour-distances to be such as are expressed in this Table;
and such an Horizontal Dyal for the Latitude of 81 degrees. 30 min. shall serve for
a North-Dyal reclining 60 degrees. in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min. The Style
must be elevated above the 12 a clock hour-line equal to the New Latitude,
namely, 81 degrees. 30 min.

PROB. VIII. Of East or West direct Recliners.
SUch Plains as lie in the Meridian or Azimuth of North and South, and do
recline from the Zenith toward the East or West-points of the Horizon, are
called East or West-Recliners; and the Natural way of finding of the
Hour-distances upon these Plains by the Globes, is thus.

I. The Operation by the Globe.
The Globe rectified to the Latitude of the place, the Quadrant of Altitude in
the Zenith, the Equinoctial Colure brought to the Meridian, the Index of the
Hour-wheel to 12, and the Semicircle of Position fixed to the Meridian in the
North and South-points of the Horizon, elevate the Semicircle of Position to
the Complement of the Plains Reclination, counted upon the Quadrant of Altitude
from the Horizon; then move the Globe about, till the Equinoctial Colure has
passed 15 degrees of the Equinoctial, and then the degrees of the Semicircle of
Position, cut by the Equinoctial Colure (counted from the Meridian) shall be
the degrees that the first Hour-line of 11 or 1 shall be distant from the
Meridian, or Hour-line of 12. -- Also turn the Globe about till the Equinoctial
Colure has passed 30 degrees of the Equinoctial Circle, and the degrees cut by
the Colure upon the Semicircle of Position shall be the degrees that the second
Hour-line shall be distant from 12, etc.

This is the natural way of making of these Dyals by the Globe; but (to retain
our former method) we will refer these East or West reclining Dyals to a New
Latitude, where they shall be upright declining Plains; which to perform, is
easy: For,

In all East or West-Recliners, the New Latitude is always the Complement of
the known Latitude, and the New Declination is always the Complement of the
Reclination; so that an East or West-Plain in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min.
reclining 40 degrees will be an upright North-Plain declining East or West 50
degrees in the Latitude of 38 degrees. 30 min. for 38 degrees. 30 min. is the New
Latitude, it being the Complement of the known Latitude, and 50 degrees is the
New Declination, it being the Complement of the Plains Reclination in the known
Latitude; wherefore, if (according to the directions given you in the Fifth
Problem) you make an upright Dyal, declining 50 degrees for the Latitude of 38
degrees. 30 min. you shall find all the Hour-distances to be such as are expressed
in this Table. d. m. East Reclining 40.00 Latitude 51.30 New Latitude 38.30
Declination 50.00 Distance of Substile from Meridian 43.55 Styles height 30.12
Hours from Noon. Hour-distances on the Plain. d. m. 12 00 00 1 11 15 14 2 10 26
12 3 9 34 57 4 8 42 42 5 7 50 21 6 6 58 39 7 5 68 43 8 4 82 18 11 1 22 09 10 2
48 43 9 3 75 52 The distance of the Substile from the Meridian to be 43 degrees. 55
min. and the height of the Pole or Style above the Plain or Substile, to be 30
degrees. 12 min. which declining Dyal in this New Latitude, shall be an East of
West reclining Dyal in the known Latitude.

But in the placing of the Dyal upon the Reclining Plain, there is this
difference: For whereas in all Upright declining Plains, the Meridian or
Hour-line of 12 is perpendicular to the Horizon, in all East or West-Recliners
the Meridian (or Hour-line of 12) must lie parallel to the Horizon. And here
note also, that all East-Recliners in the known Latitude, are
North-East-decliners in the New Latitude, and all West-Recliners are
North-West-decliners. All which may be seen in

FIG. V.
And note farther, that upon all East and West-Recliners (how far soever) in
North-Latitudes, the North Pole is always elevated; and upon the East and
West-Incliners opposite to them, the South Pole.

Thus have you the manner of making of all sorts of direct Reclining or
Inclining Dyals by the Globes two several ways; namely, by the Natural way, as
they lie in respect of the Horizon, where they are to be placed Obliquely: And
also a more artificial way, by referring them to New Latitudes and New
Declinations, where they may become Horizontal or Upright declining Plains. And
now let us proceed to

PROB. IX. Of Declining, Reclining, or Inclining Plains.
SUch Plains as do not directly behold the East, West, North, or South-points
of the Horizon, nor do stand perpendicular thereunto, but fall back from the
Zenith, these Plains are called North or South-Recliners. For the making of
these kinds of Dyals by the Globes, the natural way follows.

I. The Operation by the Globe.
For our Example, Let us suppose a Plain in the Latitude of 51 degrees. 30 min. to
decline from the North-part of the Meridian toward the West 72 degrees, and
also to Recline from the Zenith 26 degrees. 34 min.

1. Elevate your Globe to the Latitude of the place 51 degrees, 30 min. the
Quadrant of Altitude in the Zenith, the Hour-circle to 12, and the Equinoctial
Colure to the Meridian.

2. The Declination being 72 degrees Westward, count upon the Horizon 20
degrees (the Complement thereof, from the South-part of the Meridian Westward,
and from the North-part of the Meridian Eastward; and to these two Points in
the Horizon, bring the two extreme ends of your Circle of Position, (or which
is far better, a narrow Plate of thin Brass, containing a complete Semicircle
at least, divided into degrees as the Quadrant of Altitude is, beginning the
divisions at the middle, and numbering them both ways toward the ends) and
there fix it. Then bring the Quadrant of Altitude to 20 degrees in the Horizon,
counted from the East Southward. -- Now (because the Plain Reclines 26 degrees. 34
min.) count those degrees upon the Quadrant downwards, from the Pole, and to
that Point bring down the thin Plate of Brass, representing your Plain, and
there fix it; for now is your Globe prepared for the making of your Dyal. And,

I. For the Hour-distances:
If you turn the Globe about Eastward, till 15 degrees of the Equinoctial have
passed the Meridian, you shall find upon the Plain intercepted between the
Colure and the Meridian 26 degrees. 3 min. which is the first Hours distance from
12 upon your Plain. Again, turn the Globe about still Eastward, and you shall
find 44 degrees. 30 min. intercepted, which is the second Hours distance upon the
Plain.

Also, if you turn about the Globe Westward till 15 degrees of the Equinoctial
have passed the Meridian, there will be cut by the Colure upon the Plain 28
degrees. 4 min. which is the first Hours distance on the other side of the
Meridian. And so do with all the rest, and you shall find them as in this
following Table.

d. m. North declining 72.00 Reclining 26.34 Distance between the Merid. and
Hor. 36.00 Distance between the Plain and Zen. 58.17 Height of the Pole above
the Plain. 31.28 Distance of the Subst. and Merid. 82.04 d. m. 12 00 00 1 11 26
03 2 10 44 30 3 9 57 47 4 8 67 53 5 7 76 12 Substile. Substile. 6 6 84 15 7 5
87 38 8 4 78 25 9 3 66 48 10 2 50 46 11 1 28 04 Now (besides these
Hour-distances) there must be Four other things found before we come to the
Geometrical Construction of this Dyal; and those are

1. The Arch of the Plain (or the distance) between the Meridian and Horizon;
and that may be found thus. -- Take with your Compasses (or with a thin Plate
of Brass or Horn divided) the distance upon the Plain, from the Intersection of
the Plain with the Horizon, to the Intersection of the Plain with the Meridian;
and those degrees, namely 36, are the distance required.

2. The Arch of the Meridian between the Plain and the Zenith. The which may be
thus found. For the degrees of the Meridian intercepted between the Plain and
the Zenith, viz. 58 degrees. 17 min. is this Arch.

3. The height of the Pole or Style above the Plain. -- And to find this, You
must continue your Quadrant of Altitude from the Zenith below the Horizon, so
much as is the Reclination of the Plain 26 degrees. 34 min. And mark that Point,
for it is the Pole of the Reclining Plain. Then a thin Plate of Brass, (for the
Quadrant of Altitude will be (for the most part) too short) divided, being
extended from the North Pole toward the South-Pole) and passing through the
Pole of the Plain, (which is the Point before found) mark where the Plate
cutteth the Plain; and the number of degrees of the Plate that are contained
between the Pole and the Plain, which will be here found 31 degrees. 28 min. is the
height of the Pole or Style above the Plain or Substile.

4. The distance of the Substile from the Meridian. -- And that is, the number
of degrees of the Plate representing the Plain, which are contained between the
Plate which came from the Pole of the World to the Pole of the Plain, and the
Intersection of the Plain with the Meridian, which in this Example will be
found to be 82 degrees. 4 min.

II. The Geometrical Construction of this Dyal.
FIG. VI.
1. Upon the Plain upon which you intend to describe your Dyal, draw an
Horizontal-line thereupon, as A B; and another perpendicular thereunto D G, for
the Vertical line of your Plain, cutting the former A B in the point G, which
point C make the Center of your Dyal.

2. Upon the Center C, with 60 degrees of a Line of Chords describe a Circle,
as A F B G. then take 36 degrees (the distance of the Meridian from the
Horizon,) and set it from A to 12 downwards, and from B to 12 upwards, and draw
the Line 12 C 12 for the Hour-line of XII.

3. Take 82 degrees. 4 min. (the distance of the Substile from the Meridian) and
set them from 12 upwards to G on the left hand, and downwards from 12 to G on
the right hand, drawing the Line G C G through the Center, for the
Substilar-line of both the Dyals: -- And the height of the Pole or Style above
the Plain being 31 degrees. 28 min. set those degrees from G to H, both above and
below, and draw the Line H C H quite through the Center, for the Axis or Styles
of both Dyals.

4. Laying your Table of Hour-distances before you, and there finding the first
Hours distance from 12 is 26 degrees. 3 min. set that distance upon the Circle from
12 upwards to 1, and from 12 (on the other side) downwards to 11, and draw the
Lines C 1, and C 11, for the Hour Lines of 11 and 1 a clock, which will both be
but one straight line.

Do thus with all the hours in the Table till you come to the Substile, and
then, (beginning at the bottom of the Table)

5. Take 28 degrees. 4 min. and set them from 12 on the Right hand downwards to 11,
and from 12 on the Left hand upwards to 1, and draw the Line C 11 in the North
Reclining Plain, for the Sun will never shine upon the South Inclining Plain at
1, otherwise you should have drawn it through the Center as you did before. Do
the like with all the rest of the hours, drawing such through the Center as you
find occasion for; which the sight of the Figure will inform you how to do,
better than many Words.

Lastly, Erect your Style perpendicular to your Substile, making an Angle
therewith equal to the elevation thereof; namely, 31 degrees. 28 min. and your
Dyals are finished. -- And in the making of these, you have made two others
also, viz. A North Declining 72 degrees Eastward, and Inclining 26 degrees. 34 min.
and a South Declining Westward 72 degrees, and Inclining as the other; all
which is done (and may easily be apprehended by any person) as is discovered in
the 4th Problem of this Book for Upright declining Plains.

Thus have you the manner of making all manner of plain Sun-Dyals by the
Globes, not only by the Natural way, as they are Naturally represented upon the
Globe; but by an Artificial way also, by referring them to New Latitudes, in
which they shall become Horizontal Dyals, or at least Upright Decliners. It
rests now that I should say something concerning the inserting of Tropicks,
Parallels, Italian, Babylonish, and Jewish Hours, as also Almicanters,
Azimuths, and such other Spherical Lines and Arches as are oftentimes inserted
upon Dyal-Plains for the delight and curiosity of the Ingenious: but these,
with some other things concerning the Gnomonicks, I shall refer to another
Treatise by it self.

ASTROLOGICAL Problems.
INTRODVCTION.
Astrology consists principally of two parts, viz. the one Mathematical, as
is the Astronomical part; the other Judiciary, as is the Astrological part.

The Mathematical part teaches how in a Scheme or Figure (as they call it) to
represent the Face of the Heavens in Plano, for any hour of the day or night,
at all times of the year, and in all parts of the world.

The Astrological part teaches how (from the sight of the said position of the
Scheme or Figure of the Heavens at the time of its erection) to give a
determinate Judgment of what was demanded upon that Erection of the Scheme or
Figure: as of Annual Revolutions, Elections, the Nativity of a Person.

The principal Authors that have given their Opinions concerning the dividing
of the Heavens into 12 Mansions or Houses, are, 1 Ptolomy, 2 Alcabitius, 3
Campanus, and 4 Regiomontanus: Which last way, is now generally received and
practiced among the Astrologers of these times, and by them termed the Rational
way of Regiomontanus.

Now, because (as I said before) that the Erection of a Figure of the Heavens
is the Mathematical or Astronomical part of Astrology, I shall therefore show
how by the Globes to Erect a Figure of the Heavens according to the various
ways of the Four forementioned Authors, and that for the same Latitude and Time.

PROB. I. How to Erect a Figure of the Heavens in the Latitude of London 51
degrees. 30 min. N. for the 10th day of March, at 49 min. after 9 in the Forenoon;
at which time the Sun enters into the first scruple of Aries this Year 1675.
I. According to the (esteemed) Rational way of Regiomontanus.
Houses or Mansions, by 12 Semicircle of Position; for which purpose, to some
Globes, there is made one of Brass, which is fixed in the Intersections of the
Meridian and Horizon, by the Elevation or Depression whereof the Heavens may be
divided into parts or houses through each degree of the Ecliptic.

Houses or Mansions of Heaven, Four are called Cardinal, as (1.) the Horoscope,
or Ascendent, or Cuspis of the First House. (2.) The Medium Coeli, or Angle of
the South, or Cuspis of the Tenth House. (3.) The Descendent, or Angle of the
West, or the Cuspis of the Seventh House. (4.) The Imum Coeli, or the Angle of
the North, or the Cuspis of the Fourth house.

Regiomontanus divides the Heavens into XII Houses according to his way, by the
Circle of Positions passing through every 30th degree of the Equinoctial, and
cutting the Ecliptic at several points, which are the Cuspises of the several
Houses: -- So that when the Globe is set to the Latitude, and the Hour-wheel
Rectified and brought to the Given hour, you have the Cuspises of the Four
Cardinal houses given: For, The degree of the Ecliptic cut by the East Side of
the Horizon, South-part of the Meridian, West Side of the Horizon, North-part
of the Meridian,


Gives the Cuspis of the First Tenth Seventh Fourth
House.

The Cuspises of the other 8 Houses are found by the motion of the Circle of
Position, as shall be showed by and by.

Houses are denominated by 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. to 12, from the Ascendent downwards
to the Imum Coeli, up again to the Descendant, and again by Medium Coeli down
to the Ascendant. As in the following Scheme.

A Figure of the XII HOUSES.
an illustration of the 12 astrological houses

Let this suffice for Difinition, and now we will come to the Practice by the
Globes.

March, find (by the first Astronomical Problem) the Suns place in the
Ecliptic at noon, which you shall find to be in 0 degrees. 5 min. of Aries.

Secondly, Set the Globe to the Latitude 51 degrees. 30 min.

Thirdly, Bring the Suns place at Noon (0 degrees. 5 min. of Aries) to the Meridian.

Fourthly, Turn the Globe about till the Hour-Index point to the hour given,
viz. to 49 min. after 9 in the Morning.

Lastly, The Globe being in this Position, fix it.

The Globe being fixed in this Position, you shall find that the
East-semicircle of the Horizon does cut the Ecliptic in 0 degrees. 29 min. of
Cancer, which is the Sign then Ascending, and must be placed upon the Cuspis
of the first House.

Then cast your eye upon the Intersection of the South-part of the Meridian and
the Ecliptic, and there you shall find the Ecliptic cut by the Meridian in
25 degrees. of Aquarius, and that point of the Ecliptic is then in the Medium
Coeli, and must be set upon the Cuspis of the Tenth House.

Also you shall find that the West-semicircle of the Horizon cuts the
Ecliptic in 00 degrees. 29 min. of Capricorn; which point is then Descending, and
must be placed upon the Cuspis of the Seventh House.

Lastly, You shall find that the North-part of the Meridian does cut the
Ecliptic in the 25th degrees. of Leo, which point is then upon the Imum Coeli, and
must be placed upon the Cuspis of the Fourth House.

Thus have you found the Points of the Ecliptic which do occupy the Cuspises
of the Four Cardinal Houses: Now for the other Eight Houses.

Let the Globe still rest in its former Position, and then,

First, Bring the Circle of Position to its place on the East Side of the
Horizon; and being there fixed, raise it upwards toward the Meridian, till 30
degrees. of the Equinoctial be intercepted between the Horizon and the Circle of
Position; and then you shall find that the Circle of Position will intersect
the Ecliptic in 20 degrees. of Taurus; which degrees must be set upon the Cuspis
of the Twelfth House.

Secondly, Move the Circle of Position yet ^igher toward the Meridian, till 30
degrees. more of the Equinoctial be intercepted between it and the Horizon, (in all
60 degrees.) and when it so does, you shall find the Circle of Position will cut
the Ecliptic in 36 degrees. of Pisces; which point must be set upon the Cuspis of
the Eleventh House.

The Meridian gives the Cuspis of the Tenth House in 25 degrees. of Aquarius, as
before.

Thirdly, Move the Semicircle of Position from the East Side of the Horizon to
the West Side, and move it downwards from the Meridian, till 30 degrees. of the
Equinoctial be intercepted between the Meridian and Circle of Position, and
then you shall find that the Circle of Position will intersect the Ecliptic
in 7 degrees. of Aquarius; which point must be set upon the Cuspis of the Ninth
House.

Fourthly, Move the Circle of Position yet lower by 30 degrees. i. e. 60 degrees. from
the Meridian downwards, and then you shall find the Position-Circle to cut the
Ecliptic in 21 degrees. of Capricorn; which point must be set upon the Cuspis of
the Eighth House.

The Descendant or Cuspis of the Seventh House is the Intersection of the
West Side of the Horizon and Ecliptic, which is in 00 degrees 29 min. of
Capricorn, as before.

And thus have you found the Cuspises of the Four Houses above the Horizon,
beside the Ascendant and the Medium Coeli; viz. of the 12, 11 9 and 8 houses.
Now the Cuspises of the Four other Houses under the Earth have the same degrees
of the opposite Signs upon them: For, 20 degrees. of Taurus being upon the Cuspis
of the 12 house 26 degrees. of Pisces 11 7 degrees. of Aquarius 9 21 degrees. of Capricorn 8

20 degrees. of Scorpio will be on the Cusp of the 6 house. 26 degrees. of Virgo 5 7
degrees. of Leo 3 21 degrees. of Leo 2

For the Six Signs Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, are opposite to
Libra, Scorpio, Sagitt. Capric. Aquar. Pisces.

And this is the manner how (by the Globe) to erect a Figure according to the
(reputed) Rational way of Regiomontanus.

Now if you would insert the places of the Planets into your Figure, (for it is
them that the Astrologer principally gives Judgment by) your best way will be
to have recourse to some good Ephemeris (if you cannot Calculate them from
Astronomical Tables) and so may you find the places of the several Planets at
the time for which this Figure was Erected (viz. March 10. 1675. 49 min. after
9 in the forenoon) to be as follows. Viz.

degrees. Saturn is in 28 Aries. Jupiter 19 Sagitarius. Mars 17 Gemini. Sol 00
Aries. Venus 18 Aquarius. Mercury 15 Aries. Luna 24 Capricorn. Dragons Tail 17
Capricorn. Dragons Head 17 Cancer.

Having thus obtained the places of the Planets either by Calculation, by
Ephemerides, or Instrument, you may place them in their Correspondent places in
your Figure, as is here done, and so is your Figure ready to give your
Judgment upon.

Lat. N. 51 d. 30 m. A Figure of Heaven at the Sun's entrance into, March 10.
49 min. after 9 in the Forenoon 1675, according to REGIOMONTANUS.
an illustration of the heavens at the sun's entrance into Aries according to
Regiomontanus

II. To Erect a Figure of the Heavens for the forementioned time, Anno 1675,
March 10 day at 49 min. past 9 in the Morning. According to Campanus.
Cuspises of the Four Cardinal Houses according to Campanus, viz. the
Ascendent, Mid-heaven, Descendent, and Imum Coeli, are the same as they were
according to Regiomontanus: But, as Regiomontanus divided the Houses by the
Circle of Positions passing through each 30th degree of the Equinoctial, and
intersecting the Ecliptic in the Cuspises of the several Houses; Campanus
divides the 12 Houses of Heaven by the Position-Circles passing through each
30th degree of the prime Vertical Circle, (or Azimuth of East and West) and so
intersecting the Ecliptic in the Cuspises of the several Houses. So that to
Erect a Figure according to Campanus way, you must do as follows. Viz.

Globe to the Latitude, bring the Suns place at noon for the day given to the
Meridian, and the Hour-index to 12, and the Circle of Position to the East Side
of the Horizon; then turn the Globe about till the Index point at the given
hour, and then fix the Globe. Thus far as in the former way of Regiomontanus;
and the Cuspises of the First, Fourth, Seventh, and Tenth Houses will be the
same as in his way. But now to proceed according to Campanus.

The Globe seated and fixed in this Position, bring the Quadrant of Altitude to
the Zenith, and there fix it; and bring the lower part of the Quadrant of
Altitude to the East-point of the Horizon, and there keeping of it fixed:

1. Elevate the Circle of Position, till it cut 30 degrees. of the Quadrant of
Altitude, and then see what degrees of the Ecliptic are cut by the
Position-Circle, which you shall find to be 22 degrees. of Aries; which point must
be set upon the Cuspis of the Twelfth House.

2. Move the Circle of Position yet 30 degrees. higher upon the Quadrant of
Altitude, namely, to 60 degrees. from the Horizon, and then see what degree of the
Ecliptic is cut thereby, and you shall find that the Position-circle cuts the
Ecliptic in 12 degrees. of Pisces, which must be set upon the Cuspis of the
Eleventh House.

The Meridian cuts the Ecliptic in 25 degrees. of Aquarius, which is the Cuspis of
the Tenth House, or Mid-heaven, as before.

3. Remove the Circle of Position, and also the Quadrant of Altitude, from the
East to the West Side of the Horizon, and there move him from the Meridian
downwards, till 30 degrees. of the Quadrant of Altitude be intercepted between the
Zenith and the Circle of Position, and then see where the Position-circle cuts
the Ecliptic, which will be in 12 degrees. of Aquarius; and those degrees must be
set upon the Cuspis of the Ninth House.

4. Let down the Circle of Position 30 degrees. more upon the Quadrant of Altitude,
that is, 60 degrees. distant from the Zenith, and then look what degrees of the
Ecliptic are cut by the Position-Circle, which you will find to be 28 degrees. of
Capricorn; which degrees must be set upon the Cuspis of the Eighth House.

The Cuspis of the Seventh House is 00 degrees. 29 min. of Capricorn, being the
Intersection of the West Side of the Horizon with the Ecliptic, as before.

And by this Artifice you have obtained the degrees belonging to the 1, 12, 11,
10, 9, and 8 houses above the Horizon, according to the way prescribed by
Campanus: Now the other Six Houses under the Horizon, viz. the 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
and 7, are easily found, they being the opposite Points of the Ecliptic to the
Six above the Horizon. So, d. m The Cuspis of the 1 house being Cancer 0 29 12
Aries 22 0 11 Pisces 12 0 10 Aquarius 25 0 9 Aquarius 12 0 8 Capricorn 28 0 The
Cuspis of the 7 house will be Capricorn 0 29 6 Libra 20 0 5 Virgo 12 0 4 Leo 25
0 3 Leo 12 0 2 Cancer 28 0

And thus have you the Cuspises of the several Houses according to the way
prescribed by Campanus; which Figure having the Planets placed therein, will
stand as in the following Scheme.

Lat. N. 51 d. 30 min. A Figure of Heaven at the Suns entrance into Aries,
March the 10th 1675. at 49 min. after 9 in the Forenoon, according to CAMPANUS.
an illustration of the heavens at the sun's entrance into Aries according to
Campanus

III. To Erect a Figure of Heaven for the forementioned time, viz. March 10.
1675, at 49 min. after 9 in the Forenoon. According to Alcabitius.
Definition.] ALcabitius would have the XII Houses of Heaven to be divided by
Domifying Circles, or Circles of Position drawn from the Poles of the World
through every 30th degrees. of the Equator, beginning at the point of the Ecliptic
Ascending; and so counting 30 degrees. upon the Equinoctial from thence, shall be
the Cuspises of the several Houses. -- Wherefore, to Erect a Figure according
to this mode, do as follows.

Rectify the Globe to the Latitude, bring the Suns place at noon to the
Meridian, the Index of the Hour-wheel to 12 at noon, and turn the Globe about
to the hour given, and then fix it; so shall the Ascendent be the same as in
the two former ways, viz. 00 degrees. 29 min. of Cancer.

Then look what Meridian passes through the Ascendent, and count 30 degrees. more
upon the Equinoctial; and that Meridian where it passes through the Ecliptic
shall be the Cuspis of the Twelfth House, and 30 degrees. forwarder that Meridian
shall cut the Ecliptic in the Cuspis of the Eleventh House, and so onward till
you come to the Cuspis o^ the Descendent. And thus,

If from that Meridian which passes through 00 degrees. 29 min. of the Ecliptic
you count 30 degrees. more upon the Equinoctial, you shall find that d. m. The
First Meridian of 30 degrees. distant from the Ascendent, will cut the Ecliptic in
0 29 Cancer, Second 2 29 Gemini, Third 2 29 Taurus, Fourth 0 29 Aries, Fifth 28
29 Aquarius, Sixth 28 29 Capricorn, Which are the Cusps of the 1 houses. 12 11
10 9 8

And the opposite Signs and degrees of the Ecliptic shall give the Cuspises
of the Six other under the Earth; namely, of the 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, and 2. And thus
your Figure being erected, and the Planets placed therein, you will find it to
be as in the following Scheme.

Lat. N. 51 d. 30 m. A Figure of Heaven at the Suns entrance into Aries, March
the 10th 1675. at 49 min. after 9 in the Forenoon, according to ALCABITIUS.
an illustration of the heavens at the sun's entrance into Aries according to
Alcabitius

IV. To Erect a Figure for the forementioned time, viz. March 10. 1675. at 49
min. after 9 in the Forenoon, the Sun then entering Aries in the Meridian of
London. According to the way prescribed by Ptolomy.
Definition.] PTolomy advises that the Heavens should be divided into 12
Houses or Mansions, by Domifying Circles drawn through the Poles of the
Ecliptic, and through every 30th degrees. thereof from the Ascendant downwards,
round about. -- Wherefore to Erect a Figure of the Heavens according to this
way of Ptolomy, do thus.

Globe and Hour-circle as before, and you shall have the same Ascendant, viz.
00 degrees. 29 min. of Cancer to Ascend, which is the Cuspis of the First House;
then 30 degrees. forwarder, downwards, will be 00 degrees. 29 min. of Leo, for the
Cuspis of the Second House, etc.

d. m. So the Cuspis of the 1 house will be 0 29 Cancer, 2 0 29 Leo, 3 0 29
Virgo, 4 0 29 Libra, 5 0 29 Scorpio, 6 0 29 Sagittary. And the Cuspis of the 7
house 0 29 Capricorn. 8 0 29 Aquarius. 9 0 29 Pisces. 10 0 29 Aries. 11 0 29
Taurus. 12 0 29 Gemini.

And so a Figure Erected for the forementioned time, according to this
prescription of Ptolomy, and the Planets placed therein, will appear as in the
following Scheme or Figure.

Lat. N. 51 d. 30 m. A Figure of Heaven at the Suns entrance into Aries, March
the 10th 1675. at 49 min. after 9 in the Forenoon, according to PTOLOMY.
an illustration of the heavens at the sun's entrance into Aries according to
Ptolemy

And thus have I showed you the manner of Erecting of a Figure of the Heavens
according to the Prescriptions of the four forementioned Authors, and have
placed the Planets, Dragons-head and Tail, and the place of Fortune in each of
them; by which you may see, that according to these four Varieties of
Erections, the Planets keep not in the same Houses, as by the following
Synopsis appears. For, is in accor. to Regiomon. accor. to Campan. accor. to
Alcabit. accor. to Ptolomy Saturn XI House, XII House, X House, X House.
Jupiter VI VI VI VI Mars XII XII XII XII Sol XI XI IX IX Venus IX IX VIII VIII
Mercury XI XI X X Luna VIII VII VII VII Dragons-tail VII VII VII VII
Dragons-head I I I I Part of Fort. XI XII X X

PROB. II. Having the Longitude and Latitude, or the Right Ascension and
Declination of a Star, Planet, or Comet, how to find the Place thereof upon
the Globe, and to insert it therein if need require.
WHat the Longitude, Latitude, Right Ascension and Declination of a Star or
Planet is, you have heretofore defined; and in the last Problem you are taught
how to Erect a Figure of the Heavens Four several ways. Now if you would see
(upon the Globe it self) in what House any of the Planets are, without Erecting
a Figure, you were best to make Marks, or set Characters of those Planets,
Comets, or the like, upon the Globe, before you delineate your Figure upon
Paper; which to effect, do thus.

I. By the Longitude and Latitude given.
If the Latitude of the Star, Planet, or Comet be Northward Southward
Elevate the North Pole South-pole
of the Globe to 66 d. 30 m.

then will the Pole of the Ecliptic be in the Zenith, and the Ecliptic circle
will lie in the very Plain of the Horizon; in which Position of the Globe,
screw the Quadrant of Altitude in the Zenith, over the Pole of the Ecliptic.
-- This done, bring the point of Longitude of the Planet in the Ecliptic to
the Quadrant of Altitude, and count the Latitude of the Planet upon the
Quadrant, and under the degree of Latitude shall be the point upon the Globe in
which the Planet or Star in the Heavens is.

And so the Longitude of the Seven Planets being as it is expressed in the
following Table, such Longitude and Latitude they had at the time of the
Erection of the former Figure, March 10. 1675, at 49 min. after 9 in the
Forenoon. Now, if you find their respective Points upon the Globe (as I have
now showed you how to do) you may then, not only see in what House each of them
shall be, but also what Fixed Stars are there, and what Fixed Stars are in the
other Houses also.

The Longitude of Saturn 27.49, And the Latitude 2.17 M.A. Jupiter 18.55, 0.38
S. D. Mars 17.24, 1.48 S. A. Sol 00.00, 0.00. Venus 17.56, 3.44 S. D. Mercury
15.15, 1.07 S. A. Luna 24 47, 0.35 S. D.

II. By the Right Ascension and Declination given.
Suppose a Star, Planet, or Comet to have 147 degrees. 43 min. of Right Ascension,
and 33 degrees. 33 min. of North Declination, as the Star Regulus, or the Lions
Heart has, and you would find its place upon the Globe;

Count 147 degrees. 43 min. the Stars Right Ascension upon the Equinoctial from the
beginning of Aries, and bring that point of the Equinoctial to the General
Meridian; and keeping the Globe there, count 33 degrees. 33 min. the Stars
Declination upon the Meridian upwards, (because the Stars Declination is
Northward) and that point shall be the place of Regulus upon the Globe. And
thus may any part, or point, in the Heavens be found upon the Globe, if either
the Longitude and Latitude, or the Right Ascension and Declination of that
point be first known.

PROB. III. To know in what House, or under what Circle of Position, any Star,
Planet, or point of the Ecliptic is.
Rectify the Globe to the Latitude, the Quadrant of Altitude to the Zenith,
the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic to the Meridian, and the Hour-circle to
12; then turn the Globe about to the hour given, and bring the Quadrant of
Altitude to the East or West points of the Horizon, and there fix the Globe:
Then move the Circle of Position upwards, till it touch the Star, Planet, or
other Points of the Ecliptic, which you desire to know the Circle of Position
of, then shall the Position-circle cross the Quadrant of Altitude in the number
of that Circle of Position in which that Star, Planet, or other Point of the
Ecliptic is.

Thus, If at the time of the Erection of the former Figure it were required to
know in what Circle of Position (or house) the Pleiades or Seven Stars was;
Rectify the Globe as before, and bring the Position-circle to the Pleiades,
then shall the Circle of Position cut the Quadrant of Altitude in 42 degrees. and
under that Circle of Position is the Pleiades or Seven Stars at that time, and
so consequently in the XIIth House.

I might here show how to find the place of the Thing which Astrologers call
the Part of Fortune. Also how (as they call it) to Direct a Figure, and to
find out Revolutions, etc. But forasmuch as these things are not so
Mathematical as to require a Globe, or other Mathematical Instruments, either
to Demonstrate them by, or to ease the Operation; I shall refer them that have
occasion for such things, to the Arithmetical working of them by the Pen, as
most convenient, and reserve the Globes for other purposes.

PROB. IV. Of the Planetary hours, how to find the Length thereof, and what
Planet at is that Reigns any common hour of the day or night.
Planetary hour for the day, is the 12th part of the Artificial day counted
from the time of the Suns Rising to its Setting; and a Planetary hour for the
night, is the 12th part of the Artificial night counted from the time of the
Sun Setting to the time of its next Rising: So that the Planetary hours are not
of the same length all the year long, as the Common hours of 60 min. are, but
are some times of the year longer, and sometimes shorter. -- For, when the
Artificial day is above 12 hours long, (as it is all the time that the Sun is
in the Six Northern Signs) then does a Planetary hour contain more than 60
min. -- And when the Artificial day is less than 12 hours long, (as it is all
the time that the Sun is in the Six Southern Signs) then does the Planetary
hour contain less than 60 min. -- But when the Sun is in the Equinoctial, and
the Artificial day and night are equal (each containing just 12 hours) then the
Common hour and the Planetary hour are the same, either of them containing just
60 min.

Planetary hours take their denominations from the Planetary names of the days
of the week, as Sunday has for its Planetary name Sol. Monday Luna. Tuesday
Mars. Wednesday Mercury. Thursday Jupiter. Friday Venus. Saturday Saturn.

So that upon whatsoever day of the week you would know what Planetary hour it
is, the first Planetary hour of that day or night is called by the Planetary
name of that day of the week; as, if it be Monday, then Luna governs the first
Planetary hour that day and night; if Sunday, Sol; if Wednesday, Mercury, etc.

I. To find the length of a Planetary hour at any time.
have rectified the Globe to the Latitude, etc.) bring the Suns place in the
Ecliptic for that day to the East Side of the Horizon, and see what degree of
the Equinoctial is cut by the Horizon; then bring the Suns place to the
Meridian, and then again see what degree of the Equinoctial is then cut by the
Horizon: the difference of those degrees being divided by Six, because there
are 6 Planetary hours between Sunrising and our 12 at noon (which is always
the Sixth Planetary hour) and that Quotient shall be the number of minutes
contained in a Planetary hour all that day. Thus for Example, on Tuesday the 27
of July 1675, the Suns place will be found to be in 14 degrees. of Leo; bring 14
degrees. of Leo to the East-part of the Horizon, and you shall find that 115 degrees.
of the Equinoctial are (at that time) cut by the Horizon; which degrees note
down, or mark upon the Globe. -- Then bring 14 degrees. of Leo to the Meridian, and
then you shall find 226 degrees. of the Equinoctial cut by the Horizon; so that if
you take with your Compasses, or count the number of degrees of the Equinoctial
contained between 115 degrees. and 226 degrees. you shall find them to be 111 degrees. [or
if you substract 115 from 226, which is easiest, the difference will be 111
also] and so many degrees of the Equinoctial do pass the Meridian in Six
Planetary hours: Wherefore divide 111 by 6, and in the Quotient you shall find
18 degrees. 30 min. to pass the Equinoctial in One Planetary hour; and so counting
15 degrees. for 1 hour, and 1 degrees. for 4 min. of time, you shall find the length
of the Planetary hour to contain One Common hour and 14 min. more, which is one
hour and a quarter wanting one minute. -- And the length of a Planetary hour
for the night will contain only 46 min. which is less than One Common hour by a
quarter wanting one minute.

II. To find what Planetary hour of the day or night it is.
On the forementioned day, Tuesday the 27 of July 1675, Let it be required to
know what Planet rules that day at 5 of the clock in the afternoon. The length
of the Planetary hour for that day is 1 hour 14 min. Wherefore, the Globe being
Rectified, bring the Index of the Hour-circle to 5 a clock, and then count the
number of degrees which were cut by the Horizon in the last operation, and the
degrees of the Equinoctial now at the Horizon, and you shall find them to be
187 degrees. which reduced into minutes of time (by multiplying them by 4) gives
748, which 748 min. being divided by 74, the number of minutes contained in one
Planetary hour, the Quotient will be 10 hours and 8 min. showing that there are
10 Planetary hours past, since the Sunrising, and that there are 8 min. of the
Eleventh hour past also.

III. To find what Planet governs that hour of the day.
For the effecting hereof, the Globe stands you in no stead at all; wherefore
observe the Table following and its Use.

The TABLE.
Governors of the day. Sunday. Monday. Tuesday. Wednesday. Thursday. Friday.
Saturday. Governors of the night. Sol. 1 12 9 0 10 0 11 Jupiter. Venus. 2 0 10
0 11 1 12 Mars. Mercury. 3 0 11 1 12 2 0 Sol. Luna. 4 1 12 2 0 3 0 Venus.
Saturn. 5 2 0 3 0 4 1 Mercury. Jupiter. 6 3 0 4 1 5 2 Luna. Mars. 7 4 1 5 2 6 3
Saturn. Sol. 8 5 2 6 3 7 4 Jupiter. Venus. 9 6 3 7 4 8 5 Mars. Mercury. 10 7 4
8 5 9 6 Sol. Luna. 11 8 5 9 6 10 7 Venus. Saturn. 12 9 6 10 7 11 8 Mercury.
Jupiter. 0 10 7 11 8 12 9 Luna. Mars. 0 11 8 12 9 0 10 Saturn.

The use of the aforesaid Table.
Having by former Rule found what Planetary hour it is, if you would know what
Planet it is that Reigns that hour, in the head of this Table seek the day of
the week (in this Example Tuesday) and the Planetary hour of the day (in this
Example 10 hours in the Forenoon:) in the same Column, and right against it in
the first Column on the left hand, you shall find Venus, which shows that at 5
of the clock in the afternoon that day Venus governs, and has governed 8
min. of her hour.

Also in the same Table you shall find against 10 under Tuesday in the last
Column toward the right hand, the word Mars, showing that Mars governs the
10th Planetary hour for the night, and has governed 8 min. of his hour.

POSTSCRIPT.
FOrasmuch as the two first Sections of the foregoing Problem are for the more
part performed by Arithmetical computation, and not Globular Operation; I have
(for that it may be satisfactory to some persons) added a Table, whereby, if
you know but at what hour the Sun rises at any time of the year, you may know
readily the length of the Planetary hour, and also at any Common hour of the
day or night, what Planetary hour it is, and also what Planet rules that hour.

A TABLE, Showing the length of The PLANETARY HOUR For any hour of the Day or
Night At any time of the Year, etc.
In the Forenoon.
Ris. I II III IV V VI H. M. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. H. 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0
10 0 11 0 12 5 47 6 50 7 52 8 54 9 56 10 58 12 5 35 6 39 7 43 8 48 9 52 10 56
12 5 22 6 28 7 35 8 41 9 47 10 54 12 5 10 6 18 7 27 8 35 9 43 10 52 12 4 57 6 8
7 18 8 29 9 39 10 50 12 4 45 5 58 7 10 8 23 9 35 10 48 12 4 34 5 48 7 3 8 17 9
31 10 46 12 4 23 5 39 6 55 8 12 9 28 10 44 12 4 12 5 30 6 48 9 6 9 24 10 43 12
4 2 5 23 6 42 8 2 9 21 10 40 12 3 55 5 16 6 37 7 58 9 18 10 39 12 3 48 5 10 6
32 7 54 9 16 10 38 12 3 43 5 6 6 29 7 52 9 14 10 37 12 3 40 5 3 6 27 7 50 9 13
10 36 12 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 0 11 0 12 6 13 7 11 8 9 9 7 10 4 11 2 12 6 25 7 21
8 17 9 13 10 8 11 4 12 6 38 7 30 8 24 9 19 10 13 11 6 12 6 50 7 42 8 23 9 25 10
17 11 8 12 7 3 7 53 8 42 9 32 10 20 11 10 12 7 15 8 3 8 50 9 38 10 25 11 12 12
7 26 8 12 8 57 9 43 10 29 11 14 12 7 37 8 21 9 5 9 49 10 34 11 16 12 7 48 8 30
9 12 9 54 10 36 11 18 12 7 57 8 38 9 18 9 59 10 39 11 20 12 8 5 8 44 9 23 10 4
10 41 11 21 12 8 12 8 50 9 28 10 6 10 45 11 22 12 8 17 8 54 9 31 10 9 10 46 11
23 12 8 20 8 58 9 34 10 10 10 46 11 24 12

In the Afternoon.
Ris. VII VIII IX X XI XII. H. M. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. 6 0 1 0 2
0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 5 47 1 2 2 4 3 6 4 8 5 10 6 13 5 35 1 4 2 8 3 13 4 17 5 21 6
25 5 22 1 6 2 13 3 19 4 25 5 32 6 38 5 10 1 8 2 17 3 25 4 33 5 42 6 50 4 57 1
11 2 21 3 32 4 42 5 43 7 3 4 45 1 13 2 25 3 38 4 50 6 6 7 15 4 34 1 14 2 29 3
43 4 57 6 12 7 26 4 23 1 16 2 32 3 49 5 5 6 21 7 37 4 12 1 18 2 36 3 44 5 12 6
31 7 48 4 2 1 20 2 39 3 59 5 18 6 38 7 57 3 55 1 21 2 42 4 3 5 23 6 44 8 5 3 48
1 22 2 44 4 6 5 28 6 50 8 12 3 43 1 23 2 46 4 9 5 31 6 54 8 17 3 40 1 24 2 47 4
10 5 33 6 57 8 20 6 0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 6 13 1 58 2 56 2 54 3 51 4 49 5
47 6 25 1 56 2 50 2 48 3 43 4 39 5 35 6 38 1 54 2 47 2 41 3 35 4 28 5 21 6 50 1
52 2 43 2 34 3 37 4 18 5 10 7 3 0 50 1 39 2 29 3 18 4 8 4 57 7 15 0 48 1 35 2
23 3 10 3 58 4 45 7 26 0 46 1 31 2 17 3 3 3 48 4 38 7 37 0 44 1 28 2 12 2 55 3
39 4 21 7 48 0 43 1 24 2 6 2 48 3 30 4 13 7 57 0 41 1 21 2 2 2 42 3 23 4 3 8 5
0 39 1 18 1 57 3 6 3 15 3 55 8 12 0 38 1 16 1 54 3 2 3 10 3 48 8 17 0 37 1 14 1
51 2 8 3 5 3 43 8 20 0 36 1 13 1 49 2 27 3 3 3 40

Before Midnight.
Ris. I II III IV V VI H. M. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. H. 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0
10 0 11 0 12 5 47 7 11 8 9 9 7 10 4 11 2 12 5 35 7 21 8 17 9 13 10 8 11 4 12 5
22 7 30 8 25 9 19 10 13 11 6 12 5 10 7 42 8 33 9 25 10 17 11 8 12 4 57 7 53 8
42 9 32 10 21 11 10 12 4 45 8 3 8 50 9 38 10 25 11 12 12 4 34 8 12 8 57 9 43 10
29 11 14 12 4 23 8 21 9 5 9 49 10 32 11 16 12 4 12 8 30 9 12 9 54 10 36 11 18
12 4 2 8 38 9 18 9 59 10 39 11 20 12 3 55 8 44 9 23 10 2 10 41 11 21 12 3 48 8
50 9 28 10 6 10 44 11 22 12 3 43 8 54 9 31 10 9 10 45 11 23 12 3 40 8 57 9 33
10 10 10 47 11 23 12 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 0 11 0 12 6 13 6 47 7 51 8 54 9 56 10
58 12 6 25 6 39 7 43 8 48 9 52 10 56 12 6 38 6 28 7 35 8 41 9 47 10 54 12 6 50
6 18 7 27 8 35 9 43 10 52 12 7 3 6 8 7 18 8 29 9 39 10 50 12 7 15 5 58 7 10 8
23 9 35 10 48 12 7 26 5 48 7 3 8 17 9 31 10 46 12 7 37 5 39 6 55 8 12 9 28 10
44 12 7 48 5 30 6 48 8 6 9 24 10 42 12 7 57 5 23 6 42 8 2 9 21 10 41 12 8 5 5
16 6 37 7 58 9 18 10 39 12 8 12 5 10 6 32 7 54 9 16 10 38 12 8 17 5 6 6 29 7 52
9 14 10 37 12 8 20 5 3 6 27 7 50 9 13 10 36 12

After Midnight.
Ris. VII VIII IX X XI XII. H. M. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. 6 0 1 0 2
0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 5 47 1 58 1 56 2 54 3 51 4 41 5 47 5 35 1 56 1 52 2 48 3 43 4
39 5 35 5 22 1 54 1 47 2 41 3 35 4 28 5 22 5 10 1 52 1 43 2 35 3 27 4 18 5 10 4
57 0 50 1 39 2 29 3 18 4 8 4 57 4 45 0 48 1 35 2 23 3 10 3 58 4 45 4 34 0 46 1
31 2 17 3 3 3 48 4 34 4 23 0 44 1 28 2 12 2 55 3 39 4 23 4 12 0 42 1 24 2 6 2
48 3 30 4 13 4 2 0 41 1 21 2 2 2 41 3 23 4 3 3 55 0 39 1 18 1 57 2 36 3 15 3 55
3 48 0 38 1 16 1 54 2 32 3 10 3 48 3 43 0 37 1 15 1 51 2 28 3 5 3 43 3 40 0 37
1 14 1 50 2 27 3 3 3 40 6 0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 6 13 1 2 2 4 3 7 4 9 5 11 6
13 6 25 1 4 2 8 3 13 4 17 5 21 6 25 6 38 1 6 2 13 3 19 4 25 5 32 6 38 6 50 1 8
2 17 3 25 4 33 5 42 6 50 7 3 1 11 2 21 3 32 4 43 5 53 7 3 7 15 1 13 2 25 3 38 4
50 6 3 7 15 7 26 1 14 2 29 3 44 4 57 6 12 7 26 7 37 1 16 2 32 3 49 5 5 6 21 7
37 7 48 1 18 2 36 3 54 5 12 6 30 7 48 7 57 1 20 2 39 3 59 5 18 6 38 7 57 8 5 1
21 2 42 4 2 5 23 6 44 8 5 8 12 1 22 2 44 4 6 5 28 6 50 8 12 8 17 1 23 2 46 4 9
5 31 6 54 8 17 8 20 1 24 2 47 4 10 5 33 6 57 8 20

The Table described.
EAch Page of the Table consists of 7 Columns: in the first Column of each
Page, toward the left hand, is placed the time of the Suns Rising, and in the
Six subsequent Columns are placed the beginnings and continuances of of the
Planetary hours. -- The first of the four Pages contain the Six Planetary hours
for the Day, viz. I, II, III, IV, V, and VI, from Sunrising to Noon. -- The
second Page contains the other Six Planetary hours for the Day, viz. VII, VIII,
IX, X, XI, and XII, from Noon to Sun setting. -- The third Page contains the
first Six Planetary hours for the Night, viz. the I, II, III, IV, V, and VI,
from Sunsetting till Midnight. -- And the fourth Page contains the other Six
Planetary hours for the Night, viz. the VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, and XII, from
Midnight till Sunrising the next Morning. Thus much for the Description. Now
follows

The Use of the Table.
LEt it be required to find what Planet Rules upon Friday the 27 of March, at
10 of the clock in the Forenoon.

First, You must find the time of the Suns Rising for the day proposed, by the
Astronomical Problem for that purpose; which you shall find to be at 22 min.
after 5 in the Morning.

Secondly, Find this 5 hours and 22 min. in the first Column toward the left
hand, and look along that line toward the right hand, and you shall find
under the first Planetary hour 6 hou. 28 min. which is the time of the first
Planetary hour; under the second, 7 hou. 35 min. for the third 8 hou. 41 min.
etc. Now, because 10 of the clock is the time that I require the Planetary
hour, I continue looking along that line, till I find 10 of the clock, and I
find 10 hou. 54 min. to stand under the fifth Planetary hour; which shows that
it is the fifth Planetary hour, and that that hour did begin at 47 min. after 9
of the clock, and will continue till 54 min. after 10 of the clock.

Now to know what Planet it is that Rules at that time, repair to the
foregoing Table, and find Friday in the head thereof, and the Common hour of
the day given (in our Example 10.) under Friday; and right against 10 toward
the left hand, you shall find Luna, which shows that Luna Rules, and will
continue Ruling till 54 min. after 10 of the clock.

The like is to be understood of all the rest: and if it be the Night-hour, in
the little Table you must find the name of the Ruling Planet on the right hand
of the Table.

Note, That if you cannot find the very exact time of Sunrising in the Table,
you must make use of that which is nearest to it, which will be sufficient for
this purpose.

GEOGRAPHY AND NAVIGATION Made easy: OR, A plain Description and Use of the
Terrestrial GLOBE.
INTRODVCTION.
THe Terrestrial or Earthly Globe is an artificial Representation of the Earth
and Water under that form and figure of roundness which they are known to have
describing the Scituations, and measuring the distances of all their parts.

The Land drawn out upon a Globe, is bounded and distinguished from the Water
with an irregular line which runs turning and winding into Creeks and Angles
like as the shore which it represents: that side which is left uncoloured, is
the limits of the water; the other side of the Line which encircles the
Colors, is the bounds of the Land, which is either Continent or Island.

A Continent is a great quantity of Land not environed or separated by the Sea,
in which many Kingdoms and Countries are contained; as Europe, Asia, etc. An
Island is a part of the Earth clasped in the embraces of the Sea, and hoopt as
it were with a watery Girdle, as Great Britain and Ireland. These again are
subdivided into Peninsula's, Isthmus's, Promontories, Capes, etc. A Peninsula
or Pene-Insula is a part of Land which being almost environed and encompassed
round with water, is joined to the firm Land by some little Isthmus, as Africa
is joined to Asia, or Morea to Greece. An Isthmus is a little narrow neck of
Land betwixt two Seas, joining a Peninsula to the Continent; as that of Darien
in America, or Corinth in Greece. A Promontorie is Mons in Mari prominens, a
high Hill or Mountain lying out as an Elbow of land into the Sea, the utmost
end of which is called a Cape; as the Cape of Good Hope, and Cape Verde.

The Land drawn upon the Superficies of the Terrestrial Globe, is divided in
four principal Parts or Quarters, viz. Europe, Asia, Africa, and America.

Of EUROPE.
Europe as it is now divided, contains these Kingdoms or States. Cities.
Rivers. England. London, York, Oxford, Cambridge, Canterbury, Bristow. Thames,
Savern. Humber, Trent. Scotland. Edenbrugh, St. Andrews. Tweed, Froth, Tay.
Ireland. Dublin, Waterford, Galloway, Limerick. Shannon Shure. Blackwater,
Barrow France. Paris, Lions, Orleans, Bordeaux, Toulouse, Aix. Seine, Loire.
Garone, Rosne. Spain. Madrid, Siville, Toledo, Saragosse. Ebre, Gaudalquivir.
Gaudiana, Douro. Portugal. Lisbon, Braganza. Tagus. Belgia, or the 17
Provinces. Amsterdam, the Hague, Antwerp, Brussels. Meuse, Isel, Lis, Eschant.
Italy. Rome, Florence, Venice, Naples, Genua, Milan. Po. Arhe. Tiber. Savoy.
Chambery, Turin. Doire, Lisire. The Swisses. Geneve, Basel, Zurich. Rus, Aar.
Denmark. Copenhagne, Sleswick. Bergen, Christian. Sley, Eyder. Sweden.
Stockholm, Gottenburg, Upsal, Calmer. Wenar, Veter. Poland. Cracovia, Danzick,
Vilna, Warzovia. Duna, Neimen, Vistula, Neiper. Neister, Bog. The Empire of
Germany. Vienna, N^r^mberg, Hambrough, Prague, Collen, Heidelburg. Danube,
Elbe. Rhine, Veser. Oder. Russia. Moscow, Novogrodt, Archangel, Smolensko.
Wolga, Dwina. Tanais, Boristenes. Turkey in Europe. Constantinople, Belgrade,
Adrianople, Saloniche. Danube, Dravus. Savus, Tebiscus. Petite Tertaria. Cers
and Cassa. Islands. Great Britain, Ireland, Wight, Man, Zeland, Candia,
Sicilly, Sardinia, the Hebrides, Orcades, etc.

Of ASIA.
Asia as it is now divided, contains these Empires or Countries. Cities.
Rivers. The Turkish Empire. Aleppo, Smyrna. Damascus, Jerusalem, Bagdat, Mosul.
Tigris. Euphrates. Georgia. Fazo, Testis. Fazis, Kur. The Arabia's. Mecca,
Medina, Anna, Mocha. Chaiber, Nageran. The Persian Empire. Ispahan, Casbin,
Tauris, Suras, Ferrabat, Herat. Teus, Pulimalon, Ilment, Brandemer. The Moguls
Empire. Agra, Lahor, Delli, Amadabat, Cambaja, Surrat. Indus, Ganges, Jemini,
Guenga. India within Ganges. Goa, Calicut, Cochin, Negapatan, Narsinga,
Golconda, Mazulpatan. Ganges. India without Ganges. Pegue, Sian, Mallaca,
Cambodia. Ganges, Caor, Ava, Martaban. Tartaria. Astracan, Sarmachand, Cascar,
Balch, Tanchut. Oxas, Chesel, Obey. China. Pekin, Canton, Nanking, Hancheu.
Croceus, Ta, Kiang. Japan. Meaco, Jedo, Firando, Nangasacque. Islands. The
Maldives, Ceylon, Sumatra, Java, Borneo, Celebes, the Philippines, and the
Molucces.

Of AFRICA.
Africa as it is now divided, contains these Parts or Countries. Cities or
principal places. Rivers. Barbary. Fez, Morocco, Salle, Tanger, Algier, Tunis.
Suba, Tenlis, Sus, Omirabib. Egypt. Caire, Alexandre, Rossette, Damiete. Nilus.
Biledulgerid. Segelmess, Taradant, Biledulgerid, Dara. Ghir. The Deserts of
Sarra. Zanbaga, Zuenziga, Terga, Lempta, Berdoa. Ghir. The Land of the Blacks.
Tombolu, Agades, Borno, Zanfara. Niger, Senega, Gambea, Grande. Kingdom of
Nubie. Nubie, Darga, Dancala, Gorham. Nilus, Ghir. Guinee. St. George de la
Mine, Cape Cors, Settera, Benin. Sweiro, Manca, Calabar, Benin. Aethiopia,
Amara, Caxumo, Cafales, Arquico. Nilus. Conge. St. Salvador. Zaire, Coanza,
Coango. Caffares. Cefala, Mono, Motapa, Cape of Good Hope. Spirito Sancto, Rio
d'Infanta. Zanguebar. Mosambique, Quiloa, Mombaza, Melinde, Adel. Islands. The
Maderas, Canaries, Cape Verde, St. Helena, Madagascar, Babelmandel, Zocotora,
Malta, etc.

Of AMERICA.
America as it is now divided, contains these Parts or Countries. Cities or
principal places. Rivers. The Coast of the N.W. passage. Carlton Island, Fort
Charles. Prince Ruperts Riv. Canada, or Nova Fraacia. Quebeck, Breast, Hurones,
Port Royal. Canada. New Engl. and New York. Boston, Plymouth, New York,
Milford. Hudsons, Conecte. Marimack, paccat. Maryland and Virginia. St. Mary's,
James Town. ^ames, York, Patomeck, Rapahanok. Carolina and Florida. Charles
Town, St. Matthew. Albemarle, Ashly, Clarendon, Cooper. New Mexico. New Mexico.
B. del Norto. New Spain. Mexico, Valadolid, St. Jago, Gaudalajara. Panuco,
Baran^a, Qacatulca, Sal. Castilladel, or Panama, Porto Bello, Cartagena, St.
Martha. St. Martha, St. Magdalen. Guiana. Manoa, St Thome. Oronoque Surinam,
Wiapoca. Perve. Lima, Casco, Potosi, La plata. Maragnon, Patinie, Chili. St.
Jago, Imperiai, Baldivia. Copayapo. The Country o'^r Amazons. Homagus,
Yorimans, Topinambes, Coropa. Topacalma, Amazons. Paraguay. Buenos Airs,
Cuidat, Real, St. Jago, Estero. Rio de plata, Perana. Brasil. Pairaba,
Permambuco, Baha, Spirito Sancto. Grande S. Francisc. Ilheos, Janiero. Islands.
Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica, New Foundland, the Caribee- Islands, Long Island,
Magellan Island, etc.

And thus much shall serve for the Description of the Land upon the Terrestrial
Globe.

Of Water and its Parts.
THe Earth (as was said defore) is encompassed about with the Water, which is
either Ocean, Seas, Straits, Creeks, Lakes, or Rivers.

The Ocean is a general Collection or Rendezvous of all waters.

The Sea is a part of the Ocean, and is either Exterior, lying open to the
shore, as the British or Arabian Seas; or Interior, lying within the Land, to
which you must pass through some Strait, as the Mediterranean or Baltic Seas.

A Strait is a narrow Part or Arm of the Ocean, lying betwixt two shores, and
opening a way into the Sea, as the Straits of Gibralter, the Hellespont, etc.

A Creek is a small narrow part of the Sea that goes up but a little way into
the Land, otherwise called a Bay, a Station or Road for Ships.

A Lake is that which continually retains and keeps water in it, as the Lake
Nicurgua in America, and Zaire in Africa.

A River is a small Branch of the Sea flowing into the Land, courting the Banks
while their Arms display to embrace her silver Waves.

Of the Names of the Ocean.
FIrst of all, according to the four Quarters it had four Names; from the East
it was called the Eastern-Ocean, from the West the Western, from the North the
Northern, and from the South the Southern. But besides these more general
Names, it has other particular appellations, according to the Regions or
Countries it boundeth upon, and the Nature of the Sea: viz. as it lies extended
toward the East, it is called the Chinean Sea, from the adjacent Country of
China; so the Archipelago of St. Lazarus, from the multitude of Islands. Toward
the South, it is called Oceanus Indicus, or the Indian Sea, because upon it lies
the Indians. The Golph of Bengala, from Bengala a City in the Indies. Where it
touches the Coast of Persia, it is called Mare Perficum: so also Mare Arabicum,
from Arabia; so toward the West, is the Ethiopian Sea. Then the Atlantic
Ocean, from Atlas a Mountain or Promontory in Africa; by the Spaniards called
Mar del zur, as also Mare Pacificum; and on the other side of America is called
by them Mar del Nort. Where it touches upon Spain, it was called Oceanus
Cantabricus, now the Bay of Biscay. The Sea between England and France is
called the Chanel; between England and Ireland, the Irish Sea, by some St.
George's Chanel: between England and Holland, it is called by some the German
Ocean, by others the British Seas; Vulgo, the Narrow Seas: beyond Scotland it
is called Marc Caledonium; higher toward the North, it is called the
Hyperborean or Frozen Sea; more Eastward upon the Coast of Tartaria, the
Tartarian Sea, etc. And this shall suffice concerning the Ocean, or Exterior
Seas.

The Names of the Inland Seas.
THe Baltic Sea, of old Sinus Codanus, by some called the East-Sea, by the
Inhabitants the Belt, lying between Denmark and Sweden, the entrance whereof is
called the Sound.

Secondy, The Euxine Sea, or the Black Sea, by some Mare Caucasium, Scythicum,
Sarmaticum, Colchicum; by the Turks, Caradinizi: to which joins Meotis Palus,
now Mar de Zabacken.

The third, is the Caspian or Hircanian Sea; by the Turks, Mar de Sala; by the
Persians, the Sea of Backu; by the Moscovites, Chwalenskei Mare. The length is
from North to South, and the breadth from East to West, contrary to all the
Ancient Geographers; which is certainly discovered, not only by the exact
observation of Olearius, but also by his curious enquiries of the true
Situation of its Maritime places acccording to the Longitude and Latitude of
the Persians, as also by the Astronomical Calculations of Mr. Graves, etc.

The fourth, is the Arabian Golph, Mare Erythaeum, or Rubrum, Vulgo the
Red Sea; by others Mare Rasso, and Mar de Mecca.

The fifth, is the Persian Golph, or the Golph de Elcatife.

The sixth, is Mare Mediterraneum; by the English, the Straits; by the
Spaniards, Mar de Levant: the beginning or entrance of it is called the Straits
of Gibralter, rather Gibraltarec, olim Gaditanus. This Sea has many names, as
it touches upon several Countries; the particular account whereof I shall
refer to Geographical description of Maps, etc. The length of it is by our New
Globes not 37 degrees. of the Equinoctial from Tanger to Scanderone: by other
Globes and Maps it is more than 42 degrees. of the Equinoctial. And this shall
suffice for a Description of the Water, and its Parts.

Now that all Places, Cities, Towns, Seas, Rivers, Lakes, etc. may be readily
found out upon the Globe, all Geographers do or should place them according to
their Longitude and Latitude: the use of which in the absolute sense, is to
make out the position of any place in respect of the whole Globe, or to show
the Situation and distance of one place from and in respect of any other.

An Advertisement concerning Longitude.
To say the truth, by reason of the variety of Meridians, the Longitudes are
grown to such an uncertainty and confused pass, that it is not every man's work
to set them down. This indeed I have observed, that many Geographers, or rather
discribers of particular places, tell us that such a place is so many degrees
of Longitude; but from what Meridian, others must guess. Some particularly
profess to follow Mercator: but what are most men the wiser for this? for
Mercator 's Meridian was not always the same; sometimes through the Canary
Islands, sometimes through the Azores. Others again will tell you their
Meridian shall pass through the Azores; but whether from that of St. Michael,
or that of Corvo, is not set down; and yet 6 degrees. of difference. I shall
therefore take this course: First, set down the several Meridians observed.
Secondly, the difference of Longitude betwixt these Meridians. Lastly, which of
these I have fixed upon.

1. The Great Meridian by Ptolomy and most of the ancient and Greek Geographers
was made to pass through Junonca one of the Fortunate, now thought to be the
Canary Islands.

2. By the Arabian and Nubian Geographers through the utmost point of the
Western shore near Hercules Pillars.

3. Ortelius in his sheet- Europe makes London to lie in 28 degrees. of Longitude;
but in the Sheetmaps of France and Belgia it lies in but 21 degrees. so that his
first Meridian to me is yet unknown. The Spaniards since the Conquest of the
West Indies, contrary to all other, account their Longitude from East to West,
beginning at Toledo.

4. Our Modern Geographers, as Mercator, Cambden, Speed and others, removed it
into the Azores; some placing it at St. Michaels, others at Corvo.

5. Blaew the Dutch Geographer begins his Longitudes from Tenerif one of the
Canary Islands; but upon his Great Map, the Great Meridian passes through
Tercera-Isle, one of the Azores; which the rest of their Common Map-makers, De
Wit, Visher, etc. as well as many of our English, are bound to follow through
ignorance, transcribing as well his Errors as his Copies for the best.

6. Sanson the French Geographer, for some Reasons (best known to himself)
begins his Longitudes at Ferro one of the Canary-Islands; and therefore Blome
his Translator is bound to follow it, though possibly he cannot tell so much,
and yet the Kingdoms great pretender to Geography.

7. The English Hydrographer tells us, that with a great deal of Reason and
Consideration he placed his first Meridian at Graciosa one of the Islands of
the Azores; but it is delineated upon his Globes and Maps through Tercera,
almost 2 degrees. more Eastward: a small mistake, that another must come after him
to tell himself what Meridian he went by.

Secondly, The differences of these several Meridians I find are thus stated.

From Ptolomies Meridian to the Arabian Meridian was by Abalfeda in his
Introduction to his Geography accounted to be 10 degrees. of the Equator; Briet
says but 8 degrees.

d. m. From the Pico of Tenerife to Toledo is 15. 55 the Spanish. Meridian.
Graciosa 10.25 the mistaken Engl. Tercera 9. 0 the supposed D^tch Palma or
Ferro 2. 5 the French Corvo 13 25 Mercator or others St. Michael 8. 5

And this last is the Meridian from which the Longitudes are reckoned in the
new Terrestrial Globe, and in several Maps that are lately set forth by the
Publishers of this Book.

Geographical Problems.
PROB. I. To find the Longitude.
Definition.] LOngitude is the distance of a place from the first Meridian
reckoned in the degrees of the Equator, beginning, as was said, in this New
Terrestrial Globe, at St. Michaels Island in the Azores.

London, to the Brazen Meridian; then count how many degrees of the Equator are
contained between the first Meridian and that of London cut by the Brazen
Meridian, which you will find to be 28 degrees. which is the Longitude required.
And in this manner you shall find d. m. London to be distant from the first
Meridian by this New Globe 28 0 Jerusalem 66 30 Jedo in Japan 167 0 Rio de la
plata 32 0 Mexico 75 0 Charlton Isle 51 30 d. m. By other Globes and Maps 26 0
reckoned from the same Meridian. 73 30 178 0 21 0 86 0 65 50

PROB. II. To find the Latitude of a place.
Latitude of a place, is the distance of the Equator from the parallel of of
that place, reckoned in the degrees of the Great Meridian; and is either North
or South, according as it lies between the North or South-poles of the Equator.

Latitude, bring the mark of the place, for example, suppose London, to the
Brazen Meridian; then count the number of degrees upon the Meridian, contained
between the Equator and the place given. Thus you shall find the Latitude of
d. m. d. m. London to be 51.30 By other Globes and Maps 51.30 Labor in the
Moguls Country to be 31.30 23.30 The South-part of the Caspian Sea to be 37.0
41.0 Astracan, on the Nor. part of the Caspian Sea to be 46.0 49.0 The
North-part of China to be 42.0 52.0 Delli in India to be 28.0 21.0

PROB. III. The Longitude and Latitude of any place being known, to find the
true Situation of it, though not expressed upon the Globe.
Equator that answers to the Longitude of the place to the Meridian, and then
reckon the Latitude of the place upon the degrees of the Meridian toward
either Pole according as it is either North or South Latitude; and right under
that degree and minute upon the Meridian, is the true Situation of the place
enquired after.

PROB. IV. To find what time or hour of the Day or Night it is in any part of
the Earth.
Sun in 24 hours, the Sun enlightening but one half of it at the same time, it
comes to pass that when it is Morning in one place, it is Noon in a second,
Night in a third, and Midnight in a fourth, according to their several
Scituations in respect of East and West one from the other. This difference of
time is known by the number of degrees contained in the Equator between any two
places proposed converted into hours and minutes, reckoning 15 degrees. to an hour,
etc. but more readily by the Globe thus:

London, at 12 of the clock at Noon, you would know what a clock it is at
Mexico in the West Indies; bring London to the Meridian, and set the Index of
the Hour-circle to 12. then turn the Globe Eastward, because London is East of
Mexico, till you bring Mexico to the Meridian; then see what hour the Index
points at, for that is the hour then at Mexico. Thus you will find, h. m. when
it is 12 a clock at London, it is at Mexico 5 10 a clock before Noon. Charlton
Island 6 45 Rio de la plata 8 10 Jerusalem 2 35 a clock after Noon. Surrat 5 15
Jedo 9 18

And thus by knowing what difference of time there is between place and place
at 12 a clock, the like difference is to be understood of all other hours.

PROB. V. To find the distance of any two places upon the Globe one from
another.
Quadrant of Altitude upon both the places required; then count the number of
degrees of the Quadrant of Altitude contained between the two places: which
being found, multiply them by 60, gives the distance in English Miles. Thus you
will find d. m. d. m. The distance of London from Mexico 81.30 by our new size
of Globes. 91.30 by the great Dutch Globes and English. Jerusalem 33.30 38.0
Surrat 65.50 71.40 Jedo 85.10 92.30 Rio de la plata 100.20 106.0 Charlton
Island 46.20 54.0

If you find (as you needs must) that the proportion of Miles upon these new
Globes do very much differ from those distances set down by other Authors, you
are desired not to think much; for the Longitudes are not yet exactly agreed
on: the perfection is not one man's, nor one ages work, and must be waited for.
Where you find the places upon this Globe to agree with others, you have cause
to suspect they have lain upon the lees of time, not as yet inquired into:
where you find them to disagree, you may conclude that they have been brought
to a truer correction and amendment.

PROB. VI. To find the Position, or what Point of the Compass any two places
are Situate one from another.
Angle which is made by the meeting of the Meridian of one place, with the
Vertical Circle of another.

Pole to the Latitude of one of the places, suppose London; then bring it to
the Meridian, and it will fall out to be directly in the Zenith, for the
Elevation is always equal to the Latitude; then fasten the Quadrant of Altitude
to the Zenith, and turn it about till it fall upon the other place, suppose the
Isle of Tenerif, and the end of the Quadrant where it touches the Horizon will
show that the Isle Tenerif bears from London S S W: so also the bearing of
Barbados from the Lizard to be S W, half a point Westerly; and the opposite
point N E, half a point Easterly, the bearing of the Lizard from the Barbados.

PROB. VII. To know at any time in what place of the Earth the Sun is in their
Zenith.
This must be to such Inhabitants of the Earth only that inhabit in the Torrid
Zone between the Tropicks.

London, to the Meridian, and the Index to the hour 12; then consider the time
of the day, which suppose to be half an hour after 5 in the afternoon, the Sun
having then 10 degrees. of North-Declination: then because it is afternoon, turn
the body of the Globe Eastward, till the Index has passed 5 hours and, from
12, that will be to 7 a clock and, and there stay the Globe; then see what
place or Country is under the Meridian that cuts 10 degrees. of North Declination,
and you will find Nombre di dios upon the Isthmus of Panama in the
West Indies. But if it were required the same day at half an hour after 6 in
the Morning, then you should have turned the Globe Westward till the Index had
passed 6 hours and: and then under the Meridian, and upon the parallel of 10
degrees. North-Declination, you will find it near 4 or 5 little Islands close by
the West Side of Mallacca in the East Indies, where the Sun will be in Zenith
at that time.

Having found in what place of the Earth the Sun is in the Zenith, elevate the
Globe to the Latitude of the place either North or South; then bring that place
to the Meridian, so shall all places cut by the Horizon have the Sun in their
Horizon; those to the Westward shall have the Sunrising in their Horizon;
those to the Eastward shall have the Sunsetting. In those Countries that are
above the Horizon it is daylight, and in those but 18 degrees. below the Horizon,
it is twilight; but in those Countries further below the Horizon, it is at that
time midnight.

PROB. VIII. The difference of Longitude being known, to find what degree of
the Ecliptic culminates at any other place at any time proposed.
March the 10th at 10 of the clock before noon here at London, I would know
what degree of the Ecliptic culminates then at Jerusalem.

Globe to the Latitude of your place, viz. 51 degrees. 30 min. then bring the Suns
place for that day, viz. 0 degrees. to the Meridian, and the Index to 12. then turn
the Globe Eastward till the Index point at the given hour, viz. 10 of the
clock, and you will find the 28 degrees. of then culminating here at London. Next
turn about the Globe Westward until 33 degrees. 30 min. of the Equator be passed
through the Meridian, or till the Index of the Hour-circle be moved 2 hours 35
min. which is the difference of Longitude given, and then you will find the
Meridian cut the Ecliptic at almost 4 degrees. of: so that I say, 4 degrees. is the
point of the Ecliptic that is then culminating at Jerusalem.

PROB. IX. To find out the several Positions of the Inhabitants of the Earth,
the distinction of Shadows, the different Habitations, etc.
THe Longitude and Latitude of a place once resolved on, the Position of the
Sphere you cannot miss of; for if the place you try for have no Latitude, it
must of necessity lie under the Equator; and therefore in a Right Position: if
it have less or more Latitude, the Position is Oblique; if the place have 90
degrees. of Latitude, the Position is Parallel: the Reasons were told before, and
may evidently be discerned upon the Globe.

For the Climes and Parallels, and consequently the length of the longest day,
the foreknowledge of the Latitude leads you directly; for they who are under
the Equator, have their day always 12 hours, and their night 12 hours long. Now
as each Country declines from the Equator toward either of the Poles, so the
days vary their length in Summer, and the nights theirs in Winter: according
therefore to the different lengthening of their days, the Ancients did
distinguish the Earth into several portions or parts, which they called
Climates and Parallels: every Clime contains two Parallels; so that where the
longest days are half an hour longer than at the Equator, the first Climate
begins; and where they are increased an hour longer than at the Equator, the
second Climate begins, which by the 20th Problem you will find to be at 8 degrees.
34 min. for the first, and at 16 degrees. 43 min. where the second begins; and so
for any of the rest.

The Tropicks and Polar circles divide the Surface of the Globe into 5 parts o^
spaces, which are called Zones, whereof one is contained within the
Arctick-circle, another compassed by the Antartick-circle, and are called the
Frigid Zones; The other two lying between the Arctick-circle and Tropic of
Cancer, and between the Antarctick-circle, and the Tropic of Capricorn, are
called the Temperate Zones; and the other lying between the two Tropicks, is
called the Torrid or Mid-zone.

Knowing these, you may easily conclude upon the distinction of Shadows: for
those of the Frigid Zones are termed Periscii, because there their Shadows have
a Circular motion. Those of the Temperate Zone are called Heteroscii, because
their Meridian-shadows bend toward either Pole; toward the North to those that
dwell within the Tropic of Cancer, and the Arctick-circle; toward the South
to those that dwell within the Tropic of Capricorn and the Antarctick-circle.
The Inhabitants of the Torrid Zone were called Amphriscii, because the
Noon-shadows according to the time of the year do sometimes fall toward the
North when the Sun is in the Southern signs, and sometimes toward the South
when the Sun is in the Northern signs.

To find out the other distinction of Habitation, viz. Antaeci, Periaeci,
Antipodes.
LEt London be the place; bring it to the Meridian, where you find it to be 51
degrees. 30 min. elevated above the Equator, account so many degrees of Southern
Latitude below the Equator, and you meet with the Antaeci (if any be.) Remove
London from the Meridian 180 degrees. and you shall find your Periaeci under the
Meridian where London was before, and your Antipodes is in the place where
their Antaeci stood before.

NAUTICAL Problems. INTRODVCTION.
INTRODVCTION.
THere be four things upon which the practice of Navigation is principally
grounded, viz. 1. Longitude, 2. Latitude, 3. Course, 4. Distance.

As for the Longitude, though it may be found by the other, yet hitherto there
has not been published any general Rule true and practicable, whereby the
Longitudes of places may be immediately and ordinarily found out of themselves.

The Latitudes of places may be immediately found out by observation of Sun or
Stars, as shall be showed hereafter.

The third thing to be considered in the Art of Navigation, is the Course or
Line by which the Ship must go, which depends upon the Winds; the designation
of these, upon the certain knowledge of one principal, which considering the
Scituations of the Earth, ought to be North or South, which now is found by the
Needle touched with the Loadstone, being thereby endued with such a Magnetical
Virtue, that if left to its liberty 'twill seat it self in a situation North or
South. The North and South Wind thus assured by the motion of the Needle, the
Mariner supposes his Ship to be upon some Horizon or other, the Center whereof
is the Ship; so that crossing this North and South-line at Right Angles,
shows the East and West; so you have the 4 Cardinal Winds cross each of
these, and you have the 8 Whole Winds, another division makes 16, which again
divided, makes 32 in all: And these Lines which a Ship following the direction
of the Magnetical Needle describes upon the Surface of the Water, were by the
Portugals called Rumbs, and is still continued. These Rumbs are represented
upon the Globe by those Helispherical or Spiral Lines that you see divided into
32 parts, with a Flower-de-luce always pointing to the North.

The finding of the Rumb and Distance of a Ship in any place from whence she
has departed, is the last of the four things propounded as necessary in this
Art of Navigation; which how to perform, shall be also showed in the following
Problems: But first of the Latitude.

PROB. I. To find the Latitude.
I. By the Suns Declination, and Merididian-Altitude.
WHen the Sun is in the Equinoctial, having no Declination, and the
Meridian-Altitude is observed on the South Side of the Meridian, The
Meridian-Altitude taken from 90 degr. leaves the Elevation of the North Pole.
North-side of the Meridian, The Meridian-Altitude taken from 90 degr. leaves
the Elevation of the South-pole.



Place these 2 Scheams upon folio. 222.
depiction of the sun's declination depiction of a meridian altitude

When the Suns Declination is North, If the Meridian Altitude be less than 90
degrees. and the Sun upon the South Side of the Meridian, the Suns Declination
being taken from the Meridian Altitude, leaves the height of the Equinoctial;
which taken from 90 degrees. gives the Latitude North.
South, If the Meridian Altitude be less than 90 degrees. and the Sun upon the
South Side of the Meridian, add the Meridian Altitude and the Declination
together, their sum is the height of the Equinoctial; which taken from 90 degrees.
leaves the Latitude North. But if the sum of the Declination and Altitude
exceed 90 degrees. take 90 therefrom, the remainer is the Latitude South.

When the Suns Declination is North. If the Meridian Altitude be less than 90
degrees. and the Sun upon the South Side of the Meridian, add the Altitude and
Declination together, their sum is the height of the Equinoctial; which taken
from 90 degrees. leaves the Latitude South. -- But if the sum be above 90 degrees. take
90 degrees. therefrom, the remainer is the Latit. North.
South, If the Meridian Altitude be less than 90 degrees. and the Sun upon the
North-side of the Meridian, substract the Declination from the Meridian
Altitude, the remainer is the height of the Equinoctial; which taken from 90
degrees. leaves the Latitude South.


When the Suns Declination is North, South,
if the Meridian Altitude be just 90 d. the Suns Declination is the Latitude
North. South.

If the Meridian Altitude be observed under the Pole, within the bounds of the
Polar Circles, in such Case the Suns Declination must be taken from 90 degrees. and
what remains is his distance from the Pole; which being added to the Meridian
Altitude, the sum is the Latitude of the place.

Note here, that whatsoever is said concerning finding of the Latitude by the
Suns Declination and Meridian Altitude, the same is to be performed by the
Meridian Altitude of any known Star: and the manner how to effect it, will best
be seen by the Globe.

II. By the Meridian Latitude of a known Star.
Suppose that being at Sea I should observe Algol to be upon the South side of
the Meridian, and to have Altitude 62 degrees. and I would know in what Latitude I
then was.

Arithmetically.
The Declination of Algol is 39 degrees. 39 min. North, the Complement whereof is
50 degrees. 21 min. his distance from the Pole; add this distance and his Altitude
62 degrees. together, the sum is 112 degrees. 21 min. which taken from 180 degrees. leaves
67 degrees. 39 min. for the Latitude of the place North.

By the Globe.
Bring Algol to the Meridian, and from the Center of the Star, downwards, count
his Altitude 62 degrees. and mark that point upon the Meridian: then bring that
point to the South-part of the Horizon, and you shall find the North Pole to
be elevated 67 degrees. 39 min. which is the Latitude you are then in. In like
manner, if you should observe d. m. The Bulls Eye upon the South-part of the
Meridian, having Altitude 51 0 Spica Virginis 32 0 The Great Dog 72 0 d. m. you
would be in Latitude 54 48 N. 67 31 S. 34 14 N.

III. By observing of two Stars, one being upon the Meridian, and the other
Rising or Setting.
Bring the Star which you see upon the Meridian unto the Meridian, and there
holding the Globe fast, move the Meridian in the Horizon, till you see the
other Star on the East or West, Rising or Setting, as you observed it, and then
shall the Globe stand at the Latitude you are in.

So if you should see Regulus upon the Meridian, and Lyra rising toward the
East, the Latitude would be found 37 degrees. 50 min.

IV. By the Altitude of two known Stars, being both of them upon the same
Azimuth or point of the Compass.
Lay the Quadrant of Altitude, or rather your thin Brass Semicircle to both the
Stars, at the proper degrees of Altitude, as you observed them to be in the
Heavens; (for the difference of their Altitudes is equal to their distance.)
Then turn the Globe about in the Horizon, till the Quadrant or thin Plate of
Brass do touch the Horizon in that Azimuth (or point of the Compass) on which
you observed the Stars to be, so shall the Globe rest at the Latitude you are
in.

So Capella and Scheder, Capella being 20 degrees. high, and Scheder 66 degrees. h gh,
and both of them upon the North-East-point of the Compass, you will find your
self to be by this observation in the Latitude of 40 degrees. 0 min. North-Latitude.

V. By the Altitude, Azimuth, and Declination of the Sun, or of a known Star.
Suppose a fixed Star, as that in the Right Knee of Hercules, having 47 degrees. 9
min. of Declination, should be observed at Sea to have 122 degrees. of Azimuth from
the North-part of the Meridian, and to be 60 degrees. high; and from hence the
Latitude were required:

Elevate the Globe to the Stars Altitude 60 degrees. and from the Pole count the
Complement thereof 30 degrees. to which screw the Quadrant of Altitude: also count
122 degrees. upon the Horizon from the North-part of the Meridian, and to those
degrees bring the Quadrant of Altitude, and there keep it; then turn the Globe
about, till 47 degrees. 9 min. the Stars Declination (counted upon the Equinoctial
Colure from the Equinoctial) do cut the Quadrant of Altitude, and those degrees
will cut the Quadrant of Altitude in 71 degrees. 13 min. and that is the Latitude
in which you then are.

VI. By the Suns, or a Stars Declination and Amplitude.
Let the Sun or a Star have 10 degrees. of North Declination, and let the Amplitude
thereof at its Rising or Setting be observed to be 57 degrees. from the North.

Elevate the Globe to 33 degrees. (the Complement of the Amplitude) and count the
Amplitude it self 57 degrees. upon the Meridian from the Pole forward, and thereto
screw the Quadrant of Altitude, and bring the other end thereof to the East or
West-points of the Horizon; then count 80 degrees. (the Complement of the Stars or
Suns Declination) from the Pole upon the Equinoctial Colure, and bring those
degrees to the Quadrant of Altitude; so shall 80 degrees. of the Colure cut 71 degrees.
24 min. of the Quadrant, and that is the Latitude you are then in.

VII. By the Suns Ascensional difference, and Amplitude.
If the Ascensional difference be 27 degrees. 7 min. and the Amplitude 33 degrees. 20
min. and the Latitude were required;

Elevate the Globe to 27 degrees. 7 min. the Ascensional difference, and from the
Pole count the Complement thereof 62 degrees. 53 min. and thereto screw the
Quadrant of Altitude; then bring the Equinoctial Colure to the Meridian, and
count upon the Quadrant of Altitude upwards, the Complement of the Amplitude 57
degrees. 40 min. which degrees bring to the Equinoctial, and then shall the
Quadrant of Altitude cut upon the Horizon 51 degrees. 30 min. counted from the East
or West, which is the Latitude of the place.

And if you count the degrees of the Equinoctial comprehended between the
Meridian and the Quadrant of Altitude, you shall find them to be 20 degrees. 5
min. which is the Suns Northerly Declination at that time.

VIII. By the Suns or a Stars Declination, and the time that he is upon the
East or West-points of the Compass.
Let the Sun or a Stars Declination be 15 degrees. North, and let the time that the
Sun is upon the East or West-points of the Compass, be 59 degrees. 45 min. which in
time is 3 hours 56 min. and hence let the Latitude be required.

Elevate the Globe to 15 degrees. the Declination, and screw the Quadrant of
Altitude to 75 degrees. the Zenith-point; then count 59 degrees. 45 min. or 3 hours 56
min. (the hour) upon the Horizon from the South, Eastward or Westward; and
thereto bring the Quadrant of Altitude: Then look what degrees or the Quadrant
are cut by the Equinoctial, and you shall find 28 degrees. counted from the
Zenith, and that is the Latitude sought.

And thus have you several ways both by the Sun and Stars to find the Latitude
at any time. I will now proceed to some other Problems for finding the Rumb and
distance, which as was said is the last of the four things necessary in the Art
of Navigation.

PROB. II. Any two places given, to find their Rumb.
Magnetical Needle describes on the surface of the Sea, are called Rumbs, and
are (as was said) described upon the Terrestrial Globe by certain Spiral Lines;
for the better understanding whereof, I shall premise these few Propositions:

First, The Needle touched with the Lodestone points out the common
Intersection of the Horizon and Meridian; the one end respecting the North, the
other the South, as aforesaid.

Secondly, A Circle drawn through the Vertex of any place that is distant from
the Equator, cannot cut diverse Meridians at equal Angles.

Thirdly, A great Circle drawn through the Vertical-point of any place, and
inclining to the Meridian, makes greater Angles with all other Meridians, than
with that from whence it was drawn.

Fourthly, If we sail upon any point of the Compass except North or South, we
often change our Horizon and Meridian.

Fifthly, The same Rumb cutteth all Meridians of all places at equal Angles,
and respects the same Quarters of the World in every Horizon.

Sixthly, The potions of the same Rumb intercepted between any two Parallels
whose difference of Latitude is the same, are also equal to each other:
therefore an equal Segment of the same Rumb equally changes the difference of
Latitude in all places; so that in an equal space pass^d in one and the same
Rumb, one of the Poles is equally elevated, and the other depressed.

Seventhly, Rumbs though never so far continued, do not pass through the Poles,
but wind about the Poles until they loose themselves.

Hence you may understand if your Ship be directed under the North or
South-Rumb, your course will be always under the same Meridian; if under the
East or West-Rumb, you will either describe the Equator, or a Circle parallel
to it: If your Vertical point be under the Equator, your Ship will describe an
Arch or Segment of the Equator; but if your Zenith or Vertical point be distant
from the Equator either North or South, your course will then describe a
Parallel as far distant from the Equator, as the Latitude of the place is
whence you first set forwards: But if your Voyage be to be made under the Rumb
which inclines to the Meridian, your course will then be neither in a greater
or lesser Circle, but your Ship will describe a kind of a crooked spiral Line.

Globe, and when you have found them, see what one Rumb-line passes through
both of them, and that is the Rumb or point of bearing of those two places one
from the other. So C. del Gade on the Coast of Zanguebar and C. Cormorin are
both of them found upon the W S W and E N E Rumb, and that is their Point of
bearing, or Rumb required.

If you can find no one Rumb that passes through both your places, then you
must look what Rumb-line upon the Globe runs most parallel to both the given
places, and conclude that to be the point or Rumb of those two places bearing
one from another. -- So if the two places were Seirra Liona in Africa, and the
Island S. Hellena, if you look upon the Globe you shall find no one Rumb-line
to pass through both the places, but that Rumb to which the places lie most
parallel, is the N N W and S S E Rumb; and so Sierra Liona bears from S.
Hellena N N W, and on the contrary S. Hellena is situate from Sierra Liona S S
E, which is the Rumb required.

PROB. III. Having the distance sailed, and the Rumb you have sailed upon
given, to find the difference of the two places both in Longitude and Latitude.
HAving found the Rumb upon which you made your course, make a small mark
thereupon, for the place you departed from: then from the Equinoctial take the
number of miles or leagues you have sailed upon that Rumb (allowing 20 leagues
for a degrees.) and set that distance upon the Rumb from the former point made; and
at the termination of your number of miles or leagues, make a second mark upon
the Rumb: then bringing the place, or point, you departed from to the Meridian,
you shall there find the Latitude of that place or point, and the Meridian
cutting the Equinoctial will show you the Longitude of that place or point. --
Do so by bringing the second point or place to the Meridian, and there shall
you find the Latitude, and upon the Equinoctial the Longitude of that place or
point. Now if you substract the lesser Latitude from the greater, you have the
difference of Latitude; and the lesser Longitude subtracted from the greater,
gives the difference of Longitude.

PROB. IV. The Latitude of two places, and the Rumb that the two places bear
each from other given, to find the difference of Longitude of those two
places, and also their distance upon the Rumb.
Rumb upon the Globe, and turn the Globe about till that Rumb does cut the
Meridian in the Latitude of the first place from whence you departed, and there
make a mark or point upon the Rumb, and at the same time see also what degrees
of the Equinoctial are cut by the Meridian; for that is the Longitude of the
first point.

Secondly, Turn the Globe about, till the same Rumb does cut the Meridian in
the Latitude of the second place, and there make another mark upon the Rumb;
and also see what degrees of the Equinoctial are cut by the Meridian, which
degrees are the Longitude of the second point or place: and the lesser
Longitude being subtracted from the greater, gives the difference of Longitude
of the two places or points.

Then for the distance upon the Rumb, the distance between the two points
before made, being measured upon the Equinoctial, and reduced to miles or
leagues, shall give the distance upon the Rumb.

Here note, that the distance upon the Rumb being entirely taken and applied to
the Equinoctial, will give the distance in the Arch of a great Circle, and not
really in the Rumb, for the distance upon the Rumb will be always greater than
the great Circular distance: wherefore the better way will be, to take in a
pair of Compasses one, two, three (or some small number of) degrees of the
Equinoctial, and run that distance over upon the Rumb-line from point to point;
and the number of all those returns of the Compasses (reduced to miles or
leagues) shall be the near distance of the two places upon the Rumb.

FINIS.

