depiction of the Prussian Swallow-Knife

A Miraculous Cure of the Prusian Swallow-Knife: Being dissected out of his
stomach by the Physicians of Regimonto, the chief City in Prusia.

Together with the Testimony of the King of Poland, of the truth of this
wonderful Cure. Likewise the Certificate of the Lords the States, and all the
Physicians of Leyden. Translated out of the Lattin.

Whereunto is added a Treatise of the possibility of this Cure, with a History
of our own of the consolidation of a wound in the ventricle. As also a survay
of the former Translation, and Censure of their Positions.

By Dan, Lakin. P. C.

Printed at London by I. Oaks, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard, at the
white Lion. 1642.

To the Right Honorable, Sir PETER VVITCH, Knight, Comptroller of the Kings
Household, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
Right Honorable,
THe impressions of benefits from equals, should have no other Table then the
heart to be planted in. The great distance betwixt your Honor and my poor
self (in the remembrance of your many favors) may justly challenge more then
my heart, if more could be given up of me.

As a weak witness of my will, these papers seek your honors protection and
perusal, not as a Debt paid, there is neither in them, nor me, a worthiness
to deserve that Title, either in the condition of them, as meriting to be
called a debt; or satisfaction, paid; I can never attain unto it.

What I owe you sir, is my life, in a miserable Bondage supported by you, in
visiting me with your many reliefes, when I languished under the burden of
Captivity in Constantinople, there Feeding, ^loathing, and from thence
redeeming me, (in the mercies of God) and in me my life, which I owe you: the
principal is in the hands of the Creator, but you Sir have interest in it, by
these obligations, and I will pay that in my prayers for you, which is the best
use of it.

Your goodness Right Honorable, looked right forward, and survayd our calamity,
and no other respect, with a compassion wedded only to it self, and our
sorrows. Great men use to sell their Labors, and give for a return, you sir
did neither: the subjects of your pity are witnesses; being many, whom in your
honorable Embassy from his Majesty, to the G. S. abundantly tasted your
charities, that were clothed in no other Garment then their own, not for a
month or failing, but to enstating in a better being, and free.

Your Honors house was a Sanctuary to those Captives could escape into it,
your presence was the fu-ll of their hopes, your absence is a Frost unto them,
and in that, your memory is their tears.

Your virtuous Lady, stood up the mirror of her Sex, in her frequent bounties
to us all, being not only tied to you in the sacred bands of wedlock, but in
these of Piety and pity, which are the Seals, and marks of a Religious and
understanding spirit: and where the compassion of some (in vain glory) is
limited but to some only, to purchase a Title, and no more; yours was perfect,
and extended to all, which is a treasure cannot be exhausted, but will
distribute Honor to you, both in this life, and everlasting comfort in the
world to come.

Your Honors most humble Servant, in all acknowledgment: Daniel Lakin.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader, I have not here filled the margent with Catalogues of
Authors, Pages, and Chapters, or stuff't these Lines with Figures, and the
elections of whole Libraries, to send the Reader to a thousand witnesses (of
what nature in her benefits, and reason in her own limits comprehend) by such
Quotations, being only necessary to publish me a wearied Travellour, in the
Labors and Labyrinths of many Writers on these subjects.

What has succesfully happened in my endeavors being strengthened by the like,
in foreign testimony, and by such accident, I present faithfully set down,
as the changes in this misfortune and my care met, and with matter presented in
such alterations begot the substance of this Discourse.

I have not here prescribed an Order, either for the Learned, or envious, the
one will not distaste, the other must; but my confidence in the one, and
knowledge of the other, prepares me sufficiently for both; they neither honor
nor defame me, but themselves, since Truth in a homely Vesture, carries her
own reward about her, though she receive nothing from the world, but a
suspicious report, with an infamous relish, yet she requites her self with
this inestimable Treasure, to be known to be the same she appears; not
having put on Falsehood, or Hypocrisy, for Vaineglory being the common reward,
or food, the general aim. Which profane respects spotteth the luster of the
noblest work, and blemisheth the ablest Writer, though not in themselves as
they are able, and good, but in the integrity of the intent, expectations and
life, what they should be.

My whole scope is, that such wounds be not left deplorable, as Accidents so
desperate and void of hope, that they should in such considerations of their
danger frustrate the Physicians honest cure, in the attempts of healing.

The favorable acceptance of this Translation (in which my Brother Master H.
L. in somewhat has assisted me, my time shortened by my affairs not giving me
so large a scope of attendance; as also the Treatise by my self perfected)
will foment another Work in Embrion, which has yet but its proportionable
matter to make up the Limbs of it in the womb of Fancy; both quickening the
birth, and delivery of it, into the World, it carries in it self this
Character, the congruity of Medicines with parts. But if this encounter a ruff
Scene, from Capon Orators, whose judgment is derived from the price, which they
have always before them, if not half chewed in their mouths, I will smother
it before it know Infancy, and it shall live to me only, before I will
purchase at that rate, their Table Rethoricke, by which and some news, such
bablers have their morsells dealt them, by Retaile, out of the guts of a
Serving-man without grudging.

And to the Muses once retire again,
Whose privileges are their own, for when
The envious brood dares their just Works condemn,
They dare accuse their pride, and censure them.
The wise (who takes not his authority from his great gray Beard, and Plush
Clothes, or with a confused Comment, carps at the Writings of all) I invite,
and to such must J ever desire to be my self.

D. L.

To his Friend Master Daniel Lakin.
This page I will not burden with one stain,
In painting forth some selfe-conceited vain;
That having learnt to make, and spread a plaster,
Thinks himself skillful as his aged Master:
Or else such Masters that presume to object
Against this that does surpass their intellect.
I Will quarrel not with these for their own sake;
Since they in his account one Cipher make,
If they compare a simple Surgeons part,
Unto his Theoricke, and practicke Art:
Asia, and Africa approve his skill,
Let Europe read this work; then Europe will.
Henry Harpur.

To his worthy Friend Mr. Daniel Lakin.
TO read thy life with such sorrows attended,
Were to partake as much as thou have ended
Since friend-ship so unites; we cannot hear
A friends distress, but with as salt a tear
Himself let fall: when he with grief contended.
To wipe that memory out were to forget
A mercy, or else doubt of a just debt
We owe to Heaven for thy deliverance:
For Worms would witness, if we speak of chance,
Mercy and Atheism in one flesh have met.
But I will read thee, in this work, and then
To season this, begin thy griefs again:
That in those sowres, and these thy sweets we may
Relish a thankful Offering, and that pay
To Heaven, builds thee a Pattern to such men.
John Florell.

The Charter of the most Sovereign King of Poland, Vladislaus the 4. upon the
truth of this miraculous excision of the Knife swallowed by the P^ussi^cke
Swallow-knife.
Vladislaus the fourth, by the Grace of God King of Poland, Great Duke of
Lithuania, Russi^, Pru^sia, Samo^isia etc ^^s also of the Hereditary King of
the Swedes, Goths, and Vandalls.
TO all and every one to whom it does belong, We signify by these our present
Letters, that there have been exhibited unto Us Letters written in the name of
the most Illustrious Prince Elector, Duke in Prussia, and subscribed by the
hands of the Noble Counselors, Supremes, and Regents of the said Duke-dome,
and confirmed with the Dukes Seal published according to the date of
Mount-Royall the 3. of Ian. in the year of our Lord 1635. whereby indeed the
most illustrious Elector receives the renowned and famous Dan. Swaben, a
Chyurgion Physician, cutter of Ruptures, and an Oculist, into the number of his
Servants, because of an excellent and singular skill in his liberal Art, and
exempts him as his privileged Servants from all civil burdens, and grants
him other liberties in those letters expressed. And we are humbly besought in
the name of the said Daniel to approve, likewise ratify and confirm the same
Letters in all points, and Articles, and that We would v^uchsafe to take him
into the number of our Servants. We, having from many of our Counselors
received the commendation of his virtue, integrity, and addition to do Us
Service, and of his singular knowledge in the Art of Chyrurgery and Physic,
in many Kingdoms and Provinces worthily extolled, (as appears by
attestations to Us exhibited. A great experiment whereof he himself showed Us
at Mount Royal, with the exceeding admiration of all and commendation of his
experience in the excision of a knife from the man's ventricle, thereby a
certain chance illapsed into his entrails) do readily agree to this
Petition. We being willing therefore to grace the said Dan. with a
testification of our favor have thought fit to ascribe and call him into the
number of Our Servants, and his Son William Frederick exceeding well practiced
in the Art of Physic, according to his Fathers instruction, and of others, as
by Our present privilege We do ascribe and call them, giving full and all
manner of Authority, as well to the aforesaid Dan. Schwaben the Father, as to
Frederick William his Son, that at Mount Royal, and in other places,
Provinces, Lands, Cities of Our Kingdom, and Dominions, always and every
where, as well at public Marts, as at any other time whatsoever, freely and
securely, with their Families and physical and Chyrurgicall appurtenances,
they may abide, go, come, subsist, and exercise the Art of their Profession
according to the extremities of the sick without any man's let or molestation.
Moreover We do interdict foreign Chyrurgions, and Cutters, that not any of
them dare (under an Arbitrary penalty) to exercise that Art to their prejudice
and impediment beyond the time of public Marts. For which cause the
Magistrates of the Cities of Mount Royal, and of other places being required
shall administer the Justice to them committed, and by all means endeavor to
help and promote their laudable Trade, conjoined with the profit of Our
Subjects. And because the most illustrious Elector by his above named Rescript
or privilege, has freed and exempted the said Dan. Schwaben from all civil
burdens and taxations: We therefore by Our Royal Authority, so far as is
right, confirming this Electorall Rescript, do, not swarving any thing from
those Electorall Letrers, free and exempt as well the Father as the Son, from
all both Civil and Military burdens, and according to Our Princely Grace, We
do charge that in all those liberties expressed in the Electorall Rescript,
they totally maintain them, and cause and command them to be maintained by
all. In witness whereof We have commanded these presents subscribed with Our
hand, to be establishe^d with the Seal of Our Kingdom.

Given at Mount Royal, the 20. of July, in the year of Our Lord 1635. and of
Our Kingdoms of Poland, the 3. and of Swedeland the 4. VLADISLAVS REX.

The Judgment and Censure of the Physicians of Leyden upon this writing.
THe miraculous History of the Prussian Swallow-knife, and a History which will
be profitable to all ages, printed by Lawrence Segebadius in quarto, and in
the year 1636, and which you sent over to us most famous Beckhere. We have
read, with care examined, exactly and sufficiently perused. And because we
would not be wanting to the learned Commonweal, We have caused so famous
writing as this is here to be reprinted. But the more to authorize a piece so
excellent, We do testify that our selves were very much delighted in the
reading of so rare a miracle in man's body, and that with as much content We
have understood the Cure to be handled with so great a caution and
circumspection, that with singular delectation We have received so learned and
Poly-daedalous a Narration from thee, and by thee beautified with select
Histories, and manifold authority, Nor do We doubt but that all (especially
the learned and judicious Practitioners) who seriously weigh the matter, will
presently come to our opinion, for although this age (which possesses the lees
and Leestalls of a malicious world) be full of malice by reason of envy and
emulation, yet suppose We, it is not come to the height of impudence, and such
a brutishnes as that any time it will go about with a black tooth to bite at;
a chance so rare, a Curation so miraculous, and by thee most excellent Beckhere
to the use of posterity, with singular judgment perfectly brought to pass. But
should the world be so impudent, it shall sooner break than fasten a tooth:
for this work is fenced with the Adamant of Truth, and clear Doctrine. Such
shameless ones are to be refuted only with neglect; for what will thou do
with those that even in the very snow see Ink? Most eminent man! We must go
on in an upright way, that We may arrive at the very mark We aim at of
glorious fame. If any one drunk with emulation reele upon us, he must with
scorn be shaked off, and he left to his own Torturer envy, who inveighs
against such; for he carries with him the crosses of affections, and poures
into their souls the molten lead of Pallor. That itch of wicked wits it is
fatal, how do they endeavor to dispraise other men's labors that can do no
thing themselves praiseworthy, and therefore a loofe bark at famous men's
report, hoping that will be added to them which with what right or injury
soever they shall detract from others? but by no means do their vain
counsels reach to the scope, they only expose the treasure of their ignorance
and sloth in liquida luce, into the open light, and make themselves odious and
contemptible to great minds.

at Leyden Ianu. 23. 1638.
Hippocrates lib. praeception. Hoc jure jurando audeo affirmare, medicum
ratione utentem, alteram nunquam invidiose calumniaturum, sic enim animi
impotentiam proderet. i. e. I dare affirm it upon oath, that a reasonable
Physician will never enviously calumniate another; for so he would betray the
weakness of his mind.
A Physical observation of the Prusian Swallow-knife.
VEnerable Antiquity endeavoring to recompense the prolixity of Physic, and
the brevity of our life, has bin willing as it were within certain Lattices,
not only to include the same by some general Axioms belonging to the
practical part thereof, but also by more strange, yet most true observations,
Histories and special examples of Curations so to beautify it, and register
up the manner of curations, as that posterity might enjoy them, that in the
like they might be able learnedly to imitate, and dexterously administer to
their sick. Hippocrates and that resplendent light of Physic, the first of
the Epidemians has left us histories, and by this his example excites the wits
of many undertaking the like labor, and procured as well the most learned of
the ancient, as also the more rare observations of late Physicians: for they
have deemed it envy to conceal those things which might suggest unto
posterity, not only admiration but example; and then chiefly whilst Physical
Histories are read, counsel might be in the ears, and as it were a picture in
the eyes, and their heads not less furnished than with methodicall doctrine.
And likewise how should this history of the Prussian Swallow-knife be envied by
after ages, since even she as for her rarity, so for her most happy success of
cure has deserved to be consecrated to immortal memory! for thus also the
rivolets of divine praises would be further enlarged, and others too might draw
from thence not only matter of wonder, but imitation, that in the like case
they might not be puzeled, and troubled with the novelty of the thing, be
enforced to stop at the first assay of curation. Wherefore it is my mind to
publish her true and genuine Narration, and together the physical explication
stored with more rare observations, dispatching it in four Sections: whereof
the first shall exhibit the swallowing of the knife: the second the
consultation of Physicians, the third the incision of the belly, and ventricle,
and extraction of the knife, the fourth the consolidation of the wound.

Of the swallowing of the Knife. The first Section.
IN the year of our salvation 1635. the 29. of May stilo novo and the third
holy day in Pentecost, a rusticke young man by name Andrew Grunheide, in the
morning feeling in his ventricle by reason of some ill Diet heretofore
weakened, a kind of disposition to vomit, and as it was his wont, endeavoring
to procure it himself, with the haft of his knife provoked the Gorge, and
vomit not presently following did thrust in his knife a little deeper, which
partly by the violence, and partly by its own weight so let down and
comprehended within the jaws, escaped the extremities of his singers, and by
little and little tendes to the ventricle; yet stopping some what about the
Orifice not without pain and dolor. But although the Swallow-knife being
somewhat terrified, did by bowing his body downwards, assay the regresse of
the knife, yet was it all in vain; therefore upon new advice Landibergensis
endeavored rather the more to bumeet the mouth of the stomach with beer, or
ale, and so to promote the knife to the cavity of the ventricle: and which
succeeded, and the knife went to the bottom of the ventricle, and so the
anguish and pains aforesaid ceasing, the Countryman though not a little
troubled with his unwelcome guest, yet went he about his accustomed labors
without trouble. The knife as after excision it was seen, was just in length
ten fingers breadth.

The first Position. The descent of the Knife, of the length of ten thumbes
breadth, by the mouth and mouth of the stomach to the Ventricle indeed wants
not admiration, but includes no impossibility.
THe most wise Creator of the Universe, whose admirable fabric of man's body,
as of other living Creatures, as well Aristotle 1 De part. anim. c. 5.
as Galen in lib. de usupar.
do many ways extol and set forth, has made for all breathing creatures
Arist. 2. Hist. anim. c. 15.
and that have a neck idem. 3. part. animal. c. 3.
a certain common and Kings Highway from the mouth to the ventricle as to a
certain Universal Magazine Galen 4. de usup. 3. c. 1.
whereby as by a tunnel the food and all things else necessary for conservation
of our health might be handsomely carried down to the ventricle, Arist. de p.
anim. c. 3.
and there being prepared every part at last might have his share. The mouth of
the stomach it is called Oesophagus from (...), that is, I carry the meat as
also (...) in latin Gula, which in english we call the Gullet or Weazand. This
the Creator according to his singular and admirable wisdom has so
artificially framed, that even for her capacity she was naturally fitted to
receive matter, but her substance appointed to let down and swallow the same.

For first of all this passage we see it capable enough, that it may yield to
the swallowing even of greater things; which yet if they exceed the natural
expansion of the Gullet, they may easily infer the danger of suffocation, or
even death it self.

It so happened to a Country woman of whom Forest makes mention, lib. 15. obser.
28. Schol.
who too greedily had swallowed a very great piece of Martlemas Beef, not well
masticated; it having stuffed the Gullet, and there mightily sticking, had
almost choked her: and in the like manner to another woman, who as the same
man witnesses not having well masticated or chawed some raw unripe Apples, and
so swallowed them, they remained stuffed in the Gullet, whereby the voice being
totally suppressed, and her breath hindered, she was seen to give up the ghost.

Nicholas Florentinus reports of himself, that being very hungry, and by the
time he had eaten half an unripe apple together with its core, and by reason
of his hunger, as it were violently attracted it, so masticated as it was, it
descended to the stomach, and there staying, a total obstruction so
beleaguered its way that he was not able to swallow any thing, nor to speak,
nor to breath. The same almost happened to a certain friend who at a marriage
dinner too greedily swallowing a piece of roasted Kid, presently incurred the
danger of suffocation, so as he could neither speak, nor breath until having
been violently beaten upon the back, and put his finger into his throat, the
morsel was thrust down to the ventricle, whereby he himself was freed from
total suffocation, and we the sitters by from fear.

Marcellus Donatus in his third Book of wonderful Physical Histories, Chap.
8. records of a certain Citizen who too glutionously had devoured a piece of
sinowie flesh ill masticated, it sticking at the Orifice of the Gullet so took
up the way of swallowing, that the passage for water, and every the thinnest
drink was altogether intercepted, and respiration very greatly hurt: nor would
it yield to Instruments and diverse means assayed, until that on the seventh
day the morsel being rotten slid down into the Ventricle, it freed the man
indeed from anguish but not from death; for because of frequent dolor, and
violent handling of the place, the part that was inflamed and by reason of long
lack of meat and drink, all the faculties they too were weakened, and the
man on the foureteenth day changed life for death.

That death it self too often follows the subsequents do declare. One that
would swallow a Hen-egge whole, the same stopping at the Gullet because of the
vital air that was wholly intercepted, was presently choked and killed as
relates Wicrus. Lib. 4. de praestig. demon. cap. 2.
A certain Merchant break-fasting with a piece of roast porke sprinkled with
Salt and Pepper and a crum of bread, it stuck in his throat, whence forthwith
arose vehement dolor, convulsions, great cold, and at last suffocation, as it
is in Hildan. Cent. 1. obs. 35.
And likewise a certain boy having a piece of Pan-cake sticking in his throat,
was presently choked and perished. So a certain young man of Rastenburg, when
at Dinner by reason of some laughter raised, would forthwith have swallowed
down a piece of flesh whole and not chawed, by the same sticking in his throat
in the sight of all the Guests that very hour dyed with suffocation. Suetonius
is witness that Claudius Caesar Drusus lost his son Pompey of fourteen
years of age, who by a Pear tossed aloft in sport, and by gaping taken into
his mouth was there with strangled, for as Arist. has it, S. 3. Probl. 9.
because those two passages whereof one is assigned for swallowing, the other
for respiration, are placed very near one by another, and the mouth of the
stomach lies underneath the Aspera arteria which is the Windpipe, too big
a morsel being swallowed, the place of spiration is the next that is brought
and bound together, that breath is denied all passage, especially if the
compression and interception of air be in that part made, where the
membranous Artery is, and not the Cartilaginous or gristly.

Moreover we see too, that the substance of the Gullet is so fitted, that at
pleasure it is able to perform the action that is designed it, for the
substance it is partly membranous, partly fleshy, or mean between flesh and
nerve, 3 De part. anim. 3.
whereby as teaches Arist. by reason of the nerve or nervous substance it may
the better be distended into length and breadth; 1 Hist. anmi. 16.
and because of the tenderness of flesh it may the better yield, and not be
hurt with the sharpness of any food descending, whence it is that we see the
same too, with a certain continual humor moist, and so the more commodiously
yielding passage for dry things: nor are there wanting musculous Instruments
succouring and helping to the action of the Gullet: for there are observed to
be three coniugated muscles, and the fourth sine pari, without a mate is
called Oesophagaeus Orbicularis, whence swallowing is not held only for a
natural action, Bauhin: l. 2. Anatom. Theatr. c. 28. Larinx
because of the fibers or strings of three sorts, but chiefly to an Animal
action, since it is in our will to swallow when we please, and by the benefit
of the muscles to move the Pharynx and not to move it. As often therefore as we
put into the mouth an object grateful and ordered for the Pallat, we can
swallow the same without trouble: but that which is unpleasant our nature
abhorres, and the pore allows no passage to that which is unfit. Who then is
not amazed in beholding a Knife swallowed by our Prussian Swallow-knife, and
that without hurt and mischief to the Weazand: the blade that was in the haft
was very sharp and broad, and sharp pointed, and object altogether ingrate
and that which begets the greatest admiration so long. How could the Journey it
went from the mouth to the Gullet, and so to the Ventricle, being very crooked,
be well gone? Moreover for that about the fist Vertebra of the Thorax, the
Gullet inclines it self to the right side, whereby to give way to the
descendent Trimke of the great Artery, (that she might not be endamaged in the
passage of hard meats, or otherwise not well broken) how could the Knife
without longer tarryance and greater trouble so quickly descend and avoid their
turnings, and windings, since that although the Organs be free enough, and
sufficiently fitted, yet the swallowing of an object so ingrate, and
inconvenient, must needs be difficult. But indeed, the violence which our
Rusticke likewise used, takes away all difficulty: for when vomit would not
follow the Gorge being at first so much provoked, with a certain force he did
thrust in the Knife deeper, which being violently pulled in by the jaws was
not so well to be pulled back, the extremity of the haft moreover acceding to
a kind of crookedness somewhat resisting, the unacceptable Guest, therefore so
took up his lodging in the Ventricle. Something not unlike this Schenek
observes lib. 3. observe. medic. 7. of a certain Gras^er, who by thieves that
met him was enforced to swallow a Poynadoe half a foot long, with a
Horne-haft an inch thick. Laurentius Joubertus also as you may see in Hildan,
Cent. 1. Obs. 54. and cent 5. observe 75.
shows you a little blunt Knife, which being covered over with cloth was by a
Shepherd violently cast into another man's mouth and put down his throat,
which for a whole two years space lurking in the body, was by an Abscisse made
in the Inguen or groine ^^^cised, and the Patient so cured.

Position the 2. As Knives and other abhorrent things by a certain kind of
Sorcery may be thrown down, or insinua^ed into the Ventricle: so usually
man's Mclancholicke Genius conceits it so to be.
THe natural heat of the Microcosme exceeding full and mightily furnished
with innumerable Ideas of things to be gotten spreading into a many formed
matter, usually produces in our body things to be admired, the reason of the
causes whereof seems not to be much discovered, every kind of Vessels, every
cavity likewise whatsoever the secretest part brings forth, not only stones
of a various kind, but also Mettalls, Worms, and other little creatures
horrible to see to, which chiefly is observed in Steatom^taes, Atheromata^s,
and the like Apostumes, as witnesses Galen, when he says: Lib. 2. ad
Glaucum. c. 7.
If a^ sometimes there shall continue humidities in any Accident of the body,
they have many fashioned alterations; for oftentimes there are found to be
contained in the Abscesses bodies like to stones, Sand, Shells, pieces of
Woodcoales, Mud, and the filth of a Bath, Dreggs and Lees, and many such like.
Howbeit usually either cast out, or after death we see many things found which
exceed all natural beginning, and are supposed, not produced in the body, or
into the same insinuated, but by the Art and malice of the Devil; for who will
deny that the Devil has great power? yet is it limited, and depends upon the
pleasure of the most High and Omnipotent God, since otherwise by his own power
he is not able to beget even a lowse the vilest creature. But why God allows
him so great power and ability to hurt men because of sins committed, in
Divinity it is more than enough apparent. With such a like History Gemma
supplies us, Lib. 2. Cosmog. c. 4.
for a certain wench of Lovaine did by stool, first throw out a live Eele,
then by vomit abundance of hairs not to be numbered, and of a fingers length,
with a purulent matter like shat of putrefaction, in which filth too there
appeared pieces of wood, and thin shavings of skins; moreover the pieces of
wood were so lively, they seemed to be chipps unequally chipt from old stumpes
of Trees broken off: after that there followed also a ramentosous vomit,
wherewith were secue issuing every day Coals, indeed grownd very small, and in
a heap to the quantity of two or three pound, and very often with such
abundance of hairs, that a Wall-nut could not hold them: by stool likewise
very many stones of a notable bigness, as also a chippe of Wood, bigger and
thicker than ones thumb. Moreover a Triangular bone, solid without, but within
hollow and spungious, etc. the generation of all these none will dare to refer
them to the rank of natural causes: for howbeit no man will be able to deny a
generation of hairs in diverse parts of the body, for so the Naturalists have
observed a hairy heart, a hairy tongue, and that by Urine hairs have been
elected: yet so great abundance of hairs, fragments of wood, and other things
as abhorrent, do sufficiently declare that the Divills Art there was very
strong.

Benevent. Lib. De admirand. mo^bor cause.
reports that a certain woman being possessed with a wicked spirit, whiles
she was distracted with intolerable torments of the Ventricle, and that the
Physicians could bring no help, of a sudden she spewed up long and crooked
nails, and brass Needles bundled up toge there with hair and wax, and last
of all did cast up a piece of flesh at breakefast so great, that even a Giants
throat could not have swallowed it. And so Langius reports of a certain
Husbandman, Lib. 1. Epist. me dic. c. 38.
who being struck with cruel dolorous torments upon the left Hypochondrium,
suddenly caught hold of an Iron nail that was under the skin unhurt, which
being extracted by the Balneator, but the grief still raging, he out of the
weakness of his mind laid violent honds upon himself, in whose Ventricle
being opened, were found a long round piece of wood, four steel knives partly
pointed, and partly with teeth like a Saw, and two Iron tools, each of them
more than a span long. Who would not affirm that these things were thrown in
by the craft and subtlety of the Devil? Who could say that Sorcery was not
here? The last summer likewise there came unto me a certain Poland Soldier,
declaring how he had been for many years detained a Captive by the
Muscovites, and when to him and to other Captives too there was granted a
regresse, and dimission by the means of a most glorious peace, obtained by the
victorious Arms of our most August Uladislaus my exceeding Clement Lord, there
was for him and the others prepared by the Muscovites a potion, which when it
was exhausted, they underwent most grievous pains, and canciations in the
bottom of the belly, with his most unmeasurable vomitings, and that there
withal, not without trouble, he had elected diverse kinds of Newtes. Now and
then too that enemy of mankind uses a kind of violence, and has thrust into
the mouth many things to be devoured, as the sequent History recorded by
Rulandus does inform: Cen^. 4. Cu^a^. Empyric. ^5.
a certain Girl of eighteen years of age one night returning home alone, a
certain man all in black (to wit the Devil) overtooke and sat upon her,
took her by the locks, drew back her head, and stopped her nostrills; where
the wench being so handled with exclamation opened her mouth, whereinto some
what he enforced, which as she endeavored to relect, by the laws he repressed
it to the Gullet, that in spite of her teeth she might swallow it; which done,
he leaves her who presently waxeeth dumb, and being returned home remained so
for eight days; afterward of her own accord began to speak, and for many
days did vomit up with very great and direful torment, things never to be
forgotten, as needles, pinnes, diverse kinds of nails, locks of hair, small
pieces of money, buttons, whole egge-shells, threeds, knives, and many other
things, which were reserved by the beholders and standers by, and shown to me
etc. the like examples and of these and their manners how, see more in the most
famous Sennertus.

But the History of our Rustic, Lib. 6. Pract. de morb. occul. (...). 1. part.
9.
we shall not be able to reduce into the rank of these, for this immission of
the knife into the mouth was voluntary, a free and natural tickling, however
the swallowing was unawares; why? because beside the knife there was found not
any, nor the least thing in the Ventricle.

But whether a melancholy imagination might have troubled him, that we must
look into. Indeed it commonly happens that by reason of adust, and melancholy
blood, either begotten in the brain, or of fume and exhalations from some
other place trans-missed, the mind is darkened, and the brain over-cast, no
otherwise than if they were evening and night darkness, which trouble and
terrify ye minds of them, that are often in them: whence it is that the reason
waxes blind* and being enclosed with thick clouds is deprived of her light,
and altogether up and down erreth in her discourses and is deceived. But as
there is diversity of Temperaments, wherein these melancholic fumes do
domineere, even so there do arise various and diverse spices of Melancholy
that chiefly annoy, vitiate and corrupt the smagination: nor can at any time
occur any thing never so foolish or absurd that melancholy men (though sound)
dream not to be such, and stoutly believe it to be most true.

Hence you shall find says Galen, Lib. 3. de cor. affect 6.7.
that some think themselves made of Potters earth, and therefore avoid the
touch and propinquity of men: others that suppose themselves to be of Glass.
Aetius reports of one that was fallen into such an error that he conceived
himself shattered in the head, and so be walled it abroad, until that an Iron
Helmet of great weight being put upon his head, he was removed from this
fantasy. Trallianus writes that he saw a woman that strongly affirmed she
was eaten up of a Serpent, but by vomitory medicines, and a Serpent secretly
put up by a Brass Tunnell, she was restored to health. There have been those
that have deemed themselves to be birds, so that they never stirred themselves,
but with arms moved like Wings, did think they flew. Moreover, many imagine
that they foster many things in their body that are exceeding troublesome He
in Platerus imagined that for many years he nourished in his body a live Frog.
In observe. page 40.
Others dream that they have within themselves Serpents, and the like. The
like examples as they are oftentimes observed in practice: so look among some
of them. Quercetan. in Diaetet. Poly. Hist. page 154. Forest. lib. 10. Observe.
12. Marcel. Donat. lib. 2. mirab. c. 1. Schenck. lib. 1. observat. 245. and
seque. Plater. lib. 1. obs. Senn. lib. 2. Inst. par. 3. S. 2. c. 4. and lib. 1.
practic. par. 2. c. 8. Camerar. Horar. Succis. Cent. 1. c. 72. Indeed some one
perhaps might at first have guessed that our Rustic was overwhelmed with the
like melancholy, had not presently the certain relation of others, and his
own declared it otherwise. He was sent for to come. that his temperament might
be seen in no wise to be melancholicke; for although after he had taken Mars
his morsel, his visage sometimes were more sad, yet must it not be ascribed
to his natural constitution, or melancholy, but fear rather because of the
doubtful success of the extraction and Cure: even he had before shown
himself very iocund in merry meetings, and conversations, nor did he carry in
his countenance any sign of a melancholy Temperament: Wherefore even the
Physicians easily gave him credit, and consultation for his cure was appointed.

Of the Physicians, their Consultation. The 2. Section.
THis the most miserable condition of the afflicted Rusticke moved the hearts
of many unto pity, first therefore the Consul of Landiberg, Master Martin
Hartlein my honored friend, who had been to see him, and had demanded every
even the least thing of him, came to me, and with the History it self, and the
sick man's estate laid open, implored my counsel, to whom I gave this answer:
That it was a matter of great moment, and that scarce two such chances were to
be found in the observations of Physicians, and having declared a History of
the Pragensian Swallow-knife, I advised that the Rusticke should be sent over
with the soonest, that by the whole College of Physicians deliberation might be
had what were best to be done, for in the more difficult works of Art,
Hippocrates will not have us overmuch to trust our own knowledge, but to call
other Physicians into Counsel, that by common counsel it might be concluded
what were to be done, and what undone. A little while after this, the chance
it self by Letters from a most noble gentleman is laid open to the famous Mr.
L. Crager, a colleague and beloved friend, and at last the Patient himself
with commendatory Letters, sent over, to submit himself to the cure of the
Physicians, who yielded himself to be viewed and handled by them.

These Physicians after they had considered what was to be considered, and
examined the things that were to be examined, concluded that there was not here
any hurt of the fantasy or imagination, but that a knife indeed was swallowed
and lurked within the body. The twenty fifth day of June therefore was indicted
for a meeting of the Physicians, which was celebrated in the Garden of Master
Doctor Lothus, the prime and senior Professor, and chief Electurall Physician
at that time sick, in the place of the Deane and others the master Physicians.
So that every one to the purpose might freely open his mind, and speak his
opinion.

First then having found the strength of the Patient to be yet very firm,
which in great operations must especially be considered, how the sick man
might escape the danger, that the strength boing weakened the Physician labor
not in vain. Secondly the place affected must be considered, for the Abdomen
that was to be opened, and the Ventricle to be wounded for extraction of the
knife. Thirdly, the necessity of the operation which here very greatly urged,
least that either strength should fail or the Patient himself not well
brooking delay be disposed to impatience; at last I say it was with unanimous
consent concluded, that the section should be before the Dog days, yet
premising those things that seemed needful for preparation: likewise that
Balsamic Oils should be first inwardly used, whereby the dolors of the
Ventricle might be assuaged, and the Patient himself imbibe a Balsamic
virtue. But the Balsame called the Balsame of Spain was to be preferred before
any other that was named, and used as advised our most experienced Senior
Master Doctor Lothus, to whom the rest of the Physicians readily assented, and
did not mislike the imposition of the Magnetic Emplaster after the example of
the Pragensian cure.

But since for certain causes this Balsame may be very much altered,
especially for the greater efficacy in a wound of the bottom of the belly
abounding with many humors, it is good to subioyne the description of them
both. 2. Oper. Ch^r. part. 2. cap. 7. page 805.
Hierome Fabritius ab Aquapend. has it thus; I cannot (says he) pass over in
silence a medicament most excellent for wounds in the nervous parts, whose
description I received from a very credible Spanish Priest, who told me too,
that in Spain it was not lawful to compose it, because men greatly trusting
the virtue of it, made nothing of it to enter the lists and fight. And it is
thus: R. Olei vetustiss. unc. 4. Terebinth. purae. unc. 8. Frumenti integr.
unc. 1. Sem. Hyperic. unc 2. R^d. Cardui Ben. Valerian. Ana. unc. 1. Thur.
pulveris, unc. 2


Let the roots and heathes be grossly bruised, put into a Pot, and so much Wine
super infused as may submerge all the ingredients, and having made the infusion
for two days, add the oil and wheat, and let them sees all to the
consumption of the Wine. By and by after you have made a strong expression,
add the Turpentine and Frankincense, and let them again boil a little, and
be kept in a Glass It heals wounds, as they say in four and twenty hours,
the manner of using it is thus: having first wash: the wound with cold white
wine, presently annoint all the wound with the aforesaid oil warm, which if
it cannot handsomely be done, spring it and presently bring the lips of the
wound together by ligature, or suture, or gi^tine, then annoint likewise the
circumiacent parts with the aforesaid oil, upon the lips of the wound now
brought together lay lint dipped in the aforesaid oil, and upon this another
expressed with vinegar, then another dry lint, last of all bandage it.

Ours which was used was this following. Ol. Olivar. recent. unc. 3. Terebinth.
unc. 1. Sem. Summit. Valerian. Hyperici. Cardui. Ben. An. p. 1. Sem. Thuris.
unc. 1. Myrrh el. aloes. opt. an. dr. 3. Coec. infect. dr. 1. Resin. Pin. rec.
dr. 2. Vini malvatic. unc. 4.


Mix them and let them stand and digest for four hours, then let them gently
boil till the wine be almost consumed, then strain and express them.

Position the 3. The Knife that was swallowed by the benefit of Natural heat,
might be somewhat altered in the Ventricle, but not digested or consumed:
therefore was it well concluded by the College of Physicians, that by Section
the same was to be extracted.
MAny Creatures, we see that m^ke food of the grossest Diet, they have not
only a fleshie Ventricle to digest even harder things, but also of a
membranous substance in whom heat is so exacted, and their faculty so disposed
that they can dexterously concoct even every the hardest thing, they fetch not
only out of the store of Animalls and Vegetables, but Minerals to^. It is well
known of the Estridge, that according to the ass^rtion of many Authors she can
swallow Iron and digest it.

Langius witnesses as much, Lib. 1. Ep. Med. 12.
that be saw in the Duke of Feraries Garden, Estriges that did swallow down
Iron money and concoct it. Cent. 2. c. 69. Orinthol. 6.2.
Amatus Lusitanus writes that he saw and observed the same at Antwerpe. Indeed
Aldrovandus and some others cherish a contrary opinion, and do conceit that
Iron or money made of it may forsooth be swallowed of the Estridge, but not
consumed or concocted. But how comes it to pass that Hens guts mixed with
liquid gold do consume the very same? as Pliny relates, Lib. 26. Not. Hist. c.
4. Centur. 4. Memorabil. 99, Exerc. 88. Tract. De scorbut. Exerc. 7. p. 504.
Animadv. and exercit. Med. 31.
and out of him Mizaldus, Scaliger. How comes it to pass that leaf gold mixed
with Hens meat and so given them, does not only fat them, but make them of a
yellowish color, and like gold? as delivers Hieronymus Keusner. As also
Carolus Rosenberg. The most famous Eichstad in his Treatise De confect: Alkerm.
witnesses that some few years ago he had given a Calecut Hen two small
books of leaf gold to swallow up with her ordinary meat, and that afterward
he killed her and found her flesh to be of that natural color, pure and
beautiful, but neither in the cavity of the Beast nor in the garbage any
relics of the gold, much less any incrustation of it or pargetting Smizerus
Ep. 50. Cistae Medicae professes of a Hen that had devoured a great deal, of
money, and that afterward there was found in her Crop some of the money half^
consumed, especially the silver of his Daughters thimble, that was silvered
over, so that nothing remained but the brass. The sequent History seems to
confirm the same: In the garden of a certain chief Citizen of Regiomont,
many of his Guests that were at sport depas^^e^ on the ground their stakes in
beasse and silver money, an Indian Cock there perchance walking steals some of
it away and swallowe^ it; they not regarding the Cock wondered which way the
money should be gone: the Coch by and by returns and does t^o like, they take
him in the fact and so on purpose throw him down more for to devour, after
some few hours for his punishment they condemn him to the Spit, and to be
roasted, yet first they do examine his Crop and find therein some of the money
half resolved, but the rest of it almost altogether wasted, and that not
without admiration. We read in Pliny of Mice, that according to Theophrastus
can gnaw Iron, Lib. 8. Not. Hist. c. 57.
and do greatly hunt after your gold dust and digest it. But that in a man's
stomach there is the like virtue and faculty to digest Mineralls, and that
indeed naturally and commonly none can easily affirm it; for to the more noble
Creature, nature has assigned also a more noble Element and more easy, that
by reason of the hardness of food and difficulty of concoction, the creature
might not in dispatch of more weighty matters and subtler actions suffer
retardation. And which way should any Mineral, swallowed down, and before it
be well masticated in the mouth, by the ventricle, be possibly consumed, since
neither of Vegetables nor Animalls there are many grosser and harder parts,
that avoiding the preparation of the mouth, can in and by the stomach be
easily digested. Hence it is that there have been observed little bones
Tendones Ligaments and other crude things, by compost cast out again, the same
not altered.

There was one who unawares swallowing down a piece of Leather, after six
months time by stool did elect the very same nothing diminished, as Hildan
has it: Cap. 1. Obs. 31.
I knew a worthy man who having swallowed a little raw piece of Pomecytron, a
little after incurred an intermitting Tertian Ague, which could not be
assuaged till that portion was by vomit first cast up again, which was seens
for all this nothing altered. It has been noted that for two years a piece
of Cheese stuck in the stomach of a certain Matron, and by vomit afterward to
have been eiected. Neither does necessity seem here to enforce that we should
fly to any secret quality of the ventricle, since Natures intention chiefly and
her aim must be well weighed and considered, for she had rather man feed upon
that may beget a more subtle spirit. But what need many words? dos not we see
daily that Mineralls, so as they have bin taken have bin cast up again raw and
indigested? Lib. 1. De Not. facul.
Galen reports of a gold King that being held in the mouth was unawares
swallowed down, and after grew out again unchanged. Praemed. Observe. med. c.
27.
Such a like thing has Cornarius published of a Girl of eight years of age.
Another at one draught of Ale gulp'd down three Dies, which the third day by
stool he sent forth again unchanged, as relates Forestas. Some one there was
that upon a small wager swallowed down iron nails, and did again eiect the
same erude and indigested, as witnesses Cardanus. Shenck writes of one that
by excrement voyded again hard flint stones the same he had ingested. Lib. 8.
De rer. variet. cap. 40. Lib. 3. obs. med. 2. C. ^0. De abdit.
A certain woman as notes Benivenia, devoured a brass needle, which at
length on the tenth year came forth, through the ventricle being pierced, at a
little hole, and the wound consolidated and cured. A certain maid that had
swalls wed down a small needle did on the foureteenth day eiect the same not
altered, as Hildanus has it. Centur. 1. observe. 34.
Forestus writes of one that had swallowed the point of a knife, and restored
the same by the Posteriors not changed: who relates too of his Brother, that
was then but a boy, that in sport he swallowed down a pellet of Lead, round,
but slatted, and the third day with, out trouble did return it with his
excrements. These and the like which in Authors are here and there obvious, and
oftentimes in practice do sufficiently evince that Mineralls swallowed down
cannot by any man's stomach be concocted. Nor is it so that any one should
hence conclude, that the internal use of Mineralls is needless, and in vain
commended by Physicians: yea, that Gold, Silver, and the like are without
success propined unto the sick, since they are better able to corroborate a
man's purse than his body, In Tetrad. c. 25. and 31. and in pest. Alexand. Lib.
2. c. 7.
to which opinion among others subscribe Quercetanus, as also the Augustan
Physicians who in their dispensatory Ad^auriam Alexandrin: affirm that the
addition of gold and silver in Medicines satisfies opinion more then the
intention, and out of an Arabian excess introduces to feed the eyes and to
make a greater price for the Apothecary, since it is so far from being that our
natural heat possibly should draw any virtue from them by its exhalation or
power although intense, that the power it self being entire, and not having at
all suffered any change by assumption we should observe it to be refined.

Howbeit although Gold which is reckoned for a medicament as well as other
Mineralls, cannot by the treasury of our stomach be exactly wrought,
dissolved, and converted into Chyle: yet it suffices that it may by its solar
influence, and its radiation of a secret virtue into the very heart by a kind
of sympatheticall power, be as the Sun unto the Microcosme, and confer its
faculty to this intrall. Yea who could ever deny that there may from Leaf Gold
a certain spirit like some evaporation be communicated to our spirits
analogicall to the same, since we cannot deny but that in other Mineralls too
there is such a like spiritual effluxion that insinuates it self into our
bodies? That the Turquoise stone externally applied and contained in the hands
does, even to be admired, assuage the flux of blood, Tr. de Gemmis
this not only Boethius de Boot has left written in a proper Chapter, and
approved with some observations, but I my self too have found the like
efficacy of this stone in an over much Haemorrhagie. An old man of seventy
years of age, having for some days made a bloody Urine, was by fit medicines
inwardly took, recovered, and a little after by reason of some more violent
motion, and some greater rupture of a vein he had another more dangerous
flux, and his strength too was very much weakened: inward and outward means and
remedies nothing prevailing, I advised the use of the aforesaid stone: having
therefore got Rings of them, he applied them to his hands, and before an hour
was quite spent ('it is a wonder to be spoken) the flux of blood not without
admiration ceased, and he recollecting his strength by little and little
recovered health. The same Rings have done good to many in an over much flux
of the monthly Terms, as in an Haemorrhagie too or an overmuch bleeding at
the Nose. But after that some other examples likewise have declared the
efficacious virtue of these stones, is it not manifest out of Platerus, that
the hanging by of Crystal does very much good in the Vertigo? Lab. 1. Pract.
de funct. c. p. 246 L^b. De dolor. page 853. Schol. in Ep. 160.
the same Platerus teaches that the Saphir applied unto the eyes is
defensative against the Meazells. Nor is this very thing unknown to the
poorest women. What shall I say of the Amber? whose attractive quallity even
with any kind of heat can be provoked. When not two years ago the Meazells
here were Epidemicall, they got for a little Girl, at the beginning of the
Disease before the Meazells brake forth, Bracelets made of Amber, put them
about her wrists, and tho they often fell from the left hand, yet they remained
still applied unto the right, in that place such an immense company of Meazells
broke out, that not without trouble was she constrained to endure their heat.
For this cause also to draw back pain from the head it is put under the soales
of the feet. That indeed it reverts the Catharrall defluxions from the eyes if
put on the nape of the neck, and so worn is a thing known (as they say) to
bleare-eyed men and Barbers. But if these and infinite others (to say nothing
now of the virtue of the Nephriticall stone) only outwardly applied confer a
notable help unto the body, and by their spiritual effluxion resist a
diseasing constitution, why have not Gold and other things inwardly taken bin
possibly effectual? Is it not so, that if a trembling of the parts arise by
the use of Quicksilver, and that you put but a piece of Gold Coin into the
mouth, it very self is with-drawne even from the Center of the body? The
servant of a certain Goldsmiths when by the continual use of Quicksilver he
perceived his sight to be weakened, by my persuasions, for some days he carried
a Duckat of Gold in his mouth, whence daily he contracted a whiteness and had
his sight restored: the virtnall power therefore of the medicament may be
communicated to appropriated members, even in that very body that is not
disposed, since that our heat may somewhat work into that very body, which
heat yet woe find now and then to be very effectual in many subjects. Amatus
Lusitanus reports of one that had swallowed down a piece of brass money, Cent.
2. Curat. 69.
and perceived not any harm^ it did him, but that his body became something
lean, yet a year after he did egest it with the excrements, but small and so
consumed by his natural heat that it drew all into a wonderment, and the same
Author adds that he saw at Ferarie a Glutton who could eat, concoct, and
digest Leather, shells and broken Glasses, that every one would call him
Estridge, of whom you may read too in Columbus. Lib. 15. Ana. Tom p. 486.
So that piece of silver money which a Girl of nine years of age, a Cityzens
daughter of Insterberg swallowed down, we saw was somewhat altered but not
consumed, for the seventh day after she had v^yded it again, 'twas seen to be
of a color quite black, not made so but by the internal heat, nothing
diminished. And not unlike to this have we noted something about our Rustic^:
for when for eleven days the Iron knife had lurked in the Ventricle we saw it
a little changed at the point, as if it had sustained a kind of violence of the
fire. But who could believe that successively and in time this Metallic body
might have been consumed? since rather the constitution of the stomach would
have been more weakened, his heat faintned, and the aforesaid reasons advised
otherwise. Therefore the excision of the ^ni^^ was necessarily thought upon:
for such things as against nature are detained in the body, reason advises,
and Galen faith that they must be removed.

Position 4. As the knife which was swallowed down could not have bin consumed
by nature, so by her neither could it any way have bin evacuated: And since its
longer stay in the Ventricle might have inferred no little molestation and
damage; it was by Section to be pulled out.
SOme one perhaps would deem the excision to be foolish, if either its own
presence nothing troubled and endamaged, or that even Nature her self at the
last might have expelled it. For it has been observed that many things for a
long time and without danger have lurked in the nobler parts. Lib. 5. Locor aff
c. 1. Com.
Thomas Rodericus Aveiga reports of an Hind that was found bearing of an Arrow,
she anciently had gotten from the Hunter, infixed in her heart. L. 4 Anat. c.
24.
Out of Alexander Bened. the sequents are taken forth. A certain Grecian
(says he) S^^urus by name, a man very well known to me, was in the
expugnation of Chalcis with an Arrow wounded about the Temples, carried away
Captive by the Turks, with his wound after a sort healed, he lived a slave
twenty years. at last he came free to Cydon, and in five years after in
summer time, as he was washing his mouth with cold water, unmeasurable sneezing
being provoked, great itching, amongst extreme strivings there issued out of
his Nostrills a piece of the Arrow of half a fingers length, with an iron head
and left not any skar. How a little Pistoll-shot could for six Months without
any harm lie lodged betwixt the Cranion and the Dura matter, Observe. Chiru^g.
2. l 2 Lib (...). c p^ax. med admirab. obs. 5.
Hildan has left it written for posterity.

Zacutu^ Lusitanus has observed also an admirable example, yea a kind of
Prodigy in nature, speaking of a Whore that had bin too long at the Alehouse,
and being drunk and in a scolding humor railed at every one she met, but
behold, she had from another man in the same pickle given her a deep wound on
the top of the head with a knife that was very long and sharp: so that for
many days without sense and motion she remained half dead, at length with a
great deal of pains she was cured and went abroad, eight years after this,
being dead of a malignant fever, and in the Hospital by the Anatomist
dissected in the head, where betwixt the Cranium and the Dura matter was found
half the knife, wherewith before she was wounded, all rusty, she so long as
she lived after her wound, did do her business about the house, and felt not
at any time any hurt in the Ruling or Animal faculties.

And to conclude even nature, who is an admirable curer of her self, does at
last frequently expel those things that against nature she participates; by
this means the knife, whereof mention is made out of Hildan, Pos. 1.
that was swallowed down, and for two years complete lurking in the body, in
the end through an Abscesse made by nature excresced. 5 Epidem. Sect. 7. Hist.
7. Cent. 2. Obs. 74. etc. c. 1. Obs. 62. Lib. 5. pract. part. 4. c. 5.,
Hippocrates writes of an Arrows head that was inflicted near unto the
Groins, was the sixth year after drawn out. The like may be seen in Hildan,
as also in the most famous Sennertus Schenk and others.

Howbeit neither of these could have possibly gained any effect in this our
Rusticke: for first of all, those examples yt are more rare, can inter no Rule,
where are many contraries, or where but a piece of splinter, infixed in the
body, might have inferred an irrecoverable damage. But if that the Iron had
contracted rust within the Ventricle, would not direful Symptoms have thence
followed? for in the stomach very often there do lurk sundry humors either
salt or sour, or sharp, which might have infected or corrupted a Mineral
body, and disposed the Iron to rust. But whether in success of Time through
Abscesse or some other way, it might by nature have been expelled is not
without cause called into question: especially if we regard the length and
weight of the very knife, and then examine the very place being membranous. I
say nothing of that small interspace of time which Nature exacted for the
perfecting so great a work, which little time yet might have exceedingly
troubled our Patient, and easily disposed him unto melancholy.

Position the 5. The members of our body do usually so imbibe the Balsamicke
virtue of internal Remedies, that they are very strong against growing
diseases.
BIckerus will have the virtue of the food we daily use to be such as may be
able to alter the Temperament of the body, In He^met. rediviv. p. 215.
and after a manner induce its own. Card anus remembers (as the same man
reports) that he saw Infants nourished by the milk of other Creatures,
especially of Goats, in whom there was nothing in respect of the habit of the
body wanting* but that they had lost the strength of wit, and as they grew in
years became as it were stupid and blockish. And indeed it is apparently
manifest, that the very medicaments taken again and again and very often, do
communicate their faculty to the body, and the parts thereof, and as it were
impregnate the same. For Nature out of the corporeal mass of the Medicament,
extracts a convenient juice and spirit wherewith being furnished, she
endeavors to meet and resist a Disease that is coming. But although at first
in a manner it does not like our nature, because it tastes not the virtue of
the Aliment, wherewith she is more delighted, but the medicament, yet by little
and little successively by continual usage, she does make the same so
familiar to her self, that we may see nature now as it were quite altered. The
Maid, that was from her tender years nourished with Poison by Napelli, a King
of the Indians, shall be able to testify as much by her example.

Historians do declare of Mithridates King of Pontus, that with the daily use
of Mithridate he so strengthened his body against Poison, and so altered his
Temper that poison could not do him any hurt, even then when 'twas most
desired, for after that he had determined to dye rather, by drinking off again
and again a deadly and violent poison (wherewith his Daughters were slain)
then to fall alive into the power of the Romans, he sound not any poison so
powerful as could kill him. If Hellebore, says Smerius, be devoured by the
she-Goate, In Miscellan p. 177.
and that it be concocted and transformed in the stomach, then in the Liver,
and cast off all in the Teates, and from thence transplanted into an other
species, nevertheless there will remain in the milk begotten of this Plant a
purgative quality or operation. That likewise is not to be forgotten (...)
which Crato has observed of one, In Epist. Medic. Schol. 16.
that by the continual use of Rhubarbe, was not only freed from the Dropsy,
but the rest of his members also were made more robust, and by a kind of
natural Balsome extracted from the Rhubarbe corroborated, and the complexion,
and all the functions of the whole body became again to he very good, and he
lived safe and sound without any infirmity until he was old. And when after
that he had inflicted upon his brain a deadly wound, beyond the hope of
Physicians and Chyrurgions he found a most happy cure. Manderer promises of
the Aloes, In Aloedar. Marocost. c. 13.
that if it be often used yet in a due way, it is even of it self alone
sufficient to maintain our health, and that it only has heretofore preserved
many a man's faculties, strength, and health, and prolonged their age for many
days, and produced them a more free and liberal Progeny of years: for that
it drives away, says he, all kind of rottenness as well in the living as in
the dead, that it vindicateth the humors from all corruptions, and that it
suffers not any thing to live or continue in man but that which may concern
his life and health. Moreover if it with-drawes Catarches and defluxions that
may fall into the joints, so as witnesses Mormannus a most famous Physician,
those that will make a continual and familiar use of Aloes may be secure from
every Gout, and Catarrhe, Est enim in Aloe balsamicum quid dam, balsamo nostro
natu^^^ admodum confine, cunctos humores succosque, siquidem naturales adhuc
fuerint, conservans, prater naturales evacuans, medios emendans, universos,
putrifieri accorrumpi prohibens. That is, for there is in Aloes something of
the Balsome somewhat near unto our natural Balsome, preserving all humors
and moistures, if indeed they be natural, evacuating those that are
unnatural, beitering such as are indifferent, not letting any of them to be
putrified or corrupted. And for this cause Ioannes Hermannus a Physstian of
Wittemberg, frequently using the Pills of Aloes did successefully prolong his
life unto the eightieth years as writes Doring. Lib. De Mith. page 149. 4. F.
1. c. 1.
Nor need any fear, that Nature loathes the accustomed operation of the things
she takes, because as Avicen says, a Passion cannot be made of things
accustomed, whence it is that Averchoes, L 7. c. 2. L. 22. F. 3. L^b. 3. c. 78.
Avicen, Paul, are of opinion with Hippocrates, that in Diseases the remedies
are so be shifted, and dissuade the continual and often using of one
medicine. But not unfitly may one distinguish betwixt Preservative and Curative
remedies: and that Preservatives are not to be altered since Nature out of the
Remedy that is familiar to her is so formed, and so firmed that she can more
easily drive away the slighter diseasing grudges, but growing on, and infesting
the body, more happily thrust them forth a doors, as the alleged examples
^^e me to prove. In Curation the matter's otherwise, for there especially if
success answers not desire, medicaments may be varied, but if the Physician
perceive that any one does help, who of a sound Judgment would attempt to
alter it? Hence is that of Hippocrates to be observed: Siquis omnia
convenienter exactoque judicio faciat, nec quit quam ea ratione efficiat, t^men
ad aliud non est progrediendum, modo id, maneat, quod ineunti^us remedijs visum
est. That is if a man do all things conveniently and in an exact Judgment,
and cannot that way effect any thing, yet must he not pass on to some other,
so long as they seem to be growing remedies. For as we must not rashly
persever in the use of remedies, so neither must we over hastily and presently
go from their use, and in long diseases, as teaches Celius, time, Lib. 1. c.
2.
as it makes them so it takes them away too, we must not instantly condemn,
if any thing be not quickly profitable; the less indeed must we alter any
thing if at last it help a little, because it is time that compleates the
profit. Yet it any thing do not soon enough succeed it is lawful for to try
some other thing that is like unto it, according to that of Huldas, 8. Pract. c.
ult.
when a man has been too long a curing with one medicine, and that it boots
not to pass over unto a contrary, because perhaps the matter hereof agrees
not to such a Nature etc. But as in all things else, even so here must we yield
something to custom and unto nature, that by Nausea being provoked the malady
be not exasperated. So then Iprescribe for that purpose this Baisamick potion.

olei olivar. com. Lib. ss Hyperici com. Vnc. ij. misce.
To be administered before the Section, so that Nature might imbibe a kind of
virtue and efficacy to resist Symptoms that are growing on and to be feared,
and to conglutinate the wound it self. Nor did success in this deceive our
hope: for the Patient not only all the time of his Curation remained free from
every kind of Symptom, but also made a a little time serve to finish the Cure,
and indeed successefully, Nature hasting to consolidate.

Position 6. As the Attractive quality of the Herculean stone is scarce
perscrutable whereby even through a hinderance lying in the way, it is able to
exercise its faculty: So whether the same, being pulverized and mixed with
other Medicaments, it retain the same power of attracting Iron, is a thing
that very worthily deserves judgment and enquiry.
THere is in the Lodestone a kind of abstruse and hidden power, which has not
only drawn the wits of many into admiration, but provoked them also to search
into it. But whether they all may have their wishing and desire satisfied to
know, is not without cause questioned. For as Nature has in her bosom many
secret things, which she will have no oftener to admire than to understand, so
there is something in the Lodestone that nature will have lie hid, which
humane understanding should hardly attain unto, as says Boethius de Boot. But
leaving the Divine faculty wherewith it respects the Pole, Tract. De Gem. cap
deingenete
I think it good to consider the Attractive only, wherewith it covets Iron.
All almost agree in this: That the Lodestone draws Iron, but not in this,
which way it should come to pass, and whether pulverized it might yet retain
any thing of the Attractive quality? Some have dreamt of bodies that have been
made crooked by the Load stone, like Hooks or things crooked at the end, and
that these draw Iron to them. Others have feigned of Atoms starting out from
the Lodestone* and insinuating into the pores of Iron, and driving out the
very Iron Many conceit that the drier the nature of the Lodestone is the more
humid Iron, it has attracted. Lib. 3. De natural. f^cult.
Galens conceit was that the Lodestone by a kind of vivifying virtue, and an
inbred property draws Iron as a convenient food for it self. There are those
that assign the cause of Attraction to the similitudes of substance, and
Ioentity of principles: Others say that Iron is so drawn by the Lodestone as
matter is by the form, because since the more imperfect things desire their
own perfection: It pleases some to say it is a secret Sympathy which in
Naturalls deserves not the meanest place. Some latter Writers make account
that Iron is not drawn to the Lodestone but moved as to its Matrix, by whose
hidden principiations it might be perfected, as the earth unto its Center.

The Parace^sians then ke that there is a kind of Iron spirit that is resident
in the Load stone, which they guess too draws more strongly in an other body
than in its own; none of these opinions can satiate the mind, nor satisfy the
desire to learn, but for this time to discuss the same any further 'twill not
be worth the labor. The most learned Cabeus in a famous Tractate of the
Lodestone says, that the cause of the attractive virtue in the Lodestone is
a quality of two kinds, wherewith Iron is so disposed by the Lodestone that it
can provoke the very same unto it self. But is not a secret thing made
manifest by a thing as secret? for what is that quality? what kind of ground
does it acknowledge? is it manifest or hid? is it a mere kind of disposition?
Exert 131
In good troth yt of Scaliger is most true: Nos in luce rerum tenui caligare,
in mediocricaecutire, in majore caecos esse, in maxima insanire. That is, in
the sparing light of things we are dim-sighted in the indifferent we ware
blind, in the greater are stark blind, in the greatest stark mad. What? if we
should affirm that there is a kind of sulphurous spirit endued with this
hidden property, which notwithstanding may have a very near affinity with the
spirit of Iron; none shall deny that will now narrowly look into the inward
nature of Mineralls and Mefalls: yea that will consider the excellent quality
of the Actractive virtue, whereof we shall speak hereafter, but that there is
a kind of Mineral virtue in the Load stone.

Indeed I call the same Sulphurous according to those principles of ye
Chymicks, which we see are even very much in Mineralls, for they appoint the
power of drawing that it contain in it self as it were a glewish humor, and
something that is oyley yet of an exceeding subtlery. But it sufficiently
appears by this, that the Lodestone is full of sulphur, because with the
violence of fire this very sulphur may be drawn out, and like a flame it can
put it self forth, which also being so drawn out, Cabous teaches that all
the Attractive faculty does perish. Yea by its sulphurousnesse or a sulphurous
and as it were vivid effluxion easily so qualifieth Iron as so gain the like
quality of attracting other Iron which would not follow if there were naturally
only a watery subtlety and Mercuriall liquor. However it has the virtue of
Penetration not sufficiently to be extolled and expressed, so that although
shut up within never so thick a Chest, yet must it look unto the North.

And the Attractive faculty of the Lodestone as witnesses Baptista Porta,
Lib. 7. Mag. nature c. 16.
can no way be included, no way be bolted out or restrained but that it must
invincibly penetrate, and so show its power, as if there were nothing in the
way that could forbid it: for the virtue of the Stone, it is Planetary, very
subtle, going through the hardest bodies, and with no hinderance, even
whatsoever fore-stopped, for it can as easily diffuse its faculty through the
^ollidest stone as through the thinnest air. Lib. 2. c. 6. p. 124.
Be it says Cabeus, that some Iron tool touch not the Lodestone, but must
come nearer by four fingers breadth, so that betwixt the Iron and the
Lodestone whatsoever body it be that lies betwixt, whether solid or subtle,
the Iron presently conceives from the Lodestone the Magneticke qualities, and
by such a nearenesse although it touch not the Lodestone, it acquireth the
Magnetic virtue, whereby speedily it directs toward the Poles, it draws Iron
to it self, it hangs by it self, in one word, the Iron must be magneticall.
Lib. De art Magnefia. Th. 6.
Another experiment is observed out of Sueickard, Iron, says he, underlayed
with Cork, let it floate in some Vessel, which with the Lodestone outwardly
applied notwithstanding any impediment, is instantly moved, and as it were
sensible of the price of a friend, will without delay, having left its place,
as desirous to insinuate it self into his embracement, come to the brim of the
Vessel. You, the whilst which way soever you shall please, having applied the
Lodestone about the midst without the Vessel, shall carry to and fro the
needle that floates within, whence may be made many most pleasant spectacles to
be seen. The same Author prepounds a way how Iron may go upon a Table. P. 55.
Lay (says he) a needle half upon the Table, yet having first touched the
Basis of the needle upon one part or other of the Lodestone, which being done,
under the Table apply the Lodestone to the place that is right against the
Basis of the needle, and presently with exceeding delight you shall see the
needle erecting it self, and as you shall guide it, moving beneath the Table,
which if you but controvert, you shall see it not go upon the Basis but the
point, from which verefied experiments the Sympathy and Affinity of the
Lodestone and the Iron at once may be concluded. There he these that
introduce here the Identity of substance, and so indeed Iron should attract
Iron: but there is in Iron, and there is in the Lodestone a peculiar Spirit,
both of them friendly using a familiarity betwixt themselves and conspiring.
The spirit of the Lodestone draws Iron, and the spirit of the Iron receives
and suscepts this effluxion, and so is endowed with that faculty, and made
likewise Magnetical.

This excellent virtue of Attraction as, it is by all almost granted to be in
the Lodestone when it is onfire, so whether also being pulverized it can do
the same, is a thing questioned. Libavius Lib. 1. Syntagm. Arcan. p. 38. and
Lib. 1. De bitum. in Genesis p. 96. as elsewhere too, denies that the powder of
the Lodestone does attract, because the virtue thereof by confusion may be
corrupted. Gilbertus and many others that professedly treat not on this matter,
subscribe this opinion. Cabeus hereof suspends his Judgment, and leaves it to
Physicians to discuss. Wherefore I hold it not unprofitable, if partly we
shall examine the reasons that other men have produced, and partly confirm a
contrary opinion with some Arguments, for the friendly Reader to collect which
of them may be true. For Gilbertus Libavius and others that detract all virtue
from the pulverized Lodestone, stone, the sequent Reasons may propugne.

1. That in the pulverized Lodestone there can be no Ordination of the Poles
to draw Iron to Iron, for it may be so done that even the Poles driving Iron
to Iron may be directed, and so not traction, but a further promotion rather of
the Iron would arise.

2. That as many do suppose, there can be no Equator or Pole in the powder
of the Lodestone, by whose benefit that Attraction might or ought be made.

3. That being modified with Wars, Oil, and other fatty things it may loose
its faculty.

4. That betwixt the Magneticke powder ingreding the Emplastor, and its
attractive virtue there can be no proportion, for to small purpose are a few
grains of the Lodestone mixed with a little portion of Emplaster to any part
applied, when to draw Iron some ounces thereof are held unable.

5. That the Lodestone added to an Emplaster may oftentimes be of little
force. Nevertheless these reasons seem to be but infirmely knit. For to the
first I answer; first that the Attractive faculty from the converted Poles; may
communicate it self to the other Poles directly aspecting unto Iron, and that
because of the presence of it is near and Mineral friend, to wit, the Iron,
that so by reflection that faculty might be extracted. Secondly the Lodestone,
Lib. 1. c. 5. page 17.
ae Gilber^us has it, reduces and disposes the Lodestone into orderly
concordances: those parcells therefore that have respect unto Iron were able to
overthrow the rest, if not totally, yet so as that by a natural force they
might be able to unite their power, and against that part most where the
greater force puts forth it self, and that is against iron, to help the very
Iron too, to be extracted, however it be that the pulverized Lodestone may
be commixed with a harder matter of emplaster. To the Second, It is held
untrue that there cannot be even in the least portion of the Lodestone, the
Pole and the Equator, for otherwise it would follow that there is not in any
Lodestone either the Pole, or the Equator, except that pure earth should the
same exhibit; or that so only there were in every Mineral one only
Equator, whereof yet the contrary experience shows, since but from one
greater Lodestone Artificers can turn many lesser Globes, of which every one
has his Pole and his Equator; to say nothing that the Lodestone is a kind of
similar body whereof anon. To the third Cabeus shall supply his Answer, who in
the quoted place affirms, that there is nothing in nature can deprive the
Lodestone of its faculty but fire and old age: for the Lodestone being
exagitated by the fire does loose his flagrant sulphurous Spirit, which being
lost there is destroyed, with all that tractive quality residing in the
Bituminous or sulphurous spirit as was said before. But by old age the
radical moisture, as in all other mixed bodies, does not so totally perish as
it is soporated, because as the same Cabeus testifies, the Lodestone revives
if put again to another perfect Lodestone, P. 131.
and by the same impregnated. To the fourth which concerns the proportion of
the body Trahent ano Trahend, I say, we must not respect so much to the
corporeal quantity, but the active quality rather: for if we shall subject
other notable medicinal compositions, to an Examen, even a small portion of an
ingredient will promise a great effect. And indeed let us look upon the very
Simples. How great virtue ingredes the body of the Heart, with the Dietany he
expells the Arrows that are inflicted on him? What proportion is there betwixt
a violent Catharticke and the humors to be drawn and evacuated, where but one
only pill very often suffices, and which usually can induce an Hyper
catharsis? Is there not, by the benefit of a medicament assumed, and from a far
off, either from the head or from any part of the body, the peccant matter
pleasantly drawn forth, whether yet not the corporeal mass but the virtue
only of the Medicine arriveth: why therefore should not the Magneticall
quality communicated with an unguent suffice? To the fifth it may be alleged,
that the choycest Lodestone is to be elected that is to be permixed with an
Emplaster, if chiefly that effect ought to be hoped for: But that which has
its Mineral spirit exhaled by fire or old age is instly to be refused, since
it can retain no longer the virtue of Attraction.

For the contrary opinion, other sequent Reasons there are more weighty that
may be produced undertaking the Patronage of a tractive virtue in the
pulverized Lodestone. 1. The virtue or that Magnetticall tractive spirit is in
all, and all in every part, as affirms Cabeus and Gilbertus dissents not from
him. L. 2. p. 105.
The smallest pieces therefore of the Lodestone endowed with this spirit have
been able also to draw Iron: for neither is the Lodestone (...) dissimilar
body, whereof a part being cuto^^ participates not of the living form, but it
is a similar body, where even the least part can have the virtue of the whole.
Has not also a little Corn of Pepper a proportionable quality of heating.
Does not a small portion of Amber too draw chafe? yea this very Amber being
pulverized and well mingled with Leaven, and put to the soales of the feet to
extract heat, or to the nape of the neck to retract fluxion is even by poor
women used with very good success. Indeed I do confess that not all p^^^s
are equally so endued with that sulpherious spirit that they should equally
participate the faculty of (...) traction, for many excrements are mingled with
almost all Mineralls before they be prepared, which at last being sequestrated
they become the choycest Mineralls. Let the same Judgment be of the
Lodestone. Secondly the spirit of the Lodestone is of a Mineral quality, and
has a steady nature, so as that it can not easily be parted from the body or
the parts thereof, yea the smaller parts, which evsn the examples of other
Saline and sulphurous Mineralls do attest; the Lodestone therefore shall
loose nothing of its virtue by, trituration or being pulverized. Thirdly there
are also other kinds of Vegetables and Animalls, whose nature yet is more
flitting and less steady, that by trituration and pulverizing may loose this
Attractive or Magneticall quality as they call it. Practice teaches that the
head of a Swallow pulverized and mixed with Honey attracteth all things infixed
in the members, which live Crabbs too are said to do being confused and mixed
with the fat of a Hare. A Bullet or an Arrows head is easily extracted with
these sequent things:

Ovorum ex Cancris utris. unc. 4. Pingued. Lepor. unc. 5. Succin. albiss. unc.
3. misce and applica.
Yea the Herb Dogs-bane, and the Root being pulverized if laid upon a wound,
it is said by a Magneticall virtue to extract whatsoever perhaps does therein
stick. See Samuel Hasenreffer. Lib. 2. De curand. affectib. p. 360. and p.
406. Avicenna commends this for a most excellent thing:

. Ferment. Mell. opt. aut propol. Ana. Lib. ss. Visci querni quart. 1.
Ammoniaci. q. unum. misc^. F. Empla.
Rogerus affirms it for a thing approved with manifold experience, that the
root of a Reed confused with Honey can extract without pains things infixed.
Lib. 2. Chirarg. c. 4.
Tagaultius also delivers that Dictander Aristoloch, and other things have very
much of the same faculty. That the Empl. Apostolic. can draw forth Arrows and
Splinters stuck into the body. See Nicholaus his Dispensatory, and Weckerus.
Antid. Spec. p. 978 and 979.
If that therefore the Attractive faculty forsake not these things fetched out
of the Rank of Vegetables and Animalls being likewise redacted into powder,
for what reason shall we affirm that the pulverized Lodestone is of a
condition inferior, since the nature of Mineralls is of a more steady quality?
Fourthly, if a lesser piece than indeed can be had in the pulverized Loadstone
be able to draw a weight great enough, as a greater piece will draw a thing
that is greater. But yet we see, First that that parcel wherewith Iron from
the touch of the Lodestone is endowed to draw and lift up a Spanish Needle,
shall notwithstanding be far greater then that piece of the pulverized
Lodestone. Secondly, that the Magneticall needle too being only touched has
the least parcel of the Lodestone, Howbeit affect each other, and desire to
unite through Boardes or a stone Table, more therefore the greater part. Fifthly
Nature, who is a Conserver of her Domicill, endeavors something still to
defend and repair the same: and therefore she labors much and intentively in
the faculties of the very Lodestone, and as it were recollects and unites them
dispersed through the Emplaster, that it may be able to perform the more
succesfull effect. In the like Works of Nature we observe it daily, for she,
to publish her Actions, exalts her virtues both of internal and external
Remedies. Sixthly, because other things too are admixed in Magneticall
Emplasters, that have the like faculty of Attraction: to those therefore if
there be conjoined the virtues of the Magneticall pulverized, howsoever in
other men's opinions but small, they acquire tho a greater power to attract.
Hence the famous Naturalists do highly extol this sequent.

. Lapid. Magnet. Opt. unc. 1. Rad: Aristol. Veriusque. Polipod. Visci quern.
An. Dr. 1. Stercor. anserin: dr. ss. 1. Gum. Ammoniac. Galban. in vino Albo
Dissolut. An. unc. ss. Propol. dr. 2. Mell. unc. 1. Misce pro Emplastro.
Seventhly because that according to the opinion of many, there can be nothing
found or yielded in nature that might impair the virtue of the Lodestone but
fire and old age, therefore not trituration nor oil, nor any thing else, but
much less a less proportion thereof. Indeed Gilbertus will have the virtue of
the Lodestone equally to decrease according to the decreasing of the
corporeal quantity. So that a stone of one pound should lift up a pound of
Iron, and that a piece of an ounce should suspend an ounce. But from him not
without reason does Cabeus disagree, yea the contrary is approved of by the
experience of the famous Sennertus: for the Lodestone is for himself well
furnished, and by many seen, that which is scarce two ounces, draws more than
a pound of Iron, and continually sustaines it hanging by him, and never suffers
it to fall off. See Lib. 6. Practic. p. 3. Others have been able to search and
find out the same. Eighthly, because at a just distance the action of the
Lodestone is employed, for if we consider the situation of the Ventricle or
the Iron lurking in it, together with the Region whereunto the Emplaster is
applies, we shall find that the Lodestone exceeds not the sphere of his
Activity: Lib. 2. Thea^r. not. p. 247.
for as Bodinus witnesses, the Iron ought to be distant from the Lodestone
almost half a foot, but there no such distance is allowed by these. Ninthly,
because in vain had the most famous and expert Physicians framed the
Magneticall Emplasters, and from the Lodestone assigned them the denomination,
if no faculty of Attraction were thence further to be expected. Should so
precious a stone be admixed only for Exsiccation sake? since even Mineralls
of less value are endowed with the same, yea and a greater faculty of
Exsiccation. Hence not only in Felix, Wirtz is the Oppodeldoch composed of the
lodestone to extract Weapons and other things that are unnaturally in the body
as you may see in his Surgery, P.M. 668. and p. 674. L. 5. pract. p. 4. c. 5.
but also in the most famous Sennertus such like Medicaments we find set off
with the pulverized lodestone, which can draw forth weapons, pieced of bone,
thorns, splinters, iron and other things. Such as these are:

1. Cerae nova unc. 1. Colophon. Resin. Flav. An. Lib. 4 Ammoniac. unc. 2
Bdellij unc. 1. Succin. Citrin. unc. 3. Ol. e Vitell. Ovor. unc. 4. Lap.
Magnet. unc. 5. F. S. A. Empl.
2.. Cera Vi gin. unc. 4. Terebinth. unc. 2. Lap. Magnet. unc. 1. ss. Fabar.
Excort. unc 1. Axung. Lepor. unc. ss. F. S. A. Empl.
3.. Cera. Terebinth. An. unc 6. Colophon. Pie. Naval, Ana. unc. 1. Ceruss.
vitriol. Romans an. unc. 4. Lap. Hamatit. Magnet. an. unc. 2. Mastick. unc. ss.
Thuris Camph. Mum. Sang. Dracon. an. unc. 1. Ol. Juniper. unc. 2. ss. Ovor. Dr.
6. Caryophill. dr. 2. Hypericil. unc. ss. Lumbricor. unc. 1. M. F. S. Ar. Empl.

See likewise in Crollius Basil. Chym. p. 267. also Hartman in Comm. Nichola.
Dispens, and Wecker in Antidot. Special. Lib. 2. p. 981. and 989, 997.999.
Munder makes a great reckoning of the Description of Oppodeldoch in his
Tractate De Calcantho. c. 7. and out of Sennertus Lib. 5. Pr. p. 414.

Tenthly, in the like Cure of Attraction we see that the powder of the
Lodestone is also of great virtue, as the Cure of ruptured folks can
testify. Lib. 7. Chir. c. 15 in Keligraph. cap. 7.
For Pareus and out of him Geiger report of a certain Chyrurgion that had so
cured Childrens ruptures, that having wrought the Lodestone into the finest
flower, and used the same in a Pultis of Barley Flower: did afterward annoint
the Groine wherein the Intestine was fallen down, and asperged it with the
small filings of Iron, the part being bandaged and trussed up as is fitting,
the Curation was thus finished. The efficacy of the Remedy says Geiger seems
thereof to depend, that the load stone being of ye same nature with the Iron
asperged upon the groine out of a desire to attract, does with a kind of
violent force join to it self the fleshy and fatty parcells interiected,
which every way clinging together and binding the laxity of the Peritonaeum,
yea and in success of time cleaving fast unto the very same do intercept the
way, the Intestine or Omentum will slip into; which seems no more abhorrent
unto reason than that we see the very Load stone does this and that way
distract Iron after it through the thicknes of a board that is laid betwixt.
Lib. 1 p. 54
Sucickard indeed according to the opinion of others does after the manner, but
the matter seemed to come to the same effect. First says he, they propine to
the infirm the filings of Steel in the best old Wine, then outwardly apply to
the part affected the lodestone which again constraines and ioynes together
the broken skins that are ready to fall asunder, which when it is done, they
spread upon a Plaster of Dogs-skin the Root of the great Comfrey contused and
made into a Poultice, which being laid upon the part affected, they say they
heal many in the space of eight days.

To conclude, lastly who can deny the experience observed in the Pragensian
Swallow-knife, where likewise the Magneticall Emplaster was used, and the way
showed then where the Section was fittest to be made. In our Rustic something
not unlike this is observed; for upon that place: where a piece of the
Magneticall Emplaster was laid, there arose a little kind of swelling, yea the
sick man then perceived a certain motion of the knife toward that part. But
whence all this? sooth no otherwise then from the virtue of the tractive
faculty of the Lodestone, and other things likewise endowed with an Attractive
quality. Who therefore, these things well considered, could say that the
pulverized Lodestone is nothing worth, and in vain to be prescribed for
extraction of Iron, and to be mixed in Medicaments?

The third Section. Of the very Incision of the Ventricle, and extraction of
the Knife.
THe Body being well and rightly fitted with Balsamic oils and other things
necessary, at last the ninth day of July Stylo nostro was appointed for the
operation. There met therefore with the Deane of the faculty of Physic, the
most excellent Physicians, honorable members of the same College, as also the
Students, Masters of our Art, together with the most experienced Chyrurgion and
Cutter of the Stone, Master Dan. Schwabius my Gossip and Venerable friend now
in Heaven. When all things therefore were ready at hand as well external and
internal Cordialls, as other Chyrurgicalls, the Divine Assistance and
Benediction being first invoked, the Rusticke who with an undanted courage
waited the Section, was bound to a wooden Table, and the place being marked out
with a Coal, the incision was made toward the left side of the Hypochondrium
some two fingers breadth under the short Ribs, according to the direction, and
first the skin and that fleshie pannicle (there was no fat seen) and then the
subjected Muscles, as also the Peritonaeum was cut and opened. And although the
Ventricle did somewhat sink down, and avayding our fingers ends did not so
presently admit of apprehension, and a little staid the Operator and standers
by, yet at length attracted and contracted with a small needle crooked, it
showed that the knife was there, which being laid hold on, and the point
brought upwards, the Ventricle above the same was a little incised, and the
knife succesfully extracted, which was viewed by all that were standing by, and
greatly applanded both by them and the Patient himself, who professed that
this was the very knife he some few days before had swallowed, but the wound
it self when the knife was drawn forth was quickly allayed.

Position the 6. That the worth of the Ventricle it is great, the benefit
greater, the necessity greatest, yet the wounds thereof not to be reckoned of
(if they touch not the upper part of the Orifice) as neither because of the
membranous substance to be thought mortal in themselves, yet not void of
danger.
THere are indeed three Spring heads, to wit, the Disease, the Cause, and the
Effects from whence do flow the number of those that are properly called
Indicants, the Curatory regarding the Disease, the Preservatory which respect
the Cause, and the Vital, this looks unto the effects: yet many things there
are, which the Physician necessarily must heed in the consideration of
Diseases, not as the prime Indicants, but the Indicants and Co indicants of the
true, as is gathered out of Galen. 11. M. M. c. 13. and. 9. M. M. 3. Amongst
these by best right the part affected challenges to it self the Chie^dome,
whose reason and consideration is esteemed to be of so great moment that by
many it has been placed among the primary Indicants, for it not only she
weth with the finger as it were the true Indicants, and so investeth the nature
of Signs, but conferreth much to the insinuation of the things that are to be
done, and their natural administration. Moreover it suggesteth the
Prognosticke grounds, and plainly teaches what issue the Disease may have. In
wounds indeed not only the greatness of the wound and malignity of the cause,
but the excellency and precellency of the part affected is to be regarded,
whereby so we might be able to declare whether the wound thereon inflicted be
deadly, or dangerous, or not deadly. For this excellency has concomitant hoth
utility and necessity, if now then we shall consider the Ventricle, may not an
undoubted Prognosticke of the wounds thereof he made? This part it has the
notablest place of worth, because both suggesting to the whole body the
greatest profit, and is to the same exceeding necessary. For as man cannot
naturally prolong life without meat and drink, so neither can he want the
Organ of the same appointed for concoction. There are indeed many examples of
those that not only for many days but months too, yea years have lived
without any meat or drink, as note Smetius in Miscellan. p. 551. Lang. Lib. 2.
ep. 27. Donat. Lib. 7. Med. Hist. mir. cap. 1. and lib. 4. c. 14. Schenk. lib.
3. obs. med. 39. etc. Ioubert. lib. 1. Parad. 2. Quercitan. Diaetetic. Poly.
Hist. p. 204. Hildan. Centur. 5. p. 113. Sennertus. lib. 3. Practic. par. 1. S.
1. c. 2. and others. But as these are reckoned among the rater things of
nature, so their life too was very miserable until they came again unto the
natural means. Wherefore Nature provided for all Creatures a stomach, that
the food assumed at the mouth, should be by the same received, being received,
disgested, being disgested distributed to all the other parts of the body. Lib.
1. Dc prax. med. adm. Obs. 4.
Zacutus Lusitanus notes of a boy often years of age, that for 3. years lived
without a brain. Out of the same Zacutus it is evident, that in a certain boy
that had the consumption of the lungs, they were not to be found (the Region of
the Thorax after his death being dissected) but only a kind of mucilage grown
to ye Aspera Arteria: and that in a Girl of three years of age, dead of a
continual Quartan Ague, the lungs also were so wasted that nothing of them
appeared but only the skin full of purulent matter, yet not once having
complained ('it is to be accounted strange) of any Cough, or ever spat any
filthiness.

I have observed here at Regiomontium of a Dropsie-woman that was restored,
made shift to rub out for a whole year, so, as to go to Church: and to go
about her domesticke affairs, after that dyed suddenly of a Fever. In whose
Abdomen there was found a little relicke of the Liver, but quite corroded. We
read in Schenk that there was nothing found of the Liver and Milt in Matthias
Ortelius. Lib. 6. c. 88. and lib. 3. c. 72. Aetius tetrab. 4. Sermon. 4. c. 76.
Nic. Flor. Ser. 3. Tr. 3. c. 26. Lang. l. 2. Ep. 39. Benivent. de abdit. c. 11.
Christ. a Vega com. ad ^ph. 18. Lib. 8. etc. Paraeus. Lib. De Hom. genesis c. 41.
Glandorp. in specul. Chirur. p. 185. Sche. l. 4. Obs. 303, 304, 305. Zacut.
lib. 2. p. 196.
It appears out of Aegineta etc. that many women have lived, and canlive
without a womb. Moreover Telesius witnesses. Lib. 5. rer. not. c. 28. and out
of him Hildan* Cent. 4. Obs. Chyrurgic. 51. that in one that dyed of a
continual disease there was not any portion of the heart found, but only the
coat thereof. But that any man ever wanted a Ventricle or stomach, as I
remember, I never observed among Physicians, for nature would not have the food
offered raw and indigested to the parts, but first prepared and thoroughly
fitted in the stomach. Hence also it is that the health and safety of the
whole body depends upon the good disposition of the stomach: when this is well
all the body is well, but when the same is ill affected, a crude and vicious
Chyle is subministred to the Liver the vitousnesse whereof a second coction can
no way mend, and so also after that an impure blood not without detriment of
health is supplied unto every part. This the benefit and necessity of the
Ventricle now long since did Agrippa Menen^us declare at the Senate, being a
Patron for the Commonalty of Rome in an elegant Apologue, and concludes that
the stomach nourishes the body so long as it is nourished, and preserves it so
long as it is its self preserved, and that it is as it were the common
Storehouse, giving to every one its own, and conserving the peace of all,
Lib. 6. Antiq. p. 607.
as it is in Livie. as also Dionys. Halicarnasius, for which cause the stomach
too is by Quintus Serenus adorned with a Royal Diadem, while he says,

Qui stomachum Regem totius corporis esse
Contendunt, vera niti ratione videntur.
Hujus enim validus firmat tenor omnia membra,
Et contra ejusdem franguntur cuncta dolor.
They that strive for the stomach to be King of the whole body, seem to have
good reason, for it being strong all the members are confirmed, and on the
contrary being sick are weakened. But hence must all the wounds of the
Ventricle be proclaimed deadly? So indeed with Hippocrates have thought Celsus
Lib. 5. de re Med. c. 26. Valleriol. Lib. 3. enarr. medic. p. 442. Forest. Lib.
6. Obs. Chirur. 5. Comm. Frambessar. Lib. 8. Canon. and consult. medic. 13. and
Tagault. Lib. 1. Instit. c, 3. who for three coats affirms that the wounds
thereof are mortal. Lib 6. Aph. 18.
1. Because the part it self is nervous and bloudlesse. 2. Because its use for
conversation of life is perpetually necessary and beneficial. 3. Because
medicines cannot to this more inward part be commodiously applied; many do
add examples: Cent. 1. curat. 67. etc.
So Amatus Lusitanus observes of a man that dyed of a slighter wound, of the
Ventricle about the bottom, and other like examples also there are may be
produced, which show that a man may dye even of the slightest wounds.


Indeed Galen long since somewhat doubted of the truth of this general Rule.
For in his Commentaries upon the said Aphorism of Hippocrates, he says, In
the Ventricle it is doubted (to wit, that the wound is deadly) for they say
some sometimes have bin wounded there, but seldom bealed. And in sooth the
Volumes of Physicians witness; That even the deep wounds of the stomach have
been best consolidated. Lib. 2. Meth. c. 503.
Albucasis writes that he had cured the wounds of the Ventricle, and
intestines. Christ. a Vega in his Commentaries to the quoted Aphorism, reports
of a Chyrurgion that swore that he had cured a man who being wounded in the
Ventricle not long after he had eaten, did cast forth the Chyle by the wound.
Cap. 12 de Vulnerib. Lib 3. obs. 122. Cent.
Fallopius confesses that he had cured a man and a woman from whom the meat
and the Chyle egreded. Schenke out of the observations of Oetheus reports of
some Chyrurgions, that constantly affirmed they had undertaken the cure of a
Soldier, a strong and courageous man that by a Rustic Hunting-staffe was
deeply wounded about the right Hypocondrium, whose stomach on the right side
being perforated restored the drink and broth he had taken by the wound: the
standers by in the interim having this Prognostic given, diligently advised
that the wounded part of the stomach brought forth, and the skin should be
fastened together with one and the same future, and so after wards the wound
being succesfully consolidated, the Patient recovered his former strength. The
History of the-Ventricle that was hurt and healed in the Pragensian
Swallow-knife teaches and confirms the same. Some few years ago (as I
received it from credible men) a certain Mariners man living at Dantzike, a
few hours after that he had eaten some Herring and raw Cowcumbers, was wounded
by another in the stomach, the Chyrurgion was called who seeing that the wound
was deep, and supposing the Cure more difficult, for the matter remaining which
he had swallowed did artificially extract the same, and so afterward
succesfully wove out, and finished the Web of this Curation.

Mat^heus writes of a certain Carter, that after supper was wounded by a knife
into the Abdomen, but in a months time the Ventricle grew together, and the
sick man was healed. To this experience there are reasons that do accord,
quaest. Medic. 21.
for the Ventricle does not a little participate of the fleshy substance,
lurking among the common membranes therefore by the virtue thereof the
concretion and coalescence of the wound might be well dispatched: for we see
even daily that the neck of the Bladder having likewise a little carnosity is
healed, when the stone is thence extracted. In Chirur. p. 221.
For this same wound Feliz Wirtz has the best way of cure. Infinite examples
testify that the womb which has the like substance with the Ventricle being
oftentimes dissected, has been again very well consolidated. See Dodonaeus,
p. 282. Cornar. consult. medic. p. 118. Hoch steter. Decad. 6. Obs. 3. in
Schol. Francise. Rousset. tr. de part. Caesar. and Baubin. in append. eiusdem
tract. Sennert. Lib. 4. Pract. part. 1. S. 2. c. 16. and part. 2. S. 6, c. 8.
Then who would deny to the membranous and nervous parts the Balsame wherewith
as they may be conserved, so too afterward may they be united and cured, if
nature be first helped with Art. Secondly it facilitates the Cure, because
things taken at the mouth, yea and outwardly applied may more easily be
insinuated into the wound. Lib. 9. Chir. c. 51.
Hence it is not ill concluded with Paraevo: wounds that pierce the substance
of the Ventricle, the Chyrurgeon shall not let them alone as deplorable and
remediless, yea nor spare labor nor industry in the sedulous Curation of
them, for a doubtful hope is better then a certain desperation. But yet if
they be inflicted upon the upper Orifice, they are to be reckoned most
dangerous, for the Region abounds with Nerves derived a Sextae conjugationis
pari, whence arise exquisite senses and more bitter anguishes, Hipp. S. 5. aph.
2. Cells. l. 5. c. 6.
yea Convulsions which in wounds are affirmed mortal, as also Bilious
vomitings more lacerating the wound, these are to be feared. And last of all
the use of internal Remedies is not so fitting, since they when they are taken
sink unto the bottom.

Of the Consolidation of the wound. The 4. Section.
THe Knife being succesfully brought forth, and the Patient eased of his bands,
the wound was in that manner as was fitting cleansed, and the Abdomen that was
incised, closed up with 5. Sutures, but by their interstices the Balsame was
in^^^ed warm, and Tents impregnated with Balsame laid thereon, and then a
Cataplasme of Bole, the white of an ^gge, and Alum to avert all inflammation
laid upon that. About five in the evening he took this sequent decoction with
the sequent portion of powder.

. Herb. Betonic. Sanical. Matrisylv. Pyrol. an. M. 1. Tormentill. M. ss. Coq.
in. S. q. Aq. Simp.
Then:

. Colat. unc. 3. Ad. Sir. D. Hyssop. unc. ss. Misce.. Pollin. un. Mosch. unc.
1. Ocul. Caner. unc. 1. D. 3. M. F. Pulvis.
This Evening too the Cataplasme was taken away, and the stipticke Emplaster
applied.

The second day of the Disease, or the tenth day of July at staven in the
morning we met again, that night he had rested well, the pulse was a little
quicker, the Urine bloody, with a Sediment of grumous or clotted blood. The
wound we saw well disposed, and the Patient complained not of any dolor, the
wound was mundified with Wine, and two of the sutures being taken away, and the
Balm instilled, the Emplaster was laid on again. This day too he drank of
the broth of a Capon, wherein these following h^arbes were boiled:

. Herb. Veronic. Pycol. Alihemill. ana. M. ss. Stratiot. Hypericon. ana. M. ss.
Agrimon. M. 2. Flo. Cordial. An. Piss. in Colatura parum ebull. Cons. Scabios.
Melis. Ana. unc. 1. ss.
About five a Clock in the after noone a binding up again was ordered after
the manner aforesaid, and being somewhat costive, a suppository was
administered, but without effect. Toward night he took another draught of the
former decoction with the powder.

The third day of the Disease, and the eleventh of July at seven in the
morning the wound was bound up again after the manner aforesaid, two sutures
more being taken away. This night he had slept but a little, for almost all the
whole day before he had slept soundly. His Urine was yet bloody, his Pulse
somewhat remiss and commendable enough, yet felt he a kind of tension with
dolor in the left Hypochondrium, and having had an Enema infused of the
decoction of Barley made up with Cassia and Sugar, but felt not afterward any
evacuation, the sequent was prescribed, that the more succesfully the portion
of clotted blood might be dissolved; for Valeriol. in Obs. will have Savory to
do very much herein.

. Herb. Emolli^nt. an. M. 1. Saturei. Melilot. Chamam. Aneth. An. M. ss. Fl.
Chamaem. Verbasc. an. P. 3. Sem. Lini. Fenegr. Fenicul. Ana. D. 1. ss. Coq. in
S. Q. Aq. S.. Colat. Lib. 1. Add. Elect. lenit. unc. 1. ss. Mel. Anthos. Dr. 6.
Sal. Ge^^m. Dr. ss. M. F. E^ema.
The effect hereof was very commendable: for a great deals of excrement we saw
dyed with a kind of blackness. Also that troublesome Tension was eased, being
anointed at that time with the oils of Molleine and Dill. At five a clock
after the accustomed manner, all things were administered in the binding up of
the wound.

The fourth day of the Disease and the twelfth of the month, the same course
was observed in the mundification and deligation. He had slept well, his vein
yet was somewhat red, his pulse a little fainter: in Pullet broth the sequent
herbs were boiled.

R. H. Veronic. Agrimon. Pyrol. Sanicul. an. M. 1. Betonic. Tormentill. An. M.
ss. Rad. Symphyt. May. unc. ss. Scob. Lign. Sanct. unc. 1. Misce.
His back also was anointed with Vng. Rosaceum. Nor was there any thing
altered in that after noones deligation.

The fifth day of the Disease, and the thirteenth of the month, at seven in
the morning we went again to visit our Patient, indeed he had then but an ill
nights rest, yet was there not any feebling of his strength, and his Pulse
'twas laudable. The Urine we saw of a gold color, with a white Sediment, but
very much and thick: the Pus of the wound appeared good, and the costivenes
was helped with the use of Clyster the wound as before was looked unto, and which
was done too in the afternoon.

The sixth day of the Disease, and the foureteenth of the month in the
morning, the wound was mundified with Wine, impregnated with Myrrh and Aloes,
and the deligation ordered after the usual way. His tongue being somewhat
dryer was humected with Mel Rosatum, but his neck was anointed outwardly with
the oil of sweet Almonds. And the same was observed and performed in the
evening.

The seventh day of the Disease, and the fifteenth of the month he had a quiet
night of it, his Pulse strong enough and now seemed to be safe, the wound
after the usual manner was bound up, and the same done again in the
afternoon.

The eighth day of the Disease, and the sixteenth of the month there was no
alteration made. He drank this day some small portion of Rhubarbe infused Cum
Sir. Dysent Dorner, which gave him but one stool. All the other days after
until the foureteenth of the Disease, the same manner of deligation and
mundification was observed, but that the Balsame was not so often used, least
the wound might come sooner to consolidation than was fitting, and from the
Myrrhed wine also we did abstain.

The things that were done afterward when these days were ended are but
slight, and not worth the rehearsal. Howbeit the Ordinance of his diet was
held to be exact. For though nature be accustomed to grosser meats, yet by
reason of the Ventricle that was hurt alteration of diet for a time was
needfully to be appointed. That negotiaon by reason of crudity might not be
troublesome to the wound and the Patient to himself. And hence had he until
the foureteenth day his drink given him moderately warm.

And so by the grace and clemency of the Omnipotent Jehova, and supreme
Director, and with the singular industry and dexterity of the Physicians and
Chyrurgion, our Rusticke Swallow-knife was restored to very good health, who
now complains not any thing of any dolors of the Ventricle, but being returned
to his accustomed diet and ordinary calling, with us gives thanks to the
immortal God. To him therefore be the glory, praise, and honor for ever and
ever, Amen.

Position 8. As the sudden closing of the wound of the Ventricle, so too the
excretion of clotted blood by Urine is to be reckoned for a benefit of a
provident nature.
THe admirable efficacy of nature in the profligation and curation of Diseases
can with no commendations be sufficiently set forth, and with no sharpness of
understanding enough searched into and unfolded: for even those things, which we
see before our eyes are accounted as impossible, nature alone does execute and
bring to a wished end. She it is that excites the lurking sparks of an inbred
heat, and fights against the violence of Diseases, and usually overcomes them.
She it is that even to amazement often times expells a noxious humor by the
secret pores, and puts it far from our bodies. Whence not less prettily than
truly and learnedly is nature by Baricellus entitled The Captain, Lib. 2. De
Hydronosnat. c. 34.
and the Prefect defending the body from the Ambushes and Assaults of a
Disease, for however a disease the bitter enemy of health may bandy up a force
of various Symptoms and Accidents, whereby in a Hostile manner to assault the
parts of the body; yet Nature like a jealous Defendor endeavors to preserve
it, and the powers thereof from the incursions of symptoms, and insidiations
of the Affects, and with all her might intentively, whereby she may have the
victory. Does not Nature by the excitation of internal heat succou^ing the
disease discuss, and consume whatsoever might hinder their Sense and voluntary
motion, that whom not the laborious hand of the Curer, not the acute industry
of Physicians, nor the diverse kinds of medicaments have been able to restore,
she alone has vindicated from the violence of death and the disease? How often
are the Apoplectickes, who were thought presently to give up the Ghost, by the
benefit of nature recollecting her powers to the depulsion of what was
offensive, healed and revive? And whence by Law it was provided, that not these
that had the charge of the enterments, or the Bearers should presently Coffin
up those whom they took for dead, since in them especially if overwhelmed
with the Apoplex, Epilepsie, or suffocation of the Mother, the soul may often
lurk, which being excited, endues the body again with spirit and life. If
such bodies likewise do not presently dissolve with rottenness and
corruption, they shall not be delivered up for burial till after the course of
seventy two hours expired, wherein it happens that the humors are at a stay
and will not be moved, because the Moon in that time will have run through one
sign of the Zodiac, by the virtue whereof, the docurse of the humors is in
bodies perfected.

Amatus Lusitanus recites a story worth the abservation; A Girl says he of
Ferrarie, Lemn. Lib. 2 Pe occult. Not. Mar c. 3. Forest Lib. 10 Obs. 79 Il hol.
see also Aviceu^. 1 l. Tr 5. c 12. Cent. 4. Curat. 2.
stricken with the Apoplex, was of all the Physicians held for dead, but the
mother loving her exceedingly, did not so easily allow that she should be
buried, and the more, because she had understood of others, that those that are
suddenly snatched away with grievous Diseases, and reckoned for dead, should not
so easily and on a sudden be committed to the Clergy. The Mother therefore
though all said nay, made the Girl to be kept with her for three days, and
the third day the Girl revived, as if she had been risen from the Grave. How
do women that are suffocated with the mother, and presently reckoned for dead,
by the strength of nature alone, as it were take life again, as witnesses the
Volumes of Physicians? The History of that Matron of Collein is notable, whose
House is there at this day to be seen in the New Market, she whother by
strangulation of the Mother, or as others will, taken suddenly away with the
Plague, is buried for dead. But the Bearers they knew of a little Ring that was
left upon ber fingers, wherefore the next night after go secretly to the
Grave, dig up ye Coffin and open it, what comes of it? she that was buried
raises up her self and takes the Bearers Lantern, that being struck with
fear were flying away, and makes have home to her Husbands house, by whom
after wards being known, and a good ordinance of diet used, she recovered and
bare three Sons, whom she brought up to bear Rule in the Ecclesiastical
Ministry, as Cameratius has it. Cerot. 7. Obs 46.
How often are many that have been a long time lame, feebled and shrunk up,
to wit, being strucks with anger, fear, or sore affrighted with the danger of
fire, suddenly restored unto very good health, as examples witness in
Valeriola. Lib. 2. Observe. Medic. obs. 4. and p. 164. Donat. Lib. 7. Hist. Med.
Mirab. 9. Zacut. Lib 1. De med. Princip. Hist. p. 255. Schenk and others.
Secondly nature also usually by ways altogether abstruse, and the secret pores
wonderfully expells forth of the body a peccant humor in the body, and lying
in wait for life, that, that which before had mocked the industry of the
Physician, should by Nature afterward alone be overcome and driven away. She
opens what are shut, no was it were useless destinates them for use. Cl.
Arnisaeus, as witnesses Cl. Horstius, Epistol. Med. p. 459.
observed in a young thief that was dissected, the Anastomosis or conjunction
of the Vena cava and Arteria venosa, as also of the Vena canalis, from the
great Artery to the Vena Arteriosa, to be no more open than in an Infant newborn. How likewise the obliterated Vessels in the diseased of the Dropsy,
Vide Forest. e. 19. Obs. 33. Beniv. c. 42 Donat. Lib. 4. c. 21 Sennert. Lib. 3.
pract c. de Hydrop.
may again be opened for the safety of the sick by the benefit of nature
alone, and the serous matter thence evacuated, practice does teach: But what is
to be said of the motion and pregresse of vicious humors, by ways never
enough to be perceived? Of matter evacuated by Urine from the Thorax among
infinite examples Registered in Authors, that may be testified, which the famous
Sennertus has noted as well in Lib. 2. Pract. p 2. c. 11. as in other places
of a certain young Student, who in the year one thousand six hundred twenty
three, received a wound in and through his Breast by a narrow bladed Sword, on
the right side about the third rib, near the Arme-pit, and going forth at the
Region nigh the Back bone, so that no doubt was made but that the Lungs were
hurt, since the spirit too with a great found issued at the wound, and a very
great abundance of blood was effused etc. This man at first dejected some
blood by stool, but the matter of blood, which was gathered together betwirt
the Muscles and the skin in great abundance and together had possessed the
neck, and caused there a manifest humor without any coughing, was evacuated by
retching, eiecting spittle white enough and plentiful. Who will not say that
beer the secret natural Conflux of Hippocrates takes place? (...)
Who will not wonder at the imperscrutable motions and passages of nature.

But since even this wounded man was not only as he wished, by the grace of
God at short time cured, but also at this very hour is well, and from that
time unto this has not felt any trouble in his respiration, nor in his other
actions Vital, Animal or natural, and for thirteen years lived safe and
sound in a much desired Wedlock, albeit in most painful practice and other
public occupations, for these together he hangs up his vowed memoriall-Tables
unto the most Good and Great God his only preserver, and gives him devout
thanks for so great benefits hitherto underservedly bestowed upon him.
Moreover he gives and so long as life remains, will ever give continual
thanks to his most diligent Physician, the ^amous Sennertus his quondam
Master, for his faithful care, praying for his healthy old age, and the
continuance of his strength and all prosperity. But thou O God protect under
the shadow of thy wings too, ever to come the same man before wounded, and
stoutly defend him against the envy and calumny of the wicked, and at last out
of the most troublesome race of this perfidious age, vouchsafe to call him away
into the heavenly Academy.

These the benefits of Nature providently and exceedingly well working, our
Rusticke also has the experience of, partly in that most sudden occlusion of
the wound of the Ventricle, after extraction of the knife, and partly in the
evacuation of concreted blood by Urine. That the internal constitution of the
Ventricle was able to promote, being more plaited and stored with many foldes,
which if dilated do forthwith again go together; this the inexplicable
goodness of nature, after the Divine mercies. For I pray, what molestation,
what concourse of Symptoms would have risen if the blood had remained without
the Vessels? certainly it had rotted and caused a feverish heats. But if you
shall enquire the ways by which the blood might be carried ^owne to the
Raines, and by the Urine evacuated, you will scarce find them plain, it suffireth
that they are known to nature, whose motion if the Physician diligently
observe, he will be able easily to imitate her. The whole body is indeed
confluxible and perspirable; confluxion is one, perspiration is one, all parts
are consenting, as witnesses Galen. Lib. 6. Epidem. Lib. 3. De nature. Facult.
etc. Hence Nature has evacuated matter contained in the top of the Thigh by
the mouth, in an other as observes Horstius. Lib. 4. Chirurg. Obs. P. 2. p.
353. she has forced down the matter of Tumor about the right knee unto the
Ventricle, and by vomit cast it up again. Hence as testifies Hildan Cent. 1.
Obs. 81. An abscesse about the shoulder being too late opened, the humor
seeking his way downwards by the bottom of the belly, ^ath flowed down into
the privities, and the Natural heat being extinct has begotten a Gangreens,
and by and by after a Sphacell or mortification, but of these enough.

Position 9. As the great wounds of the parts are not to be left to a
Prognosticke only: So neither are small wounds to be dis-regarded, for of
every kind of wounds men may dye, as Hippocrates teaches, and experience
confirms.
TWo things there are which the Physician in his practice must especially
detest, to wit Timidity, and Audaciousnesse: for it, as Hippocrates de Lege
witnesses, argues the impotence; this the ignorance of Art but both expose the
Patient to a more eminent danger; for him whom Nature would have kept up, they
thrust into the Grave. Wherefore in Diseases that are full of danger, the
Physician must be of a ready Judgment, his prudence must direct the course of
a dangerous Curation. But in ^ighter diseases he must set apart all
over-boldnesse, that the malady prevail not against hope, and the sicke-man
dye, which as in all other diseases ev^n so in wounds must very heedfully be
regarded.

Wounds exceedingly mortal, and of all held for incurable, are usually cured
by the strength of nature, and by goodness of the temperament. Also slighter
wounds and which are almost of no moment, have commonly sound but a mortal
issue, the wounded substance of the Brain it self, and a portion there of
being lost, no man but would say that it was to be given up for a deadly wound,
yet beyond hope have men so wounded bin very well recovered, as witness
Valleriol. Lib. 4. Obs. 10. Lib. 5. Obs. 9. Lib. 6. Obs. 4. Hildan. Cont. 4.
Obs. 1, 2, 3. And a Cruce de Vulnerib. Lib. 1. tr. 2. c. 14. and others quoted
in Schenk. Lib. 1. Obs. 40.42. Indeed Amat. Lusitanus. Cent. 3. Cur. 41. in
Comm. is of opinion, that with a little portion of the Brain extracted, not
only the Patient almost always dies, but also if it so happen that any do
escape, that he remains deaf and dumb etc. that the other is true, infinite
examples can testify, ^om. 2. Nosologi disput. 36. quaest. 10.
especially ye which Petraeus relates of a Boy wounded in the head, who
although he lost tos much of the substance of his brain -- yet was he not
only very well recovered, but also there was not any of his Animal actions
hurt, and the same Boy I saw with mine eyes in the year 1615. first when I
studied at Marpurg, he was lusty and very crafty, not only in his employments,
but also villainies. Who would believe that a man with a small bullet shot into
his bowels out of a brass Trunk could have escaped safe? which yet we read
in Valleriola did thus happen unto one. Lib. 4. obs. Med. 9.
So doubtless where Nature plays her part well, and the faculties are firm,
there is no wound to be reckoned of any danger, according to Galen: but where
they are infirm, 10. Meth. Med.
or some other cause also shall molest, nature quickly fails even about a
slender wound. Now long since Hippocrates has witnessed as much in his boy
Philias, to whom, from but the denundation of the bone in the forehead, a
fever happened, which the lividnesse of the bone received, and by and by after
death it self. Somewhat not unlike this fell out here at Regiomont: for but
some few years ago a young Student of an excellent to wardnesse was by an
idle knave wounded to the very bone on the forehead, nigh the Coronall suture,
the fourth day he felt the accession of a fever, and with a Prognostic given
the seventh day dyed. The Captain of a great Ship as witnesses Hippocrates,
with the Anchor having bruised his sore-finger and the bone of his right hand,
an inflammation and Convulsion followed after, and the thirteenth day he dyed.
Lib. 7. not. Hist. c. 73. Lib. 3. enarrat. Med. p. 444.
Out of Pliny we have it, that Q. Aemilius Lepidus of his great Toe, being
quashed at the entrance of his bed chamber, gave up the Ghost. It is evident
out of Valleriol, of Ludovicus Vives that famous man, that of a small wound and
altogether despicable, received in the palm of his left hand, scarce piercing
the flesh next the skin, with a Convulsion that suddenly arose dyed. The like
you may see in Hildan. Cent. 1. Obs. 21, and 5. Obs. 2. etc. Porest. lib. 6.
Obs. Medic 49.50. Gemm. lib. 1. Cosmocritic. c. 6. Matthew. quest. me^. 27.
Sennelt. tr. 6 Pract. p. 371. About some four years ago and more, a
Nobleman L. Marshall of of the field not far from Mount-Royall in Borussee in
a Duel, had given him from another Nobleman, likewise a very small wound in
the Abdomem without hurting the Ventricle and intestines, but he, before a
little half hour quite spent, presently gave up the ghost. A certain other
Electorall Courtier in some brabbles received a small wound in the Legs, but
forthwith expired. Such mischances, alack! do almost every day fall out, but
in the explication of their causes many seem to be at a stay: There are those
that ascribe the success of the unlookt for events to the peculiar disposition
of the Stars, and that also an unlucky issue follows after the evil Aspect of
the Planets, but after the benign Aspect like wise the like effect. But since
this cause is both Universal and very remote, it may easily be hindered with
those that are more near, whereas in dying particular causes may prevail.
Others with Matthew. say that the cause is in the condition and nature of the
open Air when from the coldness thereof a wound may easily receive alteration,
Hippocrates, Lib. 5. Aph. 20. and elsewhere says: (...), that the cold is a
biting enemy unto Ulcers, whereunto Galen. 5. M. Med. 12. subscribes, which in
the wounds of the head is not to be thought unreasonable: for for that cause as
Paraeus, at Paris the wounds of the head are observed to be more mortal than
at Avignon, Lib. 9. Chirur.
and on the contrary with us the wounds of the shins are slighter than with
them. For at Paris the air is cold and moist, but at Avignon the heat thereof
more intense, whereby the humors made liquid flow more downe-wards. For the
like cause the wounds of the head at Bologna are esteemed mortal, which at
Rome though are very easily cured, and on the contrary the small wounds of the
Legs are scarce curable at Rome, which at Bologna admit an easy consolidation,
as witness Bald. Rons. d. Scorb. c. 1. vide et Cl. Senn. Tr. 6. Pract. 373.
Amat. Lusitan. Cent. 6. Cur. 100. Thirdly many there are who suppose we are to
cast one upon nature her self, for say they, if her constitution be laudable,
the natural Balsame vigorous, all things yet go well, and even incurable
wounds usually gain an happy issue. But if Nature be not of that good cheer,
the blood exceedingly corrupt, and nature her self seem as it were for to
dissolve, there verily even the slight and superficial wound is made mortal.
In these subitaneous chances I may say we must have respect chiefly to the
passions of the mind. The air can do much, but successively, for neither will
it cause a momentany alteration, nor will the corruption of Nature her self so
so much as be able to induce, with the concourse of Symptoms a successive
destruction, but after a slight stroke or small wound scarce have they been
able to infer a sudden death. I altogether conceive* that there are three
affections of the mind, that cause this mortality, to wit, violent anger,
exceeding fear, as also sudden terror or affrightment. Which way those
three may alter a man otherwise in good health, it is sufficiently manifest out
of Physicians Books, and daily experience does teach as much.

Hildans conceit is not amiss, Cent. 1. Obs. 18.
that of all the perturbations of the mind anger is the fiercest, and a very
fruitful Another of infinite mischiefs, because as Galen has it, by too much
exagitating ye humors weakening the natural heat, convulsion of the Nerves
stirring up of grievous fits in the body, she does not only change the nature
of man into a most cruel bestiality as it were, but also expose the same to
most eminent danger. Indeed Galens opinion is, that no man can dye of anger:
but not only the examples alleged in Hildan. L c
But there are more also that evince the contrary, especially if on a man
that is too much enraged a wound be inflicted, although it be but small, not
because as it is commonly supposed: Er hat im dat Oort des leb^ns getroffen, You
have taken life in that place, as if in the body life did walk up and down,
and that if that part where life then resides he wounded, a man presently at
that time must loose the same, but rather because the h^mours and spirits being
agitated by anger, and the heat too much faintned, yea by the affluxe of
humors usually extinct, the life must be endangered: for so the Physicians
have observed, that on such as were too impetuously stirred up with an impotent
anger, the Apoplex has fallen, and they suddenly have expired, of whom there
are many examples that I could reckon up, which within these few years have
fallen out at Regiomontium, but it pleases to reserve these for some other
Discourse. Truly they chiefly are thoroughly sensible of a discommodity, hence
who have gotten too hot a temperature of the whole body either by nature or a
disease, for then the natural heat^ may more easily be endangered. And what a
sudden amazement may do, it is not unknown, for this it causes a sudden
hoarinesse, as it is to be seen by many in Marcell. Donat. Lab. 1. De Med.
Histor. Mir. 2. p. 14. Nicol. Florent. Sueton. in vita Galbae. Hadrian. Iun.
Comm. de Coma. c. 10. Petr. Messin. Hispan. in Sylv. variar. Lection. Scaliger.
Exerc. 313. Lenm. lib. 2. de Complex. 1. Schenk. and others, because the heat
and spirits go back to the fountain of life, and forsake the extremities,
whereby cold is brought upon these parts, that not only the heauty of the face
is spoiled, but also young men are made hoary, yea and the wounded brought unto
a sudden and sometimes momentary destruction. And to conclude fear conceived
in the mind does presently exagitate the heart, obnubilate the understanding,
perturba^^ the Animal faculties, and at length so vitiate and infect all our
actions, that by the malignity thereof the imaginary faculty is disturbed from
its state, the brain enfeebled, and the sick man not only in a wonderful
mann^r discruciated, as Quercetanus, S. 1. Diae^. Poly-hist. cap. 9.
but also the vital heat it self as it were suffocated. Wherefore if any one
either with anger, fuming, or stricken with a sudden terror and overmuch
fear, shall receive a wound although but small, not without cause may the
reason of his sudden death be referred unto these effects.

Position the 10. and last. The use both of the Tents and Deligation ordered
twice a day, as in this case it was, even so in other cases is it exceeding
necessary.
IT is a golden Rule of our Divine Hippocrates where he says: A veterum
doctrina residere, and nova praeter rationem comminisci, cum per se temeratium
est, tum in faciendo periculosum. To recede from the Doctrine of the Ancients,
and to invent new ways against reason is in it self as temerarious as in
doing it is dangerous. For albeit there are many things left for this latter
age to find out and amplify, yet if the ancient things be altered and new
induced against reason not so much for verities sake and utility, as for
novelty and poor self glory, it will scarce be able to deserve excuse. The
old Physicians who chiefly placed their endeavors upon Surgery, did furnish
the same with exceeding great study, and intermitted nothing that might make
for the perfection thereof, notwithstanding to go back from their Decrees is
an offense that many neoterickes can not satisfy. All other wases being left.
our Patients case propounds two at least; one concerns the use of Tenis, the
other Deligation instituted twice a day; both they judge unnecessary, yea
supervacaneous and to be superseded for an unprofitable labor. For Casar
Magatus and with him Septalius, whom too do follow many Chirurgions with very
ill success, suppose, that there is no need of Tents in wounds, nor of
deligation to be used twice a day, for think they Tents molest nature by
distention, compression of the part affected, and excitation of dolors.
Secondly that they avail nothing, since the virtue of the Medicaments without
Tents can duly be carried down to the part offended. But however it be to
be allowed that there is no need of Tents in wounds superficial, strait and
generating, but little Pus, as indeed hereunto consolidation to be maturated
as much as may be, nor purposely retarded, not less ignorantly then impiously
persuaded Fioravanta, and as for that cause not long since was Thessalus
reprehended by Galen: ^. m. Meth.
yet other cases there are that necessarily require the use of Tents, because
by the operation of Tents the Orifice of the wound is kept open, that thereat
the Pus might issue. Secondly, that by the benefit of them the virtue of the
Medicaments might arrive at all and every part of the wound, especially that
from the bottom primarily consolidation and unition might be made, least that
by the upper part of the wound being closed, in the lower part an issue for the
Pus might not be afforded, which I have observed very often to fall out by the
neglect of Tents but to produce examples it would be hateful, whereas in many
it would easily move choler. Briefly with Tagaultius I conceive, that in eight
Cases chiefly Tents are not to be neglected, but used.

1. When wounds are either to be enlarged or deterged, or when any thing from
the bottom is to be evacuated. 2. In hollow wounds where the generation of
lost flesh is needful. 3. In wounds altered by the air and sordid, which need
detersion. 4. In confused wounds. 5. In wounds which with Phlegmon or any other
Tumor against nature do much molest. 6. In those that are made by bitings, for
every biting almost, Lib. 5.
as Celsus his opinion is, has a kind of a poison which is always to be
evacuated. 7. In those that must be handled about the bones. 8 Those that now
by oldnesse have degenerated into V^cers full of deflurions. These cases if the
Chirurgian shall not well consider, and by neglect of Tents too much trust and
attribute only to his Emplaster, let him take heed that he has not experience
of the like sad successes, Cent. 4. Obs. 76.
such as Hildan commemorates. Read Aquapend. part. 2. Chirurg. Lib. 2. c. 8.
Peccet. Lib. 2. Chirurg. c. 14. Senn. Lib. 5. pract. 4. cap. 9.
Secondly neither do they esteem deligation so necessary, that every day once
or even twice the same should be used, but sufficient, that at the first the
wound be opened and absterged only on the sixth or seventh day, and with new
remedies administered, bound up: for that because with a more frequent
deligation the wound with the open air is altered, the temperament of the part
destroyed, and that hence is generated a greater plenty of excrements,
conglutination hindered, and that inflammation, dolor and the like do readily
follow after. But on the contrary if deligation be more seldom and slowly
used, that the Temperament of the part offended remains in its due state,
that but little matter of excrements is begotten, that the natural heat is
conserved in its own vigor, that all symptoms are precautioned, and that the
cure of the wound may sooner and more succesfully be finished, for the nature
of the part helped with external Balsame of its very own accord hastes unto
consolidation and averts the symptoms to be seared. Notwithstanding as these
may take place in wounds superficial and but shallow Tagaultius so advising,
Lib. 2. Chirurg. p. 207.
and that deligation is to be protracted until the fourth day, except perhaps
some violent delor may come thereon, or some other troublesome symptom happen:
yet in deep wounds, I hold it to be unfitting so to protract deligation, and
against reason to swerue from the Counsels and Decrees of the Ancients. For
there is no reason that was should fear an intemperate air, but especially the
cold and moist, an enemy to wounds, since that may either be avoided or even
with Art so corrected, that no damage can be thence expected, if by the help
either of fire or some thing else the air be disposed unto a fit
temperatenesse, which being done, the natural beat of the parts affected,
whereon I willingly confess turns the hinge of all the Cure, is conserved in
its due state, no alteration of the Temperament of the part follows after, nor
will there be a more plentiful heaping of excrements, then according to the
nature of the wound. But these are twofold, as witnesses Galen, 3. M. M. 4.
thin and thick, and they not always so disposed that by vapor they might
be disgested and vanish into air; indeed these may be in wounds and cannot
be removed and absterged but by the hand of the Physician. What I pray will
be more necessary than continually to ease nature of that burden, since these
excrements and superfluities remaining, various and grievous symptoms may
arise. But for other causes also a daily deligation in deep wounds especially
will be necessary. That, First indeed the Surgeon well look unto the state
of the part, and of the wound it self, and that he know the same, since
wounds especially at unawares get that disposition, that either their flesh may
luxuriate, or worms therein be generated, or that something else come on it.
Secondly also, that he fit the Remedies to the state and condition of the part
and wound, for their constitution greatly requires that some Medicaments be
dry, some moist, for neither during the whole time of the Curation will one
Remedy be able to suffice. Thirdly, that by daily deligation cleannes also may
be procured, which Hippocrates advertiseth to be heeded, that the foulness
of the bandages and clouts molest not the Patient. Fourthly, because Pus being
daily so evacuated, even nature alone hastes to its Consolidation: for as
sometimes she alone does accomplish this, so is she not able likewise to
evacuate that.


To conclude, experience confirms that by deligation often used if need were,
the thread of the Curation is more easily and succesfully woven out. And which
the History of our Rusticke Swallow-knife can attest: for neither only was the
use of Tents so exceedingly profitable as it was needful; but also deligation
repeated twice a day was with exceeding great profit so ordered, and with happy
success, and the Consolidation of the wound dispatched as one would wish.

But since the most Clement Jehova, and heavenly Arch-Physitian had by his
fatherly grace the chief doing in this whole work, to himself deservedly
must the thanks be given, and He only to be implored, that hereafter also by
his gracious presence he would vouchsafe to be present and President to all
our actions. Let his Name be blessed for ever and ever.

Amen.

A Treatise of the possibility of this Cure.
Cap. 1.
IN so Noble a Mystery to beget things new from the intemperatures of Fancy,
and idle raptures of conceit, built on Vain glory without the sinews of
reason and experience to strengthen such Relations that they may carry their
own weight through the difficulties of envy and perverse opinion, were to
heap the burden of many evils upon my self. First the general suffrage of
the Judicious, who must proclaim such a rash undertaker, conscious of self
affection; a vanity which so blemisheth the man should live in us, that it
makes us but shadows of what we represent. Secondly, a curse from the subject
of this Art (which is man) of whose extremities and sufferings such erroneous
Traditions must be guilty, if any should be so infected with them as to do
hurt by them. Thirdly, the seducing of weak Practitioners, and poisoning their
Studies with such false Tenets, even in their foundation of growth and infamy
in such employments, on the success of whose beginnings, is partly built those
perfections their aptness and natural gifts are capable of, for in them they
are encouraged, being enflamed with desire, to confirm that in their
knowledge, in which yet they are but imp^rfect, and only have a snatch of: for
having not sealed with boldness their Actions, (through a faint assurance of what
they know) such puzzles must needs affright them, with unnecessary doubts, in
all their executions: until experience, bred up by tedious and severe
observations living in the age of many years, and gray hairs should return
the infamy into my Grave, that when my Spirit has met with peace and rest, my
ashes should be raked up in disdain by Posterity, to repeat me with reproach
and dishonor, and this would be the fourth worst and last mischief I should
purchase to that remnant of me the earth must inherit.

Next although ancient Authors have mentioned such wounds mortal, yet Galen
suspected a better success, if attempted.

These times have confirmed some, and confuted many other able Writers in their
Opinions concerning this matter.

We are not to conclude that Authenticke, although for many Ages accepted so,
which experience the Mother of all confirmation denies.

The common allowance of the venime of Gunpowder met with no obstacle from the
Learned (and for much time) until worthy Master Gale refuted that error,
although the composition in it self carries no such evil: which must be well
known to the famous Physicians of those days, but in the first invention of
^unus, and those violent materials appertaining, the disasters (without a
known remedy) happening, and the Chyrurgions of those times not considering
that in such solutions there is a large separation of united parts, with a
miserable rending of the muscles and nerves, through the furious breaking up of
the confines of nature, with horrible confusions, through which evils
thronging together intolerable dolours are bred, with inflammations, benummings
of sinowy parts, Fistula, nay the violation of all quiet in every member of the
body is kindled, as fever, sincope, convulsions etc. unto which symptoms in
wounds of the fleshy parts the ancients were not accustomed, but stood amazed
at their rage and deplorable endings; which in other divisions by sharp
spears etc. they were not disturbed with only meeting with calm distempers
in respect of these, being not accompanied with such cause of accidents, (if
they were not in the noble parts and mortal) as also since to their eye the
perforations of Harq^^buz-shot, and Lance-punctures, appeared of equal shape
and danger outwardly.

By these examinations and events, they concluded there must be a venomous
quality in the Gunpowder, by which it wrought such mischiefs in those parts
where their fury happened.

This opinion the Learned of those ages authorized, encountering no denial for
many years, such was the blind reverence those times held toward the
authorities of their Grave Writers: A nice virtue (in my judgment) only able
to bridle an apt Genius, and to smother in the dust of ignorance and oblivion
what ripe spirits may either add to illustrate, beget to amplify, or refu^^
to make pure the substance, extents, and impurities of this noble mystery.

Now may not the Judgment of the Ancients concerning wounds of the Ventricle
work the same effects, to keep in darkness such truths by their only
power? holding back such happy attempts in the like misfortunes, which
perchance the strength of nature (in such neglect) by Fistulous closings has
labored to make manifest.

Have not many griefs contrary to expectation (even of the most learned)
arrived unto happy success in healthful conclusions? which then passing the
test of a serious examination, the errors have been found to arise from the
mere censure and allowance of some learned Physicians, without any mention,
History, or memory of their experience, to affirm such deliveries for
^^^truth, on whose precepts, and by whose example, posterity has also reared
to future times their works, but further and more chiefly to let pass this
kind of search: when I consider the infinite mercies of God in such and the
like miraculous Recoveries, and how apt and willing nature is, to preserve the
prerogatives of health inviolate from the hurt and invasion of Diseases, and
being wounded with any grief, how provident she is to keep her self from
greater evils, and laborious to free her fabric from the present affliction,
I cannot then so much wonder at, as not to believe such great works of nature
made able by divine Providence, and assisted by Art, as this foregoing
Treatise makes mention of, and experience witnesses.

Cap. 2. Wherein some things of notable regard are discourst of very pertinent
to this matter, with a necessary digression.
AMongst many considerations in these Cases, the diligent and expert hand of
the skillful Physician (in whose knowledge lives that depth is required in
dangerous causes) is to be provided, to direct the will and power of nature to
benevolent uses, and to let her hurtful and unnecessary promptness, otherwise
in her own bounty she would destroy the good intended, as in many desperate
solutions (through want of knowledge in the Physician) she does, since the
heaping of so many fluxions together, is but a sudden and abundant freedom
in nature to send all aides thither, to redeem the distressed member or part to
a natural quiet and proportion, which concourse of humors are converted to
greater burthenings and oppressions, for it would be vain to think malignity
of humors lurking in the body are altogether the immediate and sole causes of
those bad symptoms, are frequent with profound and perilous solutions, since
they are of different natures, some begotten from actual emptyings, and some
proceeding from natural repletions and accidental rottennes: neither do I
condemn that opinion, since the sharpness of some inflammations far exceed
others, which must proceed from a violent malignity of humors in the blood,
Note.
which being thrust out of the bowels of conserving heat alter into Pus, and
beget the souler putrefaction, for it is a notable sign, that if after a
digestive alteration of those heapings pain and induration continue, A
necessary digression.
that there is a bad constitution to be handled, and therefore the greater
evacuations to be presumed necessary. (I will a little digress) Since thereby
a laudable pulling back from the member afflicted, is brought to pass by
bleeding, and purifying of the blood by purgings is effected, for in all the
duties and intentions of healing, the abundance and bad qualities of blood is
very carefully to be respected and hindered, for without such effectual
corrections, there will be but vile healing of wounds of small danger, and
none produced in divisions of peril and profundity, because blood is the
Author of healing being directed and assisted, by and with the skill, method
and medicine of (...) expert Physicians, I mean in parts (to be united) and
derived from blood; and yet with great care must this be done, since some
bodies cannot to the precepts of Physic forsake their ordinary diet, or be
strictly kept and handled as the Rules of Art would enforce without peril, as
in its proper Chapter shall be shown. Thus much briefly, touching the
excellency of nature in will and power, the Art and skill of the Physician, to
bring such wounds within the lists of possibility and Cure, in guiding that
Will and Power, and the necessities of general and particular evacuations
urged from the cause, appearing, or threatened.

Chap. 3. Wherein is touched some other considerations concerning this matter.
Our next consideration must reflect upon the part, which we must examine, to
know if it be so necessary to life, as not totally in some functions, or a
portion of their functions, to be spared without dissolving of the whole frame,
and here indeed are some questions concerning the present occasion to be
answered.

Some may object, that in such wounds there must be a ruin of nutrimentall
matter and substance partly produced through the visible grief of what was and
should be united, and partly by deprivation of the virtue and faculties of the
stomach, since parts of grosser composition, and much less use to life,
suffer under such and the like causes of the same effects.

Stronger reasons being added to the former, since in this Treatise we must
consider that the Incision was made by the hand of the expert Physician, with
large premediations, where, when, and how to bring his attempts to good event,
the Patient having much time before, drunk a balsamicke Oil, thereby to
infuse a quality of healing into the part, and to enable the member against
this suffering, which in other wounds accidentally given we cannot allege.
These causes and helps, to encourage us to proceed and strengthen our hopes,
and that such balsamick^ Oils and medicines would in time of the wound (being
administered) enlarge fever through disturbance, and their own power in heat,
by provoking vomits not easily, by an able and unhurt stomach to be digested,
but by adding its own flame to that is kindled in the veins by the grief,
^ive a second and more dangerous fire unto the evil. To this may be replied.

Cap. 4. Wherein is gathered part of a full Answer to the Objects in the
former, with some pertinent additions.
THough the duties of the Ventricle be altogether necessary to maintain life,
Nota.
and strength by the elimentall fuel, yet such a quantity may keep the fire
of life yet glowing, and for much time, although the strength decay in some
measure, or be largely exhausted by such wants of supply.

To assure this, the heat of the stomach by which the digestion is wrought,
both actually and potentially in the first alteration is derived from the
Heart, Liver, Arteries Veins, etc. and Muscles of the abdomen, as from the
Fountains, Channel's and seats of all heat and spiri^^, by whose fire that
excellent change of what we receive is potentially perfected, and actually by
the Omentum and Muscles of the belly keeping the Ventricle warm, and defending
it from the outward oppressions of cold.

Now the stomach being hurt by solution of joined parts, is not so abundantly
deprived of this heat, being not in it self (or but a small portion of it) as
to beget a general dissolving of nature, but only depraved, and weakened, and
the blood may be fed by nutriment received into it, (though afflicted) and
altered to laudable Chyle, sufficient to keep the vital heat, and natural
compositions from extinction, though not so plentifully to nourish them.

Next we may further conclude an ability in nature, concerning this matter,
since many Histories mention, and have registered for Posterity, that nature (in
the prolonging of life) has bin by more strange and loss means fed and
nourisht. Next, that although in the digestive duty by the excelling there is
not such a total and perfect alteration ance asweet change of our nutriment to
enfeebled bodies must needs be, in regard weak nature suddenly perish under
corrupt and vicious alterations, and all this to be eared in respect of the
want of power and heat.

Yet we may not suspect, but there will be a division of the most subtle parts
of the nourishment we receive from the more gross, Nota.
though not a total mutation. To enfeebled bodies a small quantity better
nourishes, then fullness to oppression, whereby the vital vigor yet quickening,
the natural duties may have a congruable portion (suitable to its strongth) of
nutriment, to fume into odoriferous Iuce, fit and pure to refresh the body.

Moreover, although there should not be that excellent conversion of it, yet
the coadiution of parts whither it be drawn and sent, would assist to perfect
it to their own uses, as the Liver, small Guts, meseraickes and veins, may
altoran imperfect Chyle or matter slited for such change, into the likeness
and nearenesse of blood, sufficient to sustain life until such wounds be
conglutinate, as from an insected Liver, every member sucketh an imperfect
matter, and yet without any great heat for much time. But how necessary
enfeebling by spare diet is in all perilous wounds, is not to be dispatched,
unless a continued order of food deny.

Cap. 5. In which is the Answer to the Objections fully explicated.
NExt, for what may be objected out of this treatise, thus much is granted,
concerning the place of the wound, that it must be in receipt of it like or
near this incision, for if other parts should also he perforate that carry in
themselves a peril of death, it would be sottishness to deny the
conclusions, or to presume or hope by any reasons, that carry not in them the
weight and truth of the cause.

By the Balsamicke Oils imbibed I do not conclude it so expedient, Nota.
but that the Ture might have been effected without it, and rather Judge it a
conceit put in for variety, and bred from imagination of what it would bring
to pass, then on necessity attempted.

My reasons are, if I would infuse a quality into a member so excellent and
nice as the st^nacke is, Nota.
it must not be by any thing, which it or other parts may carry a loathing
toward, there must be that sweet and pleasant congruity, as there is betwixt
flesh of good and pure Juice, and the constitutions of our bodies, that it may
be received and altered, next it must have affinity with the part in its own
complexion, as flesh has with blond, of which it is made, for what is not so
must beget disquiet, and from that a loathing.

But how Oil and Balsamicke Medicines either by Art prescribed, or Nature
produced, fail in all such needful agreements with our bodies Ineed not here
urge.

Next there must be time admitied, for to imbibe a quality, Nota.
is to alter a member in virtues, or to add or abate ability, as the matter
requires. To give unto it self a power to thrust forth superfluities, but in
this occasion it may be presumed to render nature a heat grateful in
digestion even in the member it self contained, as in other parts, whereby it
may be made able to root out what is begotten, and defend it from other bad
symptoms threatened, together with an aptness to absterge in corn and glue
together these are the intents of such infusion of qualities and these all
differ in their operations, and therefore in their substances; and to add unto
the composition of the stomach more heat then Nature bestows upon it, or
allows useful and convenient, would inflame it, a temper improper either to
cleanse, digest, or sodder by as Weckernus witnesses, Lib 4. Pr^ct General.
but if it be replied that such virtues are not to be infused, by giving the
qualities of such intentions, as a quick and sharp effect to mandifie a soft
and dry heat to incarne, or a dull and cold power to roduce a Sicatrice (which
were ridiculous to imagine) but by a benevolent vigor to assist Nature in her
Will to further these Works, since the other confusions must needs vex the
noble parts, because they must be wrought by different means, as Wickerus etc.
when he disputes how distant in virtues nature and substance, 4^. Chaps. Pract.
Gen
remedy that shall beget quitture, glue together and make escharre are, and to
disturb with so many differences the stomach which was to suffer, it cannot
be imagined needful, but that it rather might give it nauseous then grateful
temper.

And why then should we shrink from the benefits of nature, or doubt her
work, since without such suspicious applications, she has brought to pass
greater wonders then those which in her first Creation she was endued with
power to perform. Moreover we know the Balsamicke Oils have all such virtues,
for they cleanse by a sharp and subtle force, and incarne by a grosser and
soster heat effecting the intent of Siccatrice, by hindering moisture or the
generation of it, therefore by the former objections, and reasons concluded
hurtful, as assuredly it is.

But as some have thought, Balsame has an emplastick body, yet it carries not
that body with it in the infusion of qualities, because of the alteration of it
in the stomach, from all likeness it possessed in its own figure, neither is
that body so necessary and allowable to infuse qualities, but a more subtle
and thin rather to be chosen.

In which consideration I must ever applaud the wound drinks now in practice,
which may be so ordered as to return a delight in nature to receive them,
Master Clovves Works abounds both with excellent remedies of this nature.
and may be so fitted, as to consort with an especial aliment -- and so to be
by nature accepted: moreover there must be a difference betwixt things in
action and things acted, because Medicaments in their power effect most
commendably when diseases are extant and in force in the body, not to discharge
future, (I mean such as are not threatened in the growing defects and
superfluities of nature) of which sort wounds ant their symptoms as they rest
simply in themselves, cannot be reckoned, but (may I confess) partake worse
qualities by evil and vicious heapings and constitution, which may be
lessened and curbed in by the skillful Artist, and yet be no argument to fear
what does not appear, thereby to move the pouring in of many ill relisht
medicaments, with intent, to let what may be, yet does show it self but to
suspicion only; or to infuse what it is naturally possessed of, or to hinder
what in its own strength it labors to do: and that most effectually,
excelling the hand of Art in our best provisions.

Cap. 6. More able Reasons in brief collected, witnessing the Cure of these
wounds.
FUrther to answer this possibility of Cure we are to consider, whether the
part be the very seat of life, as the heart and liver: or so necessary to life
as the Gullet, Windpipe, Lungs, spleen, gall, kidneys, etc. or so violent in
their accidents, with their necessity of being whole and perfect in the service
of noble parts, since that they beget furious accidents that assault the whole
body, as the nervous part of the stomach, Diaphragma, brain, especial medall
etc. or so unfitted with the matter of unition as ye small Guts, upper part of
the Bladder etc. Besides in their duties they cannot be spared, or whither the
remedies may arrive, and remain to the comfort of the sufferer and receiver,
and not be denied by the natural expulsion of the part, or sunk from the
place divided, by reason of a large capacity b^neath.

All which considerations in the wounds of the bottom of the stomach return
us a hope, since it is not the Throne of life, as the Heart, Liver, etc. nor so
absolutely necessary (in regard of its office to Nature) as the Gullet and
Trachea arteriato be unhurt, as Lungs, Spleen, Gall and Kidneys etc.

The first utterly denying the receipt of nutriment, the Lungs and Windpipe,
respiration and refrigeration of the Heart, the Spleen, Gall, Kidneys, etc.
being the puryfiers of the blood, not only in their own substance, but also
in their duties failing must be mortal, as consequently in respect of the
fordid matter thither sucked and sent, would deny knitting together, neither in
the symptoms must follow, as in the nervous part of the stomach, brain,
S^ptum transuersum, which has affinity and derivation from the Periton. pleura
and pericard. or spinall marrow etc. which by condulsion would rend wounds in
themselves as the Midriffe, and upper part of the ventricle, or by domittings,
paralysis, Fever, general contraction of the nerves, pains etc. as in all,
(being the Original of nerves and parts compact of them) bring the sufferer to
death neither in the substance unfit to conglutinate, as in the small guts,
bladder etc. the bottom of the ventricle being paniculous and fleshy, (for
although the ventricle is made of three Coats, in some Authors but two) the
utmost derived of the person. the middle membrane fleshy of its own proper
substance, the inward nervous, yet the sensible matter of this composition is
so spent and enwrapt in fleshy filaments, that it is not of that exquisite
heat, as the voice of this kind of making threatens: but to proceed.

Neither in the defect of arriving or natural expulsion, being the pit and
lowest part, having no capacity (belonging unto its proper making only)
beneath it, and of all members I mean when there is a change of things
received) if there be any agreement in the medicine, the stomach is most apt
to retain it, of which medicines both of their composition, virtue and
consistance is discourst in the next Chapters.

Cap. 7. Of Medecines necessary and convenient in the wounds of the Stomach.
IF Experience the mother of sound reason gives us in knowledge, that Vicers
are made more fordid by fatty medicines, which have not in them a causbicke
quality and quick power, how much more may we conclude that parts afflicted
by evils are to be considered in their natures, and remedies agreeable to be
administered, whereby the member shall from what is applied, receive a double
refreshing by a comfortable quality in the medicine, to the member as it lives
in its own proper composition, and by a force and strength in the remedy, to
extirpe and finish the grief, under which the part languisheth, thus much is
expedient to use our meditations in the sufferings of the extremities that
carry in themselves ability to endure the works of error in this case; how
much more are we then to consider parts of more excellent, delicate, and
sensible Creation, and so notable in the service of life, yet since to treat of
all parts in this matter would require a Volumne, brevity being here intended
to serve the present occasion, with a pa^cell of that, which future time (GOD
willing) may beget is thought sufficient.

Cap. 8. The Medicines most efficient and congruable in wounds of the Stomach,
and why.
I Have observed (intermixed with the rest) two notable affections of the
Stomach, that it delights in heat, and abhors to be refrigerated (I
mean being without Disease) and although heat actually in it self consumes
moisture, and that the body would wast under such heat even to perishing if
the benevolent bumectings were not sed, yet that the Ventricle in its own
will, derived from its proper being is cherisht with drynes, though in moist
bodies given cannot be denied, as in old Wines and stale liquors is manifest,
which by heat dryes and does hinder the begetting of moisture, in dispatching
superfluities, and procuring unto the noble parts a firmness and stability,
since humidities only relaxe and destroy those virtues.

Therefore in the wounds of the stomach in what form soever they are blended,
either in liquid or fast, the applications must be hot and dry in the first
and not exceed the second degree, unless there be an excellent coherence with
the medicine and the part: a temper in all such medicines and for all wounds
most commendable.

Next the common thro^^ings in of remedies of doubtful and earthy substance is
to be avoided in such perilous divisions, when the injections are expedient,
and the extraction of Seeds and Flowers, by infusion or B. M. rather to be
chosen then of green Roots, and Heathes of gross and base growth by
decoction, the one from odoriferous bodies, pulls an equal excellently mixed
heat, and the other corrupt and imperfect, but how useful the one, and
distasteful the other is in such Cases, the Artist shall know when he comes to
the necessity of them.

It may be acceptable to some to set here down what I have used in the like
extremities, and as the place and season afforded provisions, from which
example they may give birth to others, according as the distemper shall
inst^^^t, as it appears in the part hurt.

R. Fol Rosarum rub. M. S. Flo. Anthos. Lavendula. An^. p 1. Summitatum Thymi.
Marjor any Ana. ps. Flo. Hyperici. p. 2. Meliloti. p. 1. Spec. Aromat. Rosat.
3.1. Infusand. in vino Odorat.. 6. Aq. Melissa. Ana.. 4. per Spatium XII. Hor.
deinde in B. M. Coq. Ad Consump.. 1. Colat. Clar. ad. Sir. de absinth. Mel.
Rosarum Ana.. 2. Vt fiat inject.
And although it is Judged needies to convay into profound wounds any
infections after a commendable quitture, by which through actual moystening
there is a melting instability to the member communicated, and that the parts
afflicted are hurt and burdened by such unnecessary loadings, yet, to the
finishing of such like cures, this may with abundant profit be used, because
it does sweetly strengthen the natural heat to hasten digestion, to quicken
mundification, revive the incarnative power, and withstand putrefaction, which
in all wounds of danger is most to be let.

Chap. 9. Of what body it is requisite the Medicine should receive that it may
cleave to, if it arrive.
ANother consideration very pertinent offers it self in this Discourse, that
since the topicall administrations may be conveyed, but not kept there, it is
expedient that they be incorporated with some useful Medicine that is of a
clammy consistence, whereby when the remedies shall arrive they may cleave, and
so effect your wishes in that point, I ever thought the Lohoc de pino, or
expertum if purged from their gross substances by decoction, and expumation,
worthy acceptance, but in such wants I have thus proceeded:. Mol. Rosar.. 2.
Sir. menthar. Absinth. Ana.. 1. Saccha. Cand. 1 Aloes opt. S. 1. Lento igne
Coq. Ad spissi^ud. Ecleg. deinter.. 1. Terebenth. vent. lotae in aq. Rosat. 1.
Ol. Tereh^nth. Gut. 16. vel 24. Ol. Hipericonis cum gummis. 4. Vel. 6. vitel.
ovorum. No 1. vel 2. Si desunt, Panlatim commisc, ut Incorporent. Prescrip. ^c
legmat. Cum infusione pro inject. Q. S. Misc. S. A. in forma fir.


So that it may be convayed warm into the depth of the wound, with a wide pipe
for the freer passage.

I prescribe not an order to be followed without addition drawing from, or
altering of the ingredients, but only an example, since the accidents in all
griefs is an Index to a wise Physician, what else may be convenient in
Physical duties bandages, and other needful Chirurgicall in, tents, because
this Translation has sufficiently set down, as also many other excellent
Works both of ancient and modern Writers has left to posterity, I intend not
here to mention these two observations neither in this Treatise spoken of, nor
by any Author particularly (but only with some darkness mixed in their
labors handled) may not be concluded impertinent.

Cap. 10. The History of Richard Patridge cured of a wound in the Stomach.
IN the year of God one thousand six hundred thirty two, and in the month of
January, being in the Gulf of Venice at Sea, R. P. was wounded by George
Farmar, (under the left Hippocondrion) being both quarter Masters of the ship
Hector, whereof Master Wild was Commander, what he received issuing at the
wound by the great mercy of God, was made whole in the space of twenty four
days, every survay and event in the time of his sickness to my memory set
down, my papers with my self being lost.

Having extracted (being forced to enlarge the Orefice) some part of the half
of the Knife which was broken and buried in the wound under the Muscles of the
Abdomen, I contenfed my self with common applications for that night, and
committed him to his Cabin.

The next day having all things in a readiness, I thought needful. I came to
the patient, and found him yet not much distempered (all sorrowful hurts
appear not in their fury till putrefaction begins, Nota.
unless those of the noble and sensible parts, by the effusion of life, or
their exquisite sense) as soon as I had removed what was applied and the wound
discovered, there distilled out of the solution, some quantity of the beer,
about half an hour before he had drunk to the amazement of the spectators,
yet it was kept from the Patient, for the intent not to dismay him.

With Stupes of Wine very hot presently I covered the wound to hinder the
egresse of air which I continued until this Balm was made ready.

Ol. Terebinth. Qt. 12. Hiperic:. S. Sir. Menthar.. 2.
Which made hot I distilled into the capacity of the wound, and with a Tent not
above half an inch in length dipped in the same, and plegants, fitted with an
emplaster of melelote, to hold together what had hin placed and convenient
bandages, I left him for that time, ordering him a little broth of Mutton with
two or three Cloves, and a small quantity of Sinamone boyld in it, somewhat to
respect the quality of the ventricle.



I could discern aliquidnes like sloten Milk to dreane from it; he felt some
grudging of the pain to extead to the Vertebres as it were by fits passing
through the laterall muscles (by the heaping of blood and humors betwixt the
fleshy membrane and muscles, Nota.
and extending by consent of parts) I used the former order in the topicall
remedies, and anointed the whole seat of the pain with the Oil of Roses,
somewhat to restrain the conflux. The ensuing night he had some feverish
distempers, which did a little disquiet him.

Cap. II. Of the third and fourth days proceeding.
Nota.
I concluded the first to be the thinnest of the Chyle distilling from the
puncture of the Ventricle, (for I conceived it no other) and the watrish
mixture, to be begotten from the evil disposition of the hurt, therefore
adding of the artificial Balm with the other, and a little of the yolke of an
Egg incorporated with the former prescribed iniection so much as might make^t
of the consistence of a Musclage: by a sering (pretty warm) I forceably threw
it in, that it might arrive unto the depth of the evil, with Tents dipped in the
first mentioned composition, of the first form, from which I did not derogate
during the Cure, with Plegrants, Plasters, and Bandages answerable to the same
order: I committed him to his rest for that time omitting phlebotomy, he having
had a large emptying of blood by the wound. In the afternoon, examining the
estate of his bowels in their duty, I found the benefit of stool had not
assisted since the mischance, therefore. I convayd in this Clister to bring
away the compost.

Iusculi galen. 12. Sacchari. 2. Ol Communis 2. S. Salis cocl. S. Misc.
Which did the effect for which it was administered, and mitigated the feverish
heat, insomuch that he slept well the ensuing night.



Cap. 12. The fifth and sixth days order.
Nota.
First, because the puncture of the Ventricle, being swollen and drawn
together, did not admit so plentifully that substance to issue, but now opened
by digestion, it slipped out more abundantly and thicker, (indeed like Cream,
as that excellent Physician Mr. Doctor Read in his Manuell of Anatomy likens
it to) Secondly, since digestion is a parting of the impure heapings from the
perfect and unhurt portions of the flesh, which compactions must needs hurt the
Muscles in matter of their sense, and they gathering together by their own
motion, cease no^, till the dischargings of such stuffings; after this there
appeared a perfect quitture, so that I altered nothing in the Remedies, but
followed my former course in this dressing. This night the Fever enlarged, the
Urine more enflamed, mouth dry, pains increasing, and eight or ten times he
went to the stool, which did much disquiet him and amaze me; I suspected a
dissolving of the noble parts, Nota.
by a secret convayance of an evil and malignant substance into the Liver,
which there infecting the spirits caused this sharp Fever, and thrust into the
bowels produced the Flux.

Considering to seek to abate or heal the Fever as the precepts of ancient
and modern Physicians allow, Nota.
by evacuating the matter and refrigerating the effect, I judged to be most
dangerous, the body too much enfeebled to admit phlebotomy, and the stomach
being hurt, not able to bear Remedies, either emptying humors or potentiall
cooling, and to restrain the Flux of the womb, the egestions and evil fumes
driven back, might be hurtful to the wounded member and the whole body, Nota.
since to help either flux or fever, were to enlarge them by medicines proper
to either, yet oppugnant in their quality to either. Neither was the cause
lodged in the bowels, nevertheless thus discussing the matter I concluded,
there must be potentiall refrigeration, in regard imperfect heat could not
digest, but hinder that work in the veins, and some restraint of the bowels,
not to drive back, but to thicken the compost, that it might not so easily
descend, to give respite unto nature from that vexation, to respect the first
cause of all those afflictions.



Also there appeared from the os fercula of the same fide even to the Orefice
of the wound, Nota.
which also extended to the Sternum a concretion of Wind betwixt the membranes
of the Muscles of the Thorax, lying immovable like so many scrofulas, by
dilating their membranous Coats, and seemingly indurated by the contraction
through the offense of feeling of the muscles, this much vexed him, but by a
warm foment, and the faeces applied in form of a Cataplasme without Oils
easily vanished.

These duties performed, I retired to consider the present estate of his body,
languishing under Fever, and so many griefs depending, my former resolution by
this second consideration was confirmed, but the next question was, by what
means to refrigerate by sharp coolers would offend the wound, by reason they
must actually arrive unto it, Urge punction, and inflammation; by external
niceties, the place and accommodation made that ridiculous, and but a delay,
therefore I ordered this Iulep.

Aq. Endiviae Centinod. plantag. Cardui benedict. Ana.. 4. Melissae. 3.
Theriacal.. 1. S. Sir. vi^lar. 3. De pomis.. 2. e rosis siceis. 1. S. Commisc.
Which he received every two hours six spoonfulls, a little warmed, this did
not only abate his thirst and heat, but also by an excellent breathing
moisture continued upon him, vented the malignity and flame of the distemper
and had some respect to his Flux, for assuredly if the unnatural heat be
curbed and abated, the natural vigor with more liveliness and facility
expells other venomous vapors and poison, begotten in and disper^t through the
Vessels of Nature: for feverish heat with a kind of dullness and consuming
setters wastes, and binds the natural spirits, that in no manner they can
move or assist the afflicted members, for being swelter'd and enflamed, by the
impurities of the disease, they languish unprofitably under such afflictions.

Therefore refrigeration (by which vapors are let in their generation, and
those diffused, collected and settled, the furious assaults of the unnatural
fire slak't the vital, natural, and Animal Spirits refresht and enabled, the
dispersing of venimaus humors hindered is most requisite.

I avvise not to cool so notably as to condense or thicken, (as in burning
Fevers is allowed) or Tertian quotidians, by which stupifying may ensue, and
that were utterly to ruin.

After this good success shus sarre I reflected, upon the oppressions of the
belly, when the malady raged with unsupportable violence, and considering how
needful it was to maintain strength, now miserably wasted by these
oppressions (although I perceived by the egestions were sent forth, the matter
of the Fever was spent, Nota.
and that by returning these humors in the denying them the bowels, whither
they were sent to be voyded to be altogether dangerous, or that being
detayn'd, they might move pains in excoriations etc. yet to give some pause to
afflicted and feeble nature, not by shutting up, but as it were losing the
bowels, that they should not so often empty, by which they had a power in them
(from vacuity, heat and motion) more violently then profitably to suck down,
I thought it might be with happy event, and so proceeded to the means by
Clister: In which I utterly mislikt the restrictive Oils, although they dull
the common gripings of the entrails, because their stipperinesse would be a
means to tardate my wishes (and in their places mixed the yolks of eggs) for I
did desire a sudden abating though not a total stopping, but as it were by
an accessible heat, and moderate dryness to effect my intent, that the Ordure
might not so willingly descend, therefore this was prepared as I was sitted.

Fol. Rosar. rubr. Bursa past. Cen^inod. Menthar. Ana. P. 1. Sem. plantag.
oxycanth. Oxalidis Ana. Cool. S. Balaus^ia^^m. Sum^ch. C^^^icis Gran. Ana.. S.
Cynamomi. 2. Coq. in aq. Plantag.. 3. Pluvial. 1^. Ad consumpt. 3. Partis.
Colatur.. 6. Vitellor Ovor. No 2. Hiposist. Acatia. Ana.. 1. Sir. e Rosi^
Sicis. 1. S. Mist.
Which although they are all eminent binders, yet they pass not the second
Classis of restriction, they are grateful and vegetate much, the small
quantity was ordayn'd that if might he kept, and yet the liquid consistence of
the decoction, Nota.
that it might not be retayn'd overlong also, but to work its effect and no
more, which made it allowable.

It was administered warmer then ordinary for the foregoing reasons, the
success was happy, he going to stool but twice that night, refresht with
good fleepes, and the feeblen^^ in some measure leaving him.

Cap. 13. The seventh, eighth, and ninth days Visitations.
Nota.
issued of what he took to nourish him, but with alteration) that with the
shutting of the lowest part of the stomach to which the Duod number is knit, the
ventricle also draws together, to perfect the Chyle, by which the wound also
was contracted, and let the issuing out at any part of what was received, or
of Chyle, till the dilation and end of that digestive work, it is evident
therefore that spare diet is perfectly and more ably altered, then fullness, and
by this reason partly confirmed, by greater extention which loses abundant
heat, not only because spi^^id bodies retain it longest and best, as the
ventricle drawn together must be, but also because a large heart, and a small
subject is soonest and aptest to ^^e well converted, since such fire does
ratify and divide the portions received more readily and purely.

Having finished the duty of this dressing, I retreated to consider the estate
he was then subject to, and found the distress notably abated, the pulse
collecting a new strength, the Urine not so much enflamed, that now I thought
upon a larger diet with the wounds ingredients, (as many as I was furnished
with) of which I first ordained a dec^ction, and with that liquor caused his
broth to be made, with a more able extraction of the Juice in the boiling,
which being often and but little given ^im (...) and suddenly a portion of his
wasted spirit^, both by renewing and reviving, yet his Flux began to ^epe^t^
its fu^y, but this emplaster.

Emp^ast (...) ba^^i^ ^ea^^. 1. S. Vng. Comitissae. 1. Trochisc. (...) t^rra
Lamnia. 1. Spec. Dicalaminth.. 4. Ci^m Ol. Rosar. Q. S. F. Emp.
Being administered and covering the inferior Abdomen, it succesfully restraind
the fury.

of matter issuing, the Fever was in a manner casheer'd, and now there appear^d
the commendable cloud.

In the Urine pulse firm, and the night before a notable breathing (even in
his sleep the hopefullest emptying, which sends forth the evil Dewes and not
the Spirits) the topicall remedies were nothing altered.



Cap. 14. The tenth, eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth days duties, to the
conclusion.


. Elect. L^^itioum.. S. Terebinth. ven^t. lo^ae.. 2. A loes ^pt.. 1. S. Spec.
Diambrae.. S. Mastic.. 1. Cum fir. abfinth. Q. S. fiat bolus.
Of this every fourth hour in the day, and before the time of rest, he
received a gobbet as big as a small Wall-nut* which opened the womb, and was
as a Balm unto the wound. The second day after, I added some drops of the
Artificial Balsame, with the oil of Hypericon, not to be discerned by the
pallat to eschew abhorring.



The twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth,



In this Discourse I have set down what I did, for I did ever so esteem of
truth, that I would cloth her as n^kedly as this story appears, though to my
prejudice I never aimed at any other reward, then what she gives, IN me sure
it is no treasure: These ages fill not their (...) offers by her revenew;
happily she will bestow a competence, beyond which my ambition reaches not: IN
never had a desire above it, since the Grave allows no superior, or greatness
more then a Tomb, which is but a feeble royalty, and a weaker memorial. I am
but now the tongue of my provisions and care being at Sea, and destitute of
assistance, (...) the Language of a Library, or the expense of many nights and
more Tapors, the fruits of palenesse and a meager visage, or the issue of
melancholy, my purse is too empty to attend these minutes, since cloth and food
came into fashion, and my an^uities are my employment, my labors must be to
feed a Family, not fill a Volume, which is my excuse, if any thing has escapt,
which carries not in it the salt of Rhetoric; strength of Argument, or the
strict precepts of Physic and Chirurgey, the success was happy: and
therefore questions and nice examinations would be both barren and ridiculous.

The Second Part of this Treatise of the examination of the former
Translations, and Censure of like Positions.
Cap. I. Censure of the 1, 2, and, 3. Posiotions.
HEre he has but faintly maintained she p^^^bility of swallowing the Knife in
repeating many Histories of less moment and greater ^anger of suffocation,
then he has spoken of to arrive unto the Prusian Swallow-knife I will add
something, briefly to set down how it may be received.















Accidental from the fury of some rotten Fever, that humor chiefly abounding
and putrefying, thereby enflaming the panicles of the brain, begetting a
disease subject unto Cure by phlebotomy, or the Medulla or in ward substance
insensibly without heat, and thereby in a kind of total alteration there
settled, if the disease be long making she malady inveterate which often convert
into passions of the mind, by naturalizing, or else by vice of the spleen,
being infirm in the change or receipt, or disposing rightly the faecall,
blood, sometimes also through debility of the mouth of the stomach, that shall
still discharge the belchings of evil digestion, accompanied with a wind up
into the brain, and also crosses in estate or affection are of this rank, yet
with some difference.

The causes natural are from constitution, parentally and spermatically
communicated; or from some nutriment in the womb, by defect either of the
mother, or part which has power in the time of shaping especially to do it is
effects and mischief, because then the stains of such evils have, a
domination without remedy, which when the quickening of life arrives, Reason why.
they cannot so easily empress their qualities into our bodies, since the
spirits then in their office are somewhat enfeebled, to defend and correct the
impurities of such Aliment.

In Fevers commonly these melancholy adust fumes are mixed with other abundant
humors, eff^er putrified and kindled, or enflamed only; which vitiating the
fancy, or reason, or both, according to their mixtures begets those varieties
of distractions are common amongst persons with this evil affected, which with
innumerable delusions of things, impossible either in their own bodies to he
altered, or without them to have being, miserably overthrowes their reason, and
as the portions of their brain either shall be weakened and receive, or yet
retaining ability to expel these corrupt vapors, so as the differences made,
as they shall be affected either particular or general if they be parentally
infected, they have not this hurt in their birth, but after some years as the
seed of the parents shall administer at such growth, ripeness, or declination,
which is the cause that many are safe for much time, and yet suddenly change in
full years, for there is a secret work in nature founded from the quality of
the sperme, that until such maturity, The Gout P^lsie, Stone, with many other
griefs, as from the like c^us^ many things.
or declining age, such griefs shall be kept secret, until by a sudden
change (in the miraculous mysteries of Nature) ordayn'd, these passions of the
mind break fresh and appear; as it were by a private power in the seed of the
Parents, to keep the Creature inviolate until such time, and then not able
any more to bear the burden of its own had derivation, it renders matter
sufficient, to make the mind sink under the weight of its proper and natural
defects, this happens to men in their vigor or their grouth unto it, but if it
chance to them in their age, Observation. Nota.
which is seldom, the matter is different; for although it carry in it the
qualities of the seed, and may challenge them as Authors, yet the spirits which
were kept in ye spermaticke substance of the noble parts, were more light and
unsteddy, and able to be quenched or disturbed with the common defects of
mankind (in declining days) being of that temperament of making and if they be
matricially given from the mother, or member, as it contains and is in temper,
they come with us into the world: and it violent, shorten our days, or if
continued for the most part infutuate us: howsoever, the Will and Divine
pleasure excepted, as they shall arrive us as Plagues and Visitations, when
these causes can take no place, but to proceed from this pertinent digression.

In such Fevers many times, there is a deprivation of all the faculties, the
Imaginative, Rational, and power of memory, and if all be abused, there is a
lamentable confusion of all wrought, as in Calent^^^, a disease frequent
amongst Mariners, that in little time visit different, and hot Climats which
though assisted, by their intemperate Lives and had diet, makes up this cruel
Disease if the imagination (the reason and memory yet whole, Nota.
but so much only hurt as the ^anta^^s wounded must needs distemper them, or
impart of its disquiet) he wronged, then is occasioned many times uncouth
persuasions of themselves, that they are Wolves, Serpents, Ghosts etc. being
altered into their natures, shapes, and qualities, or else that they are
fashioned out of Clay, or made of Glass, with such like fopperies. Now their
reason in some part safe, but as much as the force of this grief may change
it, Nota.
instructs them, to behave themselves according as their imagination deceives
them with gestures suitable, and with some show of order. Or to avoid the
vicinity of hard and robusticke things, since they are composed of such brittle
metal as they are persuaded; with a settled care to keep themselves entire and
from breaking, it out of these vanities they are recovered, the remembrance of
these follyes is not wiped out, unless that were also dulled by an inherent
humor, apt to be thickened by heat, or coldness which is not able to smother or
freeze its spirit if their reason is only distracted, Cause.
they act things utterly dissonant to that faculty, and what their imagination
shall present, their rage throws into many wild expressions, and yet they
retain a mischievous memory, as also bad intents, both to themselves and
others, which often times they will shadow with dissimulation, which has no
affinity with their reason as it may appear, because it is mischievous without
cause, which reason must condemn, these sort of people in their affliction
suffered for many years, and are sent as into the Hospital of St. Are, retired
and kept for their security They are difficult of cure, because the functions
of their understanding are ruined, and cannot labor with ye physicians
endeavors as it does in such whose imagination only suffers: Burton in his
Melancholy (a work worthy of honor from all posterity) to this purpose makes
mention, of a certain man that imagined himself dead, and as his reason in
manner yet safe instructed him that the departed had no need of nourishment, he
denied all sustenance, but was recovered by presenting before him, (being for
some time kept in darkness to make the sick more apt) men in Winding-sheets
who mee^ing with delicates on purpose there placed, fed; he with some amazement
demanding whether they deceast could feed (his appetite without doubt
assisting in this work) they replied as he saw, with hunger, here his reasons
took place, for since they might eat, he had as good reason to satisfy
himself without violating the solitude of the grave, and thereupon tasting
food was restored to his health. Who can deny his reason here to be notably
efficient?

^. Goular^ in his wonders of these latter times reports many such Histories:
if the reason and memory are destroyed, they languish under a multitude of
distractions because their want of memory enforces them to wander through many
and different apparitions, Nota.
for their memory causes them longer to stay on some one piece of vanity
expecting an event (as is before spoken) which other-waies they would suddenly
loose, but this does not commonly happen. Nota.
These Hypocondriacall oppressions seldom assault the memory alone, A
necessary Observation.
and that portion of the Brain where they are lodged, yet also we must
conclude they have a peculiar division from that part in respect of their
excellent spirits, and although spermaticully infixed there, (yet naturally in
themselves, and as it were by nece^sity in their Offices that are quick and
subtle) divided: this is made manifest in regard these faculties can be hurt,
Why.
and yet the part be safe, but it is other ways with the memory, since that
has a more real and essential incorporation, and has a dependancy begotten
of it in a manner,

when he presents them their transgressions as they are in Judgment, many,
dreadful, and remembered, and not as they are in mercy wiped out and forgotten.
This incredulity and security are companions, and both equally dangerous, and
they which are troubled with the first must he gently, and carefully
entreated, to settle such storms in them, but those that are poisoned with the
secure lethargy, must be roughly (yet wisely) handled, to a wake them out of
their Diabolical besottings.

First appearance.
Before this evil carries any outward show, either in their countenance or
tongue: there commonly precedes disquiet in their sleeps, every slumber is
accompanied, or broken up with some dreams, begotten from the melancholy
vapors assault the brain, passing through the meatus, with the precious dewes
of rest, the causes of these Visions (which have commonly a satanicall
confusion, and if they bear any stamp in the memory they are horrible, and
full of featefull constructions working in their strength; on the weak
imagination of the sufferer) are from the infirmities of the Spleen afflicted
with a cold and flatuous disease, And why.
which receiding the tincture of the natural ^iposition of it, suddenly ascend
with the moystures of the latter digestion, and beget these disorders, this is
in the beginning and infancy of this grief.



The trosses in Estate or affection, as they are accidental from the cause, so
they are natural by inclination, and in their event.

For although such misfortunes may he concluded, the cause yet the disposition
(being melancholy) urges the accident, which is easily done in such inclinable
constitutions.

Quercetanus, and the Augustan Physicians, although it may be thought, that
without the loss of substance, Mineralls can yield up no part of their
vegetive spirits to our bodies, yet the contrary is visible, that Mineral
vegetives unto other Vegitables will give up their qualities without loss of
substance, what else should we think of those frequent infusions, (of
Antimony, filings of Steels) in Wine, whose spirit extracteth Virtue out of
them: witness that latter invention of the Empyricks, the Antimoniall Cup,
further, beer and water shall pull out of it this power, which being put into
the body shall show its beleterick quality in strong vomitings, violent
operations, hurtful and other emptyings. Gold and all Mineralls are bred in
the bowels of our mother Earth,

Sine vita, cjus officio, et creationis loco. It is likewise without heat,
humidity and softness, which the heart possesses by its life, office, and
place of Creation.

And may not there be lodged in our bodies a matter fitted for the produce of
that metal, which ye native heat deficient in some power, may be the cause
that it does not appear in its making.

There is in the bones a substance that carries some shape of its matter; and
in the collection and first separation of that spermaticke and similar portion
of the seed, if there were that quantity of spirits mixed; which in the Earths
womb, the indigested matter of Gold must be accompanied with, who knows what
births, or wonders in the bowels of nature may be delivered us, to meditate
on?

It were a strange issue if any such should be brought forth; and yet that
such may be is not destitute of a reason, if we without a prejudicate and
perverse opinion examine it, neither to this assertion is History barren, but
yields us many Miracles Registered for posterity: One of notable account I will
mention.

1. Horst in his Historical and Philosophical Discourse, reports that John
Muller a Carpenter, dwelling at Weigdell dorfe a Village of Silesia, had a Son,
borne the two and twentieth day of December. Anno. 1585. in the year 1593: being
sent to the School of the Village, a Girl discovered that this Child had the
last great tooth of the left side and lower Iaw appearing of bright shining
Gold, this report and some other occasions invited Doctor Horst near unto
Weigdell-dorfe: and sending for the Child found that report to be true. The
Child having the use of its as of his other, the Gums red, and naturally
planted about it, his curiosity drew him further for touching it, he found it
to answer the Carat of Hungary. This Doctor Horst was a man of good repute, and
a most famous Physicians, I will not further urge this, but leave it to the
Judicious Reader, to receive or deny it. But to proceed.



Then why not by an answerable benevolency in gold, Gold raise out of its use a
success as certain and good unto our bodies?



What was of metal, and may be consumed in the stomach comes to pass, by
salt and moist humors contained in the ventricle; which without the addition
of heat to give life to what they can beget, would erode a decay in all gross
metalls by rust, and not by conversion into Chyle.

Cap. 2. Censure of the fourth and fifth Positions.
Position 4.
IN this Position there is little matter of Ambiguity, only I will not set my
belief so on the Tenters as to make it receive his Histories of the kind
Greek, and Strumpet: (amongst others mentioned) for truth, for the heart of
all Creatures living in the air, and nourisht by blood has such a powerful
and active elaboration of spirits, that the story of the Hind has a very bad
relish to be swallowed and digested for truth.

Next the Lunary swellings of the substance of the brain, filling the
capacities of the Cranium, and ever in pulsative motion, makes the Greek and
Whore both of bad reputation, to subsist so many years with life, and without
grief, or any sense of the hurt as the History reports.

Further that Iron corrupted into rust should so disquiet the ventricle, as he
threatens (unless it be by the quality of the humor by which it was so
altered, and with which it must be mixed, thereby mutually augmenting each
others vice) since I have administered a large quantity of it alone, which has
not ended in such afflictions, not in the least motion that promised any
violence to ensue.

Position 5:
THis is sufficiently refuted in the Treatise of the possibility of the Cure of
wounds in the stomach, happening there in the discourse most needful and in
order.

But when as the Author speaks of the aptness of nature, to make delectable
by use what at first was irksome, this experience confutes, since use of things
loathsome increases rather that vice in our dispositions, not bestowing a
gratefulness, for we see even in meats of soft and sweet Iuce (since our
natures affect change and variety) the too frequent use of them, and continued
yields them distasteful, much more balsamic Oils that carry neither to the
eye, pallat, or our imagination a shape, or taste to render them acceptable.
What our Author has set down viz. Ol. Com. Lib. S. Hiper Com.. 2. being put
together and imbibed, has a very faint power to infuse a balsamicke virtue.
Whereas in this Position also he relates a History of a Girl fed with poison
by Napelly, a King of the Indians; what we begin with in our Infancy, being
the spring and first buddings of nature may carry with it some success in
naturalizing contraries with our bodies; since in the growth of things such
endeavors may be made most effectual by the necessity of increase, through
which the body accepts such intentions (in the receipt) as aliment, and
therefore is converted: as we may perceive in Plants whose color and taste may
be altered into the likeness of others, if as soon as the seed is sown, and
that the earth has swollen it with its moisture, we observe convenient
waterings, with some mixtures needful (well known to the skillful Gardener)
which in the maturity of them cannot be: so in our full years, when we are
confirmed, or near confirmation, when grouth of spermatick parts cease, and
the Collumes of the body (the bones) have arrived unto their proportion; such
conclusions must have a more able resisting, even to denial, besides our
reason and imagination which in such Cases pleades with our pallats.

To assure this, where he quotes Avicen who says, things accustomed cannot
beget passion, it is (for his purpose) in part consented to, I mean Avicens
intent, not the words, to confirm our Authors meaning, that extends to all
bodies, without excepting constitution, or other abilities, which oftentimes
does compel a change.

But I think Avicen is to be understood in robusticke laborious natures, in
which accustomed things though never so gross cannot beget distemper, yet this
has a double cause, from the use, and power made more able by labor: yet I
hope he will allow delicate bodies a change of diet, since they cannot submit
in that, to such custom, besides, change is the custom which they observe,
and then he will conclude such order cannot be broken without peril: so that
our Authors own Argument denies his assertion, for if change in such bodies is
their custom, assuredly their stomachs cannot continue one sort of food to
nourish the body with quiet, much less imbibe Oils and such compositions a
sufficient time to infuse qualities, unless we imagine that our Author would
have nothing to do in his Art, but with such rustickes.

When he cites Paul Averrhoes, and Hippocrates in the alteration of
Medicaments, they witness against his Opinion (especially if he means
internal administrations, as to imbibe a quality must be by such) since such
variety they only ordayn'd to shun loathing.

Further in this Po^^tion he has worthily distinguished betwixt preservative
and curative remedies, that, since to keep the body whole and without disease
requires a strict, and in all an equal defense from the six things not
natural in their extremes, viz Sleep^, Watchfulness, Sloth, Exercise,
Fullness with its quality, or Emptiness: Haec enim sa^^ta^^^ tu^^dae praecepta
sunt: which Rules admit no alteration without peril: also if any inclination
be discerned in the body, ^ot yet of growth, or being, to offend, the remedies
that shall be administered, either to corroborate, remove, or alter, by
humecting, or desiccation, by cooling or adding heat, by relaxing or
restriction, or in all these a temperance intended as the cause shall instruct,
must not soddenly be altered, or without an assured reason and great care, for
since one thing is to be effected nature delights in one sort of remedy
(though altogether it be not so in diet and untriment) in whose society it
rejoices, and is mutually assisting, partly in the long use, since thereby it
has insinuated without disturbance into nature, this affection being also
assisted by a sensible relief, and thereby made more acceptable; likewise by
reason the relish or palate is by Disease depraved, and so made apt to take
what has a different taste, which must be maintained, least by change it refuse
all, and grow weary of the choycest, now though these orders seem to maintain
our Authors argument, in the drinking of balsamicke Oils, they no way assist
in that case: since the body being without a natural Disease requires not any
such observations, the evil the rusticke was afflicted with was accidental,
and yet procuring no mutation in the body; and in any such disasters by the
infliction of a wound; if the Physician should then by balsamic Oils seek to
endow the body with any such qualities, since the Curative work must suddenly
ensue, and break up the order of preservative institutions. He would condemn
himself in the success of a notable erro^^, the wound drinks now in practice
(by the excellent Chirurgions of these days) excepted, which being
nutrimentally employed, are of wonderful effect: for which purpose all
Chirurgions that use the Sea, should carefully in a clear dry air, and the
shade prepare them for keeping and their use: Mr. Doctor R^ade in his Lectures
on wounds has set down the most efficient.

To end this. in all preservative administrations (if a dangerous necessity
urge not the contrary) the Physician must carefully observe both the
constitution and pallat, and so fit his prescriptions, that they may be
agreeable to the one, and acceptable to the other.

For the Curative remedies, the Disease must either deny or approve their
continuance, and use, especially in inward griefs; yet in such change we must
not be rash, but observing if nature be not disturb's with what is given, or
weakened without profit to wait and hope a success, for when nature shall
accept a remedy if it be administered by sound Judgment, it will also extract
a virtue and efficient power out of it, and positively employ it: we must also
note whether the remedy be proficient or no, for it is not enough that it does
no hurt, but it is of necessity (if we intend a Cure) that it be profitable;
for by such delays the strength of nature may wast and suddenly vanish.
Besides as many miraculously, contrary to expectation or Judgment, have bin
healed by the continuance of a medicine, so many thereby have suddenly
perished: for the Physician by no humane reason, is able to know the secret
works of nature, since without any visible or Judicial appearance it often
bursteth out into violent execrations, and either breaks the unitings of
stubborn and malignant Diseases, or expireth. Now, when such good effects are;
the Physician must not then omit the change of Medicaments to help any
commondable Act of Natures, (^o made able and endowed) in some other work, if
necessity command.

For topicall applications the eye is the most ready discerner, and yet not
always to be trusted but with Judgment.

Cap. 3. Censure of the sixth Position.
IN this search I will not busy my self with the varieties of Authors that
write on this subject, which being collected and knit together appear a very
confusion. I will only examine so far as my own Genius shall direct me;
First, the nature of the faculties of the Magnetes, briefly. Secondly its
substance. Thirdly, the working and congruity of its virtues in that substance.
Fourthly and lastly, I will survay our Authors reasons from other simples
grounded, to confirm the power of attraction to be retained in the loadestone
being pulverized: and of these in order.

First therefore concerning the faculties, it is to be questioned whether the
power attractive and respective are wrought in the Stone by one spirit or no?
since as it respects the Poles, it has a will to pass unto them, but in the
vigor of attraction to pull unto it self what it delights in: which are
distinct virtues, and may argue a double spirit; but if we regard how
inseparably these are united together, it is to be imagined (with some
boldness) that these two functions are done by one only spirit: Moreover, if
we consider how exact it is in all its affections, without change or
contradiction; in both whose efficient powers, there is but one only order of
disposing, and that immutable, yet each virtue with a certain dependancy upon
each other, and thereby mutually assisting, for ii they were acted by a double
spirit, proper to either virtue, this could not be without change, as those
spirits shall be, either singly exasperated, or lessened, which in one spirit
cannot yet alter order; which is unchangeable in its work either quickened, or
dulled.

Secondly concerning its substance, we may think if we will not admit a
confusion, these to be brought to pass by one only vigor in it self, and
yet assisted by the influence of the Poles, endewing the stone with a Planetary
force to resist time, or age: first in it self properly living, which may well
be said; for as the breath is p^t into our bodies by the Divine Creator, yet
(by divine institution) it is maintayn'd in our bodies, by their own
effectual working with spirits, which subsist in nutriment: So, although the
virtues may be Planetary, and brought into the stone by Influence, yet by a
subtle elaboration in the stone they are sustayn'd, and therefore properly
living in it self, as also because if it be divided into many portions, yet
every lump will have its Equator, from which it equally divides and disposes
its virtues, to either Pole respectively.

These divisions wrought and altered by the vigor of respects, which although
it be not done, by the substance of the stone altogether, yet it is by the
spirit respecting, sustained in it, and may challenge some share in that work;
next, being so endew'd, many handred years cannot visibly abate the qualities
of the smallest stone, or deliver it perishable in the least: being also
manifested, by such equal alterations in the stone, which shows its influence
and Planetary immutability, which a though it be not so strictly knit to the
substance of the stone, yet it is made a part of it by it; habitation.

Further it must necessarily be possessed of a power in it self, because all
bodies enricht with the influence of any constellation must have a fit and
congruable substance, to entertain, nourish, and hold such qualities: also the
vertuall effects of some stones, more then other, approve it, as they shall be
of substance, able to enterfaine such a quantity of spirits.

Next it is of a similar growth, by its singularity of Sympathy only with
Iron, not having affinit^ with any other Mineral, nor mixed with any other
affection, which witnesses a power in it self able to give unto it, and this
not done by an absolute necessity, as compelled by a natural inclination, but
voluntary as it gives or requiteth, although there may be some such necessity
suspected in its attraction for nutritions sake.

Thirdly concerning its agreement of the virtues in its substance, if we
examine what has bin disputed in the two former parts, we may well conclude
that the foirit of respect, is chiefly derived from the influence of the Poles,
yet inhabiting the substance of the stone, though not equally, and miraculously
mixed with the power attractive in the same body, with which it passes into the
Iron; the spirit respective quickening the virtue attractive, and the virtue
attractive fed and nourisht by an admirable virtue in the Iron, which is made
evident in the delight it enjoys in its proximity: the power of the Magnetes,
in both qualities vivified and made more active, especially the attractive, by
the Iron as it is food, out of which as the Magnetes extracteth nutriment, so
it infuseth its proper excellence, and by which it bestows both the actual
and potentiall efficacy of it self, more powerfully to other portions of the
Irons nature, which is made plain in touching the Mariners Compass Needle,
for the Poles of the stone must be engirt with Iron, which Iron gives the
virtues, for as the stone exacts a tribute of food, by invisible workings; so
does it invisibly infuse the same measure of spirits into the Iron it
extracteth, to shun vacuity: the spirits of the Iron being this food, by a
natural propinquity and the substance; the ready and subtle distributer of
its virtues with a wonderful equality and pureness: as if in it of those
spirits, there were a second and necessary change for such uses.

Now if what has been said holds any scope worthy belief, then we must
conclude the spirit attractive is wrought by necessity, requiring nutriment,
and quickened by the spirit respective in the attraction; and since these
qualifies are infused by our only spirit, dwelling in the stone, and done by
Will, not compulsion (although the respective spirit is principally derived
from the Influence of the Poles, yet pleased to inhabit the bowels of the
stone, and there maintained in its fullness and vigor. It must necessarily
follow, that if the respective spirit be lost in tituration, as it must needs
be; the virtue attractive must consequently perish, since the respective power
is the life of it, quickening, and making it active in all its duties.

Cap. 4. A further search into the sixth Position.
YEt more able reasons from the qualities of the stone in its body: and the
virtues as there lodged and being may be collected.

First if the Magnetes be generally, the Palace of these Virtues as the body
is to the spirit, yet since the power attractive is particularly fixed, and
chiefly and most powerfully planted there where the respective flame delights
to dwell, we must agree that these virtues are not so essentially in the
substance of the stone, since in two peculiar points of it, the spirits of
respect please to appear (distinguishing either pole) which pull unto them the
vigor of attraction, being the duller power, to be convay'd with the nimbler
spirits of respect into the nature of the Iron, by which that wonderful
infusion of qualities is effected: then if these powers are not every where
equally distributed, but unsteady and flying (although our Author concludes
them to be most firm and stable which this last assertion refutes) how can we
hope, or by what reason shall we expect these powers to be detayned in the
stone so exquisitely reduced into powder, as the composition of an emplaster
requires.

Further if we consent that these spirits are equally condayed, and so remain
in every parcel of the Magnetes, and flying out where the most subtle part of
the stone is, yet I would know by what power the virtues are so altered, by
division; as if you separate by the Equator (as near as possible may be
attempted) the Articke from the articke, yet either part will assume unto it
self an Aequat^r, and two spirits of respect, distinguishing either Pole with
as able a virtue as the whole Mass possessed.

Is not this wrought by a Planetary Influence in the respective virtue, able to
alter its own property and nature with the attractive power when so divided,
and to quicken it to its proper effect by a necessity in either Pole to exact
its tribute: and does not the Pole raised participate the greatest portion of
the stone by reason the earths condense body interposing the one, and the other
by its proximity and being without any such interposition, made more lively,
and does not the attractive power also where the respective is weakened, fail
in equal proportion with the respective? Assuredly yes; now can these be
called steady, or are they not by influence there planted, These by experience
made manifest: worthily approves the conclusion of the third Chapter.

Moreover to add the Sinews of another reason to the former, since the
attractiue so absolutely (as it appears to me depends upon the spirit of
respect, and that also the Equator necessarily is from the division,
certainly we will consent, there must be a body left to entertain these
distinct virtues, viz. The virtues attractive and respective of either Pole,
with the Equator, because they work in and by that body, or else if any
virtue be wanting, or the body (being not of capacity to receive them) deny
their society, since their number, and unity is so absolutely necessary, we
cannot but allow a notable deprivation of their virtues, if not an utter ruin,
and what substance can there be in the Magnetes, for such receivings of
qualities so titurated? even as the finest Flower if we will according to Art
confect an Emplaster. Moreover in union things best maintain their vigor.

But say that in such Atoms of the stone being reduced into powder there
should be all these virtues, yet whether they can be of power to effect what is
expected in a work of such moment as the Prusian Swallow-knife was, with
success and profit, is questionable?

Some are of opinion that the fountain of this respective spirit, is about or
near the center of the earth.

Their reasons are drawn from certain experiments from the Mariners Compass,
for the point of the Needle being touched has a kind of inclination downwards,
which they term dipping: also if the Needle by the South end of the stone be
endew'd, yet on this side the equinoctial it will have a northern respect,
though not so nimbly in its quality appearing if touched by the Articke seat of
that virtue, in which sudden change and subtle passage, there must be an
excellent spirit allowed, agreeable in all points to what has bin prae-written
but the verity of this assertion I leave to be made known by time and
experience: for since in no manner it weakneth the argument in mention, but if
well and truly considered strengthens it.

Nevertheless it appears strange unto me, that since it is generally known
that the Magnetes (possesses two Poles) and yet should not infuse the like
distinct virtues by touch, into the points of the Needle, but with so swift a
mutation of the virtues of the one into the effects of the other, which rather
seems to be a defect then a power.

Cap. 5. A prosecution of the Censure of the sixth Position.
NOw let us deny what has been discourst, and conclude that the Magnetes
being reduced into powder shall yet retain the quality of attraction yet it
cannot be with that power as to penetrate the substance of the Ventricle, the
muscles, fleshy membrane or Cutis, because the quickening of the respective
spirit must out of all doubt be wanting: and although our Author may select
out of his merry Stories, boasting the effects of the Lodestone (as he intends
to his purpose) in pleasant pastimes by carrying Needles to and fro, on the
face of the water with the like, which he unprofitably reckons up, to put
nerves unto the seeblenesse of his Argument: I hope he will consider by what
power in the Magnetes all these miracles are perfected, no other forsooth but
by the power attractive simply, which desires a kind of aliment from the
nature of Iron is in the needle.

Further he must agree that the respective faculty cannot be infused but by
touch, (as he does not confess in his Tale, but experience in some sort being
above his authority, and all his numbered witnesses that have purchased their
seeming reasons, out of the labyrinths and disquiet of their own fancy and
brain sick Opinion, with the suffrage and allowance of the multitude, that
are easily seduced by ye common report, and allow consent of men's deservings in
such mysteries without approving) confirms this affirmative, by which touch
both the attractive and respective vigours are given to the Iron more
effectually, and that this motion on the brim and visage of the water is done
through the qualities of the Lodestone, in whose sphere and circular extent
the needle is, let by no interception; for if you touch the needle thereby
endewing it, it will as he reports, dance after your hand, moving the Magnetes
under a thick table, (yet within the bounds of its sphere) other wise it will
not so move if untoucht, or but slenderly, for it is wrought by the spirit of
respect, which is of power to penetrate condense bodies, and vicinity of the
stone, which absent, and the needle aptly planted as in the Compass it does as
it were forget its inferious benefactor; and earneth after its Pole or Center,
being the first spring and Original of such influence, from the second
Tresury; but how this could appear in the Rusticks Knife, not being touched is
doubtful, unless it be granted by the heat of nature,

Since fire may be quenched with Oil,

Cap. 6. A further search into the sixth position, being the fourth and last
part of our examination of our Au^hors reasons drawn from other simples etc.
Whereas the Author in this Position has cited Gummes and other Drugges to
strengthen the Opinion he holds, (now in question) he is much mistaken as I
think, in their natures, Gummes and other Druggs being extracted have their
portion, and exact not a future or successive nourishment for they dry, Gummes
and oils.
next they do not visibly draw forth, but rather (or for the most part by
heating and humecting with a comfortable warmth and dew, grateful and
vegetating the part, whereby nature is rather assisted to expel, then
altogether freed by the proper power of attraction in the medicament: another,
as we may gather out of the composition of Medicines, where many simples
naturally vicious and hurtful in themselves, are by the addition of others
grateful unto our bodies, and oppugnant to their qualities of hurt and poison
made helpefull and corrected, if any pact of their substance either the gross
or subtle holds in it a temper to be changed or assisted, being of a dissimilar
growth, all which may be allowed in the Magnetes, and Gummes, etc, though not
venomous, yet of opposing natures, the one pure, the other imperfect: to
enlighten this read Weekerus, Lib. 4. Pract. Generalis. Cap. 20.35, 36.



by nature intended such, and by her will made the same and unchangeable by
seasons being bruised, must loose the vigor of it self, Nota.
for we must make a difference betwixt things which nature has brought forth
divided, and those which she has delivered whole, the divided offspring of
her womb, garnisht with many forms, more Vert^es, though begotten from one
Root, brought into one heap, or body, is but the pulling back of things to
the first intent of nature, which although it be done with an abundant change
of what they would have bin, in her first intention, yet in consent and
concordance of their qualities their Virtues may be quickened, and in effect are
but the same she did intend.

But those pieces of her Womb she brings forth entire of one only substance,
color and Virtue, not to be altered by times or seasons, warmth, coldness,
dryness, moisture, not visibly collecting or loosing power, thus to be crushed
and broken must needs slake their Virtues, if not utterly quench them.

What may be objected out of this last part of this discourse, in affirming
that Gold and other Mineralls loose not their Virtues by pulverizing is vain,
for the Loadstone will not, so far as it is possessed with their matter and
substance, but they are not enricht with its spirit both attractive and
respective, concerning which the Reader may be better satisfied if he please to
look back to what is pre-written. Now I am not so confident, but that I submit
to the Judicious, only it does not appear unto me that the Magnetes reduced
into powder and so incorporated, can retain its Virtue attractive, but I will
descend to experience.

Master Bond my very worthy friend, an honest and painful Student in the
secrets of the Load stone is of this opinion, I am assures he is able to give
satisfaction in this matter to the ablest, since these times can harely afford
his equallin the Mathematical Studies, and mysteries depending upon that Art.

Cap. 7. Censure of the seventh and eighth Positions.
Position 7.
IN this Position he has worthily set down the Rules of Indication, whereby
the Physician is able to know what is menaced, and thereby invited through a
necessity, to study the letting of what may be dangerous, if arriving as
threatened. Indeed the Disease, the Cause, and strength of the Patient, are
those three principles, which we should always respect, and labor to be well
instructed in. First, the Disease must employ our understanding to know, if it
either in quantity quality, or both offend, venomous, abounding, or together.
Next if one humor, more or all it has infected, to which may be added, where
the seat of the evil is, if in the noble parts, or parts serving, yet equally
dangerous, or other ways, or whether the grief has implanted it self in
one, more, or in all parts serving, by its own proper quality and venime, as
in pestilent Fevers, etc. or accidentally.

The second needful enquiry is, of the Cause, whether that has power, from
the defects and want of nature in it self, or by accident and disorder. The
natural failings are either spermaticall, or age, parentally conferred, or by
the common Devourer Time, out of which Causes are thrust forth many branches:
to the Judicious most evident. The accidental are innumerable, and from
different means, the disquiets by disorder are likewise many, but commonly our
own.

The third quaere is the strength and estate of the afflicted body, totally, as
in Fever, etc. from one Cause, or totally from accident, as in Symptoms: or
member, simply without accidents, or else, compositively with, or partly, as in
Apostumes, etc. or totally, as in Sphacelus, or corruption of the whole flesh
and bone; in all which we must carefully consider whether the body or member be
of ability to assist a medicine of force, able to root out the evil by
concocting it without trouble, or languishing underits violence, or no: or else
to endure the assaults and rage of the distemper, till it self by paroxysmes,
and those commen evacuations in their endings ensue, shall wast it self, and
not eat up the treasury of strength or no?

These circumstances are so needful, that without their knowledge we cannot
promise to the sick any hope of their recovery being never so apparent, but
the Physician shall be puzzled with many varieties, which will shift his reason
into a labyrinth of idle doubts, neither can he (if he be ignorant of these)
advise himself by the Index of nature whether it be safe to attempt, Ex
irpare, aut morbum palliare, haec enim opera in vera causae et virum
consideratione constant et indicata sunt. The Histories he has numbered and
related, of many that have lived without some principal part, in some measure
supporting the throne of life, I cannot altogether so fit to my belief as to
conclude them worth repetition, yet of this anon. What he mentions to happen by
Disease carries some show of possibility: lues venerea had Os frontis, by the
cruelty of the Disease perforated like a sponge; out of which issued abundance
of malignant quitture, by fits ejected, as the Arteries upon his breathing were
filled with air.

Greek woman dwelling in Scio, of the age of twenty six years, having for
thirty months expectorated a rotten stinking purulent matter, after her
decease her Thorax being opened, her Lungs were almost wasted her Liver dried
up: for assuredly from the Liver that quantity (even to admiration) of matter
is violently pulled into the corrupted capacities of the Lungs and se ejected,
by which it comes to pass the body does so suddenly extenuate: for it may be
presumed, the Arteries in the want of those moist dewes which engirt their
tunicle may let loose the vital blood, which may sweat through their Coats,
and he diffused into the fouldings of the Lungs, which being empty of natural
humidity to quench their flame, and thereby made hot by them, without remedy,
this exhausting of Radicke moisture must follow, which by the pestilence of the
sick member suddenly altered intomalignity, the function of the breast as
readily exonerates.

There is often made a cista, out of ye pannicular enclosings of the Lungs, or
breast, filled with this matter or corruption, which having there a place of
receipt, and in some measure by conversion into so vile a quality continually
vexes, with a sharp and violent cough, together with ejection of that filth
which cough and expectoration miserably extenuating and disturbing the body
cease not, until that Bag be separated, partly by rottenness in its own
root or uniting, and partly by violence of the breast in its unvoluntary
motion, thereby dis-uniting it, and till then is ever without remedy: this to
many happens.

Yet that the heart should so be spent, I cannot relish a consent to believe
it: since all other parts as it were from a necessity, depend upon it: but the
heart has no necessary derivation but from it self; the Liver, Lungs, and
Ventricle, etc. ordained to serve, as all Creatures doewait in their duties the
occasions of man.

But whereas he reports of some, that have lived without a Liver, or Spleen,
from their birth, is most fabulous; can a substance be begotten of nothing? or
can a thing be without its matter? no more can these bodies of ours be without
Livers, they being the well springs of blood, and the food of all members: the
Liver is the Aliment of the heart, and the food of that vital fire, the dewes
of the brain, and the milk of the fleshy members, articulations, and bones:
but if without a Liver, without a Spleen, ^ Respect.
First, what is in the shape of medicine, our will does naturally loath, and
although in our knowledge we conclude a necessity of the receipt, yet our
affect ous hurt with a kind of a^horring, makes what is administered most
ungrateful, and less able in the efficient Work. ^ Respect.
Secondly, what is so mixed with Alimentall substance, not only is received,
but by the sympathy of parts with it is concoct, with more sweetness and liking
the medicinal virtues of the Herbs, thus being more apt to infuse quality
then as this Treatise mentions by Balsamicke Oils, irksome both to the eye and
pallet.

Position 8.
MOst assured is the conclusion of this Position, in the benefit of nature and
her unsearchable ways, to thrust forth what is obnoxious either in the quality
or quantity: Hippocrates (in this puzzle of secret confluxes) concluded, the
paths of nature to be inscrutable, nevertheless, although this congealed blood
by the Veins emptied was a miraculous benefit in nature, yet it is possible in
reason, for the blood out of its proper seat curdling and clodding together,
by that sweetness and congruity it holds with nature, might be sucked in by the
Meseraicks, Hepar begotten stones.

heaps, in regard it is yet in the continent of natural heat, besides being
accompanied with sufficient moisture, but the Liver burdened, hastening the
thrusting of it forth, it may more swiftly be convay'd to the Kidneys, which
descending into the Bladder, and there pausing may have a space of retention in
that place, till it be so settled and united, nevertheless it cannot be
denied, but as an acceptable and profitable duty in nature and as wonderfulll,
so to expel it.

One History amongst the rest of the Matron of Cullen, in my opinion is of
small credit, since where there is no air (as in the Grave there cannot be) to
refresh what is respired, smothering must needs ensue, it cannot be denied but
that in such chill takings of all the faculties of the body if life remain,

Refuted by 3 Reason.
and yet that there may be life, yet the good luck of this old woman must be
such that at the very instant she must awake out of her Trance, when her Grave
was opened (and not before) or the issue of her body would have been Worms
instead of Sons, for if before (but few minutes of time) the Grave was redigg'd,
she had revived, (since then the heart must have required a due portion of
breath, therewith to fill the Arteries and Veins, and abate and temper its
fury, she must have perished by suffocation, for supplies of fresh Air, are so
necessary to life, that with much less want, most able Bodies have bin
destroyed.

Cap. 8. Censure of the ninth and tenth Positions.
THese two Observations in the first of this Position which our Author (by the
authority of Hippocrates) delivers to be carefully avoided. etc. Timidity, and
Temerity, are of such effect to the dishonor of the Physician, and ruin of
the Patient, that they are certain producers of both: I will only discover
the events in their several parts, and first of unnecessary fear in the
Surgeon, which extends either to the Patient, or remedy chiefly to the
Patient, when the Surgeon for want of knowledge (for from impotence in Art
both those errors issue) shall Judge either the constitution to be weak, by
his ignorance in its composition, or else not of an apt making for some sort of
remedy: these Objections he frames to himself, not from the grounds of
reason, or experience, (both which admit a Science) but from a weak capacity,
united with a desire to know: the first, unable to examine a truth in difficult
conclusions: the last, carrying him into many readings, whose obscurities beget
the greater distractions, which he not of power to wind out of, sinketh into a
miserable doubt, being the mother of his fears; since assurance in all
undertakings ends with best success. The other Branch of this fault is, a
Jealousy of the remedy: in which being not able with profitable Judgment to
question the nature, and temperature of the ingredients, he must rest
disturbed; for in such knowledge of their operation, either by a subtle, or
open force; agreeable, or with some ruff quality, (whereby he is enabled, to
correct, or subdue a Vice in any simple) he is with a safety in the
administration satisfied: in which want he must ever be suspicious of good
success, and conscious of much mischief: of this sort are those in whose
natural gifts there is not that salt, is necessary in such mysteries: being
only fitted with sufficiency for mechanicke Arts, in which the eye of the body
(and not that of Judgment) is most required, the first almost sufficient, and
but a little glimpse of the other making it so; some such now a days under
expert Physicians are bred up, and live in the common allowance: but yet are
barren in what they profess: their Tutors excellence and authority holding
them up in the storms of Opinion, that they perish not, in des^^ght of that
weight of ignorance hang^ upon them, which (...) benefit to them only, and no
more. But a destruction to many, if their consciences are not more sensible
then their brains, in desiring the advice of the more able.

Next Temerity, (answering the first definition) is a prompt Excutioner of
evil, Self counsel, and of the two is the most dangerous: it is a sudden
disposer of of things worthy, a careful examination, and in its best work,
and ablest resolutions is always to be suspected, but most commonly ends in
destroying; it neither regards constitution, customs, congruity, age, or
season, to all which the expert and careful Physician (that takes in charge
his own conscience, as well as men's lives: least that he willingly wounded
more perillously, then the afflicted Patients body) must have a wise regard:
first respecting in view of the Patient, constitution, either of body or
member, to which the medicine must have a congruable force, quality and
substance, a force not to overthrow, but help, a quality agreeable, without
violence, a substance apt to be received.

Secondly, custom we must question: for when that Idea of nature has ruled,
that the Physician must labor to imitate for what has bin of long continuance
cannot be altered even i disease enforcing such alteration, without had events
and peril, in this discourse I will only remember some Histories. In the time
of my service to the Emperor of Morocco, and chancing after the overthrow he
received (from Hume^-ben Booker the Saint) at the river of We^labid, near the
foot of the mountain Atlas: many Moors there dangerously hurt, and with my
self by flight escaping visited me, at my house in the City of the Jews
(where all Christians have residence) imploring Cure, I receiving some that I
judged curable though not profitable, into my care: and in my proceedings for
their recovery with such Medicines the Country afforded, and instituting them a
spare diet and change of fare; (their food being rude, viz. made of stower, and
some other course mixtures molded into small corns like Coriander seeds, and
thoroughly heated by the steame of their Flesh pots which they term Cuscosu^)
and much: (they being greater eaters) even to gluttony, to which ^^^nder life
they were not easily persuaded, but by enforcing (since if they would not
follow my order, I denied in nothing to assist them) with regiment, when they
had consented to, and but some few days vigilantly observed, I found that a
sudden languishing without reason (which if it had continued would have bin
without remedy also) afflicted them: at last examining what might be the cause
of this extenuation, attended on by ^^^x, and fever, without the least success
in their wounds: by which afflictions, faintings ensued, even at every
dressing, and sensible touch of their griefs (which hindered the due
applications) I considered the cause might be in the want of their accustomed
sustenance; since the quality altered, to such whose bodies even from their
births were sustained by one sort of Aliment, must needs beget a distemper, as
also the quantity, since being used to labor, and thereby still to be
furnished with good appetites, and they to be satisfied with fullness; as also
commonly rising from meat, to lie down to sleep, in the want of which
custom, they rather enduied a famine then an Order. I returned (upon this
consultation with my self) to them, their liberty of feeding both in quantity
and quality: whereby their strength was suddenly restored, and their wounds
recovered, the disgestive power more commendably, even to consolidation and
siccatrice all things happening to my expectation: delicate bodies using change
of diet, sometimes quickened, and likewise dulled in the desire of food, as the
disposition of the stomach, or nature of the vyands presented shall invite or
refuse, are best able to stoop profitably to the strict institutions of
Physic: by reason such change (as is said in the second Chapter, and survay
of the fifth Position) is their custom.

Thirdly Congruity, both of medicine and part must be enquired after: in the
defect of either there may follow, inflammation, or stupefaction, and from both,
different and fatal endings, or extenuation, or some Hydropick dispositions
either in body or limb, or from both, to both a certain ruin.

Fourthly Age, must be diligently questioned and in that ability, which
neglected, the power of a Medicine may suddenly extinguish the natural beat,
either by suffering or benumming for aged bodies full of rheum, by much
suffering and dolor, are easily enflamed, and by narcoticke remedies are as
readily stupefied even to extinction, if they exceed in the least ability,
which errors youth would wrestle with, and overcome.

Lastly, season must employ our Judgment, since it both monthly by the Moon,
and conjunction of Planets, as likewise parts of the year quarterly presents
us with many varieties worthy our note and observance, and if fitly applied (in
the scope of our intents) are both pertinent, and profitable.

Next, Rashness, in the application of Medicaments is an Argument of weakness
knit to a kind of impudent boldness, the effects sometimes are to extirpation
of life, frequently to amputation of a limb, and that operation is by such
often attempted, and done with a barbarous rudeness, where topicall remedies
with Judgment administered would have promised a restoration, and have brought
to pass so excellent a duty: a lamentable work, and to be deplored.

Of this rank of Practitioners, are Tooth-drawers, Mathematical
Fortune Tellers, and that rabble of women, which strut up and down with their
skill in their pockets, which they purchased from the Chyrurgions boy for some
Garment trifle, when the events of their lusts, their diseases and poverty
thrust them into the Hospital, to be patcht up (for this employment) by those
worthy houses of charity: neither will they omit, to boulster out their
wickedness, with some show of ability, to those whose misfortunes, and sottish
ignorance has thrown them into their hands, and their own beds, in depraving
the worth of so many worthy gentlemen, the Physicians and Chirurgions of those
two free Mansion-places for the poor and maimed; whose knowlenge and care
meet in one Center, and are equal, both great, and each one the cause of the
other, and inseparably united.

Furthermore, whereas he says the passions of this Position of Anger, or Fear
in superficial wounds should altogether be the cause of such deplorable
conclusions, I cannot approve his testimony; certainly the vitiousnesse of
humors flowing to wounded members (often times the abundance ^onely is of
strength to produce, or bring with them lamentable accidents) and begetting
strange alterations in tender natures, whereby Fever is incited, by erosion,
and inflammation, and such humors kindling and putrefying in the Veins by such
heat, may be the chiefest cause of such mischiefs, although the Discourse in
this Position allow it but a second and succeeding means being derived, yet
made more able by the violent motions of the mind.

Indeed they are of a powerful quality, dail experience witnesses, in the
sudden alteration of the Visage, the spirits and blood being pulled back
with a kind of violence, in all these passions: viz. Anger, F^a^e, and sudden
Terror: but whereas he speaks of Histories, yet relates none, that men may
dye of Anger the truth is to be suspected: The passion of Anger, and the rest
are simp'e passions, not mixed with any other; (as guilt is, which is mingled
both with fear and anger, and therefore cannot properly be called a passion)
but as the sudden ebullition of the spirits, causes a drawing unto the heart
by abundant heat which naturally attracts the spirits dispersed into the
Arteries and Veins, in the service of the body; so does it as readily drive
them out again, to execute what the mind in such rage shall either conceive to
be a revenge, a satistaction, or remedy, insomuch that the parts of the body
not left destitute of heat for many minutes, cannot perish by an Apopler,
unless the matter was prepared, and lurking in the brain, that labored under
such a griefs, which this short deprivation of heat may occasion, as our
Author affirms.

Next fear is of a more killing nature, since it is a distress that lives in
the body for much time, as the occasion shall enforce: besides, as it is
properly seated in the heart, which man sensibly seeleth (although the animal
spirits in the brain by their faculty, through knowledge of the cause and
event, presents it and makes it available) so it defuseth an evil se^nper into
the blood and natural spirits, quenching their vigor also: procuring a vile
alteration by extinction of the conserving flame of the body, which at last
forsaking the blood, leaves behind it an inveterate grief, which seiseth on
nature, by a kind of infiring in every member, even to perishing, but this is
after some time.

Further sudden terror, of all the rest is most apt to bring forth such
lamentable events; for this passion not only seiseth on the heart, with a
strong power of fear, whereby as it were crushath it to pieces, but by a
necessary and furious calling back the vital spirits (sent abroad into the
channells of nature) to its aid; it threatens a stifling in the proper
Vessels of the heart. Besides, in arger there is a boiling of the arteriall
blood, by which their quality of heat is maintayn'd, which bursting forth
meets the flowing of the spirits, and thrusts them back, to their seat and
duties, and reviveth them by piercing through them; but in this assaulf there
is no such elaboration, but a dulling even to insensibility, without any
quickening, whereby follows a greater freezing of them in their fountain and
place of arrival, so that they return not, if in part they do, yet it is
with an irrecoverable feeblenes: Further, scare has its expectation, and can
Judge of the conclusion, which may a little refresh, but in this there is
neither; not through reason, but the passion afflicted and ruling in its
extremity: the differences thus far opened I leave it to the courteous and
Judicious Reader.

Moreover, whereas our Author attributes but a successive power unto the care,
to beget such hurts, or to make stight wounds difficult, or mortal, I think
he is in an error concerning this point, the passions of the mind effect
without any material, but I hope he will conclude the ears to be a subtle
one: since it is received into our veins, and arteries, and according to its
impurities and corruption, leaves there its tincture and condition, these
pestiferous seasons are witnesses, with the allo wance of all grave Writers,
besides many chronick evils, with have been cured by the only benefit of the
air: but of this enough.

Position 10.
ALthough this Position admits of tents to the depth of profound wounds, yet I
conclude that it is not so strong an Argument, as to be followed, or approved,
but rather that the tents should not pass too far, or too much beyond the
membrana carnosa.

The works of nature are the safest and most acceptable, in which amongst her
examples of memory, her defense from the hurts and oppressions of contraries,
are not a little to be admired. I will not Muster up a Legion of Histories to
repeat unto the wise her common labors, but as our present occasion invites
will only search the truth of this position.

It is assuredly confessed, that to lodge in the confines of nature, any thing
that is contrary to her being, must be an offense and a disease, we must also
consider that what is not of her must be offensive, as we see by things
violently carried into her bowels, which has and does frequently so employ
the skill and care of the Chyrurgions to draw forth, or free nature of, we may
further know, that what has been so left (especially being either in bulk
and form terrible) has been the cause of lamentable events even to
destruction. Then I would know by what Rule these times use the stuffings in of
great Tents, or dossells of toe into the broken members of the body, to extend
and wound the muscles and sensible parts by unnecessary dilations? Does the
Artist seek to extract offensive things by which only nature is freed, and
will he presume to thrust them, or the like into her entrails? does nature
labor the dissolving of griefs, and will the Surgeons hand produce dolor? did
the afflicted Patient suffer the pains of the wound in the receipt by Gun
shot, or the like violence, the torment of incisions to enlarge the Orifices of
the wounds, the better to convey in Instruments for the pulling forth of what
is against her will or sufferance there lodged and after all these endurings
will the Phys^tian cram in all bad evils as he drew forth, in passing
flannulas and Tents through and into the tender compositions of the members of
our body, whereby there is a writhing and punction of those parts of exquisite
sense produced, and no profit, frame, and sent out to our amazement; Is it not
her duty in such hidden passages to enwrap those offensive materials,
afflicting her in such measure with slimy compulsions, in which as in a Coat
Armor,



Membrana Carnosa, being so fitted that they may be large at their heads, and
small, soft, and slender at their points, Form of Tents.
in the penetrating wounds of the Thorax they may be framed longer, when our
Author has cited Tagaultius, in eight Causes to affirm the use of Tents
necessary, I will briefly examine their necessity.

First when wounds are etc. He cannot think that any power in the substance of
a Tent is of a deterging assistance, in the Cure of wounds, or that in the
making it has any effectual quality to that work, what may be presumed by
its arriving to the bottom is of weak force, to conclude a necessity, since
more properly (as it has been delivered) that may be effected by fitting
Medicines, and the sering. For the enlarging of wounds, I cannot conceive what
he means, since it has been ever allowed that where wounds for the
extraction of any thing infixed in the body are to be enlarged, or for
conveyance of any Instrument to perform that duty, it is not so convenient to
wait the dilation by Tents, since in such Cases there is a sudden (for the
most part) execution required, and not delay, (without peril) to be endured;
but this by the Knife to be brought to pass.

Secondly in hollow wounds etc. It were a notable piece of folly, to think
that in the generation of flesh Tents are requisite, which in old and unapt
constitutions, and aged people is to be done, by medicaments that have a power
to heal, and thicken the pure portions of blood sent to the part afflicted,
for such intent, I may well say intent, since it is natures, for there is an
end of all putrefaction, and malignity, there will be but bad or no generation
of flesh begotten: which good event in the time of growth, and our youth is
best perfected, more slow, after growth of parts, most difficult in age.

Thirdly in wounds altered etc. this has such dependancy upon what has been
formerly said, that it need no other discourse to refute it, only a looking
back to what has been already disputed.

Fourthly in contused wounds etc. I admire Physicians of such worth as their
labors have registered them to posterity, should link objections of one sort
and sense so together, rather to stuff a Volume and beget number then
probability, in contused wounds (especially made by Gunshot, which are most
likely to be with perforation, and thereby to demand the use of Tents) what is
absent that has not been formerly spoken? is there not ^^ulenes since
contusion cannot be dispatched without corruption? is there not loss of
s^bstance, since contused flesh which receives the air must needs putrify,
and be separated by incision, or digestion from the sound portion: and if such
loss be, must there not be generation of flesh, which is subsilly and often
done invisibly, as the digestive power shall rid away the lost and rotten parts
of the contusion? but I will be brief.

Fifthly in wounds which with phlegmon etc. This is in all most unnecessary: for
I would know, if phlegmon or any other Tumor can be so healed or removed? may
not hard Tents rather cause such evils, which being thrust into the bowels of
nature, and sensible parts, raise up into great pains, etc. I hope our Author
will allow some other precepts to let the sury of bad symptoms, or he will be
ever attendant with evil success in all his endeavors.

Sixthly in those that are made by bytings etc. I must ever acknowledge the
qualities of such wounds is venomous, which poison in them must of absolute
necessity be discharged, which evacuation must rather be done by medicines
attractive (then any other kind of remedy) which have a comfortable warmth in
them, to alter and digest: I cannot be persuaded that any such power is in
Tents, simply as they are; these sort of solutions rather requiring a liquid
body to search and penetrate, then a fast that shall only hang upon a Tent,
and not open it self to every part of the wound.

Seventhly, in those that must be handled etc. which commonly are by the
Disease opened when little flesh is naturally: yet in the fleshly parts, where
the bones are lodged deep, there is indeed an expedient use of Tents, of
indifferent length, for in such Fistulaes, the Orifice is subject to be drawn
together, which out of all doubt must be hindered, for such corruption, or such
defluxions, which have in them a malignity, must readily be emptied, since
their retaining may cause the Ulcer to receive worse qualities, and degenerate
into a more sordid temper.

Eighthly, Those that now by oldnesse etc. the former assertion in all points is
agreeable to this, and needs no other resolve.

In the black Sea (the Turks being in fight with the Cossacks of Russia)
near the River of Hos^a, experience sealed unto these Reasons, her allowance
where many being wounded with Harquebuz-shot through the brawny parts of the
Thighs and Arms, Experien^e
I healed only with Tents of not half an inch in length, placed in the
inferior Orifice, being in the Turks Galleys not furnished with Medicines
needful, only a spare diet ordered, to which naturally they are affected,
which was of worthy assistance.

For the deligation, I conclude necessary, as the member where the affliction
is methodically, either in matter of the Action to hold together, or
intentively to hinder fluxion to the part (by opening a capacity) shall
instruct the Physician, in which both of time, and manner, how, and how long to
be continued, his own observations must give him the best advice. As for the
often shifting of dressings, if the Pus issuing be virulent and sordid, either
^aturally or accidentally, it is necessary actually, twice in four and twenty
hours to cleanse it because such filth must needs infect and erode the parts
adjacent, and increase the evil both in quality and form: if grateful and
commendable, but once, and that duly to be observed, without neglect. For it
is to be presumed, be it never so laudable it would rot, but not in that time:
and to shift dressings oftener, it would dispose it to the air too much, which
is most hurtful in wounds, and would hinder a secret work in nature, both
incarnative and digestive (by a superstuous moisture ^^intaining putrefaction)
and by altering the hopeful dispositions of the matter, and cooling the
natural vigor, laboring that good effect, by both, of consolidation in the
member.

Cap. 9. Of the excellency of many secrets, and the abuse of Medicines of
wonderful operation, being administered by unskilful people.
IT is not unknown to the expert Practitioners of these days, how ancient
Authors have given place to the use of many remedies, and with great success;
for which they could hardly deliver a reason: for the secrets of nature are so
inscrutable, that they pass the bounds of humane Judgment, yet in the search
of their working qualities, it is expedient that such persons undertake, that
are truly endu'd with knowledge; for some there are, who out of vain glory
attribute to themselves belief to end so great a labor, but these fail by
that vice, which encourages them, since it cannot live but with ignorance, its
inseparable companion. Others by necessity are enforced to such Hyperboles of
themselves, that a mean capacity may judge there is no truth in them: but
others through a charitable inclination without any other respect, either of
fame, or reward are invited, to such happy collections, even to the good, and
relief of many. These are abundantly to be commended, and cherisht; with
these there also dwells a modest and commendable fear to attempt any thing,
which delivers it self full of doubt, to their eye and censure: in which
they will not travail but with the advice of the expert Physicians: these are
the richest and surest treasures of the poor, in whom they find certain
relief, and by their charities in Medicine are made acquainted with the common
distributions, which they bountifully share unto them, which by custom seems
to be an inheritance: what other places of charity end in, they begin to
perfect, when the afflictions of their bodies are taken off, they alienate them
from further refreshings: but such success endewes the Subjects of their
pity, with many immunities; the mansions of the sick have one crop of
compassion, but these many.

Now although these pious Collectors for the poor (whose purses, in food, and
remedies, are their Exchequers) may have many precious Medicaments, purchased
from a naked desire to know and do good, yet many times they may err in the
administration, for although Authors have left to the comfort of posterity most
excellent receipts, yet if they be not with Art applied, they may as well
ruin, as raise up: for the trust of health, we must not so much give unto ye
remedy as to the knowing Physician, that can employ it. There may be many exact
colors mixed by a rude hand, from order and prescription, but the skillful
Apelles, must put life unto them in the figure intended: without whose hand
they would but sully a Table with confusions, and not present a shape; although
I must in this matter confess weakness in me, yet I shall not fail (if any
suspicion of danger appear) in those shall seek help from me, to use the
assistance of some able Physician; for in my Travailes, by observation,
experience, and conversation with both Jewish, Arabian, Italian, Spanish, and
Greek Physicians, I have attained unto many worthy secrets, and shall be ever
ready with my best skill and care of them, to assist those that shall employ me
in their recoveries, especially in these griefs following, I have had good
experience, viz. Gout in youth, Dropsy, when the virtues of the Liver only,
and not the substance is wounded: yellow and black Iaundies, Cough, and
oppilations of the breast, Lungs and Liver, ulcers of the Reins, gravel and
stone in the Kidneys, strangury; Worms in children and people of age, falling
of hair, French evil: sore breasts, not indurated by Cancer, or therewith
ulcerated, and the like, in which the sick shall receive honest satisfaction,
neither will I attempt things difficult, but with the advice of the skillful
Physician, and expert Chyrurgion, attributing the success wholly to GOD, to
whom be all Glory for ever. Amen.

The end.
An Historical Addition of the wounds of the Stomach admirably healed.
Diomedes Cornarius, chief Physician to the most Sovereign Prince Maximilian,
Archduke of Austria, Brother to the Emperor Rudolph the Second, in his
admirable and rare Physical Histories, published in Lypsia, Anno 1599.
IN the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred forty six, in Bohemia a
Countryman in hunting was by^a broad-headed hunting-staffe wounded in the
Ventricle about the stomach or the upper Orifice thereof, the wound was large,
and was not possibly with any industry of Art to be consolidated; but the lips
of the wound by little and little contracted a Callous. The gaping of the wound
he stopped with an Instrument thereunto fitted, so that when he would, he
could thereat with Linen Clouts make clean his stomach, and send forth the
meat and drink he had ingurg'd. This the Imperial Majesty alone (who looked
upon the wound) may sufficiently testify: as Matthias Cornare his chief
Physician heard him oftentimes say.

Julius Alexandrinus, chief Physician of the Emperor Rudolph the second, in
his Annotations to the fourth Chapter of Galens method of Physic, describes
the same History somewhat more copiously.
A Bohemian of a Town called Pugge-brot, who was wounded in the Ventricle,
began thereat as often as the wound was dressed, to reject his meat. The
Physicians hereat stood astonished, judging the chance desperate, and therefore
handled they the wretched man neglectfully, and cured him not according unto
Art, as being in that case utterly unskilful. So at last the lips of the wound
began to be callous, there issuing always thereat part of the meat that he
had eaten; sometimes very impure, sometimes I know not what kind of Chyle or
Juice.

Thus the man left in this misery, only covering the wound with some clouts,
and bandaging it about for some years lived. This man while the wound was
green, had he had all things administered according unto Art, I suppose the
wound might have been united and agglutin'd: because he lived after that a
long while forsaken and neglected by the Physician, for the wound was not in
any thin part of the Ventricle, but in the thicker and-more fleshy part, as is
the constitution of the upper Orifice thereof.

James Oethius in his Physical Observations records the like History.
IN the Province of Fulda I was familiarly acquainted with 2 industrious
Chyrurgions, David and John Schenk, who constantly affirmed to me that in times
past they cured a robustuous Soldier, who by a rustic of Marpach in the same
Province, was with a Hunting-staffe struck through the right Hypocondrium, and
after they had diligently searched the wound, they perceived it to penetrate
into the Ventricle, and thereat the meat and drink he had supt up altogether
to gush forth. Wherefore declaring to the sick man, and to his kindred the
greatness of the danger, assayes the Cure, and penetrating that part of the
Ventricle that was wounded, to the wound of the muscles of the Abdomen, and
there with one suture fastened together the gaping of the Ventricle, and that
wound of the muscles of the Abdomen. The Patient stoutly endured this dolorous
kind of Cure. At last after the wound by little and little was consolidated,
the sick man recovered his former health and strength. I enquiring after the
truth hereof from the Countrymen of that Town, that were present at the Cure,
they did all witness unto me that such a thing was done.

John Gessen of Gessen, his History of a Bohemian Rusticke, whoswallowed a
Knife too.
IN the year one thousand six hundred and two, and in May, there met me a
Countryman of Prague, of mean stature, young and lusty, with a Surgeon in his
company, who rehearsing that some few days ago being in a Winetaverne, he
did in sport put a knife into his mouth, and it sinking to the Gullet unawares
fell down and pierced into the Ventricle; desired that in that misery I would
supply him with my advice.

He unbuttoning himself, we saw a place bunching forth, which after we very
heedfully handled, we found that the point of the Knife somewhat more blunted
in the bottom of the sto nacke tending to the left side, but the haft turned
toward the back. Therefore when I showed him the greatness of the danger,
and that the Knife could not go back the same way it went in, nor also by the
intestines could possibly come to be avoided; the Patient hereat astonished,
and considering his misery, earnestly desired that forthwith by Section I would
free him from inevitable death: But when I showed him too how dangerous it
would be by reason of violent Symptoms that might come thereon by such an
operation, and advised him to commit the matter unto nature, he did rest
contented with my advice. For I declared unto him that in my time at Paris, a
Knife likewise being swallowed down by a Iuggler, the ninth month after
egreded by the groine. Thus I parted with this wretched man, seriously
admonishing him not to stir, nor to stuff himself least the Knife might
change its place. And the Surgeon I charged to apply suppuratives to the part
affected.

A little while after the Knife endeavored to come forth, which endeavor the
Surgeon furthering with a Magneticall Emplaster, it did at last break forth.
The Knife the Imperial Majesty has commanded to be laid up amongst his
Jewels, and to testify the Miracle, to be preserved.

Written at Prague on Saint John Baptists day. 1607.

An extract of a Letter written from the famous Dan. Becker, to Otho Heurinus,
Professor of Physic in the Academy of Leyden, belonging to the mighty States
of Holland.
Of the continual Apost^umation of the thin Gut, and Stomach, sending forth
the Chyle.
Most Noble Sir,
A Matrone, here this year one thousand sire hundred thirty eight, of the age
of fifty years was much troubled beneath about the Navill with an Aposthume,
which by reason of many causes came at last to be a Fistulous Ulcer, whereunto
the humors from all about the body flowed: And she presently complained of a
pain in the left Hypocondrium, where also a tumor of swelling did appear,
which of its own accord broke and closed up again, a purulent matter by a
sinuous way creeping even to the Orifice of the Fistula next the navill, and
issuing forth thereat. By and by after there followed a Chylous matter of the
mease she had eaten: and this was an evident sign that the intestine there
resident was consumed. For ten days together of whatsoever she did eat or
drink, two or three hours after there issued thereat a kind of Chyle, to the
great terror of the Patient and standers by. The things premised that were to
be premised, I prescribed her a potion of wound herbs, and advised that
thrice a day she should take somewhat of this Balsame. Take of the simple
Balsame of Masticke. 3. of the tops of Hypericon. M. 1. let them boil a little
and be expressed.

It is wonderful, after ten days passed in that Cure, a perfect consolidation
of the internal Ulcer in the intestine was obtained, so that after that
nothing of the chylous matter by the Fistulous Ulcer under the navill issued
forth. Hence we may manifestly conclude the unspeakable power of God and Nature
(Gods hand) in the curing of diseases, for which way was it possible the
Chyrurgious hand should arrive at this secret ulcer, there to absterge the
matter collected and to cleanse it? Ho wheit three months after the
consolidation made there arises in this wretched body a greater evil; for
whereas the Surgeon contrary to the charge of the Physician endeavored the
consolidation of the sinuous Ulcer under the navill, behold immediately there
is matter collected about the left Hypocondrium, making a new Apostume, the
opening whereof he neglecting, and the patient greatly fearing nature does it
of her own accord, and casts forth the matter by the gaping lips of the
Ulcer. Some few days after follows a viscous phlegmatic matter, such as
always lies upon a man's stomach. To conclude, whatsoever she takes issues at
the Ulcer.

All signs as well of the matter as of the place affected affested that the
Apostume lurked in the bottom of the Ventricle, and being therewith eaten
through and opened, yielded issue for the matter swallowed. I could not leave
this wretched woman with the Prognosticke, and destitute of all help, because
as yet she was somewhat strong. I prescribed therefore, that she should use
with the decoction the consolidating powder of Bole Masticke, Lilly Root,
Quintesence of Crab's Eyes, and the like made up together, and that she should
use this Balsame; of the Balsame of Masticke. 3. of the Oil of Hypericon well
prepared. 1, S^m. mixed together, for five days together she continued the use
thereof, by which time the Apostume of the stomach is admirably healed; so
that afterward for two months space nothing came forth of what she had taken.
But some three months past, when the Patient loathed the Medicines prescribed
for her preservation, and that the Surgeon unadvisedly again assayed the
consolidation of the Fistulous Ulcer under the navill (because it was the first
that grew) there in that place next the ulcer was matter collected into an
Apostume. This a long time after being opened, all that she had taken at the
mouth together with had humor issued at the gaping. But I advised her then
that nature could no longer endure any medicines and curing, because all the
Corroboratives and Restoratives that were used immediately went forth at the
ulcer: and she being spoiled of all her strength by the disease, old age and
defraudation of her food, at last without any trouble or fear of death gave up
the ghost. I could willingly have opened the Corpse, whereby I might have been
an evident eyewitness of the constitution of so great and hidden a Disease,
but that she desired not to be exposed to view, and put to search out the
cause of her deadly Disease, her Kins folks also willing to observe her desire
suffered not. But I rest, for fear I might nauseate and molest your excellence.

Farewell and love still, most Noble Sir, Your most observant. Dan. Becker.

SOme Histories in my own observations illustrated I will add, to give life
to the former being in Morocco, there repaired unto me, a Moore of the Tribe of
the Shabonetes, this man being wounded some three inches above the Navill, as
he reported by a Turkish Haniarr, which is a crooked broad Knife they wear
about them, and (which was a Miracle) without Fever, or any other Symptom
walking six or seven days about his affairs, only applying to the wound a
little Honey, their common Medicine, till at length by inflammation and
rottenness in the wound, for want of digestive, helps and convenient
abstersion, he was a little vexed with pain, therefore desiring my aides, as
well as the Country could furnish me with remedies, I resisted the Accidents
appearing, and having somewhat perfected the work of digestion, I perceived a
portion of broth to issue at the wound, which but a small time before he had
received at a Jews house of his acquaintance, therefore concluding the
Ventricle to be perforated, I advised him of the danger; which he making a
slight account off, applied himself to his labor, which calling him thence,
he requested me to give him some of the Balsame I administered to him, that he
might finish the Cure in his absence from me, to which I consented, and in
three weeks after he returned in perfect health, the Medicine was framed of
these following ingredients: viz. Saint Iohns-Wort Century, Spear Mints,
Balm, Penny-Royall, Rose-mary Flowers, Spikenard, Time, winter Savoury,
Wormwood, infused in Dyle, to the straining I put Azibar, being a kind of
course Aloes they have there: Turpentine, Rosin, Wax, and Honey, dissolved in
the Oil, and boiled o^ver a gentle fire, to a fit body.

May not also the Cure of R. P. be here again repeated, since he so happily
was recovered, to the glory of God, and lived about a year and a half after,
till he perished under the burden of a sorrowful Captivity, wherein I did
partake with many other, where also expired.

Captain William Wild, a Gentleman so excellently qualifyed in the gifts of
naturs, and those made perfect, by the gifts of Grace, that he lived a happy
Pattern to men of his Coat, and dyed as sweet an example: whose goodness
made him without flatery, or failing a friend, where he saw desert drooping,
or his conversation had built him up such to any. His purse was as open as his
heart, and his good counsel as free as either; all without adulation, envy, or
conclusion, but in his own. He has left a worthy memory of himself to his
Country, Kindred, and Friends, with a Tomb that shall repeal him, when the
tongue of Marble is dumb, and Hospitalls have outlived their Benefactors,
whose Monument is neither subject to the Worm, nor Time. Another wonder of
this sort, nothing inferior to what has been discourst of happened, I will
briefly set down: A Neger Slave belonging to a Shecke of the cast of
Wellid-Amar, being hurt by his Master under the shortribbs on the right side,
and the stomach being pierced, was without any order of diet, or had accident,
healed, by the former Medicine, I had prepared for some of the Kings Eunuchs
that were hurt, and escaped out of the Battle of Wedlabid, to the glory of
our omnipotent God, whose abundant mercies in all things appears.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 9. l. 11. for exercised. read. excised. p. 68. l. 10 f. infamy. r.
infancy. p. 69. l. 3. f Ianus. r. gunns. l. 33 f refuse. r. refute p. 70. l. 9.
f. untruth. r. truth. p. 71. l. 33. f. so. r the. p. 73. l 11. f. elimentall.
r. alimentall. p. 74. l. 9. f excelling r. enfeebling. p. l. 32 f. dispatched r.
disputed. p 76. l. 6. f. in corn. r. incarn l. 27. f. temper. r. tempers. p 78.
l. 4. f especial, r. spinall. l. 33 f. paniculous. r panicular. p. 79. l. 3.
f. heat. r. sense p. 92. l. 9. f. strained. r. strayed. l. 19. f body. r.
bolus. p 96 l 6 f. enfeebled. r. enabled. l. ^8. f as. r. are l. 29. f. fresh.
r. forth. p. 67. l. 18. f though. r. being. l. 38. f. is not able. r. is able
p. 98. l. 10. f. as into the Hospital of St. Air retired r. into the
Hospital of St. Bethlem and are there retired. p 99 l 3 f. reprehensively. r.
repurcussively. l 12. f easy. r. ayrie. l. 28. f. kind. r. hind p. 107. l. 33.
f. execrations. r. executions. p. 109. l. 14. f. their. r. its. p 111. l. 4. f.
our. r. one. p. 112 l. 11. f. artick. r. antartick. p. 123. l 28. f. firm. r.
form. p. 127. l. 14. f. greater r. great. l. 16 f. nothing. r. any thing. l.
17. f. with. r. which p. 131. l. 10. f. ear r. air. l. 14. f ear. r. air.
p. 132. l. 21. f. all. r. as. l 30. f. unwonted. r. unwounded. p 133. l. 3. f.
compulsions r. compactions. l. 16. f. these. r. flesh. l. 26. f. torrid. r.
sordid. p. 134. l. 26. f. there. r. until there.


