AN ANSWER TO Sir Thomas Manwaring's BOOK, Entitled, -- An Admonition to the
READER of Sir Peter Leicester's Books.

WRITTEN By the same Sir Peter Leicester.

Printed in the Year, 1677.

An Answer to Sir Thomas Manwarings Books, etc.
IN the first place, I desire the learned and ingenious Reader to take notice
of the very first words of Sir Thomas Manwaring's Admonition -- [That you may
know Hercul^s by his Foot:] whereby he would insinuate the blasting of my
Credit and Reputation, even before he begins one word of his Book; and it is
all one, as if he should have said in downright words, take heed of believing
any thing which Sir Peter writes: For here I will show you the Partiality,
Omissions, Uncertainties, and Mistakes of the said Sir Peter, in those two
Sheets of his Historical Antiquities, in which he writes of the Township of
Over-Peever, which are so numerous, that little credit is to be given to any
thing he writes elsewhere; for ex pede Hercules, and it is no matter what he
writes of the Bastardy of Amicia, or any thing else: See here the scope of his
design.

Had he given me notice of my Mistakes in private, it would have showed more
handsomely in him, and more acceptable to me; but he now publishes to the World
his own Malignancy, which will be a greater dishonor to himself than these
pitiful exceptions can be a disparagement to me, for his Reputation is out of
his reach, Cum tamen non mordeat, oblatrat.

But let us now take a view of these his pitiful exceptions which he would so
unhandsomly charge upon me as Errors.

To the 1. Page 4.
Here he says that in Page 330 of my Book, I call Ranulphus in Doomsday-Book
the supposed Ancestor of the Manwarings: But Page 208. I call Odard the
undoubted Ancestor of the Duttons: Now what reason I can have for that, except
my Partiality, he cannot imagine.

My Answer.
Yes, Reason enough for it, though he cannot or will not imagine it:

For I have seen sundry Deeds of the first Age after the Norman-Conquest,
namely made in the time of King Henry the first, wherein I find Hugh the Son of
Odard so styled, and Hugh Son of Hugh Son of Odard: See Page 264. of my Book,
and Page 117. sub Anno iii 9. and also Page 250. whereas I should be glad to
see any one Deed of that Age, mentioning or calling Richard Mesnilwarin Son of
Ranulphus.

Again, the ancient Roll of the Barons of Halton which I have seen and
transcribed in one of my Manuscripts, noted Lib. Cap. fol. 84, 85. (which Roll
seemed to be written in a Character of 300 Years standing at the least,) says
thus -- Ab ipso Hudardo venerunt omnes Duttomenses. See also Monasticon
Anglicanum, Vol. 2. page 187. and also page 249. of my Book, but I never knew
nor heard of any such ancient Roll or Record, wherein it is said -- Ab ipso
Ranulpho venerunt omnes Manwaringi.

Again, I have seen the ancient Sword, called at this day Hudards-Sword, and is
yet in the possession of the Heirs of Dutton of Dutton, and for many Ages has
been passed as an Heir-Loom from Heir to Heir for many Generations; and I have
seen some Wills of the Duttons, giving the same as an Heir-Loom to the Heir by
that name of Hudards-Sword, which by tradition received has been constantly
preserved by the Heirs of that Family with great veneration, the like (I
believe) cannot be shown by any Family of this County, or scarcely in England.
See in my Book, page 250. I say not this to extenuate any Family, but to show
the Antiquity of this Family which has been seated at Dutton even from the
Conqueror's time to this present, and continued in the name of the Duttons,
until in our days it devolved by a Daughter and Heir unto the Lord Gerard of
Gerards-Bromley in Staffordshire.

And therefore I might well call Odard the undoubted Ancestor of the Duttons,
and by much surer proof than (I believe) can be produced to prove the
Manwarings to be descended from Ranulphus aforesaid.

Neither do I look upon the Lands coming to either of the Families to be never
so sure a proof as what I have mentioned above; for possibly Lands might
descend by a Daughter and Heir, or by Purchase, and yet Richard Manwaring might
not be Son of Ranulphus, as is certainly recorded of the Duttons from Odard.

Howbeit, I am so much satisfied with the Lands found in Possession of the
Manwarings, in the very next Ages after William the Conqueror, that I suppose
the same Ranulphus to be the Ancestor of the Manwarings, but I cannot say it is
so certain as the other:

What reason now has Sir Thomas to charge me with Partiality in the Case?

To the 2. Page 6.
Here he says, that in the same 330 Page I tell him of two Places or Hamlets
in Over-Peever anciently called Cepmundewich, the other Fodon, whereas there
were seven such places there, which he reckons up.

Answer.
But Sir Thomas mistakes himself therein, for neither Radbroke, nor the other
four there mentioned by him, were called Hamlets, as Cepmundewich and Fodon
were: See Page 331. of my Book, for although there might be some parcels of
Land in Over-Peever, so called, either Fields or Tenements, yet were those
parcels never called Hamlets in any Deed that I ever saw as yet: Now Hamlets
are as it were a Ville within a Ville, and are places more conspicuous, and
usually containing a greater quantity of Land than a private Place, Field, or
Tenement, gaining certain names as those did, and other Places also might do;
nor was it fit for me to take notice of all such inconspicuous places in my
Book, though I did take notice of the Hamlets; for that were to make my work
endless, and to stuff it with trifles: But I did take notice of Radbroke,
because it was a Freehold at this day, and now not belonging to Manwaring,
which made me the rather to mention the same; and though it be locus cognitus
in Over-Peever at this day, yet no Hamlet at all.

To the. 3. Page 7.
Here he tell us, that I have left out in the Pedigree of the Manwarings, (Page
331.) Ranulphus mentioned in Doomsday-Book, Richard Mesnilwarin, Roger de
Mesnilgarin, or Mainwaring, and William and Randle his Sons, Roger de
Menilgarin or Mainwaring, Sir Ralph Manwaring, Sir Roger Manwaring his Son.

Answer.
But if he had viewed well Page 330. of my Book, he might have found the last
Roger Manwaring, and Ralph Manwaring his Father sometime Judge of Chester, to
have been there, but that either of them were Knights, it does not certainly
appear to me, as in my lesser Book I have formerly given my reasons; and for
the descents here mentioned before, Ralph Manwaring, I think he himself will
have much ado to put them into right order as they ought to be; I am sure I
cannot; and though they were Lords of Over-Peever, or the greatest part
thereof, yet certainly none of them lived at Over-Peever, till William
Manwaring had Over-Peever given him by Roger Manwaring of Warmincham his Father
in the reign of Henry the third, and so seated himself here in Bucklow-Hundred,
where his Heirs have ever since continued to this day.

However, my design was only to show who held every paritcular Town in
Bucklow-Hundred from the time of William the Conqueror to this day, or so far
forth as I could discover, together with the Pedegrees of the better sort of
Families seated within that Hundred, or so many of them as my leisure would
permit me to go through, the other Hundreds being out of my intended task; and
this he takes notice of himself, Page 8. so that having showed how the
Manwarings of Peever first branched out from the Manwarings of Warmincham, it
was only suitable to my design to bring down that descent to this day. The like
I have done of the Savages of Clifton, and of the Brooks of Norton.

Yet I cannot but take notice how he calls the first William Manwaring of
Over-Peever, and the first of the Manwarings who seated himself there, by the
title of Sir William Manwaring; whereas it is most certain that he was no
Knight, nor can any Deed be produced wherein he was ever subscribed as a
Witness, with the word Domino prefixed, as Domino Guillielmo Manwaring de
Peever, if Sir Thomas would but survey his own Deeds with an impartial eye:

For if he finds any William subscribed Domino Guillielmo Manwaring in that
Age, it is to be understood of Sir William Manwaring Parson of Wernith, who was
contemporary with the other William Manwaring of Peever, and such Deed or Deeds
I my self have seen: See Page 330. of my Book, and my Answer to the defense of
Amicia Page 7, 8. also my first Reply, Page 73. and my Addenda, Page 16, 17.

But the first Knight of the Family of the Manwarings of Over-Peever, was Sir
John Manwaring of Peever, living in the time of King Henry the sixth, and died
about 20. Edw. 4.

So that hitherto I have committed no error at all in these things he charge
upon me.

To the 4. Page 8.
In this I confess I may be mistaken, in saying that Holt was the second
Husband of Margery Praers, since he finds John Honford was her Husband 46, 47.
and 50. Edw. 3. for then Honford must needs be her second Husband, and Holt the
first, which by long pawsing on his own Deeds, he might the better discover.

To the 5. Page 8, 9.
William Leigh of Baggiley was no Knight 33. Edw. 3. when he married Joan
Manwaring, for he was then very young and under age, and therefore no error in
what I there have said: Howbeit he was afterward a Knight, which I did take
notice of in his due place.

To the 6. Page 9.
He that tricked out the Seal for me, saw as well as my self, that the Seal was
three Bars, and not two Bars, to the best of our Judgments; but William
Manwaring the younger, did in his Seal use only two Bars 17. Richard 2. when
the Heirs Males of the Manwarings of of Warmincham failed, and also left out
the Lion in chief, as I have there truly observed.

To the 7. Page 9.
I must needs omit John and Margery Brother and Sister to the said Helen, which
I then knew nothing of, and possibly other things may be hereafter discovered,
which ought not to be imputed as an error to me when I writ my Book, but so
far as I writ, was true.

Besides, It was not my design to collect all the Children of the younger Sons:
Now these were the Children of a younger Son. It was only my task to collect
the Wives and Children of the right Heirs of each Family in Bucklow-Hundred.

To the 8. Page 9.
He says here, that he finds William (Son of Roger Manwaring) living 14. of
Edw. 3. and how long after, he believes no Man can certainly tell.

Now I said he died about 12, or 13. of Edw. 3. which expression of mine shows
only a guess, without an exact certainty; a very poor exception to be put in
Print.

To the 9. Page 9, 10.
Here he says, that I said William Manwaring the younger divided the Lands of
Baddiley between John Manwaring his Half-Brother, and John de Honford; but
(says he) William gave the Demain of Baddiley solely to his Half-Brother, and
divided the remainder of the Lands of Baddiley:

Why then he divided the Lands of Baddiley.

To the 10. Page 10.
Here he says, that all the Manwarings that he can find, have either given for
their Crest an Ass-Head on a Torce, and haltered, or else an Ass-Head erased,
or else an Ass-Head unhaltered, and within a Coronet.

Answer.
So that he makes here no certain Crest at all to his Family: A very worthy
exception: But they have given the Ass-Head someway, and it is certain, that
William Manwaring the younger in his Seal, 17. of Rich. 2. did then give the
Ass-Head couped, which his Heirs have, or should have continued.

To the 11. Page 11.
Here he says, that the said William Manwaring did not by any Will dispose,
but of a part of his Estate, namely of the Lands which came by his Mother, nor
did he by any Will settle the Lands which he had as Heir to his Father.

Answer.
Indeed I neither said he settled the Lands of the one nor the other, but only
that he settled his Estate, which if it were either of his Mothers Lands, or
Fathers Lands, I have said truth; nor is it any matter whether of the one or of
the other, to my purpose.

To the 12. Page 11.
Here he says, that he cannot understand how the dying of Sir John Warren 10.
of Rich. 2. does prove that John Manwaring married his Widow about 13. of
Richard the second.

Answer.
But it is probable to be about that time, for it may well be imagined, that it
must be some competent time after Sir John Warren's death, nor can any Man
expect punctual proof of every thing in the^^ cases; and if Sir Thomas cannot
mend it, it may stand, till bette^ proof appear.

To the 13. Page 11.
Here he says, that I have observed that the said John Manwaring wa^ Sheriff
of Chess-shire 4, 5, and 6, o^ Henry 4. but have omitted 7, o^ Henry 4.

Answer.
Certainly, this is a childish exception, as most of the other be (...) Is it
possible that any Man that ever did write, or shall write hereafter of matters
of this kind, should comprehend every particular? and this is not worthy the
labor of mending, and is well enough without it.

To the 14. Page 12.
Here he says, that Page 333. I say John Manwaring died 11. of Henry 4.1410.
whereas he was certainly dead in the Year 1409.

This is also a pitiful exception: why does he not now produce authority for
the exact time of his death?

To the 15. Page 12.
Here he says, that Page 334. I said Margery survived her Husband Randle
Manwaring, whereas she was certainly dead in the Year 1449, and died several
Years before her Husband.

Answer.
But this mistake I rectified in Print long since, at the end of my said Book,
among the Errata, and also at the end of my Answer to the defense of Amicia, so
soon as I knew the certainty of it, and therefore ought not to be charged upon
me.

To the 16. Page 12.
Here he says, that I said Sir John Manwaring died about the very end of Edw.
4. his Reign, but he was dead for certain the 14. of April. 20. of Edw. 4.

Answer.
Had I but said toward the latter end of Edw. 4. I had not much erred, and I
could not put down the exact time till I knew it: Now Edw. 4. reigned but 22
Years in all.

To the 17. Page 12, 13.
Here he says, that I omitted Agnes Daughter of John Manwaring of Peever
Esquire, and Wife of Sir Robert Nedham.

Answer.
Indeed at first I made some doubt of the truth hereof, because I found in my
Lord Kilmorey's Pedigree, under the Herald's Seal, that the said Sir Robert
Nedham married Maud Daughter of Sir John Savage: But as soon as I found out the
truth, I rectified that omission in Print, at the end of my Answer to the
defense of Amicia, Page 87, as will appear by the said Book, Printed 1673, and
did also blot out that Match with Savage in my own Book, in the Pedigree of
that Family, page 233. and yet he imputes it now again, as if I had not mended
the same, which is unjustly charged here.

To the 18. Page 13.
Here he says, that Katharine Manwaring married William Newton probably 1522,
and I had said it was 1521, so that there was no certainty of what I there said.

Answer.
I say it is as probable they were married 1521, as 1522, and can absolute
certainties be always found out in matters of this nature in every particular?
therefore let it stand, till he proves it to be an error.

To the 19. Page 14.
Here he says, that Page 335, I say Sir John Manwaring was Sheriff of
Flint-shire 6. of Henry 8. but I take no notice that he was Sheriff there 23
and 24 of Henry 7, and also 1 and 2 of Henry 8.

Answer.
What if I did not? It is true what I have said, and well enough without it:
for (as I said before) it is not possible that I should comprehend every
particular, nor any Man else; and shall my Credit of writing Truth be impeached
by him for this, because I cannot know every thing? therefore I have committed
no error herein.

To the 20. Page 14.
In the same Page 335, I say Sir John Manwaring died 8. of Henry 8. 1515. and
no part of 8. Henry 8. falls in Anno 1515.

Answer.
What of all this? It perhaps were better placed to be Anno 1516, or 1517. let
him find out the absolute time, and I will mend it.

To the 21. Page 14.
Here he says, that Page 335. I say Sir Randle Manwaring after the death of
his first Wife, married Elizabeth Daughter of Sir Ralph Leicester of Toft 6. of
Edw. 6. 1551, but (says he) I cannot prove they were married till the Year
1552.

Answer.
Therefore let it stand donec probetur in contrarium, it may yet be so for
ought I know.

To the 22. Page 14.
Here he says, that Page 336. I say Philip Manwaring Esquire was the fifth Son
of Sir John Manwaring, but he was the seventh Son born, and not the fifth, as
appears by the Monument of the said Sir John in Over-Peever Church, wherein the
Monument of the said Philip is also.

Answer.
It may be so, but they all died young, and Philip became Heir: If it be an
error, it is but a small one, and not material.

To the 23. Page 15.
Here he confesses what I say to be truth, that the Herald in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth made for Sir Randle Manwaring's Coat, Barry of twelve pieces,
Argent and Gules: See Guillims Heraldry, Page 373. but (says he) the
Manwarings since then have again given two Bars only; and the Coat which the
said Sir Randle did then usually bear, was six Barrulets; and that I knew the
ancient Coat to be six Barrulets Page 330. and not Barry of twelve pieces.

Answer.
It is true, that I said the ancient Deed of Roger Manwaring made in the reign
of King Henry the third, was sealed with an Escocheon of six Barrulets, Page
330. but that Coat devised for the said Sir Randle, Guillim the Herald calls it
Barry of twelve pieces: I know not the criticism in these terms of Heraldry,
the Heralds themselves are the best Judges herein, and whether we call it the
one, or the other, it is not a Pin matter; nor have I committed any error at
all, for I there vouched Guillim for it.

To the 24. Page 15.
Here he says, that I say the said Sir Randle Manwaring the elder, built the
Hall of Over-Peever anew, 1586. but (says he) part of the said House was built
1585, and another part was built 1586.

Answer.
Is not here a worshipful exception? It is more proper to ascribe the time when
it was built to the finishing of it, than when it was begun, for it was not all
built till it was finished.

To the 25. Page 16.
Here he says, that Page 336. I call Sir Philip Manwaring Secretary of Ireland
to the Earl of Stafford, 1638. whereas the said Sir Philip was his Majesty's
Secretary of State there.

Answer.
Here I confess my words were not well ordered, for I intended no more there,
than that he was Secretary of Ireland in the time of the Earl of Stafford, then
Lord Lieutenant there, 1638. But I have corrected this in my Notes at the side
of my own Book long before, without any admonition from Sir Thomas.

To the 26. Page 16.
Here he says, that I say the said Sir Philip Manwaring died the second of
August 1661, at London, but (says he) he died at Westminster, in Sir Philip
Warwick's House, which is in or near to St. James's Park.

Answer.
Is not here a ridiculous exception for a wise Man to make? Do not we always
say in the Country -- such a Man died at London; whether he died at
Westminster, or in any of the Suburbs, according to our common use of speaking,
it is no matter for taking notice at whose House.

To the 27. Page 16, 17.
Here he says, that I take no notice that Sir Robert Brierwood was made
Sergeant at Law 1640, nor that he was made one of the Judges of the King's Bench
1643. and further says, that Page 187, I say the said Sir Robert was made Judge
of the Common Pleas 1643. whereas he was never made Judge of the Court of the
Common Pleas, but of the King's Bench: And also, that Page 334. I say Sir John
Nedham was Justitiarius de Banco, whereby he supposes I did there erroneously
take Justitiarius de Banco to be a Judge of the King's Bench.

Answer.
For the first, It was not necessary nor material, to take notice in that place
of Sir Robert Brierwood's being made either Sergeant at Law, or Judge of the
King's Bench; for though it would have been fuller to have put them in here, yet
it is no error without it: And I had before (as Sir Thomas here confesses)
among the Recorders of Chest^r, Page 187, there taken notice both of his being
Sergeant at Law, and being made Judge of the Common Pleas; howbeit Sir Thomas
says, it should have been Judge of the King's Bench; be it so, I had it but by
common fame.

Then as to Judge Nedham, I called him Justitiarius de Banco, Page 334. which he
supposes I do there erroneously take for a Judge of the King's Bench, yet does
he not find me any where so expounding it, so that he will suppose I have
committed an error, before there be one.

To the 28. Page 18.
Here he says, that Page 336. I say Philip Manwaring Esquire married Helen
Daughter of Edward Minshul of Stoke 20 Jacob. 1622. whereas they were married
1617, 15 Jacob.

Answer.
This (I believe) is the most material mistake now charged upon me, and I have
now rectified the same, nor do I well remember now how it came about.

To the 29. Page 18.
Here he says, that Page 337. I say that the Stable and Dove-house at
Over-Peever were built by Mrs. Helen Manwaring 1654, whereas the Stable was
built 1653, and finished within the Year 1654, and the said Dove-house was not
built till the Year 1656.

Answer.
This is another Childish exception to put in Print, neither is the first of
these any error at all.

To the 30, but misprinted 29. Page 18.
Here he says, that Page 336. I say Margaret Wise of Henry Birkenhed died at
Chester 25 of July 1661, but she died on Saturday the 20 of July 1661.

Possibly I might miswrite the number 25 for 20, or it might be mistaken by the
Printer.

Thus have I taken a view of all his trivial exceptions particularly, and I
believe such ridiculous things were never before published in Print by any wise
Man, and most of them rather Cavils than real Errors, all which he ranketh
under these four general Heads, Partiality, Omissions, Uncertainties, and
Mistakes.

1. As to Partiality. I thank God I dare aver with a clear Conscience that I
had not the least intendment of Partiality toward any; in a word, if there be
any thing like Partiality in my Book, it is toward his Family, and whatsoever
he charge me with in this respect, it is altogether unjust.

2. As to Omissions. No moderate Man who shall seriously weigh all
circumstances of this nature, can judge it equal to impute such as errors; it
is sufficient, that those things be true which I do mention, and so far as I
did then know; for letany Man but consider, what multitude of particulars or
things may be hereafter discovered in future Ages, which yet are in obscurity
and appear not, especially in matters of this nature; nay, how many things
could I my self now add to my Book, relating to England, Scotland and Ireland,
and other things in this County, and Hundred (which I have collected since) in
case it might receive a second Edition, which in this first were unknown unto
me, and other things not well digested or considered by me, and God knows
whether I may live to see a second Impression of it, or no; if I should, how
many other things might yet be afterward further discovered: Collections and
Corrections would still be further necessary, a thing incident to all Books,
especially of this kind; nor is it possible for a mortal Man to comprehend
every particular, for still there will be a deficiency, though he take all the
care imaginable: But these omissions charged upon me by Sir Thomas in his
Admonition, (besides the unhandsomness of it,) are so inconsiderable, as they
be not worthy an amendment most of them.

3. As to Uncertainties. Some things will still be in the dark for want of
exact proof in remote Ages, either for punctual time or circumstances; neither
are probable conjectures to be totally rejected herein, though the absolute
certainty be not exactly known, and such may stand without any imputation of
error, till the contrary do appear by good proof.

4. Lastly, as to Mistakes. Humanum est Errare, Wilful mistakes are unworthy,
but mistakes through ignorance are more pardonable, especially small mistakes
and inconsiderable; but these now charged upon me, would have been more
handsomely done by a private admonition than a public, and in Print too, and in
such a malignant manner also.

And as to all the Omissions, Uncertainties, and Mistakes before mentioned,
they are so immaterial, that if my Book should receive a second Impression, an
indifferent Person would not think it necessary to amend above three or four of
them, besides those already acknowledged and amended in Print by me before his
Admonition published; for though many of them may be observed by Sir Thomas for
his private use, yet are neither worthy nor fit for a public view, as to my
design, and well enough without amendment.

Page 19. of his Admonition.
Here he reminds the Reader of his former words, Page 63, of his Answer to my
two Books, which he repeateth here, namely, -- That since it did appear that I
was resolved to have the last word, although I had nothing new to say; if what
I did after that time write, did prove no more to the purpose than what I had
said in my two Books aforesaid, he would not appear in Print against me any
more, but would choose to vindicate his Grandmother and himself by word of
mouth, whenever he should have opportunity so to do.

Answer.
Hereby he would now have the Reader to believe, that what I have writ lately
in my second Reply, is nothing more to the purpose than what I had said in my
two Books, otherwise he would again have appeared in Print against me, for he
had left himself that Starting-hole; but now he would choose to vindicate his
Grandmother and himself, by word of mouth, whenever he had an opportunity; so
that he would now insinuate, that though he had promised to appear no more in
Print against me concerning Amicia, yet he might no^ appear against me in Print
by a scandalous Admonition.

Page 19. of his Admonition.
Here he says in the same Page, that since that time (that is, since he
appeared publicly in Print against me: he might have done well to have
excepted this Admonition) I have put out at once no less than three Books
concerning the same Subject, that is, concerning the Bastardy of Amicia.

Answer.
Now these three Books are but one Book digested into three parts, and printed
all at one time, which he so formally calls a second Reply, Peroratie ad
Lectorem, and the case of Amicia truly stated, for the nature of the things
required there to be handled apart, which (says he) was certainly a great deal
of lost labor, if my former Books had made the case so clear, as I all along
pretended they did.

But not so neither, for though the case might be clear enough before, yet I
believe it is now made more clear, by removing those mists which Sir Thomas had
endeavored to cast upon the Truth.

Page 20. of his Admonition.
Here Sir Thomas says, that in all the Books I have written upon this
occasion, the same things are said over and over again, as he believes the like
cannot be found elsewhere; so that it would be pleasant if some Person who has
little else to do, would take an account how many times I have repeated the
same things.

Answer.
Whereunto I say, that the like may be found even in his own Books, whosoever
will take pains to read them over; and what if the same things be sometimes
repeated? these must needs fall as often as occasion is offered.

But now in the same twentieth Page he says, -- Though he intends speedily to
write an Answer to that part of the Record which is mentioned in the 76 and 77
Pages of my Peroratio, yet he does not design it at present for the public
Press, but he will show both it, and his answer to my former Advertisement,
unto all knowing Persons who desire to see the same, and he does not doubt but
to give them full satisfaction of my mistakes concerncerning both those
Records, that they do not prove those things which I conceit they do.

Surely I can have no mistake concerning them, if the Record be truly writ by
me, which my Friend has twice examined, nor do I conceit they prove any thing
but what is plain to every rational Man; and it appears by other proof, that
Robert Earl of Gloucester was not above ten Years old when he was married, and
those can be no very knowing Persons who shall be so captivated in their reason
by him as to receive full satisfaction concerning my mistakes therein.

For if Sir Thomas shall not aver against a Record (as sometime he has done
against an original Deed) his cavils cannot smother the truth, nor defend what
he here says when it shall come publicly to be scanned.

Page 21. of his Admonition.
S^eaking here of his Letter mentioned by me in my Peroratio ad Lectorem, he
says it is possible he might write to a Kinsman of his and mine, that Mr
Dugdal^ had delivered his opinion in Print on his side, as also what he had
received from a very good hand concerning several of our Judges, but he knows
nothing of his Letter being left with Throp the Stationer in Chester, and he is
sure he did not write that Mr. Dugdale moved the Judges in the case, for he was
not then in London when that Meeting was, nor knew of it till that Meeting was
past, and it was occasioned by my Appeal to them.

Answer.
Do but see now his equivocation. It is possible he might write that Mr.
Dugdale has delivered his opinion in Print: why does he not speak downright,
and say, that he did so write concerning Mr. Dugdale's opinion? when it is most
certain that he did so write to that Kinsman, and several others, and though he
says he knows nothing of the Letter being left with Throp the Stationer, yet it
is most certain that Throp had it, and showed it to others; why does he not say
what it is that he had received from that very good hand concerning the Judges?
and then he says, the meeting of the Judges was occasioned by my Appeal to
them: I Will swear, that neither I, nor any from me, by my knowledge or
procurement, did move any of them to that Meeting: and on the other hand, I
believe they would not have had any such Meeting if no Body had moved them to
it; and I would fain know what question was moved to them, and by whom.

Page 22. of his Admonition.
Here he says, that the question (as I allege) whether Bastard or no Bastard
has nothing of any Law in the case, and that it is more proper for the Judges
to judge only upon the point of Law: Now (says he) how they can judge of the
point of Law if there be nothing of any Law in the case, may perhaps be very
difficult for any but Sir Peter to tell.

Answer.
Thus the Reader may see his old way of catching at words, though he knows my
meaning well enough: I do still affirm, that whether Amicia be a Bastard or no,
has nothing properly of any Law in the case, but it is merely a question of
History, and cannot be proved but by History, Records and Reason; and because
our reverend Judges have not leisure to search up all the Histories and Records
touching the same, it is not fit to be put to them for their opinions, unless
also all the Records and Histories, together with all the reasons alleged on
both sides were produced before them: But because Sir Thomas and others would
prove it by a point of Law (though very improperly) formerly discussed between
us in our Books, and which I allege will not reach the present case, nor has
he any probable argument out of any History, Record, or Evidence to prove her
legitimate: I say it is more proper for the Judges to judge on that point of
Law in difference between us, than whether Amicia be a Bastard or no, or
whether Hugh Cyvelioc had a former Wife or no, which has no Law in the case.

Page 23. of his Admonition.
Here lastly he tells us, he expects I will write several Books against what he
has here published about my mistakes concerning his Family, which if I do, he
will not go about publicly to answer any of them; but if any one will come to
him, he will show proof of all the Uncertainties, Omissions, and Mistakes which
he has charged me withal.

Answer.
Whereunto I say that I shall write no more concerning this Admonition than
this Answer here published, unless he shall also publish more scandalous things
against me.

Only I observe he will not, or rather cannot show any proofs for my
partiality, for that is left out here among the other general Heads mentioned,
and it had been better to have left that out before, for I dare appeal to God
and his own Conscience, that he verily believes that I intended nothing of
partiality to any Family, nor especially any malignancy to his, and therefore
more unhandsomly done to charge it upon me before, and most unjust.

And what he says of showing proofs of all the Uncertainties, Omissions, and
Mistakes here charged upon me unto any one that shall come unto him, I believe
he will have very few to resort unto him on that account, only, unless they
were more weighty: and concerning, which I refer my self to my Answer here
above written.

Mobberley, Sept. the 20. 1676.
FINIS.

