A JUST APOLOGY For His Sacred MAJESTY OR, AN ANSWER TO A Late Lying and
Scandalous Pamphlet, ENTITLED, BEHOLD TWO LETTERS, THE ONE written by the Pope
to the (then) Prince of Wales, now King of England. The other, an Answer to the
said Letter, by the said Prince, now his Majesty of ENGLAND.

Printed in the Year of Discoveries, 1642.

By which is Discovered unto His Majesty's Loyal Subjects, how our Sovereign
has bin basely abused, both by the Penner and printer thereof to the scandal
and derogation of his most Excellent Majesty.

By J. L. Acad. Cant. in Art. Mag.

July 8. Printed for Robert Wood, 1642.

A Just APOLOGJE For His Sacred MAJESTY.
OF all Kingdoms in Christendom, there is none comparable to this of England,
and of all Princes in the vast world, there is none to be paralel'd to our
gracious Sovereign; who for his Piety and Clemency, Prudence, Justice,
Fortitude, and Temperance, may be a Pattern to other Potentates, and a
President to succeeding Monarchs. This is our felicity, but hinc illae
lachrymae, here is our misery; Never did any King or Kingdom suffer more then
this Kingdom has done. What with the Romish Rebels in Ireland, and the
seditious schismatics in England, the King is grievously discontented, and the
Kingdom miserably distracted. Masses amongst the Romanists, and Conventicles
amongst the Separatists, the Popish Superstitions of the one, and the Factious
Innovations of the other are the two main grounds of all the disturbances of
the peace and tranquillity of this Church and State. The Papists and the
Sectaries are the two malignant parties. These are the Ionahs that have raised
the tempest, these are the Achans that have troubled our Israel.

It Is true, there is a malignant party on both sides, both in the North, and in
the South: The former is not so far distant from us but we easily see the
storm is a coming (from little Spring flow great streams) and the latter is so
near us, that we have long discerned the Clouds gathering together.

I pray God in his good time stay the violence of the one, and dissipate the
disaster of the other, that the glory may be his, and the comfort ours.

It cannot be denied, that the Parliament (being the representative body of the
whole Nation, the great Council of the King and His Kingdom) is the
supreamest Court of Judicature, to which all other Courts are inferior, and
therefore it is impossible that such an aggregate body as that Honorable
Assembly is, should do any injury, vel ex ^dio, vel ex livore; yet there may be
some obstructions, which happily may intercept and hinder the free intercourse of
their proceedings.

In like manner we must acknowledge that the King can do no wrong, it is a
maxim in the Law. If injury be committed, we must not impute it to His
Majesty, but reflect it upon the desperate Cavaleirs, those ill-affected
spirits, who may justly be termed the malignant Party.

Always we must be circumspect and careful to preserve the Honor and Dignity
of His Majesty: For he is Fons Justitiae; in which sense we may as truly say
that he is Sol Iustitiae. Like the Sun he shines gloriously in the Meridian of
His Splendour; and yet sometimes by the Interposition of the Clouds, he does
not appear so comfortably (as oterwise he would) to his people. What those
Clouds are, which at this time are about His Majesty we are not so dim-sighted,
but we may quickly discern. Caetera quis nescit? That our Sun has of late
days bin obnubilated and Eclipsed, the cause is not in himself, but in the
Clouds, those wandering Clouds, that have too much presumed upon the glory and
splendour of his grace and goodness.

These at York, and many more here in London, are the malignant Party (in
whom we may not confide) who have bereaved and robbed his Majesty of his Native
and wonted Luster, They have injua^ously distempered the head and the whole
body, and they have furiously made the breaches wider, and the wounds deeper.

In the number of these I shall rank a Calumniating Pamphleteir, whose
impudence was grown to that hight of impiety, that he durst with those Giants
Theoumakein, strike at Majesty it self, the anointed of the Lord, and the
breath of our Nostrils.

He who his King affronts, the like would do,
To The King of Kings, could he come at him too.
He was not ashamed first to compose, then to expose to the public view of the
world two feigned Letters, with an impious intent to defame His Majesty, for his
so long absence in person, far distance in residence, and much difference in
Councels from his great Council, the Parliament, I am persuaded, that this plot
was first invented at Rome next transported to France, from thence brought over
to England, and here arrived at London, with a malicious purpose of this
detracting Conspirator, to make our King distasteful to the ears and hearts of
his people. Sure, he was some ill-affected Papist or some malignant Btownist,
that durst attempt such a design against our most gracious Sovereign, who as he
has been formerly educated from his cradle, so he has ever since continued,
and to his dying day alwais will (for the honor of his Crown) in the true
Reformed Religion of the Church of England. Certainly, he was no good Christian
to God, nor true Subject to the King, that dares say or think his Majesty is
not of the true Protestant Religion.

There are two things remarkable in the Frontispiece of that Pamphlet, both
above and below. That above is, Behold! a word of attention and admiration. In
which Ecce you may behold (and I do as much admire at) the Pamphleteers spleen
and malice. The word sometimes is used Ironice, in a deriding and vilifying way:
So Pilate said of our Savior, Ecce: Rex, Behold your goodly and hopeful King.
That below is, in the year of Discoveries, intimating what an Act he had
performed in the Discovery of his Novelty. I do not a little wonder at the
Printer, how he durst venture upon the Impression; and yet I need not much
marvel, for quid non mortalia pectora cogit Auri sacra fames? what will not
the cursed love of money make men do in these days? But I pray God that all
those who conjecture or harbor ill in their private thoughts of or to the
King, be brought most deservedly to public shame. This is my wish, and this
is my hope, many will say that thought is free, and there are too many (I know)
that dare speak what they think, and what they will, breaking forth into most
ignominous speeches, such reproachful and most odious terms, that our ears
may tingle to hear them, and our hearts tremble to think on them. It Is now
grown an ordinary sin, and the common crime of these times (even at our very
Commons and Ordinaries) to talk irreverently and disgracefully of the Kings
Majestly. There was a Rascal (some call him Roundhead) the same day that
scandalous Pamphlet came forth, was not ashamed to say that his Majesty was a
Papist when he was Prince of Wales, and is little better now he is King of
England. Hence it is, that in love and loyalty to my gracious and Royal
Sovereign, I was instigated to vindicate His Majesty's honor from such fowl
aspersions of calumny and detraction, which by factious and seditious spirits
have of late been cast upon him.

The impudence of some slaves is so frontlesse, that they no more mind the King
then I do a mechanic, and dare prate treason in their cups, as confidently,
frequently, and familiarly amons^^ their Comrades, as they will take tobacco
upon their Alebenches. This is the iniquity of the bas^ sort of people, whose
practice is to despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, as St Jude
speaks. O the cursed malice of this Generation! Oh the mischievous multitude
of this truly malignant Party. They may be aptly assimulated to the Devil
himself, for they are Leg on many. They are so many in number, that like the
flies of Egypt, they swarm in all places of this Land. The action (or ^^ther
faction) of these men is such, as proclaims them to affect an Ataxie, and to
hate all order and conformity. Let them pretend what they will, they intend all
that is ill. Their Religion is nothing but Rebellion, their sincerity sedition,
their Faith Faction, their Conscience conspiracy, their zeal fury, their
devotion distraction, and (in the end to themselves) destruction, and there I
leave them

Let me now direct these subsequent lines to my native Countrymen, that as
they are all Subjects to one King, so they would submit themselves to his legal
Commands. Let them not by tumultuous uprores provoke his Majesty: let them
endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, and let us all
pray unto the King of Kings for a happy union between the King and his
parliament, that they may both be of one mind and comply together. We are all
bound by the law of God to honor our King as our dearest parent. The very name
of K is illustrious, his Dignity glorious. There Is a kind of Divinity in
Monarchy. Divisum Imperium cum Jove Caesar habet, Vno minor est Jove. In all
causes and over all persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, the King by Gods
grace is Supreme Head and Gubernator, next under his ( reator: inferior to
none but to God himself. To whose blessed tuition, let us daily commend him in
our frequent Orizons.

FINIS

