A SERMON PREACHED AT WHITEHAL UPON The 29th day of May. 1670.

Being the day of HIS MAJESTY'S BIRTH AND HAPPY RESTORATION.

By JOHN LAKE. D. D. Late Rector of S. Botolphs without Bishopsgate, London.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb for William Grantham at the sign of the Bear in
S. Paul's Churchyard. 1670.

PSALM. II. 6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion.


UPon an Exaltation Time, here is an Exaltation Text. The Text relates to one
person, the Time to another: But Kings both, Gods own Kings both, both resisted
and rejected of Men, yet both set by God upon his holy Hill of Sion.

This King taken literally, no doubt was King David, both the Author, and
subject matter of this Psalm. Taken mystically, it is Christ, the King of
Saints; whose Father, as David was according to the Flesh, so he was a Figure
of him in his Kingdom. Analogically, and in just proportion of Reason, it
extends to all other Kings duly constituted; at least, such as serve and
worship the true God, and submit their Scepter to that of Christ.

All Christian Kings this King compriseth then, but some more especially; such
as have a more direct correspondence with David, in the like occurrences and
events.

Upon this peculiar account comes in our King, above most Kings that have been
in the World, since David's time. Set up, and set up in the same manner, by the
same means, or rather by the same immediate Hand of Providence that David was.
Never might God have said with greater emphasis, or more apt signification, Yet
have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion.

And as the Text suteth the Person of our King, so at this time, more
particularly, Upon this very day he was born to the hopes and expectations of
Three Kingdoms; and upon this same day (by a strange concurrence of
Providence) he was brought back, after a long and tedious banishment, to the
possession and enjoyment of them.

Well therefore may this Time challenge an interest, a double interest in the
Text. This is the day which the Lord has made, which he has twice made, twice
made memorable. Together with the Regem Constitui of the Text, Yet have I set
my King, etc. Herein meets the Hodie genui of the next Verse, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee. There is a somewhat strange expression. Psalm.
CX. 3. The dew of thy birth, is of the Womb of the Morning; yet it finds fit
allusion here. The birth of our King, this day, had a fruitful dew in it, which
has made it teem with Mercies and Blessings to himself, and in him to us. His
Kingdom was calculated in his Nativity, and both his Person and Office have one
date.

To set all this the better off, and to set forth the honor of God, and his
King more in it, and by it, we have in the words these considerables.

I. The Person exalting, in the Pronouns I and My. It is Ego, and Rex meus, I
and my King, whereby as Kings acquire a just power, so God, a just propriety in
them, and by a peculiar title and interest they become his.

II. The Exaltation it self, Have set, i. e. Have ordained, consecrated,
constituted, not only appointed and anointed him to the Kingdom, but set and
settled him in it: Which makes the Exaltation full and complete.

III. The State of Exaltation, and this (like the Author of it) most high and
honorable, even that of a King: Then which, God could find nothing greater or
better to grace David his servant, or yet Christ his own Son with.

IV. The Seat of his Kingdm, and that suitable and answerable to the State of
Exaltation, Even Gods holy Hill of Sion.

This, as it relates to David, is to be taken literally, for an Hill of that
name, on the North-side of Jerusalem, which David having won out of the hands
of the Jebusites (who till his time held a strong Garrison upon it) made the
Seat of his Kingdom, and erected his Royal Palace there.

As relating to Christ, it is to be taken Figuratively, for the Gospel Church;
and so it is set in opposition to Mount Sinai, which typed out the Church under
the administration of the Law.

As it may, and does relate to all Christian Kings, and our King more
especially, it is to be taken Morally. And so it denotes (1) Their
Sovereignty, being an Hill. (2) The Sacredness of their Person and Office,
being an holy Hill. (3) Their Supremacy in all Causes, and over all Persons, as
well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, being Gods own holy Hill of Sion.

V. Here is the irresistible power of God in all this, who, notwithstanding all
the Consultations and Combinations of Men to the contrary, still carries on
his counsel to perfection, and yet sets his King upon his holy Hill of Sion.

Of these in their order, and that under a threefold aspect. First, As they
relate immediately to David, and his advancement to the Kingdom. Secondly, As
they are applicable to other Kings by parity of Reason. Thirdly, As in respect
of peculiar resemblance they concern our King, and were this day accomplished
in him. For their mystical reference to Christ, I wave, as the work of another
day ( viz. the day of Christ his Resurrection) not this.

But before I descend to these particulars,

Let us Pray.
That God will be merciful unto us, and bless us, and lift up the Light of his
countenance upon us, and be merciful unto us; That he will take away all
iniquity, and receive us graciously, heal our backslidings, love us freely,
and crown the miraculous mercy of this day, with that of a joyful and blissful
eternity.

And that his way may be known upon earth, and his saving health amongst all
Nations: Pray we for Christ's holy Catholic Church; for these Churches of Great
Britain and Ireland, that no weapon which is formed against the Church may
prosper, that every Tongue which shall rise up in judgment against her, God
would condemn. Pray we herein more especially for our Dread Sovereign Lord
Charles the Second, by the especial Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, and in all Causes, and over all
Persons, as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, within these His Majesty's Realms,
and other His Dominions, Supreme Governor. That God who has set his King upon
his holy Hill of Sion, would settle Him there, where the sons of wickedness and
violence may repine at, but never reach Him. That he would keep Him safe under
the shadow of his wings, from the pride and malice of Men, and from the strife
of Tongues. That His glory may be great in Gods Salvation, and that He may
reflect that glory back upon God again, by doing Him honor and service; till He
shall change His corruptible for an incorruptible Crown, and His transitory
Kingdoms for one that cannot be shaken. Pray we for His Royal Consort our
Gracious Queen Catherine, for the most illustrious Prince James Duke of York,
and the rest of that Royal Family: And may there never want a Man of that Race,
to sway the Scepter of these Kingdoms, so long as the Sun and the Moon
endures. Pray we for the Ministers of Gods holy Word and Sacraments; for the
most Reverend the Archbishops, the Right Reverend the Bishops, and other
inferior Priests and Deacons: For the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council; for the whole Nobility; for the Judges and Magistracy; that All,
and every of these, in their several places and callings, may serve truly, and
painfully to the honor and glory of God; the edifying, and well governing of
his people committed to their charge; the settling, and securing the interest of
his Church; and the establishing of Peace, with Truth and Righteousness in
these Kingdoms, remembering the severe account which they must all one day make.
Pray we for all Schools of Religion, and good Learning; for the two famous
Universities of this Land, Cambridge and Oxford: For all the Commons of these
Realms, that they may live in the true Faith and Fear of God, in humble and
loyal Obedience to His Majesty, and in Brotherly Love and Charity one toward
another. Finally, Bless and Praise we God for all his Mercies and Blessings,
National and Personal, Temporal and Spiritual; for the happy Restoration of our
Dread Sovereign to His Kingdoms, and therein of the Kingdoms to themselves, to
their Religion, Laws, Liberties, Proprieties again. For all those that have
departed this life in Gods holy Faith and Fear, beseeching God to give us
grace, so to direct our life after their good example, that we, together with
them, may be made partakers of his everlasting Kingdom. For these, and all
needful Mercies and Blessings, pray, and praise we God, in the Name and Words
of his dear Son, our alone Savior, and Intercessor, saying, Our Father which
art in Heaven, etc.

The first Prospect of the Words is, as they relate immediately to David, and
his advancement to the Kingdom; wherein, not one Iota, or title of them failed.
And

(1) For the Person exalting David to the Kingdom, it was God, and God with his
right hand. Psa. lxxviii 71.
He took him from following the Ews great with young, he brought him to feed
Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.

Not the diffusive, not the collective Body of the people, could pretend an
interest; to whom God left nothing, but to admit and accept him. ^ Sam. i. 10.
Lest any Man of Israel should put in for a share, he brought Saul's Crown and
Bracelet, the Ensigns of his Majesty, to him, by the hand of an Amalekite.

And as he was Gods King, not theirs; so of Gods making, not his own. He might
once and again have made way for himself, by dispatching Saul out of it; and
necessity and providence (the late great pleas and pretenses amongst us) might
seem to lead him to it, as it were, by the hand: Yet David would neither do it
himself, nor suffer those, whose fingers itched to be doing. The Kingdom of
Heaven may suffer violence from him, but this earthly one never shall. May Saul
live long, and enjoy it to himself, he will be content with the reversion. Then

(2) For the Exaltation it self, God by these steps carried him up to the
height of of it. First, he ordained and appointed him to it, when there was no
intention, no imagination of him otherwise, Psa. lxxxix. 19.
till God spoke of it in vision to his Prophet. Having thus appointed, Psa.
lxxxix. 20.
God anointed him in token of it; anointed him with his own holy Oil, and that
far above his fellows. When he had thus prevented him with the Blessings of
Goodness, Psalm. xxi. 3.
he at length put a Crown of pure Gold upon his head: And he that had been
hunted as a Partridge upon the Mountains, is in the end set and settled upon
Gods holy Hill of Sion.

Set (I say) and settled also, as fast as Gods own hand and arm could settle
him; Psa. lxxxix. 21.
and this not in his person only, but in his posterity too. God (as if he
would exalt exaltation it self) speaks of his House for a great while to
come. His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the Sun before me.
Psalm. lxxxix. 36. Thus also

(3) For the state of Exaltation, it was that of a King. A King of a rich and
populous Kingdom; in which, above Thirty Kings were accounted at the first
conquest of it; Josh. xii.
and yet this (as if too little) eeked out with other Nations, 2 Samuel lviii. 11.
whom the Lord made tributary to him. A King with all his Royal Complements. A
Throne set up over Israel and Judah, 2 Samuel iii. 10.
from Dan to Beersheba. Psalm. cxxxii. 18.
A Crown, a flourishing Crown; yea, 2 Samuel xii. 30.
Crown upon Crown, that of Ammon, which weighed a Talent of Gold, being added
to that of Israel. A Sword for suppressing Rebels at home, Psalm. xviii. 39.
and subduing enemies abroad; even all those that rose up against him. Genesis
xlix. 10.
A Scepter, which should not depart from Judah till Shiloh came. In short,
whatever might contribute to glory, or safety, make him venerable at home, and
terrible abroad, met together in him, as one whom God had made his First born,
Psalm. lxxxix. 27.
high above the Kings of the Earth. That nothing might be wanting, now follows

(4) The Seat of his Kingdom. Sion the Mountain of Gods Holiness, or Gods holy
Hill of Sion. And here we have two Suns shining in one Firmament. The same
sphere for God, and the King. In that very place, Psalm. cxxxii. 13, and 17.
which God had chosen as an habitation for himself, even there he makes the
Horn of David to bud. Beds and Thrones (we say) admit no rivals; yet in Mount
Sion, Psalm. cxxii. 5.
where God had pitched his own Throne upon Earth, there are set Thrones of
Judgment, the Thrones of the House of David; Psalm. cxxxv. 2.
and where God keeps his Courts, Psalm. cxxxii. 14.
the King keeps his also. This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell (says
God) for I have desired it: Howbeit, he will not dwell alone, but will have his
King dwell there too, as if he could not rest without him. And though God of
old had devoted this Hill for himself, to set his Name there; yet he reserveth
the conquest of it for David, that he and his King might take possession
together, and become (as it were) Joynt-tenants to it. And now they are in
peaceable possession of the Seat, we will leave them there, and go on to the
last considerable.

(5) The irresistible Power of God in all this, who, notwithstanding all the
resistances that were made, and rubs that were laid in the way, yet sets his
King upon his holy Hill of Sion.

To behold David one while cooped up in such a Cave, another while lurking in
such a Wood, anon wandering on such a Mountain, or in such a Wilderness: To
behold him persecuted, not only from one place to another, but from one Nation
to another People; you would not expect a Crown to be set upon his head, but
his head, sooner, or later, to be taken from his shoulders. His own
expectations ebbed so low, that he said in his heart, 1 Samuel xxvii. 1.
I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul. In the like hasty fit he gives
all men the lie, Psalm. cxvi. 11.
Samuel and all, that ever had said word of his advancement to the Kingdom.
After Saul's death, David knowing that he had Sons enough to succeed him,
Soldiers enough to defend him in it, durst not set a foot within the Kingdom, 2 Samuel ii. 1.
till he had first enquired of the Lord: So improbable it was, that ever he
should be set as head over it.

But God who perfecteth strength in weakness, and whose counsels must stand,
yet sets his King up; and sets him up by those hands, which had been most
active to pull him down. Abner, who had been Captain General to Saul the
Father, and Ishbosheth the Son, and was the very Man to make Ishbosheth King in
Saul's stead; 2 Samuel ii. 8, 9.
is now also the Man to bring about all Israel unto David, 2 Samuel iii. 12, etc.

I have led you through the words, as they relate immediately to David, and his
advancement to the Kingdom, and spent some time upon this, as being the clew to
all the rest.

But as S. Austin in another case said of Doeg; Vnus homo est Doeg, Enar. in
Psa. LI.
sed and genus hominum est Doeg: So may I say of David in this, David in
himself is one Man, but in figure and representation a great many. Not merely
Persona Regis, the Person of a King; but Persona Regum, the Pourtraicture of
Kings; one that bears the Person of them all, and in this Text more
especially. You must therefore give me leave (...), to transfer it in a figure
to all Christian Kings, and they will appear to be so many correct copies of
it. And

First, For the Person exalting, the I of the Text looks directly upon them
all. Sovereignty is a ray of Divinity, and Kings Humani Joves, so many Earthly
Gods; represent Gods Person, hold his place, have the impress of his Power.
Psalm. lxxxii. 6.
Dixi Dii estis, I have said ye are gods, says God himself of such Men; and
none but God could give them the character. If they are Gods, they cannot be of
man's making; Tertul. Apol.
No; inde Potestas, unde Spiritus. Thence comes their Power, whence their Life
and Breath comes. They are Kings Dei gratia, by the Grace of God. The Pagan
Attribute of (...), or Jove-born, God has adopted into the Family of Religion,
and made Canonical; ye are all the children of the most High. Psalm. lxxxii. 6.
His own style written upon his thigh is, King of Kings. Now as S. Austin asks
the question, Aug. Tom. 4. qu. in Genesis 6^. and alibi.
Quid Deus coeli ad femur Abrahae? What Relation has the God of Heaven to
Abraham's thigh? So here, Quid Reges terrae ad femur Dei? What Relation have the
Kings of the Earth to the thigh of the God of Heaven? But that, E femore
descendunt, they have their descent thence, and derive their pedigree from it.
The emblem of old was an hand out of a Cloud, setting the Crown on. And though
sometime it is the right hand, when God gives good and gracious Kings:
Sometime the left, when he gives evil and oppressive ones; yet both are
dispensed by his hand.

Thus is the I of the Text upon them all; and all they have, or are his. His to
set up, his to pull down; and his only. Then

Secondly, For the Exaltation it self. He sets Kings, seateth them in their
Kingdoms, and setleth them there. Their tenure is not only Per me Reges, By me
Kings are; Prove. viii. 15.
but Per me regnant, By me they Reign, i. e. Enjoy their place, exercise their
power, are upheld in both. In all this, his hand is established with them,
Psalm. lxxx. 17.
and his arm also strengthens them. His hand of providence is over all, for
their good; but they are viri dexterae, the men of his right hand. Great
deliverance gives he unto his King; Psalm. xviii. 50.
and shows mercy, i. e. Special mercy to his Anointed, and to his seed for
evermore. Solomon's Throne was built with stays (the word is hands) on either
side: 1 Kings x. 19.
And if God had not established the throne, and him in it, with his own hands,
his Twelve Lion supporters, on the one side, and on the other, could not have
done it.

Was it not for this Divine Manutenency, Kings would never be set up, or so
soon as up, they would be thrown down again; and he is careless, or wilful, who
sees not (...), somewhat divine in this. The Heathens did, and shall
Christians be blind to it? They wondered to behold whole Nations, and in them
such varieties of humors and interests, at the beck of one man, perhaps a
woman, perhaps a child; to have Estates, Lives, Liberties, all at his
disposal, and yet to hug their chains with a cheerful freedom. The depraved
nature of Man inclines him otherwise. Singuli regnum in pectore gerimus. Each
man carries a Kingdom in his bosom, and would admit no Sovereign but himself.
They had rather be miserable in place and power, then live in an humble, though
happy subjection. The vilest bramble would not willingly stoop to the Royal
Oak; but is more ready to say, Judge. ix. 15.
Let fire come out of the Bramble, and devour the glory of Lebanon. Only God,
by a miracle of Power and Providence, uniteth all these petty Kings (for such
they affect to be) under one; and delivers him from the strivings of his
people. That for the Exaltation it self. Then

Thirdly, For the State of Exaltation, that of a King. God sets not up a
Democracy, wherein the popular equality of the many; nor yet an Aristocracy,
wherein the factious ambition of a few, bears all the swey: Much less, an
Anarchy, or lawless confusion, where (...), No body hears nothing of no body:
but he sets his King; one, and that one invested with the Regal Office and
Authority up.

This Government God dedicated in himself, Psalm. xlvii. 7.
and in his own administration of the World; For God is the King of all the
Earth; and he consigned many myriads of Angels to everlasting flames, for but a
thought of competition with him in this his Monarchical Honor.

He has settled the Church (as well as the World) in the very same way, under
Jesus Christ the King of Saints; Revel. xv. 3.
and other Kings, the Christian more especially, are his Viceroys.

This he set, and settled amongst men, in, and from the beginning. What was
Adam (in the designs of his Creation) but an Universal Monarch? Polarchy came
in with sin, and the curse. And yet it got not footing immediately neither.
Cic. lib. 3. de Logibu.
Cicero reckons it Inter certiora, and notiora, amongst the most certain, and
known truths, that Omnes antiquae gentes regibus quondam paruerunt. All the
Nations of old were subject to Kings, and the rest were but encroachments; and
such as most Nations cast in again, finding one Tyrant (take Kings at the
worst) better then a great many.

Moses, the first that God set over his own people, was King in Jesurun. Deuteronomy.
xxxiii. 5
And when they had a long time experienced the miseries and mischiefs of having
no King in Israel, God, for the remedy and redress of them, sets his King
up, and setleth a successive Royalty amongst them: And having settled this
(which was of prime intendment) changes no more; but reckons it as the
highest pitch of honor and happiness which they could attain, that they had
prospered into a Kingdom. Ezekiel. xvi. 13.

I do not absolutely condemn other Forms of Government; but I prefer the first
Model: That is the Head of Gold; these the dwindlings of it into Feet, part
Iron, part Clay. These represent God as so many small Eidylia, taken but to the
shoulders only; that in full proportion. One of the greatest Beauties and
Glories of the Creation is, Prove. xxx. 31.
A King against whom there is no rising up. Prove. xxviii. 2.
For the transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof; not for the
honor and safety of it. Prove. xxx. 27.
The Locusts have no King (says Solomon) but the Bees have. The very Trees in
Jothams parable, Judge. 9.
will anoint them a King, and choose the Bramble, rather then have none.
Briefly, of whose setting up soever other Governors and Governments are, God
sets his Kings up; and those that of late have whet their Tongues and Pens
against them, have through their sides struck at God himself, and impeached the
Wisdom of his Institution. Such is the State of Exaltation. And now

Fourthly, The Seat fitteth all Christian Kings as well: God, upon a Moral
account, sets each of them upon his holy Hill of Sion.

(1) They are set upon an Hill, not upon the common level, which speaks their
Sovereignty. Romans xiii. 1.
In S. Paul's Dialect, they are the higher powers; 1 Pet. ii. 13.
in S. Peter's, the highest, King as Supreme. There was somewhat of
signification in it, that Saul was higher by the head, then any of the people:
And in his politic capacity he was higher then them all together. The people
themselves say, Erit super nos, A King shall be over us, 1 Samuel viii. 19. And
God sets him accordingly, Super populum suum, over his people Israel. 1 Samuel
ix. 16.

This is the place which all good Christians have evermore set Kings in, not
subter, but super, not under, or on eaven ground with them, (as in the Modern
Heraldry of some amongst us) but over and above them. The first and best
Christians recognized them as such: Tanquam a Deo secundos, Tertul. ad Scapulam.
and solo Deo minores, as Second to God, and only less then God himself,
Optat. lib. 3.
and owned none above the Emperor; but God alone that made, and made him
Emperor. Vniversis Minor, was not heard of in those days, that the King, though
greater then every single person, should be less then the collective body of
the people: But, Tertul. Ubi supra.
Omnibus Major, dum solo Deo Minor, was the account then, that he is greater
then all, whilst only lesser then God.

Hereupon he is liable to no Tribunal, but Gods; because none else is above
him. The Hill, God sets his Kings upon, is above Mars his Hill. Serviunt
utilitari, non potestati. They are servants (in a sort) for the good and
benefit of their people, not subject to their power. The order which God has
set and settled in the World (and the process would be infinite otherwise) is
this, That if private men offend, there is the Magistrate to punish them; if
Magistrates, the Sovereign Prince; if the Sovereign Prince, there is a Tribunal
in Heaven, on Earth he is not accomptable to any, who may say unto him, What
do thou? Eccles. viii. 4. A piece of Divinity so generally received and
approved amongst the Jews, that it passed into a Proverb, Nulla creatura
judicat Regem, sed Benedictus. No Creature judges, or can judge the King, but
he that is over all, God blessed for ever. And that is the first step; the Hill
(...) their Sovereignty. But that is (...).

(2) Kings are set up (...) which speaks the Sacred (...) and Office. This Hill
is, or at least ought to be, (...), free from all violences, or insolences
whatsoever. It is bounded with, not only Ne perdas, Destroy them not; but Ne
tangas, Touch them not. You may no more touch one of them, then you might have
touched Gods Ark, or may touch the Apple of his Eye. David stretched but forth
his hand, and that no further then the skirt of Saul's Garment, 1 Samuel xxiv. ^.
yet it went to his own heart. This holy ground they stand upon, renders
vestigia sacra (so was the style of the ancient Councils, and Fathers) their
very footsteps, sacred and inviolable; and it is one of David's impeachments of
his enemies, That they slandered the footsteps ^o Gods Anointed. Psalm. lxxxix.
51.

Nor is this inviolableness annexed to their sanctity, but to their
Sovereignty; not to their Christianity, but to their Crown. Saul was set upon
this holy Hill, as well as David; and the Heathen Cyrus, as well as either of
them. Hereby the Person of Kings becomes sacred, Ratione Imperii, si non
Religionis, by virtue of their Empire, though not of their Religion; in respect
of the dignity of their Place and Office, though not the integrity of their
Faith and Life. Thus Saul (as S. Austin says) Non habebat innocentiam and
tamen habebat sanctitatem; Aug. Cant. Lit. Petil. lib. 2. c. 48.
had not innocence, yet he had holiness; not of life, but of unction. This made
David revere him when alive, and revenge him when dead. Optat. lib. 2.
Timuit oleum, and servavit inimicum. He feared the anointing of God upon him,
and therefore spared his bloodthirsty enemy. And spared all such, must be upon
this very account. To Solomon's Cor Regis, The Kings heart is in the hand of the
Lord, I may add, Caput Regis, The Kings head (I mean his Life, his Crown, and
all the Royalties annexed to it) is in the hand of the Lord too; and none else
can lay an hand upon him, and be guiltless. And that is the second step. The
holy Hill speaks the Sacredness of their Person and Office once more.

(3) God sets his Kings upon his holy Hill of Sion, the place of his public
service and worship, Psalm. cxx. 4.
whither the Tribes went up, the Tribes of the Lord, to the Testimony of
Israel, which speaks their Supremacy in all Causes, and over all Persons, as
well Ecclesiastical, as Civil. As nothing so high, but the Hill sets them above
it: So nothing so holy, but this Hill of Sion sets them over it. Nor would God
ever have set his King upon Sion, if he must have had nothing to do in sacred
matters.

David well knowing for what end God had set him there, straight way fetches
the Ark, and sets it by him; and withal sets order for the whole service
of the Tabernacle, and appoints the Priests, and Levites, and all the rest that
attended upon Sacred Ministrations, their several dignities, courses, and
offices. And all the pious Kings, whom God set there after him, followed his
pattern.

The Jews had a saying, and there was sense and signification in it, That the
Keys of the Temple were laid every night under Solomon's Pillow: A prime part of
the Kings office and charge being (...), the care of Religion, and matters
Divine; to see that God, and his service suffer no detriment. Then they serve
God as Kings, when they do that service, which no other can do, for him, to
establish Religion as a Law; and none oppose the Laws provided in that behalf,
but who are enemies to the Religion too.

To speak them Keepers of both Tables, the Commandment concerning them is set
(...), in the confines of both; as that wherein they concenter, and that Kings,
thus conveniently situated, may look to Religion with the one eye, as well as
to Civil Justice with the other: Up to the Temple on the top of Mount Sion, as
well as to Jerusalem, at the bottom of it.

Optatus accounts it a piece of Donatus his wonted fury (and it was no better,
Optat. lib. 3.
no other) to cry out, Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia? What has the King to do
with the Church? For he has much to do, in ordering, though not in
administering, in disposing, though not dispensing the affairs of it. To do what
Hezekiah did (namely, to cause the Priests and Levites to sanctify Gods House,
and to fulfill their Office) not what Vzziah did, to invade and usurp it. To see
God have his Incense, not to burn it himself. And that is the third and last
step (which sets Kings at their just elevation) Gods holy Hill of Sion
speaks their Supremacy in all Causes, and over all Persons, as well
Ecclesiastical, as Civil.

There is one, and but one thing, now behind, viz. Fifthly, The irresistible
power of God in all this, who whatever stands in his, or their way; Yet sets
his Kings upon his holy Hill of Sion.

Neither their place and power as Kings, nor their virtue and merit as good
Kings, can secure them from the strivings of the people. Some unquiet spirits
are still ready to cry out, Nolumus hunc, We will not have this man to reign
over us; and the most just and moderate Prince is (in account) a Tyrant to one
part or other. Moses has his Korah and Miriam; David his Absalom and Sheba;
Solomon his Adonijah: The meekest, the religiousest, the wisest of Kings, some
or other consulting to cast him dwon from his Excellency; or (as another
Translation has it) to put him by, whom God would exalt. Psalm. lxii. 4.

The Hill whereon Gods sets his Kings, is oft-times so steep and craggy, that
they are forced (like Jonathan and his Armor-bearer) to climb up their hands
and their feet; 1 Samuel xiv. 13.
and when they are up, there are Venti Typhonici, those violent and turbulent
spirits, which will not suffer them to rest. High as this Hill is, it is not
above such Winds and Storms. Only the Kingdom of Heaven is (...), such as
cannot be shaken: Not one upon Earth, but has been shaken all to pieces; and
yet for all this, God sets up his Kings. Mountains of Opposition shall be
levelled, and laid flat before this Hill. What art thou, O great Mountain?
before Zerubbabel thou shall become a Plain. Zech. iv. 7.

If at any time they are cast down, God most-what sets them up again, if not in
their Person, yet in their Posterity; and if one line fail, eeketh it with
another. Their glory is great in Gods Salvation, Psalm. xxi. 5, 7.
and through the Mercy of the most High they do not miscarry. As opposition
rises against them, he enableth them to rise against opposition, yea, to rise
by it, till they rise above it: And first or last sets up his Kings upon his
holy Hill of Sion.

Thus I have also run through the words, as by parity of Reason they are
applicable to other Kings, and like a well-set picture, they look indifferently
upon all of them.

But though all Kings are interessed, yet some have a double portion in them,
and our Royal Sovereign above the rest in his this days happy Restoration to
his Kingdoms. A Transaction which was the very Transcript of the Text; and the
Text may seem a Prophecy of it, rather then an History. Herein therefore we
may, and must read it over again, else we should be injurious to both; and it
is as legible in the face of this day, as if written with a Sunbeam upon a
Wall of Crystal. And

First, For the Person exalting. It was (...), God, and God (as it were) out of
an Engine. Psalm. lxxxix. 20.
He that found David his servant, found our Dread Sovereign also; and found him
when all hopes were lost. Only he whose help begins, where humane help
ends, turns back his captivity as the Rivers in the South; and our
Occidental Sun, when darkness was upon the face of our whole Earth, becomes
oriental again. This is the Lord who has showed us light. Haec mutatio
dexterae excelsi. The right hand of the most High has done this.

For us in all this, we were Sicut somniantes, like them that dream, if we did
so much as dream of it. And it is well, if Posterity (rather admiring, then
believing a work of such power and wonder) think us not to have been in a dream
all the while.

For those enterprises and attempts which were at any time designed to this
end, they vanished into air, and nothing. Either the worst counsels were
followed, or the best succeeded not, God reserving the honor of all to himself.
And by all means let him have it, and the King entirely for his own, together
with it. So his, as (I will be bold to say) no other King in Christendom is,
none by so immediate right, nor by so manifold Names and Titles. His in his
marvelous preservation, his in his gracious sustentation, his in his powerful
restoration, and his still in his merciful protection from the pride and malice
of men, and from the strife of Tongues. Thus fit the words are, for the Person
exalting. And they are no less so

Secondly, For the Exaltation it self. God has set him, set him upon the
throne of his Fathers; or rather made him, to surmount them all. Some of their
Thrones might seem but a Footstool to his. Set him above the heads of his
enemies, and raised him upon their ruins. The lower he was cast down before,
the higher has God set him up at the rebound: And like a broken Bone that is
well set, he is become stronger for breaking. He that was so broken, as if
never to be set again, is so set, as I hope never to be broken again. Set where
the sons of wickedness and violence may, and no doubt do, fretfully repine at
him, but cannot reach him. Set as far above their envy, as our hope. Whom they
set at naught, and would allow him no place in any part of the Building, God
has set in the highest part, of the chiefest place, upon the very head of the
corner.

And this passes me from the Exaltation it self, to

Thirdly, The state of Exaltation. God has set him as King. After the head of
Gold was broken off, much to do there was to set up another in place of it.
First, Two Houses were set up, which devoured all the rest, and one the other.
Then Keepers of Liberties, after we had lost them. A Grand Vizier with his
Janissaries, next sets up himself, not to shelter, but to overdrop us, and
protect us to our ruin. To rule Loyal obstinacy with an Iron rod, and to
measure Justice by Power. After all this, the fragments of a shattered Senate
are set up again, but these (like the Ruins of an old House) stand not long.
Out of their rubbish rises up a Committee of Safety, but which cannot contrive
their own.

Thus one Chimerical Form of Government was set up after another (Anarchies,
Polarchies, Oligarchies, Tyrannies) and none would stand. At length God takes
the matter upon himself, and sets his King up; and in him tieth a knot upon
our changes, and setleth the floating Island upon its Basis again. The Lord our
God is with us, and the shout of a King is amongst us.

A King, I say, with all his Royal Complements. Whilst other Kings have their
Crowns crossed, he has his Cross crowned; and the fire of affliction did but
embellish, and burnish it for him. Never any of his Royal Progenitors wore a
more rich and radiant.

It was much to have been feared, that if ever he was set up at all, it would
be but in the Form of a Sovereign. A King not bearing the Sword, or bearing it
in vain. Such a King, as the Jews in their cruel sport made Christ, when they
gave him a Reed for a Scepter. Indeed a King, and no King. Some such
gay-nothing, the shadow of a great name, many, that pretended much zeal for the
King, no doubt had designed. But the happiness and comfort was, that God would
have him his King, not theirs: And so a King to purpose. A King invested with
Regal both Honor, and Power. A King as a King should be, even a King that is
Supreme. And that fully answers the state of Exaltation. Then

Fourthly, For the Seat. God has set him upon an Hill, made his Sovereignty to
be recognized. Here is no coordinate, coequal, corrival power of Parliaments,
or Presbyteries with him: No Sovereign Authority of the People above him. None
to watch, much less to Mate him, as of late we have seen. No reducing him into
Order by force and Arms; no distinguishing him out of himself, nor setting up
his Politic against his Personal capacity. Singulis Major, Vniversis Minor,
Greater then each, less then all; with the like unhallowed Divinity, belcheth
not from the Pulpit and Press, as it was wont. Now Royal Majesty looks like it
self, and these umbrages vanish before it. This Mountain of the Lord is
established in the top of the Mountains, and the little Hills do their
obeisance. You are taught to submit to the King, as supreme; to pay the lowest
homage to Him, as to the Highest Power upon Earth.

But then again, he is set upon an Holy Hill. The Sacredness of His Person and
Office is recognized: and, both secured, as far as the Religion of Oaths, the
Severity of Laws, and the sincerity of our own Declarations can do it. No
Blaspheming of our Earthly God is allowed; no War levied by His Power, against
His Person; no Tribunal erected without Him, against Him, above Him; but, we
are made to profess an hearty abhorrence of all such Traitorous Positions and
Practices.

I doubt not, but, in Tertullians phrase, Tert. Apo^. ca. 35.
Post parricidarum vindemiam racematio superstes. After a vintage, a bloody
vintage, of such Parricides, large gleanings are left; Men of the like
sanguinary minds, who, by the Fathers Blood, would trace the Son, our now
Dread Sovereign, to death. But, if the Holiness of the Hill whereon God has
set his King, and the bounds which Authority has set to that again, cannot
restrain them, yet the horror of it may. If one of these Beasts but touch the
Mountain he shall die.

Once more he is set upon Gods Holy Hill of Sion. His Supremacy in all Causes,
and over all Persons is recognized: and (like a truly Nursing Father) he
improveth it for the benefit of the Church. God, who preserved him constant in
his Religion, against Scandals at home, and Temptations abroad, has made him as
resolute to preserve it. His very first care was to bring back the Ark, and set
it upon Sion by him, and by wholesome Laws to settle it there: and what was his
first, I doubt not will be his last care, to see the Church Free and
Flourishing again, and to behold Sion yet once more a Praise in the Earth. Like
that Religious Emperor of old, he has set his Crown upon the Bible, and
engaged his Power for the defense of it. Fixed upon his Sion, he would neither
change it for Babels seven Hills, and the Garish Lady that sits upon them
(though time was when they louted low to him, and with the most sly
insinuations solicited a Change) nor would he since descend from it to her
that fitteth Undressed in the valleys: but, where God has set him, he holds
his Seat still, and thence dispenses His Dews and Influences to the Church.

Thus the Seat also fitteth him, as exactly as if made for him; only we might
well wonder to see him there, was it not for

(5) The Irresistible Power of God in all this, which carried on our Dread
Sovereign through those insuperable difficulties, and sad discouragements which
lay in his way, and yet set his King upon his Holy Hill of Sion.

A matter, which passes all conceit and belief. That a Persecuted Prince (and
here let me have your pardon, if I present Royal Majesty in its Eclipse again)
after twelve years Banishment, when his Name and Memory (with long Tract of
Time) was almost worn out, only some Loyal Spirits wore Him Graven on their
hearts; when His proud Rebellious Enemies had fortified themselves with the
Wealth and Strength of three Kingdoms, and had now begun to Sing soft Requiems,
as if the bitterness of death had been past; when that Old Usurper with such
mischievous Policy, backed with Tyrannical Power, had endeavored to confirm
the Kingdom to his posterity, and such an Army of Criminal valors was engaged
in their defense; when all the People, by a Cursed Engagement, had been made to
cry out, 2 Samuel xx. 2.
We have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Jess; when
many Attempts, some hopeful and probable enough, had miscarried already, and
the whole Nation in one great Gasp not long before seemed to have given up the
Ghost; when there were Men, Moneys, and all Means on the one hand, and the want
of all on the other: that a Banished Prince, I say, under these Circumstances,
should be brought back to His Kingdoms again, and with such Peace, Honor, and
Safety set, and settled there, this might well puzzle the Faith of a Solifidian.
It was beyond expectation, beyond imagination, strange to a miracle.

Strange for the matter, that ever such a thing should be brought about at all.
He that had seen our Dread Sovereign look through the Royal Oak; that had seen
him again in his strange disguise, when (like his Savior) he put on the form
of a servant; that had seen the eager pursuits after him; that had seen Sea and
Land laid for him; that had heard the price which was set upon his head, and
therewithal the Privy Contracts, which that lump of Clay mingled with Blood
made with his Assassinates; that had thenceforth followed him through his Royal
Pilgrimage, and seen the necessities and dangers which he conflicted with
there: His panting Zeal would have susspected some other event, then to have
seen him set up as King. Yet thus God has set him, and our eyes have seen it,
and our hearts rejoice in it this day, crying to the praise of the glory of his
Grace, The right hand of the Lord has done marvellously, the right hand of the
Lord brings mighty things to pass.

Strange again for the manner, that it should be brought about in such a way.
It might have been expected, that if ever he came to his Kingdoms at all, he
must swim to them in Blood, and be set upon Mount Sinai, rather then Mount
Sion. That we must have bought so rich a Mercy, with the Miseries of a new War;
and it had been a good purchase after all. Yet lo, God takes his King, and
with the turning of an hand, sets him where he would have him, and none to say
unto him, what do thou? In all this, there was no breaking out, no breaking
in, no complaining in our streets. No spoils of War, no Trophies of Victory, to
adorn, or rather to sully his Triumphs. The Hill whereon God set his King, was
a Mount of Olives; nothing but Peace, and all possible expressions of joy upon
it.

Strange once more for the Means, and this above all, that it should be brought
about by those men, and their means, who had engaged Bodies and Souls to oppose
it. One part of them he makes to cast young Ishbosheth down; another part to
set his King up, and carries him into his Throne upon their shoulders. That
renowned Person, never to be mentioned without glory to God, and honor to
himself, who through the conducts of a secret, but wise Providence, had long
served as Captain General to Saul the Father, and Ishbosheth the Son, is
Abner-like (though upon a better principle, that of his former loyalty, which
he still kept alive in him) the very man to make our David King over his
English Israel.

Thus strange for the Matter, strange for the Manner, strange (above all) for
the Means this transaction was: Yet for all this, God has set his King upon
his holy Hill of Sion.

And now what remains, but that the Kings loyal Friends rejoice in the mercy
of this day, and his disloyal Enemies, tremble to oppose it? Somewhat must be
said to either of them, and I have done.

First, To the Kings loyal Friends. Do you with joy and praise to God, admire
and adore that unconceivable Power and Providence, which has set his, and your
King upon his holy Hill of Sion. Let not such a miracle of Mercy be lost upon
you. Think what you would have done; what you would have suffered, to have seen
such a day as this. How unlikely it was that ever you should have seen it. How
many sad days you had seen before. Seen the Father barbarously murdered; the
Son defeated, in danger to be destroyed; your lawful Sovereign wandering (as an
exile) in Foreign Countries, and Bloody Tyrants domineering in his own. Seen
the Church become a Babel of Confusion; the Land an Accldama, or Field of
Blood; the Lusts of lawless men set up for Laws; your Lives, Liberties,
Proprieties, merely precarious, and at the pleasure of Usurpers; one puff of
loyal breath, as much as they were all worth: And in all this, no hopes, or
means of better to be seen. Your present evils seemed impossible to expire, but
by dying into greater: And there was nothing now left, but Prayers, and Tears,
and sad expectations of worse.

This was your Case and State, when the sons of Belial had cast Gods King down.
Now therefore, that God has set him up again, and set him upon his holy Hill
of Sion, and by this means we see both Crown and Miter shining with their
wonted beauty and glory; see Religion settled, Liberty secured, Propriety
restored, and the Laws by which we hold them all maintained; O come let us sing
unto the Lord, let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our salvation.

Rejoice after an hearty, but withal an holy manner: For such the holy Hill,
whereupon God has set his King, calls for at your hands. See that you
celebrate not, Tert. Apol. cap. 35.
Publicum gaudium per publicum dedecus, public joy by public disgrace. Let
not disloyal spite say to your reproach, Majestas violatur, Divinitas
constupratur laudantibus vobis, That whilst you pretend to honor God, and the
King, you dishonor both. When you should contend in loyal service and duty to
God and the King, play not prizes in wickedness, and seek who shall outvie, and
vaunt of most supererogatory merits for Hell, as if you were delivered to do
all these abominations. Let not this celestial Mannah breed Worms, nor because
God has been more gracious, be you less. Affect not such a perverse emulation
of your Maker, as to bring Darkness out of Light, and to curse your Blessings.
To make your Returns, as unparalled as Gods Mercies; and this your only use
of them to pervert their nature, and defeat their design. Let not this holy
Hill bring forth such wild Grapes, and so rich a Soil minister only to
corruption. Let not that of the ungrateful Israelites, Exodus xv. 24. What shall
we drink? be the product of your Mercies and Deliverances also; nor think you
have escaped Pharaoh and the Red Sea, to be drowned in drunken excess upon the
shore. But, O give unto the Lord the honor due unto his name; worship the Lord
with holy worship.

I know you value your selves high upon your Loyalty; and, if gratitude to God
did not, even this calls for more answerable Returns. Sin (say the Schoolmen)
is quasi deicidium, a kind of Deicide; doing all that can be done against Gods
both Honor and Life: And it is regicidium, a kind of Regicide too, and the
worst disloyalty is wickedness. The sins of the Royal Party may ruin the King,
as well as the Arms and Counsels of his Enemies. This is to countermine God,
who has set up the King, and by unseen and unsuspected trains to blow up him
and his Throne. The holy Hill of Sion, upon which God has set him, is not
proof against this Artillery, which at once desecrateth, and prepares it for
destruction.

Let me therefore conjure you by the Mercies of God, and your dear loyalty to
your King, to serve the Lord with fear, and to rejoice with trembling. Let the
Mercy of this day engage you to the duty of it; and as you would approve
yourselves the Kings Loyal Friends, be careful that you make not God his, and
your enemy. Fear God who has set up his King; Honor the King, whom God has
set up; and Love him the more for that God has set your King upon it. That to
the Kings Loyal Friends.

Secondly, A word now to the Kings disloyal enemies, and but a word: For as it
is not impossible, but some such may be here, since there was a Serpent even in
Paradise; so I am willing to believe there are not many.

If any of your Consciences smite you in this, then tremble to oppose the Mercy
of this Day, lest you be found fighters against God. That of the Prophet
Zechariah is a wholesome caveat for you, if you have wit and grace to take it.
Zech. ii. 13.
Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord; for he is raised up out of his holy
Habitation. It is dangerous opposing God at any time, how much more, when he is
working such wonders of Power and Mercy as this? Put all the imaginary
Providence together, with which you amused the World of late, and match this
if you can. What you had been Twenty years in doing, and perhaps Twenty before
that in designing, Sustulit una dies, one day dashed and undid. Some of your
Friends and Fellows (the Murderers of the Father) have with their dying breath
(and it could not better be laid out) acknowledged Gods immediate hand in
bringing back the Son: And are you still blind to it? or are you stronger then
he? Shall the prey be taken from the mighty? or will you commit an onslate upon
God? He has set his King upon his holy Hill of Sion, and will crawling dust
pull him down again? If you will yet shoot your Arrows against Heaven, they
shall fall back upon your own head. The Psalmist himself, in the Verses
immediately before my Text, reads all such their destiny. He that sits in
Heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision. Then shall he speak
unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure.

I shall leave you therefore to slow, but sure vengeance, if Loyal Duty prevent
not; and leave that Prophetic Imprecation of King James of Blessed Memory with
you. Maledictus qui maledicit uncto Domini; pereatque interitu Core, qui
peccabit in contradictione Core. Cursed is he, that curses the Anointed of the
Lord; and let him perish in the confusion of Core, that shall henceforth dare
to sin in the contradiction of Core: And let Heaven and Earth, with all that
hear me this day, say Amen.

FINIS.

