Something By way of Testimony Concerning Clement Lake OF Crediton in
Devonshire; With Something he wrote in his Life time, by way of Answer, unto
JOHN FLAVELL, Independent Preacher of DARTMOUTH.

Blessed are the Dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors; and their Works do follow them,
Rev. 14. 13. London, Printed, and Sold by T. Soul at the Crooked-Billet, in
Holywell Lane, in Shoreditch, 1692.

Something by way of Testimony concerning, Clement Lake.
THis is that we have to say concerning our Deceased Friend, Clement Lake, of
Crediton; He was a Man of an Innocent upright Life and Conversation, very
Tender Heared and affectionate toward the Truth, and them that walked in it;
He at first received Truth in the love of it, and continued to the end Faithful
to its Testimony through all the Exercises he met with; for in the time of his
Convincement he met with no small Opposition and Exercise from and by the Wife
of his own Bosom, and also suffered Imprisonment with Friends for the Testimony
of Truth, all which he bore with Patience and Meekness, in a humble mind
submited unto God's Will; and in due time it pleased God through the Spirit of
the Lamb to give him the Victory and Dominion over that which stood in his way:
he was diligent in frequenting Friends Meetings to wait upon God, though
outwardly a man attended with much weakness, and infirmness of Body, and many
times being filled with a deep sense of the Love of God unto his Soul, and his
Heart tendered and broken thereby, his Mouth was opened to Magnify and Praise
the Lord, and tell by experience of the Goodness of God unto his Soul; In
short, we are generally well Satisfied concerning him, that he was a man that
did truly Fear God, loved Truth and Righteousness, bore a Faithful Testimony
until death; his Conversation was a good savor to all in his day; and now
being removed from us, we believe its well with him, and he has his reward,
viz. The Crown of Life and Peace, and is at rest in the Lord.

John Colsworthy, Robert Ellis, Peter Richards, Robert Ford.

The Testimony of Phillip Dicker, Concerning Clement Lake.
A True Testimony and Account concerning the Life and blessed End of that
Faithful Servant of the Lord Clement Lake; This I can truly say from a sense I
had of him, that I believe he was one whose Meditation was on the Lord, Day and
Night, for since I have been concerned to bear a Testimony for the Lord, I have
had great Society with him; I have considered his solemn Carriage and weighty
behavior when he was in the Body and I have heard him speak of the many
straights and conditions he had been in since first he believed that God did
expect Worship and Service from him.

And further, I have this to say of our Friend Clement Lake, Deceased, that he
was a Man wholly given up to answer the Mind and Will of the Lord; for I can
truly say from a certain sense I had of him, that his Conversation was
Heavenly, and that the Lord has made his promise good unto him, as he did unto
the Righteous in all Ages, and through the Faithfulness of him that has
promised, we are made as Witnesses of it, that his promise is fulfiled in us,
by the Spirit of his dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord and Master, for so he is.
And I being with C. L. and having had a certain knowledge that the Lord's
Goodness lasted with him, and he in it unto the end of his Days, for which we
can do no less then to return the Praise, Glory and Honor that is due unto the
Lord, for his Mercy and Goodness bestowed upon his People. So he dyed the Death
of the Righteous, and has received the Reward of the Faithful.

Phillip Dicker.

The Testimony that I have to bare for my Dear Husband, Clement Lake (deceased)
is as follows;
HE was a Man endued with much Faith and Patience, tender of the Honor of the
Name of the Lord, and Zealous for his Truth and Worship, and a good Pattern and
Example in his Family, often exhorting me, his Children and Servants in wighty
sayings, touching the good and welfare of our Souls, telling us, that if we
perished he was clear of our Blood; and since his Death several of my
Neighbors have born this Testimony of him to me, that they never were in
company with him but they received Benefit by it; and farther, I bare Testimony
of him, though often attended with much weakness of Body, yet he was very
cheerful under it, many times Declaring the Goodness and Love of God toward
him, from time to time, in the many Exercises and Trials he went through in
baring his Testimony for the Truth, in the Town of Crediton, (in Devonshire)
where he lived, and elsewhere; and further, he was a man of a clean
Conversation, his very Enemies have since his Death spoken well of him, and
confessed they believed he is happy; and further, I cannot well be clear, but
must acknowledge, that after my Husband was Convinced of the Blessed Truth,
through the many Instigations of those whom we formerly were in fellowship
with, and others, caused me to grieve him very much by ill demeaning my self
toward him a considerable time; but since the Lord was pleased to open my
understanding, and give me a sight and sense of the workings of the Enemy (who
is the sower of discord) I have been much troubled, and known sorrow for the
same; and further I add, it was the great Love of God toward me in answering
the desire of my Soul, which was often with many a Cry and Tear, that he would
show me the way of Life and Salvation and where he feeds his Flock and causes
them to rest at Noon day; and since the Lord appeared and answered (Blessed be
his pure holy Name for evermore) we lived in great Unity, Love and Fellowship,
to the Comfort one of another. Ah, but at length he was visited with a strong
Fever, whereof he lay near a Week and ended his Days here, the 23d of the
12th Month, 1689. And when the Lord was pleased to take him from me, it was I
must confess, very heard to me, considering my great loss of so dear and tender
a Husband as he was to me; but being thoroughly persuaded and satisfied in my
Heart that he is at rest with the Lord, I am satisfied in the Will of the Lord,
who is over all, God blessed for evermore; Amen, says my Soul.

Grace Lake.

A Letter sent by John Flavell, an Independent Preacher at Dartmouth, in
Devenshire, to Clement Lake of Crediton, The Second day of the Fifth Month,
1687.
DEar Christian Friend, the true Christian love I have born to you, ever since
I came acquainted with you, and saw the Grace of God in you, has engaged me in
real Tenderness to your Soul, to give you this Paper, if happily the Lord may
thereby Confirm you in his Truth, against the Soul-destroying Errors of
Quakerism; I am persuaded if the Principles of those Men were but truly
understood, and the consequence that necessarily flow from them, known to you,
you would with as much Satisfaction, choose to dye a Martyr in opposition to
that Error, as the Christians of Queen Mary's Days did, against Romish
Idolitry; give me leave to say plainly, a Quaker cannot be a Christian, I mean
a Quaker that knows and defends the Principles of that party, and I can
confirm it as strongly as I assert it plainly, and will do it for your sake, by
this Argument, every part and Branch whereof I am fully satisfied in.

If Quakerism Subvert the Fundamental and Essential Articles of the Christian
Religion, then no Quaker that understands and professes the Principles of
Quakerism, can be a Christian, But it does so as will presently appear; For:

1. They Deny the Existance of the Human Nature, and Satisfaction of the Blood
of Christ.

2. They Deny the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, as the matter of our
Justification.

3. They Deny the Resurrection of the Body, and its Partisipation of Glory with
the Soul.

4. They lead Men to the Covenant of Works, and Obedience to the Light within
for Salvation.

All these are there real Opinions, let them dissemble, and hide themselves
never so Cunningly, I can prove it out of their own wicked Pamphlets, I have
had it from there own Mouths, and that often; and to satisfy you of the truth
of what I charge them, if you will but conseal the Paper from them, and ask any
of their Leaders your self, so as they apprehend not your design, these
Questions you shall find the Charge Just and Real against them; take a fit
Season, and Demand thus.

1. Are we Justified and Saved by that very Blood of Christ that was shed at
Jerusalem, or by some other means then by the Blood of the Man Christ Jesus?

2. Is Jesus Christ now in Heaven in a true and real Body of Flesh and Blood?
Or is he not?

3. Is the Active and Passive Obedience, which Christ performed here on Earth,
in the days of his Flesh, the matter of our Righteousness before God? Or is it
something in our selves?

4. Shall these very Bodies of Flesh and Blood rise again at the last Day, and
be glorified with the Souls, and remain Human Bodies still, for Substance,
though glorified Bodies for qualities? Or what shall become of them?

5. Must we expect Salvation by believing in Christ for Righteousness, and
applying his Righteousness to our Souls by Faith? or must we expect it by
Obedience to the Light within us?

This being done discretly, so as that they see you do for Satisfaction, and
not to entangle them, I am confident you will find to your Sorrow, that I have
too Justly charged them with those Damnable Errors, and then the Snare is
broken, and your Soul escaped; But you must have a care of there deceitful
Answers, and hold them close to the words of each Question, else they will hide
the hook in general and plausable answers.

But it were better for you to converse on these points with sound and sollid
Christians, that know their Principles, then trust your self amongst them; but
if you must, I doubt not but by a discreet management you may have it from the
Mouths of their chief Leaders; the Lord keep your Soul in his Truth; remember
there are damnable Errors, 2 Peter 2. 5. as well as Practices Give me a few
Lines that may rejoice, and comfort my Heart concerning you, for my love to you
makes me Jealous over you. I Remain yours in Jesus Christ our Hope,

John Flavell.

Clement Lakes Answer to the foregoing Letter.
I Have considered thy Letter, and the high Charges in it; and to begin with
the first.

First, That they deny the Existans of the Humane Nature.

I shall, as I said, answer in Scripture Language, and shall take heed of
Philosophical words, because I do not profess my self to be one; I look on it
as a Just and reasonable thing due from all men, that all proposals of
Questions to others about there Faith and Believe of the Scriptures, should be
in Scripture Language; I do not remember that ever I read of the word Existaens
or Humane in all the Scriptures of Truth; I shall take heed according to the
Apostle's advice, of vain Philosophy, and shall ground my Faith according to
the Scriptures of Truth in all the matters on which my Salvation depends.

I believe that Christ is glorified with the Father, with the same Glory he had
before the World was, according to John 17. 5. and 1 Timothy 3. 16. He is received
up to Glory, and that he shall come again in the Glory of his Father, with his
Angels, Math. 16. 27. And that he is sitting on the right hand of Power, Mark
14. 62. And that he ascended up far above all Heavens; And that he is gone into
Heaven, and is on the Right Hand of God, and that it is a Glorious Body, Phil.
3. 21. And if this make me an Heretic, for believing as the Scripture has
said, I shall willingly bare thy Judgment.

For the Second part of it, That they deny the Satisfaction of the Blood of
Christ.

This is a false Lying Slanderous Charge, charge it who will; for my part,
according to what I have heard and seen since acquainted with them, of all the
sorts of Professors that I have been conversant with, I have not known any to
have a greater Esteem for, and put a greater value on the Blood of the Lord
Jesus Christ, then those do that are thus charged; and indeed it is no wonder
that they thus value it, seeing a remnant have experienced such unexpressable
virtue from it, and benefit by it.

As for my part, I believe Salvation in no other and out of him there is none;
and I believe, and know it is the Faith of those with whom I walk, according to
Acts 4. 12. And he is the Propitiation for our Sins, 1 John 2. 2. And he has
purchased us with his own Blood, Acts 20. 28. and Romans 3. 25. and by him we
have Remission of Sin, and we are Justified by his Blood, Romans 5. 9. And by it
we have Eternal Redemption, Heb. 9. 12. 1 Pet. 1. 2. And if we walk in the
Light, as he is in the Light, we have fellowship one with another, and the
Blood of Christ cleanses us from all Sin: And what the difference is between
the walking in the Light, that is so much derided, and walking in Christ, I
know not; but if we walk in him the Blood of Jesus Christ will cleanse us from
all Sin, John 7. 9. And I believe not only from the guilt, but from the filth
also, verse 9. And I believe that Sanctification and Justification are
inseparable.

I see but little mention made in thy Letter of the cleansing virtue of
Christ's Blood, or the work of Regeneration that must be wrought in man, or the
new Birth that must be Experienced, or no entreing the Kingdom of Heaven, John
3. 3. And we believe, that for all those for whom the Blood of Christ makes
Satisfaction, they know and Experience a purging of their Consciences from dead
works to serve the living God; and this a Remnant have found and can speak it
to the Glory of our God, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. They know Redemption from a vain
Conversation by the precious Blood of Christ, and I hope that this is also
clear, If Scripture will pass, and I be believed, that it is the Faith of those
called Quakers.

As to the Second, that They deny the Imputed Righteousness of Christ* as the
matter of Our Justification.

Before I answer this Question, I would query my self what is meant by Our?

Whether it be all men universally, without condition or quallification? and so
whether Christ did in the Body of his Flesh, in his own Person all that was to
be done for man? or whether his work is not to be experimentally known in every
man, for the destruction of Sin, and the work of Sanctification, by all that
shall have the benefit of his imputed Righteousness, yea or nay?

For my part this is my Faith, that he is a blessed Man to whom the Lord
imputes Righteousness, and to whom the Lord will not Impute Sin, Romans 4. 6, 7,
8. But I believe also, that those Souls that are in this Ble^ed State, do know
and Experience a work of Sanctification wrought in them, and the destruction of
Sin wrought for them, and Redemption from Sin, all wrought by the same Lord
Jesus Christ for all those that believe in his Name and Power, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
And he was also made manifest for the destruction of the works of the Devil, 1
John 3. 8. And where this work is wrought for man, and in man, the fruit of the
Spirit is brought forth, according to Gal. 5. 22. And this also is my Faith,
that they also know the old man to be Crucified, that the Body of Sin may be
destroyed, that henceforth they may not serve Sin; and so know a washing and a
sanctifying, before they know themselves to be Justified, 1 Cor. 6. 11. And
those shall have the Righteousness of Christ imputed to them.

Thirdly, That they deny the Resurrection of the Body, and its Partisipation of
Glory with the Soul.

This is another false Charge; we believe the Resurrection of the Body, that
the dead shall be raised up incorruptably, 1 Cor. 15. 52. And we believe the
Resurrection of the dead both of the Just and Unjust, Acts 24. 15. And that
those vile Bodies shall be made like to his Glorious Body, Phil 3. 21. And we
believe that all that are in the Grave shall come forth, they that have done
well to the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done Evil, to the
Resurrection of Damnation, John 5. 28. 29. And those that are guided by the
Counsel of the Lord, and follow it here, shall be received up to Glory Psalm.
73. 24 And that we shall be glorified to gather with the Lord, Romans 8. 17. 18.
And we believe that those that follow Christ in the Regeneration deny
themselves, and take up the Cross, shall Inherit Eternal Life, Math. 19. 28,
29. And we believe also, that the end of those that are Enemies to the Cross of
Christ, will be destruction, Phil. 3. 18, 19.

Fourthly, That they lead Men to the Covenant of Works, and Obedience to the
Light within.

This is a Slander, cast out of the Mouth of the old Dragon like a Flood, to
prejudice the World, and spread by his Agents; what ground Men have for this
Charge I know not, except it be for pressing People to the Mortification of Sin
by the Power of the Lord, denying of self, Crucifying of the Flesh, with the
Affection and Lust thereof, and tak^ng up the Cross and following of Christ,
who is our Way, Truth and Life, out of whom we believe there is no Salvation
from Sin or Wrath: No Name or Power given under Heaven whereby any Soul can be
saved, but Jesus Christ; He is our all in all, and man is nothing, neither can
do any thing as to his own Salvation; for without him we can do nothing, it is
he that works both to will and to do of his own good Pleasure: And to as many
as receive him, to them he gives Power to become the Sons of God, even to them
that believe in his Name, which Faith also is the Gift of God. It would be
thought hard measure from us if we should say, that because no mention is made
in all thy Letter, of any thing that is to be wrought in man, or done by man,
as a Quallification of those that shall partake of those benefits by Christ,
that therefore you do believe that Men may partake of them, and yet do what
they will, and live as they list, tho we have as great a ground for it, as any
have for charging us to lead Men to the Covenant of Works.

For the Second part of the Charge, That they lead Men to Obedience to the
Light within for Salvation.

This I will say, that Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft, and Stubbernness
is as Idolatry, and that without Obedience there will be no eating the Fat of
the promised Land. And for the Light within so much despised by the dark
Rabbis of the World, this Light of Israel shall be for a Fire, and his Holy
One for a Flame, that shall burn and devour the Thorns in one day, Esa. 01. 17.
And that we press Obedience to the Light within, we own, who is Jesus Christ
the Light of Israel, the Light of the World, who is given to be a Covenant to
the People, and a Light to the Gentiles, to open the Blind Eyes, Esa. 42. 6, 7.
This was David's Light to his Feet, and Lanthorn to his Paths, Psa. 119. verse.
115. And this word, or Light, or Jesus was in the beginning; and in him was
Life, and the Life was the Light of men, 1 John 8. And this beginning he is our
Light and Life, and he it is that expels the Darkness out of the Heart; and
those that are Obedient to him are called the Children of Light, Ephesians. 5. 8.
And it is by this Jesus Christ, who is the Wisdom and Power of God, the Light
that makes manifest all things as they are, that brings down every
Imagination in man that exalts it self against the Lord, and brings every
thought into Obedience to himself; he it is that is the author of Eternal Life
to all that obey him, Hebrew 5. 8. and 1 Pet. 1. 2. And that he is within, and
dwells in the Saints, we own it, tho for owning it we are an Abomination to
the Egyptians, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Are not the Saints the Temple of God? And does he
not dwell in his Temple? And is it not in the Heart? And is not the Heart
within? And is not his Throne there? And is it not there he gives in those
sweet and blessed Comforts to his People? And is it not there he pours out
his Wrath on the Wicked? And is it not in the Heart that he is striving with
the Children of Men, to reclaim them by his motions? And Men's Disobedience to
it is a grieving of him, and rebelling against him, 1. These. 5. 19. And it
seems to me, that any man that has Reason or Religion, should be satisfied
with this account, unless those that will Unchristian others that they might be
thought the best Christians themselves, and bespatter others that themselves
might shine. And So I have answered the first four Charges, and if I am besides
the Truth, I desire it may be manifested to me in a few Lines.

I look on it as a Just and Reasonable thing, that before any Man Unchristian
another, that first they prove there own Position to be according to Truth.

And Secondly, that they prove those Persons guilty of denying those Truths,
for which they Unchristian them, which neither is done in thy Letter, but by a
bare say so, as if it must be true because it is said, and said by such a one;
but it is no new thing, such there were in the days of old, Rev. 2. 9. But he
that has the Key of David has opened a Door to us, that no man can shut, and
by this little strength we have kept his word, and have not denied his Name,
Rev. 3. 8, 9. For which the People are angry that we do not as they have done:
And nothing less then to Unchristian us will serve. But what if the day should
come that you should acknowledge the Lord has loved us? sure it would be a
great change? I shall not inlarg any furher, to speak of the five last things,
but may refer them until I have the answer from them, from whom it is expected;
and as I have said formerly, wherein I am beside the Truth, in what I have
written, let it be signified to me in a few lines, who am a well-wisher to the
prosperity of Sion, and desire the Good of all men,

Clement Lake.
We are not the People we are reported to be, for we are falsely represented to
the World, by those who have made Lies there refuge, Esa. ^8. 15. And under
falsehood have hid themseves: But Judgment the Lord will lay to the Line, and
Righteousness to the Plumet, and the Hail shall sweep away the refuge of Lies,
verse 17.



A Second Letter sent to me from John Flavell, which is an Answer to my former
Letter, the seventh of the eight Month, 1687.
Clement Lake,
I Received lately an Answer to my Letter, written many Years since, to
preserve you from Quakerism, whether this Answer were made by you or others, I
examine not, for it is nothing to the purpose; our point is not what you
believe, But what is the known published Doctrine of the Quakers, from which my
care was to preserve you; I told you that a Quaker owning the professed
Principles of Quakerism, cannot be a Christian, and instanced in several
Fundamental Points of Christian Doctrine denied by them; to all of which you
gave me your own private Judgment, in Scripture terms, which seems generally
sound, as I hope you still remain in your own Principles: But what is this to
the Doctrine of that People with whom you now walk, forsaking those Assemblies
where first you found Christ, if ever you found him; I am only concerned to
prove my Assertions, that Quakerism overthrows Christianity; and this is
plain by what follows, which I take not up upon Reports at Random, but give
it you out of their own printed Discourses.

First, He cannot be a Christian that rejects the Scripture as a Rule; But so
do the Quakers, Toldervy in his Book, page 6. says, That searching the
Scriptures is not the way to find out the mind of Christ; but the turning of
the mind to within. One Mason in his defense of Cravon, page 12. says, Did
Paul or any of the Apostles walk by any letteral rule? or was not their rules a
measure of the Spirit of God committed to every one of them? Nayler in his Book
against ^ohn Rayner, speaks thus of us, who differ from him, Their Law is
without; their Light without, their Church without, all which we witness to be
within; Farewell then say I to the written word.

Secondly, He cannot be a Christian that affirms Perfection, and Freedom from
Sin on this side Heaven, 1 John 1. 8. This has been often asserted in my
hearing by the Quakers, and is Printed by Mason, in page 3. of his Book, quoted
from Ephesians. 4. 12. Concluding thus, Were England's Blind Watchmen Commissioned
from Christ, they would not thus prate against Perfection.

Thirdly, He cannot be a Christian that makes no distiction between the Godly,
and the Ungodly, but does affirm that Christ enlightens every man that comes
into the World, with a saving Light; but so did John Stubs, George Fox, and
many others affirm it, and defend it in a set dispute with Mr. Wiggon in the
Printed dispute, Page 13. Laboring to prove that every man in the World has
the Spirit of Christ savingly in him, from 1 Cor. 12. 7. If so, we must alter
the whole frame of cripture and Christian Religion. And as to Christ's imputed
Righteousness, how slighting does Nayler, speak of it, as a Doctrine of ours,
Page 20. of his Book; but I need go no farther; I could instance in many great
points more, as that of the Resurrection of the Body, which has been once and
again denied by the Quakers to my Face, and that with scorn and contempt of my
ignorance, for affirming it, so that I speak not uncharitably or untruly when I
said what I did of their Opinions.

It may be you will say these were But particular Persons, and you reject there
mistakes, I say, they were the leading men of your party; and how shall we know
your Opinions but from there Books? as for you, I pray the Lord would preserve
you sound in the faith, and return you to your first Love, to his Saints and
Ordinances. I am full of compassion for your Soul, and remain your Friend,

John Flavell.

An Answer to John Flavell's Second Letter sent 1687: to him from Clement Lake
of Crediton in Devonshire.
I Received thy Letter, and by it understand that thou have received mine,
which thou do question whether made by me or others; I assure thee that no
other but my self did indite or write one Line or passage of that or this; thou
tellst me again that a man owning the professed Principles of Quakers can not
be a Christian; and that thou did instance in several Fundamental Points
denied by them, to which I replied they were false Charges, and to all of them
I should give my reply as my own private Judgment, which was seemingly sound.

This is another abuse, seeing I said, it was the Faith of those called Quakers
also, and the Faith of those with whom I walked. But it seems tho my Answer
were sound yet not very Acceptable, for it was in Scripture terms. It is true,
I am utterly against it that Scripture should bow to vain Philosophy, and to be
wise above what is written, and also it seems one thing not liked, my
forsakeing those People with whom I have walked, (it is true) while they walked
I walked with them; but when they grew weary and sat down, must I be blamed for
not doing as they did, because I walked still, and that by the Footsteeps of
the Flock according to there own adivce, and cannot set down or turn back?
There is one thing that I have observed of the like nature, and is counted
rather a Virtue then a Vice in others (which is this) in the time when the
Sheepherds fled, and the People scattered, the Cross of Christ appearing, the
People crept in under the Wing of the Church of England for shelter, I do not
say to avoid the Cross of Christ, (look they to that) sheltered they were, and
fed too, with such food as they had to give them, if not wholesome, why did they
use it? What made them there? Why did their Stewards permit it, if they found
the Bread of Life there? Why are they drawn off again? was not this permitted
by thee and others, if not approved? (and why was it?) to keep the Children
quiet, that they might not Cry for Bread, when the Stewards would not give them
any, for the Lion was in the way; was it good Bread then, and is it Husks now?
Now they will feed these People themselves, or rather these People must feed
them, for their Bread now yeildeth a good rate, and if they will not come up to
the price, we will go to another Flock: Well now, these People must leave those
with whom they have walked, and be blamless, but blamed if they will not leave
them; surely I must needs say that they all dealt very disingenously with the
Church of England, to leave them now they have most need of them, as I have
told many to there Faees, and not only so, but rejoice in there Ruin, which is
an ill requital for there former kindness; but enough of that.

In thy former Letter thy Charges were drawn, and in thy last Letter I expected
proof of what was then Charged, but I have failed of my Expectation, and of
fare dealing too, for the first Bill is lost, and a new Indictment is drawn up,
which is not fare; it yet lies on thee to prove it, or bare thy shame.

In thy first Letter we were Unchristianed by thy false Accusation and lying
Slanders no small Evil for a Minister of Christ to be found guilty of, to
unchristian such a body of People with a bare say so, it is a Spot, but not of
God's Children, they are Children that will not lie; and it has caused my
Heart to grieve that such a one as thy self should be the author and spreader
of them, so that many in this place who have had thy Person in admiration, have
been doing the same evil Work, having an Implicet Faith, much like a Generation
of men, who believe as the Church believes, and it is true because the Church
says it; and so they did believe it and spread it because thou said it. But
now the Refuge of Lies is sweeping away, People having had oppertunity of
hearing Friends, and Conversing with them in this place, thy Folly now
appears, and thy Assertions are found to be Lies, though John Flavell have said
it, Hicks, Faldoe and others; for the Earth is lightened with the Glory of the
Lord, and we would that all men knew us as we are, and then let them judge, for
we are not ashamed of our Principles.

But to leave the first, and come to the Second Charge or Indictment, He cannot
be a Christian that rejects the Scripture as a Rule.

But what I have yet found, I may say to thee as Nathan to David, Thou art the
Man; for by what Rule are we thus falsely accused, and abominably slandered?
And it is a rare thing this day to find many such as thy self to Slander us
Ignorantly, and not Maliciously.

But to the matter of Fact, what was Abel's, and Noah's, and Enoch's Rule,
Leader or Guide, before the Scriptures were written? was it not the Spirit of
God, and the same Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures in time, and moved the
holy men of Old, who spoke as the Spirit gave them utterance, even the same
Spirit of Truth that Christ promised should be given to his Disciples, and
remain with them, and lead them into all Truth, John 14. 16, 17. chap. 16. 13.
We own and honor the Scriptures above all other Writings in the World, and
they are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, and for Correction and
Instruction in Righteousness, 2 Timothy 16. We own we are not of the same mind
with an Assembly once gathered, that the Scriptures are the only Rule, then
^arwell to the Spirit of God say I: We do believe that it is not in the Power
of men to deprive the Saints of their Rule, Leader or Guide which i^ the Spirit
of the Lord; But if the Scriptures be the only Rule, then it is possible that
men may be deprived of their Rule by their Enemies; Matthew. 11. 17. No man
knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son shall reveal him. And
now I will appeal to all the Faithful in those late Years, when their Teachers
fled from them, when trouble came, and Preaching and Hearing became expensive,
had not a Remnant been taught of God, had they not had the Spirit of the Lord
to lead and guide, and instruct them, what had become of them? Had there not
been Springs in the Desert, and Rivers in the Wilderness, streaming from the
Lord to refresh those distressed Souls, what had become of them?

3dly, He cannot be a Christian that affirms Perfection or freedom from Sin
on this side Heaven.

How is the Scripture rejected here, and made to bow down to the experience of
men? who are taught by their Teachers, that it is impossible to have the Works
of the Devil destroyed; and so make void Christ's Coming, when something there
is that cannot be parted with, and therefore a Cry is made, damnable Doctrine
to have Sin destroyed.

I shall first lay down that God has commanded it, Genesis 17. 7. Walk before me,
and be thou perfect. Matthew. 19. 24. If thou will be perfect, sell all; All must
go if God call for it, or no Perfection; he had done many things, and that from
his Youth up, and many Sins doubtless were slain, and the man dead to them; A
brave Professor for our days; but one thing must be kept, a Wedge of Gold, a
Babylonish Garment; he had great Possessions, and that he could not part with
for Treasure in Heaven, the pretiousness of which he had not the Experience of
by Faith, and this made him go away sorrowful; doubtless he liked not the
Doctrine of Perfection like the People of our days, men can be content to have
Drunkenness and Swearing, Murder, Theft, and such like Goliah's slain; this is
possible to live without to some, and cry, they will enough against those that
will not, and well worthy: But what Sin is it I would fain know that the Lord
cannot, yea, will not destroy and keep us from as well as these, if People did
not hide them, and will not let them go? Is it possible men may have the
greater, and not the lesser slain by the Power of the Lord? if they would bring
them forth, he would slay them before the^r faces. There is something that is
sweet to them, like as to Saul, goodly in their Eyes, and that must be spared;
but that which is Wild, Disgraceful and Reproachful, that must be destroyed;
but sparing of the other was his Ruin. Ah, if People were but ingenious, and
bring forth that to the Sword that is for the Sword, and that to the Fire that
is for the Fire, would not then this Sword and Fire of God's Spirit burn up and
destroy those Fatlings and Lambs that they keep in their Bosom, as well as that
which is Wild and Refuge?

I shall desire thee to view what thy own Pen has written, page 7. of the
Saint indeed; thy definition of keeping the Heart, it is to have the Heart set
right; It will be too tedious to transcribe all, view it what thou say
there, what man was by Creation, what man became by Degeneration, and what man
is by Regeneration, where all is set right again; and page 22. Had they kept
their Hearts with God, all had been well; and what is that but to keep from
Sin, page 13. holy Job durst not suffer his Heart to yield to an impure
Thought, surely then to no wicked Action, and so in a Sinless State, as long as
he kept there. I would fain know of thee, if thou do please, whether it be
possible for a Christian to observe those directions laid down in thy Book? If
possible, whether that Soul will not then be kept from Sin? and if possible,
why are we then Unchristian'd for believing of it? If impossible, why thou do
press People then to Impossibilities, and take Money for it to view thy own
Book well, and practice it also? and I dare to say thou will come to that
blessed state; Look to the 191 page read it at large, where thou cryest out,
Away with bold Censuring. But it was but a little way, for in the 194 page thou
can Censure the Quakers, that they never knew what belong to Practical
Godliness, and study of their own Hearts: I beseech thee in the bowels of Love,
do not be found in the number of them that say and do not; by what
Scripture-Rule do thou thus judge the Secrets of thousands of Hearts, Persons
whom thou never knew nor saw: View 198 and 199 page where thou
complainest of the Lives of Professors; and how can it be otherwise? (What is
the Reason of it?) they are told it is impossible to get themselves free of
Sin; and so one sets down Captivated with one Sin, and another with another
Sin. I tell thee in the Bowels of Love, that if ever the Lord did send thee to
Preach the Gospel, it was for the Perfecting of the Saints, and turning men
from the Power of Satan to the Power of God, and from Darkness to Light; and
not to tell them the strong man cannot be cast out, and all his Goods spoiled,
But, say you, there is something that cannot be destroyed; Where then is the
Purgatory to cleanse Souls? You say, and it is true, That as the Tree falls,
so it lies; and if men dye in their Sins, where Christ is gone they cannot
come, and no unclean thing can enter the Kingdom of Heaven; and yet poor People
cannot be cleansed: Ah the Souls that split on this Rock!

3dly, The Scripture holds forth there have been Perfections; I shall quote
the Scriptures, Psalm. 64. 4. Genesis 6. 9. Job. 1. 1. Prove. 2. 21. 1. Cor. 2. 6. 2
Cor. 13. 9. 11. where the Apostle Prays for it, and Exhorts to it, Romans 6.
1. How shall we that are dead to Sin live any longer therein? Men must know a
Death to Sin, or I will be bold to say, shall know a Death for Sin, Verse. 6.
They must know the Old man Crucified, that the Body of Sin may be destroyed,
that henceforth they should not serve Sin, Verse. 7. He that is dead, is freed
from sin; men will not know a Freedom from Sin, until they know a Death to Sin,
Verse. 18. Being then made Free from sin, they became Servants of Righteousness;
Verse. 22. When dead to sin, then servants to Righteousness, and then men have
their Fruits to Holiness and their End is Everlasting Life: This is the
Doctrine of Christ.

But the Doctrine of Devils is to say, that men may Sin, and not dye; he was
the first that preached it; Genesis 3. 3. Ye shall not dye; here is the great
Liar; And what are those men that say, men cannot be free from Sin till they
come to Heaven, cannot cease from Sin till come to Heaven? that Sin cannot be
destroyed? What is this but to make Christ's coming void, who came to destroy
the Works of the Devil, to save his People from their Sins? Is not this a
departing from the Faith that overcomes the World, the Flesh and the Devil,
and a giving heed to the seducing Spirit and Doctrine of Devils, to speak Lies
to uphold the Devil's Kingdom? 1 Timothy 4. 1. and unchristian all that believe;
as the Scripture has said, that Christ saves from Sin, (not in Sin) from the
Power and Practice, from the Filth as well as the Guilt, all that he will save
from Hell and its Damnation; and who are those that cry out against it, but
those that will make Christ, Scripture, and all bow down to their sinful
condition? Is there not some little one in them, that they will not give up to
God's Sword and Fire, some Fatlings in their Bosom, goodly in their Eyes, like
Saul, and yet think their Souls shall live for all this, that gather up the
Failings of the Saints to feed upon; that because Noah, David, and Peter, and
others failed, they may, yea, must sin all their days: I beseech thee in the
tender love of the Lord, to persuade the Children of men to a through Work of
Sanctification in Body, Soul and Spirit, and a perfecting Holiness in the Fear
of God, and a Cleansing from all Unrighteousness, and a casting out of the
Heart all that offend him, not only some things, but all things that offend
him, all which is to be done by the Power of the Lord; and so come to know a
Perfection in Christ, and so come to be one with Christ, as he is with the
Father, and the strong man cast out, and all his Goods spoiled, and so come to
be a Habitation for God through the Spirit. My Heart is here enlarged, and my
Mouth opened to bear witness to the Truth of God, that Christ is able and
willing to save from all Sin, and to keep us from failing, if men believe in
his Power, and keep to it; for it will be to all men according to their Faith;
but if men do not, yea, will not believe Christ is that he, that can (yea) and
will do these things for them, they shall dye in their Sins, and where he is
gone they cannot come.

3dly, He cannot be a Christian that makes no distinction between the Godly
and the Wicked, or Ungodly.

This Saddle best fits thy own Horse, on whose back I shall set it, look to the
Epistle of thy Book called The Saints indeed; where no difference is made
between the Godly and the Ungodly, the one so Confers, Prays, bewailes
Corruption, talks of Experience, open their Condition, neglect the watch over
the Heart, and does often fall into scandalous Sins as the Wicked do? What
difference do thou make between the Godly and Ungodly Hearts, except it be in
this that one shall go to Heaven, and the other to Hell, tho they thus live, no
difference in the Life, except it be that the Godly so called by thee are worse
in their Lives, for by their example they make fast the bands of death upon
both; the former are cruel, and shed the Blood of other Souls; fall often into
Scandalous Sins; and for proof David is brought, He committed Murder and
Adultery: Did he fall into this often? was it the Practice of his Life? was not
the remaining part of his Life spent in mourning and watching, and warning
against, and praying against all Sin? and did he not declare his abhorrance of
it, by his abstaining from it, all false ways he did utterly abhor? and did he
utterly abhor it with his Tongue, and not abstain from it in his Life? surely
his remaining Years were far different from the Life of the Wicked, and so were
the Life of other Saints after their falls, and therefore take this Charge home
to thy self, who pleads for Sin term of Life, and Unchristian others who plead
for purity of Heart and Life, and a ceasing from Sin, and a Freedom indeed by
the Truth: Be not offended because I spoke forth the Words of Truth, it is for
the honor of my Savior Christ Jesus. And it is my Testimony that I bare
against the Devil and Sin and the Pleaders for it (that he can) that he does)
that he will save from Sin those that believe in him, and come to him and
receive him in all his Offices, to them he will give Power to become the Sons
of God; and what is that, but to cease to do Evil, and learn to do Well?

And now for the proof of thy Charge, for which we are Unchristianed, and that
we make no Difference between the Godly and the Wicked, is this, that Christ
inlightneth Every one that comes into the World with a saving Light.

I would fain know whether Saints be Born Saints? If not, but all are by nature
Children of Wrath, Enemies to God by wicked works, as I believe they are; Then
whether that Spirit that strived with them, and convinced them of Sin,
Righteousness and Judgment, and brought them out of the state of Darkness,
Enmity and Rebellion, and turns them, or leads them from the power of
Satan, to be lead, giuded and governed by the Power of God, be not the same
Spirit, that is striving with and in the Wicked to reclaim them? and whether it
would not reclaim them, if they did follow it and obey its Reproofs,
Instructions and Counsels? God gave his Good Spirit to the old World and
others, and doubtless willing and sufficient to save them, if they had not
resisted and rebelled against it; it was Gods Good Spirit that was saving which
was given to rebellious Israel, but they Rebelled and Vexed it, that it could
not dwell in them, and it is the same secret still Voice that cries after, or
in Man and Woman, This is the Way, walk in it; Return, Return, why will you
Dye? But by Rebellion against, and Resistance of, Grieving, Vexing and
Quenching its Motions, it cease to strive, and woe then to that Soul when left
to commit Sin with Greediness.

And as I have said formerly, I say again, if in any thing thou supposest I am
beside the Truth, signify it to me in a few Lines, who desires and prays
for the coming of God's Kingdom in the Hearts of the Children of men.

Clement Lake.
Crediton, the 28th day of the 10th Month, 1687.
THE END.

