SUNDAY A SABBATH. OR, A Preparative Discourse for discussion of Sabbatary
doubts.

By JOHN LEY, Pastor of Great Budworth in Cheshire.

There remains therefore a Rest to the people of God. Hebr. 4.4. Nos octava
die (quae and ipsa prima est) perfecti Sabbati festivitate laetamur. Hilar.
Prolog. in Psalm. page 335. LONDON, Printed by R. Young, for George Lathum, at
the sign of the Bishops Head in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

TO The most reverend Father in God, JAMES, by the grace of God, Archbishop of
Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland.
Most reverend Father in God and (besides the ceremony of your style) really my
very gracious Lord,
IT is become a formality of the times, to enter books into the world under
great names, and to make them seem greater then they be, by studied strains
of excessive commendation, whereby many times they raise the Readers fancy much
higher then his faith; and while they advance their Patrons praise far above
all belief, they depresse their own reputations below a charitable hope: and
so make many, instead of reading on when they have begun (as it were with one
foot on the threshold) first to stop, and then to step back, lest their
entertainment in the second course should be answerable to the first; their
deceitful flourishes in the dedication, promising little sincerity in the
ensuing discourse.

I have no cause to fear it will be my ill hap, to take such handsale of any
judicious and pious peruser of these papers, while I do but tell (not you, my
Lord, for it is already upon evident record, whereof your own great reading
gives you intelligence at the first hand, but others) how you are valued by
such as are best able to judge, and seem to have least of the Bias of
advantageous interests, or partial affections, to wry their censures from the
straight line of truth, to the crooked brace of a favorable falsehood; which I
would have them know, not so much for your honor, as for their own good, that
in the fullness of such an example, as your Grace's, others (especially of our
Tribe, and most of all those of your own orb) may find both the discovery of
their own defects, and inducements to diligence, in following so fair a
pattern for their further proficiency.

Of many, who have writt^n what your modesty will not acknowledge, I will take
up with the testimony of three only: The first shall be learned Master
Seldom, a man of that profession, which (by some) is held too emulous of the
credit of the Clergy, and who has taken much pains against their profit in
his history of Tithes: he notwithstanding has the most reverend Archbishop of
Armagh in that esteem, that he holds him Reverendissimus Antistes Jacobus
Usserius, Archiepis^opus Armachanus, vir summa pietate, judicio singulari,
usque ad miraculum doctus. Seldom. Marmora Aru^ deliana in editionis ansa. p.
8. sine, and p. 9. princip.
A Prelate of exceeding great piety, of singular judgment, and of so much
learning, as is no less then miraculous.

The second shall be Ea certe pietatis tuae and eruditionis apud nos est
existimatio, ut Usserii nomen pietatis nobis and virtutis nomen sit, quibus
fama constans frequenter ingerit, tot ingentes dotes quibus te Deus instruxit.
Frederic. Spanhem. epist. Dedicator. praefix. 3. par^i dubiorum Evangelico^um,
excus. Genev. an. 1639.
Fredericus Spanhemius, Pastor of the Church, and Professor of Divinity in the
University of Geneva, a man, who by his books of Evangelicall doubts, has
given undoubted evidence of his Abilities, both for the Pulpit of the one, and
the Chair of the other; and he from Geneva writes thus: Your piety and
learning is of that account among us, that the name of Usher to us is a name of
piety and So said Greg. Nazianz of Athanas. A (...). Greg. Naz. orat. 21. tom.
1. p. 373.
virtue, constant and continual fame ringing in our ears the many and great
gifts wherewith the Lord has endowed you. And because piety is the Principal,
and (therefore Master Seldom did well to assign it the first place in his
Elogium) he remembers it again: Summa cum laud, voce, ac calamo, plus tamen
exemplo doces, etc. Seld.
You teach (says he) to your great praise, by your tongue, and by your pen,
but much more by your practice among them who daily look upon your life, and
observe the uprightness and integrity of your manners: And Vident in te non
anxiam, non affectatam pietatem, sed gravem, and seriam, and quae in illum
solum fertur, cui soli debetur; vident raram humilitatem per quam a fastigio
tuo descendis, nec quicquam infra tuam dignitatem existimas, quod ad
promovendum regnum De^ facit. Ibid.
Your serious and unaffected piety, which is directed only toward God, to whom
alone of duty it belongs; and (withal this) they see (that which makes these
graces the more shining, and more sure) your rare humility, whereby you descend
from your height of dignity and desert, and condescend to men of low estate,
Romans 12.16. thinking nothing too mean for the eminence of your place, which
may any way conduce to advance the Kingdom of God: Whence he takes occasion
Public profiteor, quanta Genevae nostrae nominis tui sit claritudo, quantus
apud nostrates honor. Ibid.
publicly to profess how glorious a name you have, how great honor in the
City of Geneva.

The third witness (and, that I may not turn your candor into another color,
the last I will produce, who gives ample attestation to your great worth) is
the late Author of an Epistle, published principally against Bishop Halls tenet
of Episcopacy by divine right, (under the borrowed name of Iraeneus
Philadelphus) who in the first page of his supplement of things omitted (having
left you out, where he names other Bishops with respect) makes you amends with
this honorable mention: Segrego etiam a choro Episcoporum Romanensium Jacobum
Usserium Archiepiscopum Armachanum, rarum non solum magnae Brittaniae, and
Hiberniae, sed universi Christiani Orbis ornamentum, in quem quicquid superiori
saeculo clara lumina, Cranmerus, Latimerus, Hooperus, Juellus, habuerunt
pietatis, zeli, suavitatis moram, sanctitatis vitae and doctrinae, atque
reconditae eruditionis, videtur quasi soedere facto concurrisse* Omiss. fol. 1.
post page 76. epist. Iraenei Philadelph.
I except (says he) from the company of Romanizing Bishops, James Usher,
Archbishop of Armagh, a grace or ornament not only of great Britain and
Ireland, but of the whole Christian world, in whom all the piety and sanctity
of life, all the zeal and sweetness of disposition, and the learning, the
hidden learning (hidden from the knowledge of other learned men) of those
famous lights of the former age, Cranmer, Latimer, Hooper, Jewel, are met as
it were by a covenanted consent.

It is not possible (my Lord) that such eminency of grace and applause should
not be dogged at the heels with envy; and dogged envy barks out many times
with reproachful calumny: and Gods wisdom suffers man's wickedness so to
work, for the welfare of those he loves best, lest they should love themselves
too well, and take a dangerous delight in too good a conceit of their own good
parts, and others great praises (which might robb them of their fundamental
grace, humility; for either of these, but especially both together, like the
abundance of Revelations, 2 Cor. 12.7. may incline many to selfe-exaltation;)
for the buffeting of Satan's messenger (the tongue of a slanderer, for there is
a smiting with the tongue, Jer. 18.18. and if any tongue be Satan's, it is that
which malignantly traduceth the most worthy) is either a means to prevent such
puffing up, or a remedy against it; God by his all-wise goodness, tempering
and turning a rank poison into a sovereign medicine, and so well (I doubt not)
it will be with you, (my Lord) if others be so ill minded toward you: and, in
such a case, an Apology put in may prevail, and prosper so far, as not only
to heal the wound which that cruel weapon, the tongue (for it is a sharp
sword, Psa. 57.4.) has made, but to smooth the scarre in the skin, when the
flesh is made whole.

If then there be any in whom sin so abounds (because grace abounds in you
and toward you) as to suspect your sincerity, and to speak as ill as they
think, (and it is like, with men who run to extremes on either hand, you may
suffer on both sides; on the one as a Bishop, on the other, as too gracious
with such as mislike, or admit not of Episcopal Government) I conceive
(beside the clearing testimony of your own conscience, and Gods attestation to
the integrity thereof) you may, for the one sort, who set misconceits upon you
for the callings sake, with comfort call to mind, that such as are addicted to
a discipline which denies that disparity wherein you are placed, have given
that testimony of you which I have here observed; and more (surely) of that
sort would do you right in the like kind, if they knew as well as I (and I
hope they shall know it ere long) how humble you have been (not humbled as
some are by the Parliament) and in humility, how hearty and forward to take
down your self, and to project a form of Ecclesiastical Government, wherein
you might be but as one of us in a sociable participation of Ordination and
Jurisdiction with the rest of your brethren, the incumbent Pastors and
Preachers of particular Churches.

And for the other sort, who think you have but too kindly complied with the
Disciplinarians of Geneva, and other parts, else they would not have honored
you so much as they have done, the wiser and better sort will take it for a
token of your wisdom and goodness; and to take off the offense of some (who,
in an over high conceit of Episcopal pre-eminence, disdain all reformed
Churches but those that have it) I can tell them, that Archbishop Whitgift
entertained a Minister of the French Church, one Master Buse, to preach a
weekly Latin Lecture in his own Chapel, and to other foreign Ministers
was very bountiful, as to Drusius, Rhenicherus, Fregevill, whom he
entertained in his own house; and not only gave liberally to those whose
merit was far above their means, (when they came within his reach) but sent
his bounty abroad to like objects in foreign parts, as to Master Beza, he
sent sundry times much money out of his own purse, besides the general
collections and contributions to Geneva, which he also greatly furthered, as
Sr. G. Paul in the life of Archb. Whitgift p. 63, 64.
Sir George Paul has written in the relation of his life.

And it had been more for the honor of the English Prelacie, and much better
for the public peace both of the Church and State, if there had been more
courteous correspondence betwixt Episcopal and Presbyteriall Divines,
notwithstanding the differences betwixt them in opinion or pre-eminence.

But there are a sort of men, who, whether out of unsoundnesse in religion, or
pride or perverseness of disposition, or some politic intention, I cannot
tell, but out of some motive (surely) which is not good, take small cause to
raise great clamours against those whom they should rather rescue from
reproach, if others did defame them: Such an one was he who sat so heavy
upon the skirts of the Geneva Bible publicly in the Pulpit, charging the
marginall annotations with Judaisme and Arrianisme, against whom I wrote an
Apology about twenty eight years ago, which a double occasion now calls to
remembrance, the one precedent, the other present.

The former is, That it was the time of my first happy acquaintance with your
Grace, when upon your perusal of some part of it, you left a letter for me
(at your departure from Oxford) approving what I had done, and encouraging me
to hold on in clearing their innocence, who were most untruly traduced in a
solemn assembly of the whole University; so long since is it, that I have had
cause to observe your sincere affection to all the faithful Laborers in the
Lords vineyard, whether of Geneva or any other Church of the reformed religion.

The other occasion is present, and it is the desire of diverse, who wish well
to the edification of ordinary Readers of the Bible; and therefore desire that
the Geneva notes, after a serious review and needful correction, may be
restored to their attendance upon the sacred Text, from which they have been
all this while discarded, as if they had been guilty of those heinous
accusations which were objected against them, and whereof my book, I doubt not,
(by the sentence of a The worthy Knight and Baronet, Sr. Edw. Dering, who has
the Chair in the Co^mittee of Books.
competent Judge, in whose hands it now is) will fully and clearly acquit
them, which has led me a little out of my way, but it is but a short
digression, as a step from the margin to the text, whereto the tax of these
marginall annotations did induce me, and whence I may readily go on to note
another Accuser of the brethren of the same kind, who upon the difference of
one word in the Edition of Ignatius at Geneva, falls foul first upon the
Printers, in these words, Sed a Genevensibus Typographis praeter frauds,
fucos, and praestigia, non est quod quicquam expectemus. Ric. Montacutius
Eccles. Cicestr. Minister. Apparat. ad origin. Ecclesiasticas. p. 19.
Of these Geneva Printers we must expect nothing but frauds and fallacies, and
impostures. And then upon Videlius, (a learned and religious Minister of that
City, who set forth that Father) in such intemperate terms as these, Neque
audax and importunus Ignatii censor quicquam attulit ad paginas suas implendas
praeter inscitiam, and incu^iam, and impudentiam singularem, dum ad suum
Genevatismum antiquitatem detorquet invitissimam; non autem quod oportuit,
Calvinismum amussitat ad antiquitatem. Ibid. p. 19, 20.
That bold and importunate Censor of Ignatius has brought nothing to fill up
his pages, but ignorance, and carelessness, and egregious imposture, whereby
he writhes Antiquity back to his Genevatisme, and does not, as he ought,
regulate Calvinisme by Antiquity. In whose defense I need say nothing, they of
Geneva are enough, and old enough to answer for themselves; and I doubt not, but
will do it in due time.

I am sorry that I have occasion to observe the like lashing out in him, of
whom, by his books of devotion and moderation, I was made to expect rather no
reproves of such men, then any such reproaches as I read against Master
Parker, who having said, Non volentes, sed nescientes; non per apostasiam aut
contemptum, sed per infirmitatem and ignorantiam lapsi sunt, qui in disciplina
aberrarunt. Park. de Polit. Eccles. lib. 2. c. 8.
The Fathers, which erred in this matter of Discipline, did not offend out of
will, but out of want of knowledge; not through apostasy or contempt, but
through infirmity and ignorance, receives his refutation in these words of
high disdain, viz. Bish. Hall of Episcopacy. part. 1. p. 60.
But can I now forbear to ask, Who can endure to hear the braying of this
proud Schismaticke?

If I say any thing to succor the credit of Master Parker against this
contempt (to which my charity enclines me) I shall with some men perhaps
endanger mine own, who will be ready to suggest (as the Jews against the blind
man in the Gospel, John 9.28.) that I am one of his disciples; and if they do,
I will ingenuously acknowledge, that, having read his book against symbolizing
with Antichrist in Ceremonies, and being required by a great and learned
Prelate to give my judgment of it many years ago, I answered then (and I am
of the same opinion still) he has carried the cause against you, my Lord, but
not against me: What mean you by that, said the Bishop? I mean, said I, that
he has written enough against your urging of the Ceremonies, but not against
my yielding to them, if I may not enjoy my Ministry without them: Thus much for
my self, now for Master P.

I should have thought that his great learning (well known by his printed
works, though against the Cross, and cross to the Crosier) might have
secured him from such a brutish scorn, especially from that which degrades him
to the lowest form, not only of men, but of beasts; and that as it is hard to
prove, so none should be hasty to impute either pride or schism, where
conscience is pretended, reasons abundantly alleged, and secular comforts
deserted, as in his case it was; his words did not (me thinks) so much as
tempt, much less authorize any one to return upon him with such contumelious
terms: for did he say any thing against the Fathers, that he must for that be
held unworthy to be called a son? yea, so worthless, as to be
excommunicated from men, and sorted to beasts? he said, they erred; and why
might he not? for, were they not men? they erred in Discipline, they might for
all that in matter of doctrine be very learned and Orthodox Doctors: They erred
(said he) not out of will, or through apostasy or contempt, but through want
of knowledge in that particular, and of infirmity: they might then
(notwithstanding all this) be very good and holy men (as indeed they were;)
and must Master P. for saying but this, be so far undervalued and vilified,
as to be made but as the emblem of grossest stupidity? For right against this
inhumane wrong, I appeal from the Pontifical Tribunal of the Judge,
decreeing the divine Right of Episcopacy, to the closet of the devout Doctor,
where if he meditate seriously upon this passionate reproach, he will vow (I
hope) to do so no more; and because he has not been wont in this sort to
break out of the way of Christian moderation, the plea of Balaams Ass may
serve him for some excuse, Was I ever wont to do so unto thee? Numb. 22.30.
Wherein, that none may account me like Cham, to be a mocker of so reverend a
Father (Reverend and Father both, without borrowing any reputation from his
Rochet) I profess, though his word braying brought that story to mind, I would
not have noted it with any reference to him (whom both in this book, and
elsewhere, I have mentioned with affectionate and venerable respect) but that
the Ass did not bray, but speak; and speak not the words of a man, but of an
Angel.

And O that all our Prelates, who plead their pre-eminence from the title
Angels, Revel. 2.3. had been really Angelical! that we might have seen by
their works, their heart strings were tuned to the song of the blessed Angels,
Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men; that we
might have discerned their desires by their endeavors (as your Graces) to be
seriously set upon the happy union of those sacred Sisters, Truth and Peace,
Zach. 8.19. Peace and Holiness, Hebr. 12.14. to which your zeal has burned
with such a bright blaze, and ardent and constant heat (and yet has it been
guided with so much prudent circumspection) that I cannot but hope God will
make you an effectual instrument of a most blessed accord both of Churches and
Kingdoms; and I heartily wish that you had, and pray that you may have many
Iraeneos Philadelphos (like him whom as such an one I have heard you many times
mention with much commendation) who may give most hopeful assistance of happy
success to such a worthy design.

God forbid, that either we of England, or our brethren of Scotland should be
so stupid, as not to apprehend, that the safety of both Nations is bound up in
our union one with another, and our ruin like to be let loose in our rent and
distraction; or so stubborn, in asserting our own interests, or working of
our own wills, as to fall out for them: and by our mutual hostility, so to
weaken each part, that the common enemy may come in upon us, and overcome us
both; rather then so, we should yield to any thing but sin, part with any
thing but with a good conscience.

In that which I have hitherto said (my good Lord) I have showed but some part
of that good report, which (by such as are least liable to suspicions of
partiality) is published of you; and because opposites do illustrate the
evidence of truth, I have noted some examples of another strain, whereby it
may appear, that the great schism and distraction among us, has been made
and maintained, not by a kind and respective correspondence betwixt persons or
Churches of a different Discipline (as some not only untruly, but absurdly
suggest) but by proud and supercilious disdain, rash and peremptory censures,
rigorous usages of such as have had the advantage of the upper ground, to
trample on those that were placed below them; which has been a principal
cause of the great hatred and contempt of the Prelacie; so that it is not now
taken by many as an honor to the man, but the man an honor and succor to it;
who takes the calling of a Bishop, as Saint Episcopatus nomen est operis, non
honoris. August. de Civit. Dei. lib. 9. cap. 19.
Augustine said of it, rather for a matter of duty then of dignity, which binds
him Quantum quis praecelsi culminis obtinet locum, tanto necesse est praecedat
caeteros gratia meritorum. Council. Toletan. 11. cap. 2. tom. 4. page 820. Edit.
Parisiis. 1636.
to so much more diligence as he has the higher pre-eminence; and that duty
Ibid. Item Council. Constantinop. 6. can. 19. tom. 5. Council. page 328. Council.
Trident. Sess. 24. Can. 4. tom. 9. page 414.
chiefly to consist in preaching of the Word, making more account of the Canons
which concern the substance, then the ceremonies of their calling, as all men
see your Grace does, preaching every week in the Parish of your abode,
according to the Canon of the Episcopus, si infirmitate non fuerit impeditus,
Ecclesiae cui proxime fuerit, die Dominico deesse non debet. Council. Aurel.
can. 33. tom. 1. p. 723.
first Aurelian Council, and abiding there, though with disadvantage and
inconvenience to your selse, where you may do most good, making the choice of
the Prophet Jeremy, I will get me to the great men, and speak unto them, for
they, says he, have known the way of the Lord, Jer. 5.5. If they had not
known it, he might have come to teach it them; and if our great men know it
already, you will make them know it much better; smoothing the difficulties,
and clearing the doubts of faith, in such sort, that their minds may be
settled in assurance of that which before they had but in fancy, or held but
in opinion; and this in a plain and easy way, yet full of power and
authority; so that I may say of your Grace, as the people said of our Savior
(reserving a just measure of pre-eminence to him that spoke as never man spoke,
Jo. 7.46) you teach as one having authority, and not as the Scribes, Luke 7.29.
not as they who write all they say, and can say nothing but what they have
written; who preach coldly, as Erasmus notes, because they are word-bound to a
piece of paper; and not as the Scribes, because they said and did not, Matthew.
23.3. but your life is a pattern, as well as your doctrine, and a rule of
religious conversation; and therefore I doubt not but God shall have much
honor among the honorable by your ministry unto them, and intercourse with
them at Court, and elsewhere; for if Plato his presence and example wrought so
much change in the Court of Dionysius a Tyrant, that upon his coming thither
there followed a wonderful modesty and temperance in Feasts and banquets, and
other reformations, so that as Plutarch in the life of Dion. p. 972.
Plutarch notes, the Court was clean changed, how much rather may we expect
that the Court of so good a King (as, blessed be God, we have) should be
much bettered by your Graces addresses to his Majesty, and your preaching and
practice so much observed, so highly esteemed by the best of all sorts? Which
was one cause that induced me to dedicate this preparative discourse of the
Sabbath to your Grace; for, that being the chief of days for honor to God,
and holiness in men, it was meet the defense of it should be countenanced
with a name, which is eminent in both.

Besides, (which gives your Grace more interest both in me, and what now I
present to public observation) the better to furnish and further me in the
prosecution of this cause, you have been pleased to communicate unto me
diverse MS. Treatises of the Sabbath, such I could not hope for from any other
treasury of learning then yours, which abounds with exquisite variety, not
to be found either in Booksellers shops, or common Libraries; and to promise
me under your hand, any help of that kind. Wherein I am like enough (my Lord)
to take you at your word, and sure enough that you will keep it, when upon
just occasion I shall present my desires to your Grace to that purpose.

It may be some will think I should have dispatched the difference about the
title of our Christian Holiday in a shorter discussion; and to them I shall
oppose others (who have read it, and are wise enough to censure it) that say
there is nothing idle or impertinent in it, nothing vainly or tautologically
repeated; and the more sit to be somewhat large, because so many adversaries
(which are not to be slighted) have so long opposed it, and one of them with
so much acceptance among some young Students in the University, Dr. Pocklingt.
his Book.
as that for their delight they have read his book at their common sires,
which the high Court of Parliament judged to the fire to be burned; and by
mine intentive handling of that which is of smaller moment, (though the least
things in Religion, as the filings of Gold, be very precious) I was willing to
engage my self to a proportionable care and diligence in those more important
parts of my Sabbatary Treatises, which hereafter (by Gods assistance) I shall
set forth.

It is time I should draw toward an end, lest I make my porch too large for
the pyle of building that belongs to it: and yet I believe no Reader will
think me too long, but your Grace; nor you, but that you will think I grace
you too much; and indeed, (my Lord) if I did not know you had so much
humility, (with all that excellency of knowledge and goodness, which is
obvious to all unblemished eyes) that no praises are like to puff you up; and
were not confident, that you know me too well, to take me for a flatterer, I
would not allow my self to make such a dedication unto you: But while I
apprehend you as you are in your self, and (as I conceive) toward me; I
cannot think I have offended in excess, but I should be very faulty in
defect, if I should not add to all that I have said, an Advertisement to your
Grace, touching the general both observation and expectation which, now
especially is set upon you (which, I am sure, will never be frustrate by your
default).

Your great abilities, and your acceptance with the greatest, make many of the
best and some of the wisest confident that you can, and your answerable zeal
and sincerity makes them of strong hope, that you will take all the fair
opportunities that God puts into your hands, to help forward the casting of
all scandals out of the Church, and the setting up of all good means to keep
them out for future time: Gods Providence (which does nothing in vain) may
well be thought (after so long absence, and so great distance of your ordinary
residence) to have brought you hither at this time for so great, so good a
purpose: So that, though there be some Sunt qui quod sentiunt, etiamsi optimum
sit, (invidiae metu) non audent dicere. Cicero l. 1. de Offic. p. 362.
who think better then (for fear of envy) they dare speak, and so do a
great deal worse then (perhaps) they think: for (as Veritatem reticere quoddam
sacrilegium est. Sedul. in epist. ad Romans c. 11. sol. 8.
Sedulius says) to conceal the truth (when there is just cause, and a fit
season to set it forth) is a kind of sacrilege, It is both believed and looked
for, that your Grace, as you can upon occasion show your self a Paul in
eminence of knowledge, and a Barnabas in sweetness of spiritual consolation;
so with Paul and Barnabas, you will wax bold in the cause of God and his
truth, though (as it was their lot) you should meet with contradiction, even
unto blasphemy, Act. 13 ver. 45, 46. and indeed, the sincerest and wisest
working may sometimes not only fail of due acceptance and success, but be
as wilfully withstood on the one side, as it is zealously pursued on the other:
Yet your Grace may take the more heart to give free scope to your conscience
herein, because you are so generally gracious, that as Hierome said to Tuae
dilectionis fama dispergitur, ut non tam laudandus sit qui te amat, quam scelus
putetur facere qui non amat. Hier. ad Florentium, priore epist. tom. 1. p. 53.
Florentius, To love you, is not so much to be reputed a praise, as not to love
you a crime: I should be guilty of no less, if I should not in mine heartiest
prayers to Almighty God commend your good health, and long life, for his glory
and his Churches comfort, and sincerely profess all humble observance to you,
as the duty of

Your Graces most cordially devoted client and servant, JOHN LEY.
From my lodging in Paul's Churchyard, March 19. 1640.
The PREFACE to the Reader.
THe Name and Lot of the Sabbath (as many of this generation have used the
matter) are very unlike: for that is fixed on an Hebrew root (which signifies
Rest) this, as a watery reed (tossed to and fro with contrary winds, by the
manifold oppositions that are made about it) almost, if not altogether
Restless. Not all the Commandments of the Decalogue, besides that of the
Sabbath (which for number have the odds of nine to one) have suffered more or
worse, under the strife of tongues, or conflict of pens, then it has done.

It was (by divine Ordinance) to be as Noah's Arc: for in that not men alone,
but the unreasonable creatures likewise (though most disposed to range abroad)
were under an arrest, confined to a narrow compass: and (though otherwise
adverse to each other) united in a quiet and peaceable repose among themselves.
So on the Sabbath, both man and beast (for that day) were to have each of them
their quietus est: by the one sort, Rest was only to be enjoyed as a benefit;
to the other it was enjoined as a duty: but not Rest only, but Religion with
it; nor Rest merely for it self, but for Religions sake, and that (so far as
it consists in communion with God) is another kind of Rest, and of all kinds,
the best, and most delightful.

But now is this Sabbath, or day of rest and quietness, become as a Ball,
betwixt two Rackets, bandied this way and that way, by mutual contradiction,
not only betwixt the godly and the profane (which is no news) but among many
of those, who are in no mean account in the Church of God, whether they be
valued by the eminence of their places, the excellency of their parts, or the
holiness of their lives.

The more is the grief of religious hearts that do observe it, and the more
hearty their desires (no doubt) to see some good accord (at least betwixt the
better sort) or (which is next unto a peace) that the differences about it may
be carried with such pious and prudent moderation (on both sides) as that God
may lose no part of his tribute of honor, nor his servants be defrauded of the
fruit of their holiness, nor fall to a change or cooling of those charitable
affections toward each other, without which Pomegranats, even the golden Bells
of Aaron, are but like sounding brass, or tinkling Cimballs.

Toward this purpose, if the employment of the Talent committed to my trust
may any way conduce, I shall make no scruple to add unto my other taskes an
assay of satisfaction to their Doubts or Reasons, who either waver in the
right, or are already swayed to wrong opinions in this point. And to this
endeavor, I shall with more diligence address my self:

First, because the day in question, is the training day of military
Discipline, by which the Church of Christ is unto the Synagogue of Satan (as is
said in the Canticles) terrible as an Army with Banners: Cantic. 6.4.
which, if it should not be well united, and often exercised, the powers of
darkness would be mightily exalted. It contains (as Cum subyersam omnem
religionem vult (apud Prophetas) signisicare polluta, violata, non custodita,
non sanctificata, sua Sabbatha conqueritur, quasi omisso hoc obsequio, nihil
amplius restaret, in quo posset honorari. Calvin. Instill. l. 2. cap 8. parag.
29. page 140.
Calvin shows, and Mast. Perk. exhortat. to Repent. vol. 3. page 421. col. 2.
Doct. Pride., his lect. on the Sab. Doct. Rivet. in Exodus c. 31. ver. 12. page
253. Grotius de jure belli ac pacis. l. 2. c. 20. page 244. Mast. Primrose
Treat. of the Sab. part. 2. c. 6. p. 120, 121.
other learned Divines in effect say the same) the sum and substance of all
Religion. The Sabbath is unto it as the border of Sinai to that mountain of
terror; and as the tower of Sion, to that city of perfection: and so cannot be
battered, or broken down, without an open breach upon Religion it self.

Secondly, because as it stands in eminency (for force and use) so it is the
fairest mark for Satan's malignity to aim at: and as if he had given his
soldiers some such charge against it, as the King of Syria did once against
the King of Israel [fight against neither small nor great, 1 Kin. 22.31.
but against the King of Israel] spend all your might against his person; so
against this, whether King or Queen of days (for both these titles are
attributed to the day of Rest, as I shall note in another place) are all his
forces set in battle array, and though (in some respects) adverse to one
another; yet in their way, they all of them do violence to the Lords sacred
ordinance of the Sabbath. Some endeavoring to undermine and supplant the
fabric of it, from the very foundation (on which it is set); and others
piling upon it so many over rigorous positions and observances, as with their
sad and sullen weight may incline it to crack and fall asunder.

Thirdly, The necessary instruction of the people in the heads of Catechism,
pressed by especial command of our dread Sovereign that late was, and of his
Majesty that now is, makes the Decalogue, (and within it the Commandment of
the Sabbath) a more common Theme for popular discourses, and therewith. all a
more fruitful ground of erroneous descants then heretofore, if in such variety
of opinions (which cast a mist upon the truth) there be not some more means to
clear it, and to guide men to that choice, from which too many now endeavor
to seduce them.

Fourthly, I observed, that as some set their wits on work to impeach the
piety of the doctrine of the Sabbath; so many set their wills either to work or
play, and so to pursue their profit or pleasure, as to make the Lords holiday
every way in practice, as unholy and profane, as in position it could be:
Irreligion and Libertinisme being a descent from Sion hill, which has no need
of hands to thrust it downwards toward hell.

It was well said of a grave The Bish. of S. Asaph.
Prelate (when he heard of some too indulgent doctrines this way) that
therules of manners should be strict, for men's behavior would incline fast
enough to looseness of themselves. Besides, there is a sinister zeal in some
against superstition, which proves many times prejudicial to the practice of
religion: for (as our late learned King James his Cign. cant. ^.8.
Sovereign has observed) under color of weeding out superstition, it will
pluck up by the roots many plants of Paradise.

And we see but too many ill harvest men, using the weeding hook to the
wheat, which should be exercised only to pluck up the tares: of whose ill
work I shall beware for my self, and (I hope) shall give such warning unto
others, as may not only withhold them from the like; but may be a direction to
the simpler sort, what to take, and what to take heed of, as either of them
shall be offered to their choice.

Fifthly, While men make no scruple to violate the holy rest of the Lords day,
they become the more bold to disobey their Superiors, (whether supreme or
subordinate); for, Mat. 22. v. 31.
as giving to God the things that are Gods, and unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, are sociable duties, and well sort together; so commonly, where dues
are denied and detained from God, the King is not like to receive his right,
either for aid, or obedience: for the fourth and fifth Commandments are so
near neighbors, that the like lot (whether of observance or of sleighting) is
like to befall them; which we may well perceive, if we do but observe how
our people have lately fallen, not only from piety, but from civility, and
broke out into manifold offenses against the laws of the King, since they were
taught (a lesson too easily learned) to make light of this holy Commandment of
God.

Nor is there any cause to expect any better behavior among them, until their
consciences (let loose from this bond) be tucked up to it by a more religious
regard, both of the authority and observation of the Sabbath: Then may we have
more hope, and not till then, under our Governors, (for whom the Apostle
prescribes all manner of prayer) to lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.

Sixthly, These motives were the more sharpened, and I the more quickened (for
the safer conduct of them that doubt) to set out my light (whether candle or
torch, I must leave to other men to judge) by several solicitations of many
religious and learned friends; but especially by a joint Letter, (the copy
whereof I shall present to the view of the Reader next after this Preface) sent
me under the hands of many of my Brethren of the Ministry, of whom there are
diverse, for their gifts and parts, of especial note, and all of them painful
and profitable Preachers in their places, and such as build up the walls of our
Jerusalem (as with both hands) with sound doctrine and religious conversation.

Seventhly, Since that time I have received not only encouragement, but
incitement to the same service (with a Manuscript Treatise of the Sabbath) from
the hand of a great Prelate, a glorious Star of the first magnitude, shining
illustriously in the Church, both by his admirable learning, and answerable
living.

Eighthly, I was not a little provoked to lend my poor ability to the
protection of the truth herein, by the importunate pressing of Master
Breerewood, whereby Master Nic. Byfield was forced to the field, when he had
no thought nor mind to fight, (as we shall seasonably note in another place);
for when he had excused himself, for being unwilling to enter the lists of
controversy with him, as wanting warrant to leave his calling, and to spend
his time about such confutations, Mast. Breerwood returns upon him with this
patheticall expostulation:

M Breerw. his first Treat. of the Sabbath, p. 89, 90.
How, Sir? is the defending of the doctrine you have taught, a leaving of your
calling? Are you called to teach the truth, and not to defend it? Are not Gods
Ministers to defend Christ's truth? is that no part of their calling? or have
you no warrant, say you, for such confutations? What? no warrant to confute
them in the behalf of the truth, whom ye yet condemn for adversaries of the
truth? Why, Christ is the author of the truth, John 14.6.
or the truth it self; you are a Minister of Christ, there is a warrant for
you: The holy Ghost is the spirit of truth, Ephesians. 1.13.
and he sanctified you to that Ministry, there is a warrant for you: The Gospel
is the word of truth, you are a Preacher of the Gospel, there is a warrant for
you: The Church is the Pillar of truth, you are a Pillar of the Church, there
is a more warrant for you: For would not the Author of the truth, the spirit
of truth, etc. (and to all these you owe your service and allegiance have their
Minister to defend the truth? A strange thing, that Christ's Ministers should
have no warrant to confute oppositions made against the truth, who are bound to
give their lives in defense of it! Must they spend their life and blood for
confirmation of it? and may they not spend a little labor and time about such
confutations? So far he.

Where, whether the goodness of Master Breerwood his cause, or the
apprehension of his own better abilities, and more list and leisure then
Master Bifield had, to reciprocate disputes of this sort, did more prompt him
to these braving provocations, may be better discerned, when their different
Tenets come with indifferency to be examined.

In the mean time, I thought this speech, after so many inducements (as before
I have touched) though directed to him, was pertinent to me: And (besides
other respects) somewhat more to me, then to Master Bifield, in that a great
Mast. W. C.
Admirer of Master Breerwood brought me diverse of his Dictats on this Argument
(which are not in print) that I might peruse them, and so might either take the
impression of his opinions from them: or (if my judgment swayed me otherwise)
that I might endeavor to take off the error of his and other men's
mis-conceipts, by some better evidence of truth herein, then yet had been
offered to their view.

At this mark while I direct mine aim, and address mine endeavors, my
resolution is, and care shall be, to deal with such diligence, as not to
neglect any means of due information in matters of doubt, and with such
fidelity, as not to tell a lie for God, nor to outface a truth against the
meanest man.

And, if while I devote my thoughts and pains to make some truths (not of mere
speculation, but of ordinary practice) to shine (which have been obscured with
manifold scruples) and to fence them from the storm of some men's oppositions,
it be mine hap to derive contradictions upon my self, it shall not discourage
me from any duty I owe unto the truth: for, he that gain-sayeth me in that,
makes himself Gods adversary more then mine; for, truth is not any man's so
much as his, who (I hope) will give me eyes to see both what wrong is done
unto it, and by what means, and in what manner it should be righted.

But if the exception he takes against what I write be true and just, I will
take it for a matter not of disgrace, but of gratification: for I shall account
it a favor, if he show me an error of mine own (and it shall be no longer
mine, then until it be seen) which yet I see not.

For which discovery, I shall hold it my duty to give him thanks, without
taking offense at any good office he performs for the truth, and shall
always be ready to debate any doubtful difference so, as (with the Et
refellere sine pertinacia, and refelli sine iracundia, parati sumus. Cicer.
Tus. qu. l. 2. p. 137. 5.
Orator) to give or receive a refutation without pertinacy, or passion, and
(as Nobiscum nulla contentio, cum uterque pari jugo non pro sese, sed pro causa
niteretur. Plin. opist. lib. 3. page 85.
Lucius Albinus and his friend) to join my neck with his in the yoke,
sociably to draw not the waine of our vain conceits or selfewills, but the
chariot of truth, that she may ride on in state and triumph: which will (I am
sure) be the last issue of these Sabbathary dissentions, wherein falsehood
(though for a time it may advance, as Pageants do, by an unnatural and
violent force) shall fall under her wheel, and receive the reward of the
wicked, by Solomon's doom, Prove. 20.26.

In hope whereof, and heart by that hope, I shall betake my self to my task,
which will be a double discourse: The former Historical, wherein I shall show
how the controversy of the Sabbath has proceeded from the Primitive, to the
present times. The later Doctrinall and Practical, in which the differences of
the Doctrine shall be discussed, and the duties of practice accordingly
delivered.

But because we can treat of none of them, without the use of Terms and Names,
which are called in question, and by some condemned of profaneness, or
Judaisme, especially the name In the book, called Sunday no Sabbath, made by
Doct. Pockl.
Sabbath (whereof we must needs make frequent mention) it will be very
convenient and near unto necessary, first of all to discuss the exceptions
taken at the titles of our weekly Holiday: Yet so, as that the discourse of
them may be a preparative to real resolutions afterward. In all which, the
God of Truth and Piety be mine aid and guide. Amen.

The Copy of the Letter mentioned in the Preface.
To the Reverend, and our worthy Friend and Brother in the Ministry, Mr. John
Ley, these.
(Reverend and worthy Sir)
SInce the due observation of the Lords Sabbath is of so much importance, (both
for Gods glory and man's good) that the whole Decalogue is usually with more or
less conscience regarded, as the Sabbath does abound with, or is abated of its
due respect and observance: and being conscious of the variety of opinions in
these days of contention and controversy, both touching the day and duties
thereof, Which it is; When it begins; By what force, and how far it obliges;
with the distractions which these differences may produce in the minds of all,
especially of weak (though well-affected) Christians: we are bold, in
assurance of your wisdom and abilility this way (as well as otherwise) to
entreat you to add light to the truth in these points, by a serious sifting of
them, and a seasonable divulging of your judicious Labors on them: wherein you
shall not only gratify us in particular (that much desire to partake of your
pious endeavors) but promote the public good and peace of Gods Church, stop
the mouths, and stay the pens of such as are carried away with mis-conceit and
error, settle and comfort their consciences that hover between doubt and
resolution, having need of all learned and religious helps, to clear this
doctrine from such clouds as do eclipse the brightness and beauty of it. The
Lord incline your heart to undertake this work, and so direct and assist you,
every way to plead his cause, that Truth may triumph over all subtleties and
sophismes, that (with their fair appearances) are apt to deceive the simple.
So we commend you to the Grace of God, and rest

Your very respective Friends and Brethren in the Ministry, William Moston.
Andrew Wood. John Conny. Samuel Clerk. Matthew Clayton. William Shenton.
Richard Holker. Robert Whittell. Charles Herle. Nathaniel Lancaster. Richard
Wilson. Alexander Clerk. John Glindale. Thomas Holford.


The Contents of the Discourse following.
CHAP. I. IN what cases we may be indifferent for the for bearance or use of
Names: In what we must be chary concerning both. Page 1. Chap. II. The diverse
names of the Christians weekly holiday. page 4. Chap. III. Of three most
usual names of the Christians weekly holiday; and first of the name Lords
day, Revel. 1.10. The strange opinion of Dr. Gomarus, and Mr. Braburne,
charging the title, as applied to the Christians Sabbath, with impertinency and
noveltie. page 7 Chap. IIII. A comparison of the old Sabbath day, the day of
our Saviors Birth, of his Passion, Ascension, and of his Apparition to S.
John, with the day of his Resurrection, as touching right to the title Lords
day, and the pertinency and propriety of that title to our weekly holiday. p.
13. Chap. V. The imputation of novelty in applying the title Lords day to the
Christians weekly holiday, answered. p. 26. Chap. VI. Of the name Sunday:
Whether we may call our weekly holiday by that name: objections against the use
of the name Sunday for our weekly holiday. p. 34. Chap. VII. How far it may
be lawful to use Idolatrous names: an Answer to the Objection against the name
Sunday. page 41. Chap. VIII. Of the name Sabbath; and first of the writing
Sabbath, Sabbath and Sabbath, which of them is the right; and by occasion
thereof some observations of skill and ignorance of the original tongues. page
50. Chap. IX. The Etymology of the name Sabbath: and first of the abusive
derivations of it by Justin and Plutarch, by way of contempt of the Jews their
Religion and Manners. page 60. Chap. X. The derivation of the name Sabbath from
two Hebrew words; the one signifying [seven] the other [Rest] the former being
the error of Lactantius, the later the true and most received Etymology. page
67. Chap. XI. The sever all acceptions of the name Sabbath. page 69. Chap. XII.
Whether the day, called Lords day, or Sunday, may not also be called Sabbath
day, or the Sabbath: the exceptions which are taken up by diverse against it.
page 73. Chap. XIII. Reasons why Sunday, or the Lords day may be called Sabbath
day, delivered and defended. page 79. Chap. XIV. Ancient evidence for calling
the Lords day by the name of Sabbath, observed especially against Doctor
Pocklington his assertion, viz. That no ancient Father, nor learned man, took
the name Sabbath otherwise (from the beginning of the world, till the year
1554.) then for Saturday observed by the Jews. page 91. Chap. XV. Royal and
reverend Authority for putting the name Sabbath upon Sunday, whereby it is
cleared from schism, as well as from novelty. page 101. Chap. XVI. Of such as
are Adversaries to the name Sabbath, as put for Sunday, sometimes assenting
thereto, and using the name in that sense, or yielding that which does infer
it. page 116. Chap. XVII. Exceptions (against some of the precedent Testimonies
alleged, for calling the Lords day Sabbath) propounded and answered. page 119.
Chap. XVIII. A particular answer to the particular exceptions made against the
name Sabbath, as applied to Sunday, or Lords day: and first of the dangerous
plot pretended by Doctor Pocklington in the use of the name Sabbath for Sunday,
and of his prodigious comparison of the name Sabbath on the Lords day, to the
crown of Thorns on the Lords head. page 133. Chap. XIX. An answer to Barkley
the Papist his dilemma against the name Sabbath for Sunday, or Lords day. page
143. Chap. XX. Master Braburne his objection of confusion, in calling Sunday
Sabbath, answered. page 146. Chap. XXI. The objection of Judaisme, in using the
name Sabbath, answered and retorted; as also the reproach of the name, as from
the Sabbatarian Heretics, removed. page 148. Chap. XXII. The Negative
argument drawn from the Apostles not using the name Sabbath for the Lords day,
answered. page 156. Chap. XXIII. Though neither the Apostles nor the ancient
Fathers called Sunday Sabbath, we may, and the reasons why. page 161. Chap.
XXIV. The Objection, taken from the use of the name Sabbath in Dictionaries,
Histories, and the Roman and Reformed Churches, answered. page 168. Chap. XXV.
The Objection, taken from the statute and language of Lawyers, answered. page
175. Chap. XXVI. A comparison of the names Sabbath, Lords day, and Sunday, with
a resolution of the Question for the name Sabbath, as the best, and fittest to
be the most usual title of our weekly Holiday. page 180. Chap. XXVII. A brief
accommodation of this Nomenclature, or nominall discourse to some purposes of
importance, concerning the Sabbath. page 197.
A Premonition concerning my Sons Verses after written.
THough a learned and worthy Doct. Primrose in his Preface to the Reader,
before his Sons Treatise on the Sabbath.
Doctor of the French Church, honored his Son so much, as to write to him,
to deliver his mind concerning the Sabbath; I am not so fond a Father, as to
conceive my Son (being yet by his years in his minority, and among Graduates
of the University, but a mere fresh-man, having but newly stepped up to the
first and lowest degree of the Schools) fit with that hand, which was but
lately taken from the ferula, to take the Censors rod, and to pass his
judgment (or if that be too grave a term for one so young) his opinion or
conceit, either upon the Doctrine or any Dictates of the Sabbath: yet his
filial affection and poetical fancy, prompting him to put pen to paper in
these ensuing Verses, and to send them to me (with his desire) that I would
allow them some vacant page in my Book (as some what of kin to mine own
conceptions, because they be his) I have assented to him; but with these two
advertisements to the Reader.

1. The one, That he think not the better of me or my Book, for any praise
they bestow upon either; for Poetry is an Art of deceit, which measures
expressions not by the truth of the subject, but by the strength of imagination
working upon it; nor is it more disposed to deceive, then natural affection to
be deceived; especially in relations of nearest degree (as betwixt us two)
though it be usually as more forcible, so more fallible in a descending, then
in an ascending operation.

2. The other is, That my meaning in this admittance of his Muse before my
Sabbatary discourse, is to engage him openly to this holy cause (as Hamilcar
Hannibalem filium (non amplius novem annis natum) ad aram adduxit, eamque
(caeteris remotis) tenentem jurare jussit, nunquam in amicitiam cum Romany
fore. Aemil. Probus in vita Hannib. fol. 115.
Hamilcar did his young son Hannibal, privately in the cause of the
Carthaginians against the Romans); that when time and study (with Gods
blessing) have ripened him for any religious undertaking, he may hold himself
solemnly bound to be zealous for Gods right in this behalf, and faithful
and resolute to plead for it against all opposers. With these premises I have
left him room, and given him leave (under my name) to write to the Reader in
his own style, as follows:

On the learned Treatise of my much honored Father, entitled, Sunday a
Sabbath.
Dear Sir,
PArdon my fault, if it be presumption here
Before your sacred labors to appear;
But if you will not, I shall make my pen
To keep a Sabbath, and not write again.
In former times you meant to put to press
Your English Sabbath in a I purposed to publish it in Latin, because it would
not pass in English.
Roman dress;
But'twould have grieved you (sure) your work should be
Abused by (what you hate) flat Popery;
For your own name would make most think it good,
And some to read what they not understood.
I still lamented that your deske should be
The Sabbath's prison, and still kept from me
As well as others; and 't was my delight
(Pardon the pious theft) to steal a sight,
And then to wish, O that this might not be
Imprisoned in a Latin liberty!
God heard my vote, and now has made it true,
You would not stoop to times, My confidence for this the Reader may see in the
end of my Preface, written about five years ago.
times should to you.
WILLIAM LEY, Student of Christ-Church.


SUNDAY A SABBATH.
CHAP. I. In what cases we may be indifferent for the for bearance or use of
Names: In what we must be chary concerning both.
IF under the diversity of words there were no dissension touching the things
that are treated of, (as De verbo (ut mea fert opinio) controversia est, de re
quidem convanit. Senec. de clement. l. 2. e. 7. page 102.
Seneca observes of the words clemency and pardon) it were a waywardness or
wantonness (well worthy of sharp reproof) to wrangle, or spend many words
about them; which Ne verbi controversiam vel superfluam faciam, v^l merito
patiar, quoniam cum de re constat, non est opus certare de nomine. Aug. Ep.
Hieronymo. Ep. 28, tom, 2. p. 108.
Saint Augustine professes he would neither willingly do, nor deservedly
suffer: for where the sense is sound and consonant to truth, (on both sides
embraced) there is little appearance of peril in the difference of terms, and
as little cause to be curiously nice either in the allowance or forbearance of
their use. So, in effect, has Dum res^ognoscitur, non est de vocabulis
laborandum. Aug. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 4. cap. 5. tom. 3. page 730.
S. Augustine (after Non obstant verba cum sententia congruit veritati.
Lactant. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 9.
Lactantius) resolved, as directed thereto, not only by the rule of Religion,
which requires among men, (Christians especially) as much union as may be, 1
Cor. 1.10. but by the dictate of Reason; For Logic (which is artificial and
refined reason) Docuit me (seil. Dialectica) cum de re constat, propter quam
verba di^untur, non de verbis debere contendi. Aug. contra Academ. lib. 3. cap.
13. tom. 1. page 618.
(says he) has taught me in consent of things, not to contend about the
acception of words.

But since we cannot hold discourse of the one without help of the other,
(for verbal notions are to real, (in the service of the mind) as Verba quasi
vasa. August. Confess. l. 1. c. 26.
vessels are to meats, (for the sustenance of the body) to serve them in, to
that both place and use for which they were before prepared).

Secondly, Since not only the things, but words also (which concern the
Christians weekly holiday) are brought into vehement dispute, and sometimes
censoriously resolved on the wrong way.

Thirdly, Since (likewise) men seldom except against a Word or Name, but when
they wish not altogether well to the thing it self (as the Nomen fere non
vellicat, nifi qui rei non omnino been vult. Bp. Andrews Ep. 1. Pet. Du-Moulin
opusc. page 166.
Bishop of winchester writes in his first Epistle to Doctor Du-Moulin).

Fourthly, Since sometimes by giving up words in a matter of weight (to
gratify the desire of the Adversary) there is advantage given therewith to the
left hand, and more courage taken to contend against the right of the cause in
question, which was the issue of that facility De ousia vero nomine abjiciendo,
placuit auferri; non erat curae Episcopis de vocabulo cum sensus esset in tuto.
Hieron. adver. Luciferian. tom. 2. page 144. The Arrians required the like for
the word Consubstantialis as Theodoret writes. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 18.
page 533.
which the Fathers at Ariminum showed in condescending to the request of the
Arrians, for the abatement of the word [ ousia] in the doctrine of the Trinity.

Lastly, Since (as Mr. Ironside quest. 3. cap. 13. page 123.
Mr. Ironside has out of S. Augustine observed of the Academicks) They are not
such simple men as not to know how to give things their proper names, who
purposely make choice (I may say as well, purposely make refusal) of words
which may serve to hide from the simple, and to intimate to the wiser sort of
their Disciples their opinions, (whether Sabbatharie or Antisabbatharie, if
erroneous and dangerous, it is equally material,) It is (as I conceive, upon
all these considerations of weight and moment) very requisite to make search,
and to seek for satisfaction of scruples (in this controversy of the Sabbath)
both for words and things: And (to conclude with our former comparison) as
vessels must be scoured before meat be served to the Table in them: so words
must first be cleared, (which is requisite in the trial of the title of the
day of rest, as well as in other Questions) before the matters in difference
(which they import) can well be brought in to be discussed.

CHAP. II. Of the diverse Names of the Christians weekly holiday.
THe Names of that day, which we Christians keep for our weekly holiday, are
diverse; the first name was the first day of the week: a name (for Antiquity) as
old as the beginning of the first week of the world, Genesis 1.5. And that title
is given it by all the four Evangelists; by Saint Matthew, chap. 28. ver. 1.
Saint Mark, chap. 16. ver. 2. by Saint Luke in Acts 20. ver. 7. and by Saint
John chap. 20. ver. 1. as also by S. Paul, 1 Cor. 16.2. eight times (as Mr.
Braburn. Defense, p. 162
Master Braburne numbers them) it is called the first day of the week by the
holy writers of the new Testament, all of them using, in the Greek, a cardinal
number for the ordinall, as Moses does in the Hebrew, in the forecited Text,
Genesis 1.5. Ethnicis semel annuus dies quisque festus est, tibi octavo queque
die. Tert. de Idol. cap. 14. tom. 2. p. 457.
Tertullian, Hic dies octavus, id est, post Sabbatum primus, and dominicus.
Cypr. lib. 3. Epist. 8. p. 80. col. 2.
Cyprian, and Dominicus vero post septimum, quid nisi octavus? Aug. praefat. in
Psalm. 150. tom. 8. part. 2. p. 1058.1059.
Augustine; and, if we may believe Master Braburne (but we find no proof
for it) all Churches call it the eighth day, not that they would have a
Christian week longer then after the old computation, (which took up with the
number of seven) but for that, (as it is clear by the words of Saint
Augustine) it being after the Saturday, which was the seventh, if a man count
on, the next day following makes the eighth: and (without any intention to
make the circle of the week one day wider then it was before) they made the
account in this sort, and named it the eighth day, the rather, with reference
to Circumcision, which was on the eighth day to be received: and therein (as
Octavus dies, id est, post Sabbatum primus, quo Dominus Circumcisionem
spiritualem daret, hic dies octavus praecessit in imagine. Cypr. lib. 3. Ep. 8.
page 80. col. 2.
S. Cyprian thought, and August. in Psalm. 150. tom. 8. part. 2. page 1059.
S. Augustine has the like conceit) was the Christians weekly holiday
prefigured.

With these Appellations of number and order, we may remember those Titles of
honor ascribed unto it by Chrysologus. Sermon. 77.
Chrysologus, who calls it the primate of days, and by Ignat. Epist. ad
Magnens. vocat. (...). page 57. Edit. Genev. 1623.
Ignatius, who advanced it to a denomination of an higher strain, naming it
the Queen and Princess of days (other feastdayes being as Mr. Godwin in his
Moses and Aaron. lib. 3. c. 3. p. 110, 111.
concubines, and the worke-daies as handmaids) not (as Mr, Brab. in his
Discourse upon the Sabbath, in 8o. page 53. In his Defense in 4to. page 159.
and 488, 490.
Mr. Brab. would have it) as if he left the Title of King and Prince for the
Saturday Sabbath: for if he had meant such a titular prelation of that day
above the Lords day, he would not surely (where he speaks of them both)
have adorned the one with the title of a Queen, and not the other with the
title of a King; which he has no where done, nor any body else (for ought
that I have yet either read or heard) but Mr. Brab. it is his peculiar
Courtship, whereby he would restore the old Sabbath to the prerogative of a
Crown, after it has been justly deposed from it for many hundred years
together in the Christian Church.

Besides, the Bishop of Tho Bp. of Elie in his Treat. of the Sab. page 75.
Elie has pertinently replied to this imaginary pre-eminence of the Jewish
Sabbath, by giving instance of the Rabbis stiling it by the name, not of a
King, but of a Queen; and of the Philosopher and Orator terming Justice,
Eloquence, and Money by the same title: and hence has he rightly inferred,
that Ignatius named the Lords day the Queen of days, not by way of
derogation, but to signify the eminent and transcendent honor of the day.
But, howsoever the words went in Ignatius his time, to call the one a King, the
other a Queen, in our days, would sound like an The Ebionites keep the
Jewish Sabbath; and celebrate the Sunday also. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 24.
page 50.
Ebionitish combination, or marriage of Saturday and Sunday together, (for the
Ebionites honored them both with a weekly observation); but, for that, Mr.
Brab. (while he disavowed the Lords day on the one side) and others of sounder
judgment (disclayming the Saturday Sabbath on the other) would be ready to
forbid the banes of matrimony beforehand, or afterward to sue out a divorce.

There is another name of this day, which has a sound of dignity, with a sense
of diminution; for some of late (says Dr. Bound on the Sabbath. part. 1. p.
117.
Dr. Bound) have given it a new name (unknown to the world, and not properly
belonging to it) calling it the Kings day, the Queens day, the Emperors day.
So have some Divines done, says he, but he names them not, and it is not
worth the while to seek after the names of such ungodly godfathers: ungodly
(doubtless) if, in giving it these names, they meant, as there is good cause
to suspect, thereby to degrade the day from all sacred, to mere secular
Authority. But these Appellations already specified are either out of use, or
out of Question; and so we may quickly quit them, and may betake our selves to
the consideration of other Titles, of more regardable observation in our days.

CHAP. III. Of three most usual names of the Christians weekly Holiday, Lords
day, Sunday, and Sabbath: And first of the name Lords day, Rov. 1.10. The
strange opinion of Doctor Gomarus, and Master Braburne, charging the Title (as
applied to the Christian Sabbath) with impertinencie and novelty.
THe names of our weekly Holiday more frequent in use, and yet not free from
exception, are three, the Lords day, Sunday, and Sabbath day: I put the Lords
day first, though it be the youngest name of the three; not as Dr. Bound on
the Sab. part. 1. p. 110. and 120.
some who prefer it so far, as by it to put down the use of the other two;
but because it has so much in pre-eminence of dignity by its notation, of
near reference to the Author of Rests, and Father of Lights, as makes amends
for what it wants in age and feniority; and the Sabbath I place last, though
it be the eldest of all, because I shall most insist upon it, and best
conclude with it, in regard of the real inquiries and observations, which
(with reference to it) must begin when this Logomachie, or word-warre is at an
end.

The title Lords day is not taken from Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 10.26. wherein he
says, the earth is the Lords, and so that day may be called the Lords day in a
common sense, because the Lord made it for a common use, as As the earth is the
Lords, 1 Cor. 10.26. because the Lord made it, and all things therein to serve
man in his ordinary and common use, Genesis 1.26. and 9.3. So this day is called
the Lords day, because Christ ordained it for man's ordinary and common use,
that is, for a working day. Mr. Brab. defense of his Discourse. page 240.
Master Brab. (not by any common, but by his own singular conceit) has said:
but from Saint John, Rev. 1.10. where he says, I was in the Spirit on the
Lords day; that is, on the day on which Christ our Lord rose from the dead;
Upon this ground grew the observation of that day we celebrate, under that name
wherein both the most, and the best Authors do agree.

Against this, exceptions have been taken by two late Divines, who each of them
have written two Treatises a piece upon the weekly Holiday of the Church, and
have in all four sought, by new surmises, to shift off the title, both as in,
and to this text of Saint John: the one is Doctor Francis Gomarus, the States
Professor of Divinity in the Universitie of Groaning; the other Mr. Theophilus
Braburn, a Minister of the County of Norfolk, a man, as the Bishop of Elie (of
whose Diocese he was, when he was Bishop of Norwich) In his Epist. Dedic.
page 22, 23. before his Treat. of the Sabbath.
notes of him, who laid a load of disgrace and contempt on his Puritan
adversaries, as he terms them. Doctor Gomarus makes the Lords day to be
the same with the day of the Lord, and by the day of the Lord understands the
day of the De die apparitionis Domini; aut in carne, ut dies natalis; aut qua,
illustri visione, patefecit futurum Ecclesiae statum. page 78. These. 36.
Advent, coming, or appearing of the Lord, Amos 5.8. Malach. 3.1, 2. and this
appearing he takes to be either the day of Christ's birth, or that peculiar
day, wherein, in an especial vision, he appeared to Saint John, and revealed
unto him the state of the Church for future times, or the day of judgment Sic,
1 Cor. 5.5. ut spiritus salvus sit in die Domini, quo, scil. apparebit ad
judicium. Dr. Gamar. Invest. Sav. c. 6. Ibid. These. 34.
, 1 Cor. 5.5. but he Si vero diem natalem intelligamus, aliquanto expressior
erit circumstantia temporis. Dr. Gomar. Ibid.
pitcheth upon our Saviors birth day, applying unto it that which he said of
Abraham, viz. That he rejoiced to see his day, Joh. 8.56.

Upon that Text that rarely learned Bp. Andrews in his Sermon. Joh. 8. ver. 56.
Bishop of Winchester observes, That Christ had two eminent days; his
Genesis, or his coming into the world, and his Exodus, or his going out of the
world; the first of his Nativity, the last of his Passion. But for one Genesis,
he might have noted a threefold Exodus; one, out of the world of men into the
grave; another, out of the grave into the world among men again; and a third,
out of the nether world into the upper, by his ascension from earth into
heaven.

Master Braburn in his first discourse of the Sabbath, having brought in the
Jewish The Sabbaths were called the Lords holidayes. Es. 58.13. now, if the
Sabbath be the Lords holiday, it is the Lords day. M. Brab. in his discourse.
page 8.
Sabbath, and all the forenamed days (except that of his apparition to Saint
John, which is Dr. Gomarus his peculiar conceit, so far as yet I have
observed) as rivals with the day of Christ's Resurrection, for reputation and
right to the title Lords day, of that title says thus; And which of them John
had respect unto ( scil. when he mentioned the Lords day) the Scripture is
altogether silent: and if he and Doctor Gomarus had been silent too, it had
been much better; but to make the matter worse against the Antiquity of it,
they both take such exceptions as these; Master Mr. Brab. Defense of the
Sabbath. p. 243.
Braburne in general says, The name of the Lords day was but new, and put
upon Sunday since Christ, and that not many years too since Christ: he might
happily have read in Symeon Metaphrastes, that Silvester the first, first gave
that title unto it, which Baron. Annal. tom. 3. ad an. 315. number. 16. col. 163.
See also Pol. ^nrg de Invent, rerum, l^b. 6. ^ 5. p. 366. who relates the
comeipt, and refutes it, a^ Baroniu^ does.
Baronius confuteth: Doctor Si ista app^l^atio ab Apostolis promanasset, and in
Ecclesia su^ss^t recepta; an credi^ile est potuisse fieri ut Justinus Martyr
(antiquis simus atque incorruptus Script^r) ea, in accurata rituum descripti^ne
omissa, solis diem aut unum Sabbatorum, aut primam hebdomadis tantummodo
nominaret? quemadmodum in Apologia, pro Christianis, and Dialogo cum Triphone.
Gom. Investig. Sab. cap. 6. page 76. The like is in his defense of his
Investig. c. 10. page 135, 137, 141, 142.
Gomarus more particularly tells us, That, in Justine Martyr' s time, the
Christians weekley holiday was not noted by that name, since he uses other
titles, as Sunday, and the First day of the week, but makes no mention of it
at all by the name of the Lords day, albeit, if it had been in use from the
Apostles time to his, he had good occasion both to note it in his Dialogue
with Tryphon the Jew, and in his Apology to Antoninus, where he makes an
accurate description of the rites of the Christian Religion. From his silence
then in so commodious places for remembrance, Doctor Gomarus infers, that it
was not derived from the Apostles, nor received into the Church till after
Justine Martyr his days; so that, in sum, their objections against this
title, are reduced into two heads, Impertinency and Novelty.

First, for Impertinency; they would make the title Lords day no more pertinent
or proper to the Christians weekly holiday, then to diverse days, called in
the Scripture the day of the Lord; nay, more pertinent to others then to it.

Whereto I answer for the present (reserving further satisfaction to the next
Chapter,) First, That we may conceive (as a late Rejicimus Haebraismum, illum;
multum enim interest inter diem Domini, and Dominicum; illa enim est appellatio
generalior, haec strictior and specialior; m^ltae enim dicuntur Domini, tamen
non sunt Dominica; ut, arbores Domini, Psalm. 104 16. quas, puto* arbores
Dominicas Gomarus non vocabit; and multa Dei dicebantur, quae tamen divina non
erant; ut, montes Dei. Inquisit. de Sabba^. page 84, 85.
Writer distinguishes) a difference betwixt the day of the Lord, and the Lords
day, or Dominicall day, (as the Rhemists in English turn the text, Rev. 1.10.
not so much for congruity to the Original, as to make obscurity in the
Translation;) for many things in the general may be said to be the things of
the Lord, which yet are not to be named Dominicall things; as, the trees of
the Lord, Psalm. 104.16. which Doctor Gomarus himself would not think sit to
be called Dominicall trees; and many things are said to be Gods, which are not
godly nor divine: for, in use of speech, the former imports a common right,
which is a right in God to the creatures in common; the later, a right of
peculiar appropriation to himself.

Secondly, Howsoever that distinction prove (and though it be true and
pertinent, it is, I confess, somewhat nice and curious, so that few, upon
their own reading of the Scripture, will take notice of it); yet the
distinction of Gomar. Invest. Sab. cap. 6. p. 74. These. 33.
Doctor Gomarus is manifestly faulty, both in it self, and in respect of the
purpose for which he frames it. For, he distinguishes betwixt the day of
the Lords Advent, coming, or appearing, and his Resurrection, as his words
partly express, and partly imply; and this, to the end that he may transfer
the title Lords day from the day of the Resurrection to some other; whereas
indeed, that day on which he arose, was as well an Advent, or day of
appearance unto men, as that which he so names by way of opposition unto it;
for he came that day, and, as by a new and admirable birth, appeared to many,
Mark 16.9.

Thirdly, To prevent mistaking of the Tenet, which I hold in the trial of
right betwixt the day of our Saviors Resurrection, and other days set up with
it in competition for the title Lords day; I profess with Mr. Primrose his
treat. of the Sab. or Lords day. part. 3. c. 1. p. 198.
Mr. Primrose, (though in many other points I must dissent from him) that I do
not conceive there is any moral necessity that that day of the week on which
Christ rose from the grave, should be kept holy in the Christian Church,
rather then the day wherein he was borne, or the day wherein he suffered on
the Cross, or the day wherein he ascended into heaven.

Fourthly, While therefore I plead for pre-eminence of right for the day of the
Resurrection, to the title in question, I take not upon me to render reasons
for it, demonstratively necessary; yet I doubt not but, upon serious
consideration, they will be found such as (together with the consent of all,
or at least, of the most, and best approved Authors in all ages, who have
unanimously met in the explication of that title of Saint John, and the
application of it to the day of Christ's Resurrection) will appear evidence
sufficient, in a point of no greater moment then this is, and such as will not
be counterpoyzed by any proof for the contrary Tenet.

CHAP. IIII. A comparison of the old Sabbath day, the day of our Saviors
Birth, of the day of his Passion, Ascension, and of his Apparition to Saint
John; with the day of his Resurrection, touching right to the Title Lords day;
and the pre-eminence and propriety of that Title to our weekly holiday.
THere be many days that are set up with the day of our Saviors
Resurrection, in contestation for this title Lords day, (as in the precedent
Chapter has partly been observed) viz. The old Sabbath, our Saviors Birth
day, the day of his Passion, Ascension, the day of his Apparition to Saint
John, and the day of Judgment.

And first for the old Sabbath (for here it may have the first place, The old
Sabbath.
though I have given reasons why elsewhere I rank it otherwise) concerning
which I say, though in the fourth Commandment, Exodus 20. it be called [ the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God,] and so in that respect (albeit it be there
rather declaratively then preceptively brought in) it may be named the Lords
day, as Mr. Brab. Discourse on the Sab. page 8. And in his Defense, says he,
The Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath; Wherefore the seventh days Sabbath may
be truly called the Lords day. Mr. Brab. Defense, page 238.
Master Braburne pleads; yet that is but by vertuall intimation, not by
formal denomination, as S. John has it, Rev. 1.10.

Secondly, Though it had been called expressly by the name of the Lords day in
the old Testament, (and so long as it was in force, it was indeed the Lords day
in especial manner, as is the day we celebrate now) yet it is not probable that
day being generally noted by the name of the Sabbath from its first original,
both in the old Testament, and in the new, that Saint John would entitle it by
a new name, having an old one already of pertinent importance, and permanent
continuance, especially there being a new day of especial note, and capable of
that new title, (as Mr. Braburn. Discourse of the Sab. p. 8.
Master Braburne confesses) viz. the day of the Resurrection, to which, for
its dignity in it self, and for distinction from other days, it might more
properly be applied.

Secondly, The day of Christ's Birth.
for the day of Christ's Birth, or his first coming, albeit it be a day of
high account, yet the time of it was so far from being so illustrious in the
primitive times as that day which we call the Lords day, that neither the day
of the week is certainly known, nor the day of the month, nor the month of
the year, no nor the year of our Lord so cleared, but that there is and has
been much controversy about them. Hence is that Vide variantes de ear
sententias a Bellarmino collectas. Bell. l. 2. de To. Po. cap. 5. p. 336. col.
2.
diversity in computation of his age, while some reckon his life at 30. some at
33. some 34. and some at 50. years of age.

There was difference also, I confess, about the Feasts of the Resurrection,
commonly called the Feast of Easter, as Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 21. page
91.
Eusebius, and other Ecclesiastical Writers have observed. To which I answer,
that the dissension was about the time of solemnity, whether it should be
ordered by the course of the Moon (which would cast it upon any day of the
week, as it fell out among the Jews) or were to be confined to the day we
celebrate: but there was no difference, for the day of the Resurrection, which
it was in the order of the week, a matter of chief moment in a weekly
holiday, for that there was good agreement on all hands, there being clear
texts of Scripture to take off all doubt in that respect.

Which does plainly evince, that our Savior arose the first day of the week,
viz. on the day the heathens c^lled Sunday, and we Christians Lords day: But
there neither is, nor can be just, plain, and apparent proof for the day of
Christ's birth, which it was, either for order among the days of the week, or
month of the year, or for number in the years of the world.

Ob. The learned Bp. An^rewes his Sermon on Job. c. 8. v. 56. part. 1. page 62.
Bishop of Winchester says, There is no day so properly Christ's as his Birth
day; which may appear, says he, if we set it in comparison with other days
of most memorable note, as the day of his Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension:
for the day of his Passion, that was not so properly his, because two thieves
suffered with him at the same time, in the same place, after the same manner:
Nor the day of his Resurrection; for as he rose from the dead, so did others
the same day, and went into the holy City: Nor the day of his Ascension; for
Enoch and Elias had their ascension too, and that long before his: But his
Birth day was his without a fellow; none ever so borne, none ever born such a
one; and therefore (as no Festivitie is besides it) it is attended, as Christ
himself, with an Apostolical retinue of Holidayes, which reckoning every day
in Christmas (being usually freed from secular labors) for a month, make up
the fullness of time, and so it is the recapitulation of the whole year, as
the Bp. Andrews Sermon. on Gal. 3.4. p. 23.
Bishop makes the allusion and account.

Whereto we shall return a reasonable Reply, which shall want neither light
of truth, nor weight of authority; for we shall bring in that great and
reverend Prelate to drive back that Objection, and this it is;

Repl. Though that day of Christ's Birth have much in it, which is peculiar to
Christ, because, as he says, none was ever so borne, none ever borne such a
one; yet that is no more then we may say for the day of his Resurrection; for
none was ever so raised, none ever raised such a one: and so in this respect,
even by his own argument, the days are even; but herein the day of his
Resurrection has the advantage of dignity above the day of his Birth: by his
Resurrection he was declared mightily to be the Son of God, Romans 1.4. for
he rose by his own power, (as none ever did;) and by his Birth he was in
some respects declared scarce to be the Son of man; for, as Saint Luke
shows, chap. 2. ver. 7. he was borne in a stable among the beasts, and laid
in a manger for a cradle. Hereof says the learned Bishop Bp. Andr. Sermon. 12.
on the Not. p. 114.
, The Devil breathed upon our first Parents with Eritis sicut dii, and
infected them with it, to make themselves equal with God, which is plain
robbery; for that robbery of theirs was the Son of God robbed (as I may say)
and quite spoiled of his glory; for their puffing up, (...), he was made
empty; for their lifting up, (...), was he brought low; for their comparing
with God, came he to compared with the beasts that perish, lay in their
manger. We see this (says he) preaching of his Birthday, and therewith we
may observe, that though he were a Lord, he showed himself no Lord in this
respect, as at his Resurrection he did: and for the title of the day we
celebrate, to that title in Saint John (as by a peculiar right) the Bishop is
express and peremptory, as by B. Andrews in his Speech in the Star Chamber
against Master Trask. page 73, and 74.
his words will appear, which here we forbear, since we shall more seasonably
bring them in another place.

Thirdly, For the day of Christ's Passion, Mr. Braburne his defense of his
Discourse, page 249 250. He says also for Friday, May not a man say thus?
Friday must be a Sabbath day, because on Friday Christ suffered; and Thursday
must be a Sabbath day, because on that Christ ascended: thus we may as well
have three Sabbaths in a week, as this one Lords day. Master Braburne,
Defense, page 249.
Master Braburne says, that Friday was the greatest day; for on it Christ bore
the unsupportable wrath of his Father, which made him cry out, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? But on the Resurrection day, there was only
Christ's soul put into his body, and so revived again: Now, it was a greater
matter (as I think, says he, every one will confess) for the Deity to
support the humanity on his Passion day, then to put his soul into his dead
body on the Resurrection day.

To which I answer, that though it be granted to be a I say greater, not
harder: for to the divine Power, which is insinite, nothing is hard; but all
things not only possible, but easy.
greater work for the Divinity to support the humanity in the Passion of our
Savior, then to restore his soul to his body at his Resurrection from the
grave: yet was not the day of his Passion so fit to be set up for a constant
Festivity, which was to be celebrated with rejoicing; for the day of our
Saviors Passion (as the Bish. Andr. his Sermon. on Joh. 8.56. p. 64.
Bish. of Winchester well notes) was no such day, nay, says he, that day was
none of his: for he says to them that took him, haec est hor a vestra, this is
your hour; so theirs it was, not his; and if not his, not so fit to be called
by his name, the Lords day.

Secondly, It was not his day; nay, it was no day neither, but the hour and
power, tenebrarum, of darkness: This is your hour, and the power of
darkness, Luke 22.53. and (as he there adds) so night rather then day.

Thirdly, But without all question, no day of joy; the heavens were darkened,
the earth quaking, the stones renting, every one going their ways, beating
their breasts for sorrow; that was no sight to rejoice at, that no day to
rejoice in. Thus far that reverend Prelate.

Fourthly, Nor did the day of Ascension (though an high day) ever ascend to
that height of this titular honor, (howsoever Epiphan. orat. de. Ascens.
Epiphanius prefer it before the Nativity, Resurrection, and the Feast of
Pentecost) to be styled, in the usual language of the learned Fathers of the
Church, by the name of the Lords day, (as I shall show anon) as the day of the
Resurrection was: nor need it seem strange, that rather that day, then either
the day of his Passion on the one side, or of his Ascension on the other,
should have the dignity of that denomination; for it holds the middle place,
(though with a different distance) and the middle place, for the most part, is
most honorable; as in the request of the mother of Zebedees children for the
next seats to our Savior in his Kingdom, though it were a presumptuous suit,
Mat. 20. verse. 21.
that one might sit on his right hand, and the other on his left; yet it
employed a little modesty and good manners, that she left the middle place, as
the prime place, to Christ himself, as a Judge on the Bench, with his
Assistants and Assessors on either side.

Secondly, In this situation of the Resurrection of our Savior, it has on the
one side, the black shadow of his Passion; on the other, the reslexive rays of
his Ascension, to add to its glory: for, so soon as he had raised himself
from the dead, his glorified body had its qualification for ascent, and was
readily disposed thereunto, if the time had been come: and when it did come,
as his Resurrection made an addition of honor to his Passion, (for it gave
proof, that his life was rather freely given by himself, then forcibly taken
from him by others); so did his Ascension to his Resurrection, for that gave
evidence that his body was raised with all those excellent qualifications
which made it meet to mount up on high, and much more sit for heaven then for
earth; and though he tarried still below in his person, his Resurrection was
not the less glorious for that; the Angels of heaven are as excellent spirits
when they come down Jacobs ladder, as when they go up.

Thirdly, Though the Ascension of our Savior, locally considered, be an high
degree of elevation above his Resurrection; yet, Theologically taken, it has
not such an exaltation of dignity above it; for his high humility in conversing
still among men on earth, when he might have immediately mounted up into
heaven, adds much to the honor of his Resurrection: for, hereby (as Te ad
sider^ tollit humus. Plin. Panegyr.
Pliny says in his Panegyri^k to Trajane) may the highest grow yet higher,
when he comes down (and so may we say when they keep down) below the
elevation of his own advancement. And who would not think Solomon worthy of as
much honor honoring God upon his knees, 2 Chronicles. 6.13. as sitting upon his
Throne; being no less a King on earth, but an holyer, humbler subject to the
King of heaven in the one posture, then in the other?

If altitude of place must carry away the pre-eminence of things and persons,
the fowls of the air would fly up with it, and leave men, as their
inferiors, on earth below; who, by Gods primitive appointment were to be
their lords, and to have dominion and soveraigntie over them.

Fourthly, But howsoever the comparison betwixt the Resurrection and Ascension
go, in respect of themselves, yet in respect of men, who are to make
observation of them both, the Resurrection is more remarkable in these
respects;

First, In that the Resurrection was made known unto more by his several
apparitions, both to more in number, and more often in time; for he was seen at
one time to no fewer then five hundred brethren at once, 1 Cor. 15.6. His
Ascension was seen but by a few, viz. but by his Apostles, Act. 1.2.9.

Secondly, As for number, so for time, his Resurrection was manifested more
often then his Ascension; for, as Saint Luke observes in that Chapter, by many
infallible tokens, he was seen of them by the space of forty days, and spoke
of the things appertaining to the Kingdom of God: But his Ascension was
sudden, in a manner in a moment, Act. 1.9.

Thirdly, As Christ's Resurrection was manifested to more, and more often, so
more clearly also; as the Sun at his rising appears to us more fully then
when it is ascended to high noone. And it is to be observed, that whereas our
Saviors Resurrection is set down with assured evidence of sense, for he was
said to be seen by many infallible tokens, Acts 1.3. yea, and he was felt
too; for though he said to Mary, Joh. 20.17. Touch me not, for I am not yet
ascended, yet did Thomas touch him, and put his hand into his side, verse. 27.
But for his Ascension, it was more sudden, and at further distance; and it is
noted, that it was less in sight; for, when he ascended, says S. Luke, a
cloud took him out of their sight, Act. 1.9.

Fourthly, Though the Ascension, touching the particular day of the month, be
thought to have been the Christus mortuus Martii 25. resurrexit Martii 27.
ascendit Maii 5. Lorin. in Act. 1. v. 11. page 33.
sixth of May, and for the day of the week, by probable conjecture, be
supposed to have been Thursday, (for it is but probable, else Saint Chrysostom
would not have said (as Chrysostom. apud Lorin. Ibid.
he did) that he ascended on the Sabbath; nor would it be doubted (as it is
by diverse) whether the forty days from our Saviors Resurrection to his
Ascension (mentioned Act. 1.3.) be to be reckoned inclusively, as taking in
both ends of that account; or exclusively, for the one or both), yet neither
that, viz. the day of his Ascension, nor good Friday, nor any other day, which
in any sense is called the Lords day, is so often, and so expressly and
punctually noted, with its place, and order in the week, as the day on which
Christ rose from the dead, which is precisely observed by all the Evangelists;
therefore none of them in all respects is so fit to be set up for a weekly
Holiday, and to be named the Lords day, as that is; and being now weekly
observed (as the days of the Birth, Passion, and Ascension of Christ are not)
it has best right to the red Letter, and to be eminent above the rest, both
in brightness of color, and dignity of denomination, and so to be called the
Dominicall day, or the Lords day, (...), both before and above all the rest;
which title it may hold now not only by original right, but by ancient
prescription, as we shall show in another place.

Nor can this title be so shrunk up in that place where it is mentioned,
scil. Rev. 1.10. as to be confined to the day of the Lords appearance and
revelation to Saint John (as Sic dies hic a Johanne Dominici dici appellatione
insignitus dicatur, quod in eo Deus quam admiranda pro Ecclesiae effet salute
facturus, declarabat. Apud Rob. Locum of fig. very Sabbatism. page 51.
some would have it): for it is opposite to common sense; which may appear thus,

First, The Apostle begins the narration of the vision with the time, I was
in the Spirit on the Lords day, as not only distinguishing the time from the
Apparition, but premising it, as being indeed before it.

Secondly, He mentions the day as a time known already to the Church, as
those that report to others a thing done at such a time, presuppose that that
time is not unknown unto them: but the day of his Revelation to Saint John was
unknown, and the day of the Lords Resurrection was not; therefore, it is much
more like the day of his Resurrection, then of his Apparition to Saint John,
was intended by the Apostle.

Thirdly, If the Lords day and the day of Apparition in this place were the
same, it were no Revelation, or giving of light to the matter, but the drawing
of a curtain, in stead of the opening of a casement: for this gloss does
rather darken, then clear the text.

Fourthly, To understand by the title Lords day, Rev. 1.10. the day of his
Apparition to Saint John, or the day wherein he was ravished in spirit, is, as
some conceive, to make a mere Si pro die Apparitionis solum intelligatur,
tautalogia erit divina sapientia indigna: sic^enim esset sensus, In die
apparitionis hujus, vel in die quo correptus eram a Spiritu, correptus cram a
Spiritu. Inquisit. de Sabbat. per Nath. Eal. page 86.
tautalogie in the text, as if it should be read thus; In the day of this
Apparition he appeared unto me; or, in the day I was in the spirit, I was in
the spirit: So the Author of the Book called Inquisitio de Sabbato, wherein
he keeps closer to Gomarus his Comment, then Gomarus his Comment to the Text
of S. John.

Fifthly, Before Doctor Gomarus, not any (at least, none that was held for an
orthodoxe Doctor) did ever light upon such an exposition as this, [viz. that by
the Lords day, Revel. 1.10. should be meant the day of the Lords apparition to
S. John,] which the Doctor himself seems sometimes not so well to like, but
that (for right to this title Lords day) Gomar. Invest. Sab. cap. 6. These. 36.
p. 75.
he prefers the day of Christ's Nativity, the day of his appearing in the
veil of his slesh, before the day of his appearing by revelation to Saint John
(as we have noted his opinion before) and withal, (so far as it proceeds
to the prejudice of the day we plead for) confuted it. And for the fancy both
of Dr. Gomarus and Mr. Braburne, that by the title Lords day, Rev. 1.10. may
be conceived the day of the Lords coming to his last Judgment, (for which
the one cites Luke 17.30. the other, 1 Cor. 5.5.) I answer, first to the
opinion it self, and then to the proof.

For the first, I say, That Saint John speaks, as we noted before, in the
readiest construction of the words, as of a day that was in being before that
Vision, and so known, that the Reader might take notice when the Vision came
unto him: but the day of Judgment is not yet come, and so unknown to man, that
our Savior says of it, but of that day and hour knows no man, no not the
Angels of heaven, but my Father only, Mat. 24.36.

Secondly, For their proofs, though both places produced be meant of the day
of Judgment; yet, that they appertain not to the title now in question, we
may observe, that neither of them names the day, as Saint John does the Lords
day; for in the one, viz. 1 Cor. 5.5. it is called the day of the Lord Jesus;
in the other, viz. Luke 17.30. the day of the Son of man: So that this device
of the day of judgment (as to the day pointed out by Saint John in his
appellation) is void of all judgment, and withal, so full of presumption,
that if any man should go on in commenting on the Revelation throughout, to
the last Chapter, as he begun with the first, he might thereby derive upon
himself a wretched right to those plagues, with commination whereof Saint John
shuts up, and seals up his mystical Prophecy, Revel. 22.18, 19.

Ob. But, if we take the Lords day for the Resurrection, (for that, as M.
Brab. in his discourse. page 8.
Master Braburne, notwithstanding his cross conceits, confesses is properly
the Lords day) it will not follow that it should be a weekly Holiday; it may
suffice for that title, being given it but once in Scripture, M. Brab. in his
Defense p. 163. and 175.
if it be celebrated some one first day, though but once a year, as the
Nativitie, Passion, and Ascension are, and as the Feast of Easter is with us,
in reference unto it.

Ans. To which I answer, First, That the question yet is not, whether the Lords
day should be a weekly Holiday or not: But being such a one in fact, (for yet
we are not come to discuss in point of right) whether it may not in its
weekly recourse be entitled by that name.

Secondly, That the day of the Resurrection being still noted in Scripture to
be the first day of the week, and not such a day of the month as returns
but once a year, or once in half a year, or once a quarter, or once a month
only, it may be called the Lords day once a week, for its weekly recourse,
as well as once a year, if, as the Feast of Easter, it came no oftener.

If it be said, that no Friday is called good Friday, nor any Thursday holy
Thursday, or Ascension day, but one in the year; it may be replied to that,
if they were weekly observed (as for a time good Friday was, and the first day
of the week has been since the Apostles time) they might all be partners in
the same appellation (all holy Thursdaies, all good Fridaies) as well once a
week, as once a year; though the first might have some pre-eminence above the
rest; and after the first, that which answers to the first in the season of
the year, as well as in the day of the week, and by reason thereof (as being
no common guest) it might have an Alablaster box of ointment bestowed upon it,
more then upon those which were more ordinary guests; as Easter Sunday was (by
a A die Resurrectionis (per integram hebdomadem) sideles feriuntur Council. 6.
gener. Constable. Can. 66. page 646.
Decree of the Council of Constantinople) to be kept holy, and for its sake,
all the six days that followed next after it, yet it might, in its weekly
recourse, be very well called the Lords day; as though all the Jewish
festivities were called Sabbaths, and some in solemnity exceeded others, yet
the weekly holiday of the Jews was best known by that name, which was
sometimes by especial privilege Shabbath, Shabbathon, given only to the
Sabbath, i.e. of the 4th Commandment, or to such days as for cessation from
work, were equivalent unto it. Dr. Willet in Levit. 23. q. 31. p. 586.
doubled upon it: so the name of the Lords day, howsoever it be sometimes
attributed to other days (all being his) yet does it most appertain unto the
weekly holiday of the Christians; and the rather, because it has a more
constant and continual Lordship or dominion over the days of the week, then
any other by its coming in a weekly return above fifty times in the year:
for the other Festivities, they have their turn but once a year. And so we
have answered the objection of Impertinency of that title [Lords day] to our
weekly holiday, which has been urged, as if it did not more properly
appertain unto it, then to some other days before rehearsed.

CHAP. V. The imputation of Novelty in applying the title Lords day to the
Christians weekly holiday, answered.
WE are now to answer the objection of Novelty which Doctor Gomarus and Master
Braburne bring in against the setting of the title Lords day upon our weekly
holiday, and therewith we shall further strengthen the truth against the last
objection, for which the best proof alleged is a negative Argument, or an
Argument drawn from the negative testimony of one man, which is of little
authority in it self, and the less in this case, because it takes up with one
Writer only; whereas, if more could be produced to that purpose, the
antiquity of that Name (as now the Church applies it) might yet be upheld by
the advantage of a greater number of grave and ancient Authors, positively
(which is better then negatively) giving their votes and voices to the contrary
Tenet.

That singular Author who is brought in as a dumb show, speaking nothing of our
weekly holiday by the name of the Lords day, is Justin Martyr, from whose
silence Doctor Gomarus argues thus, Si diei Dominici pro die Resurrectionis
Domini, seu primo hebdomadis, appellatio ab Apostolis promanasset, etc. ut
supra citatur, cap. 3. and lit. m.
If the title Lords day, (as applied to the day of the Resurrection, or the
first day of the week) had been derived from the Apostles, and received in
the Primitive Church, is it credible that Justin Martyr, a most ancient and
incorrupt Writer, in his accurate description of the rites of the Christian
Religion, would have called the day by the name of Sunday, or the first day of
the week, and not Lords day at all?

To which I dare not answer as Dr. Bound on the Sabbath. part. 1. p. 114.
Dr. Bound does, that Justin Martyr in his second Apology has the name of
Lords day; for I find it otherwise: But Dr. Rivet disscriat. de orig. Sab.
cap. 10. page 180.
Dr. Rivet replyeth very well, whose answer I shall a little transpose and
alter, to make it more serviceable to the truth. First, That it is no marvel
that Justin Martyr writing to an Heathen, and discoursing with a Jew, used such
terms as they were best acquainted with, and best liked of, as did the
Translater of the Bible, (out of which the Epistles and Gospels of our Liturgy
were taken, as we shall observe in the seventh Chapter) and such was the name
Sunday to the Heathens, and the first day of the week to the Jews; and
therefore (which he might further have observed out of Justin. Apol. ad Anson.
2d. prope sin. page 419.
Justin) speaking to the Gentiles, he calls the day before it not the
Sabbath, though among the Religious it were both of most ancient and common
use, but Saturday, or the day of Saturn.

Secondly, Whereas Doctor Gomarus grounds the weight of his Argument upon
Justin Martyrs accurate description of the rites of the Christian Religion, as
that if the name Lords day (for the Christians weekly holiday) had been in use
before that time in the Church, it must either there be mentioned, or from the
omission of it there, it might well be denied to have been the title of it in
his time; Doctor Rivet answers, by retortion of his reason, out of
Tertullian, That when the Gentiles conceived from the Christians weekly
Assemblies upon Sundaies, Tert. Apol. cap. 16. tom. 2. page 632.
that the Sun was the god they worshipped, he stands to the name, with denial
of their sinister conceit of the Christians practice, and takes not that
occasion to tell them (though it be a better inducement then Justin had any in
the place fore-alledged to mention the Lords day) that they had another name
for that day, viz. the Lords day; and another reason of their religious
observation of it then they imagined, viz. the memorial of the Lords
Resurrection, their Lord and Savior.

An non hic erat opportunissimus declarandi locus? Dr. Rivet ubi ante, page 182.
Here surely was a most meet place to have made some declaration of the day,
as under that title (the Lords day); and because he did it not there, will it
follow that it was not in use in his time among the Christians? the contrary
will appear by his Book Die Dominico jejunare n^sas ducimus vel de geniculis
adorare. Tertul. de corona milit. cap. 3. com. 1. page 747.
de corona militis, and O melior sides nationum, quae nullam solennitatem
Christianorum sibi vendicar, non Dominicum diem, non Pentecosten. Tert. de
Idol. cap. 14. tom. 2. page 457.
de Idololatria; wherein, having to do with Christians, he uses the name or
title Lords day, for the Christians weekly holiday: And to answer both Doctor
Gomarus and Master Braburne together, the observation of Bish. Andrews in his
Speech in the Star Chamber against Master Trask. page 73. and 74.
Bishop Andrews is of some weight, as himself sets down in these words;
This day, this (...), came to have the name of dies Dominicus in the Apostles
time, and is so expressly called by Saint John in the Revelation, chapter 1. ver.
10. and that name from that day to this has holden still with continuance of
it from the Apostles age, and may be deduced down from Fathers to Fathers,
even to the Council of Nice; and lower, I trust, (says he) we need not
follow it: no doubt is made since then, by any one that has read any thing.

Yet some raise a doubt upon the Constitution of Constantine, by whose
authority, they say, Sunday was made a general and a public holiday, and with
it Friday, and both of them were to be observed weekly, as Eusebius. de vita
Constantin. l. 4. c. 18. p. 254.
Eusebius shows: why then may not Friday be the day to which that title
Lords day might belong? especially, since (as in English we commonly call it)
it has an addition of especial weight and worth [good Friday] good, (...), by
way of eminence and excellency above all other days? But, notwithstanding
this, the day of the Resurrection has the pre-eminence, as in dignity (as
before has been proved) so in antiquity, perpetuity, and generality of
solemn observation, above all other days: for it was a Originem hujus
denominationis ab ipso Apostolorum tempore accersendam omnibus fere
Scriptoribus placet. D. Walaeus dissertat. de quart. praecept. cap. 7. page 150.
weekly holiday from the Apostles time, as we shall manifest elsewhere; and
though it were to gain ground of the Jewish Sabbath but by degrees in Ignatius
his time, (who lived in the first Centurie, or hundred years of Christianity)
it was grown to that credit, as not only to be well known by the name Lords
day; but to be dignified with that royal title, the Queen of days, as has
been observed; and it is to be noted, that this Ignatius was his disciple, who
first used that title, Lords day, viz. the disciple of the Evangelist S. John,
and so was most like to know what day he meant by that appellation.

Secondly, For that Decree of Constantine, it was not made until the fourth
Century was begun, above two hundred years after this of Ignatius.

Thirdly, As Friday was made a weekly holiday much later then Sunday was (not
to stand upon comparisons betwixt Apostolical and Imperial powers for the
making of holidaies, in which respect Sunday has the advantage above good
Friday) so has Sunday continued much longer by many hundred years, and has
been both for time more perpetual, and for place in the Christian Church, more
general then Friday ever was.

And, as the observation of that day has been almost universal; so has the
application of this title Lords day been unto it likewise: for, as Doctor Omnes
fere sacrae Scripturae interpretes, tam veteres, quam recentiores, de primo dic
Septimanae intelligunt, ac proinde nova plane interpretatio est little qui
Apocalypscos diem, etc. Wallaeus dissertat. de quart. praecept. cap. 6. page
150.
Walaeus notes, the deriving of the original of that name from the Apostles
time, out of Apoc. 1.10. is approved almost by all Writers: and Doctor D. Heyl.
Hist. Sab. part. 2. c. 1. ad sinem cap. p. 37.
Heylin, though otherwise far from doting on the dignity of our weekly
holiday, not only for the tenure of it, but for the title too, having referred
the original of it to the year of our Lord 94. wherein he follows M. Broad
his MS. part. 2. c. 10. p. 62.
M. Broad his note upon it, which shows but little good will unto it, says
thus; D. Heyl. Hist. Sab. part. 2. a. 1. page 30.
So long it was, scil. the 94. year after Christ, before we find the Church
took notice of it by a proper name: and when he has brought in the opinion of
Gomarus against it with a smile, as if he meant to favor it, he puts it out
again with a frown, saying, D. Heyl. Hist. Sab. part. 2. c. 1. page 73.
But touching this meaning, (i. e.) of Doctor Gomarus, applying of that name to
the day of judgment, (which Saint John might see, being rapt in Spirit, as if
it were come already) we will not meddle; let them that own it look unto it,
the rather, since Saint John has generally been expounded in the other sense,
by Arethas and Andr. Caesariens. taken by D. Heyl. for two Writers, are but
several names of the same Author or Work in Vos. his These. de Advent. Christ.
page 273. but the reconciliation may be, that though the men were two, the work
(in a manner) was but one; for Arethas Caesariens. made a compendium out of the
larger commentary of Andr. Caesariens. Bellarm. de Eccles. Script. page 134.
Arethas and Andr. Caesariensis upon the place, and by Bid de Rat. Temp. cap.
6. and by the suffrage of the Church (the best exposition of Gods Word) wherein
this day has constantly, since the time of that Apostle, been honored by
that name above other days: yea, and Q^ae ratio, etsi non mihi sufficere
videtur, ad rejiciendum communem interpretatione^, and facile concedam diem
Dominicum eam significare qua Dominus resurrexit, etc. D. Gomar. def. Invest.
Sab. c. 10. p. 133.
Doctor Gomarus himself confesses it to be the common interpretation of
those words [ the Lords day,] and that they signify the day wherein Christ
rose from the dead.

I need the less here to bring in a Catalogue of the names of the Ancients to
this purpose, they will come in to do more service when we treat of the
Authority and Antiquity of the day, where we shall (with one labor) further
clear both the title and tenure of it, by such testimonies as make
indifferently for them both; and, for the present, that which has been said
may (I conceive) be sufficient to secure the title of the Lords day, to the day
we celebrate, against such exceptions as have been taken by these two
opposites, Doctor Gomarus, or Master Braburne; and two more, I think, will
hardly be found since the first spring of that day, who have shut their eyes
against such light of truth, or opened their mouths to speak, or moved their
pens to write in such sort against it as they two have done.

In whose confutation is virtually included an answer to that which Mr.
Primrose since them has affirmed, by way of comparison, of the days of
Christ's Passion, Ascension, and of Pentecost, viz. M. Primrose part. 3. c. 8.
page 140.
that the day of the Resurrection has none advantage beyond the days of
Christ's Passion, Ascension, or of Pentecost: For it was, says he, inferior
to the day of Christ's Passion, in regard of the merit to purchase; and to the
day of Pentecost, in regard of efficacy to communicate the spiritual and
heavenly gifts: the Ascension day is conform unto it, in the same
correspondency, both to the acquisition, and to the execution of the
establishment of the Church.

For disproofe whereof, we have already said enough, save that we must add
that which himself has said, viz. That though the Resurrection of our Savior
be not the merit of our Redemption, but rather the reward of it (as Aquia.
part. 3. quast. 57. art. 2.
Aquinas resolves of his Ascension); yet it is a demonstration that our debt
is paid, as when M. Primrose part. 3. cap. 8. page 139.
a debtor comes out of prison: and that is matter of more manifest rejoicing,
and so the fitter ground for a solemn and sacred gratulation, then the payment
of a debt, especially then such a payment as was so painful and pensive as our
Saviors Passion was.

And for the day of Pentecost (of which alone we have said nothing hitherto)
it may be sufficient to allege, First, In die Dominico venisse Spiritum
sanctum, communis traditio est. Lorin. in Act. 1. ver. 1. page 74. col. 1.
That many have, and not without reason, taken it to have been the same day of
the week which we call Lords day.

Secondly, That no age since that time has observed a weekly holiday upon that
occasion, as all ages from the Apostles time have done upon the Resurrection.
But Ea discrepantia exigui est momenti, quia in re ipsa est consensus. Gomar.
cap. 10. pa. 132. Defens. Investig. Sab.
Doctor Gomarus says, It is a difference of small moment, since in the thing
it self there is consent: and if so, there has been much waste of words about
it, in drawing on the dispute thus far. Not so neither; for, First, We have
(under the title of words and names) made some preparations for material
points that come in question; for the words we have here used have not been an
empty sound, without solid and real notions under them.

Secondly, It is not a matter of small moment to set seducing glosses upon that
sacred text, which, in the controversy of the Christians weekly holiday, has
always been of special note and use, from the Apostles time to this day.

Thirdly, If it were a small difference, and drew after it none evil
consequence at all, (as it does, for it lays a stumbling block at the door
of the Sanctuary, causing men to stop or stumble at the very entrance of the
cause, which, for the new Testament, if Testimonies be taken in due order,
begins there;) it was no small fault in him, and the other, for a small
difference to run out of the road way, from so good and so great company, to
tread out a Schismatic track by themselves.

CHAP. VI. Of the name Sunday: Whether we may call our weekly holiday by that
name. Objections against the use of the name Sunday for our weekly holiday.
THe next name of note which is stuck at, is the name Sunday; whereof some make
scruple, as if it had in it (as we use it) an unsavory smack of heathenish
superstition: and some again (as if therein they bewrayed a spice of Puritan
preciseness) flout at them, as for negative nicety in their forbearance of it,
as one (who was in his time a man of eminent mark) in a pleasant Poem, which
he calls Iter Boreale, speaking of the Professors of N. a Town where he
lodged in his Northern journey from Oxford, among other particulars (at which
he scoffed, as savouring of too much preciseness) brings in this for one:
Proque die Sabb. scelus est ibi dicere Sunday. Dr. Eades in his ^er Boreale.
That to call the Sabbath by the name of Sunday, they account a crime.

But against that name, some in sober sadness have framed this Argument;
Idolatrous names are not to be used; But the name Sunday is an idolatrous
name; Therefore the name Sunday is not to be used.

To the major Proposition there is some consonant sound both in the Scripture,
and in the sayings of Ancient and late Writers, both Protestants and Papists,
which we must first allege, that we may the better judge of the liberty of
our lips for the use of that name.

First, For Scripture, the proof produced by Dr. Bound on the Sab. part. 1. p.
116.
Dr. Bound (as most pertinent to oppose Idolatrous names, in particular, the
name Sunday, and to depose it from the dignity it has, in being taken into
titular association with the Lords day) is Exodus 23.13. In all things that I
have said be circumspect, and make no mention of the names of other gods,
neither let it be heard out of thy mouth: To which may be added the like
prohibition, Jos. 23.7. Neither make mention of the name of their gods; nor
cause to swear by them: and that which goes farther, Deuteronomy. 12.3. where God
commands not only abstinence from them, but an abolition of them, as was
done by the children of Reuben, Number. 32.38. The children of Reuben built (with
other Cities) Nebo and Baal, and their names being changed, they gave other
names unto the Cities which they builded, for Nebo and Baal were the names of
Idols; of Nebo we read Isa. 46.1. upon which, the note of Doway Bibles is,
that, It was otherwise called Dagon, the Idol of the Philistines, mentioned 1 Samuel 5.2. and of Baal we read, Judge. 6.30, 31. and in diverse other places: and
because it lay not altogether in the power of men, as to leave out their names,
so to put out their memory; God promises to put to his helping hand for their
suppression, I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and they
shall no more remember their names, Hos. 2.17. and, I will destroy the names of
Idols out of the earth, says he, Zech. 13.2.

Answerably hereunto, we should not only forbear the names of Idols, as David
professes he will do, Psalm. 16.5. but, so far as lies in our power,
utterly abandon and abolish them. All this, as well as that in Exodus 23.13. may
be urged against the name Sunday; though all this and more may be well
answered: but yet the objection is not at the strongest, it must be further
fortified by adding the Testimony of the Ancients to the Authority of the
Scripture.

Secondly then for the ancient Fathers, The most learned and religious of them
have expressed their dislike of Idolatrous names; Absit ab ore Christiano sonet
Jupiter omnipotens, and Mebercule, and Mecaster, and caetera, magis portenta
quam nomina. Hier. Epist. de filio prodigo and frugi ad Damas. tom. 3. p. 231.
Far be it from any Christians mouth, says Saint Hierome, to take up the
titles of Jupiter omnipotent, or to say, Mehercule, or Mecaster, or other such
words; which are rather prodigies, then appellations. And Displicit mihi, quod
Musas quasi Deas (quamvis jocando) commemorarim. August. retract. lib. 1. cap.
3.
S. Augustine censured himself for having named the Muses Goddesses, though
but in jest. And (which comes home to the point we have in hand) having
mentioned the Pagan names of diverse days in the week, as of Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, etc. used by some Christians, as well as by Pagans, Secunda Sab.
secunda feria, quam seculares diem Lunae vocant; tertia Sabbat. tertia feria,
quam diem illi Martis vocant; quarta Sabbatorum quarta seria, qui Mercurii dies
dicitur a Paganis, and a muitis Christianis; sed noluimus ut dicant, atque
utinam corrigantur, ut non dicant. August. enarrat. in Psalm. 93. tom. 8. part.
2. page 181.
he says (as to the Christians) I would not have them so to do; and I would
to God that error were corrected in them. Melius e^go de ore Christiano ritus
loque^di Ecclesiasticus procedit. Aug. Ibid.
It were better, says he, that Christians should speak in the phrase and
style of the Church, which notes them by other names. And, that this may seem
no uncanonicall nicetie of theirs, there may be quoted for it, a Canon of the
first Council of Nice Ne fideles imponant nomina Gentilium suis filiis, sed
iis inter baptizandum, nomina Christianorum indant. Council. Nicen. Can. 30.
Alph. Pisan. Edit. Can. Council. Nicen. lib. 3. Can. 30. tom. 1. Council. p. 355.
Edit. Bin. 1606. and apud Caranz. Summa Council. fol. 632.
; where (for fear of giving countenance to Idolatry by names) the faithful
are forbidden to impose heathen names upon their children in Baptism, and
prescribed to put upon them only Christian names.

Thirdly, For Protestants, Bish. Pilking. in Hag. c. 1. v. 1.
Bishop Pilkington misliketh the heathenish names of the months and days,
suspecting great danger in the use of them, though there seem matter of small
moment in them; whose censure is cited, (as also that of Beroald. Chro. lib. 1.
c. 4.
Beroaldus, touching the subtilty of Satan in putting Pagan names in stead of
Christian names upon the days of the week) and approved by D. Bound of the
Sab. part. 1. page 112, 113.
Doctor Bound, in his first part of his Book of the Sabbath.

Fourthly, For Papists; though they detest not Idolatry so much as they should
do, yet against the Idolatrous names of days they are very zealous, as we
may well perceive by their sayings, which we shall have occasion presently to
cite in the proof of the minor Proposition, which is this [ But the name
Sunday is an Idolatrous name.]

Of the days of the week we have showed the conceit of S. Augustine already,
which may be applied to Sunday as well as to the rest: For the Sun was made
an Idol by the Gentiles, as is notorious to all the world; and (which comes
nearer unto us) the Saxons (our Predecessors in this Kingdom) did adore it in
this figure, It was made (as Verstegan. Restitut. of decayed Intellig. cap. 3.
p. 68, 69.
Verstegan gives the description of it both by scheme and gloss) like an
half naked man, set upon a pillar, his face as it were brightned with gleames,
and holding (with both his arms stretched out) a burning wheel before his
breast; the wheel being to signify the course which he runs round about
the world, and the fiery gleames and brightness, the light and heat wherewith
he warmeth and comfort the things that grow: This Idol thus figured, was
placed in the Temple, and there adored and sacrificed unto, for that they
believed, that the Sun in the firmament did with, or in this Idol correspond
and cooperate.

And, as the Christians (for keeping holy that day which the Pagans dedicated
to the Sun, and for directing their worship toward the East) were suspected
by them in that respest to be of the same Religion with them (which gave Si
diem Solis laetitiae indulgemus, alia long ratione quam religione Solis, etc.
Tertull. Apol. cap. 16. tom. 2. page 632.
Tertullian occasion to clear himself and his fellow Christians from it, by
observing the difference betwixt themselves and those sunburnt Idolaters, who
did indeed adore it as their god, which they did not;) so by the retaining of
idolatrous names of days, it is conceived by diverse (as in part we have
showed) that some spice of that superstition is like to be retained, with no
little prejudice to true Religion, by keeping better names out of ordinary use.

The Devil, says D. Bound on the Sab. part. 1. page 13.
Doctor Bound, caused the Mathematicians to call the first day of the week
Sunday, lest that any ignorant man hearing the name of the Lords day, should
inquire what that Lord was of whom the day was so called. The Rhem. Test. cap.
1. ver. 10.
Rhemists dislike it in part for the same reason: The name Sunday, say they, is
an heathenish calling, as well as all other of the week days be in our
language, some imposed after the names of certain Idols (which the Saxons
worshipped) and to which they dedicated the days before they were Christians:
which have so long continued, that Profecto pudendum est, simulque dolendum,
quod non antehac data sint istis diebus Christiana nomina, ne dii gentium
(inter nos) tam memorabile monumentum haberent. Polydor. Virg. de Invent. rer.
lib. 6. cap. 5. page 367.
Polydore Virgil complains of it, as matter of sorrow and shame to the
Christian world, that the days of the week have not hitherto been called by
Christian, but by heathen names; whereby the Gentile gods have had too
honorable a memorial among us. To which opinion Doctor Fulkes answer to the
Rhem. Test. Rev. 1. verse. 10. prope sinem, Sect. 6. The like dislike is showed
by that other industrious Writer of our Church, Doctor Willet. Synops.
controvers. quest. 8. part. 2. err. 72. p.
Dr. Fulke inclines, where he says, That the name of Sunday, and the rest of
the days were of heathenish beginning; and therefore were better to be left
off.

Here are then against those names several sorts of Testimonies, divine and
humane, and these both ancient and of later time, Protestants and Papists; and
in these Testimonies are included sundry reasons against the name Sunday,
especially these:

First, That it is of heathenish beginning.

Secondly, That it hardneth men in Idolatry, and hinders the progress of true
Christianity.

Thirdly, That it may bring those that use it into suspicion of heathenish
superstition.

The Conclusion or Inference from these Premises, will be the forbearance of
these names, as D. Fulke his answer to the Rhem. Test. in Rev. 1.10. S. 6.
Dr. Fulke would have it, and the observation of some such Decree as is said to
be made by the Pope Silvester the first, at the request of the Emperor
Constantine, which in Durand. rational. l. 7. f. 426. page 1.
Durandus, Polid. Virg. de Invent. rer. l. 6. c. 5. p. 366.
Polidore, and Rhem. in Luke 24.1. ex Brev. Romans December. 31. and in Rev. 1.10.
Sect. 6.
others, we find to be brought in thus; Pope Silvester, abhorring the
Idolatrous appellation of days, and having a mind to reform it, was yet
loath to imitate the nomenclature of the Jews, who reckoned the week thus,
the first of the Sabbath, the second of the Sabbath, etc. I say, the first of
the Sabbath, not the first after the Sabbath, as the Rhem. in Luke 24. ver. 1.
Rhemists expound it; for in the Jewish computation, the Sabbath day was the
last day of the seven, and so the accomplishment of the whole week; wherefore
the word Sabbath is sometimes taken, not for a day, but for a week, as Luke
18.12. and chap. 24.1. as our best English Translators render it; and the
account being made with such particular mention of the Sabbath every day, it
might be a means daily to keep in mind the memento of the fourth
Commandment, that all profanation of the day by provident forecast of secular
affairs might be prevented; and that other days of the week wearing as it
were the Sabbaths livery, they might be so regulated with reference unto it,
that there might be none occasion to make inchroachments upon it.

Notwithstanding this, that Pope having no liking of the Jewish reckoning
(though with this intimation it did not deserve to be disliked), nor yet of the
Gentiles, who count Sunday, Monday, etc. gave them this numerall denomination,
calling the first day of the week, prima feria, or the Dominicall day: the
second secunda feria, and so to the sixth, naming the last of the seven by the
old name Sabbath.

This is the most and worst that can be said against the usual appellation of
the days, especially against the name Sunday, which is the chief in
acceptance with some, and in exception with others. Notwithstanding, I
conceive, that in our times, and in our Church, the name Sunday is not so to be
censured or shunned, as by some it has been; and this will appear, chiefly
by clearing it from such objections as are made against it, which now we shall
offer to the judgment of the indifferent Reader.

CHAP. VII. How far it may be lawful to use Idolatrous names. An Answer to
the Objection against the name Sunday.
ANd first for the places of Scripture before alleged, they do not imply, in
their proprer sense, so precise a prohibition of all names of idolatrous, or
otherwise of sinful intimation or acception in all respects, that it should be
utterly unlawful to mention them: the name of evil is forbidden sometimes, to
make us more estranged from that which is evil; yet not wholly and altogether:
For,

First, An evil (as it is evil) may be reproved, and that under that name by
which it is known; so though the Apostle forbid the naming of fornication in
his Epistle to the Ephesians. chap. 5. ver. 3. yet himself names fornication and
fornicator, by way of reproof, well toward twenty times in his Epistles: and
in that very place he could not so well have forbidden the thing it self, if
he had not at all made use of the name.

Secondly, It may be lawful to mention an idolatrous name without reproof,
as M. Ainsworth in Mr. Pagets arrow against the Brownists p. 142, 143.
Master Ainsworth (though a Brownist, and so a vehement adversary to all
appearance of idolatry) acknowledges, and gives instance in the names
Nebuchadnezzar, and Belshazzer, and others: to which may be added, the
idolatrous name of the Ship wherein Paul was carried, which he called (...),
(i. e.) Castor and Pollux, Act. 28.11. and this in an idolatrous sense, though
without either approbation or reproof of Idolatry.

Thirdly, An idolatrous name may be retained and used in a sense not
idolatrous, as Hermes the name of Mercury, mentioned Romans 16.14. as it
signifies a particular person, and not the Idol of the Gentiles called by that
name: so the names of Friar, Monk, Abbat, Pope, as they are names of Families,
not of Offices, or Callings, may be retained still, as M. Ainsw. Ibid. p. 143.
Master Ainsworth has acknowledged, though he (as well as Master M. Paget. ib.
p. 145.
Paget) thinks the Popes have been made great Idols by too many people of all
ranks; and so think I.

Fourthly, Names that have been Idolatrous, or any way impious, may in time
(having been long accustomed to a better sense) be ayred and purged from all
impiety: for words are like to fashions, which vary with the times, and so
either get or lose grace and acceptance, thereafter as the vulgar use, and
common custom gives the construction of them; in whose power it is, (as the
Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere cadentque, Quae nu^c sunt in honor
vocabula, si volet usus. Morat. de art Poetic.
Poet has observed) to ratify or reject them both for use and sense.

But what is that which in the forecited Scriptures is forbidden then? Not all
mention of idolatrous names, as we have already proved; But either swearing by
Idols, or praising, or approving of them, or maintaining superstition toward
them, or giving scandal by them; against which we should be so careful, as
to prevent all suspicion and appearance of that evil, as Aug. de Civ. Dei, li.
19. c. 22. part. 2. p. 525.
Saint Augustine did, who fearing the translation of Sacrificiendum Domino soli
would imply that the Sun was a God, presently brought in some words of caution
to guide the Reader to a better sense; Sacrificiendum Domino soli, (i. e.)
Domino tantum, to the Lord alone; and with these limitations the sentences of
the Fathers may be interpreted: As for the Canon of the Council of Nice, I
will not (for this particular) by way of exception say it is one of those which
is supernumerary, and not any of those which are acknowledged to be the
legitimate ordinance of the Fathers of that Council, because it is capable of
a very good sense: but I answer thus; The difference is great betwixt the new
imposing a name, and the old and received use; over that we have power, over
this not so.

And for the word Sunday in particular, though it be no more idolatrous then
the names of other days of the week, and some months of the year, it may be
the better borne withal.

First, Because the Sun is not as many Idols are, to which (for want of real
entity out of the fancy) we may pertinently apply the words of Saint Paul, An
Idol is nothing in the world, 1 Cor. 8.4. for it has a true, solid, and
glorious being of its own, and a name it must have to express that being.

Secondly, For joining it with the day in the name Sunday (as if it were
devoted to the honor of the Sun) though that were the intention of the first
imposers, (and the like was their meaning in the names of the rest of the days
of the week, as many Authors have observed, especially Hosp. de orig. Festor.
Jud. and Etha. c. 5. fol. 52. a. and 53. b.
Hospinian, Verslegan. Restitut. of decayed Intellig. cap. 3. p 69.
Verstegan); yet the Christians that used it did clear themselves from all
participation with their impious superstition long ago, viz. in Justin
Martyrs, and Tertull. dpol. cap. 16. tom. 2. page 632.
Tertullians time; since whom, so many well minded men have made use of it,
that we may well think all Pagan apprehensions are (by this time) quite worn
out of it, as well as out of the names of other days of the week, or of the
months of the year, as of January, of March, of May, of June, (which are
Idolatrous names, as August. contra Faust. Manich. l. 18. c. 5. tom. 6 p. 420.
Saint Augustine shows) for where is there one of a thousand that when he
names Of this, and the derivation of the rest of the days, see Versteg
Restit. of decayed intellig. a p. 71. ad 77.
Tuesday, has any reverence or reference to the Idol Tuisco? or to Woden when
he names Wednesday? or to Thor when he names Thursday? or to Frigo, or Frea
when he names Friday? or to Janus in the name of January, or to Mars in March,
or Juno in the name of the month of June? It is more like that our vulgar
people use the word without setting any note on the notation or etymology of it
at all; or if they do, they may think it is called Sunday from the Son of God,
who is Lord of the Sabbath.

And if we distinguish all men into two sorts, viz. learned, and ignorant, we
may say of the learned, that it is not like that they (having been trained up
in Christian religion) should retain any respective relish of such absurd
Idolatry; and for the unlearned, they have no apprehensions of words and things
so obscure and remote, as these etymologicall mysteries, but take the sense of
words according to the use of the times wherein they live.

But thirdly, If, as the Sun in the Firmament makes the day, so the Sun and
the day make up the name Sunday: there is yet (for ought I see) no peril of
applying unto it an idolatrous fancy; for we may (with good congruity of
reason) mean by it the splendor and glory of our Christian holiday, in the
many prerogatives of that day above the workdayes of the week (elsewhere to
be declared) as the Sun is a more bright and resplendent Planet then any of
the rest.

And whereas Dr. Bound treat. on the Sab. part. 1 page 13.
Dr. Bound says, That the Devil, (that he might retain men in this error,
or heresy rather, and thereby he means the k^eping them by the name of
Sunday from inquiring into the cause of the name Lords day) caused this
probable conjecture of the name Sunday to be given, namely, that seeing the Sun
was the chief of all the Planets, as that which fills all things with light;
therefore in the number of the seven days, the chief place was given unto it.

Though it cannot be denied, but there is a comparative conformity betwixt
this day and the other six, as betwixt the Sun and the rest of the Planets,
whereby in an odd number the days and Planets are even, both making up the
number of seven; yet may the name Sunday be as ready for an orthodox, as for
an erroneous sense if we come without prejudice to consider it. Nor can it
impeach the title Lords day, either for truth or evidence, any more then the
calling of Christ so often the Son of man (in the sacred Scripture) does
darken that glorious name, the Son of God: nay rather, as we may use the
matter, this name may give us light to see the shining beauty of that day, M.
Herb. Temple page 66.67.
and in a religious and sound sense to say as that pious and ingenious Poet
does: O day most calm and bright!
The week were dark but for thy light.
-- the other days and thou
Make up one man, See many pertinent conformities betwixt Christ and the Sun in
Dr. Tailors Meditat. on the creatures, from pa. 44. to 55. at the end of his
treatise of the practice of Repentance.
whose face thou art,
Knocking at heaven with thy brow,
The working days are but thy back part:
The Sundays of man's life
Thredded together on times string,
Make bracelets to adorn the wife
Of the eternal glorious King.
Thou art the day of mirth,
And where the work-daies traile on ground,
Thy flight is higher as thy birth,
O let me take thee at thy bound;
Leaping with thee from seven to seven,
Till that we both being tossed from earth,
Fly hand in hand to heaven.


If yet any be afraid of Idolatry or Superstition in the use of the word (and
we may so shun one superstition, as to slip into another, as Pope Sylvester
did, when he left the old names of the days of the week, and called them
ferias, that Feriae dictae a feriendis victimis. Polidor. Virg. de Invent. rer.
l. 6. c. 5. page 367. The like has Dr. Fulke observed (out of Isidor. orig. l.
6. and Sext. Pomp. de verb. veteribus) in Rev. c. 1. v. 10. Sect. 6.
word, as some give the Etymology of it, being very much stained with
idolatrous blood) we may call the day Sunday, as Dominica nobis ideo
venerabilis atque solennis est, quia in ea Salvator (velut Sol oriens)
discussis infernorum tenebris, luce Resurrectionis emicuit; propterea, ipsa
dies ab hominibus dies Solis vocatur, quod ortus eum Sol Justitiae Christus
illuminet. Ambr. Sermon. l. 6. tom. 3. page 286.
Saint Ambrose, Aug. cont. Faust. Manich. tom. 6. lib. 18. c. 5. p. 420.
Saint Augustine, and others do, with especial respect to that of the Prophet
Malachy, chap. 4. ver. 2. where Christ is called the Sun of Righteousness,
enlightening, as the Sun does, every one that comes into the world, Joh. 1.9.
And if the Lord be likened to the Sun, and for that likeness be called by
that name, (as he is by David, Psalm. 19) the Lords day, as his day, may in that
sense be called Sunday; and so the title will not (as Dr. Bound fears) lead
us from the Lord, but light us to him.

Hereto if we add Saint Hieromes note upon the text in Malachy, the name
Sunday may be improved to a more profitable use, thus; Orietur Sol Justitiae,
quivere omnia indicabit, and nec bona nec mala, nec virtutes nec vitia latere
patietur. Hier. in Mal. 4.2. tom. 6. page 365. col. 2.
The Lord, as the Sun, will bring every thing to light, so that (as he says)
he will suffer neither good nor bad, virtue nor vice any more to lie hid.

I will say no more for the warrant of this word Sunday (for I think I need
not) save that it has had the honor to be many times named in the public
Liturgy of the Church of England, and has been allowed by diverse, who were
so far estranged from that gross Idolatry of the heathens, (in offering up
Sacrifice to the Sun) that they offered themselves to be sacrificed in the fire
for the Son of God, rather then they would yield to the Idolatry of the
Papists; for there were of those that approved of the Communion Book in King
Edwards days, who suffered martyrdom in the days of Queen Mary; and in that
Book the name Sunday is brought in (in the titles of the Epistles and Gospels)
five and twenty several times in order, without interruption: besides that, it
is mentioned often also in other places of the same Book; and with that Book
(for this note) agree our Service Books of all editions, in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and our Sovereign that now is.

And that the name Sunday was taken up by them who first penned the Communion
Book, not as a profane, but as a Scripture name, it is very probable by this;
The Epistles and Gospels in the Communion Book agree with the ancient
Translation of the Bible printed in the year 1540. (to which Archbishop
Cranmer prefixed a Preface) and that Translation rendereth Saint John, Revel.
1.10. I was in the Spirit upon a Sunday: So also in 1 Cor. 16.2. In Master
Tindall his second edition of his Translation, printed 1540. he uses the same
word, thus; Upon some Sunday, etc. 1 Cor. 16.2.
Upon some Sunday, let every one of you put aside, etc. Wherein the Translator
descended to the capacity of simple persons, to whom the day (in those times)
was best known by that name. Of that Translation is the Bible of the Chapelrie
of Warburton in Cheshire, which is the eldest of that sort, and best accords
with the Service book in use, of any that I have seen.

That which has been said on both sides (if duly considered) will serve to
commend a caveat unto us against that fault which the Prophet Isaiah reproves,
in making a man an offender for a word, Isa. 29.21. either for not speaking of
a word, as those who (with some scruple of conscience) do forbear the name
Sunday, whom (for Saint Hieromes, and Saint Augustines sake, as before we have
produced their Authorities) we should not too sharply censure: or for speaking
of a word, as if men could not name it without some savor of Pagan
superstition. Whereas, the common people use it out of common custom, and
without any intention or intimation of ill; and the wiser sort may well be
thought to mention it with an intimation of good, as (out of Saint Ambrose and
Saint Hierome) we have observed. And so we will shut up all (for this question
of the name Sunday) with a conclusion like that which the Apostle makes
concerning the difference of meats; Let not him that eats despise him that
eats not; and let not him that eats not judge him that eats, Romans 14.3.
So let not him who uses the word Sunday, despise him (as foolishly precise)
that uses it not: and let not him who uses it not, judge him (as carelessly
profane) that uses it, since, in that sense wherein we have taken it, there
is neither duty nor sin, either in the use or forbearance of it.

CHAP. VIII. Of the name Sabbath: And first of the writing Sabbath, Sabbath,
and Sabbath, which of them is the right: And by occasion thereof some
observations of skill, and ignorance of the original Tongues.
THere is difference, though not much controversy (for it goes rather by a
diverse practice, then by an adverse position) about the writing of the word,
more about the etymology, but most (and that which is of most moment in the
present subject) concerning the use of it, whether the Christians weekly
holiday or Lords day may be fitly called by that name.

For the first, Some write Sabbath, which is the right; some Sabbath, and some
Sabbath; M. Minsh. Guide of the Tongues. p. 638.
Master Minshaw in his Guide of the Tongues has them all. In Master Brerewood
his first Treatise, the title of the first edition was, A learned Treatise of
the Sabbath, and that word so written runs on throughout the whole Book:
Whereupon M. R. Byf. page 1.
Master R. Byfield (in the Preface of his Answer to it) says, What the
Treatise affords shall be seen anon, God willing; that title savours of
little learning, wherein for Sabbath is written Sabbath, which signifies
hoasts, as in Isa. 1.9. And a little after, says he, I would have imputed
this to the Printers oversight, if either the Errata had mentioned it, or the
whole Book in any one place had given the true Orthography. Wherein (though in
many differences about the Sabbath) I shall (and I hope, upon just grounds)
dissent from Master Brerewood; yet I shall be ready to do him all right, and
to quit him from all such causeless exceptions as come in my way, as this
does; and so I answer,

First, That if the title of the Book did bewray some ignorance of the Hebrew
in the Author; yet might he be a very learned man, and his Book like
himself, a very learned Book for all that: for a man may be very learned, and
yet be unacquainted with the original tongues; so were many of those Divines,
who have had, and still have the honor to be styled the Fathers of the
Church, and yet have been noted (for We have (over and above the benefit of
all their works (i.e.) of the Fathers) much skilfulnesse in the original of
the old Testament, which most of them wanted, and of the new also, wherewith
some were but little acquainted. Mr. Down 2d. part of his works. p. 220.
the most part of them) to be unskilful in the original text of the old
Testament, and diverse of them also of the new.

And to instance in particulars, for the Latins, S. Augustine with his one
tongue is set in comparison, and preferred by Non ideo quisquam vere sapiens
quia Graecus sit vel Hebraeus, quare and beatus Hieron. quinque linguis
monoglossam Augustinum non adaequavit, Luther To. 1. Ep. fol. 54. Epist. ad
Jo^. Lang.
Luther, before Hierome with his five tongues, and though Erasmus, somewhat
netled with the censure of Eckius, (who noted him for his Nihil est quod tibi
deesse Erasmici omnes conquerantur, nisi quod Aurel. Aug. non legeris. Eckius
Epist. Erasm. lib. 2. page 95.
not reading of S. Augustine his works) in his Epistle to him, weigh and sway
the comparison the contrary Erasm. Epist. Eckio lib. 2. page 97, 98.
way, giving the pre-eminence to S. Hierome; yet elsewhere bringing in the
particular praises, not only of him, but of Athanasius, Basil, Cyprian, Hilary,
Ambrose, Gregory, At non arbitror alium esse Doctorem, in quem opulentus ille
juxta ac benignus spiritus dotes suas omnes largius effuderit, quam in
Augustinum: quasi voluerit in una tabula vividum quoddam exemplum Epis^opi
representare. Erasm. Epist. Archiep. Toled. praesix. tom. 1. operum Aug. page 2.
he says, He does not think there is another Doctor into whom the Spirit
has powered out all his gifts in a more ample measure, then in Saint Augustine,
as if he meant in him (as in a Table) to represent the lively pattern of a
Bishop; and having styled him an incomparable Incomparabilis Ecclesiae D^ctor,
invictus propugnator, quem tu non sine causa sic adamare prae caeteris, sic in
deliciis semper habere consuevisti. Quid enim habet or bis Christianus hoc
Scriptore vel magis aureum, vel augustum, ut ipsa vocabula nequaquam fortuito,
sed numinis Providentia videantur indita viro. I^. page 1.
Doctor of the Church, and an unconquered Champion for the truth, and confessed
that the Cardinal of Toledo (not without good cause) took delight in him
before all others (alluding to his name, Aurelius, Augustinus, importing golden
goodness, and Imperial greatness) he asks (as with admiration of him) What
has the whole Christian world more golden, and more majesticall then this
Writer? these names surely, says he, seem not by chance, but by especial
Providence imposed upon him.

Yet is this so great a Clerk, so accomplished and admirable a Doctor noted
(sometimes by way of excuse, sometimes by way of exception) for ignorance in
the Hebrew, and very little skill in the Greek, by Nee Hebraice sciebat
Augustinus, and Graece minus quam mediocriter. Ludov. Viv. in Aug. de C. D.
lib. 15. cap. 13. part. 2. page 133.
Ludovicus Vives, Augustinus vitiosam versionem secutus, and quia Hebraeae
linguae ignarus, minus culpandus quam hodierni Papistae. Polan. Syntag. Theol.
lib. 1. cap. 42. col. 561.
Polanus, Augustinus dubitat Adam an Eva id dixerit? sed gnarus linguae sacrae
videt foeminae verba [ acquisivi verum a Domino]. Pa^aeus in Genesis 4. col. 655.
fine.
Paraeus, and Adeo Augustinum ex sola ignorantia linguae Hebraeae esse
deceptum, in voce Cephas. Bell. de To. Po. li. 1. cap. 10. p. 208. col. 2. So
was S. Ambrose deceived when he derived the Hebrew word (...) from the Greek
word (...) signifying to suffer. Ambr. de mist. Pasch. chapter 1. tom. 2. page 190.
Bellarmine, and of Saint Hilary, though De Hilario nunc agimus, qui tum ob
vitae sanctimoniam, ^^m ob insignem eruditionem, tum ob eloquentiam
admirabilem, aevi sic lumen suit. Erasm. Ep. Johan. Carondeleto. Arch. ep. l.
28. page 1165.
Erasmus sets him out (as a most illustrious light of his age) for holiness of
life, learning, and eloquence; and brings in for an improvement of his praise,
That Hieronymus qui pene contempsit Augustinum, nec ita multum tribuit Ambrosio
toties tanta cum veneratione citat Hilarium, alibi vocans eum orbis
Deucalionem, etc. Ibid. page 1168.
Hierome, who almost contemned Saint Augustine, and did not attribute much to
Saint Ambrose, did admire him, calling him sometimes the I doubt Erasmus is
mistaken in this title, Deucalion of the world; for Hierom gives this title to
one Hilary, a Deacon of Rome, in contempt: for he brings it in thus; Est
praeterea aliud quod inferemus, adversum quod ne muci^e quidem audeat, Helarius
Deucalion orbis. Hieron. advers. Lucifer. prope finem. and he calls him so,
because he separated from others, as if all the world but he and his sect were
drowned in heretical Baptism.
Deucalion of the world, sometime the Trumpet of the Latin tongue, sometime the
Rhodanus of Latin eloquence, noting withal, that Augustine would not cite him
without a Preface of honor: yet after all this and more (which I forbear to
mention) he says of him, that Hebraei se^monis prorsus rudis fuit Hilar.
Ibid. por^o Graecas literas tenniter attigerat se quidem Hier. credimus. Ibid.
non admodum Graece calluit. Eras. I^. p. 1169.
he was altogether ignorant of the Hebrew, and was but little acquainted with
the Greek.

If we should gradually draw down all examples of this sort from the Ancients
to our own times, we should make this occasional digression too long, and so
perhaps over-weary the Reader, who would not be too much taken up with
impertinent pains, having made his recourse hither for a Rest, or Sabbatharie
repose of his apprehension. I will therefore add but one Instance more of a man
famous for his learning, and yet unlearned in the original tongues of both
Testaments, and it shall be that of Cardinal Cajetane, of whom the judicious
Writer of the History of the Tridentine Council, makes this observation:

Hist. Council. Trident. lib. 2. page 155.
Cardinal Cajetane, the Popes Legate in Germany, a man very well read in
Divinity, having studied it even from a child, who, for the happiness of his
wit, and for his laborious diligence, became the prime Divine of that, and many
more ages, unto whom there was no Prelate or person in the Council who would
not yield in learning, or thought himself too good to learn of him. This
Cardinal, going Legate into Germany, Anno 1523. studying exactly how those
that erred might be reduced to the Church, found out the true Remedy, which
was the literal meaning of the text of Scripture, expounding not the latin
Translation, but the Hebrew roots of the old, and the Greek of the new
Testament: In which tongues (having no knowledge himself) he employed men of
understanding, who made construction of the text unto him word by word; as his
works upon the holy books do show.

Nor was this, or the like note on the names of others any impeachment of the
high Commendation given of him before: for man's knowledge was at the best when
he spoke but one tongue; and until it come to that again, we shall know but
in part, understand but in part, 1 Cor. 13. and howsoever (since the confusion
of tongues) there have been more use of verbal learning then before, and
therefore the Apostles had the gift of Quindecim linguarum dona tunc acceperunt
Apostoli (quemadmodum Chrysostomus inquit) ad usum eorum qui praesentes erant:
Quid enim opus fuisset lingua Persica, vel aliis, non praesentibus iis qui
uterentur. Glycas Annal. part. 3. page 315.
fifteen tongues (fifteen and no more, as some affirm) conferred upon them,
(for there was need of no more, say they Ibid.
, and they had not any that were not needful) yet the knowledge of things is
far better then the knowledge of words, as Multo melior doctrina quam verba.
Aug. de magist. tom. 1. page 793.
Saint Augustine resolves; for words are but means to give intimation to and
of the mind for real notions: so that, if we could intuitively know (as the
Angels do) without words, we might know so much more and better, that words
would be supersluous; and so words are Omne quod ad aliud est, vilius est quam
id propter quod est. Ibid. page 792.
inferior to things, as the means is inferior to the end.

And we may well conceive variety of languages to be now less needful,
because the community of the Latin tongue is a great part of the cure of the
babbling confusion: besides, a man may so much more abound in the knowledge of
things, as to make amends with copia rerum, for want of copia verborum, in the
multiplicity of tongues: for the Nacti peritiam Graecae linguae, patent fontes
omnium d'sciplinarum quae a Graecis manarunt, adest and cognitio maximorum
ingeniorum, quorum suit semper Graecia feracissima. Lud. Viv. de Adolescent.
Instit. page 549.
Grecians (who were more learned then other nations, and the very fountains of
liberal arts and sciences, and among them, he that is magnified for natural
knowledge above The very first man that to any purpose knew the way we speak
of, has alone thereby performed more, very near in all parts of natural
knowledge, then sithence in any one part thereof, the whole world besides has
done. So Mr. Hooker speaking of Aristotle, in Eccles. Pol. lib. 1. page 13.
all other men) had little acquaintance with any language but their own, and
therefore set out their learned Works in their own tongue. The ignorance
then of an Hebrew word should carry no great prejudice against either the Book
of the Sabbath, or the Author that made it.

I speak not this to diminish any part of the praise which may be due to some
learned men, who have excelled both in languages and other learning; nor to
discourage any from being studious of these sacred tongues, by exact knowledge
whereof some have done great and profitable service to the Church; for so far
I am from allowing of the fancy of Galen apud Petrum Gregor. Tholosan. de rep.
l. 15. c. 4. p. 1088
Galen (who thought it a disparagement to Alcibiades, that he spoke several
languages, and resolved it as best to make use but of one) that besides my
desire to be competently furnished with the knowledge of the originals of both
Testaments, I have (so far as my leisure would give me leave) bestowed some
time upon other tongues.

But if any have desired to have better store of things, then of words, (the
short and uncertain life of man keeping him so far below the omniscience of
both, that if he abound in the one, he must abate in the other) I think, his
more solid and substantial learning should not be undervalued for the defect
of that wherein he that knows not much, may have that ignorance recompensed
otherwise, and that with advantage, both for kind and measure, as much as
real learning is better then verbal, and a great deal of that better then a
little of this.

And on the contrary, the knowledge of that language may be had without any
great store of other learning besides; for Sir Edwin Sands Relat. of Relig. of
the West Church. p. 222.
little children of three years old are set to learn Hebrew among the Jews,
(as Sir Edwin Sands has observed in his Relation of Religion): and if the
fundamental rules of it may be attained in four and twenty hours (as Edidit
horologium Hebraeum Guilielmus Schickardus Tubingensi Suevor. Academia
Professor, ubi ait se expertum esse fundamenta linguae Hebraeae spatio 24.
horarum a Tyrone percipi and addisci posse. Editus est liber in 8^. Lipsiae,
an. 1633.
Schickardus, Professor of that tongue at Tubinge, upon experience has
averred) they may attain to remarkable proficiencie therein before they can
be furnished with real knowledge. And I remember one Wolfgangus a Jew, a
Teacher of the Hebrew tongue in my time, in Oxford; who (as both my self and
others, who were his Scholars with me, easily observed) had but little
learning, either in divinity or humanity, and so little acquaintance with the
Latin tongue, that he could not (without much difficulty) dictate two lines in
that language with congruity.

So far short was he of a facility for elegant speech, and yet he took
upon him to read his Lecture to us in Latin: and I have heard of some (by such
as I may well believe) who are mere aliens in Logic and Philosophy, and so
little acquainted with the Latin tongue, that they cannot construe one sentence
in the easiest Latin Author, without consulting with a Dictionary; who yet are
so familiar with the Hebrew, that their people are in danger to be choked
with Hebrew roots, which they obtrude upon them in their ordinary Sermons, and
in as much danger to be starved too, for want of the sap and juice of good
instruction; which they are not like to receive from them who are become Prius
imperitorum magistri, quam doctorum discipuli. Hieron. ad Demetriad. p. 70
Teachers of the ignorant, before they have been Scholars to the learned;
which puts me in mind of the censure which an ingenious Student Master N.S.
(sometimes my Chamber-fellow, and Proctor of the University) made of the
Sermon of a verbal Doctor, who, with very little matter, had a Babell of words
in his head and mouth; which was, That he spoke nothing in as many languages
as ever he heard any man. And I doubt not but there be many such as deserve
the censure of Tacitus, upon Secundus Carinates, viz. Hi^ Graeca^ doctrina ore
tenus exercitatus, animum bonis artibus non imbuerat. Tacit. Annal. lib. 15. f.
236. b.
That he had some wordy learning in his mouth, and little knowledge of the
Arts in his mind.

Secondly, I say for Master Brerewood, that his Book of Inquiries into
Languages and Religions, (besides other evidence of his great knowledge in the
Hebrew tongue, and other learning) might have set him far enough out of the
reach of all suspicion of such ignorance, as the mistaking of that title may
import in him that made it.

Thirdly, The word Sabbath is in that part of the Book which is Master N.
Byfields dictate, as well as in that which is Master Brerewoods; and it is so
also in Master Byfields own handwriting, as I can show; yet will I not impute
that unto ignorance; for it might be the sliding of his pen into a word near
unto it, as I have often taken my self with misprision of prophet for profit;
and contrariwise, through cursory writing. Or,

Fourthly, It may be the Transcribers mistaking of his dictates, into which he
might easily be induced by the like writing in many Books of Common prayer, in
the fourth Commandment of diverse editions, and in the parcels of Scripture
therein rehearsed, and in the books of In the Homily of the place and time of
prayer. p. 161, 162, 164.
Homilies, Archbish. Whitgift. page 541.
Archbishop Whitgift against Mr. Cartwright, Bish. Bilson. part. 2. page 270.
Bishop Bilson in the true difference betwixt Christian subjection, and
unchristian rebellion; Dr. John White. page 210.
D. White in his Way to the Church; Master Perkins, in the Order of causes of
salvation and damnation. chap. 5. page 14. col. 2.
Master Perkins in the Order of causes of salvation and damnation; Mr. Sprint,
his Propositions of the Christian Sabbath; in which Book the word Sabbath is in
every leaf at least, and in some it is diverse times repeated.
Master Sprint his Propositions of the Christian Sabbath; for in the Books
that bear their names, and particularly in the places quoted in the margin,
the name is mis-written, either Sabbath, or Sabbath for Sabbath.

Fifthly, Some Authors have that word so miswritten in their Works, who yet
were verys kilfull in the Hebrew tongue, as is evident by Bp. Andrews, in his
Speech in the Star Chamber. p. 72, 73.
Bishop Andrews, in his Speech in the Star Chamber; and in his And in his
third S^rm. of the Resurrect. page 406, 407.
third Sermon of the Resurrection; by Weemse Exercit cerem. exer. 3. p. 7.
Mr. Weemse in his Exercit. and in his In his Christ. Synag. lib. 1. cap. 4.
page 45. cap. 5. page 71. and p. 74. eight times, and p. 75. eleven times.
Christ. Synag. Test. Rev. 1.10.
Mr. Cartwright in his Answer to the Rhemists.

Sixthly, Whereas as Mr. R. Byfield Praef. page 1.
Master R. Byfield says, I would have imputed this to the Printers oversight,
if either the errata had mentioned it, or the whole Treatise in any one place
had given the true orthography of it: It may be replied,

First, That there is no necessity, that either the Printer or the Author
should bear the blame of that mistaking; but rather the Publisher betwixt them
both: and so (as I have By Mr. A. Byfield, Mr. N. Byfields son. Febr. 1640.
heard since my coming to London) it was Master Richard Byfields meaning, to
impute the ignorance to the Publisher and none else, which I conceive he had
just cause to do.

Secondly, For Master Brerewood, I can show it in a manuscript of his own
hand, many times so lettered as it should have been throughout the Treatise,
and not once as it is in the mistaken title.

And lastly, In the Answer to Master Brerewoods Book, Mr. R. Byfield himself
has brought a Letter of his to Alder^n Ratcliffe, wherein the word is written
right, by Master Brerewood, five times in one page (the Mr. R. Byfield his
Answer to Mr. Brerewood, page 224.
later page of the last leaf but one) and not otherwise by him at all in that
Letter.

I have insisted longer on this erroneous writing, and the exception made
against it, then a Critical Reader would require, or perhaps allow of; but I
was induced unto it, partly to correct the indiscreet ostentation and
comparisons of some who have vaunted themselves of a little Hebrew, and
disvalued Latin learning, in all faculties, in those men, whose Books, (if
they be balanced with them in Scholasticall abilities) they are not worthy to
bear, nor are they able to bear the volumes which some of them have written:
and partly by this pleading for Master Brerewood, (whom in many things I shall
have cause to contradict) to advertise the indifferent Reader, that my purpose
is to deal indifferently, and without partiality in the Controversies of the
Sabbath; which he may observe by my readiness to right him, even to a word or
letter, from whom (in many points of more importance) I must dissent, and
against whom (for them) I must dispute.

CHAP. IX. Of the etymology of the name Sabbath: And first, of the abusive
derivations of it by Appion, Justine, and Plutarch, by way of contempt of the
Jews: Their Religion and manners.
THe second point proposed concerning the name Sabbath, (for that is the right
writing, and we must stick to it) is the etymology of it; wherein, comparing
some collections of mine own with what I have met withal since, in Doctor
Prideaux his Lecture, and Doctor Gomarus his Investigation of the Sabbath, I
find that, for a good part, we have all of us light upon the like
observations, yet without conspiracy or plagiarie dealing with one another:
for, though that Book of Doctor Gomarus came forth four years after Doctor
Prideaux his Lecture was in print, yet when he published the Defense of it two
year after (six in all) he had not seen it, as in the tenth Chapter of his
later Book, he De quibus etiam and doctissimi Doctoris Prideaux in oratione
de Sabbato consensionem extare eodem judicio libenter intelleximus, etsi eam
orationem videndi faelicitas nondum contigeret. D. Gomar, Defens. Invest. cap.
10. p. 136.
expressly professes: and before either the one or the other came abroad,
viz. at least two years before the Act in the year 1622. (when our learned
Doctor first delivered his Lecture of the Sabbath) I had noted most of the
observations of the notation of the name, as some of good place well know, to
whom (upon special occasion) I imparted them, with other points of this
Argument in writing: whereto if I add any thing of theirs, for which I am
beholding to them, I shall not be more ready to make use of it, then to give
thanks for it, by a respective mention of their names: and so shall I deal
with all other Authors, as they shall give me occasion in the like kind; yet
not doubting, but they may meet with some animadversions of mine, by which (if
I borrow ought) they may account themselves to be paid, and me sufficiently
quit of that debt.

The derivations of the word Sabbath are four; ( derivations I say, not
etymologies, for that word signifies right speech; and most of them are wrong)
two of them are aliens from the Commonweal of Israel, or at least stragglers
out of their own Tribe, and have no kindred with the stock or root from
whence the word Sabbath is deduced.

The first is that of Appion the Grammarian, against whom Josephus wrote two
books, which is that of the Egyptian word Sabbo, which, as Hosp. de orig. fest.
Judaeor. and Ethn. cap. 3. f. 7. page b.
Hospinian out of Giraldus observes, signifies the spleen; but by Josephus
against App. l. 2. page 783.
Josephus in his second Book against Appion, it is taken for a disease in the
privy parts: upon which Appion tells this tale, viz. That the Jews,
troubled with it in their journey out of Egypt, (for six days together) were
constrained the seventh day to rest; and thereupon, when they came into Judea,
they kept an holiday under that name. Justine the Historian tells rather the
Fable then the Story, in another manner; Cum scabiem Egyptii and pruriginem
paterentur. Just. l. 36. p. 284. Edit. Meae, the edition which Dr. Gomar.
follows, reads scabiem vitiliginem. Gomar. Investig. Sab. cap. 1. page 2.
The Egyptians, says he, being infected by the Jews with the scab and itch;
but (as some have it) with the leprosy, were warned (lest the disease should
spread any farther) to drive out Moses and his diseased countrymen, who having
wandered seven days in the desert of Arabia, with much hunger and labor, at
mount Sinai obtained an end of both: and therefore there they set up the
Sabbath, as a remembrance of their freedom from famine and wandering: and being
expelled from the Egyptians, for fear of the infection, lest for that cause
they should grow odious to other people, they forbad, and forbear communion
with them, and by degrees turned their turning out of Egypt into a matter of
discipline and religion: So Justine in the forecited place. But whatsoever
Moses and the Jews did by way of digression in the desert, he wandreth far
wide from truth in this Discourse: but no marvel, in matters of this kind,
he was a blind man without a guide.

The second error is that of Plutarch, which I could not but observe, having
read him through with diligence and delight, upon the especial commendation of
Apud Claud. verd. Cension in Auth. p. 174.
Theodorus Gaza, who said of him, That if he must read but one man's Books, he
would confine himself to Plutarch: the more pity to observe, in so worthy a
Writer, so foul an error as now I must note (as Caelius Rhodigin. Antiq.
lection. lib. 7. c. 15 col. 302. Hospin. de origin. Fest. Judaeor. and Ethn.
cap. 4. sol. 7. page b. D. Pride. Lect. de Sab. p. 131. D. Gomar. Invest. Sab.
cap. 1. page 2. D. Walaeus desertat. de 4to Praecepto. c. 1. page 2.
others have done) about the notation of the word Sabbath, he having (in
diverse particulars) charged the Jews with riotous rites, like the Services of
Bacchus, in their principal Plutarc. Sympos. lib. 4. cap. 5. page 712.
Feasts, will have it, That their Sabbath holds near affinity with the Feast
of Asebesis, (...).
which in the grammatical sense does signify impiety and profaneness, (as
Budaeus in Locico.
Budaeus renders it) but in Plutarch it is taken for the inordinate motion and
agitation of the people devoted to Bacchus, who are called in many places of
Greece Sabboi, and who (in their Bacchinals) used to reiterate these words,
Evoi and Sabboi, as appears in the Oration of the Crown which Demosthenes
made against Eschines, as also in the Poet Menander: So far Plutarch, more
like a vain Poet, then a grave Historian, as most what he was.

To which purpose it is pertinent to observe, that (as Hensius exercit. sacr.
cap. 1. page 11.
Hensius has it) Sabasius is one of the names of Bacchus, among the Greeks,
and thence is Sabazein, a word used (as (...), Budaeus Lexic. verb. (...).
Budaeus notes) among the Thracians, importing Bacchanall excess, and
disorder: from that Plutarch, says Hensius, insinuates the Hebrew word Sabbath
to be derived; but he is deceived (I mean Plutarch) for both word and
practice are rather Greek then Hebrew; and hence is that which Graeco more
potare, interpretantur quidem grandibus poculis se invitare. Cael Rhod. lib.
18. cap. 16. col. 1292. princip.
Rhodiginus notes of the Grecians, viz. That to drink after the manner of the
Greeks, is to provoke one another to excess with great cups; and Pergraecari,
in Plautus, is taken for excessive eating and drinking, and other riotous and
disorderly living; and of one of that humor, we use to say, in our language,
He is a merry Greek.

And it may be, Plutarch, though he were a Boetian, and not a Cretian, and so
came not under the reproach of the Apostle, (borrowed of the heathen Poet) who
says of the Cretians, that they are always liars, Tit. 1.12. yet as a
Grecian, (for a Grecian is in a little better credit for truth with the
Quicquid Graecia mendax audet in Historia. Juvenal. Satyr. 14. page 89.
Latin Poet, then a Cretian with the Greek) he might use some of the
outlashing and lawless liberty of his native Country, either in faining of
his own, or spreading others reproaches against the Jews; but to conclude
with him, as he corrupts the derivation of the word Sabbath, so in the same
place does he the word Levita, deriving it from [Evios] another name of
Bacchus: And if he had thought of it, (such was his scornful spite toward
the Jews) it is like he would have derived the word Hebraeus from ebrius, a
drunkard; and had he understood the Hebrew, it may be he would have drawn it
(as a full cup from an Hebrew vessel) out of the word Saba, which signifies,
as (...), Dan. Hens. exer. sacr. c. 1. p. 11.
Hensius gives it in the Greek, to drink profoundly, and to be full of wine:
but neither could that disparage the parentage of the word Sabbath: for Saba is
written with Samech, and Sabbath with Scin; and yet I confess (besides the
Pagan oppositions, and contempts of all Religions but their own, which most of
all deserved them) there might be, and was much miscarriage in the manners of
the Jews (well known to the Greeks) which might give occasion of such a
scandal and scorn as Plutarch has taken up against them, and others partly
from him have put upon them, though his derivation of the name Sabbath, for all
that, be no Btymologie, but a Pseudologie.

And it is very like, that their excesses of that sort procured their reproach;
for Saint Augustine comparing our Saviors caveat in Saint Luke, Take heed,
that your hearts be not overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and with
the cares of this life, and so that day come upon you at unawares, Luk 21.34.
with that in Saint Matthew, Pray that your slight be not in Winter, nor on the
Sabbath day, Matthew. 24.20. refers the cares of this life to the winter, and
surfeiting and drunkenness to the Sabbath; which evil, says Crapula vero and
ebrietas, carnali laetitia, luxuriaque cor submergit, arque obruit, quod malum
Sabbati nomine propterea signisicatum quia hoc erat (sicut ut nune est)
Judaeorum pessima consuetudo illo die deliciis affluere, dum spirituale
Sabbatum ignorant. Aug. de consensu. Evangelist. lib. 2. cap. 77. page 536.
tom. 4. part. 1. page 635, 636.
he, is signified by the name of the Sabbath, because this was, and yet is the
impious practice of the Jews, to overflow (that day) with carnal delights,
not knowing the spiritual observation of the Sabbath. And it may be also, that
in their sports, as well as in their meats and drinks, they were too near
allied to Bacchanall behaviors; for Saint Augustine in the 91. Psalm charge
them not only with luxury, but with trifling vanity, and wickedness of other
kinds: Ecce hodiernus dies Sabbati est hunc in praesenti tempore otio quodam
corporaliter languido and luxurioso, celebrant Judaei: vacant enim ad nugas,
and cum Deus praeceperit observari Sabbatum, illi in his quae Deus prohibet,
exercent Sabbatum: vacatio nostra a malis, vacatio illorum a bonis operibus:
meliu, enim est arare, quam saltare. August. in Psalm. 91. tom. 8. part. 2. page
158.
They are at leisure for toys, says he, and for such things as God forbids:
our Rest should be a restraint from wicked works, but theirs is from good
works: it is better to plow, which they do not, then to dance, which they do on
that day.

And thus much for the erroneous derivations of the name Sabbath out of Heathen
and Christian Authors: which were too much for the notation of the Name; but
that withal there may be intimation given of more caution to all that
profess the Gospel of Christ, to look to their lives, that they be so much
more fearful to give (as some are more forward to take up) occasion of
scandal and calumny against them; that Christians to Pagans, orthodox
Christians to Heretics, Catholics to Papists, strict Professors to
Protestants at large, minister no matter of reproach in their manner of
observing the day and time especially dedicated to Gods solemn worship, that,
as at all times, so at such most of all, they be careful to conform
themselves to that of the Apostle, Let every one that names the name of Christ
depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. And let this advertisement (at the entrance
of the doctrine of the Sabbath) be as an Inscription or Title on the Porch of
the Temple, that all profaneness may be kept procul a Fano, both far from
the Church, and far from the Sabbath, which is most solemnly to be sanctified
in it.

CHAP. X. Of the derivation of the name Sabbath from two Hebrew words, the one
signifying [seven], the other [rest]; the former being the error of
Lactantius; the later, the true and most received Etymology.
TO draw near the etymology, and to conclude this Criticisme, Hic est dies
Sabbati, qui lingua Hebraeorum, a numero nomen accepit; unde septenarius
numerus legitimus and plenus est. Lactant. Instit. l. 7. c. 14. p. 640.
Lactantius says, (and the like is in Sypontinus, which Hospin. de orig. Fest.
Jud. and Ethn. cap. 3. page 3.
Hospinian notes for his error) that the word Sabbath, in the Hebrew tongue,
is derived from a word of number; the word (though he name it not) is Sheban,
as Hospinian; Shebbang, as Ubi supra. D. Gomar. Invest. Sab. cap. 1. page 3.
Gomarus reads it; for which, says he, for more easy utterance, the vulgar
take up with Seba, signifying [seven]; but joined with a verb, as Cum verbo
adverbiascit. Schindl. pentag. col. 1793. D.
Schindler noreth it, it becomes an adverbe; and so it is changed into seven
times: but though this come a little nearer the true notation of the word, for
that both the initiall letters and the sense suit better with the name Sabbath;
(...)
(for both begin with the letter Schin, and the Sabbath has its recourse and
revolution in the circle of the week, which is made up of seven days;) yet it
is plain to such as have any insight in the Hebrew tongue, that Lactantius was
mistaken: and that (as we may well conjecture out of that which follows his
numerall notation) by some mysterious superstition in his mind touching that
number, which seduced his opinion to that mis-conceipt: besides that, the
congruity of the word in sound, and confining of the week to that number of
days, both in the commandment and common practice, might readily incline a
man to that imagination; for even those fables, both of Appion the Grammarian,
and Justine the Historian, before mentioned (how wide soever they wander from
the truth of the Sabbath in other points) keep within the compass of the
septenary number; which is as a girdle of the days of the week, of which the
Sabbath is as a golden claspe or buckle binding them together.

We have reserved the best derivation (as our Savior did the best wine, John
2.) for the last place; it is of the Hebrew word (...) cessavit, quievit, has
rested; which (rendered with exact correspondence to the Hebrew characters)
should be written (...)
Schabbath; but for sweeter sound, somewhat is abated of complete expression;
and so it is usually written in the (...).
Greek translation of the old, and the Greek edition of the new Testament; and
the Latins, in conformity to it, rather then to the original, use the word
Sabbatum, and we our English word Sabbath, which (as a participle) in the
former syllable, takes part with the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, in the later
with the Hebrew only. And very fitly does a name of rest agree with the day of
rest, or cessation from secular labors (as the Sabbath day is) and of this
deduction and doctrine it is agreed by the best Divines on both sides.

In respect of this both rest and rank, the seventh being after all the rest,
has the Planet Saturn a name of near cognation to it, signifying ease and
laziness, as Planeta sede^tarius Gualper. Syllog. vocum exotic. part. prior.
page 106.
Gualperius notes, which he reckons for the last of the seven Planets,
beginning his account with the Moon as the first; so still (remembering what we
have before observed) we may say, the number of seven, and the title of rest,
are joined together in observations of the Sabbath, whether with the religious
or profane: and so I could willingly derive it (if the radical characters
would bear it) from both words, as a child from its Parents of both sexes;
for as the Sabbath is every seventh day, so it has a near affinity with the
word which signifies seven (from whence Lactantius takes it to be derived, as
has been showed). And as it is a time of vacation from worldly labor; so it
has as near consanguinity with the word which signifies rest. But this
derivation of it from rest is the right, and to it we shall stand.

CHAP. XI. Of the sever all acceptions of the name Sabbath.
THe next inquiry of it, is how far the name Sabbath reaches in sense and
use; especially, whether this name of Rest may not be applied to the Lords
day, it being a day of Rest; and that will the better appear, if we observe
the distinction by several acceptions, which are chiefly these:

It is taken for 1 Rest from labor. 2 Rest from sin. 3 Rest from both.


First for the first, As the Sabbath signifies a rest from labor, it is used
first generally, for all days ordained for the solemn service and worship of
God: for, as Omnem Festivitatem Judaicam non solum Judaei, sed and Gentiles
Sabbatum vocant. Scal^g. de Emend. Temp. lib. 3. p. 223. edit. ult.
Scaliger observes, The Jews and Gentiles both called every Festival of the
Jews by the name of Sabbath. Idem fere apud Chrysostom. Homil. 40. in Matthew.
Doctor Gomarus would not have the new Moons numbered among the rest, under
that name, though some learned men, says he, do so, (he might mean Ursin
catech. page 580.
Ursinus for one, who reckons them for monthly Sabbaths) because, says
Gomarus, there is no divine Authority for restraint of labor on those days.
Yet he confesses, the Gentiles called them Sabbaths; and they, it is like,
had that name from the Jews, whose practice it was to observe those days,
with cessation from servile works.

But this was upon their own superstition, says he, and not by precept: and
yet he confesses that there were peculiar sacrifices for those solemnities
for which he quoteth Number. 28.11. and 15. And as they were Festivals, they were
distinguished from other days, and a good part of the distinction of them
consisted in cessation from secular labors, which needs must be forborne while
the people were employed in other things; and so far the name of Sabbath
might be communicated to them.

Secondly, The name Sabbath is taken particularly, and that diverse ways.

1. The principal acception of it is for a weekly holiday, ordained by God in
the fourth Commandment.

2. By a Synechdoche (of the part for the whole) the word Sabbath is put
sometimes for the whole week; so in the speech of the Pharisee, where he
says, I fast twice a week; which, precisely rendered according to the
original, should be (...), Luke 18.12. Jejuno bi^ in Sabbato, hoc est, in
Hebdomada. Cent. 1. lib. 1. cap. 6. col. 244.
read, I fast twice a Sabbath; which cannot be meant of one day, for though a
man may eat thrice, or oftener in a day, it cannot be said with good sense,
that in one day he fasted more then once; for if the fast be continued, it
makes but one fast, though it last the whole day; and if it be broken by
eating, it cannot for that day be pieced up again.

3. Sometimes the word is especially applied to the first and last days of
such solemn Festivals as consisted of many days together, Levit. 23. a ver.
24. etc.

4. From days, the Sabbath goes on to the comprehension of years; to the
Jews every seventh year was a Sabbatharie year; wherein they were not to
exact any debt of one another, Deuteronomy. 15.1. nor to exercise the ground, but to
let it rest from tillage, whereof we have the Law at large, Levit. 25. a verse.
2. ad 7. The circle of the Sabbath grows yet to a further compass: for these
seven-yeere Sabbaths multiplied by sevens, made up the whole number of 49.
years, and the year after was the year of Jubilee, a great Sabbath, which
was proclaimed by the sound of the Trumpet, and rest from tillage, as before,
with many other particulars prescribed; whereof you may read more in the
forecited Text, from the eighth verse to the end of the Chapter. These
acceptions of the word Sabbath have especial reference to rest from labor.

The second acception of the name Sabbath (but counting on, the fifth) has
another sense; it is that whereby it is taken for rest, not from labor, but
from sin: In this it is frequent among the Fathers of the Church; and well
might they call it a Sabbath, or rest in that sense, as in opposition to the
restless turbulencie of sin, for that is a very troublesome evil: the sin
of Simeon and Levi troubled Jacob, Genesis 34.30. the sin of Jonas troubled the
air, and the sea, and made it restless, until he was offered up as a
sacrifice to becalme it; and, The wicked, says Isaiah, are like the troubled
sea, whose waves cast up mire and dirt, Esa. 57.20. and though the godly,
having less sin, have thereby the more rest; yet to them it is a very
troublesome and toylesome evil, which will not suffer them to sleep; David's
tears are eyewitnesses hereof, Psalm. 6.6. and for a more solid assurance of
this truth, he brings in his bones to give testimony to it, I find no rest
in my bones, says he, by reason of my sin, Psalm. 38.3.

The third acception of the name Sabbath (but adding it to the former, the
sixth) is that which the Apostle uses, Heb. 4.9. the word in the original is
not Sabbatum, but Sabbatismos; but the termination troubles not the rest of the
former part of the word, and therefore our best Bibles render it (as if it had
been the word Sabbatum) by our English word Rest; and this is the best Sabbath
or Rest of all others, wherein the Elect shall wholly cease from sin and
labor; and it is that eternal Sabbath, whereof the external or temporal
Sabbath was a Type (in respect of the time of it) as the Tabernacle or Temple
was a Type (for the place) to the kingdom of Heaven, where it shall be
enjoined.

CHAP. XII. Whether the day called Lords day, or Sunday, may not also be called
Sabbath day, or the Sabbath: The exceptions which are taken up by diverse
against it.
THese acceptions premised, it will be the more easy to answer the exceptions
which some have taken at the use of the name Sabbath, as applied to the Lords
day, who would have that name under so rigorous an arrest, at the suit of
Saturday, that it may not stir one step to the day next unto it; and so we
may not (by their leave) call the Lords day the Sabbath day.

Of this mind are some of the greatest friends of the Lords day, as well as
they that (as enemies) oppose the divine authority of it: for, D. Bound l. 1.
de Sab. p. 110.
Doctor Bound (a man sincerely devoted to the doctrine and duties of the fourth
Commandment) says, The name of the Sabbath was changed into the name of the
Lords day, which must be retained: and if the old name be to be changed,,
and the new must be retained, then the old name must be taken to be
abolished, at least to be prohibited, as to the day now solemnly observed,
and generally received: And M. Brerew. repl. p. 73. and 74
Master Brerewood (an opponent against diverse points of Doctor Bound his Book
of the Sabbath, in his Reply to Mr. Byfields Answer) says, The name of the
Sabbath remained appropriated to the old Sabbath, and was never attributed to
the Lords day for many hundreds of years after our Savious time; none of the
Apostles, nor of the ancient Christians, for many hundreds of years after them,
ever entitled it by the name of Sabbath: and since him Bish. white treat of
the Sab. page 134, 135.
Bishop White has written, We Christians keep a weekly holiday, namely
Sunday, which (with the holy Apostle, Revel. 1.10.) we style the Lords day,
not the Sabbath day: D. Heyl. Hist. Sab. part. 2. c. 8. page 255.
Doctor Heylin in his History of the Sabbath, having objected against some an
intent to cry down holidayes, as superstitious and Popish ordinances,
mentions (as in scorn) their new found Sabbath; and Sabbath now, says he,
it must be called.

And the Translator of The Transl. of D^. Pride. his Lect. on the Sab. Praef.
page ult. edit. 2.
Doctor Prideaux his Lecture of the Sabbath, in his Preface before it, brings
in Barkley a Papist with a notable Dilemma (as he calls it) the better to
encounter those who still retain the name of the Sabbath; What is the cause,
says he, that many of our sectaries call this day (meaning the Christians
weekly holiday) by the name Sabbath? If they must observe it because God
rested on that day; then they ought to keep that day whereon God rested, and
not the first, as now they do, whereon the Lord began his labor: If they
observe it as the day of our Saviors Resurrection, why do they call it still
the Sabbath, seeing especially, that Christ did not altogether rest, but
valiantly overcame the powers of death?

His question (God willing) shall be answered anon: as yet we are to note
only his disallowing of the name, as applied to the Lords day; which we may
observe also in M. Dowe in his Discourse, page 4. and 19.
Master Dowe his late Discourse of the Sabbath, or Lords day: and in Mr.
Ironside, quest. 3. cap. 12, 13.
Master Ironside his seven questions concerning the Sabbath. Mr. Broad his MS.
of the Sab. part. 2. cap. 2. p. 26. prope sin.
Master Broad forbids Preachers, in their Sermons, to say, Remember the
Sabbath day to sanctify it; and would have them, in stead thereof, to say,
Remember to sanctify the Lords day, for the Lords day, says he, may be
called no more Sabbath, then the Sabbath may be called Lords day: If as much,
it will be enough, as shall be showed afterward.

But Master Braburne, as he misliketh that the Lords day should lord it over
the Jewish Sabbath more then any; so he cavilleth more at the calling of it by
the name of the Sabbath, lest, under that name, it should take up some
authority from the fourth Commandment. He begins his Discourse, which is
his former Book against it, thus, Mr. Braburns Discourse of the Sab. p. 1.
Be pleased, Christian Reader, first of all to note, that we, now adays,
apply the name Sabbath to the Lords day promiscuously, and without difference;
now thus to confound two proper names of days, is as if we should call Sunday
Saturday, and Saturday Sunday.

And to restrain the name Sabbath to the old day of the Jews (which he
pleads for) he would have the words of the Commandment rendered thus, Ibid.
page 7. and page 68.
Remember the Saturdayes Rest, to keep it holy; from which, says Ibid. p. 200.
he the name Sabbath cannot be separated. And in his other Book (which he
wrote in defense of the former) he says, M. Brab. Defense p. 164. edit. 2.
That it is an error of our Ministers, to call the Lords day, or the first day
of the week by the name of Sabbath; and a Ibid p. 164. and 626.
mere fiction, since none of the Apostles ever called it so, nor is it any
where so named in the Scripture; he adds, that Ib. page 52.
by calling the Lords day by the name of Sabbath, they have robbed the Sabbath
of its honorable ornaments, that therewith they might deck and trim up the
Lords day, Ibid.
which is, as if one should take the crown off the head of a King, and set it
upon a common subject: Ibid. page 35.
for Saturday, says he, is a King or Mistress to the Lords day.

He had spoken with more congruity to himself, though not unto the truth, if
he had kept to his gender, and called it a King and Master, or a Queen and
Mistress: he objecteth further, Ibid. p. 50.
that we may as well call Ibid.
Baptism Circumcision, and the Lords Supper the Passover, and Ibid. p. 494.
that when the Minister says, Remember to sanctify the Sabbath day, to take
it for the Lords day; and so to say, Lord have mercy upon us, etc. is to make
answer (as deaf men do) who, when a man calls for a knife, do bring him a
sheath.

The resolution at which he would have his reasons and exceptions arrive, is
this; Let me, says he, for conclusion, exhort Minister and people to refrain
putting the name Sabbath day on the Lords day; and let them take with it, Ib.
p. 54, 55.
that they must, with forbearance of the name Sabbath day, refrain the use of
the fourth Commandment; for these go unseparably together.

Where we may see in him (as in others) that of Bishop Andrews made good, of
showing ill will to the thing, by carping at the name, as before we have
noted: for, Mr. Braburne (and we may say the like of some others) knowing the
right and title (claimed for the Lords day) by the fourth Commandment to be
kept a foot by the title Sabbath, first fettereth it to the Jewish weekly
holiday, by affixing the word Saturday unto it; not daring to trust it alone,
lest, being left loose, it should be ready for use, as an appellation of the
Lords day: Much like the Papists, who pinion the name Catholic with the
addition of Roman, that so they might keep it captive to their own side, and
by it, as by a lock or bolt, might let in, or keep out of the Church as please
themselves.

But the most severe Censurer of the name Sabbath (as applied to the Lords day)
is the Author of the Book called Altar Christianum; wherein, speaking of him
who wrote the Letter to the Vicar of Grantham, he says, D. Pockl. his book
called Altar Christianum, cap. 22. p. 130.
He had showed himself more like a son of the Church, if he had said that
the name Sabbath had crept into the Church, in a kind of complying, in phrase,
with the people of the Jews, and that in a shadow of things to come, as if
Christ were not come in the flesh, against the Apostles express doctrine and
charge, Colos. 2. and from hence would have sought to have cast that old leaven
out of our Church, which has sowred the affections of too many toward the
Church, and disturbed the peace, and hindered the pious devotion thereof.

This is enough, and bad enough; yet he says more and worse in his Sermon
preached at the Visitation of the Bishop of Lincoln, Aug. 7. 1635. wherein he
visits with the rod those that call the Lords day Sabbath day; and with it,
gives such sharp jerks as these; D. Po^kl. Visitation Sermon. called Sunday n^
Sabbath, page 6.
What shall we think of Knox, Whittingham, and their fellows (anabaptizing
the Lords day, or Sunday, after the mind of some Jew, hired to be Godfather
thereof) who call it Sabbath, and do disguise it with that name, and who were
the first that so called it, and the Testators, who have so bequeathed it to
their Disciples, and Proselites. D. Pockl. Ib. page 6, 7.
It was, says he, thirty years before their children could turn their tongues
to hit on Sabbath; and if the Gileadites (that met with the Ephraemites before
they could frame to pronounce Shibboleth) had snapt up these two before they
had got their Sabbath by the end, their counsel had brought much peace to the
Church.

For this name Sabbath, says he, is not a bare name, like a spot in the
forehead, to know Labans sheep from Jacobs; but it is a mystery of iniquity
intended against the Church; and the mystery (as he reveals it) is to shut
out the Letanie, and all the Service of the Communion Book: for that is no
Service for their Sabbath, but for Sunday.

Ibid. p. 19.
Item, they must make a Sabbath of Sunday, to keep up that name; otherwise
their many citations of Scripture, mentioning only the Sabbath, being applied
to Sunday, will appear so ridiculously distorted and wry neck'd, that they
will be a scorn and derision to the simplest of their now deluded Auditors.

Ibid. p. 20.
Others (says he) again, for the plot's sake, must uphold the name Sabbath,
that stalking behind it, they may shoot at the Service appointed for the
Lords day. Yet further, he makes the name of the Sabbath ( as on the face of
the Lords day) to be as an ugly vizzard, which does as well become it, as the
crown Ibid.
of thorns did the Lord himself; this was platted, says he, to expose him
to damnable derision, and that was plotted to impose on it detestable
superstition: Yet to die for it, says he, they will call it Sabbath,
presuming, in their zealous ignorance, or guilefull zeal, to be thought to
speak the Scripture phrase, when indeed the dregs of Ashdod flow from their
mouths: for that day which they nickname Sabbath, is either no day at all, or
not the day they mean. Thus far he, who, that his ill will to this word
Sabbath, (as applied to our Sunday) might appear in every page, the Title
throughout his Book, is [Sunday no Sabbath.]

CHAP. XIII. Reasons why Sunday, or the Lords day may be called Sabbath day,
delivered and defended.
BUt on the contrary (if impetuous passion may be so hushed, that religious
reason may be heard) we shall show cause sufficient to take up an Antititle to
that of Doctor Pocklington his Sermon, and to say, Sunday a Sabbath; and that
upon such evidence, both rational and exemplary, as without cavilling (as I
conceive) cannot be contradicted: and first for Reason.

First, The name Joseph. Ant. l. 1. c. 2. page 3. and in his first Book against
Appion. p. 783. Isidor. etymolog. l. 6. c. 18. fol. 32. p. 2. col 2. and all
Hebrew Lexicons.
Sabbath signifies rest, Sunday is a day of rest, wherein men are restrained
from their wonted works, and ought to rest, says B. White his Treat. on the
Sabb. page 152, 153, 158.
Bishop white, and to give themselves to religious exercises: Therefore the
Sunday may be called a Sabbath; For when the thing is acknowledged, why should
the word, by which it is most fitly signified, be denied? And when the thing
is denied (as rest on the Saturday by us Christians) why should the word
Sabbath, signifying rest, be allowed, as applied to it? Is there any reason why
names should not in sense be surable to things to which they are applied, but
rather contrary to them? To call that day by a name of rest, which is a day
allowed for labor, and to deny that name to the day wherein we are required to
rest, is not so little an absurdity, as that which Master Braburne remembered of
deaf men, who, when a man calls for a knife, do bring him a sheath; for
there is that neernesse betwixt them, that they may be both together, the one
within the other; but rest and labor are like light and darkness, in a
contradictory distance, which cannot be reconciled nor brought together.

It is no marvel that Master Braburne, who denies the thing (holding the
Lords day for no day of rest, but for a workeday) should deny the name Sabbath,
as in application to it: for he takes it to be a proper name of the day of
rest in the old Testament; which, if it were granted, would do him no good,
nor the Lords day any hurt (for its right to this title) for Adam was the
proper name of the first man, Genesis 3.8, 9. and yet it is used in Scripture for
man in general, Psalm. 9.1. ver. 12, 20.

But, says M. Ironside quest. 3. cap. 12. page 122.
Master Ironside, the name Sabbath leads us only to an outward cessation from
bodily labor, which, of it self, and precisely considered, was indeed a duty
of the Jewish Sabbath; but it is not so of the Christian Festival. Ibid. cap.
13. page 123.
The corporal rest was a chief thing aimed at in all the days of public
worship in the Jewish Synagogue, being both memorative of some things past, and
figurative of things to come. The name Sabbath is therefore no more moral, and
to be retained in the Gospel, then the names Priest, Altar, and Sacrifice. To
which we may say;

First, that the word Sabbath signifies not a cessation (with limitation to
outward work) nor precisely a Jewish memorative, or sigur ative rest, proper
to the weekly holiday of the Jews, but rest absolutely, and therefore Master
Ironside quest. 3. cap. 13. page 124. Si vocis primaevam signisicationem
spectemus, Sabbatum erit omnis dies sestus, Estius 3d. Cent. d. 37.
he confesses, out of Estius, That if we look to the first, and original
signification of the word, every holiday wherein men rest from their labors,
may be called a Sabbath; and that M. Irons. ubi supra. p. 123.
God himself in Scripture, imposed the name Sabbath upon all the days of
publik worship in the Jewish Synagogues.

Secondly, He acknowledges, Ibid. quest. 6. cap. 24. p. 223.
That there is a cessation from works required of Christian people (under the
Gospel) upon all days of their public worship and assemblies: for Nature her
self, says he out of Natura dictat aliquando vacuam diem quieti. Gers. de
december Precept.
Gerson, teaches all men sometimes to rest from their own employment, and to
spend that time in the praises of God, and prayers to him: for, as Ibid. cap.
24. page 223.
he very well says, to attend Gods public worship, and at the same time to
follow our own employment, are incompatible, and imply contradiction.

And that's enough to qualify the Lords day, or Sunday for the title Sabbath;
which he implicitly yields, when upon that ground he says, Ibid.
The Turks, nay, the Indians have their Sabbaths.

Thirdly, Whereas he says (as by way of distinction of the old Sabbath of the
Jews, from that day which Christians celebrate) that it was memorative of
things past, and sigurative of things to come: I answer, That that cannot
consine the name Sabbath to their day, nor restrain it from ours: for in the
former of the two we have as much interest as the Jews, for we are to
remember Gods finishing his works in six days, and his resting the seventh,
as well as they, and to have a grateful memory of the benefit of creation as
they had; and we need such a remembrance so much more, as we are at more
distance from it: and for the later, we build not the title upon a figure,
(which is but a feeble and sandy foundation) but upon the letter or sense
already confessed, which is firm and solid.

Fourthly, For that he says, That the name Sabbath is no more moral, and to
be retained in the Church, then the names Priest, Altar, and Sacrifice; we
will him to remember what elsewhere he has said, viz. Mr. Ironside quest. 6.
cap. 25. page 231.
That there is a rest which is eternal and moral to all days of public and
solemn worship; if so, the name Sabbath may be eternal, and reach as far
as the thing it self.

And whereas he says, That rest, to the Jews, was an essential duty, (i.
e.) of it self, and in its own nature, without reference or public worship,
which he denies to the Christians weekly holiday: I answer, That the question
is not here, whether the Jews were more restrained from labor then the
Christians; but whether there be not so much rest required now, both in respect
of public duties, and of private, (which require also cessation from outward
works) as that our Sunday or Lords day has thereby a better title to the name
Sabbath, then Saturday has, which has been long ago deposed from the dignity
of an holiday, and made an ordinary workeday.

Lastly, For the names Priest, Altar, and Sacrifice, I persuade my self he
will not deny the name Priest, since he took orders under that name, and does
under that name officiate according to the Liturgy of the Church of England,
which he will not say is rather Jewish then Christian, Legal then
Evangelicall: and for the words Altar and Sacrifice, I remit him (if he doubt
of them) to be resolved by the late Treatises, wherein both the Names and
Things are busily discussed: only I will say (by way of answer to his
comparison) that since we have a literal Rest of a weekly recourse, and not
literal Altars and Sacrifices, the name Sabbath thus may be retained under
the Gospel, though the names Priest, Altar, and Sacrifice be abolished.

But, says M. Ironside quest. 3. cap. 13. page 125.
Mr. Ironside, the day is to be named not from the nature of things done; but
from the quality of the person to whom they are intended; and therefore not
Sabbath, but Lords day.

I answer, The Antecedent is subject to exception many ways.

First, The chief holidayes in the old Testament were nominated from the
things done, and not from the quality of the person to whom they were intended;
as the Passover from the Angels passing over the houses of the Israelites in
Egypt, without hurt: Exodus 12.25.
the feast of Trumpets from the solemn sounding of Trumpets at it: Levit. 23.
Levit. 23. Deuteronomy. 16.
the feast of Tabernacles from the tents and boothes wherein the people lived
in the Desert: and (which more punctually meets with this objection) their
weekly holiday had its name, not from him to whom it is dedicated; but from
Rest, the duty of the day enjoined.

Secondly, In the Christian Church, his rule of denomination does not hold, for
we call one holiday dedicated to Christ by his Birth, another by his
Circumcision, another by his Ascension, (which are the things done on the day)
not by his name only to whom they were dedicated.

If it be said, when we speak of the Nativitie, we understand the Birth of
the Lord, and so also the Circumcision of the Lord, and the Ascension of the
Lord; I grant we do so, and so when we say the Sabbath, we may mean (as in
the Commandment is expressed, the Sabbath of the Lord, or to the Lord.

Thirdly, That the names of days should not be taken from the quality of the
person only, to whom they are intended, is plain by the feast of Pentecost,
so called from the number of the days betwixt it and Easter: and the name of
the Lords day called from its order (by the Evangelists, and the Apostle Paul)
the first day of the week; and by the Ancients the day of light, from
illumination at the Sacrament of Paptisme; and the day of Bread, from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper administered every Lords day, as Mr. Ironside,
quest. 3. cap. 13. p. 124, 125.
Mr. Ironside himself has observed.

Fourthly, If the names of holidayes should be taken from the quality of the
person to whom they are intended, as because our weekly holiday is intended to
the honor of the Lord, it must be called the Lords day; then all the holidayes
which are named by the Saints, should have their names from their Lord: for,
though the portions of Scripture read on them concern their lives and deaths,
the honor and service of the day is directed and intended not to them, but to
the Lord; yea, all holidayes of both Testaments are days dedicated to his
honor; by that reason then all must be called the Lords days: and so names
that should be given for distinction, would turn to confusion. Thus much for
the first Reason for the name Sabbath, as applied to the Lords day, or Sunday;
which were more then enough, if there had not been much more then there was
need and cause objected against it; but the rest we shall contract into a
narrower compass.

The second Reason why our weekly holiday may be called Sabbath day, is this:
rest; and that by virtue of these words, Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it
holy: that time then which the Church keeps (as in obedience to that part of
the Commandment expressed in the letter of the law by the name Sabbath) may,
or rather must be called by that name. By that word Sabbath, in that
Commandment, as B^. Andr. his Sermon. de Natic. page 37.
Bishop Andrews said of the words [which shall bee] we hold; and though we
say not (as he farther adds) it is our best tenure, yet a tenure it is,
which we must not let go, but we must, as he said of the word [ Idem. In
his second Sermon. of the Nativ. page 15.
nobis] make much of it, for thereby our tenure and interest grows up to a
further degree of assurance and evidence.

Thirdly, B. Hall, dec. of Ep. 6. epist. 2. p. 384.
Bishop Hall says, The son of righteousness rising upon that day ( called
the Lords day) drew the strength of that mor all Precept unto it: for all the
virtue and vigor of it is vanished from the Jews Sabbath, so that it
remains a mere working day; and if so, the title of Rest surely did not stay
behind it, but with the strength was transferred to the day for which it was
changed.

Fourthly, Lords day by the ordinance of the Lord himself, as (...).
Athanasius de Semente, Tom. 1. page 835. Edit. Graeco-lat. Commelian. Ann. c
10.10 c.
Athanasius says, succeeded the Jewish Sabbath, whose name it may have (in
that respect) if there were none other reason of more weight.

Here it will happily be objected, that so one might call Baptism by the name
of Circumcision, and the Lords Supper by the name of the Passover (for these
two Sacraments of the new Testament succeeded those two of the old) which were
to bring in a confusion of terms and times, and so in part to incur the
scorn which the Bish. of Elie his examinat. of the Dialogue. page 85.
Bishop of Elie puts upon his Dialogist, for his Argument drawn from the
succession of the one day to the other.

I answer; Howsoever the Argument of the Dialogist succeed (which we have
nothing to do withal at this time) we shall easily shake off this slight
exception, thus:

First, We do not ascribe the proper name of the old Sabbath to the Lords day
(for we do not say Saturday is Sunday, or the Lords day) but that name which
is common to them both, and wherein the one by a real right and congruity of
sense succeeds the other, and that is the name Sabbath, signifying Rest,
which belongs to them both; and that is not, as if one should call Baptism
Circumcision, or the Lords Supper the Passover; but as if we should call them
Sacraments and Seals of the Covenant, in which respect the later have both the
authority and appellation of the former.

Or, as if one should say, Doctor White succeeded Doctor Buckeridge, Bishop of
Elie, therefore he has the Title and Authority of the Bishop of Elie, though
he be not called by his Predecessors Christian, or surname in particular; he
says indeed, Examinat, of the Dialogue, p. 63, 69. marg.
That the fourth Commandment appointed a particular fixed day, to wit,
Saturday; but if that were true, (which I deny) he cannot say the word
Saturday is named there; and if it were, we would not take that, but the name
Sabbath for the true title of the Lords day, against which no just exception
has yet been taken, nor in truth can be.

And for a second Answer (which, in regard of the ground of it, it will not
become a Bishop to slight) we may say, That upon a substitution of one thing
in the room of another, it is not unusual (in our Church) to assign the
name, as well as the place, to that which is substituted: for a parcel of
Scripture is called by our Church the Epistle, though it be not taken out of
those writings which are properly so called^ but out of some book of Prophes.
Isa. chapter 7. ver. 10. On the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary. 40. v. 1. On Saint
John Baptists day. 63. v. 1. On Monday in Passion week.
Jer. c. 23. ver. 5. On the twenty fifth Sunday after Trinity.
Joel c. 2. v. 12. The first day in Lent.


Prophecy, or Hist. Acts chapter 1. ver. 1. On Ascension day. ver. 15. On Saint
Matthias day.
2. v. 1. On whitsunday. 5. v. 12. On Saint Bartholomewes day. 7. v. 55. On
Saint Stevens day. 8. v. 14. On Tuesday in Whitsun week. 9. ver. 1. On the
Convers. of S. Paul. 10. v. 34. On Monday in Easter week. On Mund. in Whitsun
week.
11. ver. 22. On Saint Barnabies day. ver. 27. On Saint James his day.
12. ver. 1. On Saint Peter's day. 13. v. 26. On Tuesday in Easter week.

History, as in the Service of diverse Sundays and Holidayes in the year,
according to the Catalogue in the margin; because it is read in the place, and
stands in stead of the Epistle.

And thus M. Brab. Desence p. 600.601.
Master Braburne will allow the Lords day, not only the name, but the honor
of a Sabbath, viz. as in the room of the old Sabbath, for a time, and for its
sake.

Fifthly, Chrysostom of old, and Jos. Scaliger of late) that the other
holidays of the Jews, which were not weekly, are called Sabbaths; and Doctor
Hevl. Hist. Sab. part. 1. c. 5. page 87, 88.
Doctor Heylin, M. Brab. Discourse p. 81, 82.
Master Braburne, and Master Ironside queil. 3. cap. 13. page 123.
Master Ironside acknowledge no less: and if they (when the seventh days
Sabbath was yet in force and use) might be called by that name; much more may
the Lords day now, which is a weekly day of rest, as the old Sabbath was, but
now is not; so that there is nothing in it, much less in any other day of the
week, that may give it a better right to the title Sabbath, then the Lords day
has.

Sixthly, There is a Sabbath or rest from sin, D. Heyl. Hist. of the Sab.
part. 2. c. 5. page 157.
Doctor Heylin allows the name Sabbath, to be given to cessation from sin;
why then not rather to rest from labor? Since this is literal and proper, (as
the law of the Sabbath requires,) that metaphorical and sigurative: and the
right of appellation goes rather by the letter then by the figure, as Bish.
Andr. 3. Sermon. of the Not. p. 64.
Bishop Andrews (observing of the world [day] taken sometime figuratively, for
the whole time of man's life, and sometimes properly and literally, as in our
ordinary speech, for the seventh part of the week) makes his choice of the
sense which consents with the letter, and leaves the figure.

Add hereunto a further latitude of the word Sabbath, (allowed by Mr. Broad in
his 3d. quest p. 5.
Master Broad) and therewithal a greater liberty for the use of it to
Christians, which is, That the Kingdom of heaven and the Sabbath have one
common name; and yet, says he, the difference betwixt them is as much, as
betwixt the sacrifices of beasts by the law, and the sacrifice of Christ in the
Gospel: and if the difference be less betwixt day and day, rest and rest, in
observation of Jewish and Christians holidayes (which cannot reasonably be
denied) the same name may be attributed to their holiday and to ours,
especially by turns; to theirs while it was in force, to ours since (that
being put down) it has obtained the honor of the day.

Seventhly, Heylin again (notwithstanding his exceptions both against the
name, and thing it self noted by the name) takes the name Sabbath to be an
honor; where he says, that the new Moons were not honored with that title
in the book of God: conceiving belike, as M. Brah. des. of his disiourse. page
53.
Master Braburn said, that the name was a crown on the head, rather then, as D.
Pockl. Visit. Sermon. p. 20.
Doctor Pocklington held, a deformed vizzard on the face. And if the Lords day
have gotten the honor of the Jews Festivity (as indeed it has) since that
was put down, and this set up in its stead, that name as well agreeing with the
precedent proofs, may be the more fitly attributed to it.

Eighthly, M. Dowe in his Discourse of the Sabbath, and Lords day, page 41.
Master Dowe observes (though by way of complaint, for which there is no great
cause) that the day we celebrate is vulgarly called and known by the name of
the Sabbath: the like has Mr. Brab. def. p. 626.
Master Braburne, Do not they, says he, usually call Sunday, or Lords day,
the Sabbath? And if it be vulgarly known and called by that name, the rule
is, We must speak with the vulgar, and think with the wise. Master Ironside,
by way of exception to this (vertually I mean, not expressly, for he makes
no mention of the rule) says, Mr. Ironside quest. 3. cap. 13. page 126.
Who speaks most religiously, the Apostles, and the whole Church, or some few
private persons of late years, is easy to determine: wherein he implies,
that the first, and best, and most Christians forbear the name Sabbath, and
use rather the word Lords day; therefore the name Sabbath must cease, as
savouring both of novelty and schism.

Whereto I answer, for the present, that all the four Evangelists note the day
we celebrate by the name of the first day of the week, and only one of them,
viz. S. John, and that but once, viz. Rev. 1.10. calls it the Lords day: yet
without any imputation of novelty or schism, which we shall more clearly and
fully take off and avoid (for the denomination of the L. day by the name of the
Sab.) in the ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. XIIII. Ancient evidence for calling the Lords day by the name of
Sabbath, observed especially against D. Pockl. Visitation Sermon. called, Sunday
no Sabbath.
Dr. Pocklington his Assertion; viz. That no ancient Father, no learned man
took the name Sabbath otherwise, from the beginning of the world till the
year 1554. then for Saturday, observed by the Jews.
USe of speech (which for the name Sabbath, as applied to the Lords day, has
for our age been See c. 12. and c. 13. prope sin.
confessed by the adversaries of it) is, as the -- Si volet usus, Quem penes
arbitrium est, and vis, and norma loque^di Hor. de art. poet.
Poet says, the rule of speech; and of such authority, that wise men willingly
submit unto it, and that sometimes so far, as to speak amiss, that they may
be understood aright: so did Ossum, sic enim potius loquamur; melius est ut
reprehendant nos Grammatici, quam non intelligant populi. August. enarrat. in
Psalm. 138. tom. 8. part. 2. p. 871, 872.
S. Augustine, when he said Ib. in Psalm. 36. part. 1. p. 358.
ossum for os, and foenerat for foeneratur, as being desirous rather that
Grammarians should reprehend him, then that the people should not understand
him; and among us many learned men use to say with the vulgar, The words
Chirurgus and Apostema are so englished by Cooper in his Dictionary.
Surgeon for Surgeon, and Impostume for Aposteme; and there be many more
words of this sort.

But for the name Sabbath (there being such sufficient reasons to set it as a
title upon the Lords day) when the more judicious make use of it in that sense,
they may well be conceived to do it, not as complying with the erroneous
dialect of the common sort, but as guided to it, by reason as well as by use.

And for such as have so taken it, or the conjugate to it (which is the same in
sense) we may mention diverse of eminent place, both of ancient and of later
times; as first Ignatius, the Disciple of Saint John the Evangelist, who,
having spoken against the manner of the Jews spending their Sabbath in
sensual jollity, excessive feasting, dancing, and other revelling, (...).
Ignat. ep. ad Magnes. page 57.
advises Christians, every one of them to sabbatize, or keep the Sabbath
spiritually, that is, rather to bestow the time in religious delights, then in
carnal contentments.

If any one except, and say, that he means this of the Jewish Sabbath day,
which in his days, and a good while after, was kept holy with the Lords day;
we may thence infer, that if Ignatius could brook the observation of
Saturdayes rest without any fear of Judaisme, when that day was to give up to
the Lords day, the holiness and honor of a weekly holiday (which necessarily
requires both Rest and Religion) he would not have made scruple to call it
the Sabbath. (...), etc. as it is forecited cap. 13. lit. ^.
Athanasius has a sentence, from whence we may derive the like inference for
his opinion of the name Sabbath, with reference to the Lords day; The Lord has
changed the Sabbath day, says he, into the Lords day: Whereof, says D^.
Twisse, in a MS. of the Sabbath.
a learned Doctor of our Church, what can be the meaning, but that the Lord
himself has, now in these times of grace, made the Lords day to become our
Christian Sabbath? So that, upon the change, the Saturday is not what before it
was, a day of rest; but the Lords is so, as before it was not.

And if the holy rest of Saturday be translated to the Lords day, shall not
the name that is answerable to the nature of it, pass along with it? If more
express and formal Testimonies be expected, (for these are but employed, and
vertuall evidences) we find Origin in Numb. cap. 28. Hom 23. tom. 1. page 259.
Origin in his three and twentieth Homily upon the book of Numbers, expressly
applying the name Sabbath to the day set apart for Evangelicall devotion.

Ob. Dr. Pockling. Sunday no Sab. page 16.
But it will be said, he adds the word Christian to it, calling it not simply
Sabbath, but the Christian Sabbath.

Ans. Let them allow of the name Sabbath, and we will not stick with them for
the title Christian, if (for distinction sake, and to prevent misprision) there
be any reason to make that addition; but where the word will be readily
referred to the right day, without another to explain or restrain it, it is
needelesse to add it.

Ob. Here Doctor Pocklington, to extenuate this Testimony, says, Dr. Pockl.
Sunday no Sab. page 19.
That Origin his Christian Sabbath is not kept on Sunday only, but every day
in the week; he means (I suppose, according to the conceit of diverse of the
Ancients) a Sabbath consisting in cessation from sin, and sanctity of life.
Christ (says he out of Origin) is our Christian Sabbath, and he that lives
in Christ, rests from evil works, and works uncessantly the works of Justice.

Answ. This is no contradiction to that we have said, but a concession of much
more then we demand; Christ himself, says Doctor Pocklington, and every day
(in regard of the holy life of a Christian) might be called a Sabbath: If so,
the Lords day, which was ordained, and must be observed with more general and
solemn holiness, and with more rest and cessation from worldly affairs, (for
holiness sake) might much more be called a Sabbath. In the Latin Fathers, the
name Sabbath in this sense may also be observed.

I will give some instances, as in Nos octava die, quae and ipsa prima est,
perfecti Sabbati festivitate laetamur. Hilar. Prolog. in Psalm. oper. p. 335.
Hilary; Upon the eighth day, which is also the first day, says he, we rejoice
in the festivity of a perfect Sabbath.

Whereby we are to understand, not an every days Sabbath, in forbearance of
sin; but an especial sabbatizing above other days, as in the celebration of
the Lords day, by cessation from works of the week days, and exercise of
religious duties belonging unto it, which he calls the eighth day (though it
have a weekly return in the number of seven) because in the first observation,
counting on beyond the Jewish tale of days, coming next after their seventh,
that makes the eighth.

To this purpose we may produce Saint Augustine Observa diem Sabbati, non
carnaliter, non Judaicls deliciis, quae otio abutuntur ad nequitiam. August.
enar. in Psalm. 32. tom. 8. part. page 242.
in his enarration upon the 32. Psalm, where he exhorts to observe the
Sabbath day, not carnally, with Judaicall delights, for they abuse their Rest,
etc. And in his Observa diem Sabbati, Magis nobis praecipitur, quia
spiritualiter observandum praecipitur; Judaei enim serviliter observant diem
Sabbati, ad luxuriam and ebrietatem. August. Tract. 3. in Johan. 1. tom. 9.
page 30.
fourth Tract upon S. John, We Christians, says he, are more strictly
commanded to keep the Sabbath, then the Jews; for we are to keep it
spiritually, they keep it carnally, in luxury and drunkenness* which, in the
readiest construction of the words, must run thus: We Christians are more
strictly commanded to keep (not the Saturday Sabbath, from which we are
discharged Col. 2.16. but) our Christian Sabbath, then the Jews keep their
Jewish Sabbath: If then we be commanded to keep a Sabbath, we must have the
thing, and the thing may have the name that belongs to it, and that name
properly is Sabbath.

There is another allegation for the name Sabbath taken out of the 251. Sermon
de tempore, in Augustine his name, which I forbear to urge as his, because the
B. of Elie in his Examinat. of the title Dial. page 107.
Bishop of Elie, in his Examination of the Dialogue of the Sabbath, takes
exceptions at it, when it is brought in to this purpose, and shows some
reasons why it should be supposed to be none of his, but of a later time; and
if it be none of Augustines when it is so cited, it was none of his when
himself cited it in his name, and as his, as he did in his B. of Elie in his
Treat. of the Sab. page 110.
former Treatise of the Sabbath

After Augustine, and as a near follower of his, both in tract of time, and
tractates of doctrine, we may note Prosper Aquitanie, who in his sentences
collected out of Sententiae ^ine dubio sunt Augustini, sed collectae a Sancto
Prospero. Bell. de Eccles. script. page 185.
Saint Augustine, says, Male celebrat Sabbatum qui ab operibus bonis vacat.
Prosper. Aquitan. sent. 114. ex Aug. tom. 3. part. 2. p. 1402.
that such celebrate the Sabbath in an ill sort, who make it a vacation from
doing good. In which words he vertually allows of the celebration of a
Sabbath, both for name and thing: If the like exceptions be taken at these
Testimonies, out of Augustine and Prosper, to those that have been noted
before, concerning the saying of Ignatius, the like answer may be here
returned, which there was made.

By such authorities as these (whereof I forbear some, being to bring them in
upon another occasion) I desire not to make show, that the Ancients did always
use to call the Lords day by the name of Sabbath, as some See B. White his
treat. of the Sab. page 201.
have said, or for the most part; for no man can prove that. And it is evident,
that in their Idiome it is more frequent and familiar to call the weekly
holiday of the Jews, the Sabbath, and the Christians weekly holiday Lords day:
but to observe, that they did not condemn the name, as in application to the
Lords day, nor forbear it so constantly as some (especially Doctor
Pocklington) have said, nor upon such conceits, as he and some others have
imagined, but upon some considerations which appertained to their times, and
not to ours: as I shall seasonably show in answer to another objection, when it
crosses my way.

Now I will descend from the Primitive Church downward, where the Doctor may
find his Assertion gain said by a Synod of Bishops, and other Prelates,
collected by Fox Mart. page 128. edit. 2.
Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury, about the year 747. in which, among other
Ecclesiastical matters, it was decreed, that the Sabbath day (and by that was
meant the day we now keep holy) should be reverently observed. And in M.
Fox, Ib. Dies Sabbati ab ipsa diei Saturni hora pomeridiana tertia, usque in
Lunaris diei diluculum festus agitator. Sr. Hen. Spelman de council. etc. cap.
5. an. Christ. 967. page 445.
King Edgars days, ann. 959. the Christians weekly holiday was by a decree,
under the name of the Sabbath, measured out from Saturday at three of the clock
in the afternoon to Monday morning.

Against this Decree of King Edgar, D. Heyl. hist. part. 2. cap. 7. page 216.
Dr. Heylin objecteth, that though the Decree in Latin have the word Sabbath,
in the Saxon copy it is only [Heald] which signifies holiday; which makes
nothing against our present observation (unless he had showed that the Latin
edition of that constitution was much later then the Saxon) and not a little
for it; Because,

First, They that penned the Latin, in likelihood were more learned, and so
the better able to judge of the fitness of the name, then they that penned it
in the Saxon language; for it requires less ability to speak a native
tongue, or to understand or translate a learned one, then to pen or speak it.

Secondly, As the Latin is a more learned language, so it is more general,
especially in the Christian world, where the celebration of the day so named is
received; and so it implies, either that the word was usually understood, or
that they would have it commonly taken in that sense. And whereas the D. Heyl.
Hist. Sab. part 2. c. 7. page 216.
Doctor says, There is only Heald or holiday in the Saxon Decree; he
implies holiday to be less then Sabbath, whereas Sabbath (in a mere
Grammatical sense) signifies less then holiday, for so Sabbath signifies
rest, and no more: and so the Levit. 25.2. and chap. 26.34.
earth has its Sabbath, when it is not tilled, and the Otium est Sabbatum
Asinorum. Bish. Downam in his Analys. of the ten Commandments. Com. of the Sab.
beasts their Sabbath, when they are not toyled; whereas the holiness of the
holiday belongs to us as we are Sanctius his animal, mentisque capacius
altae Deerat adhuc and quod dominari caetera posset. Ovid. Met. l. 1.
men, and much more as we are Ephesians. 1.4.
Christians: yet I confess, where both names are in use, so distinguished,
that the Sabbath stands for the Lords day, and holiday for other days
ordained for religious exercises, the name Sabbath is of more and better
importance then holiday is; but that makes nothing for the Doctors purpose.

In the Laws of Fox Martyr. tom. 1. p. 1017* col. 2. edit. ult.
Canutus, anno 1016. there was a constitution like that in King Edgars time,
concerning the Lords day by the name of the Sabbath, making the measure of it
from Saturday noon till Monday morning, which might yet be all one for the
measure with the Decree of Edgar, for the ninth hour (which is called nona, or
noon) was at three of the clock, which now with us is the third hour after
noone.

Again, Fox Martyr. tom. 1. p. 1017. col. 1.
King Edward the elder, and Gythrum the Danish King, forbidding buying and
selling, and all labor upon the holiday of the Christians, make their
prohibition of them in the name, not of Sunday, or Lords day, but of the
Sabbath.

And out of Albert. Krantz. Metrap. lib. 4. cap. 8.
Krantzius D. Heyl. Hist. Sab. part. 2. c. 15. page 131.
Doctor Heylin notes of Olaus King of Norway anno 1028. that taken up one
Sunday (on the Lords day, says Krantzius) in serious thoughts, and having in
his hand a small walking stick, he took his knife and whirled it, as men do
sometimes when they are troubled, or intent on business: and when it had been
told him, how he had trespassed therein against the Sabbath, he gathered the
small chips up together, put them upon his hand, and sit fire unto them, that
he might take a revenge upon himself for violation of the divine Precept.

The matter most remarkable in this story, is his scrupulous conscience and
precise severity, for which he is Gloriosissimus Rex Olaus -- Christianae
Religionis observantissimus inter alia virtutum suarum praeconia, and hoc
reliquit exemplum sanctimoniae die Dominico, etc. Albert. Krant. metr. l. 4. c.
8. p. 106.
highly commended by Krantzius; but for Cum die Dominico cogitationibus
gravatum, cum gereret animum baculumque manibus reneret, cultello (ut sit)
scindulas f^^it, -- admonitus ab astante (per jocum) de violatione Sabbati, non
leviter in se punivit admissum, scindulas collegit diligentissime, manuique
suae impositus, jussit incendi, ut in se ulcisceretur, quod contra divinum
praeceptum incautus admisisset. Albert. Krantz. Metrap. lib. 4. cap. 8. page
106.
our present purpose we are especially to note, that that day which Dr. Heylin
calls Sunday, was then called the Sabbath.

Ob. He says, the King was told [by way of jest] that he had trespassed
therein against the Sabbath.

Ans. So it might have been in jest, if the party had used another name
(whether Lords day or Sunday) and in using the name Sabbath rather then either
of them, it is most like that was a name rather of common use, then of special
choice to break a jest withal.

D. Heyl. Hist. Sab. part. 2. c. 5. page 158, 159.
He adds (for the year 1120, the time of Rupertus) an observation of one
Petrus Alphonsus, calling the Lords day the Sabbath of the Christians; but
(says he) he meant none otherwise, then the feast of Easter is called the
Christian Passover; for which he brings nothing out of that Author that
may be a just ground for such a gloss. And on the contrary, it may be said
that there is a Sabbath or Rest, according to the letter confessed, in the
observation of the Lords day; but the word Passcover was figurative (even to
the Jews) after their coming out of the Land of Egypt: much more is it so to
Christians since the coming of Christ.

Besides, he brings in one John de Bury, Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge (about the later end of the reign of King Henry the eighth)
assirming, That every day designed to divine service, might be called Sabbath;
which seems also to be the judgment of Bernard, who expounds the fourth
Commandment thus; Observa diem Sabbati, quod est, in sacris feriis te exe^ce,
quatenus per requiem praesentem discas sperare aeternam. Bern. super salv.
Regina, Sermon. 4. col. 1744.
Observe the Sabbath, that is, Exercise thy self upon the holidayes, that by
present rest thou may learn to hope for rest eternal. If so, much more may
the Lords day be called Sabbath, which has the pre-eminence of other days, as
the old Sabbath had, every week throughout the year; and not only once a
year, as Easter, and other holidayes, which have (in an anniversary
revolution) one turn, and no more.

We need say no more then this to confute the fond and new found conceit of
Doctor Pockl. concerning the novelty of the name Sabbath: wherein also D. Heyl
Hist. Sab. part. 2. c. 8. page 269.
Dr. Heylins negative observation ( That a Sabbath day was not heard of in the
Church of Christ forty years ago) is disproved; for, a day of cessation from
worldly works for religious duties (which indeed is a Sabbath) has been in use
in the Christian Church in every age since our Savior ascended; and the name
Sabbath has been often and answerably applied to the thing, as has been
showed.

And if the Doctor said right touching the late time of the Sabbath, and made a
true return by his Search we did with all care and dil gence, to see if we
could find a Sabbath in any evidence of Scripture, or Writings of the holy
Fathers, or edicts of Emperors, or decrees of Councels, or finaliy, in any one
of the public acts and momuments of the christian Churcl; but after several
searches made upon the a^ias and the pluries, we still ^eturne, non est
inventus. So in the second page of his Epist. to the Reader, before the second
part of his Hist. of the Sabbath.
non est inventus, for the fore going ages, he gave a wrong Title to the
second part of his History, when he called it The History of the Sabbath from
the first preaching of the Gospel to these present times: for, if there were no
Sabbath day heard of from the beginning of the Gospel until forty years since,
he should rather have called it for that time the History of no Sabbath: And
albeit it be as strange to write an History de non ente, or of a mere nullity,
as it is untrue that there was no Sabbath all that while; yet such a Title had
been (though more contradictory to the truth) more correspondent to his own
tenet, which with greater desire, and more diligent endeavor he striveth to
defend; yet happily, as the truth in his conceit, and so without any
contestation against his own conscience: I will yet think so charitably of
him; and if he had done so by others, it had been better both for them and him.

CHAP. XV. Royal and reverend Authority for putting the name Sabbath upon
Sunday, whereby it is cleared from schism, as well as from novelty.
THat it is no novelty to call the Lords day or Sunday by the name Sabbath, we
have proved in the precedent Chapter by sundry Testimonies, all of them of much
ancienter date then the year 1554. designed by Dr. Pockl. for the first use of
the word in that sense.

And for the time since, which is long enough to gain allowance to a word
(especially such a one as has congruity of reason to the thing whereto it is
applied) we can name Authority for it, sufficient to over sway any thing that
he has said against it, and to clear the use of it from schism, which the
same Doctor Pockl. has objected against it.

1. The Book of Homil. of the time and place of prayer, page 102.164. twice,
and p. 166. twice. The Author of the Dialog. betwixt A. and B. reckons ten
times, edit. 2. p. 25.
Homilies, ratified by the Royal Authority of three Princes, and by
subscription of all the conformable Clergy in their several reigns, calls
the Lords day the Sabbath diverse times.

2. King James in his b Apud D. Bound on the Sab. l. 1. p. 268, 269. And D.
Heyl. Hist. Sab. part. 2. p. 257.
Proclamation against profane sports, dated at Theobalds, May 7.1603 gives to
Sunday, or the Lords day the name of Sabbath: and in his second book of his K.
James Basilic. Dor. lib. 2. page 164.
Basilicon Doron, having spoken of the lawfulness of recreations, he
concludes with a proviso, that the Sabbath be kept holy, and no unlawful
thing done therein.

3. 1639. 1. For the Town of Weedenbeck. 2. For John Cheny of Leftwich in
Cheshire. 3. For Walker in Yo^^shire.
1631. 4. For Riddl^hur^^ of Dav^nh^m in Cheshire. 5. For the Town of Yaxall.
6. For William Small of Cletham.
1632. 7. For Richard Wood of Ha^ton. 8. For East and West Rebford. 9. For
Mariners of H^lb^i^. 10. For Amos Bedford, a Minister in Lincoln shire. 11.
For Thomas Wilson of old Whitingham in Cheshire.
1633. 12. For Underhill in Shropshire. 13. For one Hubie in Yorkshire. 14.
For Roger Posterne of Salop. 15. For the Town of Stone in Staffordshire.
1634. 16. For Lincolneshire poor. 17. For the poor of Ha^lscot in the County
of Salop. 18. For John Jackson of Langer in Nottingham shire.
1635. 19. For Port Patricke and Doneghday in Scotland. 20. For Broughton of
Southampton, where the Church, Parsonage house, and Schoole-house, etc. were
burnt.


K. Charles (our gracious Sovereign that now is) in his Briefes (appointing
the time for collections under his broad Seal) setting down the day when they
shall be made, names it the Sabbath day, whereby it is plain, he means not
Saturday, but Sunday; and so (which is directly against Dr. Pockl. his tenet
and title) that Sunday is a Sabbath. The most that I have seen (until the year
1636.) have directed to our weekly Holiday under the name Sabbath. For
intimation of the frequencie of that word in the sense wherein we take it, I
have made a List of twenty Instances of Briefs for this County of Cheshire
within these few years, and noted them in the margin, not doubting but there
have been many more, both within it, and without, which have not come to my
view. And I doubt not, when the truth upon impartial trial has broken
through all clouds of contradiction (as certainly it will do) but the name
Sabbath will outshine the name Sunday, and be again received into the style of
the Kings Briefes, as formerly it has been.

4. The Reverend Bishops of the Land, in the Confer. at Hamp Court, p. 44 and
45.
Conference at Hampton Court (as conscious of the lawful use of the word
Sabbath day for Sunday) when Doctor Reynolds desired a reformation of the abuse
of the Sabbath, before his Majesty that late was, and themselves, gave a
general and unanimous assent thereunto, none of them (for ought appears in
the Book) taking exception that he called the Lords day by that name. And
howsoever the name of the Lords day be more usual in their Ecclesiastical
Courts for our weekly holiday, then the name Sabbath day is: yet that they
condemn not the use of it, is plain by the seventh Canon, wherein they
prescribe the use of the Register book upon every Sabbath day.

In the Latin edition, I confess, the words are diebus Dominicis, and not
Sabbath: and there might be reason for it, because in Latin the word might
be more ambiguous, that tongue being more general, and reaching happily to such
places as yet have both the Saturday and Sunday in honor and use for the
exercise of Religion: yet had it been Sabbath in the Latin also, it had been
no prejudice, but rather an advantage to the truth, if withal it had been
understood to be meant, not of the old Sabbath, but of the new.

Besides, they meant, no doubt, by using the name Sabbath in the Canon in
English, to show the lawful use of that word, as well as of others, by which
the same day is signified unto us; and if the Latin be of more authority then
the English, which in some respects may be so, as before has been observed,
we can quote a Latin Book of good authority for it; it is the Book called
Reformatio legum Ecclesiasticarum, which, mentioning the observation of our
religious rest, does it under this Praecipuus Sabbatorum cultus, Reform. Leg.
Eccles. fol. 18. b.
Title [ the principal celebration of the Sabbath.]

The high Commissioners (of whom the Archbishop of Canterbury is chief) are in
Ecclesiastical authority next to a public Synod; and of their indifferency
for the use of the word Sabbath, as well as the word Sunday or Lords day, may
appear by the recantation enjoined by them to John Hethrington* wherein he
was to The Sermon called the White Wolf by Steph. Denison, preached at Paul's
Cross the same day. page 34.
disavow that which formerly he had delivered, viz. that the Sabbath day or
Sunday, ( which we commonly call Lords day since the Apostles time) was of no
force, and that every day is as much a Sabbath day, as that which we call the
Sabbath day, Lords day, or Sunday; and in these terms he was to publish it at
Paul's Cross, Febr. 11. 1627.

If it be needful to add particular testimonies for calling Sunday by the
name Sabbath, (and such scandalous invectives as some have made against it will
not suffer it to be superfluous) we may note by name diverse Reverend Bishops,
who take the word Sabbath in that sense: as to begin with Bishop Latimer, (whom
D. Pockl. Visit. Sermon. p. 28, 29.
Doctor Pocklington brings in expressly, with other Bishops unnamed, as a godly
Prelate, and well affected to the godly discipline of the Church, and he was
besides that a Martyr) B. Latimer.
he, in his Sermon upon the Gospel, of a King that married his son, after he
has cited the story of the man stoned for gathering sticks upon the Sabbath
day, has these words, Bish. Latimer in his Sermon upon the Gospel, of a King
that married his son, preached an. 1552. as the title shows, sol. 188. p. 1.
Which is an example for us to take heed, that we transgress not the law of
the Sabbath day; and a little after he adds, These words pertain as well to
us at this time, as they pertained to them in their time; for God hates the
dis-hallowing of the Sabbath as well now as then, for he is, and still
remains the old God, he will have us to keep his Sabbath as well now as
then; for upon the Sabbath day Gods seede-plow goes, that is to say, the
ministry of the Word is executed, for the ministry of Gods Words is Gods plow.

In which few lines he calls the Lords day Sabbath, no fewer then four
times: he calls it Sunday also, I confess; but that is nothing to this
purpose, since the name Sabbath is in question, not the name Sunday, which we
have treated on before, and proved to be lawful. Archb. Whit. Ans. to T. C.
p. 578. or 758.
Archbishop Whitgift was after him in time, though above him in degree and
dignity of the Church, and he, translating a Testimony out of Justin Martyrs
Apology, turns dies solis into the Sabbath day. B. Babington.
Bish. Babington, sometimes his Chaplain, was Bishop of Worcester in the late
Queens reign, (as Bishop Latimer was in King Edwards days) a venerable
Prelate, and a frequent and famous Preacher; and he uses the same name of the
same day, B. Babington in com. 4. p. 72. printed 1594. in 4th.
we plainly see, says he, what day the Apostles celebrated, and met upon,
having their solemn Assemblies, namely on this our Sabbath; and it adds also
further strength to this, that Saint John, in his Revel. calls this our
Sabbath day, the Sunday, Dominicumdiem: and afterward (having set down some
general duties of the day, says he) Ibid. p. 74.
These things are not to be done only on the Sabbath day, but every day, even
all our life long.

So does that renowned and so admired Sacratissimus antistes, Lancelotus
Andrews, linguarum, artium, scientiarum, humanorum, divinorum omnium,
infinitus Thesaurus, stupendium ora^ulum, etc. So in the Title page the second
edition of his Sermons.
Bishop of Winchester, Bishop Andrews (who used to make a curious choice of
his words, as well as of his matter) in his third Sermon of the Resurrection,
where, speaking of the women that would have embalmed our blessed Savior, he
says, B. Andrews his 3d Serm^n on the Resurrection, p. 406, 407.
Though they feign would have been embalming him, yet not with breach of the
Sabbath, their diligence leaped over none of Gods Commandments for haste; no,
not this Commandment, which, of all other, the world is most bold with; and if
they have haste, somewhat else may, but sure the Sabbath shall never stay them.
And beginning his Sermon at the Court on Whitsunday, 1606. he says thus, B.
Andr. his Sermon. Acts 2. verse. 2, 3, 4. page 595.
We are this day, besides our weekly due of the Sabbath, to renew, and to
celebrate the yearly memory of the sending down of the holy Ghost. And even
there where he set himself most seriously against Judaicall opinions, viz. in
his Speech against Mr. Traske, in the Star Chamber, he says thus, Ibid. In
his Speech to the Star Chamber against Master Tracke, page 72, 73. and this
name new Sabbath he has (if the Author of the Dialogue betwixt A. and B.
reckon right) twenty times in his Book called Catec. Doctr. So the Dialogue
betwixt two Divines A. and B. edit. 2. page 20.
the Sabbath had reference to the old creation; but in Christ we are a new
creature, a new creation by him, and so to have a new Sabbath* if a new
Sabbath, then not no Sabbath, as Doctor Pocklington would have it. And the
Bishop means by that the Lords day, which he maintains against Master
Traske, who stood for Saturday the Sabbath of the Jews.

Bishop Alley (Bishop of Exceter, in his Book called, The poor man's Library,
printed Anno 1560.) speaking of the due observation of the day we celebrate,
says: Bish. Alleys Poor man's Library, miscelan. praelect. 5. fol. 143. p. 2.
All Governors and Householders offend against this precept, if they do not
their diligence to retain the sanctifying of the Sabbath in their houses:
whosoever despise the Religion of the Sabbath, give evident testimony in
themselves of impiety and contempt of God, etc.

Bishop King (not long since) Bishop of London Bishop King.
(who in his time was accounted a very venerable Prelate, and always well
affected to the Government of the Church, before himself was made a Governor
of it) in his Lectures upon Jonah (of several impressions) uses the name
Sabbath diverse times for Sunday, or the Lords day; as in his sixth Lecture
(where he reproves careless, dissolute, and ill disposed persons) he says,
Bishop King. lect. 6. p. 90.
They love the thresholds of their private doors upon the Sabbaths of the
Lord, and their benches and alehouses, better then the Courts of the Lords
house: And a little after he taxes them by the name of Profaners of our
sanctified Sabbaths. And in his seventh Lecture he has these words: Ibid.
lect. 7. page 96.
The Sabbath is reserved as the unprofitablest day of the seven, for idleness,
sleeping, walking, rioting, tippling, bowling, dancing, and what not: I speak
what I know (says he) upon a principal Sabbath (For if the resurrection of
Christ deserve to alter the Sabbath from day to day, I see no cause, but the
coming down of the Holy Ghost should add honor and ornament to it) I say,
upon a principal Sabbath, etc.

Doctor Howson, late Bishop of Durham, though a real opposite to the Sabbath
in some particulars, was not an enemy to that name (when he made mention of
the thing) for in his Sermon, Bish. Howsons Sermon of Festiv page 6. edit. 2.
in defense of Festivities, he has these words: Beloved Christians, were any
of those excellent Fathers in our times, what think you he would say? if he
should see Oratoria turned into Auditoria, Churches into Schools, our Sabbaths
and Festivities not spent in cultu latriae, but in hearing of Exercises, as
some call it, etc. though he were no friend to the Sabbath, either for the
dignity of the day, or the duties belonging unto it (for both in opinion and
practice he was opposite to preaching) yet was he not so ill affected to the
name, as Doctor Pocklington and others have been.

That very learned Bishop of Bath and Wells (whose Sermons were so approved by
Doctor Reynolds, Bishop Lake.
that what he heard him preach, he still desired to read; and therefore used
to crave a copy of his Sermon) was not only a friend to the name Sabbath for
Sunday, but a zealous pleader for it, as we shall observe in another place.

And the Bishop of Exceter that now is (who has so decently dressed Devotion
and Piety with delicacie of conceit, and elegancy of expression, as to make it
amiable in all eyes) in his art of divine meditation, says in approbation of
it thus: Bish. Hall in the art of divine meditation. cap. 10. p. 111.
No Manna fell to the Israelites on their Sabbath, on ours it does. Where the
word Sabbath must be necessarily understood in the word Ours: And if so it be
not plain enough, see further in his second book of Characters, where part of
his description of a distrustful man is this: Lib. 2. Charact. p. 196.
He dares not come to the Church, for fear of the crowd; nor spare the
Sabbaths labor, for fear of want; nor come near the Parliament house, for
fear it should be blown up.

I make no doubt, but the Articles of Episcopal Visitations give allowance for
the like use of the name Sabbath for Sunday, or Lords day: for so it is in the
15. Article of Archbishop Parker his Visitation. Nor is it to be doubted, but
in Archbishop Whitgifts Articles the word was in the same sense: for, as we
have noted before, he turned the word Sunday into Sabbath, in translating a
testimony out of Justin Martyr. And sure we are, that Archbishop Bancroft used
the word Sabbath for the Lords day four times in his Articles of Visitation,
twice in two Articles, viz. 75, 76. whence it is probable, that other Bishops
were in phrase and form of speech (for that name) conformable to them: for, in
the Province of York (much more in that of Canterbury) it was so, as in our
Diocese of Chester.

Bishop Lloyd in his Visitation, Anno 1605. Bishop Lloyd.
in the 2.4.8.44. and 45. Artic. calls that day Sabbath day. So did Bishop
Morton in his Visitation of the same Diocese, Anno 1617. Artic. 11.30.33.39.
Bishop. Morton.
And Bishop Bridgman in his trienniall Visitation, Anno 1631. Bish. Bridgman.
Artic. 11.41.43. used the word Sabbath for the weekly Holiday of our Church;
who were yet all of them both in judgment, language, and practice, far enough
from siding with Schismatic Novelties. To these Bishops of England, I will
add two out of Ireland; and so conclude my Episcopal Testimonies for the name
Sabbath.

The one is Bishop Usher, the most reverend Archbishop and Primate of Armagh,
who (I know by conference with him) approves of the application of the name
Sabbath to our Sunday, or Lords day. The other is Bishop Downham, the Bishop of
Derty (who has done and suffered much in the defense of the Prelacie) he in
his abstract of the duties commanded, and sins forbidden in the Decalogue,
treating of the fourth Commandment, taxes (with reference to our times) those
that are mindful of the Sabbath to profane it, who (having extraordinary
business) will not bestow any part of the week upon it; but will reserve it
for the Sabbath, and make bold with God to borrow part of his day: and those
who observe the Sabbath for fashion sake, keeping the outward rest only,
putting on gay clothes, and doing nothing, etc.

After these reverend Prelates (in number sixteen, whereof four are
Archbishops) we will give in the names of some Cathedral Deanes and Doctors
(of venerable estimation in our Church) noting the Lords day by the name
Sabbath, as Doct. Boys expos. of the Liturgy. p. 92.
Doctor Boys (Archbish. Whitgifts Chaplain, and Deane of Canterbury) and
Doctor Done, Deane of Paul's: The Deane of Canterbury says, The Sabbath is (as
one calls it) Gods Schoole-day, the Preachers are his ushers, and the Church is
his open School house: which he does not only repeat, but approve of; and
when Sabbath breakers are rebuked (says Doct. Boys ubi sup. page 93.
he) all their answer is, that most do so: If they will follow fashion and
example, let them follow the best (scil.) Gods example. And again, Ibid. page
95.
The duties required on the Lords day, are principally two, Rest, and
Sanctification of this rest: a double Sabbath, rest from labor, and rest from
sin; and if there be a double Sabbath in it, it has a double right to the
title Sabbath.

Doctor Done, the Deane of Paul's, Dr. Done.
preaching at the dedication of a new Chapel in Lincolnes Inn (where he was
Lecturer) speaks thus; Doctor Done of Paul's in his Sermon, Jo^n 10. verse.
22. which he calls the Feast of Dedication, at the dedication of a new
Chapel in Lincolnes Inn, consecrated by the Bishop of London, anno 1623.
page 7.
Though God take a seventh part of our time in the Sabbath, yet he takes more
too, for he appoints other Sabbaths, other Festivals, and in all the Sabbaths
there is still a cessation. He says not, God took, but takes, in the present
tense, a seventh part of our time, not of the Jews only, (though he took it
first of theirs): and though he call other Festivals Sabbaths also, the
seventh day may have an especial right to the name Sabbath, above the Rest;
for so it had under the old Testament, though then there were other holidaies,
which, for their congruity with it in rest or cessation (for in all Sabbaths,
says he, there is still a cessation) might be partakers of the same title:
and prosecuting the same point afterward, he reproves some who think we are
bound to no festivals at all, but to the Sabbath; but God requires as much
service from us as from the Jews, says Ib. page 10 of his dedication Sermon.
he, and to them he enlarged his Sabbaths, and made them diverse. And to the
same purpose he speaks in his Sermon on the 10. of John, As God takes the
tenth part of our goods in Tithes, but yet more in Sacrifices; so though he
take a seventh part of our time in the Sabbath, yet he takes more too, for he
appoints other Sabbaths or Festivals.

There be some (to take in a doubt by the way, which his coupling of Sabbaths
and Festivals as Synonymaes induces us to consider) who so precisely
distinguish betwixt Sabbaths and Festivals, as to deny that the Sabbath may be
called by the name of a Festival. The Sabbath (says the Re-examiner of Perth
Assemb. p. 187. printed in anno 1636.
Re-examiner of Perth Assembly) under the Law, was never called Jom tob, a
good, that is, a merry day, as were the solemn Feasts: which seems to be a
portion of Sacrifice taken from the Altar Damasc. page 666, 667.
Altar of Damascus, where the same observation is made: and concerning
Festivals in particular, the Author says, It was not lawful to fast on a
Festival.

But it may be answered, that though there be difference betwixt the Sabbath,
and other days properly called dies festi, (in regard of particular occasion
of the institution, and of more liberty in meats and delights, then on the
Sabbath); yet might the Sabbaths, yea, all public solemnities (even the Fast
of Expiation not excepted) be sometimes called Feasts or Festivals, and so
much the Author of the Ib. page 666.
Altar of Damascus (not without some apparent contradiction to himself) has
acknowledged. And as the old Sabbath was unto the Jews a day of spiritual
delight, for which purpose some cite Isa. 58. (how fitly, we shall note in
another place); so is the new Sabbath to the Christians, on which (in Die
dominico j^junium nesas ducimus, vel de geniculis adorare. Tert. de coronmilit.
c. 3. tom. 2. page 747.
Tertullians time) it was held a great offense to fast; and in all times when
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is administered (which in the Primitive times
was as often as that day returned) it exhibiteth a Feast of the body and blood of
Christ, the best and most delicious cheer that can be desired, to him who is
rightly prepared to receive it.

But this only by the way, or rather as an occasional digression out of the
way, taken from the doubt in the words of the Deane, concerning the Sabbath,
from whom we have one observation more to remember, and that is in his Sermon
on Mat. 21. Idem, Sermon. on Mat. 21.44. page 16. printed 1634. at Cambridge.
We will admit of Christ, says he, but we will not admit him to reign over
us: If he will be content with a Consulship, with a Colleagueship, that he
and the world may join in Government, that we may give the week to the
world, and the Sabbath unto him; that of the day we may give the forenoone to
him, the afternoon to our pleasures; If this will serve Christ, we can be
content to admit him; but, nolumus regnare.

To these two Reverend Deanes, I will add two worthy Doctors, who are witnesses
to the warrantable application of the word Sabbath to the Sunday, and who
(though neither Bishops nor Deanes) have had the reputation (and not without
desert) of very learned and religious men; viz. Doctor John White (brother to
Doctor Fr. White late Bishop of Elie) and Doctor Daniel Featly (household
Chaplain to the late Archbish. Abbot.
Archbishop of Canterbury,) Doctor Joh. White, in his answer to the Papists,
bragging of the holiness of their Church, and upbraiding of our Church for
want of holiness, has, among other accusations of their courses, these words;
D. Joh. White in his way to the true Church.. 38. p. 210.
And for mine own part, having spent most of my time among them, this I have
found, that in all excess of sins Papists have been the ringleaders; in
royotous companies, in drunken meetings, in seditious assemblies and practices,
in profaning the Sabbath, etc. And again, Papists hold, that it is lawful on
the Sabbath day to follow suits, travel, hunt, dance, keep Faires, and such
like: this is that which has made Papists the most notorious Sabbath breakers
that live.

And Doctor Featly, as he had more occasion to mention the day, and the duties
thereof, so he more frequently makes use of the name Sabbath; as in his
Handmaid to Devotion, we find mention of an Dr. Featly Handmaid to
Devotion, in the direction for the use of the book. p. 4.
hymn and prayer before the Sabbath; wherein, says he, the duties of the
Sabbath are expressed: and in preparation for the receiving of the Sacrament,
there is a confession in these words, Hand maid to devotion, page 107.
Thou command me to keep holy thy Sabbath, and set an especial mark
of Remembrance upon it; yet I have not remembered to put off my ordinary
business: and in the Devotion for the Christian Sabbath, the name is Ib. ^ p.
172. ad page 200.
often used for the day we celebrate, sometimes with the word Christian joined
to it, sometimes the name Sabbath is set without it: and in his volume of
printed Sermons, treating on these words, Wherefore God has highly exalted
him, he says, Dr. Featly Sermon. which he calls Lowliness exalted. page 735.
If the rest of God from the works of Creation were just cause of sanctifying a
perpetual Sabbath to the memory thereof, may not the rest of our Lord from the
work of Redemption (more painful to him, and more beneficial to us)
challenge the like prerogative of a day to be hallowed and consecrated unto
it? shall we not keep it as a Sabbath on earth for him, which has procured
for us an eternal Sabbath in heaven? And a little after he adds, Ib. page
735, 736.
The holy Apostles, and their successors fixed the Christian Sabbath upon the
first day of the week, to eternize the memory of our Lords Resurrection: and
speaking of Easter day, With what Religion, says Ib. page 736.
he, is the Christian Sabbath of Sabbaths to be kept?

I could lengthen this Catalogue (for the name Sabbath thus applied) with many
more names of those whose sufficiency and sincerity is such, that it would
little become them that carpe most at the name Sabbath in this sense, to teach
them how to speak, without corrupting their dialect with the dregs of Ashdod;
as of Mr. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5 p. 183. and 385 M. M^son, who wrote of the
consecrat. of Bishops, anno 1613. p. 269. Pet. Ramus de Relig. l. 2. c. 6.
Master Hooker with diverse others; but that will not need, especially, if we
add unto these that which has been confessed, or rather complained of by M.
Brab. in his Desence. p. 626.
Master Braburne and M. Dowe his discourse p. 4.
Master Dowe, viz. That the Lords day is usually and vulgarly called and known
by the name Sabbath; and then there will be a full answer to Master Ironside
his objection, which sounds as if the name Sabbath, for the Lords day, were a
mere mistake of a Mr. Ironside quest. 3. cap. 13. page 126.
few private persons of late years: I hope, Kings, Archbishops, Bishops, and
Deanes, and other eminent Doctors are not private persons, nor they (together
with the vulgar) few: and we may yet make them more, by bringing in some of
those to bear witness to the lawful use of the word Sabbath for Sunday, or
the Lords day, (being drawn to yield some assent unto it by the force of
truth) who otherwise show their great dislike of that denomination.

CHAP. XVI. Of such as are adversaries to the name Sabbath ( as put for Sunday)
sometimes assenting thereunto, and using the name in that sense, or yielding
that which does infer it.
AS first, Master Braburne in his discourse to this Objection ( the name
Sabbath signifies Rest: Now on the Lords day we Rest; therefore we may call
it Sabbath day) answers, M. Brab. discourse. p. 81.
It Is true, the Sabbath signifies Rest, and so the Lords day might be called
Sabbath day; but yet in no other sense then every common Holiday, wherein we
work not, may be called Sabbath day, that is, Resting day.

We take his concession, for the Lords day to be called Sabbath; but not his
comparison: for, as much as that has more right to the name, which has a
weekly recourse of Rest, then that which comes but once a year; which
himself does in effect acknowledge, when he so In his Defense p. 276, 277, 481.
often mentions the Lords day Sabbath, as out of a kind of necessity to
express his own conceptions: otherwise (to use his own M Brab. Defens p. 50.
phrase) he would not so often have taken the crown off his King Saturnes
head, and set it upon that day, which (in his conceit) is but a common Subject.

2. Doctor Heylin (notwithstanding what we have before observed of him)
appears sometimes indifferently disposed to give to the Lords day the name of
Sabbath, as Doct. H^yl. hist. Sab. part. 2. c. 6 page 182.
where he says, By the Doctrine of the Helvetian Churches (if I conceive their
meaning rightly) every particular Church may destinate what day they please to
religious meetings, and every day may be a Lords day, or a Sabbath. If we were
to judge of his opinion, by this place, we could not tell which word he liked
better, Sabbath, or Lords day, he shows himself so equally affected to them
both, seeming to be the same man, and of the same mind with him, who in
another book wrote thus: Pet. Heylin. Geogr. p. 702.
I dare not so far put my sickle into this harvest, as to limit out the
extent of Sabbath keeping, which, commanding us to do no manner of work, does
seem to prohibit us to work for our own safeguard. Wherein he shows such
modesty in himself, and such equity, both to the word and to the thing (which
is signified by it) as if he had observed the same throughout his book of the
History of the Sabbath, it had neither been so bad, nor so big as we see it
is.

3. Master Mr. Primrose. part. 1. chapter 13. pa^. 73. See also part. 4. p. 302,
304, 305. to the same purpose.
Primrose (though otherwise neither fondly nor friendly affected to the
Christian Sabbath) is sometimes so facile and liberal in his allowance of the
use of the name Sabbath, in the time and state of the Christian Church, as to
allow Christians liberty to keep every day holy, and to say, that all days
under the Gospel should be as so many Sabbaths; all the days of the week, and
the whole year, should be as Sabbaths unto them. If so the Sunday may be a
Sabbath, much more for the reasons and authority fore-alledged; and if it have
more of the thing, it has more right to the name.

Master Mr. Ironside. quest. 3. c. 13. p. 123.
Ironside also (though he dispute against the title Sabbath, as to our
Christian Holiday) ingenuously confesses, that the name Sabbath is lawful,
and may be also used by such as have their wits well exercised in Scripture, if
without superstition, fraud, or scandal. Mr Ironside. quaest. 2. cap. 9. page
96, 97.
And that God must have his rest, and appointed Sabbaths; which is the essence,
life, and spirit of that Commandment, and for ever moral. And if the thing
Sabbath be moral and perpetual, and the effence, life, and spirit of the Law
(as he says,) can any one deny the title Sabbath? Master Ironside cannot well
do it, who affirms this, and that by the express title of the Sabbath. And
of the Friday (made a weekly Holiday by Constantine) he faith, M. Ironside.
concius. of his quest. cap. 31. page 293.
that he made it a Sabbath.

Object. But when he says, that the Lords day is Sabbath, he means not that
it is properly so called; but analogically, and in its proportion. To which I
answer,

1. That when men call the Lords day Sabbath, there is no need to add, either
properly, or improperly, or analogically; therefore (for ordinary speech) it is
no exception against the use of the word. It is familiar with many to call the
Lords Table, Altar, though it be not properly an Altar, but analogically: and
yet he will not say, they are bound to bring in this distinction when they
mention it, and to say, it is an analogicall Altar; and when Christ is called
the Lamb of God, the Lion of the Tribe of Juda, he is not properly, but
analogically a Lamb, or a Lion: yet he is commonly so called, without adding
either part of the distinction of properly, or analogically.

2. But the Lords day may be called Sabbath properly, because (as it is an
Holiday) it is a day of Rest, properly so taken a day of weekly Rest, as the
old Sabbath was. And even in Doctor Pocklingtons Se^mon (though we should not
much account of his Testimony, but where it is against himself) there is
something (albeit he meant it not) which makes for the title Sabbath, to
belong to the Lords day, viz. this, Doct. Pockl. Visitat. Sermon. p. 19. Cujus
vis soluta, nec nomen haerebit. Ambr. so cited by Doct. Pockl. Ibid.
When the Sabbath lost its force, it forfeited its name (says he out of Saint
Ambrose) and therefore ought not so to be called; and so, having lost both
force and name, is become nothing at all but a mere Idol: The Saturday then,
which was the day of Rest unto the Jews, is now no Sabbath, nor must be so
called; which by the way is contradictory to that With us the Sabbath is
Saturday, and no day else. Doct. Pockl. Sermon. page 21.
which he says elsewhere: for, if it have forfeited its name; forfeiture is
not an annihilation, but an alienation of a right from one to another: and if
that be so, let any body judge what day has most right to that forfeiture.
Can any other day of the week put in for an interest in it, before the Lords
day, or Sunday? If the Lord of the Sabbath may be Judge, he will give no
sentence surely for any day against his own.

CHAP. XVII. Exceptions against some of the precedent Testimonies alleged for
calling the Lords day Sabbath, propounded and answered.
THe Bishop of Elie, in his Treatise on the Sabbath day, and in his Examination
of the little Dialogue, made in answer to it, would avoid the allegations for
the name Sabbath, taken out of the Fathers, the Book of Homilies, Bishop
Andrews and Master Hooker, and his brother Doctor John Whites Book of the Way
to the true Church, by such exceptions as these:

The first Exception, touching the Fathers.
First for the Fathers; The Question is not, says Bish. Whites exam. page 109.
he, whether the ancient Fathers have at any time styled the Lords day a
Sabbath in a mystical or spiritual sense, (that is, a day wherein Christian
people ought to abstain from sin) for in this sense they have styled every
day of the week (wherein Christians rest from sin) a His former Treatise of
the Sabb. p. 203.
Sabbath, yea, every day throughout their whole lives: I have diligently
searched, says Ibid. p. 202.
he, into Antiquity, and observed (in the Fathers) their forms of speech,
when they treat of the Lords day, and I find it far different from the usual
language of the Fathers, to style the Lords day the Sabbath: and that they ( by
the name Sabbath) either understand the old legal Sabbath, taken away by
Christ, or the spiritual or mystical Sabbath, which was typed and represented
by the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment. Wherein he speaks more warily
(though not altogether truly) then No ancient Father, no learned man, Heathen
nor Christian, took the name Sabbath otherwise then for Saturday, from the
beginning of the world, until the beginning of Schism, An. 1554. Doct. Pockl.
visit. Sermon. p. 21.
Doctor Pocklington did: And when the Fathers distinguish, and give proper
names to the particular days of the week (says the Bishop) they always
style the Saturday, Sabbatum, the Sabbath; and the Sunday, or the first day of
the week, Dominicum, the Lords day. This is his reply to the Testimonies taken
out of the Fathers; whereto I answer:

This distinction of mystical and literal is familiar with the Bishop, and
may serve for a shift to elude other Testimonies for the name Sabbath, as well
as those particularly mentioned. But it is but a shift, and will serve but for
a while; for to answer, First, concerning the Fathers, though they, in their
times, distinguished two days by the names of Sabbath and Lords day, to avoid
confusion (when they celebrated both with services of devotion, as the Bish
White his Treat. of the Sab. page 202.
Bishop has observed out of Ignatius, Ambrose, Socrates, and Clemens Romanus);
yet there is no reason we should give up the proper title of the religious
Rest, of the fourth Commandment, to a day which we use neither for Rest nor
for Religion.

Secondly, If they held a mystical conformity betwixt the Jews Sabbath, and a
Christians holy conversation sufficient ground for bestowing the name Sabbath
upon a spiritual rest from sin; it must needs be so much more warrantable to
call the Lords day Sabbath, as there is the more agreement betwixt it and the
Jewish Sabbath: now betwixt them there is an agreement much more then
mystical; for whereas that mystical Sabbath (as the Bishop takes it) may be
every day in the week, and all the days of man's life, our solemn Sabbath
comes only once every week, as the Jews Sabbath did: In ours we forbid
and forbear secular employments, so was it with the Jews; there was a
cessation from such works with them, that they might the better attend upon
religious exercises, and those principally public; and so it is with us
Christians: The reason of the Commandment drawn from Gods example, in his
proportion of working six days, and resting on the seventh is exemplary to us,
as well as to the Jews: it belongs to Christians to deal as equally with
God, in letting him have one day in seven, for his honor who allows us six
for one for our own occasions) as to the Jews.

And for their end and use of the Sabbath, which is a grateful remembrance of
their creation, and the blessing of God upon their careful and holy
observation of it: we Christians are as much bound to the one, and may hope
for as much benefit by the other, as the Jews.

All which literal conformities considered betwixt their Sabbath and ours,
with reference to the letter of the fourth Commandment, our Church takes that
Commandment wholly into her Liturgy, and prays (as after the other nine)
Lord have mercy upon us, etc. and therefore the distinction of literal and
mystical (to say the least of it) is impertinently applied to preclude the
title Sabbath, in a literal sense, from the day we celebrate.

Bishop Whites second Exception touching the name Sabbath in the Homilies,
answered.
Secondly, Against that which is propounded for the name Sabbath out of the
Homilies of our Church, he says, Exam. p. 37.
It may be questioned in what sense the Homily styles Sunday the Sabbath:
whether in a proper and a literal sense (according to the style of the old
Law) or in a mystical and analogicall sense, as Christ is called our
Passover, 1 Cor. 5.7. But a little after he puts the matter out of
question by a peremptory resolution, which is this; The Lords day is not the
literal Sabbath of the fourth Commandment; and therefore, in propriety of
speech, it cannot be called the Sabbath day expressly, and in particular
commanded in the Decalogue; but the same is styled by the Homily our Christian
Sabbath, in a mystical and analogicall sense, even as mortification is called
circumcision, Circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit, not in the
letter, Romans 2.29.
Romans 2.29. and sincerity and truth are called unleavened bread, 1 Cor. 8.5.

This exception of his touching the name Sabbath, taken out of our Homilies, is
obnoxious to so many exceptions, that I wish rather some weak and worthless
Adversary to our cause had made it, then a man of so great learning, gravity,
and authority as he was; for whose sake I will deal as respectively in the
return of mine answer, as I well may (without betraying the truth) and so
first I say:

1. That in saying, That the Lords day is not expressly and in particular
commanded in the fourth Commandment, he implies (which Bish. White in his
treat. of the Sab. day. p. 112, 126, 269. and in his examinat. of the Decalog.
p. 46, 52, 63. marg. and 69. marg.
elsewhere he expressly delivers) that the Jews Sabbath (which was Saturday)
is expressly, and in particular there commanded, which is not true in it self,
as I shall prove, in handling the material points of that Commandment: and
being yet acknowledged by learned Christians, does gratify the Jews, and
prejudice our Christian Holiday so much, that upon that ground Master Braburne
set up the Saturday for a Sabbath; and did what he could to demolish the
doctrine and observation of the Lords day: and others have, and many more may
(if that be granted) incur the like scandal.

It is not April 26. 1636.
long since a woman, one Margaret Former, examined before Sir John Lamb, Doct.
Turner, and Doctor Somes, disclaimed our Saviors Doctrine, by the name of
Ceremonies, Rites, and Sabbaths; and professed to keep the Sabbath of the Lord
of Hosts, which (said she) is Saturday.

If she had been examined, why she did so, could she have given a better
answer then such a one as the Bishops examination of the Dialogue ministers to
the Reader, viz. Bish. Thites examinat. page 63. marg. p. 69. marg.
That the fourth Commandment appointed a particular fixed day, to wit,
Saturday? The time commanded in the fourth Commandment is Saturday. Who can
desire a better warrant for any thing he will say or do, then that? and what
is there to be alleged for the Lords day, which may preponderate such a
proof? which yet is no proof, but against such as are so inconsiderate, as to
confess (that which the adversary cannot prove, viz.) that Saturday is
particularly prescribed in the fourth Commandment.

Secondly, the Commandment appoints the proportion of one day in seven for
sacred and solemn services of Religion, which is as the Characteristicon to
the Jews Sabbath, and the Christians (which are the variations, into which it
is divided) while neither of them is expressly, and in particular there
commanded; so that to say, the Jews Sabbath is literal, and the Christians
only mystical, is as if one should say, that Homo signifies literally a man;
but hominis, homini, and hominem, note not a man literally, but mystically.

Thirdly, whereas he says, the Homily uses the word Sabbath for the Lords
day; but in a mystical and analogicall sense, even as Mortification is called
Circumcision, etc.

There be two particulars very faulty: The one is his assertion; the other his
similitude.

1. For his assertion, The Homily of the time and place of prayer. page 164.
edit. 1582.
That the Homily uses the name Sabbath but in a mystical and analogicall
sense: the contrary is evident to any intelligent Reader of the Homily: for,
such a one may (out of it) deduce these literal observations:

1. That by the fourth Commandment, Christians must have one standing day in a
week for the exercises of Religion.

2. That they must rest upon it after Gods example.

3. That on that day lawful works must be forborne.

4. That yet they must not be idle, but wholly give themselves to exercises of
Gods true Religion and Service.

There be other deductions besides these, which found to the same sense; but
these sufficiently show, that the Compilers of the Homily took the name
Sabbath not in a mere mystical sense, but in a literal: and herein their
Doctrine is conformable to the letter of that Commandment.

Secondly, for his similitude (that our Lords day is called Sabbath, but as
Mortification is called Circumcision, the circumcision of the heart, Romans 2.29.
or as sincerity and truth are called unleavened bread, 1 Cor. 8.5. or as Christ
our Passover, 1 Cor. 5.7.) it is guilty of gross disproportion: for,

1. In a natural acception, no two numerall things are more like, then one day
is like another; but circumcision of the flesh, and mortification of the
corruptions of the heart; sincerity, and unleavened bread; Christ and the
Passover, though in some respects semblable (as the Kingdom of heaven and a
grain of Mat. 13.31.
mustard seed) are yet in their kinds at very great distance: for, Circumcision
is an act of the hand, Mortification an act, or rather an habit wrought by the
spirit upon the mind: unleavened bread is a visible substance, sincerity an
invisible quality; Christ is a most excellent person, consisting of a divine
and humane nature; the Passover an action literally, the Angels passing over
the doors which were sprinkled with the blood of the Paschall Lamb: which
(after the Angel) was immediately (yet figuratively) applied to the Lamb it
self; and afterward (by another figure more remote from the letter, and so
more mystical) our Savior was called the Passover.

Secondly, if we take the two days in a religious (as well as in a natural)
acception, there is much more conformity betwixt them, then betwixt the terms
of the Bishops comparison, so much that the name Sabbath may be literal to
them both, though (in his instances) one part be purely mystical, and
analogicall.

For (to say nothing of other conformities forementioned) it may suffice to
make them both partakers of the name Sabbath (which signifies Rest) that rest,
or cessation from secular labors, was on the one, and is required and observed
on the other: wherein the advantage now rests upon the part of our Christian
Sabbath; since that is still, and will be to the worlds end a day of religious
rest: and the Jews day, though it were so from the beginning, was many an
hundred years ago degraded from the dignity of a weekly Holiday, and made a
work-day, and so shall be, until our temporal Sabbath on earth, be changed
into the eternal Sabbatism in heaven, which the Apostle promises, Heb. 4.9.

The third Exception of Bishop White, touching Bishop Andrews, and Master
Hooker, applying the name Sabbath to our Sunday, answered.
Thirdly, For the Allegations out of Bishop Andrews and Master Hooker, (for
application of the name Sabbath to the Lords day) the Bishop takes occasion to
observe, that Bish. White his examinat. of the Dialog. p. 89. and 96.
the greatest Doctors at some times, and before errors and heresies are openly
defended, are not, neither can be so circumspect in their writing, as to avoid
all forms and expressions, all sentences and propositions, all and every
Tenet, which in after times may yield advantage to the adversaries of the
truth: and he gives instance in Augustine and Chrysostom, speaking not so
warily, as they should have done concerning the natural power of freewill,
before the Pelagian heresy did arise; which he applies to the precedent
Testimonies thus:

Before there arose a controversy in our Church concerning the Sabbath, or (at
least wise) before the controversy grew to an height, Divines spoke and writ
more freely, and they were not always so cautelous and circumspect, as to
foresee the evil construction which the adversaries of the truth might make of
their writing and speaking: but now, when the Sabbatarian heresy for necessary
observation of the old Sabbath, and a fanaticall opinion of some others, for
the observation of the Lords day, in a more precise form then the very
Judaicall Law it self, obliged the Jews to keep the old Sabbath; when, I
say, these errors sprang up, and were defended with an high hand, and obtruded
upon the Church: a necessity was cast upon us to examine all such positions, as
were the grounds and forms of speaking, which were incident to the question in
hand.

Now, if upon evidence of truth, says he, we shall in some passages dissent
from some men of note, living in this Church before us, or use other terms in
our writing or disputing; nay, if we should in some things have altered our
own former opinion, and forms of speaking, we trust that godly Christians
will not impute this unto us as an offense, but in their charity will judge of
us, as the ancient Church did of Saint Augustine, to wit, that what we do in
this kind, proceeds from the care we have, in a fair and perspicuous
manner to maintain and defend the truth. Thus far the Bishop.

I have set down his exception at large, because I mean to make a full answer
to it: for that purpose three particulars are especially to be observed in this
the saying of the Bishop:

The first, Of the ancient Fathers unwary writings before heresies arose; which
is true, but not to the purpose: for none that reads them at the first hand,
unless he bring with him a violent impression of prejudice against the
Sabbath, will conceive one syllable in them to sound to that sense which the
Bishop intends.

The second, His application thereof to the Sabbatarie controversies; which is
to the purpose: but (as he states the difference) not true.

The third is a request for charitable construction, which, in regard of the
second, he has need of: We need say nothing of the first, and for the second,
it may be said,

First, that though some have exceeded in severity, both for the doctrine and
practice of the Sabbath (and yet I account not all to be excessive, which the
Bishop approves not) many have much more exceeded in loosnesse and
profaneness; which is more dangerous to the actors, and more scandalous to the
observers of their excesses: and there was more need, that all the Bishops of
the Land should oppose this, then that he should set upon that in such sort as
he did.

Secondly, for that he says of the Sabbatarian heresy, for the necessary
observation of the old Sabbath, the way to withstand it, is not (as he does) to
take the title Sabbath from the Lords day; and to shift it from the firm
ground of the fourth Commandment, and to make it stand so much upon mere
tradition as he does: nay, so to give up that both title and text (as he has
done) to the old Sabbath, is to confirm, rather then to confute the Sabbathary
error; which (by his manner of handling the matter) neither is, nor can be
soundly convinced as it should be.

Thirdly, whosoever will advisedly read and consider, what has been lately
written concerning the Sabbath, will find as great cause to give caution
against Anti-sabbathary, as Sabbathary errors. And though the Bishop pretend
the error of the old Sabbath, and rigor of the new, to have been (so new,
that Bishop Andrews, and Master Hooker could not take notice of it, being
before their time; and that therefore they took the less heed to their
terms, when they spoke of our Christian and Weekly Holiday:) yet it is not
like, that either was unknown unto them (as he says the heresy of Pelagius
was to Chrysostom and Augustine, when they wrote somewhat uncircumspectly,
concerning some points which he perverted.)

For, the conceit of the necessity, and perpetuity of the Saturday Sabbath,
has bin the heresy of all Jews, and of some Christians, ever since the
Christian Sabbath was ordained; and the most rigorous excesses, touching the
observation of the Lords day, were published in a M Rogers Prefat. to the Art.
of Relig. printed anno 1607.
Book of general note, and common use, before the passages, cited out of
Bishop Andrews writings, were published by himself, or any one else; at least
before his Star Chamber speech against Mr. Traske was made: and in that
speech, though Traske were Jewishly conceipted of the Saturday Sabbath, he
gives the name Sabbath to the Lords day, as has been noted: and even Doctor
Howson Bishop of Durham, though (in his Sermon of Festivities) he mention the
same strains of ever-strained severity, in observation of the Christian
Sabbath, calls Sunday, or the Lords day (for all that) by the name Sabbath.

Besides, the wiser sort well knew, that to prejudice the piety and authority
of the Lords day, as from the fourth Commandment (from whence the name Sabbath
is derived upon it) would be to give too much countenance to Libertines and
Antinomists, whose heresy being plausible to the flesh, by the craft of the
Devil, was like to find more welcome entertainment with the world, then that
opinion of the Saturday Sabbath, or then those extreme severities in
observation of the Lords day.

So that all doubts and dangers duly considered on both sides, I make no
doubt, if most of those Worthies, whose testimonies we have produced (for the
name Sabbath) were now alive, to see the carriage of the cause in our days;
but they would think it most convenient, to continue the title Sabbath to the
Lords day, to make good their precedent, by subsequent attestations to this
truth: and to add their further care, to oppose profaneness, which has
mightily advanced, since the Legal and Evangelicall authority, and piety of
this day has been so opposed: I may say in the Bishops own words (and with
reference to him) opposed with an high hand: for no hand so high as his, did
ever strive so to weaken the one, and darken the other (since the darkness of
Popery, was by the light of the Gospel, driven out of our English Horizon) as
his has done.

Fourthly, yet for all that (as he desires) I will judge charitably of him:
for, my charity inclines me to conceive, that he wrote what he thought; but
withal, my discretion tells me, that his pen marched (in this quarrel)
after Jehu's pace, in some pangs of passion (which are no helps to true
information in any difference, whether of Religion, or otherwise) else he
would not have stained his style with such infected phrases, as [ Bish. Whites
answer to the Dialogue. p. 72.
the mangy objections of the Dialoguedropper, and the scabby similitudes of old
Thomas Cartwright] terms more meet for the Frocke, then for the Rochet. If his
Adversary dealt uncivilly with him, I excuse him not; and if I might be so bold
as to speak my mind of them both, I should freely blame them, for mingling so
much of the dross of their own corruptions, with the pure Gold of the
Sanctuary, in this cause of the Sabbath.

The fourth exception of the Bishop, touching the testimony of his Brother,
Doctor John White, answered.
Fourthly, for that which is brought in in the name of his brother Doctor John
White, calling the Lords day by the name of Sabbath, he replyeth thus: There is
not any contradiction between the two brethren in this Doctrine: for, the one
brother calls the Lords day, Sabbath, in a mystical sense; and the other
brother says, that it is not the Sabbath of the fourth Commandment, in a
literal and proper sense. Where he brings in again the distinction of
literal and mystical, taking literal in a negative sense for his own part
(for he denies the name in that sense) and giving mystical in a positive
acception (but with an implicit negation of the letter) to his brother: to
which I answer,

First, that had Doctor John White been alive, when the Bishop wrote thus, he
could not (I believe) have made him such a younger brother (though he were the
elder brother, and a Bishop both) as to put upon him his opinions of the
Sabbath; either for the title or tenure.

Secondly, the mist of that mis-application of mystical and literal, is
already dispelled by the exposition of the Homily, which contains the Tenet
of the Church of England; so that we may say, supposing his brother an Orthodox
Doctor of this Church, he did not (howsoever he should not) so take the name
Sabbath in a mystical sense, as to deny the literal, in application to the
Lords day.

Thirdly, by that I have heard of that learned and godly Doctor, both for his
Doctrine, where he preached, and for his conversation, where he lived, I have
cause to suspect his brother imposes an opinion on him, which he did not hold,
as he did on our Churches Homily, before rehearsed.

Fourthly, whosoever shall please to peruse the Chap. 16.
quotation out of Doctor John Whites Book, shall evidently see, that he took
the word Sabbath not in a mystical, but in a literal sense, and without
absurd and perverse wrestling of his words they cannot otherwise be expounded.

CHAP. XVIII. A particular Answer to the particular exceptions made against the
name Sabbath ( as applied to Sunday, or Lords day) and first of the dangerous
plot pretended by Doctor Pocklington, in the use of the name Sabbath for
Sunday; and of his prodigious comparison of the name Sabbath on the Lords day,
and the crown of Thorns on the Lords head.
WHat before we have observed (by way of exception against the word Sabbath)
was only to note how far (by some) it was disliked; now we must
particularly examine the grounds and reasons of their dislike, and give answer
to them; though some of them be rather passionate reproaches, then probable
objections.

Here the clamours of Doctor Pocklington are so loud, that he must needs first
be heard with his accusations against the word Sabbath: which, if they be as
true, as they are heinous, just cause there is to decree down, and cry down
the name Sabbath, as the name of him, who (to be famous) burned the Temple of
Diana at Ephesus; and thereupon, became so infamous, that all mention of his
name was forbidden by a solemn Decree. His charge, on the use of the name
Sabbath, is, That there is in it a double plot: the Doct. Pockl. Visit. Sermon.
page 20.
one is, to stalk behind that name, and to shoot at the service appointed for
the Lords day; the Ibid.
other is, to impose upon the day damnable superstition; which he aggravates,
by this opprobrious comparison: he Ibid.
resembles the putting of the name Sabbath upon the Lords day, to the putting
of a crown of Thorns upon the head of the Lord himself: making them both
unsuitable alike; and says, This was platted, to impose on him damnable
derision: that was plotted, to impose on it damnable superstition. Now, because
he was aware, that his comparison might touch some to the quick, who were
better then himself, he puts on their heads (as a linen cap for an
headpiece) this poor Apology, to save them from pricking. Ibid. p. 20.
If we find the word Sabbath for Sunday (says he) used in some writings, that
of late come unto our hands, blame not the Clerks, good men, for it: Nor
entitle the misprision any higher, or otherwise, then to these pretenders of
piety, who (for their own ends) have for a long time deceived the world with
their zealous, and most ignorant, or cunning clamours, and rung the name
Sabbath so commonly into all men's ears, that not Clerks only, but men of
judgment, learning, and virtue, not heeding (peradventure so much as is
requisite) what crafty and wicked device may be managed under the veil of a
fair word used in Gods Law, do likewise suffer the name often to escape the
door of their lips, that detest the drift of the deviser in the closet of
their hearts.

In which speech (to spare many other passages of his book, which lie open to
just exception of reason and religion) there are diverse particulars, worthy of
examination and censure, which we may refer,

First, to the fault objected, an impious plot.

Secondly, to the persons, for whom he puts in a perplexed and impotent
plea, to acquit or excuse them from participation therein.

For the former, (viz. the plot) it is twofold (as he takes it) the one, to
stalk behind the name Sabbath, and to shoot at the service appointed for the
Lords day: the other, to impose upon the day damnable superstition.

For the first, Let him remember what he has said page 7. viz. Dr. Pockling,
Sunday no Sab. page ^
Allow them their Sabbath, and you must allow them the service that belongs to
their Sabbath; then must you have no Letany, for that's no service for their
Sabbaths, but for Sundays. To which I say,

First, He seems to except against a Sabbatary service, as faulty or
offensive in some positive points; but notes nothing in particular but what is
negative, the leaving out of the Letany.

Secondly, That those whom we have produced for the use of the word Sabbath,
require no Jewish services on that day, nor any other then such as the Church
has established under the name Sunday.

Thirdly, That if the word Sabbath will serve for a stalking horse against the
Letany, and other service of the Church, because that is enjoined not under the
name Sabbath, but Sunday; then the word Lords day, (which he allows) will
serve as well for a stalking horse to the same purpose; for the Service is
entitled not with the name [ Lords day], but with the name Sunday; which (as
we have observed before) is the word that bears the greatest sound and sway
throughout all the Communion Books since the Reformation of Religion within
this Realm: yea the title Lords day will serve better to that purpose; for the
name Sabbath is incorporated into the service of the Church in the fourth
Commandment (where that title Sabbath is repeated thrice over) and that
Commandment, with the other nine, is appointed by the order of our Church, to
be rehearsed (in her public Liturgy) every Sunday and holiday: and (besides
them) on the fifth of November, and on the days of solemn fasting, prescribed
upon especial occasion of the Church and State, and to be learned by heart by
the younger sort, as a part of the Christian Catechism: but the name Lords day
is not (to my remembrance) once mentioned in our Communion Book now in use.

Now for the other plot, It is, as he says, to impose upon the day damnable
superstition. I answer,

That the day may lawfully be called by that name, as before we have proved;
the abuse of it in some (if it were such as he pretended, but cannot prove)
cannot take away the Christian liberty of others for the lawful use of it; nor
hinder, but that good Christians may have their intentions (when they use it)
truly pious, though the minds of others be superstitious.

Secondly, That this condemning censure of an harmless word (in Peccar, qui
damnat quasi peccata, quae nulla sunt. Aug. de lib. arb. lib. 3. cap. 15.
Saint Augustine his judgment) is a sin, and that sin may be a severe and
sour superstition: for there is a superstition negative, as well as positive
(as in those who say, Touch not, taste not, handle not, Col. 2.21.) The
forbearance of a thing as unlawful when it is lawful, is a superstition; and
the damning of such a thing may be a damnable superstition; but howsoever,
says the Doctor, it is a great indecorum to call the Lords day by the name
Sabbath: D. Pockl. p. 20.
The vizzard of the Sabbath on the face of the Lords day, says he, does as
well become it, as the crown of thorns did the Lord himself.

A speech not sit to be delivered for shame, without a vizzard on the face of
him that speaks it, to hide his blushing at the guilt of such an excessive
absurdity, if he have any modesty at all, or to cover his impudency, if he
have none.

Here (by the way) let him not think it much, if we return him a taste of
rue, or herb grace, for his full dos of vinegar and gall: for what indecorum
can be conceived comparable to that of setting of a crown of thorns upon his
head who was so innocent and excellent, that roses, and the powder of gold were
not good enough to be strewed in his way, nor worthy to be trodden on by the
sandals of his feet?

Surely, if there had been an appearance of such uncomelinesse in calling the
Lords day by the name of the Sabbath, King James, so pregnant in apprehension,
so sound in judgment, and the learned Bishops, with other Ecclesiastics of
especial choice, who were at the conference of Hampton Court, would not have
showed an unanimous assent to the thing Doctor Reynolds proposed, which was the
Reformation of abuse of the Lords day, by the name of the Sabbath day, without
any exception at the word used by him.

But indeed, there was no cause of offense in it at all, for want of
comeliness (as Doctor Pocklington objecteth) for the comeliness of words
chiefly consists in their congruity with the things to which they are
applied; and betwixt the name Sabbath and the Lords day there is that
congruity, for that word signifies rest, and the Lords day is a day of rest;
whether of such strict rest as the Jews Sabbath was, is a Question not now to
be discussed.

Now, if Master Doctor like his own resemblance, let him take the consequence
of his odious comparison, which is, That it is as comely, or not more uncomely
to put a crown of thorns upon the head of Christ, then to call the Lords day
by the name of Sabbath day, and then he may join hands, and hold society (for
Paradoxes) with them; or rather, be the Ringleader to them in such absurd
similitudes unto them, who match in malignity and guilt, They cannot resolve
whether the sin be greater to bowl, shoot, or dance on the Sabbath, then to
commit murder, or the Father to cut the throat of his own child: all which
doubts will soon be resolved by plucking off the vizzard of the Sabbath from
the face of the Lords day, which does as well and truly become it, as the
crown of thorns did the Lord himself. D. Pockl. Visit. Sermon. p. 20.
bowling, shooting, or dancing on the Sabbath, with the commit^ing of murder,
or the Fathers cutting the throat of his own child: which barbarous
absurdities he condemns, and within four lines after commits the like
himself, in his comparison of the word Sabbath, set upon the Lords day, with
the crown of thorns on our Lords head.

Secondly, for the persons for whom he seems to plead, and put in an excuse,
saying, If we find the word Sabbath for Sunday used in some writings that of
late came to our hands, blame not the Clerks, good men, for it, etc. It would
be known

First, whom he calls these good men, whether Clerks, or others (for his
words are ambiguous.)

Secondly, whether he take the word Clerks for Clergymen, or for such only
as transcribe the Dictats of others; if of these (as it seems he does) then

Thirdly, how he knows, that in such late writings (as have the name Sabbath
for Sunday, or the Lords day) the Clerks, who copied them out, mistook the
Authors mind and hand, so much as to write the one for the other, there being
no such vicinity in the words, as might lead them to such a misprision.

Fourthly, whether it be not more likely, that the word might drop from the
Authors pens, as well as it did often escape the lips (as he confesses) of
such as he commends for men of judgment, learning, and virtue, rather then
that these Clerks, good men (as he calls them) should corrupt their
manuscripts in their transcription.

Fifthly, how is it probable, that a few pretenders to piety should so long
deceive the world with zealous clamours of the word Sabbath (men of judgment,
learning, and virtue, not excepted) as he pretends especially, since (as he
says) they were most ignorant clamours: he adds (I grant) [ or cunning]
clamours; but how ignorance and cunning (being so contrary) should so
indifferently be disposed, to produce the same effect in men of judgment; and
why ignorant clamours should not as much withhold from assent unto them, as
cunning clamours induce them to consort with them, is that which my
shallowness cannot conceive, and his wisdom, I think, will not be able to
manifest.

Sixthly, how could he come to know, that these whom he exempteth from
society in this Sabbathary stratagem, should detest the drift of the devisers
in the closet of their hearts, since not he, nor any (but God only) has the
key of that closet; and if they did so, how could they have the name Sabbath
(whereby it is advanced) so frequently in their mouths? If they knew it not,
how could they detest it? If they did know it, how could they (being such men
of judgment as he takes them for) so familiarly use it, without fear of
scandal, or danger by it?

Lastly, how could so many reverend and learned men, Prelates, Deanes, and
other Doctors, or these men of judgment, learning, and virtue ( Men of
learning, judgment, and verzue, not heeding perhaps, what crafty and wicked
device may be managed under the veil of a fair word. Doct. Pockl. Visit.
Sermon. p. 21.
whom he commends) be so blinded, as not to see; or so mindlesse, as not to
heed this crafty and wicked device, managed under the veil of a fair word (as
he suggesteth) that not any one from the year 1554. (when as he feignes it
was first set on foot) apprehended it, until this Doctor made discovery of such
a dangerous plot, and (withal) of their dullness who all the while could not
discern it? Pardon me (good Sir) if I believe they were so wise and watchful
over the safety of the public service of the Church, and the purity of
Religion, as to give due warning against such damnable superstition. If there
had been any such danger in the use of the word Sabbath, as you seem to
conceive, they would not have left the honor of that discovery, and caution to
you: much less would they have used the word themselves (as they have done)
whereto they were not induced by the Clamours of the pretenders of piety (as
Doct. Pockl page 21.
you pretend) but rather in all likelihood, by the fourth Commandment it
self, by the Liturgy of the Church (requiring that to be said, as a part of
divine Service, and to be learned by heart, as a part of the Catechism, as
before was observed) wherein all her children, by her prescription, are to be
instructed and examined; from hence might the word Sabbath be a name of vulgar
use, for our weekly Holiday, and not from the noise which such men have rung in
the ears of all men.

Here, if a man should return to Master Doctor some of his own language, and
say, No ancient Father, no learned man, Heathen, or Christian, ever imagined
such a plot or mystery of iniquity, to lie hid under the name Sabbath, before
the year 1554. yea not one, besides himself (and yet one besides himself
were the likest to light upon such fantastic Bugbeares) from the beginning of
the world, until the day and year of his preaching the Visitation Sermon at
Ampthill, August 17. 1635. ever found out, or feigned such a dangerous device,
in the use of that word, as he has invented in his study, or elsewhere, and
vented in the Pulpit, and since made public by the press: I am consident he
cannot give one Instance to confute it, nor name one man, who may be thought to
lead him to it; and I hope, he will find no more to follow him in his strange
and extravagant surmises.

And may not a man cry quittance with him in it, by taking a liberty to
imagine, that he (who so vehemently inveigheth against the name Sabbath) had a
plot therein, to shake the foundation of the Lords day, which (as it is a
weekly day of Rest) rests on the fourth Commandment; to slacken, if not to
break the bond of conscience to the duties of the day, and to make way for
more living, and less labor, to heap up Benefices, and shrink in the
services due to the Lord of the Sabbath, and to the souls of the people on
that day, to give them leave to turn a Christian Holiday into a profane
play-day, that his pains may be less looked for at his Pastor all charge, and
his negligence the less blamed, when he is absent from it, or idle at it? And
if a man read his book over, and give way to the working of his imagination,
as he has done, may he not happily think, that by his setting upon the name
Sabbath, his plot was to prostitute the dignity of that day to such
profanation, as might be a preparation to Popish superstition? for, if ever
Popery (like the unclean spirit) return to the place whence it was expelled,
the common breach of the fourth Commandment by violation of the Sabbath will
be, if not a wide gate, yet at least an open wicket, or window to receive it
again. For, as Bellarmine observes well, though he apply it ill, Nec fere
solet accidere, ut ante circa fidem aliquis naufraget, quam naufragare caeperit
circa mores. Bellar. orat. in Schol. ant. tom. 4 fine orat.
The shipwreck of manners is the readiest way to the shipwreck of faith. And
for shipwreck of manners, there is not a readier way, then profanely to rush
upon the breach of that Commandment, which is as a pale or wall to all the
rest.

CHAP. XIX. An Answer to Barkley (the Papist) his Dilemma, against the name
Sabbath, for Sunday or Lords day.
THe next Exception to be answered against the word Sabbath, is the Quaere,
and a Dilemma of Barkley the Papist, in his Parenaesis ad Sectar. translated
thence by the Translator of Doctor Prideaux his Lecture, and by him called a
notable Dilemma The Translator of Dr. Pride. Lectine, in Epist. to the Reader,
p. ult. but in Barkley his Paraenes. ad Sectar. it is l. 1. page 161.
; What is the cause, says he, that many of our Sectaries call this day
(meaning the Christian weekly Holiday) by the name of Sabbath? If they observe
it, says he, as a Sabbath, they must observe it because God rested on that
day; and then they ought to keep that day wherein God rested, and not the
first (as now they do) wherein the Lord began his labors. If they observe it
as the day of our Saviors Resurrection, why do they call it still the
Sabbath, seeing that Christ did not altogether rest, but valiantly overcame the
power of death? To which I answer;

Ans. First, That not only Sectaries, but prudent and potent Kings, reverend
and learned Bishops, and other orthodox Divines, have allowed of the word
Sabbath for the Lords day, as the Testimonies premised sufficiently show.

Secondly, for the Dilemma, it is an absurd impertinency to the point in
question; for the Question is of the appellation, and the Dilemma is made of
the observation of the Sabbath: yet (as if it were not a squint-eyed and
distorted Argument, but looked directly to the title) I answer

1. To the first part of it, that to call a day Sabbath, there is no necessity
it should be the same day on which God rested; for the name is given to it,
not only because of Gods example of rest, but also because of his ordinance of
rest; for if he had not rested himself, but only instituted a day of rest,
such a day might significantly and sutably be called by such a name, as we
have observed. The Holidayes of the Jews were so called (besides the Sabbath
of weekly recourse); yet is not God said to have rested on them, nor did he,
for they were days of work both to him, and to us.

2. The second part of it is, If they observe it as the day of our Saviors
Resurrection, why do they call it still the Sabbath; seeing especially that
Christ did not altogether rest, but valiantly overcame the powers of death?
Which words are liable to the like exceptions as the former: for the
Resurrection contains not the nature of the Christian Sabbath, but the
occasion of it; nor is the day called Sabbath from Christ's example and practice
on that day, but from Christians resting from their secular affairs, for a
religious, grateful, and solemn memorial thereof.

Secondly, It is called Sabbath, with reference to the Creation, which was
finished in six days, and Gods rest on the seventh; and to our duty to sinish
our secular affairs in the like number of working days, and after them to
rest as God did after his works: but with reference to the Resurrection, it is
called, not Sabbath day, but Lords day, because on that day the Lord of the
Sabbath showed his Lordship and Dominion over the Devil, death, and the grave,
in breaking their bonds, and rising up (in despigh^ of their power) when they
had him at their greatest advantage, being under their Arrest.

And, for that he faith our Savior did not rest on the day of his
Resurrection, we may say with See B. White his examinat. of the Dialog. page
110, 111, 113.
Bishop White, and his Ibid.
Adversary also (for therein they are not adversaries, but agree well together)
that though he were in action, yet did he not labor; for his glorified body
had that ability and perfection in it, that all motions and actions were as
pleasing to it as any ease or rest could be; and not only that day, but all
the days betwixt the Resurrection and Ascension, he was conversant in
Sabbatary or sanctified employment, speaking of the things appertaining to the
Kingdom of God for forty days together, Act. 1.3. and though he did not rest
(nor needed it as we do) yet we must. And if we may call the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ the Lords Supper, though we take it before
dinner, as Christ did not; we may call our day Sabbath, since we rest, though
he did not.

So this notable Dilemma, brought in with its two horns, against the two
syllables of the word Sabbath, has not defaced one letter, but left it entire
for a title of the Lords day; and Barkley has but barked at it, not bitten it,
to do it any manner of hurt.

CHAP. XX. Master Braburne his objection of confusion in calling Sunday
Sabbath, answered.
Braburne, who charge the Appellation with confusion: Mr. Braburns discourse,
page 1. and 79. And in his def. of the discourse. p. 494.
To call Sunday Sabbath day, is (says he) as if a man should call Sunday
Saturday; and what a confusion would this breed in time? M. Primrose Treat. of
the Sab. or Lords day, part. 2. c. 6. page 123.
For this name Sabbath is the proper and particular name of the seventh day,
(i.e.) from the Creation; M. Brab. def. p. 43, 44, 522, 550.
as John and Thomas are two proper names of two of Christ's Apostles, so the
Sabbath is a proper name to Saturday.

Answ. The comparison has two parts; The ground of it; and the inconformity
betwixt Sabbath and Sunday, which he makes to be as much as betwixt Sunday
and Saturday, and no more.

For the first, He says the name Sabbath is a proper name, as Sunday and
Saturday are: which is not true; for Sabbath is rather a name of office, as
King; then a proper name, as Edward, or James, or Charles; and therefore any
day of religious rest, what day of the week soever it fell, was called a
Sabbath: and so may the Lords day be much more, because it succeeds the
Sabbath of the old Testament, as a weekly day of rest (as that was, and other
holidayes were not) and exceeds it too, in as much as the occasion of it, and
motive to observe it is doubled.

Secondly, For his comparison, saying, That it is as great confusion to call
Sunday Sabbath, as to call Sunday Saturday, he will make it good, when he can
prove, that the Sun and Verstegan seems to derive the word Saturday from
Seater an Idol of the Saxons, which he says, is fondly supposed by some to be
Saturn. Versteg. restuut. of decayed Intelligence, cap. 3 p. 77. but most
learned men take the name of Saturday from the Planet Saturn.
Saturn are not two distinct Planets; but that one may as well be called by
the name of the other, (as the Sun Saturn, and Saturn the Sun) as either
Saturday or Sunday (when they be days of Rest) may be called by a name of
Rest, Sabbath. In the mean time, it is but a Planetary or wandering
comparison; so far from truth, that it draws near to absurdity.

Mast. Brab. discourse. p. 200.
The name Sabbath, and the time of the seventh day cannot be separated.

I answer, If that were true, it makes nothing against us: for, we apply it
to a seventh day now, and to none else, though not to that seventh day, which
was at first observed; and if he say, that the name Sabbath, and that seventh
day, which was Saturday, cannot be separated (which is indeed his meaning) I
say,

First, the name Sabbath may be communicable to other days, though it were
not separable from the Saturday: for, if the day had never been changed, yet
other days agreeing with it in cessation from work, might, and did partake
with it in the appellation of Rest. At this day we may find it so in the
Ethiopicke Church, keeping both Saturday and Sunday holy, and calling them both
Sabbaths, though with the distinction of Jewish and Christian, as we shall
pertinently note afterward.

Secondly, I say the name Sabbath, and the seventh day from the Creation, are
separable: for, if Saturday may be made a working day (as the Christian world
acknowledges, both in position and practice: and Master Brab. himself, in his
dispensation (whereof we shall speak in another place) confesses it may) then
the name of Rest, viz. Sabbath, may be separated from it, unless the day shall
be called by a name quite contrary to the nature and condition thereof.

CHAP. XXI. The objection of Judaisme, in using the name Sabbath, answered and
retorted: as also the reproach of the name, as from the Sabbatarian Heretics,
removed.
Bish. of Ely his Treat. page 207.
Bishop of Ely misliketh the name Sabbath, for the peril of Judaisme, and the
heresy of Judaizants. The name Sabbath (says Mast. Dowe in his discourse of
the Sab. and Lords day. p. 4.
Mr. Dowe) is Jewish: and (which is more) Doct. Pockl. Visit. Sermon. p. 6.
Doctor Pocklington says, That Sunday was anabaptized after the mind of some
Jew, hired to be Godfather thereof, and so called the Sabbath: And M. wonside.
q. 3. of the Sab. chapter 12. p. 121.
Master Ironside also objecteth, That in using the name Sabbath, we gratify
the Jews in their superstitious obstinacy against Christ and his Gospel: for,
they abhor the name of the Lords day, as the greatest blasphemy, Ibid. p. 121.
adding withal, that the ancient Christians fasted on Saturday, when the Jews
feasted, that they might be so far from gratifying of them, as to be quite
contrary to them.

To all which I answer, That many points of Religion, both Jews and Christians
hold in common, and that only is to be refused, as I wish, which is peculiar
to them; but so is not the keeping of a day of religious Rest, nor the proper
name of that Rest: if the word Sabbath did properly import sacrifices, or
shadows of things to come (as Doct. Heyl. hist. Sab. part. 1. c. 6. page 111.
Doctor Heylin would have it) it might have some Jewish favor in the mouth of
a Christian; but that it does not. The word Altar has a nearer reference to
Judaisme and Popery; and yet they Doct. Pock^. Visit. Sermon. page 28, 29. the
title of another book of his is Altar Christianum. p. 50.80 does D. Heyl. in
Antidot. Lincol.
familiarly use it, and think there is no danger of Jewish or Popish error,
by calling the Communion Table by the name of an Altar; but rather the
discovery of a Bish. Whites Treatise of the Sab. page 207.
perverse disposition of novell Sabbatarians (by the way I do not approve of
his words, but only repeat them) to make scruple of that, while they call the
Lords day by the name of a Sabbath, as Bishop White objecteth.

Secondly, Bish. White in his Treatise of the Sab. page 5.
Bishop White, and Doct. Heyl. part. 2. p. 236, 237. hist. of the Sab.
Doct. Heylin bring in the sayings of John Frith, and William Tindall, for the
Churches liberty, to have chosen any other day then the Lords day, for
religious Rest (the Jews day not excepted) and the Apostles, and many Churches
(since the Apostles) for three hundred years and more, kept Saturday holy every
week, as well as Sunday (as Bish. Whites Treatise of the Sab. page 109.
Bishop White alleges) and M. Primros. Treat. p. 1. c. 12
Master Primrose allows a liberty to Christians to observe that day, and in
it to give themselves to all exercises of our Christian Religion: and if any
Holiday light upon a Saturday, no man is to make scruple, to observe it as an
Holiday.

Besides, our Church commands (with the rest of the Decalogue) the reading of
the fourth Commandment for sanctification; and this weekly, with a prayer for
pardon of profanation past, and for grace for better observation in time to
come: and if there be no danger of Judaisme in all this, there is none surely
in retaining the name of the Sabbath with another day then that which the Jews
solemnized.

Thirdly, to deny the name of the Sabbath to the day we Christians celebrate,
is rather Jewish: for, those that are Jews indeed, or Jewish in opinion (as
Mast. Brab. in his discourse. page 44.
Master Braburne was in this point) affixe the name Sabbath to Saturday; whence
it is, that he in his plea against applying the name to the Lords day,
appealeth to the Jews at Amsterdam, and elsewhere, who call Saturday the
Sabbath day: Ibid.
whereto (says he) I may add the Jews reckoning of the days of the week;
Saturday they call Sabbath day, Sunday they call the first day of the Sabbath,
Monday the second of the Sabbath, etc. In which account (says he) no day is
called Sabbath but Saturday; nor can the Jews, or those that are Jewish, abide
to have the Lords day to be called Sabbath, because they would exclude it from
all right and title to the fourth Commandment, as is plain enough, by that
we have already noted out of Master Brab. and therefore that of Doct. Pockl.
Visit. Sermon. page 6.
Doctor Pocklington before remembered, viz. That a Jew should be the Godfather,
and give it the name Sabbath (as he says) is a fancy, which both
superstitious Jews, and religious Christians, will deny and deride.

Fourthly, let those that think to call the Christian weekly Holiday by the
name of Sabbath, is Jewish, consider, whether it be not now either Jewish or
foolish, to call Saturday by that name, rather then the Lords day, since
Sabbath signifies Rest; and to say, that Saturday must now be a day of Rest,
is Jewish: and if it be a workeday (as we take it) to entitle it with a name
so contrary to work, is little less then foolish: especially, since we have a
day of rest, to which that name, with more congruity may be applied.

For now to give Saturday (a workeday with us) that name of rest, and to deny
it to the Lords day (wherein we rest indeed) is as if we should call the
body of a deceased King by the name of a King, and deny that Royal title to
the living person of his surviving Son and heir, the heir of his Crown.

Lastly, For that which Master Ironside says, of gratifying the Jews by
applying the name Sabbath to ours Lords day, and of their abhorring of the
title Lords day, as the greatest blasphemy: I answer,

That we shall gratify the Jews, and those that are Jewish, much more by
giving up the name and title Sabbath unto their day, then by applying it to
ours: for M. Brab. des. of the Sab p. 54.
Master Braburne (when he was most Jewish in this point) made his exhortations
to Ministers and people, to refrain putting the name Sabbath day on the Lords
day; and with forbearance of the name, he requires them Ib. page 55. and 288.
to forbear the use of the fourth Commandment: the name Sabbath day
therefore, and the fourth Commandment (says he) must go unseparable
together; hold the one and hold the other, Ibid.
renounce the one and renounce the other also.

But for the name of Lords day, he was well enough pleased that it should be
applied to the day we celebrate: for when he had exhorted to a forbearance of
the name Sabbath, he enforces his exhortation by this reason: Ibid. page 54.
We have names enough besides, we may call it Sunday, Lords day, or First day
of the week.

And which is more, he was then (when he did so Judaize in that point as
never Christian did before him) so far from being offended at the title Lords
day, that he pleaded for a right in it to the Jews Sabbath; M. Brab. defens^.
page 238. and in his discourse, page 8.
The Son of man, says he, is Lord of the Sabbath; wherefore the seventh day
may be truly called the Lords day. And if he had been a complete Jew, and
so would not have allowed Christ to be called Lord, yet it would have offended
him more to hear the Lords day called Sabbath, then Lords day simply: For, the
name Sabbath (in his conceit) dignifieth the Lords day with too high and holy
a title: M. Brab. his defense, p. 52.
for, says he, it is as if one should rob the Mistress of her Jewels, and
bestow them on her Maid; or should take the Crown off the head of a King, and
set it upon a common subject (as before we had occasion to observe); For
Saturday, says he (he means as the Sabbath) Ib. page 53.
is as the King or Mistress to the Lords day, which is Ib. p. 52.
but a common working day in Gods account. And for that M. Ironside, cap. 12.
of his quest. of the Sab. page 121.
Master Ironside says of the Christians crossing of the Jews, in fasting on
Saturday, when they feasted, it was not general; nay, the greater part of the
Christian world, in Aug. Ep. 19. ad Hier. p. 81.
Saint Augustine his time, did not fast on Saturday, as he has recorded in
his Epistle to Saint Hierom.

Ob. 6. Yet by keeping up the name Sabbath, some pretenders of piety cite many
places of Scripture under that title, which may incline to Jewish rigor, and
so comes in the peril of Judaisme, which the Bishop of Elie seems to
suspect in the former objection. Doctor D. Pockl. Visitation Sermon. p. 19.
Pocklington more plainly complains of it, when he says thus, they must
make a Sabbath of Sunday, and keep up that name, otherwise their many citations
of Scripture ( mentioning only the Sabbath) applied to Sunday, will appear so
ridiculously distorted, and wry neck'd, that they will be a scorn and derision
to the simplest of their deluded Auditorie. And so does M. Brab. def p. 53.
Master Braburne in his Discourse; By translating the name Sabbath from
Saturday to Sunday, (says he) the common people, when they read in the
Scripture any thing of note touching the Sabbath day, they presently cast that
in their minds upon the Lords day, thinking it to be meant of that. The like
is objected by M. Irons. Sab. quest. 3. cap. 12. page 121, 122.
Master Ironside; The name Sabbath may be, and is become a snare to many weak
ones, and especially in reading of the Scriptures: for wheresoever they find
the name Sabbath, they presently conceive it to be spoken of the Lords day,
and many times by this means fall into flat Judaisme, as appears by their
quoting of the old Testament in the question in hand.

Answ. First, This objection, if it have any weight in it, makes more against
the reading of the fourth Commandment in our Communion Book, and the Prayer
annexed to it (for inclination of the heart to keep that Law,) then against the
simple name or title Sabbath; for there is much more conformity with the Jews
in that, then in this; especially, as some expound the Commandment, with
particular limitation of it to the Saturday Sabbath; and whether it reach not
also (in part) to prohibit the public reading of some parts of Canonical
Scripture, I will not determine.

Secondly, If any apply any place to our weekly holiday, which is peculiar to
the Jews Sabbath, he may as easily be answered by distinction of the Jewish
and Christian Sabbath; as if from the name [ Altar] (much in use with some in
our days) any should make inferences of Jewish Sacrifices to be offered upon
it: he may be stopped (which the Author of this objection I think will not
deny) by the distinction of a Jewish and Christian Altar, and application
accordingly.

Thirdly, To disavow the name Sabbath, would become a more dangerous snare to
Judaisme; for that were to give up the fourth Commandment wholly unto the
Jews, both for title and tenure, (for without the title how can our Christian
Holiday be in any good sense set upon that ground?) and to establish their day
by the best Authority that can be, viz., by a most holy and express law, as
the Jews assume, and some Christians too easily assent: And to leave our Lords
day floting upon the uncertain conjectures of an Apostolical tradition, as
some account it: Who can tell, says Mr. Ironside, quest. 5. of the Sabb. cap.
20. p. 200, 201.
Master Ironside, whether the Lords day (of which Saint John speaks) were the
Lords day, which we keep, or Easter day; which Saint John and his Disciples
observed, as it fell out, any day of the week, according to the Jewish
supputation?

This (as I have In my historical part of the Sabbath.
showed) was a snare and scandal to M. Braburne, which made him relapse from
Sunday to Saturday. And if his Books were as commonly read as they are
cunningly penned to this purpose, many more might be taken in that snare at
unawares, unless they were more soundly answered then yet they have been.

Lastly, There is a snare to profaneness, as well as to Judaisme to be
shunned by Christians; but the taking of the name Sabbath from the Lords day
(as those that most dislike that title would have it) may be a snare to
profaneness, and that in a higher degree, then the Judaisme pretended: for
they that most mislike the name Sabbath, as applied to Sunday or Lords day,
disavow both the honor and holiness of the day, and would depose it from
being a Queen, to make it a drudge, an ordinary workeday; and therefore with
the name, they deny its right to the fourth Commandment, as the uncommunicable
charter of a weekly holiday in the Jewish Church; whence will follow, that
many will be more bold familiarly to profane it: Therefore, in this respect
also, there is more danger in refusing or forbearing the name Sabbath (when we
speak of our day of religious rest) then in receiving or approving thereof.

Object. 7. Though Master Braburne account it too great an honor to the Lords
day (as before we have noted) to be called Sabbath: yet the Christian Church
has observed some matter of reproach in it; and therefore has she called a
sort of Heretics, by way of contempt and censure [ Sabbatarii;] and it is a
ready reproach, in the mouths of many, to call them, as in disdain,
Sabbatharians, who put the name Sabbath upon Sunday.

Answ. It is true: but first the Church condemns them not for calling and
holding the Lords day to be a Sabbath, but Saturday; as the Ebionites did of
old, and Master Brab. of late, and the Jews do to this day.

Secondly, though Heretics have been so entitled from the name Sabbath, and
some (who are not Heretics) be too forward to cast that term in contempt
upon their Orthodox brethren; yet the word is never the worse, or less
honorable for that: for, there were Heretics called Aug. de Haeres. ad quod
vul. haer. 39. p. 22.
Angelici, Ibid. haer. 40.
Apostolici, Ibid. haer. 34. page 21.
Melchisedechians, as well as Sabbatarii: yet the names of Angels, Apostles,
and of Melchisedech, are (for all that) sacred and venerable.

CHAP. XXII. The negative Argument, drawn from the Apostles, not using the
name Sabbath for the Lords day, answered.
Lords day by the name Sabbath, yet the name wherewith the Christians have
anciently christened Sunday, is the Lords day, and not Sabbath day: yea, the
Holy Ghost (says M. Ironside. quest. chapter 12. p. 120, 121.
Master Ironside) does every where in the New Testament call it the Lords day,
and no where Sabbath; so did the Primitive Church in precedent times, for the
first three hundred years; and so do both Roman and Reformed Churches, who
style it Lords day, and not Sabbath day: wherein to vary from them, may be
justly noted of singularity and affectation; and if it be said, that religious
persons call it Sabbath day, who speaks most religiously (says he) the
Apostles, the whole Church, or some private persons, of late years, is easy
to determine.

In setting down his Objection, I have contracted three Arguments into one
(abating from the number, not from the vigor of his reasons of exception)
because the answer I shall return unto them, will (for the most part) give
satisfaction to them altogether.

The Bish. Whites Treatise of the Sab. and Lords day. p. 127. See the like. p.
135.
Bishop of Ely makes the like Objection: We Christians (says he) observe a
weekly Holiday, namely, Sunday, which, with the Apostles, we call not Sabbath,
but Lords day. He says further, That the Lords day was not called Sabbath day
by our Savior, nor by any of his Apostles, or their immediate successors. It
is far different (says Ibid. p. 201.
he again:) and the like has M. Dow in his discourse. page 4.
Mr. Dowe, from the language of the Fathers, to style the Lords day by the name
of Sabbath.

The Sabbath, and the seventh day (says M. Primrose Treatise of the Sab. or
Lords day. part. 2. chapter 6. p. 132.
M. Primrose, and he means the seventh from the Creation) are indifferently
taken for the same thing, and the one is the explication of the other; (to
which purpose he quoteth many places of the Scripture) but our Lords day,
says Idem. Ibid. part. 2. c. 20. page 138, 184.
he, wherein we apply our selves to Gods outward service, is always called in
the New Testament, the first day of the week, or the Lords day, and not
Sabbath: which name the Apostles, and first Believers had not failed to give
unto it, if Jesus Christ had not so qualified and styled it: but they never
termed it by such a name.

Hereof, Master Broad in his Treatise of the Sabbath and Lords day (which was
sent me in a MS. by Mr. D. of B.) has these words: M. Broad in his MS. Treat.
of the Sab. and Lords day. p. 41.
The Scripture never calls the Lords day by the name of the Sabbath, neither
any other (I believe) for the space of two hundred years and more since
Christ's time: and whether it were so called by the Fathers (says he) I know
not: But the The Sovereign Antidote against Sabbathary errors. qu. 1. p. 5.
Author of the Sovereign Antidote against Sabbathary errors, speaks for a
further compass, and with a fuller confidence, thus: Concerning the name
Sabbatum, or Sabbath, I thus conceive, that in Scripture, Antiquity, and
Ecclesiastical writers, it is constantly appropriated to the day of the Jews
Sabbath, or Saturday; and not at all (till of late years) used to signify our
Lords day, or Sunday. We may here recall to mind, what we have said before out
of Doctor Pocklington (though to another purpose, touching this point) Doct.
Pockl. Sermon. Sunday no Sabb. p. 21.
No learned man, Heathen nor Christian, took the name Sabbath otherwise then
for Saturday, from the beginning of the world, till the beginning of Schism,
which was 1554.

Lastly, Master Braburne (when he was a Jew in his dis-affection of the
dignity of the Lords day) pleads for continuing the word Sabbath to Saturday,
and against applying it unto the Lords day, by the phrase of the M. Brab. def.
p. 44. and 164. and 626.
Scriptures, by the M. Brab. page 44.
testimony of the Jews at Amsterdam, and elsewhere, and of the M. Brab. page
44.
Latins to this day, M. Brab. page 44.
by all Latin Dictionaries, and so ends with an appeal to all M. Brab. page
44.
Divines, if the word Sabbath be not used in Ecclesiastical histories for
Saturday.

Now the Objection is at the full (both for weight of exception, and the
condition of persons that except against the title Sabbath, to the Lords day)

I will make a full, and (I hope) a satisfactory answer.

And first, I desire it may be remembered, what reasons have been formerly
rendered, for the application of the name Sabbath to the Lords day.

Secondly, for the title Lords day, I have acknowledged it to be given (by the
holy Ghost) to the day of our Saviors resurrection; and that others might do
so, I have proved it also, though I dare not say, as M. Ironside. qu. 3. chapter
12. page 120.
Master Ironside does, that the holy Ghost does every where in the New
Testament call it the Lords day: for, it is more usually there called, the
first day of the week, and but in one place, and but once called the Lords
day, viz. Revel. 1.10. and if he can show it me but once more, he shall
gratify me much.

Thirdly, for the negative exception against the name Sabbath, as the Bish.
White in his Treat. of the Sab. and Lords day. page 127.135.
Bishop of Ely makes it, where he says, With the Apostles we call our weekly
Holiday not Sabbath, but Lords day; the Lords day was not called Sabbath by our
Savior, nor by any of his Apostles (says Bish. White. Ibid.
he) and thence infers a conformity in our Christian phrase. If that be a
good reason, we must not call it Sunday: for, the Apostles called it no more
Sunday, then they called it Sabbath; and the Primitive Fathers very seldom so
termed it: and yet in our Churches Liturgy it is usually called Sunday, and
seldom or not at all Lords day, as before has been observed.

Fourthly, it may be pertinently noted to this purpose, that for the same
thing (in one age) one word may be more in use, in another age another, as we
see by 1 Samuel chap. 9. ver. 9. Before time in Israel, when a man went to
enquire of God, thus he spoke: Come, and let us go to the Seer; for, he that
now is called a Prophet, was in old time called a Seer.

Where you see the same men, that is, men of the same profession, were not
always of the same denomination, not called by the same name: for, in the
former age they were called Seers, who in the later (which was the present time
when that book was penned) were called Prophets: so that day, which in
precedent times was commonly called by one name, in after ages may be called
by another. Master Ironside tells us, that Antiquity ever used one of these
four names for the holiday of Christians; Sunday, not from the Sun in the
Firmament, but from the Sun of righteousness with healing in his wings; or
the day of light, for the Sacrament of Baptism, called the Sacrament of
illumination; or the day of bread, not from holy bread, (as the Papists now use
it,) but from the Sacrament of the Supper administered every Lords day; or the
Lords day, which does and will continue to the worlds end.

He might have added a fifth, or rather have brought in as the first and most
ancient, the first day of the week; which, though it were the first, and has
the best Authority for it, as being mentioned by all the four Evangelists, was
not used by any Profession (whether of orthodox or heretical Christians) in
any age since, but by the Brownists of late: and though nothing be more
useful or usual then light and bread, yet those names of light and bread are
quite out of use for the denomination of the weekly holiday of the Christians,

CHAP. XXIII. Though neither the Apostles, nor the ancient Fathers calbed
Sunday Sabbath, we may; and the reasons why.
6. TO answer more particularly, touching the title which the Church anciently
used, to signify this day; I confess, that in the holy Scriptures, and in the
Writings of the ancient Fathers, the word Sabbath is familiarly set upon the
Saturday, the old weekly holiday of the Jews: but that therefore the
Christians weekly holiday should not now be called by that name, is an
inference which I may justly deny, since there was an especial reason of the
distinction of those two days, in those times, by the titles Sabbath and Lords
day, which now is not of force.

For it is acknowledged by those that took exception at the word Sabbath, as
set upon the Lords day, that both those days were celebrated with solemn
Assemblies in many Churches in the primitive times. The primitive Church (says
Bish. of Elic his treat. of the Sab. page 71.
Bishop White) which had Jews and Proselites in their Christian Assemblies,
made the Saturday of every week an holiday, upon the same reasons the Apostles
had formerly done: And the reasons (which he notes out of Existimo veram and
Germanam causam fuisse, quod cum primum inter fratres and Judaeos disseminani
Evangelium coepisset, nollent, aut certe non auderent ceremonias omnes Judaicas
rescindere. Sic Alb. obser. in Optat. and Council. Carthag.
Albaspin his observation upon Optatus, and the Council of Carthage) were,
because, having Assemblies mixed of Jews and Gentiles, when they begun the
promulgation of the Gospel, either they would not, or they durst not abolish or
cancel all the ceremonies of the Jews.

He might have made his reason more particular, and withal more pertinent,
from the Sabbath it self; as that (on that day) the Jews being accustomed to
assemble themselves together, they would then be more willing to meet; and the
Gentiles being now converts, would easily join with them, having no holidayes
of their own to pitch upon, but such as were stained with odious idolatry; and
so the Apostles had the better opportunity to sow their sacred seed in larger
fields, with better hope of greater fruit. And afterward the B. of Elie, Ib. p.
189.
Bishop shows how long this double devotion of Christians was in use; The
Apostles, says he, and likewise the successors of the Apostles (for many ages,
at least three hundred years) in some Churches kept holy the Saturday in every
week, as well as the Sunday. Dr. Pride. (who is brought in by the Translator of
his Lecture, as not well affected to the title Sabbath for the Christians
holiday, having said, that Christ ascended up on high, and left behind him his
Apostles to preach the Gospel) asks, D. Pride. Lect. Sect. 6. p. 24. English.
And what, did they not keep the Jewish Sabbath without noise or scruple, and
gladly teach the people congregated on the Sabbath days? nay more then this,
did not the primitive Church design as well the Sabbath day as the Lords day,
to sacred meetings? Little do you know (says M. Breerwood his first treat.
against M. Byf. page 77. and MS. page 48.
Mr. Breerwood to Mr. Byfield) if you know it not, that the ancient Sabbath did
remain, and was observed together with the Lords day by the Christians of the
Eastern Church, three hundred years and more after our Saviors Passion.

And D. Heyl. Hist. Sab. part. 2. c. 2. page 56. and c. 3. p. 57.
Doct. Heylin has an observation out of Basil, That the Christians assembled
four times a week, and Saturday, and the Lords day were two of them: and of
these two, the observation was more general then of the other, both for time
and place, both while the Apostles lived, and after their decease: which I note
rather for the Jews day (for the present) then for the Lords days sake; for
that belongs to another place.

To these Testimonies (most what of the adverse party assenting to that which
will infer their conviction for application of the name Sabbath) I will
annexe other evidences, both for the Apostles time, and for some succeeding
ages of the Church.

First, for the time of the Apostles, their practice for religious and solemn
Assemblies on the Jews Sabbath is plain, in the relation of their acts by St.
Luke, whereof they that doubt may read their own resolution, and receive
satisfaction in Act. 13. ver. 14, 42, 44. Act. 16.23. and chap. 27. ver. 2.
besides other places.

Secondly, from the Apostles time until the counsel of Laodicea, which was
about the year 364. the holy observation of the Jews Sabbath continued, as
may be proved out of many Ignat. ^p. ad Magnes. p. 77. edit. Vedel. Athanas.
tract. de semente Socrat. Scholast. hist. lib. 6. ca. 8. and ca. 29. Centuriat.
Cent. 406. col. 410. Council. Laod. can. 29. tom. 1. council. page 300. edit.
Bin. 1636. Paris. in lib. qui inscrib. Canon Apost. and Sanctor. Council. 4. per
Jo. Tilium Hospin. de orig. Festor. Christian. cap. 9.
Authors; yea (notwithstanding the Decree of that Council against it.) about
the year 380. Quibus oculis diem Dominicum intueris, qui Sabbathum
dedecorasti? an nescis hos dies germanos fratres esse? si in alterum injuriosus
sis, in alterum impingis. Greg. Nyssen. de castig. in cos qui aegre ferunt
reprehens.
Greg. Nyssen passionately complained of the violation of the old Sabbath (as
an holy brother to the new Lords day) questioning the profaners of it thus: (as
the Bish. Whites Treat. page 80.
Bishop of Ely brings him in) With what face (says he) do thou look upon
the Lords day, who have dishonored the Sabbath? Know thou not that they are
Germane brethren, and that thou can do wrong to neither, but thou must be
injurious to both?

But (says the Bish. of Ely his Treat. of the Sab. p. 72.
Bishop) Saturday was not made a weekly Holiday universally in all Primitive
Churches: for, Cent. 4. chapter 6. col. 477.
at Rome, Alexandria, and throughout Africa it was a work day. To which I
answer:

First, that though Saturday were not universally kept as an Holiday in the
Primitive Church; yet it was observed as a sacred time, and noted by its
ancient name in so many places (and I think I may say in most, for the
Eastern Church) for diverse hundred years after Christ, as the places
forecited in the margin show. So that then, to have put the name Sabbath upon
the Lords day, had been to speak with confusion, unless some other term were
added to it, for distinction sake.

Secondly, for the Churches specified by the Bishop, viz. the Churches of Rome,
Alexandria, and Africa, I answer: first for Rome;

First, that there might be some especial reasons why they kept not holy the
old Sabbath (as the Eastern Church did) and that either, because they had a
religious respect to Wednesdaies and Fridaies, Hieron. com. in ^p. ad Galat. c.
4.
as Saint Hierome shows, more then the Eastern Church had.

Secondly, or because the Jews and the Romans were (by the wars betwixt
them) become most odious to each other, as appears by the history of Joseph.
de bello Jud. l. 6. (...) 26, l. 7. c. 18.
Josephus and otherwise (as I have observed in mine historical part of the
Sabbath) though now (which I point at but for a glance by the way toward the
Popish Metropolis) they be better accepted at Rome, then the best Christians,
who are not suffered there to live, while the Jews are Sr. Ed. Sands his
Relat. page 218. edit. 1632.
toler ated to trade in usury, straining it up upon Christians after eighteen
in the hundred, whereas half that sum in a Christian is not allowed.

Thirdly, Though the old Sabbath were slighted at Rome, it was not so far
out of request, but that elsewhere, even in Italy, it was sociably observed
with the Lords day, and that in Millaine, and there by Crastino die Sabbati,
and Dominico, de orationis ordine dicemus. Amb. de Sacr. l. 4. c. 6.
Saint Ambrose, and the people of his Church, to whom (it seems by what he
says in his discourse of the Sacraments) he preached as well on the one day
as on the other.

Secondly, For the Church of Alexandria, we have cause to conceive, that there
the old Sabbath was observed: for the Centurists observe (out of Athanasius who
was Bishop there) a saying of his to that purpose, Cent. 4. col. 410. q.
We assemble on the Sabbath day, says he, not as if we were infected with
Judaisme; but therefore we meet together on the Sabbath, that we may worship
the Lord of the Sabbath; which in part is acknowledged by the B. of Elie his
Treat. of the Sabb. p. 72.
Bishop of Elie, where he observes, out of Athanasius his Tractate de
semente, That the Saturday Sabbath was so observed, that it was not prohibited.

Thirdly, For Africa, Saint Augustine (since he was an African Bishop) may
inform us by that he has in the 91. Psalm, where, treating upon it as the
text of his Sermon, Hodiernus dies Sabb. est. Aug. in Psalm. 91. tom. 8. part.
1. page 158.
he says; this day is the Sabbath: if it were the Jews day, on that day he
preached to the people, and they had an holy Assembly on that day, with
conformity, it is like, to other Churches) for he calls it the Sabbath, as a
day designed to holy duties, and (as it is like) with conformity to other
Churches; if it were the Lords day, he called that the Sabbath; and so the
title is authorized by his Testimony.

But whatsoever become of these Allegations, or however they prove (for force
or feebleness) certain it is, that the Decree of the Council of Council.
Laodicen. can. 29. Caranz. sum. council. p. 190. Bin. tom. 1. p. 300.
Laodicea (about the year 368.) prevailed not so far, as quite to put down
the observation of the Saturday Sabbath, though to Si inventi fuerint
Judaizare, i. e. non operando in Sabbato, and non praeponendo diem Dominicam
eidem diei, Anathema sint. Ibid.
Sabbatize with a Jewish cessation were forbidden upon pain of an Anathema:
for, in time of Pope Gregory the Great, there were some who had it in too great
honor, and religious reverence; but by this time, the Lords day had so far
advanced in estimation above it, and in operation against it, that Greg. ^p.
3.11
he is almost as sharp with them, who were precise observers of the Sabbath
with the Lords day, as Ignatius was with such as combined them both in
superstitious abstinence, or fasting: Gregory held those who observed the old
Sabbath, to be Perversi spiritus homines die Sabbati operari prohibent; quos
quid aliud nisi Antichristi Praedicatores dixerim. Greg. ^p. ex Regist. l. 11.
c 3. fol. 452 p. 1. col. 2.
Antichristian; and (...). Ignat. ep. ad Philip. page 45.
Ignatius termed those who fasted on the Lords day, or Sabbath (one day
excepted) the killers of Christ. So in his Epistle to the Philippians.

But for all that of the Laodicean Council, and this of Gregory, the Sabbath
was in some places upheld with the sacred services, not only as that Sabbat is
evangelia cum al^is Scripturis legenda esse censemus. Council. Laod. can. 16
page 180.
Council decreed for the reading of Scripture (for that day) but as with an
equal respect to the Lords day, which the Ibid. can. 29.
Council forbad; and so it is to this day in the Ethiopicke Churches, as Quod
autem Sabbat^n aeque ac diem Dominicum ab opere immune habent, id non est
argumentum Judaisini, sed veteris Christianismi; quot enim Canones sunt qui
vetant Sabbato opus facere: Joseph. Scal. de emend. temp. l. 7. p. 683.
Joseph Scaliger shows, which he will have to be no argument of Judaisme,
but of ancient Christianity: for how many Canons, says he, are there to
forbid men to work on the Sabbath day, meaning the Saturday?

I wish he had set down how many; some I have met with, but not many; and of
those, that which is pretended to be of the greatest Authority, is (in true
judgment) of least account, viz. that of Clement. constable. Apost. l. 7. c. 24.
Clement, published in the name of the Apostles, which commands to keep holy
the Sabbath day in memory of the Creation, and the Lords day in memory of the
Resurrection; which, if Clement had received from the Apostles, the Romans, it
is like, would (which they did not) have received it from him: for they reckon
him for one of the prime successors of S. Peter in the Bishopric of Rome.

The sum of these observations concerning sacred Assemblies twice a week,
viz. upon Saturday the old Sabbath, and the Lords day the new, (begun by the
Apostles, for the quicker progress of the Gospel, and better advantage of
devotion, and continued by Christians in after ages, after their examples) is
this;

In the primitive times the Lords day was seldom called the Sabbath, because
then the old Sabbath of the Jews was religiously observed with solemn
Assemblies; and while, and where two days were so solemnized ( i. e. Saturday
and Sunday) it was sit to call them (for distinction sake, and to avoid
confusion) by several names: and good reason that the Saturday, having, for
some thousand of years, had possession of the title Sabbath, when yet the Lords
day, or Christian Sunday, had never shined in the world, should be called the
Sabbath, rather then any other day; and that the Lords day should rather be
called by another name, then by that.

But now, at least among us who use the day which was the Jews holiday, not as
a Sabbath, or a day of rest, but as a workeday; now, that some Jewishly, some
profanely affected, do deny the name of Sabbath to the day we celebrate, to
supplant the support of it by the fourth Commandment, (not as it is the Lords
day, but as one of the seven) there is no danger of confusion by calling the
Lords day the Sabbath, but due caution thereby given against such conceits as
tend to impeach the pre-eminence thereof.

CHAP. XXIIII. The objection taken from the use of the name Sabbath in
Histories, Dictionaries, and the Roman and Reformed Churches, answered.
NOr is it any thing to prejudice the pre-eminence of the title Sabbath among
us, that Latin Authors (whether of Histories or Dictionaries) take the word
Sabbatum usually for Saturday, (as M. Brab. his defense, p. 44.
Master Braburn has objected) since so long a custom of the Sabbaths
observation upon Saturday, both in the Jewish and the Christian Church, might
easily prevail with many Writers, to take the term as they found it in
familiar use before their time, wherein they might be more facile, while they
suspected none advantage would be made of it against the truth.

But if from that facility of phrase exception be taken against the right of
the Christians weekly holiday (though a day of rest) to the name Sabbath, a
name of rest, then we must have recourse to the proper sense of the word, and
correspondence of the thing, and rather speak according to both, then to the
improper and abusive application of it, though customarie or usual.

And as for the word Catholic, though many Protestants have familiarly called
the Papists by that name; yet since they have insolently gloryed in it, and
perversely inferred from our use of it (agreeing with their usurpation) that
we that call them Catholics, do (by consequence) confess that our selves
are Heretics, who are opposite to them, as Coqueus concluded from King James
his courteous charientismes, in the use of that title: it is requisite that we
take it according to the right sense and signification which it properly
imports, and so to deny them, and affirm our selves to be Catholics; as the
learned and judicious Chamier has done, who in his controversies continually
calls the Protestant tenets and arguments by the name of Catholic; and the
contrary Popish, or the doctrine, arguments, or objections of the Papists.

So, since the name Sabbath is impertinently applied to the wrong day, and
wrongfully withheld from the right, with purpose to impeach the tenure of our
Christian Sabbath by the fourth Commandment, we must not so much regard how
it has been rightly used in former times (while Saturday was allowed and
observed for a Sabbath, or day of rest) or how the tyranny of custom has
carried the name along (where there is no realty to answer it) as what it
properly signifies, and how that propriety of signification now belongs
rather to our day which we celebrate, with religious rest, then to the Jews
day, which we hold not for an holiday, but for a workday, as the other days of
the week allowed and employed in secular labors; and we must inure our
tongues with correspondent titles to make mention of them.

And for the proper signification of the word, we may appeal more pertinently
and truly, then Master Braburn could, to all Dictionaries in all languages,
which render the word Sabbath (according to the (...) Sabbatum a radice (...)
cessavit, quievit, destitit, is dies quietis Hebraeis est septimus, vel dies
Saturni; Christianis vero est primus, vel Solis. So Schindler Pentaglot. page
1801. col. 1.
Hebrew original) by rest, repose, or cessation from bodily labors.

And though it be usual with them to take the term rather according to
custom then to truth, and to apply it to Saturday, the day of rest which
anciently was, but now is not, (many of the So Thomasius word for word,
follows Morelius in exposition and application of the name Sabbath.
later transcribing what they find in the former); yet Sabbath a day of rest,
among the Jews celebrated on Saturday, among the Christians on Sunday, or the
Lords day. Minshei Dictionarium. 10437.
some more wisely and warily distinguish the name, and render it according to
the difference of time, first to Saturday, and then to Sunday: for that day
first, and for a long time had; and this now has, and shall have the honor of
a sacred Sabbath until the worlds end: and therefore, if it be fit, to speak
rather according to the tenor of things, as for the present they are, and in
perpetuity they shall be, then as formerly they were, but now are not, and
must be no more: when we render the word Sabbath without distinction and
difference of times, we should rather say according to Cotgraves French
Dictionary, verb. Sab. printed 1632.
the French Dictionarie, that the Sabbath is Sunday, then, as Master Braburn
would have it, Saturday.

Ob. But then it will be said, though we may differ in phrase and form of
speech from the primitive times, because we differ in practice from them, we
should not so dissent from the Churches of later ages, who have left off the
observation of the Jewish Sabbath, and with it the word Sabbath also. We of
the reformed Churches, says Mr. Ironside quest. 3. cap. 17. page 121.
Master Ironside, should not forsake the Roman Church, but where necessity does
enforce us; for then we are guilty of the schism made in the Christian world:
Ibid.
neither should we vary from our selves so much as (were it possible) in a
sound or syllable, for then we may justly be noted of singularity and
affectation: but both the Roman Churches, and all the Reformed, use to style it
the Lords day, not Sabbath day: Ergo, etc.

This Argument is made up of three particulars, whereof there is not one, but
it is liable to reasonable exception.

The first is, That there should be a strict union betwixt the Church of Rome
and the Reformed, and betwixt other reformed Churches among themselves; except
where necessity does enforce a difference.

Secondly, That to differ (except in such a case) from the Roman Church, is to
become guilty of Schism; and from the Reformed, is to be guilty of
singularity and affectation.

Thirdly, that to style the Lords day Sabbath, is to make our selves obnoxious
to the charge of both. Whereto I answer:

First, that not to allow one Church to differ from another (but where
necessity does enforce) is to take away the Christian liberty, which God has
granted to his Church, contrary to the 34. Article of subscription, which
runs thus: It is not necessary, that traditions and ceremonies be in all
places one, or utterly alike; for, at all times they have been diverse, and may
be changed (according to diversity of countries, times, and manners) so that
nothing be ordained against Gods Word: and a little afterward, every particular
or national Church has authority to ordain, change, or abolish Ceremonies or
Rites of the Church, ordained only by men's authority. And accordingly we find
them exercising their power in varieties of Rites and Ceremonies: for, the
ancient Die Dominico jejunare nefas ducimus, vel de geniculis adorare. Tert. de
Coron. milit. c 3. tom. 1 page 747. quoniam sunt in Dominico die quidam
adoratione genua flectentes, propterea utique statutum est a sancto Synodo
(quoniam consona and conveniens per omnes Ecclesias custodienda consuetudo est)
ut stantes ad orationem vota Domino reddamus. Council. Nicen. 1. can. 20. apud
Caranz. sum. Council. page 109 edit. 1633. in 8no. and Bin. tom. 1. page 345.
edit. Paris. 1636. Die Dominico, and per omnem Pentecosten. nec de geniculis
adorare, and jejunium solvere. Hieron. advers. Lucifer. tom. 2. epist. p. 140.
So also in a Council of Towers. an. 813. can. 57. Patr. Symps. hist of the
Church lib. 4. page 557.
Church (for many hundred years) partly forbad, and partly forbore kneeling at
prayer all the Lords days in the year, and all the days betwixt Easter and
Whitsuntide: the later Churches neither forbad nor forbore it.

The Popish Church keeps the celebration of our Lords Nativity, and other
Holidaies (according to the Gregorian Calendar) ten days sooner then the
Reformed, especially in England, Scotland, and Ireland. And in many other
points they differ besides these, which are not of necessity, as (if necessity
required) might be abundantly manifested out of William Durandus his
Rationale, and John Steph. Durantus his three books de Ritibus Eccles Cathol.

The Reformed Churches differ among themselves in many particulars. For
instance, we in England observe more Holidaies then the Transmarine Churches,
more then his Majesty that last was required to be kept of the Church of
Scotland, by the Articles enacted at Perth, an. 1618. our Church of England
has a Canon for the Cross after Baptism, and bowing at the name of Jesus,
many Reformed Churches have none for either of them: and in England, Cathedral
Churches differ from most others, in the use of Copes, Organs, prick-song
tunes, and many other ways besides. Of these, with the rest of the
differences, we may say they are such, as no necessity does enforce; yet will
not Master Ironside (I suppose) be forward to charge the later Church in
departing from the former; nor the Reformed, in dissenting from the Romish; nor
the English, in differing from the Scottish Church; nor Cathedralls, in varying
from other Churches (for such particulars) with schism, singularity, or
affectation: Which I do not mention with any mind to maintain any thing that
is amiss in the different manner of Cathedralls from other Churches; (for, I
wish rather a reformation, then a ratification of them as now they are) but to
give fit instance against Master Ironside his position.

Secondly, I say, and shall (where it is requisite) prove it, that neither the
Romish, nor many of the Reformed Churches out of England, are so Orthodox in
the Doctrine of the Sabbath in particular, for the explication of the fourth
Commandment, as they should be, and as the Churches of England and Scotland
are; and it is no marvel, if their dialect be like unto their Doctrine.

Thirdly, it is too late to impute schism, singularity, or affectation to the
word Sabbath, when the use of it is justified by such both reasons and
authorities, as have been produced; and when not only persons of chief
pre-eminence so call it, but that it is as well received into use by most, as
approved by the best, as has been observed.

Fourthly, for the Reformed Churches, the Waldenses, who first separated
themselves from the Church of Rome (as the Whore of Babylon) called the Lords
day Sabbath, and that so familiarly, that nothing was more usual among them,
as a learned Doct. Twisse in a MS. of the Sabbath.
Doctor has observed of them.

Fifthly, we must not account it schism, singularity, and affectation, to
conform rather to our brethren about us, then to either brethren or
adversaries that are separated from us.

Sixthly, nor are we more liable to exception of schism, singularity, or
affectation, by using the word Sabbath for Lords day, then by putting Sunday
for it (the most usual name in our Service Book) which is as unwonted a word
in the reformed Churches as the word Sabbath is, and has been Pope Silvest.
See Polyd. Virg* de invent. rer. lib. 5. c. 6.
forbidden by the most Cathedral Doctor of the Popish Church, with more
probability of reason then has been urged by way of exception against the name
Sabbath.

CHAP. XXV. The objection taken from the Statute, and language of Lawyers,
answered.
THere remain yet two objections more, and but two that I have read, or can
call to mind, which are brought in by Master Broad Mr. Broad his 3d. quest p.
22. marg.
in his printed book of three questions: the one is, That a Process to appear
die Sabbati, is meant and understood [ upon Saturday]: The other in Mr. Brad
his 2d. MS. p. 18. marg.
another book of his, (which is yet a MS.) wherein says he, the last
Parliament may well be thought to dislike the name Sabbath as to the Lords
day; for neither in the title of the Act which is for the keeping of the Lords
day, nor yet throughout the body thereof is this name used, though the
heathenish name Sunday be in both; yea, and though the Commandment read in the
Church, speaks of sanctifying of the Sabbath.

He might have alleged two Acts of two Parliaments: the one, anno 1. of King
Charles, chap. 1. The other anno 3. chapter 1. In the former whereof there is the
name of Sunday in the title of the Act, though not in the body of it (as in the
Statute, anno 5. and 6. of King Edward the sixth, chap. 3. page 133. of the
Stat. at large) and the name Lords day once in the title, and thrice in the
body of the Act: and in the later Act, they are each of them named once in the
title, and once in the body of the Act, but the name Sabbath not at all.

Whereto I answer, first for the Process; concerning which I say,

First, That such a Process might be taken up when there were many Jews, and
much Judaisme in the Land, as in the reigns of many of our Popish Kings; which
gave occasion of warrant in contracts and bargains against Jews by especial
mention, who kept a foot the name and observation of the old Sabbath: and so it
might be then (as in the days of ancient Fathers) a word of distinction
betwixt the Jewish and Christians holiday. Or,

Secondly, If not for that reason; yet the use of the name in that sense
(having obtained such general passage in the times precedent) might be a
motive to the Lawyers to continue it, though the reason which began it
descended not so low as to their age: as we call an houre-glasse in Greek and
Latin, Clepsydra, which signifies the stealing away of water drop by drop,
from one bottle to another, (for at first it was made to measure time by water,
though now it be made to run with sand only.)

Thirdly, Their Process being Latin, happily they made choice rather of that
word which had in it some relish of Religion, both among Jews and ancient
Christians (and so has the word Sabbath), then of that which was (for that
language) in a manner merely heathenish, to wit, Saturday; and though the word
Sunday (which is originally heathenish as well as Saturday) be used in our
Church Liturgy, yet we call the Lords day Sunday, not from the Sun in the
Firmament, but from the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. as has been formerly
observed: the word Saturday is not capable of a signification so sacred and
suitable to the person of our Savior, the Lord of the Sabbath.

Fourthly, Though the Lawyers did in their Latin writs use the word Sabbath for
Saturday, yet they did neither forbid nor forbear to use it of the Lords day
in French and in English; as in Fitzherberts natura Brevium it is said, Pleas
cannot be held upon Quindena Paschae Que est le Sabot, jour. Fitzherb. nature.
Brev. fol. 17.
, because it is the Sabbath day: whereby not Saturday, but Sunday, or the Lords
day must be meant: for on the Saturday it was lawful not only to hold Pleas,
but to keep Markets, as Judge Fairfax (in the Prior of Lantonies case)
resolves, viz. Devant le Incarnation le Sabbadi suit le Sabat jour, and
solenize mes ore est change per les eglise at jour demain, etc. the year book
12. of Ed. 4. b.
That before the incarnation, Saturday was the Sabbath day; but since it is
changed by the Church into the Lords day, that day is to be kept holy, and
Markets may be kept upon the other. And in Sir Edward Coke his first part of
the Institutes of Litleton, resolving what day is not dies Juridicus, he says,
In Sir Edward Coke in that first part of his Institutes, lib. 12. c. 11. Sect.
2. of Villenage, page 135. calls it ^oure times the Sabbath day in this page.
all the four terms, the Sabbath day is not dies Juridicus: for that ought to
be consecrated to divine service: and in his Reports in the case of the City
of London, it is said, Le jour de Sabbath (so it is written for Sabbath)
solemnit. Except Cokes reports. part. 8. p. 127. a.
That every day in the week is a Market day, the Sabbath day (by which is
understood the Lords day) only excepted. And in Machellies case, who being
arrested on the Sunday, slew the Sergeant; it was objected against the
Sergeant, Le jour de soleile est le Sabbath. Idem Ib. part. 9. p. 66.
that Sunday was the Sabbath day, and answer made, that no judicial act may be
done that day, but ministerial may. In this instance is both the word Sunday
and Sabbath for the same day.

And those two, and a third, are all of them by an eminent Sir Jo. Finch in his
first book of the Law, cap. 3. p. 7.
Lawyer, (it is Sir John Finch) in one side of a lease indifferently used for
the day we Christians celebrate: and another bird of the same golden feather
(Master Henry Finch) in his Nomotechnia, showing (besides the lawful use of
the name Sabbath for the Lords day) the separation of it from secular affairs,
Si le jour del return, vel si le primer ou darraine jour del term hap sur le
Sabbath, jour donque se jour procheine en suaul server en lin de ceo. So Master
Hen. Finch in fol. 52. in which edition the figures are mis-reckoned; for on
that lease is set number. 58. which comes twice, but the former should be 52. as
I have cited it.
says, If the day of return, or the first or last day of the term happen
upon the Sabbath day, (by which must needs be understood the Lords day) then
the day next ensuing shall serve, or be kept in stead thereof, for the
beginning of the term, or day of return.

Now to answer to the objection taken from the Acts of Parliament, I say,

First, That in the M. Pultons Abridgement, fol. 134. p. b.
Parliament of the 19. of Queen Elisabeth, cap. 13. which is of Hats and Caps,
the name Sabbath is used for the Lords day.

Secondly, For the Act forecited, concerning the observation of the day we
Christians keep, giving it the name of Lords day, or Sunday, not of Sabbath; I
answer, That I have heard a M. Ed. Whitby late Recorder of Chester.
Parliament man (of eminent note in his time) say, that the bill was penned and
passed in the Commons House in the name of the Sabbath day; and I have read,
that (when an Act was made for reformation of abuse by profanation of the
Sabbath) In a MS. of Doct. Twisse concerning the Sabbath.
Doct. Lake Bishop of Bath and Wells, was somewhat eager to have it called by
the name of Sabbath: and it had not been the worse, if that reverend Father had
been allowed as a Godfather, to give the name and title in the Statute.

Thirdly, though some prime persons of the upper House thought it fit (in the
Act) to make use rather of the word Sunday and Lords day, then of the word
Sabbath; it does not follow, they disallowed or condemned the use of that word:
for, they were not ignorant of his Majesty's Proclamation and Briefes (calling
our weekly Holiday by the name Sabbath) nor how the name and day were
incorporated into our Communion Book, with a prayer at the end of the fourth
Commandment, for pardon of profanation past, and for grace to shun the like in
time to come; nor that that Commandment, as well as the rest, was a part of
the common Catechism, prescribed for the instruction of children before their
confirmation.

Fourthly, they might happily mention the day we observe for a Sabbath, by the
name of Sunday, because that name was used in the Statute of the 5. and 6.
Stat. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. c. 3. p. 133
of Edward the sixth, wherein it was enacted, that all Sundaies in the year
should be kept holy, and by the name Lords day, because that is the name which
S. John gives it, Revel. 1.10. and which the Latin Church most used, to
distinguish it from the Saturday Sabbath; and for the name Sabbath, they might
at that time forbear it.

First, because these two names (chosen for these reasons) were sufficient to
make it well enough known unto all.

Secondly, because the name Sabbath in the Communion Book was like to be
upheld with so much honor and reputation (so long as the fourth Commandment
is a part of the Liturgy and Catechism, and both of them are in force and use)
that there was no such need to grace it with a particular mention in the Act,
as the other two titles; yet if all three had been brought to a serious
consultation for the choice and use of one above the rest, the name Sabbath of
right might have had the pre-eminence; and so much I hope to manifest in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. XXVI. A comparison of the names Sabbath, Lords day, and Sunday, with a
resolution of the Question for the name Sabbath, as the best, and fittest to be
the most usual title of our weekly Holiday.
THough all the three names be lawful enough, and may each of them (as just
occasion requires) be used, without either sin or scandal (if there be not
more fault in the mind of the speaker, or hearer, then in the words themselves)
yet since they are not all at such an equipoize for sense or acceptance, but
that there may be observed a pre-eminence among them, which may incline the
custom of speech to one more then to another, thereafter as it is apprehended,
when the name is uttered or heard: It will be a matter of some use, to observe
the importance and prelation of these names, so far as to resolve, which of
them in our Church and age is most sit to become most common among us.

Names are of chief account for these seven particulars:

First, for Antiquity: secondly, for Authority: thirdly, for Significancy:
fourthly, for Facility to the speaker: fifthly, for Acceptability with the
hearer: sixthly, for Frequency: seventhly, for Efficacy.

First, if we compare them for Antiquity, the name Sunday (in the language of
the world) is more ancient then Lords day, the name Lords day (in the language
of the Church) a more ancient name then Sunday: for, we find the Lords day in
Revelat. 1.10. about the 94. year after Christ; but the first mention of
Sunday (as a Christian Holiday) is in Justin Martyrs 2d. Apol. ad Antoninum
pium, about the year 150. but the name Sabbath, for a weekly Holiday, is
ancienter then them both.

Secondly, if we compare them for Authority, we may consider it in a double
sense, as divine and humane.

First, by divine Authority the Sabbath and Lords day have the best warrant;
for, they are both Scripture names, and the name Sunday is not so.

I confess, in the translation of the Bible, published in King Henry the eight
his days, anno 1540. before which Archbishop Cranmer prefixed a Preface, the
words of Saint John, Revel. 1.10. are rendered thus: I was in the spret on a
Sunday (as I noted before) but in the original there is not that word which
signifies either Sun or Son: and in all other translations that I have seen,
it is rendered (according to the original) Lords day, and not Sunday.

Secondly, the name Sabbath for a weekly Holiday, is in the fourth Commandment
of the Decalogue (the greatest warrant of Authority that can be) thrice
mentioned: neither the name Lords day nor Sunday are so. And for humane
Authority in the Liturgy of our Church, the name Sabbath and Sunday are both
mentioned, and the name Lords day (to my remembrance) not at all. In the Canons
of the Church, though the name Sabbath (for the English edition, as I have
already observed) be not omitted, the names Sunday or Lords day are more often
mentioned; and in the Latin Canons, the title Lords day only.

Thirdly, if we compare them for significancy, that swayeth the pre-eminence by
three respects:

First, by Dignity: secondly, Propriety: thirdly, Perspicuity.

First, for Dignity, the name Lords day has prelation over the other two, and
carries a signification of his dignity, who is Lord of all, both Angels, Men,
and Devils; and imports with his person, his absolute Lordship over the world,
especially over his Church, and the name Sunday shows his illustrious
excellency, if we understand the term, according to the Prophet Malachy, for
the Sun of Righteousness; but the name Sabbath (in its Grammatical sense)
signifies only Rest, which is in dignity inferior to them both.

Secondly, for Propriety, that is to be considered as opposed, either to
figurativenesse, or to community, taking proper for that which is not
figurative, the name Sabbath signifying in the Grammatical sense, a [literall
rest] which is required on an holiday, is a more proper word then either of the
other, which are not well understood without a figure; for we call the Sabbath
Lords day by an For all days are the Lords, but this by an especial eminency.
Antinomasie, and Sunday by a In the sense of the Heathens, who dedicated the
day to the Sun, and thence gave it that name.
Metonymie, or In the religious sense in the Prophet Malach. c. 4. v. 2.
Metaphor: But taking propriety as opposed to generality or community, the
names Lords day and Sunday (as in application to days) are more proper and
particular, noting a set and certain day in the week, viz. that which we
Christians celebrate, and none other, as the Sovereign Antidote against
Sabbatary errors. page 7.
Author of the sovereign Antidote well observes: Whereas Sabbath has been a
name for any holiday which may fall out any day of the week. In which respect,
if there had not been other considerable reasons to the contrary, he had well
resolved, that when we speak of a time of rest undeterminately, and in
general, the name Sabbath is the fittest; the other two, Lords day and Sunday,
when we speak determinately of that day which is observed in the Christian
Church.

Thirdly, For Perspicuitie, that is most perspicuous which is least ambiguous;
so is the name Sunday, which presently points all to the day we observe: but
the names Sabbath and Lords day are not at all times, and in all places so
clear, since the name Sabbath has been for a long time taken for Saturday,
and the name Lords day has been taken, not only for the weekly Sabbath of
the Resurrection, but also for the day of Christ's Nativity, Passion, Ascension,
and last Judgment, as has been showed in the second Chapter. Besides, the
Apostle says, there be Lords many, 1 Cor. 8.5. and the more they be, the
more ambiguous is the name whereof that word makes up the one half.

Yet, to say the truth, in our Church and age, they are all perspicuous and
clear enough; so that there is scarce any one so silly, but he presently
knows, if he hear the name Sabbath, Lords day, or Sunday, what day of the
week is understood by them.

Fourthly, If we compare them for facility or readiness of speech, the names
Sabbath day, or Sunday are more apt to be taken up; as when we speak of the
weekly holiday past, or to come, it is readier to say, (and withal, more
distinctly understood) the last Sabbath, or the last Sunday; next Sabbath, or
next Sunday; some Sabbath, or some Sunday, as in his Majesty's Briefes
fore-noted, then the last Lords day, or the next Lords day, or some Lords day.

Fifthly, If for acceptance with speaker or hearer, they are every one of them
single (for the most part) of better relish then the other two with some or
other; some like best of the name Sabbath, some of the name Lords day, some of
Sunday; and by that we have observed of each of them before, it appears that
there are many of the better sort of men, who stand divided in their
inclinations and prelations, according to the diversity of the titles
forementioned: and yet, when two holidaies were observed in a week, the name
Lords day (for the day we celebrate) was most acceptable to most men: and
(since they have all of them been taken to indifferent use by the wiser sort)
it has been less obvious to exception then either the name Sabbath or Sunday
have been, while some (though without just cause) have charged the one with
Judaisme, the other with Paganism, which is worse, since our Religion has
more affinity with Jewish, then with Heathenish principles.

Sixthly, For frequencie or community of use; all in our Church are bound to
assent unto the name Sabbath, and to use it also by the obligation that tyeth
them to the Liturgy and Catechism of the Church; and as Religion has
advanced, so has that name prevailed, and bin most frequently used by the
religious of our Church: until that (a very few years ago) some took up such
exceptions against it as have been seen in the precedent Discourse, which
either reason may work out, or time wear out of men's opinions; as in the title
Lords day has come to pass; for that, at at the first, did not pass without
cavil and contempt: for, in the memory of some yet alive, many were as much
offended (suspecting a tang of excessive preciseness) that some said Lords day
for Sunday, as any now are at those who say rather Sabbath then either.

Seventhly, and lastly, If we compare the three names for efficacy to
edification, (which ought to be of most account with us) we may say,

First, That the name Sabbath and Lords day, at first apprehension are more
ready and effectual to mind us of, and dispose us to pious conceits, then the
name Sunday is, which at first blench (according to the literal sense and
primitive use) has an idolatrous intimation; for it was so called, with
reference to, and reverence of the Planet Sol, which was made an Idol by the
Saxons, our predecessors in this Kingdom; though the word be capable of a
better sense, as before has been showed upon Malach. 4.2. and has been a
good while since purged from the smack and suspicion of idolatry or
superstition, wherewith it has been tainted in former times.

Secondly, That though the title Lords day design some day of eminent note,
and by consent of most be taken for the day on which Christ rose from the dead;
and though it may also import (with a little working of the understanding upon
it) that he is Lord both of times and persons, with other religious documents
which conduce much to the edification of the Church, yet the name Sabbath
edifieth much more, as to the solemn services of religion, which ought to
prevail in this comparison; for it signifies rest, or cessation from secular
labors (without which no day can be holily and solemnly observed) and that, by
an easy transition from the letter to a figure, may admonish us of our
Saviors resting in the grave all the Sabbath day, which he punctually
observed while it was in force; and of his resting from all further pain, or
suffering for our Redemption, upon his Resurrection; and of Gods resting
satisfied with us, he having then fully discharged all our debt, and quit
himself from prison, as by a most complete satisfaction to his Fathers
Justice; and last of all, of that everlasting rest, Hebr. 4.9. which in the
literal Sabbath was partly prefigured.

Besides, the name Sabbath guides us to the fourth Commandment of the
Decalogue, where the proportion of time, for the weekly recourse of it is to be
read, and the personal extent of the Commandment to superiors and inferiors
home-borne or aliens, together with the duties of the day, both affirmative and
negative, and the reasons both of the institution and observation of them, and
those both many and weighty, and so it upholdeth our solemn and sacred
Assemblies once a week, then which nothing is of more moment to edisication.

And all this it does in such sort, that no cavills of men can either weaken,
or darken its tenure from that text, in the judgment of any reasonable man;
nor can any one (who considers that) hold himself so little obliged to an
holy celebration of one day in the week, as if no more should be pleaded for
it then what is either formally or vertually contained in the title Lords day,
or in any part of holy Scripture, besides the fourth Commandment, whereto it
directs us.

Thirdly, the name Sabbath keeps title to that ground, which (while it is
made good for the proportion of one day in seven, and not for Saturday Sabbath
in particular, as it easily may) is the best means to maintain the Authority
of our weekly Holiday, against any Adversary whatsoever.

To wind up those comparisons to a conclusion, though every one of the words
may lawfully be used (as before has been said) I conceive (and hope in the
virtue of the premises I may resolve) that for our Church and time the name
Sabbath is fittest to be familiarly used for the day we keep holy every
week; since for Antiquity, Authority, Propriety, Significancie, Facility,
Frequency of use among the religious of later times; and, which is most to be
heeded, for efficacy to edification, it has the pre-eminence of the other two
names compared with it.

To which we may add (and it is a consideration of some moment) that those
that have most ill will to our Christian Holiday (as Mast. Brab. in his
defense. page 54.
Master Braburne had) would rob it of its right to the name Sabbath, and
therewith of its right for this authenticke Tenure by the fourth Commandment:
which it cannot claim under the name Sunday, nor will it be allowed under the
name Lords day; for, I marvel with what face (says Ibid. p. 55, 56.
he) men can press the fourth Commandment upon that day, which themselves
confess is named Lords day, and not Sabbath day: and if he could have
supplanted it (for that support) he would have had it to depend upon the mere
power of man, so as to stand or fall at his pleasure; and rather to fall, then
to stand: for that was his drift in both his books, to which purpose he has
said so much, as requires a farther and fuller answer, then has been made
unto them: for the Bishop of Ely (who professedly undertook the defense of our
Christian Sabbath against his Judaizing Arguments) deals but with one of his
books; and for the other, it seems he has not seen it; for he never
makes any mention of it.

Object. Against this prelation of the name Sabbath, it may be said by way of
exception, that the name Sabbath is less proper then the name Lords day, or
Sunday: for it is a name for any day of Rest, as has been observed and
acknowledged (on all hands.)

Answ. It is true, the name Sabbath may be communicated to more days then the
weekly Holiday, whereof we treat, if there be a cessation from labor upon
them; and so it was in the Old Testament: for, the Jews had many Holidayes
which were named sometimes Sabbaths; and yet the weekly Sabbath, by an
excellency, had that denomination belonging unto it, which other Holidayes had
not.

If a Papist object this, I will give for instance the word Pope, which
anciently was a general title for all Bishops, as I have In my Christian
Nomenclature.
observed and proved at large in another work: but now use has confined it to
the Bishop of Rome. If a Protestant, the word Bible may serve to answer him,
which (as the learned know) signifies in the Greek tongue a book in
general, and has been in use with that latitude of extent; yet by an
Antinomasie, or excellency (and we may say the same of the word Scripture) it
is now taken only for the book of the holy Scripture, and it is (though a
common word of old) now become so proper, as that we know what one means,
when he says a Bible, as well as if he said Gods Book; so we may know (as
most men use the word Sabbath) as well what day is meant by it, as if we said
the Lords day, or Sunday.

Besides, the Lords day is (in its Grammatical signification) of as large
extent as the Sabbath; both because the Apostle says, there be Lords many, 1
Cor. 8.5. as we noted even now: and for that it may belong to all days
dedicated to public devotion, whereby God, our great Lord, is honored; yea,
and all week days (as he is Lord of all time however measured or entitled)
might be called Lords days: and only use has shrunk in generality into a
propriety, and confined the title Lords day to that which has a weekly
recourse for religious observation (as it has done the name Scripture and
Bible but now mentioned) and in this also the name Sabbath has as much
propriety as it.

Object. To succor this objection, M. Ironside. qu. 3. chapter 12. page 122.
Master Ironside his Argument may be brought in, which is this, That name which
does less edify is less proper, this I think (says he) will be easily
agreed on by all parties: But the name Sabbath does less edify; for, it leads
us only to a cessation from bodily labor: on the contrary, the Lords day does
betoken and explain the whole nature and duty of the day; as the remembrance
of Christ's resurrection, acknowledging his Lordship over the Church, and over
all other creatures in the world: Ergo, etc. I answer:

Answ. Both major and minor are infirm and unable to beget, or bring forth the
conclusion which he desires: First, for the major, That name which does less
edify is less proper (says he, and he says it with confidence, that all
parties will yield consent to that conceit:) But if his proposition be
general (and so it must be, or it will be too narrow for a Logical
conclusion) I conceive it is subject to just exception, and so is not like to
obtain an acceptance of such an extent as he talks of: for, it imports a
nearer affinity betwixt propriety of words and edification, then we find in
use, and sets words not proper at a further distance from edification then
there is cause.

First, for the first; Proper words do not always best edify, nor improper
or figurative least: nay, many times, improper words and figurative speeches
give both most light to the understanding, and work with greatest force upon
the affections, and so are of best use for edification: There are memorable
instances hereof both in the Scripture, and in other Authors, which will be
superfluous in this place; since we need none other then his own word [
edifie] which (as he uses it) is a figurative, and not a proper term: for,
it signifies properly the building of an house, figuratively the bringing of
light to the understanding, working heat upon the affection, or any furtherance
in matter of Religion; and in that sense it is usually both uttered and
understood by men, whether learned or illiterate.

Secondly, if propriety and edification consort so well together (as he says)
it makes much for the pre-eminence we plead for; for, the name Sabbath is
proper.

First, as not figurative, signifying a literal Rest, which is requisite for
celebration of our weekly Holiday, and proper.

Secondly, as not common to all Holidaies; common use now having confined it to
our weekly Holiday, though called also Sunday, or Lords day, according to the
different impressions set upon the fancy or affection of those that mention it.

Secondly, for the minor, which is, But the name Sabbath does less edify then
the Lords day does: for, it leads us only to an outward cessation: I answer;

First, that the name Sabbath does lead us directly to the fourth Commandment,
the fundamental Authority for a weekly Holiday; and if the foundation be of
most use in building and edification, the name Sabbath, leading us to that,
does best edify; the word Lords day leads us to a tenure of less both
evidence and assurance, and consequently of less authority, as has partly
been showed already, and we shall further manifest afterward.

Secondly, The name Sabbath leads not only to a cessation from bodily
labor, but to holiness also; for it leads us to the Commandment, which
says as well, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy; as, Thou shall do no
manner of work.

Thirdly, Whereas he says, The Lords day does best open and explain the
nature and duty of the day, as the remembrance of Christ's Resurrection, and
acknowledgement of his Lordship over the Church, and all other creatures of the
world. Let any one read the fourth Commandment, where the Sabbath is named,
and the first of the Revelat. ver. 10. where the Lords day is named, and let
him tell me which of them does more explain the duty of the day: nay, the
name Lords day does neither expressly, nor by necessary consequence direct to
the duties of the day, nor to the Evangelicall ground of it, the Resurrection
of our Savior; since other days have been set up with our weekly holiday (by
way of competition for that title) as has before been observed.

Besides, When the name Sabbath leads to the fourth Commandment, it brings
us to the title Lords day; for if it be the Sabbath of the Lord, as it is there
called, it is the Lords day; for the Sabbath is a day, and he is called Lord
of the Sabbath, Mat. 12.8. Mark. 2.28. and the Lordship he has there is not
only particular, over the Church; but universal, over the world: for there it
is said, that in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and sea, and every
thing contained in them all.

Yet I deny not, but the title Lords day is generally used for the day of our
Saviors Resurrection, wherein as a Lord of life and death, he raised his body
from the state of the dead, and returned to the living, accomplishing thereby,
actually his own restitution to a glorious liberty, and vertually ours: but
that consideration is more remote from the sanctification of one day in seven,
then that which the name Sabbath does import.

Notwithstanding, I deny not but that it might be well used to edification, if
men would so take it to be the Lords day, as to take none of it from the
advancement of his glory, to the promotion of their own profit, or practice of
their own pleasures; wherein most make as bold with it, to serve their s^^^lar
affairs, or sensual humors (sometimes upon very slight occasions) as if not
Christ, but they were Lords of that day.

Object. But the name Lords day inclines to no erroneous conceits, and the
name Sunday, though once it did, does not in our days bring with it any peril
of Paganism: but the name Sabbath may import some danger of Judaisme;
therefore the name Lords day is the best, the name Sabbath the worst.

Answ. I have in effect, though not formally answered to this objection before,
and have made it plain, that Judaisme is best opposed, and those that are
Jewish most displeased by entitling our Lords day to the name Sabbath, and to
the authority of the fourth Commandment, as it prescribes the holy
observation of one day in seven, and by averring, that their seventh day in
order is not expressly there prescribed, but a seventh day in number, as shall
be manifested in its proper place.

Object. But a learned and zealous Pleader for a weekly Sabbath in the
Christian Church, first gives the Lords day a real preeminence above the old
Sabbath, saying, M. J. Walker in his book of the Doctrine of the Sabbath. p.
89.90.
that the old Sabbath had no other light nor life in it, but only from obscure
promises, and dark shadows, through which Christ was seen as things afar off
are seen, and in the starre-light nights: but the Lords day (the first day of
the week) has light and life from the Sun of Righteousness, who in it rose
up to be the light of life to all Nations. And after that he gives it a
nominall pre-eminence under the title Lords day; Ib. p. 90, 91.
God, says he, has given it a most honorable name and title above all the
days of the week: for the holy Evangelist, and divine Apostle Saint John, who
was the intimate, beloved, and bosom Disciple of the Lord, and did best know
his mind, calls it the Lords day, Revel. 1.10. and the word (...) Lord, is the
same in signification with Gods proper Name Jehovah, and most commonly is used
(in the new Testament) to express that sacred Name. And if that day and name
both be more excellent then that of the old Testament, the denomination should
be taken according to it; and so we should call it rather Lords day then
Sabbath. To which I answer,

First, That howsoever the new Sabbath be (in many respects) more excellent
then the old; yet the name Sabbath may be very agreeable to them both.

Secondly, that if name Lords day be a more excellent name then the name
Sabbath, it does not follow it should be more usual and ordinary: for, there
be many other intimatious of moment, for the use of a name (as before we have
noted) and for instance, though the name Son of God, be a more excellent
name then Son of man; yet our Savior, who best knew how to speak ( for he
spoke as no man ever did, John 7.46.) called himself oftener Son of man, then
Son of God.

Thirdly, the name Sabbath does import more clearly and assuredly a weekly
Holiday (as we observe it) then the name Lords day does: for that is
questionable (as before we have showed) whether it be to be taken for the day
of our Saviors Resurrection, or no; and if that be resolved on, then whether
it note that individual day only, on which he arose, or other days also that
succeed it: and if others, whether only an Anniversary day, as Easter; or a
weekly day, as the Sabbath is, and has been since it was first ordained: but
the word Sabbath, without all question, signifies a day of Rest among six
days of labor, and so one set day within the circle of the week.

Fourthly, the name Sabbath, being the title of the fourth Commandment (which
is the best warrant for a weekly Holiday, and which prescribes our duty, both
for what we must forbear, and what perform, and presses it by many
effectual reasons) there is great reason, that it should be more used then
any other; which in such material considerations is not comparable to it.

Fifthly, the name Sabbath, guiding us to the fourth Commandment, will bring
us readily to the title Lords day (as before has been observed) but the name
Lords day in that text, where it is noted, viz. Revel. 1.10. (the chief, if
not the only text for that title in the New Testament) gives none intimation
of a Sabbath, neither in Deed, nor in Name; therefore the name Sabbath, as more
significant and monitory, is fitter for instruction and use, then the name
Lords day is.

Sixthly, for such reasons as these, or some other of like importance, the
forecited Author uses the name Sabbath more frequently (throughout his whole
book) then any other whatsoever; and sets it as the title, in the highest
place of every page, though no man express a dearer affection to the dignity
of the Lords day, then he does.

Lastly, he so far approves of the name Sabbath, for our weekly Holiday, that
he sets upon them, who say, the Lords day was not called Sabbath (in the
Primitive times, next to the Apostles, nor since by any, but only Jewish
Sabbatharians) with some sharp terms, calling them M. Walker in his Doctrine
of the Sabb. chapter 16. p. 113. but page 112 of the impression at London. 1641.
Adversaries of a bold and impudent face, who make that objection. Thus far
the exceptions against the name Sabbath, both simple and comparative with other
titles.

Though I have set my wits on work, on the Antisabbatarian side, both to
multiply and fortify objections against that name, as applied to the day of
our Christian devotion, I can find nothing more, which is of any weight or
worth to be objected or answered, concerning the comparison of the names of
Sabbath, Sunday, and Lords day, and the resolution for the name Sabbath: of
which we may now (I hope) without all appearance of partiality or presumption,
conclude, That the name Sabbath is of best use to support the true Doctrine of
our Christian Holiday, both for the time and tenure of it; for discovery of
duties required on it, and for incitement to the conscionable practice of them
accordingly: and therefore (notwithstanding the contrary determination of
Better by far, and far less danger to be feared, in calling it the Sunday,
as the Gentiles did; and as our Ancestors have done before us, then calling it
the Sabbath, as too many do, and on less Authority: nay, contrary indeed to
all Antiquity and Scripture. Doct. Heyl. hist. Sab. part. 2. c. 2. p. 163, 164.
Doctor Heylin) to be most used, when we speak of the weekly Holiday of the
Christian Church; yet without prejudice to the liberty of any one to call it
Lords day, or Sunday, as just occasion shall incline them, or religious
discretion induce them to term it.

CHAP. XXVII. A brief accommodation of this Nomenclature, or nominall
discourse to some purposes of importance, concernning the Sabbath.
HE that does read thus far, will not (I hope) conceive I have need to make
an Apology for this discourse, as if it were some idle Logomachy, or word war,
which the Apostle forbids, 1 Timothy 6.4. for,

First, it may serve to stint the strife of words, Esaias 29.21.
which some have already raised up, making a man an offender for a word, which
affords not a syllable of just exception, or offense, and to prevent the like
in after times; since by what we have said, our lawful liberty is fully
declared, and firmly assured, so that we may without doubt or danger of sin
call the time or day we celebrate, Lords day, Sabbath day, or both, as the holy
place of Gods public service was called the Lords house, and the Temple.

And for the name Sunday, we have showed the lawful use of it, if it be not
brought in like the Sun with a burning glass (as Doctor Pocklington does) to
scortch the name Sabbath, or to cast a shadow upon it, to conceal or obscure
the divine Authority of the day, or to diminish ought of the duties of devotion
belonging to it; so that all three names (if there be not more fault in their
minds that make use of them, then in the words themselves) may and will (with
peaceable men) be passable, without any cavil at all.

Secondly, hereby may be precluded their intents (that they take not effect)
who by cavilling at the name, bewray a mind to undermine and overthrow the
thing it self: which I will not say, nor do I think, of all that take
exception at that name; yet I have showed it of some, that they plead against
the word Sabbath, to supplant its fundamental right by the fourth
Commandment: and there is no little power in the use or refusal of words, to
advance or undervalue the things themselves to which they are applied, as has
been proved in that we have before produced: yea, sometimes (as Nescio quid
veneni in syllabis latet. Hier. ad Damasc. tom. 2. page 132.
Saint Hierome observes) there lurketh a kind of poison under syllables, as in
every page of Doctor Pocklington his book, which wears this title, Sunday no
Sabbath; whereof I have said enough before, and he too much, though very
little to the purpose for proof of his distructive determination against the
name Sabbath.

Thirdly, In clearing the doubts that are made of those names and titles of our
Christian Sabbath; diverse personages of highest place, with many more of the
better sort (though of inferior rank in the Church or Commonweal) are
cleared from such reproachful imputations, as (by taunting at, or traducing of
the lawful use of those names, especially that of the Sabbath) some, with
Ismaelitish malignity, expressly, or by consequence, have cast upon them; to
which purpose the fore noted judicious Divine has said somewhat in his
Antidote against Sabbatary errors, though (me thinks) a little too faintly;
viz. A sovereign Antidote against Sabbatary errors. qu. 1. page 5.
That men, otherwise sober and moderate, ought not to be censured with too
much severity, (not with any severity at all, he might have said) nor charged
with Judaisme, if sometime they call Sunday by the name of Sabbath; (if he had
said, if commonly they call Sunday by the name of Sabbath, he had spoken no
more then the truth will bear) Ibid. p. 8.
for there is none of the three names, says he, to be condemned as
unlawful, but every one is to be left to his Christian liberty herein, so
long as superior Authority restrains it not, and so that he do it without
vanity or affectation in himself, and without judging or despising of his
brother that does otherwise: which is a pious and prudent proviso, though so
far defective as it imports a mere paritie, without any pre-eminence on
the Sabbaths behalf.

Fourthly, By explication of these titles (in this sort) we may answer many
passages of the ancient Fathers, produced against our weekly holiday in the
name of the Sabbath; whereby they mean not (as many misconceive them, and so
misapply them) any prejudice to the holy observation of the Lords day, as in
weekly recourse in the Christian Church, but precisely and punctually the
Saturday Sabbath, which we hold as much as they to be abolished, and much more
then some of them did.

Fifthly, If all the names be lawful, and that of the Sabbath most useful
(as has been showed) let us be sure to make use of it upon all fair and fit
occasions, (though we neither wholly forbear the other two titles, nor
quarrel with any for their more familiar use of them) that we may uphold the
tenure of the day; together with the title of it by the fourth Commandment,
whereto I desire to exhort the Reader with the more earnest entreaty.

First, Because some (with such supercilious disdain) have endeavored to
disgrace that title that others (as much too modest, as they too bold) have
been afraid, or ashamed to use it; and I remember one, who was of eminent
parts and place, and who formerly had diverse times used it in a printed book,
having upon occasion named the Sabbath, presently recalled the word, as if it
had been a fault, and took up the title Sunday in stead thereof.

Secondly, Because if we let go the name of the time, we may be like to
lose the thing in time to come, or, at least, to loosen and weaken its claim
to the best authority on which it depends; for as it is a weekly holiday, we
cannot plead better for it, then by the proportion of the fourth Commandment,
and that being made good upon that ground, the difference about the particular
day (within the circle of seven) will be the more easily composed, since it is
no more then other proof and evidence (inferior to an express precept of the
Decalogue) may well support.

I would now put a sinall period to this comparative discourse, but that
opportunity prompts me, and it may be a twofold duty (which I owe both to my
superiors, and to this sacred cause, wherein they are interessed as supreme
Judges over it, and I as a faithful Advocate for it) binds me to bend my
conclusion toward the Bar of the most awful Court in the Kingdom, and with
prostrate humility to beseech you, most Noble Lords, and you, most worthy
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the high Court of Parliament (now
assembled) to take into your prudent and pious consideration the weighing of
the precedent titles, and the poyse of Religious reason, swaying the resolution
on the Sabbath side: and that, as you have occasion to mention the day (by
divine ordinance designed to the solemn service of God, and the salvation of
man) in your Discussions or Decrees, you will be pleased to give it that
authentic and edifying appellation, which best serves to uphold the surest
tenure by which it holds, and most minds us of that holy observation to
which, by many and weighty reasons, we are obliged; whereby, as it ha^h been
most highly honored from heaven (by Gods own hand writing in the fourth
Commandment) so it may be ratified by the highest authority on earth (the
highest to us, viz. an Act of Parliament) to secure it from contempt, and to
restore it to the right, whereof many, either in simple ignorance, or
inconsiderate rashness, or audacious profaneness, or partial prejudice, or
in politic impiety, (for all these are Antisabbatary symptoms in some or
other) have endeavored to deprive it.

You have already (to the great joy of the godly throughout the Land, raised
your devout indignation against the indignity done to Religion, by the most
irreligious Pamphlet of Doctor Pocklington (though composed and published under
the sacred title of a Sermon;) and if now, as by an act of your Justice, SUNDAY
NO SABBATH must burn; so, by some act of your Grace, SUNDAY A SABBATH may
shine, (and the same holy zeal will dispose you to this double devotion) you
will further advance his honor, (who has promised to return you like for
like in that kind, 1 Samuel 2.30.) and he will do it not only in kind, but
in degree, and give us of the Clergy the better means to persuade the people
with better minds, to compose themselves to all due obedience for what your
Honors shall decree concerning their duty both to God and man.

And so I conclude the titles of our weekly Holiday, which will both conduce to
the contracting of our task, and to the clearing of the truth to our
understandings, when we come to deliver more material observations: which
from henceforward are to follow, and which we shall begin in another Book, and
go on withal, as God gives ability to perform, and opportunity to publish,
what this great and weighty cause of his and his Church requires at our hands.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 1. line 2. after the word times, add with many. page 4. line 3. a^ the
end of the quotation c leave out [ Selden] page 5. lin. 8. for the word for,
read and. page 8. lin. 5. for desire, read more. page 8. lin. 24. for
Videlius, read Vedelius. page 9. lin. 3. after but, add the. page 10. lin. 6.
after the words cross and, blot the words [ cross to] page 12. in the margent
over against the third line, read Mr. Duraeus. and lin. 11. for distraction,
read division. page penult. lin. 3. for grace, read honor. In the subscript.
of the Letter to the Author, for Samuel, read Sabbath. and for Glindale,
Glendole. p. 15. l. 21. or read of. p. 16. initio, l^. 30. add be. page 38.
l. 18. respest, read respect. p. 63. in the mar. for in locico, read in
lexico. page 64. lin. 16. after the word [ is] add but. page 82. lin. 22. for
or, read to. page 89. lin. 21. for Christians, read Christian. page 124. lin.
25. for hominum, read hominem. page 143. lin. 7. for Parenaesis, read
Paranesis. page 179. lin. 1. for Sabbath, read Lords day. page 195. lin. 2.
after the word [ if] add the.


