CHARITY TO OUR Poor Persecuted Brethren Abroad, Recommended in A SERMON
Preached on the FAST DAY, April 5. 1699.

By CHARLES LIDGOULD, Rector of DUNSBY in Lincolnshire.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Wild, at the Elephant at Charing Cross. 1699.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, JAMES Lord Bishop of Lincoln.
MY LORD,
THE Countenance your Lordship has been pleased to give me has emboldned me to
beg leave that I may make this Address, as an humble Testimony of my Zeal to
the Work your Lordship has recommeded in a Circular Letter to your Clergy.

Charity, indeed, is a Subject worn so threadbare, that I wish it have not lost
its warmth; and the frequent Occasions of exercising it (which should cherish
and keep it alive among Christians, that ought to rejoice in all Op:
portunities of doing Good) been the cause of its being too much disregarded and
shifted off.

For my own part, I desire it may not be thought Vanity in me to declare, that
my Sympathy, as well as the sense of my Duty, have engaged me to promote this
pious Work with all the Affection, wherewith I could at once express and back
your Lordship's Arguments, and my own to encourage and set it forward.

The Parish, under my Care, is both Poor and Small, and therefore not much to
be expected from it; though I think I can say there is hardly Man, Woman, or
Servant, but have cast in their Mite. And should the whole Nation give but as
much, in proportion to their several Abilities (as, I humbly beseech God, All
throughout may) we need not fear coming behind the Protestant Churches abroad
in Contributions toward the relief of our Poor Suffering Brethren.

To which purpose, I heartily wish this plain Discourse may have an influence
farther than I had thought of, had I not had a Sermon now in the Press,
Preached the last Year upon occasion of His Majesty's Proclamation against
Profaness, etc. which should have been out a Quarter of a Year since, but for
the neglect (to say no worse) of one that was entrusted with it; out of whose
Custody I was forced to take it near two Months after the time he had engaged,
by Promise under his Hand, that it should be Printed. So that now, it being
thus long deferred, I resolved this should wait on your Lordship at the same
time with it; and humbly desire your Lordship to accept of both together, as a
sincere, though mean, Acknowledgment how much I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships Devoted and Obedient Son and Servant, CHA. LIDGOVLD.
Dunsby. Easter-Eve, 1699.
A FAST-SERMON. 1 PET. IV. X. As every Man has received the Gift, so Minister
the same one to another, as Good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God.


THere is nothing more unquestionable than that God has imparted to every
particular Member of his Church certain Gifts and Graces, of the Use and
Employment whereof he will one day exact a strict and severe Account. Every
true Christian has a Twofold Vocation or Calling. The First is General, To
the Profession of that Religion, which our Savior and his Apostles have
transmitted down unto us. The Second is more Special, To some particular
Employment, that may tend to the benefit and behoof both of himself and others.
This is what St. Paul means by the word, 1 Cor. 7.20. Let every man abide in
the same calling, wherein he was called; and therein doubtless, without
encroaching on that of another, he may render himself very beneficial to the
good of his Neighbors; For God has given to every one such a measure of
Grace, as may make him some way useful to the good of his Church, whether by
gently admonishing his Fellow members, when he perceives them going astray, or
winning them over that are already gone, by the example of a Holy and Virtuous
Life. Which if every one of us would but seriously consider, we should find,
that, in whatsoever Station we are, there is none of us all exempted from
being, in some measure, serviceable to God's Church and People. As Provident
and Careful Parents deal with their Children, they suffer them not to live idly
and sluggishly at home, to eat the Fruit of other Men's Labors, but do wisely
take Care that they may be fitted and enabled for some special Employment,
whereby they may Eat in the sweat of their own brows, and become instrumental
to the common Good; so does God deal with his Family, his Household, the Church.
No Servant, no Son, but shall have some Employment; for he will have no
Loiterers in his Vinyard, no unserviceable, unprofitable Servants in his
Harvest. What then will become of those licentious Libertines, that are so far
from endeavoring the Salvation of others, that they are altogether regardless
of their own Souls? or of those malicious Pharisees, of whom our Savior
complains, That they will neither enter into Heaven themselves, nor suffer
those to enter in that would? Mat. 23.13
Whatsoever becomes of them, let it not be so with us; but, since it is the
part of every Christian earnestly to desire, and carefully to endeavor, the
Spiritual Welfare of his Brethren, let us strive to improve those Talents,
which we have received, to the Glory of Him that gave them, and to the Benefit
of them that want them. As every man has received the Gift, so minister the
same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God.

That Is the Sense some Expositors have thought fit to put on these words.

Others, and among them the Judicious and Learned Hammond, have adapted the
sense and meaning of them to the Duty this Day required of us, viz. to Works of
Charity, Beneficence and Liberality to our indigent Brethren; making it a
continuation of the sense of the preceding Verse; Use hospitality one to
another without grudging; Communicate of the good things God has bestowed on
you with a ready hand, and a willing mind: And as every man has received the
Gift, that is, Wealth, or any other good thing, so let him freely distribute it
to others, who stand in need; that you may hereby approve your selves Good
Stewards and Dispensers of that Plenty God has blessed you withal; As good
Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. And so we find likewise those words
interpreted in the verse following: If any man minister, let him do it as of
the ability which God gives. If any man minister, that is, distribute or
exercise Liberality to the Poor, as it is there Paraphrased, let him do it in
proportion to that Estate which God has given him. And from this sense of the
words I shall endeavor to excite your Charity to our Persecuted Brethren
abroad, after I have first handled them in the former, by showing you some
Reasons, why we ought to advance the Spiritual good of our Brethren, by
employing those Talents, those Parts, those Graces, that Reason and
Understanding God has given us, to his Glory, and the benefit of those who are
not blessed with so great a share.

Deuteronomy. 4.10. wherein he not only enjoins it, but promises to be himself an
Instrument, an Agent in the furtherance of it. I will cause them to hear my
words (says he) that they may learn to fear me all the days they live on the
earth, and that they may teach their Children. This is what the Apostle so
often inculcates in all his Epistles; as in that to the Col. 3.16. Let the word
of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one
another; and in the 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. Exhort one another, and edify one another,
even as you do: So Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily, while it is called to
day; and again Romans 14.19. Let us follow those things which concern peace, and
wherewith one may edify another. St. Peter, 1 Ep. 2.5. compares the Faithful to
a Spiritual House, whereof we are the Living Stones, which if not cemented
together, by Christian Charity, will soon turn into a ruinous heap. Every Man
must bring something to the building up or repairing this House; and although the
Pastors of the Church are the Principal Builders under our great Master Christ,
yet must we all in general, and every one in particular, contribute our utmost
endeavors, not only by private Reproof and Admonition, by Exhortation and
Counsel, but especially by our own good Examples to reform what is amiss, and
not suffer Sin to reign in our Brethren. So that every Man in some sense is,
what Cain denied to be to Abel, his Brother's keeper. Genesis 4.9.
And as God has placed within every one of us a Conscience, as well to chide us
when we have done evil, as to check our Jehu-like march, when we would run into
Sin, so has he given to each of us a Friend or a Brother without, that should,
as the Angel did by Lot, Genesis 19.16.
call upon us and lead us, nay, enforce us out of Sodom, out of the danger into
which Sin would hurry us. And he that does truly and faithfully discharge this
duty to his Brother, does the highest and most transcendent act of Charity in
the World; for he saves a Soul that was likely to perish, and instrumentally
redeems his Brother from the jaws of Hell and the power of Satan; and not only
so, but receives likewise infinite advantage to himself by the performance of
this Duty: For, besides his reward with God, and the comfort in his own Bosom,
he engages his Friend to a return of Gratitude and Justice, and so begets the
truest Friendship, and the most indissoluble tie of Amity that can be between
Man and Man. So that, he that performs this Duty as he ought, treasures up to
himself three of the most inestimable Jewels in the World; First, A good
Conscience within; 2 dly, A true Friend without; 3 dly, The favor of that God
who has enjoined it; who, for our Reward, shall make us to shine as the Stars
for Wisdom in this lower Firmament, Dan. 12.3.
and for transcendency of Glory in that which is above.

Secondly, Let us practice this doing of good to our Brethren, because we
cannot express our Love unto God, or our Thankfulness for those Blessings we
receive from him, better than by improving them to the enlargement of his
Glory, in the Conversion of others. Simon, thou Son of Jonah, love thou me?
then feed my sheep, says our Savior: Joh. 21.15.16,17.
Which words he repeats no less than three times. Thrice he urges him to the
same Confession, says St. Chrysostom, and thrice he conjures him by that
Confession to the same Duty; to show, that as there is nothing wherein Christ
is more joyed than in the welfare of his Church, so there is no better way for
us to demonstrate our Affections unto him, than by all holy means to endeavor
the Salvation of each other. By this shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye have love one for another. Joh. 13.35


As a Father pitieth his own Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.
Psalm 103.13.
Now, how does a Father express his Love to his Son? Surely not so much by
Feeding and Clothing him: This is the least part of the Duty incumbent on
Parents, and more properly belongs to the Mother than the Father; It Is the
Mother's Duty to cherish and bring him up, but the Eather's to educate and
instruct him, faith the great Philosopher, in his Oeconomicks. The Love of the
Father is most seen in the well modelling of his Son's Manners, which is a
thing of wonderful importance, and for the most part of Immortal consequence;
for, what we sow in the Spring, we reap in the Harvest. The Spring of a Man's
Life is his Childhood, and what impressions are then made, be they good or bad,
those we generally carry with us to our Graves, and what we carry thither,
remains on the Tally of Eternity. The first Token of the Father's Love to his
Son is seen in the care he takes of his Education; that the first impressions
that are made on him, be the fear of God, and the love of Goodness; and
afterward, as his Faculties grow more strong and vigorous, he goes on to
season them with the Principles of Religion, the Precepts of Morality, and the
Dictates of Wisdom and Prudence. And to this end he sometimes Counsels and
Advises him, what is to be embraced, and what avoided, what is necessary for
his well-being, and what superfluous; what is just and honest, and what is not.
Sometimes he comforts and encourages him against the Difficulties that may
dishearten him; and when he finds him neglective of his Duty, he changes his
Countenance toward him, and first admonishes, then rebukes, then threatens him;
and if none of these will prevail, he adds Verbis Verbera, to words of reproof,
stripes of Correction; and all these are but the Expressions of his Fatherly
Affection, an Affection as infinitely surmounting that of giving Food and
Raiment, as the incorruptible Soul does the perishing Body. Thus the highest
Expressions of our Love, and the purest works of Christian Charity, are those
which have for their Object the Spiritual welfare of our Brother's Soul. To
Instruct the Ignorant, to bind up the brokenhearted, to reduce those that are
out of the way, to support those that are weak, ^o restore with meekness those
that are fallen, to admonish, reprove, convince, and, as much as lies in us, to
restrain those that are wilful and obstinate; this is the proper Language, and
the most perfect Demonstration of Divine Love. Non amatur Servus aut Filius,
cum non corripitur, says St. August. Think not that thou can love thy
Servant, and not correct him, thy Son, and not chastise him, or thy Neighbor,
and not reprove him. Non est ista Charitas, sed languor; this is not Charity,
but fondness and stupidity. Fervet Charitas ad emendandum, ad corrigendum;
perfect Charity burns with an holy Zeal, and will not be satisfied till it has
wrought that Character and Impression of Grace and Goodness in others, which it
has received in it self.

Fourthly, and lastly, We cannot imitate our heavenly Father in any thing more,
than in endeavoring the Spiritual Good of others; without which, Man is so
unlike the Image wherein he was made, that he is but little better than a
Beast, preying only to satisfy his own appetite; whereas Homo homini Deus, a
good Man is a God among Men: For, as every Creature derives its Being from that
inexhaustible Fountain of Goodness that is in God, (...) the whole Universe is
partaker of the Charitable Man's communicated Goodness. This is it, Charity, I
say, it is, that gives Life and Being to all other Graces and Virtues, which
without this are not so properly Graces, as Blemishes and Deformities, not so
truly Virtues, as Vanity and Emptiness. Honor, Riches, Beauty, Wisdom,
Knowledge, if not seasoned with this Salt, do but putrefy and lose their
savor. Have thou all Faith, so that thou can remove Mountains, and have not
Charity, thou art nothing. 1 Cor. 13.2.
Could thou comprehend in thy Memory the whole Book of God, and understand
all the Mysteries thereof; could thou speak all Tongues, and unriddle every
Prophecy, yet if thou enjoyest those Gifts to thy self only, If thou hidest
these Talents in the Earth, or put this Light of thine under a Bushel, Mat.
25.25. Luke 11.33.
what is the World the better for thee? what account can thou give of these
Graces to him, who has entrusted thee with them? True Love is never idle,
wheresoever it is, it is working; so that when once the Holy Spirit of God has
made this impression on our Hearts, there does naturally, and necessarily
succeed an indefatigable endeavor to propagate that Goodness in others, which
God has imprinted on our selves; and therefore let us beseech God that he
would Engrave the Characters of this Divine Love on our Hearts, That we may
every one of us, as we have received the Gift, minister the same one to
another, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God.

So much for that sense of the words, as they signisie the improvement of God's
Gifts and Graces in us to the spiritual Benefit and Edification of others.

I come now to the other sense of them, namely, That of Communicating the good
things of this Life, wherewith God has supplied us, to the Releif and Support
of those, from whom he has either withheld or withdrawn them; that we would in
this respect, according as every man has received the Gift, that is, his
Portion of God's Bounteous Liberality, minister the same, that is, impart and
dispense of our Substance toward others that are in want, as good Stewards; as
becomes faithful Stewards, who are entrusted with God's various Mercies and
Blessings to the same end, of the manifold Grace of God, that is, of his
Liberality in diverse kinds, particularly, of the Wealth he has committed to
them as Stewards, to distribute to them that stand in need of it, says the
Learned Dr. Hammond, in his Note on the word (...) in that Place.

And here we may observe, how that God in the Allwise Dispensations of his
Providence has ordered it so, that we should never want Objects to exercise our
Charity upon; some being Born in such Circumstances, as daily to need the
Assistance and Releif of others; some being reduced by the sudden violence of
Fire, Water, Storms, Tempests, Thunder, Lightning, Rapine, and other surprising
Accidents from a plentiful Condition, to extreme Want and Poverty; from being
able to assist others, to stand in need of that assistance themselves: Some, by
the cruel Tyranny of Merciless Men, to be driven from under their own Vines,
and their own Fig Trees, to seek Shelter and Support in Foreign Countries, and
that too for the sake of God and his holy Religion, choosing rather to endure
and undergo the greatest Hardships, than to make Shipwreck of their Faith and a
good Conscience; 1 Timothy 1.19.
which is the Case of those who are this day recommended to your Charity; who,
if Suffering for Righteousness sake, can claim any Title to our Pity and
Compassion (and certainly we must disclaim our own Title and Interest in
Christ, if it does not) may challenge as great a measure of our Commiseration
as ever any Object did; they being such as have kept their Faith entire and
undefiled ever since their first embracing the Gospel, and that is longer than
can be said of any other Nation or People in the Christian World; and rather
than they will now pollute themselves with Romish Idolatry and Superstition,
suffer not only the spoiling of their Goods, Heb. 10.34.
but even the being Exterminated and Banished from their Native Soil, Enduring
a great fight of afflictions, wandering in Deserts, and Dens, and Caves of the
Earth; Heb. 10,32. 11,38.
herein coming not behind the first Professors of Christianity, who were
dispersed and scattered abroad upon the Persecution that arose about Stephen.
Act. 11.19.
On the mentioning of which, let me propound to you the example of that First
Age of Christians, how ready the Churches of Philippi, Thessalonica, and
Corinth were to relieve the Necessities of their Poor Brethren that were in
Judea. Of which we find St. Paul giving a large account in the 8 th. and 9 th.
Chapters of his 2d. Ep. to the Cor. How that even under a great trial of
afflictions, when they were in great Distress and Poverty themselves, they
abounded in a cheerful Liberality toward them; and even beyond what their
Circumstances would allow them to do, they were willing of their own accords,
without being so much as called upon, to make large Collections for their
Supply, that they did, I say, without being solicited, voluntarily contribute
what they were able, nay, and more than they could well spare; to their power,
says St. Paul, yea, and beyond their power they were willing of themselves. 2
Cor. 8.3.


And that ye may all here present abound in this Grace also, v. 7.
I need use no other, nor can give you better Encouragement than the Apostle
gives his Corinthians on that occasion. First. From the Example of Christ; For
ye know (says he) the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich,
yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich. v.
9.
As if he should have said, To the performance of this Duty, ye can want no
Motives, when ye consider the Example of Christ in his Dealings toward us, his
Liberality and Bounty in exhausting himself for us, submitting himself to so
mean a Condition, that thereby we might be spiritually enriched, as Dr. Hammond
has paraphrased those words.

Secondly, From the Acceptance and Reward the cheerful Performance hereof will
meet with from God. For if there be first a willing mind (says he) it is
accepted according to what a man has; v. 12.
supposing a Man to do what he is able, that resolution of his, if it be
performed, that is, if he do according to his Ability, shall be well accepted
and rewarded by God; as it is again paraphrased in that Chapter. And so again,
chapter 9. v. 7. Every man, according as he purposes in his heart, so let him
give, not grudgingly or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver; not with
any trouble to part with it, or, as if it were extorted from him; for the
Liberality that God loves, and will reward, must be such as is shown with all
alacrity and cheerfulness. To which there follows in the next verse

Third Encouragement. God is able (says he) to make all Grace abound toward
you, that ye always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every
good work. Which is a very good Argument to take away all fear and mistrust
that such Liberality may bring our selves into Streights and Want (which is a
too common hindrance and check to Charity.) God, says he, is the Fountain of
all Plenty, and is able to make this Grace, this Charity, this Liberality,
which you show to others, turn to the increase of your own Wealth, by giving a
Blessing to it, and making it multiply to you, that it may become like Seed
cast into the Ground, to bring forth the increase of an hundred fold, Mat.
19.29.
promised to those that part with any thing for his sake. And thus every Alms
you give, shall make you the Richer instead of the Poorer, as the Learned Dr.
says on these words, bringing you by God's Blessing, such a sufficiency of all
things, that you may abound to every good work, that you may, out of your
abundance, be constantly able to supply others, and have enough for every
Object of Charity that offers it self to you. To which purpose I must desire
you to take notice of one thing more, which the Apostle would have his
Corinthians consider, in the 6 th verse, and that is, That he that sows
sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he that sows bountefully, shall reap
bountefully. He that contracts his Hand, and gives not sutably to his comings
in, must expect the less from God, must not look for so great increase in his
Substance, so much success in his worldly Affairs, as he who gives more
bountefully, and opens his Hand as wide as his Cicumstances will permit. For,
God will most certainly reward Charity in proportion to the several degrees of
it; and he that distributes most Liberally, shall besure to receive the greater
advantages from God, and that even in this Life, which is the strongest
Argument that can be used even to the most worldly-minded Man that is; if so be
he can but be convinced of the truth hereof, or, in other terms, if he can but
believe the word of God, which says also in the 112 Psalm. He has dispersed
abroad, he has given to the poor, his righteousness remains for ever, his
horn shall be exalted with honor; v. 9.
his generation shall be blessed; -- 2.
wealth and riches shall be in his house. -- 3.
Nay, the holy Prophet makes it the Observation of his Old Age, that, so many
Years as he had lived, he never saw, either the Charitable Man or his Children
Destitute. I have been young (says he) and now am old, and yet never saw I the
righteous forsaken, Pss. 37.25.
that is, the Liberal and Bounteful Man (which is the true meaning of the word
there) or his seed begging their bread.

But now, if, after all that has been said, the distressed and deplorable
Condition of our Poor Brethren, our Christian Brethren, our Protestant
Brethren, professing the same Religion with our selves, and even at this time
groaning under a most severe and heavy Persecution for the Profession of that
Religion; which, if God had not mercifully and miraculously interposed, was,
within these few Years, like to have been our own Case. Which is one of the
Topics our Reverend Diocesan, in his See Dr. Hammond's Note on (...), 2 Cor.
3.1.
Systatick Letter, has thought proper to be insisted on, among others, as a fit
Motive to excite your Charity on their behalf; and which, because the time will
not allow me to enlarge on, by way of Addition to what I have and shall offer
upon this occasion, I have thought meet to represent to you only in the words
of that Letter; which are, indeed, so full and comprehensive, that they can
receive no advantage by my amplifying and expatiating upon them; especially, if
you have been so attentive to what is there urged, as to give each
Consideration its due weight. If this, I say, will not move us: If the Example
of the first Race of Christians, when some of their Brethren were under
Afflictions, and brought to great Distress in Judea, together with St. Paul's
Encouragements and Motives to that Charity, which their own forwardness and
willingness had in a manner superseded and forestalled: If the holy Psalmist's
description of the Liberal Man's thriving Condition, together with his own
experimental Observation of the truth and certainty thereof, so far as he could
make proof of it throughout the whole Series and Course of his Life, namely,
That he never saw such a One, or his Children after him, come to want: If all
this will not provoke and stir up our Charity, our Liberality on this pressing
occasion; Let me beg of you, Beloved,

that you would, when such great, and, in a manner, irresistible Objects offer
themselves, endeavor to enlarge your Hearts in imitation of Him, whose whole
Life was one continued act of Charity; He went about doing good. Act. 10.38.
And who, the more effectually to work upon us by all the Motives of Hope and
Fear, has made our Charity the very Touchstone, whereby to try us at the last
Day. I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink, I was a stranger, and ye took me in, Mat. 25,35.
naked and ye clothed me; -- 36.
come ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you; -- 34.
as you heard in the Gospel appointed for this occasion. And, if we have failed
of being thus Charitable in our Lifetime, let us remember, that it will be in
vain for us to expostulate with him in that Day, or to urge for our selves that
we never dealt thus unkindly by him, since he has there given his answer to
such: Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not unto the least of these,
ye did it not unto me. -- 45.
The consequence of which hard-heartedness we find in the next words, namely,
That these shall go away into everlasting Punishment. -- 46.


In a word, To use an Argument suitable to the present Season, we must never
expect to reap the Benefit of his Cross and Passion (which we are this Week
Commemorating) that great Charity of his in Dying for us, that we might Live
with him hereafter, unless we endeavor to Live like him here. And like him
most certainly we cannot be, unless we exercise acts of Love and Kindness one
toward another; which then, if ever, ought to appear, when our Brethren stand
in the greatest need of it. In vain do we call our selves Christians, if we are
not sensible of each others Wants and Necessities. Christians are a body of
Men, united under one Head, Christ Jesus. Ye are the body of Christ, says St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 12.27. and members in particular. Now, if one member suffer, all
the members suffer with it, says he, verse before. And if we are
Fellow Sufferers with them, this must necessarily prevail with us, as far as we
are able, to relieve them, since, in doing so, we relieve our selves. And in
this sense, he that loves his Neighbor, loves himself, or rather, he that
loves himself, cannot likewise but love his Neighbor. We have not a right
sense of the Miseries of others, unless it put us upon Works of Charity and
Kindness toward them. It is not the wishing them in better Circumstances, or
saying, Be thou warm, or, be thou full, that will serve the turn: For, if a
Brother or Sister de destitute of daily food, and one of you say thus unto
them, says St. James, notwithstanding ye give them not such things as be
needful for the body, what does it profit? Jam. 2.15.16.
So that we cannot be said to have any Compassion for our Brethren, unless we
do effectually assist them; and consider with our selves, what a miserable
estate we should think our selves, were we, as they now are, driven out of our
own Country to seek our Bread in a Foreign Land. But, though even common
Humanity might teach us this, yet have we still much stronger Motives and
Engagements to it from the Word of God; if ye will but suffer this farther
Consideration, beside what I have already urged, to take any place, and only
once more allow our chiefest Interest and Happiness to be so; for, 1 Timothy 6.19.
by being ready to give, and glad to distribute, we lay up in store for our
selves a good foundation against the time to come, that we may lay hold on
Eternal Life. Nay, God seems to stand engaged, in vindication of his Justice
and Equity, what we thus lay out, to pay us again; which is plainly hinted from
that of the Apostle, God is not unrighteous to forget our work and labor of
Love, which we show for his names sake; Heb. 6.10.
as if it were a piece of unrighteousness and injustice in him to forget it. In
a word, Unless we will disown that we have any Love for God, we cannot forbear
relieving the Necessities of our indigent Brethren; since the Apostle has made
this a special Mark of our having no Love for him; Whosoever has this world's
good, says he, and sees his Brother have need, and shuts up his bowels of
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? 1 John 3.17.


I hope I shall not need to add any more Arguments, and therefore shall only
repeat this one Request to you, that you would but make their Case your own,
and thereby work in your selves a Fellow feeling of their Distress; which if
you can once be persuaded to do, there must naturally arise in every one, nay,
even the poorest among you (who indeed upon that very score are the best Judges
of their Condition) a desire of contributing the utmost of your assistance
toward them.

Haud ignara mali miseris succurrere disco, was the saying of Dido to the
Sea-wrack'd Trojans: I have had so much experience of Hardship my self, that I
cannnot but commiserate the Calamities of others. And even the meanest among
us, if they have any Bowels; if they can but bring their Hearts to a sense of
the greatness of those Sufferings our Poor Brethren abroad now lie under,
cannot but have one Mite to spare on that account. I shall urge none to do any
thing beyond their Abilities; and I hope none will show themselves so
narrow-hearted, and so distrustful of the Divine Providence, as to do any thing
snort of it.

It is indeed too plain an Argument that we dare not trust Almighty God, when
we cannot persuade our selves to part with any thing to Charity, for fear we
should hereafter stand in need of it our selves. Know ye not that he that
gives to the Poor, lends to the Lord? Prove. 19.17.
And can we hope to put out our Money to better Interest, or desire a more
Responsible Debtor? who does always most certainly repay us even in this Life,
which there is no Man but may find out by his own experience, that has but the
Grace and the Gratitude to make the Observation.

I shall conclude all with an earnest Petition to Almighty God, that the
unusual Pressingness of this Extraordinary Occasion may render all I have urged
the more effectual, and make so much the deeper impression on your Hearts;
shutting up what I have said with that most Excellent Collect in the
Church-Liturgy.

O Lord, who have taught us that all our Doings without Charity are nothing
worth, send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our Hearts that most Excellent Gift
of Charity, the very bond of Peace and of all Virtues, without which, whosoever
lives is counted dead before Thee. Grant this for thy only Son Jesus Christ's
sake.

Amen.


FINIS.

