A MONITOR OF MORTALITY, THE SECOND SERMON.

OCCASIONED By the Death of Mrs. Harpur, a grave and godly Matron (wife to Mr.
Henry Harpur of the City of Chester) and of the death of their Religious
Daughter Phoebe Harpur, a child of about 12. years of age.

By John Ley Minister of Great-Budworth in Cheshiere.

GENESIS 30.1. Give me children or else I die.

Parcamus lachrymis nihil proficientibus, facilius enim illi nos dolor iste
adijcret, quam illum nobis reducet. Senec. Consolat. ad Polyb. c. 23. LONDON,
Printed for Christopher Meredith at the Crane in Pauls-Church-yard. M.DC.XLIII.

To my much HONORED AND WORthy Friends Thomas Standley Esquire, and to Mrs.
Elizabeth Standley his most loving and beloved wife: I.L. wishes increase of
grace here, and the accomplishment of grace and glory hereafter.
THere is none example of any one dead, but may be an admonitor of the
mutability of man's estate to any one alive: Since death is not the limited lot
of particular persons, but the common doom of all living creatures, of mankind
especially, as having always a desert of the sentence of death by the guilt of
sin in his soul, and a condition of body ever capable of the execution of
that sentence.

But for these two memorandums of Mortality (now presented by the Press to
public use) the one of a godly Matron, the other of a gracious maid her
daughter (whom I bring in both together, because there was a time, when the
mother and the child by their bodily union, were reckoned but for one person,
and when their bodies were divided, their souls were, as was said of the soul
of Jacob and Benjamin, as it were bound up in one bundle, Ge. 44.30, 31.) they
areso much more meet to be commended to your memory, as they were the better
known unto you, and the more frequent and familiar reciprocations of respect
have passed betwixt you, and they have bin usually such and so many, that in
mine observation (for diverse years together) seldom has your house bin
without some guest of theirs, or theirs without some of your Family, and this
amicable intercourse has been mutually exercised with such cheerfulness of
affection, as came near in conformity to the communion of the Primitive
Christians (so far as the distance of your ordinary dwellings would permit)
and they as St. Luke shows in his Story of the Acts, had all things common,
Act. 2.44. and this Community (like that professed by Ruth to Naomi, Ruth
1.16.) has held on from life to death, from death to burial: For the
daughter, (whose death through the dearnesse of motherly love was an occasion
of her Mothers translation from a mortal to an immortal life) spent her last
days, as one of your household, dyed under your roof, and lies buried in the
Church of your both Parish and Patronage.

And that neither of them might be buried in oblivion, I have now published
that of both to common view, to which I have bin diverse times solicited by
such as were near enough to them to discern a mere color of sanctity from
the solid truth of it, and who have too much integrity in them (by straining
their own consciences) to scrue up the credit of others, to an over high
commendation: the just elevation whereof, (in reference to those two whom death
parted for a while, but now has joined in their better part for ever) is so
well known to you both, that if what I have written of them, were to come to a
legal proof, I might (for very much of it) produce you two as witnesses
(above exception) of their well deserving, and of my true speaking of them,
which is one reason of my Dedication of their Funeral Remembrance to your
names. Another is the request of him, who had a peculiar right in the Mother
(as an husband) a primary right in the daughter as a Father, and a very great
Interest in me as an ancient familiar and an affectionate friend.

But that which has moved memost unto it, is a desire I have (since besides
all your former favors in our own Country, you will needs be so kind, as to
importune me so often to the entertainment of your house where you are now a
sojourner) to traffic with you upon the terms of the Apostle, by commerce
and exchange of spiritual things, for things carnal, To. 15.27. 1 Cor. 9.11.
and the spiritual things, wherein for the present, I am desirous to make some
return for your favors are an advice and a prayer: mine advice is that (while
your conjugall amity is visibly such, as those that observe it, do very well
perceive, you are both very well pleased in your choice) you would now and
then, by meditation of a mortal divorce, prepare not only for courage to
encounter the pangs of death, but (which to either of you may happily prove a
more difficult task) for patience to bear the sadness of a surviving life:
For a parting there must be betwixt you and yours, as well as others, and it
will cost you the more in grief (when it comes) if you do not prepare and
forecast for it, by serious study of the hard lesson of Self-denial, of what
is most dear and delightful to you before hand: And this I mean not only for
the affection communicated betwixt your selves, but for that also, which (in
common) as you are Parents descends from you, upon your hopeful children: and
which I wish may be moderated to such a measure as may become the children of
an heavenly Father, professing to pray for the fullfilling of his will,
(according to the prescript of the Lords Prayer) before your own; so shall you
be sure to be gainers by the greatest loss that can be fall you. Now my prayer
is that God will be pleased so to unite your heartiest devotions and affections
in himself, that in his favor you may find a Sovereign Antidote against all
the discomforts of this life, and that after it, you may meet in a blessed
fruition of him in a better world, whereof there is none end. This shall be a
part of the daily intercession of him, who desires to be

From my lodging in Pauls-Churchyard, June 3. 1643. Really and will be
sincerely serviceable to the welfare of you and yours John Ley.

Errata in the first Sermon.
Page: a Epistle Dedicatory in the marg: for Tzere: write Tzere: In the verses
p. 1. lin. 2. for break, read breath. lin 21. for Graces r. Jewels lin. 26
for cinst read rinst. p. 2. lin. 24. for Elisha read Elijah In the Sermon p
2. lin. 7. for Philosopher read Philosopher. So also p. 21. lin. last. p 2.
lin. penult, blot out the word your. p 3. lin 8. marg alter Applic. blot out 1.
p. 4 lin 7. marg. blot out the word Use. p. 5. lin last but two marg blot out
Use 1. p. 15. lin. 31. after the word sometimes read is. p 19 after the last
lin blot out the last word deadly, and read it after the word no. p. 20 lin 1.
p. 20. lin 6 for come to pass which cannot, read which cannot come to pass.
p. 21. marg. for Plin. Not. Hist. c. 53 read l 7 c. 7. p 29. lin. last after
the word full add Gen 15 16. p. 30 lin 23. for notion read motion. p. 33.
lin. 27 over against the word diverse add in the marg. I. H. Hist. of the 3
Norman Kings, p 117, 118, 119, 120. p. 34. lin: 3. blot out the word So, and
lin 35, for their life is, read the lives of their Popes are. p. 37. lin. 11.
for Deuteronomy 3 read 13.

Errata in the second Sermon.
Page 1. lin 1. for Solicis^e read Soloecisme. p. 3 lin. 5 for this read the,
lin. penult. blot out he. p 5 lin 10 from the bottom after the word them add
Nor the innocence of those whom they have hated without acause, as I have In my
Fast Sermon, page 30.
else where observed. p 7 l. penult. blot out own. p. 9. lin. penult for 22.
read 20 p. 13. lin last but one, after the word who add took: and lin. last
blot out upon. p. 14. lin 2. blot out took her death. p. 14. lin. 14. for
whosoever read whosesoever. p. 14 lin. last but two, after the word were blot
out a sin. p. 16. lin. 27, after the word and read that. p. 17. lin. 11. begin
the Parenthesis next after the word well.

The principal Contents of the first SERMON.
INstruction profitably ministered by way of question. Page 2. The profitable
use of Catechizing. p. 3. Too much neglected by some, and by others too much
urged, to the disreputation of a suppression of after-noons preaching. p. 4, A
Catalogue of profitable questions for self-examination every day. p. 6, 7, 8.
The Luxury of Vitellius, having 9000. dishes at a meal. p. 7. A Reproof of,
1. Impertinent Questionists. p. 9. 2. Trifling. Questionists. p. 9. 3. Curious
and presumptuous Questionists. p. 10. 4. Distrustful Questionists. p. 10. 5.
Blasphemous Questionists. p. 11.
Luthers censure of the Popish Schoole-Divines for their ignorance of the
Bible, p. 9. Erasmus his comparison of Luther and Aquinas, and his preferring
of one page of Luthers books for profitablenesse before all Aquinas works, p.
9. Some ordinary things more worthy of serious consideration then many
extraordinary. p. 12. The shortness of man's life with the causes of it, the
primary cause of it, p. 13. Secundary causes, 300 several sorts of diseases
named above 2000 years ago. Ibid. Their different manner of working unto
death. p. 14 Pherecides eaten up with lice, Ibid. Immoderate passions and
affections of the mind no less deadly then diseases of the body, particular
instances thereof, p. 14, 15 16, 17. The sent of lime and snuff: of a Candle
deadly to some. p. 17. Malignant hostility how deadly. p. 18. Cruel Malignity
in little children. Ibid. The deadly cruelty of the Sword. p. 19. The vale of
the red-Horse, why so called? p. 19. Strange accidents deadly to some. p 20.
606 Houses in London blown down at one tempest. p. 21. One choked with a
Reyson stone, another with a Fly, and another with an hair. p. 21 Many signs
of certain death, none of certain continuance of life. p 21, 22. Neither
kingly prerogatives nor physical cordials of force against death. p. 22.
Application.
The consideration of a short and uncertain life may serve, for 1. A spur
unto diligence, p. 23 2. A whip or scourge for our negligence, p. 25, 26, 27.
3. A check to vain confidence. p. 27. 4. A curb to concupiscence. p. 30. In
the desire of
1. Riches. p. 31. 2. Honor. p. 32, 33, 34, 35. Alexander the great wanted a
burial place 30 days after his death. p. 33. William the Conquerours burial
often interrupted. Ib. None more unhappy then the Pope with his triple Crown.
p 35 A Pope hardly saved by the judgment of a Pope, p. 35
3. Pleasures, p. 35
5. A prop to patience against anger or envy at the welfare of the wicked and
against immoderate sorrow for deceased friends. p. 36, 37.
A narration of the condition and course of Mr. I. A. p. 38. His travel and
return from Rome without corruption in manners or cooling in Religion. p. 39,
40 His escape from dangers and dying where he was thought most safe. p. 41 His
disease. p. 42. The Devil busiest with the best when they are at the worst,
43. Examples of such as have had fearful conflicts in their faith and
doubtings of salvation out of which they have bin comfortably delivered. p. 43,
44, 46. But if they had not we must judge of the godly by their regular life,
not by the distempers of their sickness or death, p. 45. The pious and
comfortable conclusions of the life of M. I. A. p. 45 46.
The principal Contents of the second Sermon.
DEath and Divinity make no difference of Sexes, p. 1. Every one should be
chary of the life of any man. p. 3. Murder destroys the Image of God, as well
as a member of the commonweal, and therefore is a breach of the first Table,
as well as of the second. p. 3, 4. A whole City in danger by the slaughter of
one man, though they know it not. p. 4. The cruelty of the wicked against the
godly. p. 4, 5. Children should be chary of the lives of their Parents, and
why. p. 6. A good son to his Parents below, is a favorite of the father above.
p. 7. A bad child a parracide or murderer of his Parents. p. 7, 8. Whence it
is that Parents love their children better then children do their Parents. p.
8, 9. Why Jacob was so loving to Benjamin above the rest of his brethren. p. 9,
10. The best sort of persons most kindly affected to their kindred. p. 10, 11,
12. A reproof of the want of natural affection. p. 12, 13. Some lament more
for the loss of a dog or an horse, then others for their near kindred or
friends. p. 13. Of two extremes, better to be too kind then too hard-hearted.
p. 13. Yet a fault to exceed moderation in sorrow for deceased friends or
kindred. p. 14. To die for sorrow is not to be guilty of a sin unto death. p.
14, 15 A young Saint an old devil, one of the devils proverbs. p. 16. Signs
of saving grace in a young child. p. 16, 17. An historical passage touching
dancing on the Sabbath day to save life, whether lawful to do so to escape
such a danger? p. 17 The charity of Ph. H. answerable to her piety, and both
rare in a child of her age. p. 18. Parents more honored by good children, then
children by good Parents. p. 18. The good disposition and religious life of
Mrs. H. her mother. p. 19, 20, 21, 22. Godly examples to be set forth for
others imitation. p. 22 Wicked men believe not Gods children to be endowed with
such gifts and graces as they have. p. 22, 23. An acknowledgement of the gift
and power of prayer in a mean man by a great Prelate. p. 23. Yet all have not
the gift that take it upon them. p. 24. No example of mere man a perfect
pattern of imitation, p. 24. Considerations for the patient bearing of
crosses; first from God, both in regard of his authority over us, and of his
intention toward us and ours. p. 24. God calls away our friends to call our
sins to our remembrance. p. 25. Our sin toward them may be idolatry, and the
cure of idolatry is to take away the I doll. Ibid The godly taken away from the
evil to come. p. 26. The case worse with the surviver then with the decedant,
p. 26.
THE MONITOR OF MORTALITY, The second SERMON.
GENESIS 44. v. 3. It shall come to pass when he sees that the Lad is not with
us, that he will die.


IT is no Solicisme in preaching, to bring in the Example of a Father and his
son (linked in love together, even unto death) for the ground of our
Commemoration of a Mother and her daughter, betwixt whom there was as near
kindred, not only of blood, but of affection: for neither death makes
difference of Sex (as every one knows) nor yet Divinity, since both Religion,
and the reward of it, belongs unto both Sexes, by an equal right, and though
Christ were of the male-kind, in Christianity there is no difference; There is
neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male
nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.28.

It is all one then (as to that we intend) to present you with Jacob, loving
his son so much, that he could not live without him, as if we took for our
Text, Rachel Weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they
were not, Math. 2.18. and in some respects (as we shall show before we have
done) Jacobs example is more considerable then Rachels, and withal more
pertinent to our purpose, which that you may the more perspiculously perceive,
some precedent passages of this verse must be observed, which may come in with
good due coherence to the Text thus.

There was a general Famine over all the face of the Earth, Genesis 41.56. except
in Egypt (so far as was known to the Egyptians) thither did Jacob send all
his sons he had with him, except Benjamin, for him he would not send, Genesis
42.4. for a supply of food against the famine coming to Egypt their brother
Joseph (not known as a brother, and honored as a Prince) furnishes them with
provision, but with condition to come again, and to bring Benjamin, their (but
especially his own) brother with them, and (until he come) he requires one
of them to stay with him (as a pledge for his appearance) and he was Simeon.
Returning to their Father without him, they related to him, what Joseph
required, and treated with him, that they might bring his dearly beloved
Benlamin with them; with much ado (especially by the prudent importunity of
Judah, he yielded to send him, and so they went all together into Egypt: There
Joseph (having power to act any part he pleased) whether in jest or in earnest)
put a fallacy upon them, which troubled them all, for be caused his Steward to
steal his Cup into Beniamins sack; and (when they were in their way) to
follow them with hue and cry, who having overtaken them, and charged them with
felony, they plead not guilty, and yield to have their sacks searched, and that
he in whose sack the Cup should be found, should be his servant.

Benjamin is the party, who for the present is taken for a Thief, and now (for
ought he knows) is for hereafter to be used like a slave. Judah (having
deeply engaged himself to his Father for his safe return, for (said he) I
will be surety for him, of mine hand shall thou require him; If I bring him not
unto thee, and set him before thee, let me bear the blame for ever, Chap. 43.
ver. 9.) pleaded earnestly with Joseph for his release, that he may restore him
to his Father, according to his former undertaking: And the Argument he most
pressed to this purpose was, that unless this good man's heart be upheld by
this son of his right hand (for that is the signification of his name) it
would sink down into the grave, and so he would prove a Benoni (as his mother
called him) that is, a Son of sorrow, not only to her, (who dyed in labor of
him, Genesis 35.18, 19.) but to his Father, who (if he saw him not with them)
would suppose he was dead, and the apprehension of that, would be the
shortening of his life, by excessive sorrow for his death: for as Judah said,
His life was bound up in his sons life; and being bound together, they were
both safe in the same security, or both lost by one mishap, at least Jacob's
life so depended upon Beniamins, that if Benjamin did not live, Jacob must die.

Having brought in the Coherence of the words of the Text with the precedent
Story, we must now consider them first together, then a part.

For the first, since Judah pleading with Joseph, as a great Courtier and a
Stranger to him, both in blood and Religion, (for ought he knew) persuades the
deliverance of the Son, for the prevention of the death of the Father, we may
thence observe. That every man should be chary of the life of any man: For
every man in this case was as much bound to regard the person of another, as
Joseph was, and Jacob was no more to him (in Iudahs apprehension) then any
other man. And the reason is, for that to hinder or Si non paveris occidisti.
withold any preservative of life, is to make a man guilty of another death,
and that is murder; and murder is a sin not only against humane society, but
against divine Majesty. That it is against the first, is easily confessed by all,
I need not prove it. And that it is against the second, is showed in the ninth
of Genesis, where God enacting a penal law for a capital punishment against a
Manslayer, in these words, Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood
be shed: he gives this reason for such retaliation, For in the Image of God
made he man, Genesis 9.6. So that he that kills another, not only destroys a
member of the Commonweal, but defaceth the Image of God, and so though the
prohibition of killing be sorted to the negative precepts of the second Table,
the guilt of it is as a breach of the first Commandment of the first Table.

Because the point is but covertly employed, Applic.
not plainly expressed, I will not be long in prosecution of it: and in short it
may serve for Caution to all, that they be not any way guilty, either by
committing of violence against the life of another, or omitting any Act of
benevolence, which may serve to preserve it; for the least degree of guilt,
which has any affinity with that crying crime, may raise the tempest of a
troubled conscience within a man, and bring down a storm of vengeance from
above upon him: From this sin, we shall be disposed to keep a further
distance, if we consider the Law in case of killing, Deuteronomy. 21. from the first
verse to the ninth inclusively, where we read, That if a man were slain in
the field, and the Manslayer were not known, the Elders of the next City to
the slain man (which if it were not apparent otherwise, must be tried by
measure from the place of the dead round about) must offer Sacrifice, ver. 4.
And though neither their hands did shed the blood, nor their eyes see it, verse.
7. (by which is meant, that they were altogether innocent and ignorant of it)
yet must they deprecate the imputation of the bloodshed, in this manner. Be
merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel, whom thou have redeemed, and lay not
innocent blood unto the people of Isreal's charge, and the blood shall be
forgiven them, ver. 8. So shall thou put away the guilt of innocent blood from
among you, when thou shall do that which is right in the sight of the Lord, v.
9.

Secondly, If by the killing of one man, a whole City (though neither
consenting to it, nor knowing who did it) must thus far profess their
clearness from it, and yet offer Sacrifice, and pray, that they may not be
accounted as guilty of it, how deep is their guilt, how dangerous their State,
who make no scruple to make a Parisiensis horrenda la ^iena in nuptijs Henrici
Regis N^varrae. Luc. Osia^d. Epit. Cent. ^600. l. 3. c. 69. part alt. p. 832.
City a Shambles of bloodshed? And think it their greatest glory, when they
wade deepest in blood, not of Turks and Infidels, but of Christians,
especially of those whose blood (next unto the blood of Christ) is most
precious in the eyes of God? wherein they revell with such a bold and
boundless bloud-guiltinesse, as if they might and meant to hear, some
comparative acclamations of themselves, and some other man of blood and
Beliall, like that in the first of Samuel the 18. Saul has slain his
thousands and David his ten thousands, verse 7. But most unlike it in this, for
that David's valor was exercised upon the enemies of God, their violence rages
against his dearest favorites; for whose security he has entered a Caveat in
the Courts of Kings, Psalm. 105. He suffered no man to do them wrong, yea he
reproved Kings for their sakes, ver. 14. saying, Touch not mine anointed, and
do my Prophets no harm, ver. 14, 15. which they that dare disobey, When he
makes inquisition for blood, he will remember them, and not forget the cry of
the humble, Psalm. 9.12. whose blood will cry (as Abels did, Genesis 4.10.) for
vengeance against theirs, and God will hear it and avenge it too, Romans 19.2.
and his vengeance will be such, as (if they did apprehend it as God will
inflict it,) would put them into the extremity of Belshazzar ( when he saw the
fingers of a man's handwriting, the doom of his ruin upon the plaster of the
wall, which made his countenance to be changed, his thoughts to be troubled,
the joints of his loins to be loosed, and his knees to smite one against
another, Dan. 5.5, 6. but it may be, He that was a murderer from the
beginning, Joh. 8.44. whose slaughter-men they are) and a juggling impostor too,
who blinds the minds of them that believe not, 2 Cor. 4.4. will not suffer
their blood-shotten eyes to see the guilt of their cruel hearts and hands,
until they feel the weight of Gods revenging hand upon them.

After this Observation of the words taken together, we must take them apart,
and so take notice of two remarkable examples.

The one is of Iudahs care of the life of his Father Jacob.

The other of Jacobs danger of death by the loss of his son Benjamin.

The former I shall dispatch in brief (intending more copiously to prosecute
the latter, as being more pertinent to our present purpose) noting it as a
disposition worthy of praise in him, fit to be a pattern for the practice of
Children toward their Parents, viz. to be charie of their lives, and so was
Joseph as well as Judah, and (having more power) he shows it more then Judah
did or could do, and in that wherein Judah might have equalled him, he
suffered Joseph to go beyond him; the five last Chapters of Genesis contain an
excellent story which may both instruct Children in their filial duty, and (if
they mark it as they ought) will much induce them to perform it, for which
the grounds are laid in nature, and upon them may be built considerations of
Religion.

For that Children should be chary of the lives of their Parents, is Natures
immediate instinct without any exercise of reason or discipline of Religion;
and thus all the world over (the brute creatures not excepted) yea some of
them are noted for example of very kind and tender love and care of their
parents; for the young Storkes as Plin. not. bist. l. 10. c. 24.
Pliny observes, will keep and feed them when they are old, as they
themselves were nourished by them when they were young.

Secondly, The dictate of natural reason requires it, that Children should be
careful to prolong the lives of their Parents, for

First, They are (under God) the means of the beginning of life and being unto
them.

Secondly, They are (under God again) the means of the continuance of their
life and well-being.

And for Religion, God calls for this care in the fifth Commandment, where
(under the word Honor) all filial duties are commanded, and under the
prohibition of killing (in the sixth) whatsoever may tend unto it is forbidden,
and the contrary is virtually enjoined, that is, whatsoever may conduce to the
preservation of life, especially of those to whom (by divine and humane law) we
are most obliged. Applic.


This I could wish Children would apply unto themselves, whether their Parents
be dead or alive; if they be dead, to examine their own precedent carriage
toward them, whether they have not given them any cause, or been an occasion
to hasten their deaths; and if they have, to mourn more for their own sins
in secret, then they seemed to do (at their Parents funeral) in public; if
they have them yet alive, seriously to recount what causes they have to desire
their life, and to do their best endeavor to prolong their days, cherishing
them in their old age, as they were cherished by them in their infancy; so did
good Joseph by his aged Father Jacob, for he nourished him, and his brethren,
and all his household (for his sake) with bread, or (as some read the words) as
a little child is nourished, Genesis 46.12. or according to the Hebrew) even to
the mouth of the little one, that is, from the greatest to the least, or with
such tenderness, as that wherewith a Nurse feeds her little one, or with as
little care or pains to Jacob, and those of his family, as little children use
to take in providing for themselves; and while they show such a chary
disposition toward their health and welfare, they shall thereby get themselves
an interest in that gracious promise of the Father of Spirits, annexed to
observation of the fifth Commandment, which is, length of days, for to that
precept, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, is annexed this promise, that thy
days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee; and if from
children they grow up to the degree of Parents, and have children of their own,
they shall repay them the observance and succor which they have performed to
their Progenitors before.

And on the contrary, the praise of such good sons, must serve to the
reproach of such bad children, as wickedly requite the blessing of their
Parents, by wishing for their death, who were the means to bring them to life,
and to preserve them alive by their tenderness over them, in the time of their
ignorant and impotent minority; thence was the observation of the heathen
Prophet, (so the Apostle calls a Poet, Tit. 1.12.) Filius ante diem patrios
inquirit in anno^*
the Son inquires into his Fathers years before his time, thinking it long
before he be wrapped in a white sheet, and himself clad in a black suite, that
he may have a merry heart under a mournful habit. Such as have so little both
of Grace and goodnature, as to desire the dispatch of their Parents, commonly
do somewhat which may be like to lesson the measure of their own lives, as
their yoking themselves unsutably without their Parents consent, or against
their minds; the thought of such a thing was so great a grief unto Rebecca, as
caused her passionatly to say, I am weary of my life (because of the daughters
of Heth; if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, (such as these which
are of the daughters of the Land) what good will my life do me? Genesis 27.46.
and such a grief as makes one weary of life, wears out the life before the
time.

In this respect, many children become Parricides of their own Parents, by such
heard-hearted stubbornness in wicked ways, as makes them worthy of stoning to
death by the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 21. ver. 20, 21. whose want of grace and good
nature, with their gross ungratitude (returning for all their Parents
tenderness and indulgence toward them, nothing but what may offend and
afflict them) is so much more grievous, as (in relation and affection) they
were more near and dear unto them. Of the 23. wounds given to Caesar in the
Senate House, (whichsoever was most deep and deadly) surely that was most
grievous to his heart, which he took from the hand of Brutus, when he said
unto him, (...). Sueton. in Jul. Caesar. cap. 82.
and thon my son? art thou one to kill me, who have loved and cared for thee,
as a Father forhis son? And howsoever the forecited penal Statute, Deuteronomy.
21. be not in use among the Christians, (yet it is no more a mere Jewish Law,
then the sin is merely Jewish,) God seldom suffers a very rebellious son
(unless he become a gracious convert (which is very rare) to pass unpunished
in this life; and many times his punishment is of that kind, which may bring
his own sin to remembrance, his child revenging upon him his own miscarriage
toward his Parents. Thus much of Judahs care of the life of his Father Jacob.
Now of Jacobs danger of death by the loss of Benjamin, It shall come to pass,
etc. the reason of this great danger of Jacob, was his dear love to Benjamin
(very dear (doubtless) if it had cost him his life) which is commonly greater
in the Father to the child, then is reciprocated from the child to the Father;
happily First, because the child is better and longer known unto the Father then
the Father to the child, both for certainty of truth and continuance of time.

Secondly, Because natural affection (as the Lawyer speaks of inheritance)
rather descends from the Parents to the children, then ascends from the
children to the Parents.

Thirdly, the discipline of Parents, is many times grievous to their children,
crossing their wills and ways, and sometimes severely chastising them for
their failings of duty, or transgressions against it; all which are commonly as
unpleasing unto them, as profitable for them.

Fourthly, Parents expect in their children to live, when themselves are dead;
and to be perpetual in their succession, while themselves are but temporal
and transitory: and children take their Parents (too many times) to be
impediments, if not to their lives, yet to their comfortable living, in keeping
Inheritance, Honors, Offices from them, and restraint of their liberty, which
they cannot expect (in a full fruition) until they be dead.

And for Jacobs love to Benjamin, it appears to be more then to the rest of his
sons, by the saying of Judah, he loves him (says he) Genesis 44.20. and so he
did all his other children, but his words imply, that he loved him in an
especial manner and measure above his brethren; so that they as not beloved,
or little beloved in respect of him, are not named as partakers of his love;
and he shows his love to Benjamin, by being so fearful of his life, for he
would not let him go, lest death should befall him in the way, Genesis 42.4. any
of the rest might have dyed as well as he; but his care, his fear and his love
were all for benjamin, in a very eminent degree, and that made him so stiff
against the entreaties and undertakings of Judah and of Ruben, who when he had
offered his two sons for security for one (yea and as for sacrifice also; for
he said, slay my two sons, Genesis 42.37. if I bring him not again,) he could
obtain none other answer but this; My son shall not go down with you, ver.
38. he would have that son never go down or set, but always to shine within
his horizon.

And the reason of this love (if such an heat and height of affection, were
not rather an aberration from reason) may be: because he was the son of his
most beloved wife Rachel, for whom he served seven years, which yet (such was
his love unto her) seemed unto him but a few days, Genesis 29.22.

Secondly, Because he was dear bought, for while she labored boured to give
life and liberty to him, she lost her own, Genesis 35.19. In other cases,
whosoever is the cause, occasion or instrument of a friends death, is commonly
distasted, sometimes detested; but here innocence pleades against all
imputation of guilt and blood, and kindred and neerenesse of blood, apprehends
the mishap at first with grief, not with grudge, and after a time (when sorrow
is assuaged concerning the dead) pity and compassion, love and delight, do
exercise their operation upon the living, with so much more tenderness, as the
loss is the greater not only to the Father, but much more to the child: since
it is more like that his loss may be supplied by another wife, then the child's
by another mother.

Thirdly, Because his brother Joseph, (who was dearly beloved of his Father,)
was supposed to be dead, and so Benjamin surviving, was heir to the love that
belonged to him: and so he loved him the more, in that he was not only Rachels
son, but Joseph's brother, and in whose Name and right he was to inherit an
high degree of love, for Jacob loved him more then all his children, Genesis 37.3.

Fourthly, The Reason of Jacobs great love to Joseph, was, because he was the
son of his old age, as is noted in the forenamed verse. which has so much the
more force on Benjamins part, as he was younger then Joseph, and Jacob
consequently so much elder when he begat him; and to give a reason of this
reason, the old Father delights so much more in his young child, as to be a
Father in old age, is an argument of more favor from God, in supporting his
bodily ability so far, or making supply of it by his own power where it is
deficient.

Fifthly, Though natural strength be more feeble and faint toward the end of
life, natural affection is more vigorous in its course the longer it lasts,
and therefore the love of old age toward young ones, is many times a mere
dotage, whereby he that was once a man, grows the second time a child, and the
more childish, the more like to exceed in the love of children. But we will
abstract from the particular considerations of Jacobs love to Benjamin, and
propound an observation of more general use, which is this, That the best kind
of persons are most kindly affected to their kindred. Of this you have had
evidence enough in Jacob already; and the next remarkable instance is Joseph,
who though he personated an Egyptian Prince) and pretended rigor toward his
brethren, while they know him not (for he accused them for spies, sent after
them as thieves, put them all together three days in ward, yet (all that
while) his heart was tenderly affected toward them, and turning his face from
them he wept, Gen 42.24. he took upon him to act the part of a stern
Governor, but his kind heart put him out of it, and he was feign to turn
aside that he might not bewray it, and for that time he suppressed his
compassion; but his kindness broke out again, and his bowels yearned upon his
brother, and he sought where to weep, and he entered into his chamber and wept
there, Chap. 43.30. and when he revealed himself unto them, he manifested his
love very freely and fully, for he fell upon his brother Benjamins neck and
wept, and Benjamin fell upon his neck, and he kissed all his brethren, and wept
upon them, Genesis 45.14, 15.

There be many vigorous reasons of the vehement affections of such as are
linked to others in this kind of love; especially of Parents to their children,
which is the track we must take for our way at this time.

First, An impression of Nature, which we may observe in a descending, as we
have done before in an ascending operation, in unreasonable creatures, for the
Sea Monsters hold forth their breasts unto their young, Lament. 4.3. which (by
the way) shames many nice Ladies and Gentlewomen, that are not so kind as to
give suck to their own children, and the Bears robbed of their whelps; are
extremely enraged, 2 Samuel 17.8. and rage toward those that take them, is an
effect of loving affection to those that are taken from them.

Secondly, But where rational knowledge is added to natural affection, there
it grows to an higher degree of goodwill; For the things we know not at all
(as the vulgar Ignoti nulla cupido.
Proverb says) we have no desire of. If we know them but little, we like them
but little (though they be never so good) and if our knowledge of them be much,
our liking of them will be according to the proportion as much; And if nature
begin, and good acquaintantance go on, it takes degree from favor to
friendship, and the affection of friends is the marriage of souls, Deuteronomy. 13.6.
so far it seems did the love of Jacob proceed; for it is said (in the
original) that his soul was bound to his soul, that is, to the soul of
Benjamin.

Thirdly, there is yet a further incentive to this affection, if there be any
good parts (in the party beloved) whether of the body, as beauty (which made
David so kind (if we may not say fond) to his beautiful Absalom, as to wish
that himself had dyed that he might have lived, 2 Samuel 19.33.) or of mind,
which is a more generous object of love, because mental endowments are more
excellent then corporal.

Fourthly, If with all this, Religion come in with its operation and interest,
and both parties be uniformely pious, then is love most accomplished, and
comes near to perfection.

How many of these causes of love concurred in Jacobs case we cannot tell, but
sure we are (where they all meet in one object, they must needs be very
potent, and the grief of loss of the party so beloved (especially if it be
sudden and unexpected) will be answerable to it; for love is the standard to
all the affections, or as the mould whence they take both figure and measure.

The Application hereof, we must serve in with several sawces of vinegar and
oil, according to the different temper of those that have need of it. Some are
sharply to be reproved, some softly and gently to be dealt withal; the first
are such as the Apostle brings in (in his bead-roule of offenders) by name of
(...), without natural affection, 2 Timothy 3.3. as if their hearts were hewed
out of the rock, or at least might be said to be hearts of Oak.

It is a part of the discipline of the Stoics, to cast off all passions and
perturbations (as being the distempers of such as are weak and unwise, rather
then the qualifications of those that are established by prudence, and ruled by
reason) and to dry up that humidum radicale of kindness, which is apt to melt
into tears of tenderness; and they argue themselves into a Stock-like
stillnesse and dryness, by this Neminem flebo laetum neminem fl^ntem ille
lachrymas meas ipse absterfit, hic suis lachrymis effecit ne illis dignus sit,
Seneca, de Tranquil. l. 1. c. 15. p. 147.
Dilemma; if a man be merry he prevents the use of tears, if he weep, his own
tears do make him unworthy of mine, and some be hard-hearted enough of
themselves, without any discipline or instruction, who can part with friends,
kindred, Parents, partners in the state of marriage, or children, and yet not
to be moved at all for any of them; and for such a disposition as this, the
mother of the Gracchi is commended by Plutarch (which I marvel at, since he
was a professed opposite to Stoicall opinions) Plutarch in the life of Tiber
and Cajus Gracchio page 841.
saying of her as in her praise, that she used to report the untimely death of
her two worthy Sons, as a Story without a tear, for therein me thinks she
showed more of the pride of an high-spirited Lady, then of the pity of a kind
hearted Mother.

But what an absurdity is that for which some are taxed by Plutarch in the life
of Cicero, p. 878.
him (in the life of Cicero) who while others took on for the death of a dog
or an horse, for children or friends showed no sorrow at all?

The want of this natural affection, is the ground of many fearful
temptations, which sometimes proceed to unnatural executions, whereof we may
read many crimson Characters, both in foreign and domestic Stories; but we
began not with vinegar to end in blood.

Now for the oil: if such an Arch-Patriarch as Jacob (for he was the Father of
the Patriarchs) were so dearly affected to his Son Benjamin, that his death
would kill him that begat him to life; this may be as oil, to mollify the
misconceit of some, who are too rigorous in censures of such, as are of a
tender and an affectionate Nature, and like unto holy Jacob, or his best
beloved Rachell, apter to drink deep of the bitter potion of sorrow, then to
take a taste of the cup of comfort against it; when it is with them, as Partem
maliputant audiresalutem. Senec. consolat. ad Martiam. c 5.
Seneca wrote to Martia, made as a part of the grief, to hear any thing of
the Consolations of life.

And if I would make choice of an extreme, it should rather be of that which
is near of kin to natural kindness, then of that which comes so near to
a Stoicall Apathy: for not only good men, but as wise men as any of that Sect,
have showed themselves most tenderly and affectionately disposed toward their
children, both living and dead: and we see by the Testimony of a grave Plutarch
ubi supra.
Author concerning Cicero, who upon the death of his daughter by childbirth
(though he were visited by Philosophers and learned men that came on all sides
to comfort him) took her death so sorrowfully to heart, that he put away his
second wife, because he thought she did rejoice at her death.

Wherein we allow him rather as a Father, then as an husband: for his mourning
for his daughter was an Argument of good nature, but the casting off his wife
upon that occasion) might be a sign of too much suspicion of her, and of too
little of that affection which was due to a wife.

But for that love which is natural (yet such an enemy to Nature, as by too
much favor to the object afflicts the Subject unto death) though wheresoever
it is found, in such a degree of excess, it must be acknowledged for a fault;
yet such is the privilege of Gods children, that even faults whosoever they
be, their own especially may be of useful consideration to themselves and to
others; to themselves for their humbling; to others for their warning and for
their comfort, that though their kindness to another should prove so cruel, as
to kill their own bodies, yet that the conceit of that killing may not through
distrust or despair endanger their souls.

For the first, though (as a Mother) the affections of the pious Matron (whose
death has spread a black cloud upon a great part of this Assembly) were so
strong as a Christian, her understanding was not so weak, as not to discern
the error of her love: for she took notice of it, and accused her self for
it, and had the more spiritual sorrow, because her carnal sorrow for her
daughter (if we may call it carnal, which was set upon her, rather as Gods
child, then as her own) was so immoderate (whereof though I were an
eare-witnesse) I took no exception at her accusation of her self, because I
saw her sorrow was a godly sorrow working repentance to salvation, not to be
repented of, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Corinthians. 7.10.

Yet now she hears me not (that none may mistake her state with injury to her,
or misery to themselves, as if to die of grief were a sin, A sin unto
death, 1 John 5.16. of such a selfe-killing guilt, as consist with the safety
of the soul) me thinks, I may thus resolve touching the reciprocal operation
of the distemper of her mind and body.

First, Though in the weekly Bill of mortality, we find few that die of her
disease, yet there are every where examples of diverse, who expedite their own
deaths, either by intemperance of diet, or pursuit of pleasures, by
intempestine Studies, and too laborious employments, and many (when they think
to cherish nature) do by too much case, chariness and curiosity, weaken it
and sometimes finally overthrow it: yet none of them, no not they whose excess
is most faulty (if they dyed true Penitents) were ever by any judicious Divine
or Christian doomed to the second death.

Secondly, If any excess be capable of defense, it is that of love, especially
when it is set upon an object amiable, not only in the eyes of natural
Parents, but of our spiritual and heavenly Father, and for hers in particular,
if we compare it with Jacobs love to, and his grief for Benjamin (in case he
had miscarried) it is more capable of excuse then his could be: For these
reasons.

First, The Female Sex (out of a natural tenderness (attending upon it) is
more disposed both to love and compassion then the Male; and therefore where
God sets forth his singular affection to his people, he does it by
comparison of himself, with a woman, not with a man, Isai. 49.15. and what is
more consonant to nature, is more capable of pardon, if it somewhat exceed.

Secondly, Jacob had many sons, at least twelve, and all twelve alive, at the
last when he blessed them upon his deathbed; of which he loft not one by death,
but one in his conceit, and that but for a time, whose absence was recompensed
with comforts beyond expectation, even to admiration, they were so many for
number, so rare for degree; but she having had diverse children, was by their
death deprived of them all.

Thirdly, of Jacobs Benjamin we read no great matter of Commendation, either
for piety or any other virtue, and there is somewhat said of him (even by him
who loved him so dearly, and that in the last words he spoke of him) which
implies rather matter of reproach then of praise, Benjamin shall ravine as a
Wolf, in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night, he shall divide
the spoil, Genesis 49.27. But our Rachels Phebe, was an innocent and harmless
lamb.

A child of about 12. years old, as like him for piety (who, when he was but
twelve years old, was found in the Temple hearing the Doctors and asking them
Questions, Luke 2.42, 46.) as any of her Sex, and that age within the compass
of my acquaintance.

Her piety and charity, were commendable in any age, admirable in one so young
as she was: I will give a brief touch of both (since they are the principal
qualifications of a Christian) and the rather, because though In Chester.
here she was borne, and lived to honor God with a singular example of
sanctity (for one so young) yet here she dyed not, and therefore had not here,
that commendable mention made of her, which in this place was due unto her;
whereof I will give you such a report, as is like unto an Echo, resounding
back a few sillables for many words of her Preached at Alderley where she dyed
and was buried.
Funeral Sermon: and this for yours, and your childrens sakes, that they may
be induced to become godly betimes; and fear not the saying, a young Saint, an
old devil, for that is one of the old devils Proverbs, and prophecies as
false as himself, who never speaks truth, but to make way for belief of a
lie, and the contrary is regularly true, A young Saint, an old Saint, a young
Devil an old Devil.

First, for her Piety, it was such (for a child) as must needs argue her the
child of God, and by such evidences as these.

First, she set her self an holy and daily task for prayer and reading of the
Scripture: wherein if by any occasion she were interrupted she was very much
troubled, and this she did not formally, but affectionately; which may appear
by these particulars.

1. By her serious enquiries, and questions of the sense and meaning of that
she read.

2. By her constant care to keep close to the rules of it, for fear, least in
any thing, she should do contrary unto it.

3. By her scruple and trouble of mind, if in any thing she digressed from her
duty to God or man commanded in the word.

Fourthly, if any doubt or case of conscience arose, where in favor to her
self, and honor to God by way of competition, came in for pre-eminence; as
whether she should abridge her self of lawful liberty on the Sabbath day, or
make a breach upon it, by a profane employment of any part of it, she was much
more ready to be injurious to her self, then sacrilegious to God.

Whereof I shall relate unto you a strange, but a true Story, which I know very
well, for (it was in a passage of conference betwixt her and me, yet in the
presence of diverse others, who may yet remember it.) It was thus, Upon some
speeches against the violation of the religious rest of that day by carnal
recreations, she showed her dislike of dancing on the Sabbath, so far as to
say, she would rather die then do it, I told her with commendation of her
Christian care and zeal to keep it (not only holy for the manner, but wholly
for the measure) that so she might make her self more guilty of the breach of
the sixth Commandment by her rest, then of the fourth by her motion: for if her
dancing were not an exercise of delight unto her self, but done as a work of
mercy for preservation of her life, and so professed to such as would compel
her to do it, it was no breach of piety, but an act of charity, as lawful as
the labor bestowed to lift up an Ox out of the pit least he should die there,
Luke 14.5.
which is allowed by our Savior, and so much more warrantable, as the life of
a Christian is of more worth, then the life of a beast: Against which, though
she could say little, I found somewhat to do, to free her from the fetters of
her former opinions; so deeply did Doctrines of self-denial sink into her
heart, though she were yet but of that age, which uses to make scruple of
nothing, and to deny nothing to it self, which has any savor of sensual
delight.

2. Secondly, for her Charity, (let her Piety stand for an abridgement of the
first Table, and her charity will serve for the same in the second) she was
kind and courteous toward all, tender hearted to the distressed, desirous (if
any breach were made between any of the family) to make it up quickly by
hearty reconcilement.

And to the poor she was exceedingly pitiful, interceding for them, giving
of her own unto them. For which purpose, she got a little stock before hand
(for her Parents seeing she was so well-minded, would not suffer her to be
empty handed) and that stock sometimes she adventured all at once (as goods in
a weather-beaten Bark) by way of loan to some poor person in extreme
necessity; where may we find so much upon record of Jacobs Benjamin?

On these two points, Piety and Charity, hang all the Law, and the Prophets,
and these two were so habitually settled in her, that in the exercise of both
(so far as others could judge) she took much delight.

How could it be but a delight to any godly Parents to have such a child? How
but a great grief to be deprived of her, who was like (if she had lived) to
have been an excellent pattern to both Sexes, and every age to which she
attained.

And the better she was, the more lovely in the eyes of God and of all that are
good, and her goodness doubtless was that which so united the soul of her
good mother to hers, that they could not part, but (as Jacob and Benjamin) with
the peril of life.

By this child you may make some conjecture of her Mother; for children
(especially in their minority) owe much unto their Mothers, for their godly
education, so did King Lemuel to his, Prove. 31.1. and Timothy to his Mother and
Grandmother both, 2 Timothy 1.5.

And though grace be of God, it is regularly conferred by means, and religious
instruction of children, and exemplary conversation of their Parents, is a
means, which God many times blesses with gracious effects: So that whereas
most make boast of their Parents (as Josephus in the beginning of his life
written by himself.
Josephus of his, Know therefore that I am not basely, but nobly descended,
being both on the Fathers and Mothers side derived from the line of the
Priests) in reason there is cause, rather for Parents to glory in good
children: since God (many times) makes them useful instruments of their
goodness: But seldom (on the contrary) is the Parents goodness effected by
any means either of example or instruction of their children.

Howsoever she (this grave Matron I mean) had not bin so happy, as to be the
Mother of so religious a daughter, she was in her self well worthy both of our
commendation and of others imitation.

First, as a Woman. Secondly, as a Wife. Thirdly, as a Mother. Fourthly, as a
mistress, Fifthly, as a friend. Sixthly, (which is the chiefest of all) as a
Christian.

Under these particular Titles, we might make discourse for a whole hour, but
I will wind up all (as many long threads) into a little clew.

First, as a Woman, she was gravely and venerably modest.

Secondly, (as a Wife) she was loving, loyal and pleasing to her husband,
never repining at any beneficence bestowed upon his friends, but freely and
affectionately assenting to what was done in that kind, as if it had bin done
to her own kindred; and therein she has been quitted with a kind
retaliation to those of her alliance: she was an helper to her yoake-fellow
(in all his affairs) by taking upon her self, all household cares, and
ordering them like a prudent and faithful Steward, and so much the more, as he
(partly out of the cumber of occasions of his calling, and partly in confidence
of her discretion) was the more neglectfull of them; which she observing,
caused a summary or inventory to be taken of what was in the house and under
her hands, and this (as a kind of Legacy in her last sickness) she bequeathed
to him with advice, hereafter to take it into his own consideration with more
circumspection: and as during the time of their marriage, she lived with him in
a most amiable manner (betwixt 24 and 25 years together) so at last, she took
her leave of him, with as many affectionate expressions, as could possibly
proceed from a soul ready to take her flight from earth to heaven.

Thirdly as a Mother, I need say nothing, but that as she was to her pious
daughter departed, so was she proportionably careful of, and affectionate to
the rest of her children, while she enjoyed them, but they as blazing Stars
(but of short continuance) shined for a while, and then vanished out of sight.

Fourthly, As a Mistress, she so ordered the government of her servants, as to
make them as loath (out of love as out of fear) to offend her, forbearing
rebukes, but when necessity did require them, and so tempering them, when there
was need, that they might neither (through levity) incline to contempt, nor
through rigor to hate.

Fifthly, As a Friend she was kind, free, hearty, trusty, forward to act her
part to the full in friendly commerce, and as ready to take in good part what
came from a friendly mind, though it were not presented in all the
demonstrations of pleasing respect.

Sixthly, As a Christian, she was devout in holy duties both of the solemn
Assemblies, the Family, and the Closset, which (when by sickness she was
suspended from the public service of God in the Church) served unto her for a
Chapel of ease, though it were a great grief unto her, that she could not
praise the Lord in the great Congregation, Ps. 22.25. nor enjoy the communion
of Saints so fully as before, yet (when she bare her part of the public
worship) her accustomed manner was (as those who were nearest to her have
observed) thrice a day to betake her self to her private devotion of reading,
meditation and prayer, wherein (besides her constant reading of three Chapters,
and some portion of the Psalms every day) she spent some hours in other good
books as opportunity served. Hereby she strengthened her faith, humbled her
soul in the severe (yet saving) martyrdom of sincere Repentance) quickened her
watch over her spiritual estate, for prevention of the encroachment or
surprizall of sin, and so by fearing even to a gnat of sin, she kept her
conscience at great distance and far out of danger of swallowing of Camels.

Her profession and practice of Piety (in this sort) was secured from all
suspicion of hypocrisy, by her answerable measure of charity and patience: For
the first, she was of a free dispofition in her house, compassionate to the
poor, and liberal to them, whereof I need say the less, by how much the more
they bemoan her loss, on which bare, and barren soil (bare and barren in
respect of men, but very fruitful by the plentiful repaiment of God, who makes
himself a surety for what is bestowed upon the poor, Pro. 19.7.) she sowed so
much seed, that as it were casting her bread upon the waters, Eccl 11.1. in
considence of divine recompense no doubt she finds a more bountiful hand then
her own, restoring unto her, her layings out of that kind with advantage.

Her Patience is one of the particulars, which was most apparent in the latter
part of her life, which beginning with her sickness, held out to her death:
She had a sore sickness, and of long continuance, from Whitsontide until
after Bartholmewtide, (which was the time of her darling daughters advancement
to her heavenly Father) she had not one hours case in a day from her pain,
and yet she bore all with very much patience, and much of it also with
lightsomenesse; which though it were marvelled at by such as observed it, she
thought she had too little of that found and solid virtue; and made it her
prayer very often, to have more of it, that it might proceed with an even pace to
her pains, so that the one might be increased with the other.

But indeed it seemed, God rather assuaged her pains, for the most part of the
week wherein she dyed, she was much given to slumbers, but as it is said of
the Church, Cant. 5.2. I sleep but mine heart waketh; so might she have said,
for so it appeared she did; for on the sudden, she would break through a
slumber, (as it were a ray of lightning breaking through a Cloud) with such
pathetick ejaculations as these, Lord pardon, Lord pardon, Mercy good Lord,
Mercy.

While she had the free use of her speech, she promptly applied many places of
Scripture, which most fitly appertained to her present condition; and when it
failed, as it did a little before her end; she recovered it again, to give
some vent to her intentive mind, in such passages as these; Lord I believe,
help my unbelief; the Lord is my rock and my defense, therefore I will trust
in him; and her trust was not deceived, for her gracious Father, dealing with
her with much favor and tenderness^, did not break asunder, but gently
unlaced the bonds of life, so that she departed, in such a calm and quiet
manner, that none standing by, could perceive any pangs or struglings, when the
divorce was made betwixt her soul and body.

I will commend but one thing more to your memory of this religious Rachel, and
it is, That her Piety was not a goodness of the scant measure of many of the
world, who allow God but some part or portion of their lives, (having many
excursions out of the rode-way of Religion) serving God with a Synechdoche of a
part for the whole:) for she began to be godly betime, and held on to her end,
with such an uniforme tenor of piety and integrity, that her perseverance
assures us of her faithfulness to the end; and we are sure then, that
according to promise and prophecy of the Scripture, Rev. 2.10. She has
obtained the Crown of life, which she shall never put off, but wear it for
ever.

Shall we say here is an end of her. Applic.
I did not propose her praise (as some may happily conceive) merely, or chiefly
to gratify her friends, but principally to edify the hearers in general, by
such observations of the course of her life, and manner of her death, as may
redound to the benefit of all, by a serious consideration and imitation of her
virtues: For God sets forth such examples for patterns, that those who are not
so pliable to the practice of prescribed rules, as they should be, may be led
on by examples, and certainly if they be not the better for them, it shall go
the worse with them; for if the Queen of the South shall rise up in judgment
and condemn the generation which never saw her, Mat. 12.42.
how much more shall so many holy and worthy examples condemn the wicked, who
see or may see their holy behavior, and take no heed nor care to conform unto
them.

But it may be, they do not believe the reports of their piety, and why do
they not? because sometimes men (even Preachers) lash out in excessive
commendation of them, far above their deserving: If it be so, the more is
their sin, and the greater one day will be their shame; but certainly there
are many that are far more holy then the wicked of the world will easily
believe: and one maine cause of their diffidence and distrust is, because of
their own guilt, and unacquaintance in the ways of godliness.

They will not believe that illiterate, unlearned Laymen are able in prayer to
power forth their souls with patheticall and plentiful expressions, they have
not been eare-witnesses of any such gift of Gods Spirit, and therefore they
will give no credit to those that report it; but doubtless there are such men
and women too, and there are such gifts manifested by their exercise of them;
and I have heard it, from the mouth of a very Mr S G.
faithful witness, that a man of as eminent place in the Church, and of as
eminent parts and proficiency in all kind of knowledge, (especially in
Divinity) as any is to be found in all his Majesty's Dominions, has
acknowledged, That he has heard a Layman in a Leatherne Jacket, pray by
heart, without Art or Book, and with such an evidence and demonstration of the
Spirit, as has made him much ashamed of his own defects and disabilities to
perform that duty of devotion, in such a manner and measure as he did.

But they that have not had some experimental proof of this kind, entertain
such reports, (many times) as not only untrue, but as impossible, when they
should think all things easy and possible with God, Mat. 19.26. and they may
find (if they would mark it) somewhat in experience betwixt the devil and
themselves, which might induce them to believe a strange and strong operation
of Gods Spirit in his children. For does not that powerful impostor sometimes
so prevail with their corrupt nature, as by his suggestions to sway them
against the evident direction of Gods Word, the light of their own reason, the
bent of their own resolutions, the checks of their convinced consciences, the
example of all good men, though they can expect none other end of that way
wherein the Devil drives them, then the ruin of their souls.

And shall not the Father of lights, the Author of every good and perfect gift
(who could make the dumb Ass to speak more wisely then his rider, though a
Prophet) endow those whom by peculiar favor he has chosen to be his, with
what portion of spirit of illumination and sanctification, pleases himself,
and guide both their minds and tongues, and all their faculties to such effects
as he thinks fit for his own glory and the good of his people.

Doubtless though all have not the Spirit that pretend to have it, nor the
gift of prayer who take upon them to pray by the Spirit; there are diverse that
have it, and give proof of it, in such sort as cannot be gaine-said, and more
in this age then in any other since the Primitive Doctors, who had a constant
and infallible guidance of the Spirit, were advanced from earth to Heaven. And
their examples are as considerable in their ordinary practice of Religious
precepts, as in the exercise of their extraordinary gifts. Yet I propose none,
though a Patriarch, a Prophet, an Apostle or Martyr, much less any one below
them to imitation, without the limitation of S. Paul. Be ye followers of me,
even as I am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11 1. For example, though Jacob and Rachel were
very good people, yet be not like unto him in his immoderate affection to
Benjamin, nor unto her in such a wilful bewailing of her Orbity, as would not
admit any consolation because she was childlesse.

Let us rather consider what may be said to quiet and becalme our passions,
that they grow not too headstrong, for Religion and reason to rule them. Be
our loss what it may be, we should bear it without repining or impatience,
and that for reasons of weight taken both from God and man.

From God, concerning whom we must take notice.

First of his Authority over us. Secondly of his intention. 1. toward us, and
2. toward ours.

For the first, It is God that kills and makes alive, Isa. 45.7. and this he
does, not only de Facto, but de Jure, he has not only a power to do so, but a
right also, for we are all of us, unto him, as the clay in the hands of the
Potter, not only to make us vessels of honor, or dishonor, as he pleases,
but (when we are made) to dash us in pieces, if we please him not; and shall we
then be displeased with him, when (as the owner of the Vineyard demanded of the
murmuring labourer, Mat. 23.15.) he does but what he will with his own.

Indeed we use to speak of what we possess, with a term of propriety, my
Wife, my Husband, my Child, my Friend; but our Title to them is not original,
but derivative from him, and by way of subordination under him: for we and they
are his, made by him and for him, they to us are but lent, and so lent,
(without any certain time or date) that we cannot (in right) say he calls
back, or takes away too soon, if it were the same day of our first possession
of them: and if we have enjoyed them long, the less time, in reason there
remains for the future, and so we should the sooner prepare for a parting.
And when it comes to that, we should consider what intents God may have in
taking away from us, that which is dear unto us.

First, it may be (as the Widow of Sarepta said when her Son was dead) to
call our sins to our rememberance, 1 King. 17. ver. 18. a child or friend of
ours is dead, that we may not dye in sins and trespasses without repentance.

Secondly, it may be (with our other sins) we may be guilty of some kind and
degree of Idolatry, by setting that delight upon the creature, which of right
belongs to the creator alone; and if so, we are spiritual adulterers and
adulteresses, James 4.4. and God is a jealous God, Exo. 20.5. who discovering a
decay of our love that we might love him better, will take away the impediment
betwixt him and us, which was as a curtain or screene to intercept our sight,
and the heat of our hearts toward him. As a discreet Lady, if she should
perceive that her Waiting Woman stole any part of the Nuptial affection of her
Husband from her, would find some means to put her away: And God very well
knows that our hearts are narrow, our love but little and faint, a great
deal too little for himself, if it went all one way, and therefore if he love
us he will take away that which steals away our affections from him, that our
love being set upon him more intentively, he may return more kindness to us
again, and so his end may be to cross us in our way that he may bless us in
the end, that he may do us the more good at our latter end, as is promised,
Deuteronomy. 8. v. 16.

Thirdly, Gods intent in taking away, may be in favor to the deceased parties,
to set them safe out of peril, the Righteous is taken away from the evil to
come, Isa. 57.1. and of this the cause is so evident in reason, that he that
never saw the Bible, nor read that sentence of the Prophet, could say, who
knows that God has not taken away in favor to mankind from the evil to
come. So Plutarch consolat. ad Apo^on. page 528.
Plutarch in his Consolations to Apolonius.

And this cause is especially considerable in these times wherein many good
people have of late been taken away, and we may have cause to conceive from the
evil to come, there may come much evil without any preface or premonition at
all; but we see nothing but dismal clouds gathering in our horizon, and as it
were preparations for terrible storms.

Our sins doubtless are come to a very great height, and who knows whether
their guilt be not more clamerous for vengeance, then our prayers are
importunate for pardon? We see things grow worse and worse with us, a few grow
better and better, to pacify Gods displeasure by due reformation. And
therefore for such of the better sort as are taken away in those times as this
virtuous Matron, after the course of an holy life on earth, we may conceive it
is done that they may live in rest, and peace, and joy, and glory with God for
ever. There is cause then to give thanks to God for their happy change, since
they are set up so safe, that they shall never feel nor fear the evil to
come, and to mourn, not for them but for our selves, that we are left below,
in a state of subjection to all sorts of sorrows, which may the sooner
overwhelme us, because they are taken away (as Lot out of Sodom,) for whose
sakes happily has the judgment been suspended hitherto.

And hitherto having had your presence, and I hope your attentions also to what
I have delivered; I shall now commend you to the gracious favor of the Lord of
life and death, Deuteronomy. 32.29. beseeching him to teach you to number your days,
that you may apply your hearts unto wisdom, Psalm 90.12. and to give you
wisdom to consider your latter end, Deuteronomy. 32.29. and all the while that you
are in the way unto it, that you may by an holy life get sound assurance to
your souls, that (when your mortal bodies are laid asleep in the dust of the
earth) they may be received to a most happy conabitation with God in Heaven, in
his presence to be possessed of the fullness of joy, and of the pleasures at
his right hand for evermore, Ps. 16.11. Amen.

FINIS.

