THE Gentleman's New Jockey: OR, FARRIER'S Approved Guide. CONTAINING The
exactest Rules and Methods for Breeding and Managing HORSES, etc. in order to
bring them up in the best manner, for Profit, Pleasure, or any kind of Service
or Recreation: Especially in what relates to Racing or Running, Coursing,
Travel, War, etc. With Directions for Heats, Dieting, Dressing, and the several
Paces requisite on any of the like occasions.

Also Approved Receipts and Remedies for all manner of Diseases, Sorrances,
Hurts or Grievances, incident to HORSES, according to the Opinions of the best
Farriers of all Countries and Ages: With Directions for preventing Sicknesses
and Griefs, and the Symptoms whereby they are known.

To which is added a Second Part, Containing many rare and new Secrets, never
before made Public, relating as well to Management as Cure, and what else may
contribute to the advantage of Buying or Selling; and many other Things and
Matters: highly necessary to be known by all Lovers of good Horses.

Illustrated with sundry curious and necessary Cutts.

LONDON, Printed by W. W. for Nicholas Boddington at the Golden Ball in
Duck-lane. 1687.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Advertisement.
AN Alarm to Unconverted Sinners in a serious Treatise: Showing, 1. What
Conversion is not, and correcting some Mistakes about it. 2. What Conversion
is, and wherein it consists. 3. The Necessity of Conversion. 4. The Marks of
the Unconverted. 5. The Miseries of the Unconverted. 6. Directions for
Conversion. 7. Motives to Conversion. Where unto are annexed diverse Practical
Cases of Con science Judiciously Resolved. By Joseph Alleine late Minister of
the Gospel in Taunton in Some^ setshire. Sold by Nicholas Boddington at the
Golden Ball in Duck-lane.

The Preface to the Reader.
Reader,
THough sundry persons of no small Experience, have undertaken to give Mankind
an insight into the Manner and Method of bringing Horses to the hight of
perfection, in what relates to their Rule and Management on those occasions, or
services to which they are properly intended or designed; as likewise to know
and distinguish them in all their capacities, with Directions for discovery and
^ure of distempers, grievances and defects ^ncident to them. Yet let me tell
you, ^here are many things Material of that ^ind that have not as yet been made
pub^^ck; all, or most of them, so necessary be known by the curious Inquires
into ^is Mystery, that without knowing them Man can be an excellent Jockey, or
a^ expert Farrier, nor consequently have his Judgment approved in any thing
material relating to Horses or Horsemanship. Great indeed have been the Studies
and Travel of the Industruous of many Kingdoms and Provinces in this Affair,
whose Labors have Worthily found acceptance: The Consideration of which has
imboldned me to make this Essay, hoping it will turn to a General advantage,
being rightly considered put in practice, and applied, since that by a more
than usual curiosity, what has been contained in this, has been searched out
through all the revealed and (till now) unrevealed Mysteries of this kind, so
that the Reader may with easy prospect or survey find out whatever he can
wish, relating to a good Horse, good Management, knowledge in the Craft, and
means to preserv^ his Beast from a multitude of infirmitie^ nay rescure him
from death and utter d^struction, near and into which, through neglect or
ignorance, he is fallen; a^ thereby not only give themselves sat is f^tion in
the prolonging the days and heal of so Noble a Creature for service a^
employment sundry ways, but always redound to their profit and advantage in
capacitating them to sell and dispose of at a considerable rate, the Horse that
they perhaps deemed lost, and of no value: In order to which, beside the
Mystery of Breeding Horses to the best advantage and regard that is to be
observed in diet, dressing and preparing them for Racing and other the like
undertakings, with Habit of body, knowledge of Goodness or Badness; and in
general and particular, all things of that or any other kind whatsoever that is
requisite to be known, I have set down such ready and easy ways and methods to
discover diseases and other grievances jointly and severally; as also speedily,
and with little charge, labor or trouble to prevent, redress or cure them,
that what is written must undoubtedly satisfy the largest expectation as to
things of this nature, or at least give that satisfaction, that the most
penurious or critical may find enough to make him confess that time and ^ost
were not employed in vain. Some in^eed may upon the first sight object against
the smallness of this Book, and imagine a subject so copious allowing such
variety, is unlikely to be cramped in so narrow a corner: But let me tell them,
that when at great expense and pains they have searched larger Volumes, as also
into the unpublished Practices of those who are famous at this day, they will
find that they have wearied themselves in vain in traveling the longest way
about, when in all that tedious progress they found nothing material but what
is comprehended in this Treatise. But not longer to gloss upon what is able to
speak for it self, I shall only say that of this kind, Nothing exceeds it; and
so submit it to the Censure of the Ingenious Reader, and remain,

Yours further to oblige you, G. L.

To his very good Friend, The ingenious G. L. upon the perusal of his Book,
entitled, The Gentleman's New Jockey, etc.
SIR, I have viewed the Authors of this kind,
That did pretend or seemed to this inclined:
(This Art I would have said) such as have wrote
Unskilled themselves; and would have others taught:
But prove in all their large Pretense defect,
Either the cause of Weakness or Neglect.
But in the Work you to the World propose,
I find to the Essence of those, numerours those,
Who vainly built on a Foundation bad;
Which from ill structures of old times they had;
You have Additions in strange measure made,
Such as those Ages never knew: So when,
Light from the Chaos sprung, those things were seen,
That brooding Darkness spread her wings upon,
And long obscured beneath her gloomy Throne.
In Epitome, the noble Creature you
Have in perfection, given all his due:
From his beginning to his end, and done
What has in Ages past, attention wone
By all the Brave, the Wise, when in a Cloud,
It dimly shone, but you remove the Shroud;
And give unscreen'd a prospect of what may
Avail Mankind and your own worth display:
Whilst those who hunt, who Travel or in War,
At Home seek Fame or in the Regions far;
Aided by your advice, are ever free
From Danger great, or Ill-conveniency.
And could a Creature made Irrational,
Arrive to that Discretion which we call
The Sense of Mankind; he far more then they
Would for this Work, a humble Tribute pay
And at your feet himself an Offering lay.
Sir, Yours to serve you, J. D.

THE CONTENTS OF THE First PART.
CHAP. I. Excellent Rules and Instructions, highly necessary to be observed in
the Election and Choice of goo^ Breeders, how, and at what time, etc. a Mar^
ought to be Covered; how ordered being with Foal, and after Foaling: With many
other things of the like nature. Page (...) CHAP. II. HOw to Manage a good Colt
to bring him to be (...) excellent Horse; and what is to be observed in th^^
timely knowledge of what he will be when come to M^turity; with the season of
Weaning, Cutting and (...), etc. p. ^^ CHAP. III. WHen and how to Break a Colt,
and render him tame and gentle; with the Art of Management on that occasion:
And many other things necessary and requisite to be known. p. 8 CHAP. IV. THe
Art of Dressing in General; and may serve upon all occasions for bringing a
Horse to perfection, and render a Groom or Horse-keeper acceptable to Persons
of Quality, etc. p. 10 CHAP. V. HOw to render any tolerable good Horse an
excellent Racer; And how Running-Horses ought to be managed in Diet, Physic
and Exercise, in order to their being capable of Running a Match with success,
etc. p. 12 CHAP. VI. A Continuation of what is to be done to the Running or
Race-horse, relating to his Election, Dressing, Feeding, and other Usage, etc.
p. 14 CHAP. VII. HEats; what they are, and how to be managed to the best
advantage, in Racing and ^all other Recreatory undertakings. p. 17 CHAP. VIII.
How to make the Bread of the first Make; and what ought to be observed in the
distribution thereof, With many other things. p. 19 CHAP. IX. OTher things to
be taken notice of, in regard to the Running-Horse, in the second Fortnights
Diet and Ordering, p. 22 CHAP. X. THe Running-horse's third and fourth
Fortnight; and what is to be observed therein as to Diet, Usage, and bringing
the Horse to the Weighing-Post, and. p. 23 CHAP. XI. WHat the Rider ought to
be; and what by him is to be considered in order to Backing and good
Management; as also the Office and Duty of a Groom, etc. p. 26 CHAP. XII.
INfallible Rules for Buying a good Horse; and how so well by sundry marks and
tokens to distinguish good from bad, as well in case of soundness as diseases,
as thereby to prevent being imposed on or cheated, etc. p. 30. CHAP. XIII.
EXact and Infallible Rules to know the Age of a Horse by the perfections or
imperfections of his Teeth in al^ their particular and general Marks; as also
by the Tail; when the Mark is out of the Mouth, etc. p. 39 CHAP. XIV. HOw
exactly to know the state or condition of a Horse's Body, relating to Fatness
or Leanness, Health or Sickness; with many other things worthy of note. p. 34
CHAP. XV. OBservations to be taken as to the state of a Horse's Body, from the
Privy-parts, Limbs, Feeding, and many other Matters and Discourses, worthy to
be taken notice of by the Curious, etc. p. 47 CHAP. XVI. OF the Elementary
parts of a Horse's Body, and of the Agreement of the Humors therewith. A
discourse of Corruption and Generation; in which is set forth all things of
that kind, relating to Goodness or Badness, Health or Sickness, etc. p. 49
CHAP. XVII. HOw a Horse ought to be used in general and particular, as to his
Physic, Diet, and Looking to, for the preservation of him even to old Age. p.
53 CHAP. XVIII. AN exact Description of the Veins of a Horse, how situate in
the Body; as also of Blood-letting; and how, and upon what account of Sickness,
or other defect, the Veins are to be opened, for the prevention of death or
danger. p. 58 CHAP. XIX. A Discourse of the Sinews, and their Situation;
together with their Use and Office; and what farther in that kind is to be
observed as to the state of a horse's Body, etc. with the Description of the
Bones, etc. p. 61 CHAP. XX. OF Blood-letting in general; and how to know by
sundry signs and tokens the state of a horse's Body, when and where it is
convenient to let him Blood, for the preventing of sickness, or recovery of
health. p. 64 CHAP. XXI. A Description of Diseases, Grievances or Sorrances,
incident to Horse's, etc. to foresee them by sundry signs and tekens, and know
whence they arise; with the ways and methods of Preventing, Redressing and
Curing them, by Approved Rules and Remedies, according to the Practice of the
best Farriers in all Ages, etc. p. 68 CHAP. XXII. EXcellent Receipts for the
Cure of Diseases, etc. in Horses or Mares, according to the best Experience of
skillful Practitioners: Many of which were never before made public. p. 70 The
Glaunders; from what it proceeds, and how to Cure it. p. 71 The Quinzey in a
Horse, etc. what it is; and how to Cure it. ibid. A Horse's Bleeding at the
Nose, how to stay or prevent it. p. 72 For Pains in the Teeth or Jaws. ibid.
The Canker in the Nose, what it is, and the Remedy. p. 73 A Remedy for the
Colic, Belly-ach, or Belly-binding. ibid. The Lasks or Bloody Flux, and its
Remedy. ibid. The Botts, what they are, and their Cure. p. 74 For the
Shoulder-strain, a good remedy. ibid. Broken-wind; what it is, and to remedy it
if not past Cure. p. 75 A Horse burnt by a Mare, how to Cure. p. 76 For a dry
Cough, cold Pursiveness, broken Wind, or shortness of Breath, an excellent
Remedy. ibid. To restore decayed and putrefied Lungs. p. 77 A dry Consumption,
its Remedy, etc. ibid. The Breast-pain; from whence it proceeds, and how to
Cure it. p. 78 Heart-sickness, or the Antecor; whence it proceeds, and how to
remedy it. p. 79 Foundering in the Body or Surfeiting, how occasioned; together
with the Remedy. ibid. The greedy Worm or hungry Evil; what it is, and how to
be remedied or prevented. p. 80 Yellow and Black Jaundice in a Horse, the Cause
and Cure, etc. p. 81 Constiveness; from whence it proceeds, amd its Remedy. p.
82 The Cramp, or Convulsion in the Nerves or Sinews, how occasioned; together
with the Remedy, etc. p. 83 The Mourning of the Chine, its Cause, and the means
to Cure it. ibid. Irenzy or Madness, its Original; with the means to remedy it
according to the Experienced way. p. 84 The falling-Evil, its Cause and Remedy.
p. 85 The sleeping-Evil; what it is, and the way to remedy it. ibid. The
Horse-Pestilence, and its Cure. p. 86 For Chest-foundering, the Remedy. ibid.
For an Obstruction in the Bladder, or Windiness in the Bowels, etc. p. 87 The
Pole-Evil, how to know and cure. ibid. The Fistula, how to discover and
cure. p. 88 Hard Kernels under the Throat, how to remove. p. 89 For the
Navel-gall, the Remedy. ibid. For a Blovv, Bruise, or the like misfortune that
causes a Swelling or Tumor, the Remedy. ibid. The Scratches, their Remedy. p.
90 For Foot-foundering, a Remedy. ibid. For a Canker in the Head, a Remedy. p.
91 For the Mangey or dry Scurvey, a Cure. p. 92 The Vives, and their Remedy.
ibid. For swanking in the Back, or a strain in the Kidneys, caused by
indiscreet Riding or over-burthening. p. 93 For any pain or foulness in the
Reins or Kidneys, an excellent Scowring, etc. ibid. A present relief for an
Attaint or Overreach on the Heel, or the like. p. 94 A Cure for the Sorranee,
called the Ring-bone. ibid. For the Water-Farcion, a Remedy. p. 95 For the
Ives, a Remedy. ibid. To take off the Film or Skin from a horse's Eye. p. 96 A
Mallender, the Remedy to cure it. ibid. For the Palsy or Apoplexy, a Remedy.
ibid. A Farcion in the Head and Neck, to cure. p. 97 A Linnament to cleanse a
Wound, new or old. ibid. For Kib'd-heels, commonly called the Mules, a Remedy
ibid. The Quitter-bone, what it is, with its Remedy. p. 98 An excellent Cure
for the Blood-spavin, etc. p. 99 For a Nether, Attaint, or Overreach in the
Paster^ Joint. ibid. For a putrefied Frush, the Cure. ibid. To dissolve the
Humors, and thereby anticipate Diseases p. 100 To soften any hard swelling or
contracted hardness. ibid. For the Splint, Wind-gall, or Bladders of Gelly in
or about any of the Joints subject thereto. p. 101 To cleanse any putrefied, or
other Sore, the safest way. ibid. A Horse Planet-struck, how to Cure. ibid. For
the Poze or excessive Cold, a Remedy. p. 102 To remedy or cure Hide-boundness
in a Horse. ibid. For a wet inward Cough, a Remedy. p. 103 For a dangerous
Cough, commonly called the dry Cough. ibid. For the Yard of a Horse falling, a
Remedy. p. 104 To prevent the Mattering of the Yard. ibid. Of the Diseases
incident mostly to Mares, and known by the name of the Pestilent-consumption.
p. 105 How a Mare that is subject to cast her Foal ought to be used. ibid. How
to oblige a Mare to cast her Foal. p. 106 Of the several Fevers in a Horse,
and how to Cure them, etc. ibid. For any disease and stoppage in the Liver. p.
108 For a Botch or Sorrance in the Groin of a Horse, a good Cure. p. 109 For a
general Manginess, the remedy. ibid. The Barbs, what they are, and how removed.
p. 110 For Blood-shot Eyes, an excellent Remedy. ibid. For any Film, Bite or
Blow in the Eye, a Remedy. p. 111 To kill Lice, or remove Flies from offending
your Horse. ibid. To rid a Horse from any foulness or disorder in the Body.
ibid. For an extraordinary Bruise or Bite. ibid. For a Horse that is troubled
with the Strangling, a Cure. p. 112 To remedy the Swelling of a Horse upon
having eaten any infectious thing in his Grass or Provender, that may, if not
remedied, prove dangerous. ibid. For a Heart-burning or Wasting, occasioned
thereby. p. 113 To prevent staling Blood, a remedy. ibid. Another excellent
Remedy for the Farcy, vulgarly called the Fashion. ibid. An approved Cure for
any Sinew-strain or Overreach. ibid. Diseases in the Hoof, how to remedy, etc.
p. 11^ Hoof-bound; what it is, and how to remedy it. ibid. To soften or harden
a hoof the best way. p. 11^ To harden a hoof as occasion requires. ibid. For
any hurt or Cankerous sore in or on the hoof. p. 11^ To oblige a horse to carry
his Ears well, etc. ibid. For the grievance called the Frounce, a Cure. p. 117
For a heat, which sometimes occasions a breaking out in the Mouth and Lips, the
Cure. ibid. Wolf-teeth, what they are, and how to ease their Pains the ready
way. p. 118 To staunch any Bleeding, a speedy way. ibid. To supply the defect
of the falling of the Crest, etc. ibid. To cure Manginess, or the like
disorder, in the Crest. p. 119 The Navel-gall, what it is, and its Remedy.
ibid. For a Sitfast or horney Excressence under the Saddle, whereby the horse
is disabled from carrying it in good order (...) he ought. p. 12^ For any Knob
or Wen near the Saddle-skirt, or the Sides (...) the horse, a Remedy. ibid. For
Weakness in the Back, a strengthening remedy. ibid. For the Swelling in the Cods
of a horse naturally, or occasioned by any Bruise, etc. p. 12^ For Burstenness,
or the Rupture in a horse. ibid. The Art of discovering hidden Griefs or
Ailments in a horse and from what they proceed. p. 12^ The Bone-spavin, what it
is, etc. p. 12^ For a Haw in the Eye. ibid. For the falling out of the
fundament, a remedy. p. 12^ To preserve a hoof from decaying, etc. ibid.
Interferring, what it is, and the remedy. ibid. A false Quarter, what it is. p.
12^ The Melt on the heel. ibid. An excellent remedy for any Strain or Swelling.
p. 12^ How to remedy the harm done a horse by unadvisedly and unskilfully
letting Blood. ibid. For the Leprosy in horses, a remedy, with the cause.
ibid. For any disease in the Lungs, an excellent remedy. p. 12^ For the
Swelling of the horse's Legs, the Cure. p. 128 The flying Worm, what it is, and
how to Cure it. p. 129 Excellent Directions for the prevention of Diseases in
horses, at sundry times, etc. ibid. A Cure for a sore or defective Mouth. p.
130 For the Mellet in the heels. p. 131 The Stavers, their signs, cause and
cure. ibid. For the Stone, a very good remedy. p. 132 To take away a Wen in the
Neck, or any part of the horse's Body, without danger. ibid. The Crownet-Scab,
what it is, together with the Cure. p. 133 To draw out a Thorn or Stump, or any
Iron or sharp thing gotten into the flesh. ibid. For a Strain in the
Coffin-joynt, etc. p. 134 For a horse that is perpetually sick or out of order.
ibid. For a Cold in the Summer, etc. p. 135 A Through-splint or Screw-pin, what
it is. ibid. To render a brittle hoof firm and serviceable. p. 136 To cure the
Anbury. ibid. To prevent a horse's pissing Blood. ibid. For a broken Knee.
ibid. For the Dropsey in a horse. p. 137 To join a Sinew that is cut. ibid. For
a Wound or hurt in the Tongue. p. 138 For the Itch in the Tail, or any other
part. ibid. Another excellent Remedy for the Tetter. ibid. For a hurt or Wring
in the Withers. ibid. Forms of any sort in the Body of a horse, how to kill and
remove them. p. 139 An excellent Salve for any sort of Wound, how to make and
apply it. ibid. ^n Imposthume to ripen and cure. p. 140 For any Internal
sickness, etc. ibid. For the Ach, weakness or numb'dness of the Joints. p. 141
How to stay any violent Looseness. ibid. ^he Lampas, what it is, and how to
cure it. p. 142 For the Fig in the foot of a horse. ibid. For the Flanks, a
disease so called, and the way to remedy it. P. 143. The Shackle-gall, and its
cure. ibid. A Horse that is Gravelled, how to remedy. P. 144 Of Cataplasms or
Poultises. P. 145 For any Swelling, Aposthume, Rankling, Wound or broker Bone.
ibid. For a Swelling in the Throat or under the Ears. ibid. To draw or break a
Boil or Vlcerous Sore, etc. ibid. An excellent Poultis to assuage any Pain or
superate Tumor. P. 146 A Poultis to break any Infectious Sore. ibid. To
disperse the Flux or Oppression of Blood in any part. ibid. For an Imposthume
or sudden Swelling in any part of the Body. P. 147. In case of the Palsy in
the head, etc. ibid. To heal and contract any Wound. ibid. An inward Balm to
destroy Worms, and heal Interna^ Bruises. P. 148 An excellent Balm in case of
any Sprain, Internal Bruise, Swelling, Blasting, old Sore or Gunshot. ibid. An
excellent Balm to be given a Horse inward, in case of a Consumption. ibid. An
excellent Red Water to cure Ulcers. P. 149 An excellent Water to allay any
Internal heat or feverish Indispondency. ibid. In case a Horse be troubled
with the Stone, an excellent Water. ibid. For any disease in the Eyes, etc. P.
150 An excellent Purgation for Gravel in the Bladder or Kidneys. ibid. For the
Vlceration of the Yard, an excellent Water, ibid An excellent Powder for the
falling sickness or falling-evi^ in a Horse. P. 151 A Powder for the Ague,
which frequently happens, especially to young Horses. ibid. To purge Choler and
Phlegm, an excellent Powder. ibid. An excellent Bath to allay any Swelling or
suchlike disorder, especially diseases in the Legs, occasioned by the
descending of evil humors, etc. P. 152 A Bath to soften and mollify the Skin.
ibid. To stanch Blood in any Vein or Artery. ibid. An excellent Medicament to
provoke a Horse to Vomit, as also to purge his Belly. P. 153 An excellent
Purge, good on sundry occasions. ibid. or a Joynt-sickness. ibid. For an
Internal Ulcer. ibid. An excellent Electuary for a dangerous Cough or rattling
Cold. P. 154 CHAP. XXIII. THE Symptoms of Diseases, Sorrances, Distempers,
Grievances, or the like, in general and particular, how to foresee them and
prevent them; as also to know when they happen, etc. P. 155 CHAP. XXIV.
DIrections for making and preparing Ointments, Oils, Salves, Waters,
Purgations, Poultises, Charges, Supplements, Pills, Powders, etc. singular good
in case of any Distemper or Sorrance, etc. P. 159 ^n Ointment to search any
Wound or Vlcerated Sore, or any thing of the like nature. ibid. ^n Ointment
excellent good in case of Botches, Boils, Scabs, or the like Sorrances. P. 160
(...) skin any Wound, an excellent Ointment. ibid. (...) mollify and assuage
any Swelling, an excellent Ointment. ibid. An excellent Ointment to cool and
allay any Inflammation ibid. An excellent Ointment, or rather Balsom, to be
inward^ given a Horse for Obstructions, Bruises, and other Ailments and
Grievances. P. 16^ To make a green Ointment, proved by Experience, more
effectual than what has formerly been published. ibid. An excellent Remedy for
the Staggers, or any Pain tha^ suddenly takes a Horse, sometimes to the loss of
h^ life. ibid. An excellent Salve for any Wound. P. 16^ An approved Salve to
draw any stub, thorn, or splinter (...) Bone or Wood out of the flesh. ibid. To
fill a Wound, Ulcer, or the like, with good flesh, an excellent Plaster. P. 16^
A Salve to draw Corruption from the bottom of a^ Wound, or to draw a Swelling,
or any such grievance to a head. ibid. To ripen a Tumor, or assuage any
Swelling, not aboun^ing with extraordinary humors. ibid. An excellent Poultis
for a Tumor or Swelling. ibid. A Charge to ease a pain in the Back, or for any
Sprain P. 16^ To mollify any Chap or rough Sore. ibid. For the Eyes of a
Horse, afflicted by any means, an approved Water to cure or ease them. ibid. A
Water to Wash the Mouth in case of any Sorrance (...) defect. P. 16^ A Pill
good for any Internal disorder, etc. ibid. A Supplement exceeding good for any
strain or grief (...) the Sinews, etc. ibid. A Vomit for a Horse that has a
Queesy stomach, there (...) to render him a good Appetite. ibid. To purge
Melancholy. P. 16^ To purge Phlegm. ibid. CHAP. XXV. CLysters, how to make
them, and on what occasion they ought to be applied in order to their effectual
working and bringing away bad humors. P. 167 (...) case of any Pestilential
disease, occasioned by a choleric or firey humor. ibid. For any Internal
distemper proceeding from Melancholy. P. 168 For any distemper Internal,
occasioned by sanguine, corrupt Blood, or wa^ry Humors, by means of bad
concoction or obstruction, etc. ibid. For Sickness in general, an approved
Clyster. ibid. ^n case of Restringency or hard Binding. P. 169
CHAP. XXVI. Cordials, Cordial-Powders, Drinks and Drenches, Purgations and
Suppositories, wonderfully conducing to the health and strength of a horse. P.
170 Diapente, an excellent Powder in case of any cold or Pestilential diseases.
ibid. An excellent Cordial-Ball to be given in case of any Internal distemper,
and especially to prevent the Consumption, or wasting of any part, etc. ibid.
An excellent Drench to cure any Internal distemper proceeding from any of the
four Humors of the Body, etc. especially such as are Pestilential. P. 171
^uppositories, and their Use. ibid. CHAP. XXVII. PErfumes, Baths and
Purgations; what they are, and to what end they serve: with the Manner how, and
under what Considerations they ought to be applied. Page 173 Directions for
Purging, according to the estate and condition of Your House. Page 174 CHAP.
XXVIII. COsticks, Corrosives, and Rowelling; what they are; for what causes,
and in what manner to be applied. Page 176 Rowelling; what it is, and how to be
performed. Page 177
THE CONTENTS OF THE Second PART.
CHAP. I. THE Manner of Breaking a Horse the best way, and perfecting him in
his Paces, etc. and preserving him from danger, etc. Page 181 CHAP. II. HOW the
Jockies made Old horses look young; A lean horse artificially and naturally;
how fatned by Jockies. A Remedy for Restiffness, Neighing, and the vice of
Lying down in the Water: The Art of making Stars, Snips, Blazes, setting on
false Ears, Tails, Manes, etc. Page 189 A Horse subject to lie down in the
Water, how to remedy it. Page 190 A Tired or Restiff Horse, to remedy. Page 191
To prevent the Troublesomeness of a Horse's Neighing, which may prove
disadvantageous to the Master, especially in time of War. ibid. If a Horse be
dull, and will not feel the Spur without much wounding, etc. Page p. 192 To
make a lean Horse artificially far, or to seem so to the Buyer. ibid. To make a
lean horse really fat, the best and cheapest way. Page 193 To make the hair of
a Horse that stands rough and staring, smooth and sleek. 194 To make Hair come
where it is thin, or to take it away where it is thick. ibid. Stars, Blazes,
Snips; what they are, and how to make them for Ornament or Disguise in any part
of the Horse where they may be conveniently situate. 195 To make a Black Star
in a white horse. 196 To make a Blaze-Royal. 198 The loss of Ears, how to
supply. 190 CHAP. III. HOw to set a horse off for Sale to the best advantage by
Trimming, Washing, etc. As also directions for the Management of a horse in
Hunting, relating to his Leaping, etc. 200 How to make a Ball, wherewith a
horse being well Lathered and smoothed down, shall look exceeding slee^ and
comely. 20^ How to Manage a Horse in Leaping, taking a Hedge^ Gate, Style,
Ditch, etc. 20^ CHAP. IV. WHat the Stable to keep a good horse in ought to be
and how he ought to be regarded; the hoofs ho^^ to be corrected and minded in
Shooing, etc. 20^ Critical Days, and the Observation thereon. 20^ Some further
Considerations upon the Cause of Diseases, a^^ how to Remove them, etc. 21^ The
Spirits, what they are, with their Office, etc. 21^ A further Description of
the External Parts, etc. 21^
The Gentleman's New Iockey or Farriers Approved Guide
Impostume Falling Evil Head ach Staggers Eye Water Film in ye eyes Diseases
in ye Eyes Pearl Pin or Web Bleeding at Nose Glanders Cold Canker in ye Mouth
or (...) Horse ^ye Mouth diseases Kernells Stangles
Pole Eril Crick in Neck Falling of ye Cresst Mangines Stains in ye Shoulder
Windgall or Strains in ye Shoulder Fistula Knobs old and hard Pain in ye Wither
Back swancked Narell Gall
Fundament or Moth fallen out Glister and their use Itch in the Tail Lask or
Bloody Flux Laxativeness or Loos Pit^ges Scowring
Blood Spa^in Shacklegand Ringbone Tough hoof Brittle hoof Founder and Frettize
Back sinue Strain Cut or heweing Enterfaring Hurts in Cronet Quitter bone or
Maltlong Stub or Hurt Prick in foot Surbated Sinnu Spraine Sprain Splinter
Spa^in Facion Over reach Legs swelled Grease fallen Dropsy Scratches Founder
Garget Belly ach Colic Pissing blood Burnt by a Mare Cod bruised or bitten
Stiff in bone


Reader the mind of this Cut is readily to direct you to ye (...)

London. printed for Nicholas. Boddington. in Duck Lane.



THE Gentleman's New Jockey: OR, FARRIER'S Approved Guide.
CHAP. I. Excellent Rules and Instructions, highly necessary to be observed in
the Election and Choice of good Breeders, how, and at what time, etc. a Mare
ought to be Covered; how ordered being with Foal, and after Foaling: With many
other things of the like nature.
WHEN any Gentleman or other Person is desirous of a good Breed of Horses or
Mares, that may redound to his Pleasure and Profit, the chief thing is to Elect
a Stallion and Mare, or Mares, in whom Nature has not been defective, but
rather fitted and framed for Beauty, and promising service of what kind soever,
shall be premeditated or proposed by the Master: And in this ^ase Instructions,
how unerringly to choose such as may ^nswer the largest expectation, will not be
amiss; for ^s the Sire and Dam are, such will the Colts prove.

Those that have been Curious in these matters, generally agree, That the Mare
for breed ought to be about four years old, altogether free from Diseases and
Sorrances, clear limbed and well proportioned, her Eyes lively and sparkling,
standing somewhat out of her Head, her Ears standing direct, her Buttocks broad
and well fleshed, with a large Womb, little Head, well-set Shoulders, and an
Arched Neck; her Legs even, and her Neighing sharp and clear, with fair Hoofs
and large Ribs, one that is not used to trip, stumble, interfere, or given to
any untowardly vice. And to answer her, The Stallion ought to have a little
Head, inclining to leanness, a swelling Forehead, full Ears, with Eyes quick
and standing out, being somewhat speckled with Blood, his Nose crookt, or
bending, his Nostrils wide, and Neck archwise, with a large throple and curling
Mane, broad and well-set Shoulders, large Knee-joynts and lean Legs, a well-set
Chest, broad Back, large Ribs, a gaunt Belly, Straits, Fillets and good
Pasterns well knit and well proportioned; of Color bright Bay or Cole black,
though in this case other Colors may prove good both as to the Mare and
Stallion, as will appear when I come to describe the Goodness by the Color,
etc.

A good choice thus made, it will be altogether convenient to feed your
Stallion for a time in the Stable with heartning Provinder, as Splent-beans,
Oats or sod Barley, to render him lusty and mettlesome; yet let him feed on
good green Pasture, at least a day before you suffer him to back your Mare, for
fear that by reason o^ the stiffness of his Limbs and pursiveness, he brake hi^
Wind by over-straining himself in the Action. If the Mare, who must be suffered
to Run in good warm Pasture, appear averse, and by her striking, or other way
seeming-unwilling, decline the company of the Stallion then will it be
convenient to put some little Stone Nato woo her, taking away the Stallion; and
when he ha^ brought her to a compliance, take him away without suffering him to
leap her, and bring the Stallion to he again about Sunrise, the Ground being
well fenced about, and, no doubt, she will suffer her self to be Covered; and
if the Horse be very headstrong and unruly, it will not be amiss if two strong
Men lead him to her, and manage him according to their discretion, for fear he
injure himself or the Mare: Then let a third stand ready with a Bucket of Water
to cast upon the Mares Shape with all his force, so soon as the Horse dismounts
her, thereby to make her shrink up her Body, and suddenly close the Womb for
the better Retention of the Seed; and in fifteen days after, if you imagine she
has not thoroughly conceived, which will appear by her turning her back-part to
the Wind, pricking up her Ears often, scenting the Air and Neighing, you may
put the Horse to her again, and order her in the like manner. But if the Mare
be notwithstanding defective in conception, to remedy that fault, occasioned
mostly by two much Blood, take a pint of Blood from either side her Neck four
or five days before your Horse Covers her; and the day after bleeding, take a
quart of warm Milk, half a pint of the Juice of Mugwort, London-Treacle and
sweet Butter, of each two ounces: dissolve them together; and being well mixed,
give them to her in a Drenching-horn lukewarm, and you will find the effects
answer your expectation, especially if twice or thrice repeated the succeeding
mornings when she is fasting. Now if she has conceived well, her Belly within
four or five days will appear gaunt, her Hair more bright and shining, her
regard of Horses or noises will be little, her Ears will flag, and she will
decrease in flesh. Ways there are to oblige either Stallion or Mare, in case of
Aversness, by rubbing a Sponge in the Mares Shape, and ^ith it rubbing the
Horses Noses; as likewise by rubing the ^hape of the Mare with Aquavitae,
Cow-Itch, Nettle-seed, (...) the like. But these being vulgarly known, I shall
^ave them, and proceed to what is more material to ^e known.

Some are of opinion, that knitting the right Stone of the Horse with a List or
silken Cord, will occasion a Female Colt, and the contrary a Male; but how
often that has failed, there are few Horse-keepers ignorant. Wherefore to
follow Experience, the best Mistress, observe, that if you would be sure of a
Stone-Colt, to let your Mare be covered when Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer or
Leo, are predominant, which are called Masculine Signs, and as well rule
Irrational as Rational Creatures; and if your desires are contrary, then let
Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces be your
Rule: For as Heat and Moisture are the great distinguishers of the Sex, so the
Signs influencing more or less, are not a little concerned as Second Causes, in
the production of things participating of their temperature.

For the space of three weeks, or somewhat longer, after Covering, she must or
ought to be kept in a warm House and Dieted, least the Conception happen to be
impaired before the Colt be well formed; and after that she must not be hard
rid nor labored, neither come into any Ground or Stable where unruly Cattle
are, or where, by attempting to leap, she may injure her self, least thereby
her Masters expectation be frustrated by Miscarriage, or the Colt's being
bruised and distorted in the Womb; observing the Ground she runs in be dry,
well sheltered with spreading Trees, Barns, Quicksets or Outhouses, under or
into which she may retire at leisure; nor will it be unnecessary to have Racks
with Provinder placed where she may advantageously come at them.

The time that a Mare goes with Fold, unless some mischance happen, is, by the
most curious Observers, a year and ten days, though some will have it twelve
months within eleven days, and some a shorter time. This, I confess, as to a
young Mare, in her first Teeming, does often fall out; but upon the second
Foaling rarely or never: For if your Mare be Covered about the middle of
December, which is the best time that she may have the advantage of the Summer
to run in, and the following Spring to bring up her Colt; she will be sure to
Foal about the latter end of December in the following year, as has been
frequently observed. When the time of her Foaling is at hand, let those whose
charge it is be assisting to her in case of emergency, she being continued in a
warm House without any Halter or other cumbersome thing about her whereby she
may be hindered or caused to slip or stumble, being eased in her lying down with
clean Litter, or laid to receive the Colt, if she cast it standing, as often
it happens; and when she has dried the Colt with licking, let the Milk be
drawn from her Teats before he be suffered to suck her, to prevent it is
clotting in the Udder; and if she be scanty of Milk, to prevent dryness and
increase it, give her warm Mashes, with some Powder of Brimstone and Water,
wherein Scabeous or Vervine have been boiled, anointing her Dugs with the
Decoction of Lavender and Spike; and so a Month or two after you may work or
ride her gently: But beware if she return hot, let her cool before the Colt
take the Teat, least the humors being too much stirred, the heat of the Milk
being too greedily taken, surfeit him. And thus a good Mare will bring forth
able Colts till ten years, and a Stallion get them till twelve; but those that
on either part happen beyond, will prove weaklings, and not worth the rearing.
And thus much for procuring a Colt; which if carefully reared, will
unquestionably make a good Horse or Mare. Wherefore to leave nothing of that
kind in the dark, I shall proceed to direct in the following Chapter what is
necessary to be done till the time of Backing, etc. and from thence onward to
the rest, more materially to be known by the Reader.

CHAP. II. How to Manage a good Colt to bring him to be an excellent Horse; and
what is to be observed in the timely knowledge of what he will be when come to
Maturity; with the season of Weaning, Cutting and Usage, etc.
Though what has been said be exactly observed and performed, yet a Colt, after
it is brought forth, may be spoiled by neglect, or for want of Management in
his tender Age; which is the next thing requisite to be taken notice of, that
proceeding gradually in passing through the several Stations of so accurate a
matter, I may be easily traced in my Method, and thereby the better and more
exactly understood, plainness and brevity being the marks at which I aim; and
yet that in so accomplishing my design, nothing may be wanting that may conduce
to the advantage of any.

The first thing necessary to know, whether a Colt will make a Horse, and when
arrived to Maturity, is the Observation of his Linaments; the measures in that
kind to be taken thus: Viz. Observe whether the Shinbones be strait and even,
of a convenient thickness, according to a durable or firm proportion, that
thereby his tallness and ability may be perspicuous or apparent; for in
consideration of the proportion between the Withers and the Knee you may expect
a duplicity, or as much more in the hight, when at full growth: Observe
likewise that his Joints be large, and that he be full boned, his Head small,
lean, and his Ears of a moderate size, standing upright; and that when he
stands in due proportion, or at ease, his hinder Legs stand rather backward,
than crimpling forward; or even which denotes speed: Then consider by his
frisking or playing up and down, his shaking his Ears or Tail, staring in your
Face, or the like, his mettlesomeness, and consequently thereby his other
properties, as far as his tender age will give an insight; for in this
Creature, as in all others of what kind soever, there remains no certainty
without industry as to the reducing them to the Service of Mankind: And to
prevent his pining when weaned, let him by all means be out of the hearing of
his Dam; and that he may the better brook her absence, make a mixture of the
best Butter you can get, and Ruburb, Rue or Savine, and give him nourishing
diet; as Mashes, Splent-beans, boiled Oats and hot Bran, with somewhat that is
green and juycey for the space of three Months after: Nor indeed ought he to be
used to hard Provinder altogether till three years after his weaning, least
thereby he be induced to neglect his feeding, and so by pining hinder his
growth and activity.

If it be a Stone-Colt, separate him from that of the other Kind at the
expiration of a year, least he spoil himself in attempting what he is not
capable of performing; and the better to prevent the endangering of either, is
to put them into different Pasture, well fenced, to prevent leaping, and
secured by Quick-sets, Trees, Barns or other Outhouses from heat and cold.

If you design to make Geldings of your Stone-Colts, the proper time to Cut or
Delapidate them is, when they are between nine and twelve Days old, if the Sign
of Life, which may be gathered from the Course of the Moon in her Wain, being
either in Aries or Virgo, especially in the Spring or Fall, which are accounted
the safest seasons, though by those that well understand this affair it may be
done at any time, the Weather being dry, and not too hot or cold. And what now
remains as to the bringing a Colt to perfection, is the Art of the Breeder,
which may be, as the Vulgar term has it, the principal Verb; for if he neglect
his charge, all that has been mentioned may prove ineffectual. Which Breeder I
also term the Manager; for it is not enough to feed a Horse well, that thereby
he may be able limbed and high-mettled, but to bring him up to those degrees of
Exercise, that may fit him for any employment. And seeing many are ignorant in
this affair, it will be highly necessary to give Directions after the best and
most approved Manner and Method: which take from Experience, the best of
Masters, as follows.

CHAP. III. When and how to Break a Colt, and render him tame and gentle; with
the Art of Management on that occasion: And many other things necessary and
requisite to be known.
When your Colt comes to be of the Age of five years, which is a good time to
oblige him to endure Backing, or the like, having before made your self
familiar with him, by stroaking, feeding and shaking the Bridle at his head,
laying your hand on his back, smacking the Whip or cheriping, with such other
signs as are commonly used to create a sufferance; lay your Saddle, not being
over weighty, on his Back, continuing, as you observe his patience, either to
increase the weight by a greater Saddle, or by placing on the lesser somewhat
that is ponderous, stroaking and rubbing him the mean while that he may not be
intent on what you are doing; and when you have brought him to a moderate
sufferance, Girt the Saddle with soft Girts, and that by degrees, loosening
them as you find occasion, by his winching or untowardness, or straitning them
according to his patience or sufferance: And so in case of your Bridle, which
ought to be the second thing applicable in reducing a Colt or young Horse to
obedience and observance of what tends to his Accomplishment; but if you
perceive a Colt, before he arrive at any convenient Maturity, to be
over-mettlesome, it will be prudent to make him familiar, though at a year old,
yet not to press his Back with weights for fear of swaying it; and so by a
timely taming him, render the Men of other Nations mistaken, who account the
Spanish, Turkey, Barbary, Pelopoenesian, Flanders, Friesland, Holiand and
Artois Horses and Mares the best: And the Reason they give is, that they may be
made gentle at any Age; which the English Horses, etc. whom they term of a
stubborn nature, cannot be brought to: And indeed the taking them up too soon,
without due Management, is the occasion of stunting, and other-ways spoiling,
of many a brave Colt or Horse.

If you find your Endeavor, in the manner aforesaid, fail you in bringing a
young Horse or Mare to your bent; then consider Loanliness may be the occasion,
or fear more than obstinacy: To remedy which, oblige him or her to accompany
those that are Tame, and of a gentle nature already reduced to, what you design
them, or at least flexible on that occasion; and by often observing, you handle
them, a mildaess will be created, and a familiarity will increase to a desire
of the like; nor will moderate Rubbing and Picking the Feet be the least means
to introduce what else you desire. Some indeed, and those the most curious in
this affair, will not attempt to Back a Horse which they intend for Travel or
Racing, till the sixth year: But, in my opinion, they lose a years service
thereby to no manner of purpose; for the difference as to the one and the other
in this kind, is inconsiderable, unless in case of extraordinary labor; for
consequently the longer the Horse remains in good feeding undisturbed, the
stronger he grows in Joint or Member, though less in swiftness.

And seeing I have thus far proceeded, it will not be amiss to give the Breeder
an insight into what more materially relates to his Duty and Office as to Diet
and Dressing; in order to which he may apply himself to the following Chapter.

CHAP. IV. The Art of Dressing in General; and may serve upon all occasions for
bringing a Horse to perfection, and render a Groom or Horse-keeper acceptable
to Persons of Quality, etc.
As the old Proverb is, The Eye of the Master makes the Horse fat; so his care
in this case is necessary, (if he cannot be present as he would wish) to choose
such a one, who may as well in his absence as in his presence, perform his duty
to the benefit of his Master and his own credit, by rising early and tending
the Horse or Horses within his charge; and the best Diet in this case to bring
him to perfection is, in general, a quart of Splent-beans, and two quarts of
Oats sweet and well sifted; and so, if more than one, the like quantity. Then
Curry him well with an Iron Comb, after that Dust him over with a
Dusting-cloth, and pass a French Brush upon him, and smooth him with your hands
to sleekness, passing over him beside a Woollen, and then ^innen cloth,
cleansing his Eyes, Ears, Sheath, and picking his Feet, placing his Mane
decently, and smoothing his Forehead after it is being ruffled, to loosen the
Skin when putting on the Saddle, with Wisps under the Girths: Ride him gently
to Water, suffering him to dung or stale as you see him inclined; and in case
of defect, provoke him thereto by letting him scent Horse-dung, musty Hay, cast
Straw, or entering into Stubble or Brakes; and so in a gentle motion return him
to your Stable, which ought rather to be Paved than Planked, to prevent
dampness and unwholesome scents arising from the Urine, etc. that Stagnates
between the crevises or chinks of the Plank, be they laid never so close; of
which I shall say more when I come to give Directions for a convenient Stable,
fitting for choice Horses.

Your Horse being in the Stable, rub him down in all Points, as before
directed, ever observing to begin at the Head, and so proceed backwards, till
every part be decently passed over, not taking off the Clothes, or removing the
Bridle under the space of an hour; and in the mean while let him have the same
quantity of Provinder as before, adding, as he has dispatched the Grain, a
bottle of sweet Hay bound up hard and cast into the Rack, that with some labor
he may pull it thence. These are General Rules, and no way to be contemned.

But from hence I shall proceed to those that come nearer to the purpose, and
have been the best Approved ones that this Age can afford, giving in the
Experiment a general satisfaction to the Ingenious.

CHAP. V. How to render any tolerable good Horse an excellent Racer; and how
Running-Horses ought to be managed in Diet, Physic and Exercise, in order to
their being capable of Running a Match with success, etc.
SEeing Racing is highly in esteem, and a good Horse of that kind much coveted
by the Gentry of all Nations, I shall in this Chapter give an insight into that
affair: And first in choosing a Horse for Running; Consider he be well managed,
tractable, and no ways skittish, familiar with his Keeper or Master, and free
in eating what is given him; lively and sprightfull in his looks and action:
Let him be one of an indifferent large reach, well set in the shoulders, and
fairly hipped, gaunt and smooth backed, his legs and thighs standing in due
proportion, his head small and lean, with fast or firm cheek-bones, a sharp, or
Hawks Nose, wide Nostrils and wide Throple, and not exceeding twelve years old,
nor under six being of a good breed: Nor is this all, for the main point of
bringing him into a condition to Run successfully is yet behind, which consists
in Dyeting, Dressing* and carefully Ordering, before he undertake such a
business: And in that case, if you would have him answer your expectation,
observe these Rules, which are by the great Searchers into these Mysteries held
to be the best and most exact that ever were.

Resolving to Run, and having matched your Horse, the first thing you ought to
do is, to have a regard to the state and condition wherein he is, as to what
relates to his Body in case of health, sickness, or any other advantage or
disadvantage, and especially to what follows: As whether he be newly taken from
Grass or Soil, and by that means his Body rendered foul and unwieldy,
over-burthened and encumbered with unnecessary fatness or crudy humors; or, on
the contrary, whether by bad usage he is become poor and feeble, or that some
hidden infirmity occasion leanness or a pining away: And, lastly, whether he be
in good liking or state for your purpose, by having been moderately exercised
and carefully regarded.

These Considerations weighed, if you find your Horse in the first Estate, let
him not be matched, if it will any way stand with your convenience under six
Weeks, or at least not in less than a Month, that so he may be prepared by
regular Diet and Applications for what he is to undertake.

In the second Estate, unless your Horse be neglected, six Weeks or a Month may
suffice, for that his Exercise may be suited to his Feeding, and in that case no
time lost, if he that looks after him be careful and industrious.

As for the last Estate, it being a Medium between what has been mentioned, a
Month with care is a sufficient time to bring him to perfection, though many
allow six Weeks; but that is, as he is more or less inclining to fatness or
gross humors, contracted in rank Pasture, or by cating foul Provinder. Now if
it so happen, that any of these kinds be of a free and firey nature, apt to
excess in Exercise, thereby to spend the flesh he has got in Dieting; he that
has the charge, must, as he sees convenient, restrain him with a hard hand; and
if he be defective in feeding, let him use what devices he can to prompt him to
it, as by whistling, singing, stroaking, clapping, rubbing, to^sing his
Provinder, and the like; though in the fat Horse this ought chiefly to be
observed; for the lean one, and that in good case, if not indisposed by any
distemper or grievance, will eat freely, and may be better exercised, not
needing any restriction, unless upon extraordinary occasions, though a tender
regard must be had to either. And because the way of Dieting and Preparing is
much desired, I shall now descend to treat of it in the Estate of the Fat
Horse, in whom the rest may be comprehended; for he being the most difficult to
render thus serviceable, the rest with more ease, though by the same method,
may be rendered capable.

CHAP. VI. A Continuation of what is to be done to the Running or Race-Horse,
relating as to his Election, Dressing, Feeding, and other Usage, etc.
THE Horse you chose, though naturally a good one, having contracted fatness or
foulness by the means of too rank a Pasture or bad feeding; having put him into
a dry and warm Stable, though somewhat darkish, to render him the better
feeder, lead him out by the rising of the Sun, suffering your Boy or Servant to
give him a Turn or two till you have cleansed the Stable of what is offensive;
then return him, and having your Bridle dipped in Beer, put it on, and tie him
up to the Rack; at what time Curry him in every part, beginning with his Head,
and ending with his Pasterns; then with a Horse-tail, or clean Dusting-cloth,
dust him over: That done, take your French-Brush and rub him decently over in
all parts by such degrees as he may be sensible of your kind usage: As, first
the Forehead, then the Cheek, so down the Neck on either side, after that the
Shoulders, Forelegs, Back, Sides, Belly, Buttock, Rump, Thighs, Cambrils, and
the very Fetlocks, beating and sounding the Hoof to make it sit the firmer:
This done, pass over him again with your wet hand to settle the Hair, and
render him sleek and shining; the wet being dried by a repetition, cleanse his
Sheath, Cods and Tuel, his Ears, Eyes and Nostrils, his Mane, Foretop and Tail,
and rub the moisture, if any remain, from between his hinder Thighs, picking
his Hoofs, and running over his Legs with dry Wisps, or a clean Woollen-cloth,
which, if you see convenient, pass over his Body, combing his Mane, Tail and
Foretop. Having thus far proceeded, take a large Body-cloth of Kersey, or the
like thick Woollen, and spread over him, if it happen in the Winter; but if in
the Summer, that of a lighter Make will suffice; on that lay a light Saddle,
girting it pretty strait, yet let a wisp or two stick on each side to give him
the better breathing room, bracing the Cloth likewise about his Breast and
Shoulders.

Thus having dressed and attired your Horse, spurt a little warm Beer into his
Mouth, and lead him forth, and mount him, leaving one to order the Stable and
provide good Litter against your return. Wheat-straw being the best of that
with which your Stable must always be sufficiently provided for; other Straw is
not only unseemly, but unwholesome; the Oat-straw breeding dislike, and the
Barley-straw, if your Horse be subject to eat it, a scowring.

Being abroad, ride your Horse for some time a foot-pace, which, by the
curious, is termed Racking; and after you have so managed him for the space of
a Mile or more upon firm ground, advance to a Hill that gently rises, if the
situation of the place afford it; and mending by degrees his pace, bring him
to Gallop up; the which when he has performed, lead him, or Rack him down to
the best advantage, suffering him to cool and contract an equal temperature of
body. Thus having done, as you see your Horse without over-straining will
conveniently bear it, lead him a Mile or thereabout to some pleasant River or
Spring, and suffer him to drink moderately, and then Exercise him as before:
Which done, give him a second Watering; and after that another Exercise, ever
observing to Exercise him before and after watering; which done, ride him
easily home; and coming to the Stable-door, alight, suffering your Horse to
stale or dung in the foul litter; the which if he refuse freely to do, provoke
him to it by whistling, clapping or waving your Switch, raising the Straw under
him, and reaching him upon it; which will often, if not always, oblige him to
it, Custom giving him an insight into what you would have him to do. This
done, lead him in, and fix him upon the clean Litter, take off the Saddle and
Body-cloth, rubbing him down, and cleansing him as before; after which put on
the Cloths, girt them gently with Sirsingles; and for the easement of his lying
down, put wisps between of loose and soft Hay or Straw: Being thus clothed,
pick his Feet, and stop them with Cowdung, casting into the Rack a small bottle
of Hay well tied up, it being well dust, and let him tear it out at leisure,
whilst he stands on his Bridle.

Your Horse having stood for the space of an hour, rub his head well with a
Hempen-cloth; and having cleansed the Manger, draw his Bridle, and take about
three pints of large white Oats well dressed, sweet and dry, free from light
Oats, or such as are defective; for the preparing of which, you ought to have a
small Wire Sieve. These being given to your Horse and if with a good stomach he
eat them, you may give him a quart more, and suffer him to rest till toward
noon; at what time run over those parts the Cloth covers not, with a Rubber;
and having cherished him with your hand and voice, give him a quart of Oats
more, doing the like at one and three of the Clock in the Afternoon; or if it
be in the Summertime, you may stay till four; and when it is near Sunset,
having rubbed and clad him at all points; as in the Morning lead him forth and
Air him upon hard level ground, not too subject to stones; Gallop him gently;
Water him in due order, as has been observed, and bring him home. In like
manner, when you have obliged him to stale and dung, dress him, cloth him and
suffer him to stand on the Bridle till such time as he has torn out of the Rack
a small bottle of Hay; at what time give him another quart of Oats, the Manger
being made clean, and leave him till about nine of the clock the same Evening;
at what time coming to him again, cheer him with hand and voice; Rouse up his
Litter, and giving him another quart of Oats, leave him to his repose till the
next Morning; and so order him every day for the first fortnight, daily
increasing his Exercise and Keeping, the Stable as dark as may be, both for his
quiet, and the better obliging him to feed; and by so doing you will find the
advantage.

CHAP. VII. Heats; what they are, and how to be managed to the best advantage,
in Racing and all other Recreatory undertakings.
IN consideration of Heats and Exercise, they are somewhat different, the
former being a more violent course than the latter, and therefore twice a week
is sufficient for Heats, the days being as equally distant from each other as
may be, one of them being observed to on the day of the week, answering the day
whereon the Race is to be run: Observing likewise not to give any Heat in rainy
weather, unless necessity compel you thereto; for it is better to vary hours or
days than so to do; and on such emergent occasions you must provide your Horse
a linen Hood made of thick Canvass, with a Bearing on the Nape of the Neck,
and covering over the Ears, so that none but the Eyes and Nose appear. The
Heats you give, in case of wholesome weather, being to be given an hour before
it is dark, and as soon as day springs, but not in the dark; for two Causes: As
first to prevent unwholesome Airs; and, lastly, stumbling, tripping, slipping or
falling.

The manner of Heating thus observed, the next thing to be considered is the
manner of Usage and Diet for the second Fortnight. Touching the first of these,
there needs no great distinction between it; and what has been premised only
before his Bridle be put on in the Morning, you must give him about three pints
of the best Oats well sifted; after the eating of which, dress him up and
Bridle him, Cloth, Saddle, Air, Water, and return him in like manner; only
what Hay you give, suffer him to take it out of your hand, and let him eat a
pretty quantity if he desire it; and while he does so, let him stand upon his
Bridle; as also, draw not the Bitt till an hour after; then having rubbed him
all over, give him a quart more of well-sifted Oats; and from this time forward
make a Dietbread to give him with his Oats, etc. according to direction.

CHAP. VIII. How to make the Bread of the first Make; and what ought to be
observed in the Distribution thereof: With many other things.
TAke to the quantity of three pecks of good Beans, Splent and well cleansed
from the Husks, a peck of good Wheat; mix them well, and grind them into fine
Flower or Meal; and having bolted and dressed them, make them into Dough, with
store of Yest and hot Water; break and tread it, that thereby it may prove the
shorter, which ought to be done in a Kneading-trough; after that cover it with
a warm cloth, and set it by the fire till it swell; then knead it again, and
being well molded, make it up into the bigness of three penny Loaves: soak them
well, and when they are drawn from the Oven, turn the bot^^ms upwards and
suffer them to cool; and at the end or three days paring off the crust, the
Loaf being dry and in good order, crumb it amongst the Oats; but if it be too
moist or clammy, you must dry it in slices before the fire, or suffer it to
grow staler, always putting a third part of Bread, small crumbled, to the Oats:
And on this quantity of Provinder suffer him to rest till about eleven of the
clock, at what time renew the quantity of Bread and Oats, and leave him again
till one in the Afternoon or longer, if the next day be not his Heating-day.
But if the next day you intend to give him a Heat, then give him only a quart
of the best Oats; and when he has eaten them, put on his Bridle and tie him up,
not forgetting to rub him, and do what else is convenient; as Dressing, Airing,
Watering, bringing him home and putting him into the Stable; where having let
him stand a while, give him a quart more of Oats; and then having a clean
Muzzle, wash it in Beer, Ale or White Wind, put it on to prevent his eating the
Litter, or gnawing the Manger or Rack-staves, if he be prone to such Vices, and
let him stand till nine of the clock at night.

The best Muzzle for Summer is that which is made of smooth large Pack-thread
or Whip-cord, well knit, yet so that the Horse may freely breathe through the
Lattice: And the Winter-Muzzle, the best is of Canvas, with a square Lattice of
Tape at the bottom, both of them having convenient Loops and Strings to fasten
them about the Napes of the Horse's Neck. The hour of nine being come, having
well rubbed your Horses Head, and other convenient parts, as have been often
mentioned, give him a quart of clean sifted Oats; and when he has eat them, put
on his Muzzle, toss his Litter, and leave him to rest till the next Morning;
and then coming to him, if you find him lying, give him a quart of Oats, not
disturbing him till you find him disposed to rise, which he may be obliged to
by the further Allurements of Provinder; and these Oats you may wash in Ale or
Beer, and afterward dry them by rubbing between a Cloth, and then dress him,
and putting on the Bridle and Body-cloth, lead him forth, after by drawing up
his head to the Rack, you have obliged him to swallow a new-laid Egg, and
washed his Mouth with a small quantity of Beer; and after he has dunged or
staled upon the foul Litter, Rack him gently to the place you intend to course
him, suffering him, as you find him disposed, to smell at Horse-dung or Straw,
if any lie in the way, which will oblige him to empty himself; and then finding
him somewhat warm, take off the Clothes, and send them away, Racking him gently
to the starting-post, and beyond it, obliging him to smell to it, and then by
degrees put him on to a three-quarters speed, obliging him, if you find him
able, to hold it throughout; that is, from the weighing-post, to the Post at
the other end of the Race: But in this case do not force him above his strength
and wind, but bear with his yielding, which will make him take pleasure in what
he does; and so by degrees he will come to perfection, observing upon what
ground he takes most delight to run, and carries his legs best, whether moist
or dry, sandy or stony, hilly or smooth, which may turn to your advantage in
the Race.

Having heated your Horse, breathe him again by gentle Galloping about the
Field, till you find he begins to cool; at what time your Servant bringing the
Clothes, put them on under some warm Hedge, to shelter him from the Wind, and
ride him gently home; or you may, if he sweats, much scrape off the moisture
with a broken Sword-blade, or piece of a Scithe, before you cover him, and rub
him with dry clothes, not bringing him to the Stable till you find he is
thoroughly dry, and moderately cool, and that he have well emptied himself, and
then suffer him to stand upon his Bridle tied to the Rack; and having the
following Scowring ready prepared, give it him in a Drenching-horn, viz.

Take a pint of the best Mallaga, and pulverizing an ounce of Per-rosin, put it
therein: which being incorporated, add six ounces of Olive-oyl, and an ounce
and a half of brown Sugar Candy beaten to Powder, with an ounce of the Juice of
Savin, or Powder of Ruburb: heat them over a gentle fire, and then by that
means mixing them well, draw up his head to the Rack, and oblige him to take
it: by which means he will be eased of the Molten grease and foulness.

CHAP. IX. Other things to be taken notice of, in regard to the Running-Horse,
in the second Fortnights Diet and Ordering.
YOur Horse being thus used, great care must be taken that he catch not cold;
to prevent which, you must rub him well, and keep him warm clad, combing out
his Mane, his Tail, and the like; keeping the Stable close, and putting large
Wisps under his Sirsingles, and over them a loose Blanket or Coverlet, if the
weather be any thing cold; and let him fast two hours or better after he has
taken the Scowring, keeping him stirring or moving all the time to prevent his
sleeping; which in this case he will be apt to do, and thereby prejudice
himself.

Your Horse having stood the space of two hours, etc. give him some Ears of
Wheat to chew upon, and so by the extraordinary beating and motion of his Body,
the shortness of his Breath, and dullness of his Eyes, you may perceive that the
potion has met with abundance of bad Humors and gross Crudities, with which it
strugles; and if so, you must forbear till the Sickness it will occasion be
over; at what time take off his Bridle, turn up his Litter, and suffer him to
lie down and ease himself for the space of an hour; then rouse him, and let him
tear a small bundle of Hay out of the Rack; in the mean while dress him a quart
of Oats, and a pint of Splent-beans: mix them together, crumbling amongst them
a slice or two of the before-named Bread, and then suffer him to rest for the
space of three hours; and in the Evening, before you dress him, give him again
the like quantity of Beans and Oats, clothing him up warm, but neither Saddle
nor ride him forth that Evening, nor give him any Water till the potion has
thoroughly done working, only let him have another parcel of Beans and Oats
washed in Beer, and so continue till Morning.

When day appears, dress him, and let him have a quart of Oats only, then
cloth, Saddle, and gently ride him abroad to Air him, and let him drink, but
not overmuch, least after so long a drouth he swell himself: And when you
return him, let him be fed with Oats, Splent-beans and crumbled Bread, in all
to the quantity of two quarts, suffering him afterward to tear a little Hay out
of your hand; and so continue him the second Fortnight, and he will increase in
firmness, flesh and strength.

CHAP. X. The Running-Horses third and fourth Fortnight; and what is to be
observed therein as to Diet, Usage, and bringing the Horse to the
Weighing-Post, etc.
THE third and fourth Fortnights Management being material, I shall therein
come closer to Particulars: And in this case your care must be to make him a
second Bread, finer then the former, but after the same manner in all respects;
which being well dried and chipped, crumble it into his Oats and Beans; and
that it may exceed the other in fineness, you may add as much Wheat as Beans,
viz. half a bushel of each, suffering him to take his Heats on the proper days
with ease and pleasure, not over-straining him, thereby to render him stiff on
the Racing-day.

The thing to be next observed, is to omit the further Scowring, after you have
given him other Heats; and in lieu thereof, give him a Ball made after the
following manner, viz. Take Fenegreek and Cardamum-seeds, Anniseeds and those
of Cummin, Coltsfoot and Elecampane-Root, of each two ounces: and having
bruised them, and sifted off the Husks and grosser part, add two ounces of the
Flower of Brimstone, and one of Licorish Powder: moisten them with White Wind,
and add more an ounce of the Chymicaloyl of Anniseeds, Molossus and Olive-oyl,
of each half a pint, and incorporate them with as much Flower as will make them
up into balls as big as Pullets Eggs, and keep them in a thick Glass or
well-glazed Pot for your use, they being good for a Horse on sundry other
occasions; as for Colds, Coughs, Glanders, Stoppage of the Stomach or shortness
of Breath, in case of molten Grease or crudy Humors. And thus you may pass him
over the third Fortnight with good looking to, and a due observance of Heats,
Airs and Diet; From which I proceed to the fourth and last Fortnight, for so
much time is sufficient to bring any Horse to perfection.

In the fourth Fortnight observe to let his Bread be yet finer, as allowing
three pecks of Wheat to one of Beans, reducing it to the most imaginable
fineness by bolting and other ways dressing, lightning it up with a sufficient
quantity of new Ale Yest, Whites of Eggs and new Milk: working them to the best
advantage, and baking them as the former, and give it him crumbled amongst the
best Oats well sifted, and well rubbed between your hands; as also Splent-beans
freed from the Husks: Nor must you give him any Scowring, neither augment the
potion of his Meat. As for his Heats, the first week you may give him two, but
the second week one is sufficient, and that some five days before he is to Run;
yet to supply the defect of the other Heat, you may give him strong Airings for
the ^etter preservation of his Wind, and to render him ^he cheerfuller; as also
to remove gross fumes and ^apours, you may Morning and Evening burn any sweet
Perfume on a Chafing Dish of Wood-coles in the Stable; as Benj^mine, Storax,
Frankincense or Olibanum, and often wash his Oats in Ale or Beer: And the
better to corroborate him, give him every other day a new-laid Egg in a Glass
of Muscadel, and debar him from Hay, unless his Belly be very loose.

The last week observe, if he be a foul feeder, to Muzzle him, unless at such
times as you are with him, least by eating his Litter, biting the Manger or
Rack-staves he injure him, or neglect his Diet; and above all, let your Stable
be so kept, that neither Pigeons, Hens, or any Fowl can come to dung in it; and
the day before he is to Run, let him have his proportion of Meat in the
Morning; but in the Afternoon, take away a third part, and Shoe him to
advantage; as like ^ise dress him well, breading his Mane, Tail, and do ^^^er
necessary things of ornament, but with that cau^^on that he may not take
distaste thereat.

The Morning the Match is to be Run, come to your Horse before it is well day,
and give him a quart or three pints of Oats sprinkled with Muscadel or Whites
of Eggs; but if he refuse to take them, then you may give him dry Oats, with a
third part Wheat, well sifted and ordered, and entice him what you can to empty
himself; and so putting on his Muzzle, let him remain till you have notice to
bring him forth in order to Run the Match.

The warning being had, take off the Muzzle, and put on the Snaffle, it being
washed in Muscadel; then rub him sleek, and cast a white Linen Cloth over him
next to his Body, and over that the Horse-cloths; lay on them the Saddle well
pitched with Shoomakers Wax, of which the Girths must likewise participate, and
Girt it gently, so that he may not be straightened; Give him after that a
mouthfull or two of Oats, an^ pour down his throat half a pint of Muscadel,
wit^ the yolk of a new-laid Egg, and so draw him out (...) the Stable, leading
him to the Course, using by the way your endeavor to make him empty. When h^^
is arrived at the Weighing-post, wash his Mouth with fair water, rub his Legs
and other parts, and then u^^ cloth him, and clap on your Saddle; then mou^^
and wait the Signal; when starting fair, observe we^ your ground, and commit
the rest to the goodness (...) your Horse. And thus, Reader, have I laid down
the most approved Rules and Methods of this kind, which being put in practice
and well observed, will doubtle^^ turn to great advantage, and may
indifferently serv^^ in preparing a Horse for any other occasion or employment.
And seeing the Management of the Ride^ is very material in this and other
cases, I shall no^ think it amiss to give directions of that kind in the
following Chapter, with other matters.

CHAP. XI. What the Rider ought to be; and what by him (...) to be considered
in order to Backing and go^^ Management; as also the Office and Duty (...) a
Groom, etc.
AS it is not every one that is fit for a Rider, relating to management and
curious occasions so it ought to be considered who is, and what his chi^^ care
must be, that he neither spoil nor baulk a Hor^^ in his first Breaking, or in
Racing; for such thing too frequently happen, and thereby render altogethe^
fruitless the care, pains and cost of the Breeder, and create such Vices in the
Horse as will not easily be removed; and therefore your Rider must be a
temperate and patient person, not given to fury nor anger, one of a strait
upright body, of an indifferent weight, not too heavy nor too light, by reason
the one may render young Horses in Breaking sway-backed, and ^he other
regardless of him that sits him; he must in his Function be laborious and
diligent, a lover and cherisher of Horses; one who rises early to practice, and
is not given to immoderate Exercising; and when the Horse makes a default, he
must use his diligence to let him see it, and thereby render him tractable; for
if the person be hasty, rash and choleric, soon provoked to impatience, he can
never make a perfect Horseman, neither can he be able to make a Horse perfect,
as otherwise he might. If a young Horse of the right strain for shape, breed
and color, be well handled, he seldom fails to answer the expectation of his
Master; when on the contrary, he may be spoiled, and be found good for nothing
but the Plow and Cart. And this is often occasioned in a young Horse by the too
much rigor of the Rider or Breaker, by which the Horse is so confounded and
over-feared, that he is not capable of understanding; or else Breaking through
that fear, grows restiff and sullen; when, on the contrary, sweet words and
mild behavior wins so far upon a good-natured Horse, that in a short time he
will take pleasure and pride in performing the Will of his Master; and when he
readily does so, or at least offers as far as his understanding will reach, he
ought to be cherished and encouraged, not only with words, but with some
pleasant and heartning morsel, which the Rider ought for that purpose to carry
about him; at least let him spurt some Wine, or other comfortable liquor, into
his Mouth; and never correct him but when he is in a fault; always considering
to strike him in a convenient place, but not about the Head, least he dull him,
or give him opportunity to be hardened in the Vice of going backward; nor with
your Legs and Thighs press his Ribs too hard, least his burden become uneasy
and unpleasant, ever considering in a strait Course to keep a steady and even
Rein, not inclining to the right nor to the left; and also an upright Body,
unless in a full Course; at what time a little stooping forward, but not so as
to press your weight on the Horses shoulders, will not be amiss, for that will
prevent gathering the Wind; the which, though it be unperceived by many, is a
great hindrance to the speed of the Horse. As for your Switch in such cases, it
must be carried upright, or over the Horse's head, that he may not see it, to
affray him; nor decline your Body from the one side to the other to over-sway
him, but in all things observe a moderation and mien, being ever sure to have
your ground in your eye, and thereon manage your Horse to the best advantage;
as also which Ground he delights to tread, which in a Race may profit much; for
it has been seen that many a good Horse has been baulked by not being managed
in such Ground as they naturally affect.

As for the Office of a good Groom, it chiefly consists in keeping his Stable
sweet, clean and warm stored, with fresh Litter, by frequently renewing the
old, having your Horses Clothes, Furniture and Materials ever in a readiness;
in being expert in the convenient times and manner of Airing and Feeding;
knowing what Prov^nder, and what quantity is seasonable and sufficient; and
above all, to be exact in Dressing and Furnishing out for Ornament, as occasion
requires, minding what Saddles and what Bridles are most fitting and
convenient, and taking care to place them in due order, that they may be in a
readiness when ever they are to be used: He must be a Man temperate, and free
from passion; one who aims at his Masters interest and his own credit; such a
one as has skill in Horses, and can discern the Grievances or the Symptoms of
Diseases, always having Instruments ready to search the Horses feet, or Blood
him upon necessary or emergent occasions; and in case he see any imminent
danger, he must not delay giving notice thereof to his Master or the Farrier,
least by neglect the Horse may grow past cure; nor when a Horse is returned
from a Journey heated, or the like, must not neglect him, but ever be careful
to Rub him well down; give him good Litter, Cloth him well, and let his
Provender be proportionable and seasonable: For if a Horse be newly taken up
from Grass or Soil, an excess of dry Meat will prove injurious by subjecting
him to Lasks, shortness of Breath, Costiveness and Pains in the Stomach, as his
suddenly being turned from hard Meat into rank Pasture will cause
Laxativeness, Scowrings, Pains in the Belly, Rawness of Stomach and offensive
Rheums. And thus much may suffice for the Office of the Groom, who, as to the
feeding of a Horse, may take further Directions from what has been spoken of
the Dieting the Race-Horse.

And now seeing every Gentleman has not the convenience of Breeding good Horses
or Mares, by reason of the Situation of his Dwelling, or want of opportunity
to regard them as he ought, I ^^ink^ it highly necessary to give such
Instructions and insight, as may render every Judicious Man capable of
purchasing without being defrauded.

CHAP. XII. Infallible Rules for Buying a good Horse; and how so well by sundry
marks and tokens to distinguish good from bad, as well in case of soundness as
diseases, as thereby to prevent being imposed on or cheated, etc.
In the Election of a good Horse many things are to be observed, and especially
to what end you design him when purchased; for certain it is, that no one
Horse, how perfect soever, can serve to all ends and purposes. Then for the
goodness of his breed, it is very difficult to be known but by speculation,
unless you will take it upon the credit of those that had the breeding of him,
in which you run a hazard, for few Sellers will disparage their own: However,
this you may observe, that according to the Country this distinguishment is
infallible: If he be of a Spanish breed, then is he small and neat limbed; if
Neapolitan, hook-nosed, if Dutch, rough-leged; if Barbary, neat bodied and
headed; if Flemish, full and smooth buttocked; if English, well-set and
strongly joynted; and so for others. Now the Colors are various, according to
the constitution of the Horses Body, and by those elected according as it likes
the fancy of the Buyer, though there is difference in Goodness, to be known by
the Colors, as the Horse participates more or less of the several Elementary
humors: And thus they are held.

The Cole-black, without any mixture of other colored Hairs, is subject to
Choler, and the heat thereby occasioned, inclines him to Pestilence, Feavours,
Inflammation of the Liver, and other hot Diseases: To prevent which, Purges that
correct the Choleric humors are very convenient; and Horses of this
complexion are of a fierce and firey nature, good for War and Travel; but by
reason of the heat, which consumes the moisture that should support them, they
live not, or at least last not long.

A Horse of a bright Bay or dark Bay, with a clear and cheerful countenance,
and a well-proportioned Mouth, is counted a lasting one, and fit for Racing,
Hunting or Travel, and is of a sanguine constitution; as also are the
white-flanked or flea-bitten, white Loyard, with hairs like Silver, or black,
with a white Star, white Foot, or white Rash; and the Diseases these are most
subject to, are Consumption of the Liver, Glaunders, Leprosy, and such like
disorders as are taken by Infection or Contagion; wet and foul feeding in damp
weather, and the like; and will endure stronger Medicines than the former,
without any danger, if they be not compounded of such Ingredients as will
over-heat the blood.

A Horse that is very white, py-bald, yellow, dunkile-glew'd, and the like, are
Phlegmatic, and fittest for Cart and Plow, or to labor in Mills, etc. not
being capable of speed, or at least not forced to hold it long; and are subject
not only to loose their flesh, but to Staggars, Coughs, Catarrhs, cold
Distillations. Rheumatisms, and the like disorders proceeding from watery
humors; and therefore in case of such disorders, hot Medicines are accounted
the best and most successful.

The Dark Bay, with long white hairs, Russet, Ashcolour, Chestnut, Gray or
Mouse-Dun, are accounted Melancholicks, and are subject to Inflammations of the
Spleen, Dropsies, Frensies, Oppression of the Heart, and Pains in the Stomach.
Wherefore being of a dry constitution, cold moist Medicines are requisite to be
Administered, and are generally heavy and lumpish; but if it happen you find a
Horse with some or all of the Colors, the latter being very rare; then
conclude, that the four Humors predominate by turns. And though these
Observations are made for distinction sake, yet it is found by experience,
which is the best Master, there are good Horses, or at least tollerably good of
all these kinds: Therefore not any ways to discourage the Buyer, or prejudice
the Seller, that which follows ought duly to be considered.

If you purchase a Horse for ease and gentleness, though to Travel
considerably, then the most fitting is an Ambler; then observe in the moving of
his Legs, that he performs it equally, smooth, large, just and nimble; for if
he tread false, he will prove uneasy; Treading short rids little ground; if he
tread rough or uneven, he seems to roll or tumble along.

If Hunting be your aim, especially that of the Buck, or for the riding Post,
or the like, wherein a large Pace is required; the running or swift Amble, as
some call it, is very necessary and expedient, differing from the other Amble
only in the swiftness, and is altogether easy and delightful.

As for the Trot, or as some call it, the Lofty pace, it most properly belongs
to War-Horses, though indeed it may indifferently serve to any other end; and
those that Trot well, seldom fail to Gallop: In which case, observe that the
Horse take up his Legs nimbly from the ground, yet not raising them over high,
nor rolling his Body from side to side, that he beat not himself, if he
forcibly labored, or do it in pain, but that stretching out his fore-leg, he
nimbly follow with the hinder; nor by any means Cut under the Knee, which is
called the Swift-cut: Further observing, that he neither crosses one foot over
or upon another, but with his far fore-foot ever leads, and not with the
other. If these qualities are found, then is the Horse good for speed; but if
he Gallop roundly, raising strongly his fore-feet, he is fittest for a
Charging-Horse, or one to be trusted in carrying his Master through a dangerous
Attack. If his Gallop be slow, so it prove sure, he may make a good Traveller;
but if he handle his Legs confusedly or shufflingly, then beware of some
defect, especially if he Gallop painfully.

As for the Stature, that I leave to every Man's discretion, as his occasion
suits or requires; the largest being for strong and solid labor; the
middle-size for swiftness and long Journeys, if not over-burthened; and the
lesser size for ease and moderate Recreation. And what more remains materially
to be known of this kind, is the deformities and imperfections; That is, how to
discover them; and these are contained in natural and accidental deformities,
inward and outward; many of them hidden, and so secretly couched, insomuch that
they may well deceive the skillful: And of these, especially of such as are
most dangerous or material to be known, I shall acquaint you.

First observe and inform your self what you can as to the Breed and Paces of
the Horse; when having taken off the Saddle and Bridle, leaving a Halter only
upon his head, cause him to be rubbed down well, and stand just before him,
earnestly beholding his countenance, whether it be cheerful and sprightly,
free from cloudiness or scowling; That his Ears be small, sharp, thin and
pliable; and though they be inclining to longness, yet if they be well
proportioned and well set on, it is not much amiss, for his freeness, beauty
and goodness of meettle are thereby declared; when, on the contrary, if they be
loleing, thick, heavy, dull and clouterly, weakly set on, and seldom moving,
dullness and a heavy disposition are denoted. If the Forehead of the Horse
swell, and the feather or mark stand high above his Eyes, or on the top of his
Eyes; if it happen he have a white Star, or white Blaze, evenly placed, of an
indifferent size; or if it be a snip on his Nose, it is a mark of Beauty; but
if his Face and Forehead be flat and cloudy, they are tokens of dullness and
defect; if the Star or Ranch be awry, or low, it is unseemly; or the Nose,
instead of a snip, be bald, it signifies badness, and a Horse not fit for any
considerable service; if the Eyes be brown, black, shining, staring or standing
out, and move with an equal motion, the black of the Eye filling the fleshy
Orb, so that little or nothing of the white appear, then is it a sign of
goodness, and a well-mettled Horse; but, on the contrary, if the Eyes move flow
and uneven, and the white greatly appear; if they seem cloudy or dull, then is
it a sign of badness, and the like, if they seem wrinkled, or are very small;
if they be of a firey red, they incline to Moon-blind or Moon-eyes, which are
but a remove from blindness; if the Eyes be white and walled, it denotes a weak
sight; if very bloody, inclining to blackness, bruises are thereby signified;
Red, dull Eyes, and a hollowness, fore-run blindness; if the Eyes Matter, and
much Rheum flow from thence, then the Horse has been extremely abused by
over-riding, or else is very old; and so of the rest.

When you come to handle the Horse's Cheek or Chaps, if there you find the Bone
thin and lean, the Windpipe or Throple full and large, even, and free from
Knobs or Keruels, and the Jaws standing even, so that the Teeth shut like a
Box; and above so placed, that the Neck may seem to shut or sink into them, it
is a sign of a free Horse, and one of great Wind and Courage; but, on the
contrary, if his Chaps and Cheeks be thick, fat, and sullenly inclined, the
Throple small, and muffled up with a thick gross substance of fat, then
(especially if it appear much kernelly) it not only signifies short Wind, but
threatens the Glaunders, Strargles, and other Diseases incident to straitness
and pursiveness; and more particularly dangerous Colds of many natures.

If it happen the Jaws be so strait, that the Neck swell over them as it were;
yet if it be occasioned by no distemper, it matters not much as to the service
of the Horse, though it is very unseemly; but if it swell out long, and end
taper, then the Horse may be subject to the Vives, Tumors, Imposthumes, or the
like: Then observe that his Nostrils be wide, large, open and dry, and that the
Redness naturally appears without any forcing or straining: If the Lips are
even, the Mouth deep, and the Muzzle small, they signify good wind, speed and
courage; but if on the contrary, dullness and infirmity; as also by the
shortness of the upper Lip, and wrinkles on the side of the Mouth old age; and
above all, observe his Teeth be clean, even, firm, and well proportioned. But
of them more particularly hereafter, when I come to speak of the Horse's Age,
though in general, unseemly and uneven Teeth are a sign of badness.

Observe the Breast of your Horse; and if it appear broad, bowing outward and
well feathered, it denotes health and strength; when, on the contrary, a small
Breast ridged or flat; as also the Shoulders standing in, denotes stoppage,
weakness in travel, pains of the Heart and Liver, and the like, with stumbling
and interfering; as also does a Breast that is narrow and imbowed inward, those
being generally the marks of a Horse, weak and unfit for labor.

Next cast your Eyes from the Elbow to the Knee, and see his fore-thighs be
well proportioned, strait and well clad, with flesh and sinews; by which
strength is signified, and by the contrary weakness.

Observe the Knees, that they are carried even, that they be well joynted,
close knit and fixed, with Sinews and Ligaments free from Scabs or Scars, not
over round, but well joynted and boned; for if they appear contrary to these
marks as round, and swelling of a more than ordinary bigness; if they be
scabbed, broken, or the hair off, then it betokens an uneven treader, and one
that is apt to stumble, or subject to the swift cut.

Having thus far taken notice, the next thing to be observed materially, is
from the Knee to the Pasterns; and there consider, if the Legs be clean, well
fleshed and well sinewed, bowing somewhat inward, which shows strength and a
firm treader; but if on the inside you find any fleshy Excressences or Scabs a
little beneath the Knee on the inside, likewise then is the Horse subject to
interfering; but if a general Scab, etc. then the cause is foul keeping; if on
the inner bowing of the Knee you perceive Seams, or the hair broke disorderly,
a cankerous Mallender is denoted, or Ulcer.

Observe that the Pasterns be clean and well knit together, especially the
first, and the other short and strong, standing upright; if the first be large
or swelled, then is the Horse frequently subject to the Sinew, strain and
twitching girds; or if the other be weak or bending, it will hardly support the
body in any long Journey or uneasy way.

As for a good hoof, it ought to be black, tough, and much inclining to
roundness; for a long, white, rough or brittle hoof, denotes an uneven tread, a
tripping or loosing the Shoe upon every occasion, and is altogether unseemly,
and fore-shews the Horse subject to foundering: As for the Crownet of the hoof,
observe if the flesh swell a little, and that the hair lie decently and in good
order, that no Scabs nor boney Excressences happen there; for if those appear,
ten to one but the Ring-bone will afflict it.

Thus having observed your Horse in the front, place your self on the right
side of him, and observe that his head be neither too high nor too low; that
his neck at the setting on be small, and indifferently long, growing deeper by
degrees, till it arrive at the moulder; Then for the Crest, let it be high,
strong, and somewhat thin; his Mane somewhat curling, thin, long and soft.
These are not only signs of a good Horse, but a Beauty also; and consequently
the contrary of deformity.

In the next place have a regard to the Chine of his Back, that he have a due
proportion of even, broad and strait; his Ribs somewhat large, and bending
outward like a bow; his Fillets short, strong and upright, about four fingers
distance from his last Rib and his huckle-bone; his Body being well let down,
yet hidden as it were within his Ribs; his Stones round and even hanging; and
these are marks of beauty and perfection: Whereas, on the contrary, a narrow
Chine will subject the Saddle to wound the Horse, and bending or Saddle-back'd
denotes weakness; to have the Ribs over fat, makes the Horse breathe painfully,
when hard labored. If his Fillets hang long and thin, they denote him weak,
and not capable of performing a Journey in a hilly Country; and if his Stones
hang down, as in long bags or purses, uneven and unseemly, it denotes a defect
in nature, occasioned either by sickness or a feeble constitution.

As for his Buttocks, note that they be round, full and plump, and that the
Tail be well set on, the best observance being the evenness of the Buttocks
with the Body; and that although they are something long, that they spread well
behind, and are not inclining to make a ridge of the Crupper-bone, nor stand
long and narrow; for in such cases neither a Pillion nor Pad-saddle can sit
easy nor convenient.

The hinder Thighs, commonly called Gascoins, are likewise to be regarded; and
the observation is, that they be well let down in an evenness to the middle
joint, thick, brawney, full and swelling, by which strength and goodness are to
be observed; whereas a lean and lank Thigh, not will gristed, but very slender,
denotes weakness: Then observe the middle joint behind, and see that it be
somewhat lean, well knit and ligamented, and Sinews well veined, and moderately
bending, which shows perfection in that part; but if it have any Chops or Sores
in the inward bending, then it threatens a Sellender; and if it have a general
swelling, then some blow or bruise has happened again; if the swelling be
particular in the pot or hollow part, or on the inside, and there it happen the
Vein be full and proud, and the swelling moreover short, then is it the
blood-spavin; if hard, the Bone-spavin; but if it happen behind, on the
Knuckle, then is it a Kerb or Curb.

After this look on the hinder Legs, observing whether they are clean, well
fleshed, and supported with Sinews: If so, it is a good sign; but if they be
fat, they will not endure labor; and if they swell, it is a sign the grease is
molten in the body of the Horse, and that he is foul: If scabbed above the
Pasterns, then beware the Scratches; if under the Pasterns, Chaps appear, then
it is the Pains: All which are infectious and dangerous to the Horse, and
render him far from being good.

As for the Tail, it seldom sits amiss upon a good pair of Buttocks; and, on
the contrary, never well upon ill ones; but the best setting on is broad, high
and flat, a little couched inward. And these Rules for knowing and choosing a
good Horse, may generally and particularly suffice, though in the sequel many
more will occur.

CHAP. XIII. Exact and Infallible Rules to know the Age of a Horse by the
perfections or imperfections of his Teeth in all their particular and general
Marks; as also by the Tail; when the Mark is out of the Mouth, etc.
TO know the Age of a Horse, there are sundry things and matters to be observed
besides his Teeth, though by them most take their Rules, though not altogether
infallible; yet that nothing may be wanting on this occasion, I shall
deliberately discourse of Particulars, beginning with the Teeth, the better to
comply with custom.

The full number of a Horse's Teeth are computed forty, and seldom, when he has
all that he will have, prove less: And thus they are distinguished, viz. On
either side, above and beneath six great wang Teeth, which compute at twenty
four, generally termed Grinders; Then six above, and the like number below, in
the fore part of his Mouth, which, with the other, make thirty six, these
latter being properly called Geatherers: and moreover four Tushes, two above,
and the like number below, generally called Bite-teeth: And from these the
Considerations are as follow.

In the first year only the Grinders and Geatherers, commonly called
Colts-teeth, only appear small, white and smooth.

The second year two of those Teeth are changed in the middle of the
Geatherers, viz. one above, and another below; and as for those that come up in
the room of the shead ones, they are generally darker or browner, though they
may be distinguished other ways by the largeness.

The third year, the next to those beforementioned, are changed, leaving the
rest to be changed the successive years, so that after the fifth year no
Colts-teeth, and then likewise his Tushes are complete; and those that succeed
the last Foal's Teeth will be hollow, having in the midst of them small black
specks, of which many take singular notice, shaping their Judgment thereby;
though if they take not heed, they may be imposed upon by Artificial as well as
Natural specks or spots, though indeed by these Natural Spots a Horse's Age may
be known till eight years are past, and no longer.

The sixth year being come, his new Tushes arise at the bottom, of which young
flesh will appear, the Tushes being small, white, short and sharp, and so
continue to the seventh year; in which year they are of full growth, and the
Mark very plain to be seen and observed.

The eighth year all the Teeth will appear plain and smooth, but the Specks,
generally called the Marks, will decrease by degrees, till they are seen no
more, ending as it were with or before this year; nor will the Tushes continue
longer white, but incline to a yellowish.

The ninth year being come, and the Mark consequently no more to be seen,
consider the fore-teeth will be broader and longer than usual, their Color
inclining to a yellowish paleness, and the Tushes to bluntness.

The tenth years age may be known by the filling up of the holes within side
the Tushes, which were before like cells or hollow pits; as also his Temples
will be crooked or distorted.

The Horse being arrived at the eleventh year of his age, the most material
thing to be known by the Teeth is their distortion, yellow color and
unseemliness; as also their more than ordinary length. Now as for the twelfth,
and generally held to be the last year a Horse's Age can be known by the Teeth,
your observation must be taken from their largeness, foulness, and hanging over
each other; and though some have held that by the close wearing of his Tushes
to the chops, his Age may be further known; yet let me advise the Buyer, that
he may be deceived therein, that, being no certain Rule or Mark, especially to
rely on. And thus much as to what relates to the knowing a Horse's Age by the
Teeth; from whence I proceed to his Mouth in general: And that which I infer
from thence is this.

If upon having regard to a Horse you perceive his Teeth and Lips hang over,
uneven or unpleasant, unless it proceed from some distemper in the Head, or
disorder in the Body, then is that Horse old.

Observe you find not too deep a burning for the Lampus, that so the Provender
may be apt to stick therein to his hindrance in feeding; and that the spaces
between the bars are not too deep and hollow of themselves, for that denotes
Age, but that they be pleasantly fixed, smooth and soft.

As the Eyes are, if sprightly and well fixed, a great ornament to the Horse,
so if other ways, they render him uncomely and deformed; Wherefore the defects
ought to be considered, viz. If upon view you perceive the Eyes to be sunk, dim
or hollow-pitted, the Temples crooked or wrinkled, then old Age is signified:
But if the contrary, viz. If the pits be full, the Eyes lively, bright and
sparkling, the Temples strait and smooth, then is the Horse young.

If you mistrust a Horse's Age, and cannot well find it according to the former
directions, then apply your feeling to the Tail; and if there you find two
knobs near the Setting-on, each about the bigness of a Musket-bullet, then you
may conclude your Horse to be very young; but if the Joint thereabout be plain
and smooth, no such sign or token appearing, then conclude him to have passed
the tenth year; and so by those knobs, proportionable to the bigness, consider
his years.

Other Considerations there are to be had from the Hair and Skin, as if you
perceive any Hairs that are grisly about the Eyebrows, especially if the Horse
be of a dark or contrary color; or if such be found underneath, the main Age
thereby is signified: The like if a white Horse, or one very light-coloured,
happen to have black or red Mannals. As to what is to be observed from the
Skin, let this be a Rule: If the Horse be old, the Skin you raise between your
thumb and finger will stand in a pucker, and not suddenly return to its place:
But if young, it will fall flat almost as soon as let go. Nor is the Hoof to be
altogether neglected in this case; for if you cast your Eyes upon a Horse whose
Hoofs are crinkled, seamed, rough or unseemly; or if they be brittle, and
subject to break or crumble, then is the Horse old or infirm. And thus much may
suffice as to Age, unless somewhat that will occur by the way in handling other
matters of the like nature.

CHAP. XIV. How exactly to know the state or condition of a Horse's Body,
relating to Fatness or Leanness, Health or Sickness; with many other things
worthy of note.
Having bred up or purchased a good Horse, there is nothing more necessary than
to keep him well; but especially look narrowly to the state of his Body; so
well informing your Judgment in the symptoms of Diseases, as at all times to be
able to discover the least defect as to what relates to his health, or hinders
his flourishing: And the better to enable such as are minded to turn their
Studies this way, I shall lay down such Rules as have upon all, or most
emergent occasions, proved effectual: which take as follows.

If you find your Horse in a drooping condition, if he refuse his Meat, and be
heavy or dull-eyed, seem uneasy, standing, or restless lying down, then
conclude some inward grief or defect afflicts him, not to be so easily
discovered as some have conjectured. Wherefore I shall first point my
Directions at the state of a Horse's Body in General, and from thence to
Particulars; beginning, the better to give the Reader an insight into the rest,
with the strong Estate or healthful Constitution of a Horse, etc.

As for some Horses, though they are in health and good temper, yet by reason
of their roundness and well-compacted body, the Buyer may have a lean one put
upon him instead of fat one, unless he be skillful in handling and trying,
thereby to discover his want of flesh or feeble constitution; and so a Horse
that is long and full-made may seem lean to the Eye at a distance, when really
he is in good case; or a fat Horse may likewise deceive the expectation of the
Buyer, by having contracted inward fatness and foulness, which will require
time and labor to avoid and bring away; when, on the contrary, some Horses
will be fat without, and in good case, yet be clean within, and free from gross
humors; and others again, though outwardly appearing lean, will be inwardly
gross and foul; and these proceed from the Order and Constitution of the Horse,
etc. And this is to be known upon search, by demonstration, sundry ways, as to
what is outwardly to be taken notice of.

First feel the Horse's Body in all the advantageous places, but especially
upon the Ribs; and in so doing, if you perceive a general softness of the flesh
or looseness, so that your fingers easily sink into it, then conclude a
foulness within; or if it be hard and firm upon all but the hindmost Ribs, then
suspect Molten-grease within, which must be voided by Purging or Scowring,
though at the same time the Horse appear poor and lean, or else he cannot well
be reduced to a good state of body; and the better to make the potions
opperate, is to prepare him for them by Exercise, that being moved and stirred,
it may the easier be brought away.

If so it happen, as has in some manner been said, that the Horse appear so fat
and thick, that the space between his Chaps is as it were closed up, or the
Jaws upon handling prove fleshy and full, then much foulness in head and body
is signified; but if upon handling he happen to be thin and clean, though some
hard knobs or kernels be contracted, yet that may rather proceed from a cold
taken, than from foulness, etc. But to come to Particulars.

If the Horse's Dung appear of a pale, whitish, yellow Color, not too hard,
yet so that in falling at only flats a little, but does not break in sunder nor
crumble, and be not of a rank noisome scent, then is the Body of the Horse free
from inward foulness: but on the contrary, if it be of a black or ^nuddy
color, hard like pellets, yet hot and greasy, it betokens foul feeding, and a
neglect in the keeper of not giving him a due proportion of Corn, but rather
feeding him with Hay in over-abundance, or suffering him to feed foul by eating
his Litter, etc. denoting he has likewise Molten-grease within him that cannot
come away without some Artificial helps. If the Dung be of a reddish color,
and hard, it signifies the Horse has been overheated or overstrained, and
therefore ought to have a Clyster of cooling Simples to cool and open his Body,
thereby preventing Sickness, or at least Costiveness.

If the Urin be of an Amber color, somewhat inclining to thickness, of a
strong, yet not offensive scent, then it denotes a healthful constitution; but
if it be ruddy or high-colored, hot and scalding, so that the Horse makes
water with pain, or does it by degrees, then has the Horse taken hurt by being
overheated, or in being ridden too soon upon being taken up from Grass: If so
it happen the Urin be of a high color, yet very clear, like Beer well settled,
then is it occasioned by Heat or Inflammation, caused by a surfeit.

If a white film or scum happen to be upon the Urin after settlement, it
denotes the Horse weakened by too much Venery; and a Mare by too often Breeding,
too furious a Lust, and consequently not very fit for service, by reason of the
weakness of the back. Green Urin denotes a Consumption of the Body; and that
with bloody streaks or specks, not much unlike to a mattery substance, denotes
an Ulcer, or the like defect, in the Kidneys: And further, a Lead* colored,
gross and cloudy Urin, denotes a dangerous sickness, if not Death it self. And
thus much as to what is to be known in relation to Health and Sickness by these
Excrements.

And now let us consider a little if a Horse be out of order, how those that
attend him ought to carry themselves toward him in relation to his Diet.

Let him observe in this case the disposition of the Horse, and not violently
thrust or intrude the Provender upon him, but consider to give him what h^ best
likes, and that at leisure and by degrees, winning him with mildness and sweet
behavior; and bewaring, above all things, not to give him any offense,
increasing the quantity as you perceive him desirous to take it, giving him
white Water to drink and ply him, as you see occasion, with warm Mashes warming
his Water with a little Bran dusted over it if the weather be cold; and be sure
to suffer him to be in a warm Stable, with clean Litter and good Dressing.

If your Horse be any ways subject to Lameness, beware in your Coursings or
Heats you avoid craggy or stoney Ground, or forcing him too much against a
Hill. Other things there are to be observed of this or the like kind, relating
to the state of a Horse's Body, as to the knowing by sundry other matters and
tokens: But as for them, I refer you to the following Chapter.

CHAP. XV. Observations to be taken as to the state of a Horse's Body, from the
Privy-parts, Limbs, Feeding, and many other Matters and Discourses, worthy to
be taken notice of by the Curious, etc.
THE Privy-parts of a Horse, as to sickness and health, are much to be
observed; and this especial notice to be taken, viz. That if he be a
Stone-horse, his Cods hang even, and his Stones well trussed up, firm and
round, which shows him in good heart, and fit for business; when, on the
contrary, if they hang long, or bagging down, a weak constitution is thereby
implied: Nor is it less to be observed by the Yard of a Gelding, or Shape of a
Mare. But, for brevities sake, waving further Particulars, I shall proceed to
take Observations from the Limbs, and what, in case of defect, ought to be done
on that occasion.

In case you intend to Run or Travel your Horse, if you find his Limbs stiff,
or not so pliable as you would have them, or as ordinarily they happen to be;
Then to render them supple and plyant, Melt Hog's-grease and Oil of Chamomile,
and dipping a Wollen-cloth hot into the Liquids, anoint or bathe therewith the
Legs or Thighs from above the Knee, and from the Cambrels downwards; or, for
want of these, Neats-foot Oil; after which chafe it in with your hands; and in
often so doing in all places where you see occasion, you will wonderfully
restore his Limbs, rendering them supple and pliable.

There are many things to be observed from the Sweating of a Horse, especially
from that which proceeeds without External force, occasioned by hard labor, or
the like; for then is the Horse faint, foul fed, or wants Exercise to
evaporate the abundance of watery humors which he has contracted: And
especially this is to be noted, when his Sweat is white and frothy, like a
Lather of Soap; but in case of Heats, and other considerable labor to create
Sweat; if it appear black and pearly, like clear water, then is the Horse in a
good plight o^ habit of Body, especially if he be lively and brisk, not in the
least afflicted with any shaking or trembling, for that infers the Sweat forced
out by some Internal disorder, rather than naturally evaporated.

And now seeing the Causes of Sickness are very material to be known, that is,
from whence they arise, that so the Skill in Curing may be the greater, and the
Remedies to be applied more powerful and certain in their Operation; as also
the causes of health and long life. Take for your better Experiment what you
find in the subsequent Chapter.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Elementary parts of a Horse's Body, and of the Agreement of
the Humors therewith. A discourse of Corruption and Generation; in which is
set forth all things of that kind, relating to Goodness or Badness, Health or
Sickness, etc.
CErtain it is, that no Man can truly pretend to Experience of this kind,
unless he duly weigh the Nature of Generation and Corruption, for on them, as
on the Collumns of this Art, stand what is material of this kind. These two
being ever consonant in the main, though one Horse's body may differ in
Constitution from the other; for these being the Suparlative of Elementary
subsistence or matter, fail not to operate in their turns, or as Nature
disposes them in their places and degrees; and therefore it will be highly
convenient to discover them in their Parts and Particles.

As for the Body of a Horse, it differs not in Elementary composition from that
of a Man; for of all the Elements it consists, viz. Fire, Air, Earth and Water,
which are indeed the Generatives and Consumers of all Mortal things and beings:
And although these Elements are different in themselves, yet are frequently
agreeable in the Composition; for the Fire, though hot and dry in it self, yet
compounded with the other Elements in a Mortal frame, or bodily composition,
diffuses a gentle heat to nourish and support life. Though the Air is hot and
moist, but more participating of the latter, yet does it temperate the heat of
the former, and gives a kind respiration and gentle breathing to refresh and
exhilerate each Part and Particle. The Earth, though it is in it self gross and
ponderous, yet in this composition is it rarefied, and by its substantial
matter composes the frame wherein the rest of the Elements cohabit; and being
cold and dry, serves to temperate the hot and moist. The Water, though cold and
moist in it self, serves in this case to moisten and render pliable the
Sublunar works of Nature, and enabling them to subsist: And of these four,
Mothers of Creation participate more immediately the four humors, of which the
Bodies of Animal and Rational Creatures are composed, as Choler, Blood,
Melancholy and Phlegm; the first of Fire, the second of Air, the third of
Earth, and the fourth to Water. And as these more or less operate, so,
according to their qualities, is the Body moved and exposed to heat, cold,
moisture or dryness, and consequently to the effects they produce; for these
have their principal Dominion in the Seats of Life, and from thence extend
their power and force to every part and member. As thus Phlegm possesses the
Brain, Choler and Blood the Liver and Heart, and Melancholy the Spleen, which
is the Recepticle and Conveyancer of the Excrements of the Liver, all of them
having distinctly and conjunctly their proper office assigned. As thus the
Blood is the principal nourisher of the natural frame, Phlegm or Moisture
renders the Members flexible and complyant in motion and use. Choler causes
digestion by its Operative heat; and Melancholy disposes to an Appetite, and
attracteth the grosser parts of Nutrimental Elements, and occasioneth the
disburthening of Nature.

It is generally agreed on by the Learned, That every Organical-body is
supported by four principal instrumental Members; and these are held to be the
Brain, Heart, Liver and Genitors, these performing their particular offices and
functions: Por as the Sinews are supported by the Brain, the seat of Animal
Spirits; the Arteries from the Heart, or seat of Vital Spirits; the Veins,
which are natural parts, from the Liver; so the Seminal Vessels are supported
by the Genital Parts or Instruments of Generation; and these conjoyntly
operating, are the Elementary Substitutes, as participating of their Nature,
and consequently the Materials of Generation.

Thus having briefly discoursed of the Elementary parts of the Bodies of
Creatures, I now proceed from the four Humors, Elements and Instrumental
Members, to the Natural faculties; which in this case are the next things to be
considered, which are Eating, Retaining, Concocting and Expelling; and though
all the Humors are Instrumental in promoting these, yet principally Nature
serves her self but of only one to work upon, and that is a wheyish kind of
Blood, generated in the Liver, or attracted thereby from the purest part of
such nutriment as has been concocted in the stomach, and from thence conveying
it self to the Liver, and through the great Vein, conveying nutriment into all
its branches, and consequently into all the parts of the Body, by dispersing
the Rarefied blood into every part, which, by the help of the other Humors,
supports the frame of Nature. As for the watery part of nourishment, and that
of the grosser substance; the one is carried into the Bladder, and the other
passing into the Bowels, are in the end cast out of the Body to make room for
more of the like nature. But moreover, there are two Veins that conduct part of
the purest and rarefied matter into the Seminal Vessels, where, by the
operation and contractions of the Generative parts, it is refined by a gentle
heat to a more spirituous quality, and so in the end becomes Seed, which,
according to the goodness or badness mixed in the Womb, proves effectual or
ineffectual; for note, that if the thin and subtle Blood be wanting to support
the Seed, and enliven it with heat, it frequently fails in performing its
office, and the Horse becomes frigid and incapable of performance, and is often
subject to moist diseases; as the Glaunders often proceeding from the Liver and
Lungs when they are infected with putrefaction, occasioned by moist Rheums, and
other indigested Moistures dedescending on them, or Inflammations occasioned by
Lumps, Knots or Kernels under the Chaul, proceeding from cold or immoderate
labor, and many times the Mourning of the Chine by a Horse's immoderate
Leaping a Mare, or over-straining himself in the action: And this may likewise
happen by his eating too much raw meat, or drinking upon a sudden heat, and
many other ways; which, when I come to treat of Diseases, I shall largely
discourse on. But first, I shall proproceed to let you know how. Horses ought
to be used, to prevent their contracting Diseases, as much as in the
superficial Schemes of Art the greatest Artists of this kind have allowed; and
the means are chiefly five, as Cleansing, Blood-letting, Purging, Sweating and
Vomiting.

The first of these may be said to be twofold, as outward and inward; the first
being by cleansing his external Parts by care and good dressing, which ought
the more diligently to be observed upon his being taken up from Grass; and the
time limited for that, by the curious, is Bartholomew-tide, for then the heart
of the Grass begins to decline. And this may be done in the manner which I
have often recited in what relates to Dressing; nor is it at all inconsistent
with Reason, that the cleansing the Skin from dust and dirt, and loosening it
in every part by gentle rubbing, should enliven the Horse, and render him more
sprightly; so that Nature having her free course and progress without
restraint, may opperate in dispersing kind refreshment to every part, and keep
those gross humors from settling, that are frequently the origi^al of Diseases
and Grievances; and if so it happen that your Horse be mirey and foul, then may
you use Fulling-earth, Soap, and other scowring Materials, especially with warm
Water; but then having an especial care he catch not cold thereupon, keeping
him warm, and well drying him till he be thoroughly cold; and in so doing you
will prevent those moist Diseases wherewith he is otherwise afflicted: And the
better to effect this, cut away all the superfluous hairs that any way anoy the
body, or other parts, etc. And so being shooed and neatly dressed, I leave him
to the Second Part, which consists in the Internal cleansing and purging
Directions; for which, in consideration of more immediate or particular
Directions, take in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XVII. How a Horse ought to be used in general and particular, as to his
Physic, Diet, and Looking to, for the preservation of him even to old Age.
THough I have named what I intend to propose in the foregoing Pages; yet let
not the Reader, considering the consequence and validity of what I shall here
propose, think it amiss that I select a Chapter for no other purpose; and that
the advantage may neither be delayed, nor appear small in the Eyes of the
Reader or Practitioner, take a prospect of it in the following Directions.

As for inward Purging, the measures ought to be taken from the temperature of
the Horse's body, and more especially in case of his retirement at such a time,
that no hard labor or immoderate exercise has been imposed on him: And in this
case, if you find him costive, or that in case of Evacuation, nature help not,
as in usual cases, let some one with a small Arm penetrate his Fundament, and
draw thence the Dung that obstructs, or at least clogs the fluent or natural
passage, that so both the natural and artificial Motions and Causes proceeding
from Drugs, or composition of Purgation, may opperate and perfect their
intended design, and may be best administered Clyster-wise: But then consider
the constitution of your Horse; If he be fat, and somewhat inclining to
foulness, it must be a strong potion that will effectually opperate; but not so
if the Horse be weak and melancholy. But waving 'em here, I shall speak more
particularly of them in due place; as also of Drinks which ought to be made,
and seasonably given for the preventing sickness, and preservation of health;
and if you find the Blood coagulated, which may be perceived by the trembling
of the Veins, and the working of it therein, then it is requisite to let him
Blood, and give him a gentle Vomit to carry the foulness from off the stomach,
that may be the occasion of bad digestion, and consequently of the naughtiness
of the Blood; Dieting him with Mashes and fine Provender, from which may spring
such wholesome nutriment, as may create a thin and airy Blood; rubbing and often
anointing his Body with Hogs Lard, or Ointment of Marshmallows. And now to be
satisfied what things mostly contribute to health, take the following Opinions
of the Learned, viz. A good natural constitution, good digestion, good
nourishment, moderation in feeding and diet, moderation in labor and sleeping,
moderation in leaping Mares. Again, wholesome Airs, not labored too soon after
Grass, to be kept from raw Meats, not to drink nor eat being hot, ever
observing to walk him at the end of any Journey, and not to Physic him unless
you find occasion. And these observances being the occasion of long life, I
shall endeavor, for the better satisfaction of the Reader, more fully to
demonstrate them.

As for Nature, good Digestion, and sound Nutriment, they ought to be
consonant, and indeed they are well proportioned, when neither the moisture
with its humidity is not so predominant as to quench and overpower the heat,
nor the extraordinary heat too suddenly consume the moisture, though of
necessity the latter must be of force above the former, or else Digestion
cannot be perfected as it ought; and in that case seasonable nourishment must
consequently fail.

Moderation in Eating is another main cause of long life, as immoderate Eating
is of a short one: For as excess in Eating, though the Provender be never so
good and wholesome, obstructs good digestion, and contracts crudities with a bad
habit of stomach; so on the contrary, spare Diet weakens and decays Nature, and
infeebles the natural powers and faculties of Life, giving the heat by that
means a power absolutely to subdue and conquer the Radical moisture, and gives
Diseases an opportunity to break in upon the infeebled body, which prove many
times too hard for the Farrier; for in all Creatures observe, that the weaker
Nature is, the stronger is the distemper.

Another cause of health and long life proceeds from moderate and kind labor,
for by indifferent motion digestion is much forwarded, and the humors
dispersed, being by that means prevented from settling more than is requisite in
any one place; besides, it is the cause that Excrements are sooner voided,
which by lying long in the body might occasion sickness. And further observe,
that he be not labored upon a full stomach, so as by over-straining, digestion
may be hindered, which should turn to nutriment; and lay a foundation for
Diseases by indigested Crudities, being too suddenly drawn into the Veins, and
by that means dispersed into all parts of the Body.

Another cause there is of the like nature that depends upon the moderateness
of sleeping and waking, for too much waking is an enemy to health, by spending
the vital spirits that should support and maintain life, and a decaying that
moisture that should refresh the several parts of the body, causing thereby
Leanness and Barrenness, a dulling of the Brain, and a defect in the Lungs and
Liver, whose offices it weakens by decaying the vigor in the performance; and
contrary to this excessive sleeping, dozes the brain, hinders digestion, and
obstructs nature in the performance of her offices, contracting noxious vapors
and a foulness of the stomach.

Another thing to be considered is, that your Horse be not admitted to spend
himself too much upon Mares, because such immoderate exercise weakens the
Brain, Back and Eyes, wastes the Vital Spirits, and often shortens the days of
many a brave Horse; and therefore if you would have your Horse last long, let
him not cover above three or four Mares in a year at the most; or if your
convenience will not at all times admit you to keep him from them, then Geld
him whilst young; for it is ever observed, that a Gelding lives longer
naturally than a Stoned-horse, and a Mule than them both, because he is not
subject to generation.

Wholesome Air, above all things, is to be chosen, for that rarifies the blood,
helps digestion, and comfort the Vital spirits; when as gross Air or evil
scents not only make the Horse loath his Provender, but corrupt the Blood, and
subject the whole body to diseases.

Traveling after Grass too soon, without purging and cleansing the Horse's
body, cause the bad humors to incorporate, or by spreading themselves, to
afflict each part with pains and disorders, reducing the Horse to a dullness of
temper and disposition, and so raw meats engender raw phlegmatic humors,
afflicting the Stomach and Brain, occasioning the Glaunders, Coughs, Catarrhs,
Stavers, Yellows, Anticors and Morfoundring, not only disable the Horse, but if
neglected, become incurable but by death.

Another cause there is, and that not to be lightly regarded, which is, not to
suffer your Horse to eat or drink when hot, and to stand thereon, for by so
doing the Blood will corrupt and putrify, occasioning Surfeits, Fevers,
Obstructions, and many the like Maladies and Grievances frequently occasioning
death: But as soon as you bring him home in that condition, put him into a warm
Stable without washing; Rub, or cause him to be well rubbed down; Cloth him
well, and let him have a sufficient quantity of warm Litter to stand on; and if
he be subject to eat it, put on his Muzzle, and so let him stand an hour or
more till his grease be sufficiently cooled, and you will find him in a fit
condition to give him his Provender: And lastly, that he may be well breathed,
and sound winded thereby, being enabled to hold out as occasion shall require,
you may at seasonable times mix with his Provender the Powder of these
following Seeds and Drugs, etc. viz. Cummin and Anniseeds, Powder of Licoris
and Ellecampane-Roots, Farberries, Brimstone, Flower, and the Roots of white
Lillies, Hysop, Horehound, Savin, Coltsfoot, the Seeds of Marshmallows, Rue,
and Polipodium of the Oak, and any of the like quality that will occasion good
Wind, and prevent Infections, purify the Blood, and help the Liver in the
performance of its office, that is, to rarifie the nutriment by a good
digestion; but you must not mix overmuch at a time, especially when you first
begin it, least he take disgust at the scent or taste, and so reject his
Provender; but increase the quantity by degrees, not giving him any above twice
a week, and then let it be Morning and Evening.

CHAP. XVIII. An exact Description of the Veins of a Horse, how situate in the
Body; as also of Blood-letting; and how, and upon what account of Sickness, or
other defect, they are to be opened, for the prevention of death or danger.
HAving thus far discoursed in Generals and Partiticulars of what relates to a
good Horse or Mare of any sort or kind, that thereby the Reader might instruct
himself; I shall proceed to what yet remains material to be known, especially
to Farriers, and such who undertake the Cure of Horses; which is to give an
account of the several parts of the Body, so as they may be distinguished as
occasion shall require, but especially of such parts as shall be found most
useful on immergent matters, and the Veins being the pipes or conduits that
carry off Blood, and consequently nutriment to all parts of the Body; I think
it highly convenient to say something in the first place of them.

From the Liver note there arises one large Vein, which, like a conduit,
supplies the rest of the branches, which are many in number, and spread
themselves throughout the Body like little Rivolets or streams: And of these,
two material ones are found in the Palate of the Mouth, above the first and
third Bars, which ought to be opened by a discreet Farrier, when the Horse is
afflicted with any Malignant pain, or disease in the Head or Stomach. Two more
there are that descending* which from the lower part of the Eyes, descend to
the Nostrils, and are best opened when the Eyes are afflicted with any
distemper or grievance. Two others there are above his Eyes, which are called
Temple-Veins, because they run cross the Temples; and these are generally
opened for cold diseases in the Head. Two great ones there are likewise that
run along the Windpipe, by the sides of it, from the uppermost Joint of his
Chaps, to the Breast, commonly called Neck-Veins; and these are opened for
sundry diseases, being the most usual Veins that are opened. There are two
other Veins that arise from between the forelegs, and are called Breast-Veins,
because they end on the top of the Breast; and these are opened in case of
Surfeits, Fevers, or Heart-sickness. Two others there are which ascend from
the forelegs, but rise not so high as those before mentioned; and these rest
upon the foremost bough of the fore-leg, and are generally called Plat-Veins;
and are opened in case of Foundering, or any other grief or grievance in the
Legs or Limbs. Other two there are that pass from the Elbow of the
fore-shoulder, down along the inside of the forelegs, being known by the name
of Shank-Veins, which are generally opened in case of Splents, Spavins,
Mallenders or Sallenders, etc. Then are there four Veins which run along the
Fetlocks of the Horse, known by the name of Shackle-Veins; and these, although
they are small, are yet important ones, and by bleeding cure the stiffness of
the Joints, and prevent Foundering. Then are there four more about the
Corronets in his Hoofs, called Corronet-Veins, and are opened for the Ring-bone
and Surbating. In the Hoof are four more, which circle his Toes, called
Toe-Veins; and are opened for fretting and foundering. Two great Veins there
are, that descending from his Stones, pass along the inside of his Thighs, to
his Cambrels; and these are called Kidney-Veins, and are opened with success
for diseases in the Reins and Kidneys. Two others there are which, descending
from above the hinder Cambrils, pass along on the inside of the hinder-legs,
down to the Fetlocks, being called the Spavin-Veins, and are seldom opened,
unless in case of the Blood-spavin. Two Veins are likewise found in his Flanks,
from whence they take their denomination, and are opened successfully for any
pain or grief in the Fillets or Reins. Two Veins he has in his Haunches, called
by the name of Haunch-Veins, and are opened in case of falling away, or
consumption of the Flesh, Hideboundness, or the like. Two there are that run
along the side of the Belly, from the Elbow to the Flank, and are called
Spur-Veins; and in case of fretting, belly-foundring, spurgall, festring, or
swelling of the belly or flank, they are opened with success. In his Tail is
one single Vein, called the Tail-Vein, which is opened in case of sheading the
Hair; so that in all there are found, as a complete number of principal Veins,
or as from which Blood is taken on sundry occasions, thirty seven; in knowing
which, any Man may understand how to let his Horse blood, in case of the
beforementioned Distempers, at such times as a Farrier is not at hand. Many
other small Veins there are, but so inconsiderable to our purpose, that I shall
not undertake them in this place, but proceed to speak somewhat of the Sinews:
which is another Material part of this noble Creature, worthy to be inspected.

CHAP. XIX. A Discourse of the Sinews and their Situation; together with their
Use and Office; and what further in that kind is to be observed as to the state
of a Horse's Body, etc. with the Description of the Bones, etc.
SEeing the Sinews are the principal Ligaments that support the frame of a
Horse's Body, and so convenient to be known, in order to the remedying sundry
griefs and disorders, it will be highly necessary to speak of them in their
order, and especially of so many of them as are the principal movers of the
Body.

As for the fountain or source from whence the Sinews spring, and by which they
are nourished, it is the Brain, for there passes through the hollow of the Neck
one large Tendon or Sinew, which running along the backbone, continues its
course even to the end of the Tail: And from this proceeds two small branches,
which passing through the Scull, fall down along the Horse's cheeks to the
points of the Nostrils. Two other branches there are which pass through holes
in the neither Chap, knitting it with the other, and so pass along by the great
Teeth, meeting just beneath the neither lip. Then are there twenty eight small
strings, that running through the seven Bones that compose the Neck, knit them
together; and passing from thence, use their office in knitting; likewise the
Chine even to the Strunt. Then are there two great ones that stretch themselves
over the Spade-bones, and then dividing into diverse branches, spread in a
descending manner into the Legs, even into the Hoofs, and in their progress
knit every Joint together. Besides what I have named, there are two main Sinews
coming through two holes to the flat bones of the Hips or Huckle; and from
thence being divided into many branches, pass down into the hinder-legs, even
into the coffin of the Hoofs, binding all the Joints firmly together. Now above
all these, there is one main Sinew or Ligament proceeding from the setting-on
of the Horse's Neck, which passes along the Chine, and is one entire Sinew of
near three inches broad, being in its nature flat, and not having any branch
proceeding from it: And this is the great strengthener of the Back and Neck of
any Horse, and holds the Shoulder-blades firm; so that in all it is reckoned,
a Horse has no less than thirty principal Sinews, whence a great number of
other Sinews do proceed of lesser note. But these which I have named are so
useful in supporting the frame of the body, that if any one of them are
afflicted, the Horse will be much afflicted, etc. And now the next thing
material to be known of this kind is the number of Bones, and their situation;
which, according to the best account that has been given, take as follows.

The full number of Bones found in the body of a Horse are a hundred and
seventy, viz. the upper part of the Head are computed two bones; from the
Forehead to the Nose are two more; the neither Jaws are computed two Bones; the
four Teeth are found to be twelve; the Tushes four, and the Grinders twenty
four; the Bones in the Necks, from the Spade-bone to the Huckle-bone eight;
from the Huckle-bones to the end of the Tail are accounted seven: Next, or at
least next to be considered, is a broad bone, in which are found twelve Seams
or Joints: Then the two Spade-bones, and after them the Forcales or
Canale-bones, and subsequent to these those that are commonly called the
Marrow-bones, and from thence to the Knees; two called the Thigh-bones, next to
them two others, proceeding from thence to the Pasterns, called the
Shank-bones, and so downward into the Hoof; other Bones, called the Supporters,
in all sixteen, though some of them are very small. In the Breast there is a
great Bone, whereunto thirty six Ribs, great and small, are appendances; and to
the Colume behind are afixed two Bones, and from the Molars to the Joints you
will find other two Bones, and two more toward the bending of the Ribs; from
the bending of the Ribs, unto the Ribs, are two Bones, though very small in
comparison of those we account Capital ones; and from the Legs to the two
Focils of the Legs, are to be found other two little Bones. And moreover
observe, that from the Pasterns to the Hoof, and in the Hoof are sixteen little
Bones: All which are ruled and governed by Ligaments, and tends on to the best
advantage or complacency in the frame of nature, and are necessary to be known
as to the frame and station wherein they reside, or are situate. From which I
proceed to the Art of Phlebotomy, or letting Blood, and the seasons and
distempers that require it, etc.

CHAP. XX. Of Blood-letting in general; and how to know by sundry signs and
tokens the state of a Horse's Body; when and where it is convenient to let him
Blood, for the preventing of Sickness, or recovery of Health.
IN consideration that Bleeding is held by many, and those none of the worst
Experienced, to prevent distempers and disorders in Horses, if the times and
seasons are rightly observed, and the Disease according to what has been
mentioned, I shall not fail to give Instructions of all kinds any way tending
or relating to this matter, so far as may consist with any purpose, or what
thereby is intended to the good or advantage of a Horse: And of these
Directions in their order.

To let a Horse Blood too often, decays Nature, and much weakens the Horse;
when, on the other side, too long to defer it, gives corrupt Blood an
opportunity to create Diseases that infect and afflict him; if it be done for
healths sake, without any sign of apparent danger, then is twice in a year
sufficient: The times best approved of for this office, are the end of
December, and the beginning of May. Now some are of opinion, that there is no
need of letting a Stone-horse Blood, if he be used to cover Mares, unless some
disease be apparent; and the reason they give is, that his spending does
exhaust his Blood sufficiently: But such a reason is very weak, considering the
Blood of which the Seed is made, by the working and operation of the Genital
Parts, is the most spirited, and and pure of all other; and that which ought to
be taken away by Blood-letting, is commonly the most gross and offensive, so
that it will never turn to Seed, but corrupt by continuing in the Body, and
create Diseases; and therefore ought it to be drawn off, that the Veins being
emptied, may fill with better Blood; nay, Blood-letting is coveted naturally by
some Horses; for the Horses of Poland often let themselves blood by often
rubbing against a sharp Post or Rock: And so does the River Horse in Niius,
from whose Example it is held, that Phlebotomy or Blood-letting came in use.
Others there are that will not have Geldings let Blood; and the reason they
give is, that his Body, through the loss of his Genitors, being infeebled,
wants the Blood to support and corroborate it; and that it consumes faster in
him than in a Stone-horse: But this bears no weight, for the Blood will
increase according to the constitution of the Horse and his feeding, and
according to the heat or coldness of the Country the Horse is bred in, the less
or more Blood is found in him.

The next Material matter to be regarded, is the exact time when it ought to be
performed; and most hold it best in the Morning, when the Horse is fasting, an
hour after he wakes or rouses up: And then again have regard to the Moon, it
being in the increase, if possible, but by no means in the Sign where the Vein
is situate that you open, least thereby your Horse be weakened, for then the
Vital spirits will issue with the blood. And another regard is to be had to his
Age; for if he be very old, you must not bleed him, unless upon some emergent
occasion, but suffer his Blood to nourish him, that his Flesh may not wain or
decrease. And in all these cases you must have regard to a Horse's
constitution, for some are more capable of losing three pound of Blood, than
others are two or one; or in case of a Disease, according as more or less is
required, as the Blood is more or less infected; and in such a case no time nor
season is to be regarded, but as necessity requires; for many times
Blood-letting in such cases is a means to save the Horse, as deferring of it is
to the destroying of him: And in these or the like cases it ought to be known
in what Diseases it is requisite, and that it may in the general be discovered
by these Signs, Viz.

If the Horse's Eyes look red, and his Veins rise and swell beyond the ordinary
bounds, then is he oppressed with too much Blood, or at least that which is not
good. If you perceive by his Itching, scrubbing himself, and uneasiness, that
there is a salt firey humor contracted in the Veins, then let him Blood; which
is more immediately known by the extraordinary itching of the Mane and Tail; by
rubbing of which, the Hair frequently sheds, and the Skin peels off. If his
Urin be red and high-colored, and his Dung very hot, black and hard. If on his
Back there appear little Bubles or Inflammations red and angry; or if his Meat
be not well digested, then they denote the Horse to abound with Blood, and
stand in need of having it drawn off to a degree, that his health may be
preserved or restored. If the Whites of his Eyes are tainted with yellowness,
or the like happen to his upper or neither Lip, it is requisite to bleed him,
for upon the happening of any of these Signs the Blood is disordered,
super-abundant or corrupted, and some fatal sickness is threatened: To prevent,
or at least mittigate which, there is no better way than bleeding. And in the
manner of letting Blood, when you have corded your Horse conveniently, that the
Veins may appear full and fair, you may strike your Fleam in the Neck-Veins
four Inches on this side the setting-on of the Head; but the other Veins being
small, you must open them with a Lancet, for fear of cutting them through, and
so consequently injure the Nerves that support them. And thus much for
Blood-letting, and the Signs of Bleeding, etc. From which I shall proceed to
what relates to Cures of all kinds, whether Internal Diseases, or External
Sorrances, after the best and easiest manner and method, according to the
approved Rules and Directions of the ablest Farriers and Horsleeches that are,
and have been rendered famous for their Skill, not only in this, but in diverse
other Nations; and withal let you plainly understand the cause of the most
Chronical diseases, as well as the means to Cure them, rendering the method and
manner easy to the Practitioner, and advantageous to those that trade in
Horses, and keep them for their profit or pleasure. But before I absolutely
enter upon them, there are a few things necessary to be considered, and
especially five, Viz.

(1.) To inform ones self to what grief or distemper a Horse is inclinable.
(2.) The cause from whence it proceeds, whether External or Internal. (3.) The
tokens and symptoms by which the distemper is known. (4.) By what means the
Causes accrue that create the distemper. (5.) How to apply Remedies fitting to
the distempers and disorders. And these are so absolutely necessary, that
without such knowledge a perfect cure cannot be wrought by any Farrier.
And now as for the Diseases and Grievances incident to a Horse, they are not a
few, those that reckon the least, consent to sixty of different natures; and,
to be plain, there are many more which may be called dependants on these, or
indeed some of them, no less dangerous. But submitting to the Judgment of the
Learned, I now come to another Material Point, which relates mostly to the
Chyrurgical part, or Methods to be taken and known in the curing Sorrances,
etc. which indeed are the most difficult; and then I shall proceed in order.

CHAP. XXI. A Description of Diseases, Grievances or Sorrances, incident to
Horses, etc. to foresee them by sundry signs and tokens; and know whence they
arise; with the ways and methods of Preventing, Redressing and Curing them; by
Approved Rules and Remedies, according to the Practice of the best Farriers in
all Ages, etc.
MAny are the terms and names given to Grievances and Sorrances, and these
frequently take their denomination from the place of their situation, relating
to the parts of the Body, and chiefly arise or proceed from the evil state or
habit of the Body, and defect of the Members, especially when there happens a
loosning and division of the Unity, or a Dissonance in the temperature; and so
we say when any division or loosning happen in the Bone, it is a Fracture; if
it happen in the Veins, it is a Rupture; and in the Flesh a Wound or Ulcer; in
the Sinews it is termed the Cramp or Convulsion; and in the Skin an
Excoriation. And now observe, that in Cauterizing or Burning, which may be done
two manner of ways, viz. with hot Oils or Water, or with a hot Iron; as also in
making Incision, or the like, that they ever be done with caution above or
beneath the Vein or Sinew, and never upon them, least by the discommodity that
may arise, the Horse be rather damaged than furthered: And again, observe never
to apply to Veins or Sinews any extraordinary Corrosives; and these we reckon
so, are Arsnick, Sublimate-Mercury, Resalgar, Oil of Vitriol, Tartar, etc.

In case of Cauterizing, ever observe rather to Lance with a hot Iron, than a
cold one; and rather cauterize than cut, because by the heat the humors are
driven back, which would otherwise render the Sore or Grief of long
continuance; and by the product of a Sore in the Original, you may know the
constitution of a Horse; for if he be sanguine, a whitish watery Excressence
will flow of an indifferent thickness; if Choleric, a thin salt one, inclining
to greenish; if Phlegmatic, a kind of a gellied-water; and if Melancholic,
then a gross blackish moisture, attended by a dry Scab or Scurf.

In case of Swelling or Tumors, it will be necessary with heed to mark the
place they begin in, as also their progress and ending, that so the part of the
body afflicted with bad humors may have Applications suitable to remove them.

Now if it so happen that the Swellings or Tumors be not upon any master Vein
or Sinew, or too near the Vital parts, then may Repercussive Medicines be used:
but if so, then those that are mollifying, to raise it gently by degrees, that
so being ripened, it may break of it self; or if necessity require it, be
Lanced, that the Corruption passing away, such things may be applied, that with
a Lenitive softness may heal the grief.

In case the swelling be hard, it is generally Corrosive, and must have such
Medicaments applied: but if soft, those of a more supple nature will prevail,
though many happen to be of a long continuance. And now to know whether a
Swelling has been of a long continuance, press it with your finger; and if the
dint continue after you have taken your finger away, then is it old, and of a
long standing; but if the flesh suddenly return, then is it newly taken. If a
Swelling or Sore be broken, and moderately matter, then it signifies a good
constitution, and that it mends apace; but if the Putrefaction greatly
increase, then it denotes a mass of bad humors there contracted which must by
degrees be brought away; and many times in this or the like cases is
Cauterizing actually or potentially used, that is, with hot Irons, or with
Liquids, etc. of which I have before spoken above or beneath the Sore, to
divert or keep back the humor. And now to that which relates to Cures, etc-

CHAP. XXII. Excellent Receipts for the Cure of Diseases, etc. in Horses or
Mares, according to the best Experience of skillful Practitioners: Many of
which were never before made public.
AS the Causes of Sickness are many, so are the Cures or Medicines wherewith
they are redressed, and the Signs that fore-run and attend them, which I have
given in Generals and Particulars. Yet seeing something of this kind may remain
untouched, I shall take them in the way as I proceed. Now of Sicknesses there
are two kinds; one that possesses the whole body, as Convulsions, Fevers,
Pestilence, and suchlike general disorders and contagions infecting the Blood;
and others but a part of the Body, as Vertigoes, Headache, Yellows, and the
like; yet both many times prove equally dangerous and destructive.

The Glaunders; from what it proceeds; and how to Cure it.
The Glaunders is a distemper often gotten by overriding, and sudden cooling
upon heats; eating too much raw food at unseasonable times, or continuing in
wet moorish ground, proceeding from a phlegmatic constitution: And this you may
perceive before it take too firm a possession by a white matter issuing from
the Horse's Nostrils, and his unseasonable snorting: And this Disease having
its seat properly in the Head,

Take of the green Leaves of a Box-tree, an ounce of Anniseeds, and the like
quantity of Licorish-powder: steep them in Ale or new Milk, to the quantity of
a quart; adding Treacle four ounces, and the like quantity of Olive-oyl: heat
them well over a gentle fire, and with a horn give the Horse the liquid part to
drink in the Morning fasting, as hot as may be well endured; then give him a
moderate Course, and bringing him home, let him have a warm Mash; Cloth him
up, and leave him in a warm Stable for the space of two hours before you feed
him.

The Quinzey in a Horse, etc. what it is; and how to Cure it.
The Quinzey is a distemper, occasioned by phlegmatic humors, settling in the
Neck or Throat, so that the passage of the breath is in a manner stopped, and
the beast obliged to breathe with a more than ordinary pain and labor: To
remove them then, and redress the grievance, after having bled him in the
Neck-vein,

Take Marshmallows, Groundsel, Cammomoil and Hart's-tongue; bray them with a
like quantity of Smallage, and fry them with Hog's Grease; so being very hot,
apply them to the place which ought to be under the Chaul, and they will
mollify the swelling, and by degrees remove the obstruction of the passage:
Then take Roach-Allum, Honey, and white Dogs-turd: dissolve them with brown
Sugar Candy in a quart of Milk, give it him hot; and so continue to do for a
week together, Morning and Evening; renewing likewise the Poltis once a day.

A Horse's Bleeding at the Nose; how to stay or prevent it.
This happens, especially amongst young Horses, through the abundance of Blood,
that through the free passage of the large Veins, ascends into the Head; and
passing to the thin Veins within the Nostrils, either by its violent motion
forces them, or by its corrosive quality eats them in sunder; or it may
accidentially happen by a stroke or violent straining: To remedy which,

Take the Juice of Nettles, mixed with Loaf-sugar* and squirt it up the Horse's
Nostrils, using at convenient times to burn under his Nose Storax,
Frankincense, or Linen dipped in Aquavitae, in a Chafing Dish; the fume of
which will oblige the Blood to retreat: or instead of Nettle-juyce, you may use
that of Garlic, blowing up after it the Powder of dried Rubarb.

For Pains in the Teeth or Jaws.
Pains in the Teeth or Jaws of a Horse are created by Wind or cold Rheums that
often afflict the Marrow or Sinews which support them; and are often known by
the Horse's Drivelling, holding open his Mouth, and defect in feeding: And in
this case,

Take a good handful of the Herb Bettony, sees it in a quart of White Wind
Vinegar till half be consumed, then add an ounce of the Powder of Elecampane:
wash with the liquid part, his Teeth and Gums, anointing his Jaws with Ointment
of Tobacco, Lancing the Gums, and opening the Temple-vein on the side where the
pain is most predominant.

The Canker in the Nose; what it is, and the Remedy.
The Canker in the Nose proceeds from a virilent humor contracted there,
occasioned by Inflammation. To cure this, or indeed one in any part of the Body,

Take of White Wind Vinegar a quart, Roach-Allom two pounds, a pint of the
Juice of Plantane, and as much of that of Rue, with four ounces of Honey: boil
them to the consumption of a third part, and wash the grieved part therewith as
hot as the Horse will well endure it morning and evening, and the Canker within
a fortnight will decay.

A Remedy for the Colic, Belly-ach, or Belly-binding.
The two first of these proceed from cold, raw, slimy humors settled in the
Bowels, there occasioning a fretting or shrinking up of the Bowels, or by a
contraction of Windiness, which stretches them out; and the latter by
excessive heat or bad digestion. Now to remedy these,

Take four ounces of Dill-seed, or the Herb it self, if it may be gotten; as
also two handfulls of Mayweed: boil these in a gallon of small Beer, with a
pound of brown Sugar, and give the Horse a quart at a time each morning fasting
for the space of four days, suffering it to be lukewarm.

The Lasks or Blood-flux, and its Remedy.
This distemper is an unnatural Looseness of the Body, contracted either by raw
feeding, or a fretting of the Bowels caused by choleric and firey humors, and
a superfluity of bad blood; which not being stayed in time, will, for want of
other Excrements, cause the Horse to void Blood. To cure this,

Take a good handful of the Herb called Shepherds-purse, and two ounces of the
Seeds of Woodroof: stamp them, and boiling them in three pints of Ale till it
come to a quart; strain out the Liquid part, and give it him hot in a
Drenching-horn, continuing so to do for three or four Mornings successively.

The Botts; what they are, and their Cure.
The Botts are a short thick Worm, like a Maggot, having black heads, and are
engendered through the corruption of heat and moisture in the Maw or Bowels of a
Horse, where they gnaw and afflict him in a grievous manner, and may be
discerned by his lifting up his feet to strike at his Belly, and the small
stomach he has to feed. The way to destroy them is thus:

Take Rue, Savin, Nightshade, the Seeds of Ameos, each two ounces: bruise them
well, and with Honey and Roach-Allum make them up into little balls; and
buttering them over, suffer him to swallow two of them in the Morning fasting,
and about an hour after give him of Salad-oyl and Aquavitae, each a quarter of
a pint, very hot; and after that let him stand another hour before you give him
any Provender: and this Rule observe for a week together.

For the Shoulder-strain, a good Remedy.
Having tied up the lame Leg, drive your Horse till by his striving to go on
three Legs the Plat-vein appear; then let down his Leg, and bleed him on that
side, having in a readiness a basin with Salt in it to receive the blood,
stirring it to keep it from clotting: then having likewise an ounce of the Oil
of Turpentine, put it into half a pint of Beer or Ale, warm them well; and when
he has bled a quart or more, as you see occasion, nip the Orifice with a piece
of Lead made in form for that purpose, and chafe the place grieved with the Oil
and Beer, and afterward with the Blood and Salt; then putting him into a warm
Stable, draw the two forelegs to an evenness with a Lift or Girt, binding them
strait, and so permitting him to stand; or if you think convenient, to keep his
feet the firmer and evener, wedge them between the Shoe and the Hoof with a
flat stick, continuing to anoint and bathe him as often as occasion requires,
unbinding his Legs, and leading him each Morning till you find the Lameness
decrease. And thus you may do for a Wrench or Distortion of the Shoulder.

Broken-wind; what it is; and to remedy it, if not past Cure.
The Breaking of the Wind is occasioned by excessive riding or straining, or by
bad usage after much labor, or excessive Rheums falling upon the Lungs, and
hindering them in the performance of their office, to that degree, that the
closures of the Windpipe shrink up, or are restrained from their former
plyableness: And to remedy this, if not too far gone,

Take the Soil or Dung of a Boar or Barrow-Pig dried, that it may be reduced to
Powder, and of Anniseeds an equal quantity: boil them in Milk or Whey, and give
him a pint of it hot to drink every third Morning, causing him to Exercise
moderately thereupon: or it would be better if you could get the Dung of a
Hedgehog, usually called an Urchin; the Dose to the pint of Milk is two
spoonfulls of each of the Ingredients.

A Horse burnt by a Mare, how to Cure.
This grief is to be observed by the Mattering of the Yard, etc. and the
dullness of the countenance of the Horse; which perceived. To remedy the
grievance,

Boil a quarter of a pound of Roach-Allom in a pint of White Wind; and being
reduced to a thinness, squirt part of it blood-warm up the Horse's Yard with a
Syringe: and by doing so once a day for a week together, the Cause will cease,
and the Effects be no more.

For a dry Cough, cold Pursiveness, broken Wind, or shortness of Breath, an
excellent Remedy.

These distempers being occasioned by cold gross humors, rawness of diet,
overmuch labor, unseasonably gross feeding, and unwholesome Airs which infect
the Lungs:

Take an ounce of Rue Seeds, Tarr two ounces, and as much fresh Butter: mix
them well together with the Powder of Licorish, Anniseed, Nutmeg and brown
Sugar Candy, and make them into three balls in equal potions; and when your
Horse is warm with motion or riding, having put into each ball three or four
Cloves of Garlic, oblige your Horse to swallow them when he is fasting; and
bringing him home, let him stand without Meat for the space of an hour in a a
warm Stable.

If the former fail, as rarely it does, Take of Bacon-Lard a piece to the
breadth of four fingers, and every way as thick as long, if you can get it: But
as for the thickness, two fingers may serve: then stop it with Cloves and
Garlic, dusting it over with Powder of Licorish, Anniseeds, Sugar Candy, and
Flower of Brimstone, and cause him in two long slices to swallow it fasting,
and ride him thereupon, that he cast it not up: and do so every other Morning
for a week together, giving him after it a Glass of Mallaga.

Now to make a Horse in this case swallow, though against his will, Draw forth
his Tongue as far as is convenient, and put the potion down his Throat beyond
the roughness; and then suddenly letting go his Tongue, he will swallow it
down without tasting or scenting: and in so doing you must ever draw up his
Head to the Rack, that it may descend the better.

To restore decayed and putrefied Lungs.
The Sign of the Lungs being in this disorder, is to be known by a faint Cough,
and the casting of putrefied matter out of his Mouth like small pieces of red
Flesh. eating his Provender with greediness. To redress this,

Take of the Juice of Purslain; or, for want of it, that of Housleek, half a
pint; Steel-dust two ounces; Oil of Roses four ounces; of Tragcauthium one
ounce: Add to them a quart of Goat's Milk, and give it him hot at three times,
keeping him for a while after fasting and in motion: And this you may use till
you find his Breath become sweet, and the Cough allayed; the which, if it be
not too far gone, will be in a weeks time. And the better to refresh the Vital
parts, Burn under his Nose Sterax, Galbam^m or Myrrh.

A dry Consumption, its Remedy, etc.

This Disease is occasioned by sharp corroding humors descending from the
Head, and falling upon the Lungs, by which they are many times ulcerated, and
by their bad effects, cause a Macerating or Wasting of the Body; yet sends
forth no Corruption at the Nose, because the moisture is consumed by the heat.
To remedy which,

Take a pint of the Juice of Comfory, half a pint of Oil of Roses, the Juice of
four Lemons, and an ounce of the Juice of Rue: Let them simper over a gentle
fire, and add the Powder of Round Bithwort-Roots two ounces, and an ounce of
that of Ruburb; and give him these in two equal potions Morning and Evening.

The Breast-pain; from whence it proceeds, and how to Cure it.
This disorder of the Body proceeds from a superfluity of blood which presses
the Heart, and gross indigested humors that make the like unnatural Invasion
upon the Liver; and the signs to know when he is so afflicted, are a stiff
staggering and keeping together the forelegs as it were, and but weakly
proceeding in his pace* etc. his gate distorted and uneven, stiffly, for the
most part, holding up his Head and Neck, as not being well able to reach the
ground; and moreover, you will observe him to groan and strain in his eating
and drinking.

To cure this, which frequently ends in death, if not timely regarded, let him
Blood in both the Breast-veins; and when he has bled sufficiently, two quarts
at least, chafe his Breast and Fore-body with Oil of Peter, that the Blood may
be drawn into the empty Veins, and so ease the Vital parts of their oppression,
and give him a pint of warm White Wind, with two ounces of Diapente: or if the
Pain afterward continue, which is very rare, you may Rowel him.

Heart-sickness, or Antecor; whence it proceeds, and how to remedy it.
This distemper being an enemy to the Heart, seems from thence to take its
denomination, and is caused by a superfluity of Blood in Horses that feed high,
and are put to little or no labor: which Blood, for want of motion, being
corrupt, infects the Heart, and renders it sickish and languishing.

The signs are a small swelling rising at the bottom of the Breast, increasing
upward to the top of the Neck; whether if it arrive before it be prevented,
death frequently issues: It is known also by his hanging his head, loathing his
food, and groaning through the oppression of pain. These things being observed,

Let your Horse Blood on either Plate-vein, or in the Neck, if the Swelling be
risen high; and having bled him freely, Take of the best Malmsey a quart, add
to it two ounces of Sugar, and an ounce of beaten Cinnamon: give it him to drink
blood-warm, and it will revive and cherish the heart by dispelling the evil
vapors from the seats of Life; and after that wisp him well over his Cloth,
and let him rest, giving him the next Morning the like dose, and riding him
gently.

Foundering in the Body or Surfeiting, how occasioned; together with the Remedy.
This disease, according to the Skillful, is occasioned by a contraction of
Molten-grease and evil humors, which oppress the frame of the Body, and is
taken by the bad management of those that use the Horse indiscreetly, watering
him when hot, or letting him upon a heat suddenly cool in a bad air or moist
place: by which means the dispersed humors, together with the Molten-grease,
have opportunity to contract themselves into one Mass, to that degree of
Consolidation, that Nature, without extraordinary helps, is not capable of
dispersing or dispelling them.

The signs demonstrating this distemper or grievance, are the staring of the
hair, hanging the head, an unusual Cough, staggering, belching; the clinging up
of the Belly, and rising of the Back.

To remedy this distemper, Take a handful of Mallows, as much Smallage,
Cammomoil and Groundsel, an ounce of Alloes, two quarts of new Milk, and half a
pound of brown Sugar: boil them together, and strain out the liquid part,
giving it the Horse Clysterways; and when it has caused him to empty
sufficiently, Take a quart of Malmsey, or, for want of it, Canary, of Licorish,
Anniseeds and Cinnamon beaten to Powder, each half an ounce: put them, with two
ounces of beaten Sugar Candy, into the Wine, and give it the Horse warm,
keeping him afterward in motion, though in the Stable, for the space of two
hours, well clothed and littered; after which give him two quarts of Oats and
a quart of ^plent-beans well sifted, and sprinkled with Beer, etc.

The greedy Worm or hungry Evil; what it is, and how to be remedied or
prevented.
This distemper, or rather defect in a Horse, has deceived many; for whereas
they take it for a good sign to see a Horse feed hastily, and be voracious, yet
is it the cause of sickness, and decay in the end, if not prevented; for the
cause a Horse is so hasty and large a feeder, is either by reason he has been a
long time debarred from Meat, and so the Veins being open and empty, crave
nutriment: or from too excessive a heat in the stomach, that consumes the
moisture and nutriment faster then it can be reasonably expected to digest: The
first of these, if not prevented, creates diseases, and other disorders, by the
Veins, drawing in the crude digestion not perfected, and filling their Cavities
with a gross watery humor, rather than good blood; and the latter by feeding
the heat (which otherwise would decay) that consumes the Radical moisture.

The help for this is, first feeding the Horse by degrees, suffering a regular
digestion; and the latter by giving him cooling things to allay the heat, and
moderate the Appetite, are the best things to reduce him to a due temperature
and managed diet, as has been said; but more particularly, give him a quart of
Cream, a pint of White Wind boiled with a handful of Wood Sorrel, and the like
quantity of Scabeous or Mugwort, the liquid part only: Let him take it cold,
and rest upon it, and it will close the Veins to that degree, that the
digestion may be made perfect; as also it will allay the heat.

Yellow and Black Jaundice in a Horse, the Cause and Cure, etc.

The Yellow Jaundice generally arises from the abundance of choleric humors
contracted, which occasion the overflowing of the Gall, and are great
oppressors of the body, and obstructors of health; and the signs are the
yellowness of the Mouth-skin, insides of the Lips and Eyes. There is another
kind of this disease that proceeds from Melancholy; and these are called the
Black Jaundice, and have their original from Obstructions in the Liver-vein,
which passes to the Spleen, and consequently hinders the Spleen from doing its
proper office, by receiving only corrupted Blood from the Liver; and so is
obliged, by reason of its being surcharged, to cast it back into the Veins: And
this latter, in case of death, as indeed being most dangerous, mastereth the
former; but a timely regard may remove them; as thus:

Take, after you have blooded your Horse in the third Bar of the Mouth, an
ounce of Turmerick, and half an ounce of Saffron, four or five Cloves, and six
spoonfulls of strong Vinegar, Long-Pepper and Licoras, beaten fine, of each an
ounce, with the like quantity of Burdock-roots: boil them in two quarts of Ale
till a third, or at least a fourth part be consumed, and give it him to drink
very hot; and in so doing you will find the bad humors disperse, and by
degrees losing their force by the opperation of nature, and the conquering
quality of the Medicament; but if it be too long delayed, it many times runs
beyond the help of Art.

Costiveness; from whence it proceeds, and its Remedy.
This disorder is a hardening of the Excrements in the body, so that without
great pain the Horse cannot evacuate or void his Dung; and this is often
occasioned by excess of Provender, insomuch that nature forces it into the
Bowels before it be well digested in the stomach: or again, it happens by
feeding altogether upon dry Meats; the which, though wholesome and nourishing,
contract notwithstanding the Excrements by the extraordinary heat they
occasion; and it may likewise happen by excessive fasting. To remedy which, you
may give him a Clyster made in this manner:

Take a handful of Marshmallows, decoct them in Spring Water, not exceeding a
quart: add to these half a pint of Salad-oyl, and six ounces of fresh Butter;
of Benedicta Laxativa an ounce, and force them warm up his Fundament, holding
or tying close his Tail, by bringing it with a cord between his Legs, obliging
him to keep it in for the space of an hour: And the beteer to make it work,
give him a warm Mash, and as soon as he has discharged it, give him in a
Drenching-horn a potion made after this manner:

Take two ounces of Castle-soap, dissolve it in a pint of warm White Wind, and
with it a quarter of a pint of Linseed-oyl; sweetning them all with
Sugarcandia, and give it him as hot as he can drink it.

The Cramp, or Convulsion in the Nerves or Sinews, how occasioned; together
with the Remedy, etc.

These generally proceed from some bruise, wound, or other hurt on the Nerves
or Sinews, or excessive straining, especially where the Horse after a great
heat by riding or servile labor suddenly cools.

This grievance is known by the trembling of the Joints, Nerves or Veins, or by
their contracting to such a stubbornness or stiffness, that, for a time,
neither the Horse, nor those that attempt to help him, are capable of bending
them.

To cure this, Take Cammomoil, Primrose-leaves, the Roots of Crowfeet and
Cowslips, with the Branches of Fennel, Rosemary and Pimpernel: boil them in
Running-water, and having pressed out the liquid part, bathe the place grieved
with it exceeding hot, binding on the Herbs Poltis-ways with course Linen, or
bands made of Straw or Hay, and keeping him in a warm Stable, with good
Provender, his Limbs will be restored, and rendered as before; and the better
to hearten him, let him receive for a Morning or two the Yolk of an Egg in a
Glass of Canary.

The Mourning of the Chine, its Cause, and the means to Cure it.
This grievance is caused by suddenly cooling upon excessive heats standing in
damp or wet places, or eating such things as turn to raw humors; which falling
upon the Liver and Lungs, frequently inflame or putrefie them, so that they
occasion the Horse by defect of their office to fall down suddenly and dye.
Therefore when you by any trembling or dullness suspect this grievance, let
your Horse blood; and having chafed him well,

Take Olive-oyl and Verjuyce, of each two ounces; the Juice of Sellendine, and
Powder of Elecampane-Roots, of each an ounce: warm them a little, and tying his
head up to the Rack, pour them into his Nostrils, stopping them close after it,
that he may be forced to sneeze and strain to cast it out; after which, having
an ounce of the Powder of Ruburb heated in a pint of Canary, give it him in a
Drenching-horn as hot as he can well endure it; and so use him each Morning for
a week together, and the bad humors will be worked off.

Frenzy or Madness, its Original; with the means to remedy it according to the
Experienced way.
This disease is very dangerous, and often terminates in death, and is
occasioned by hot and firey humors unseasonably mixing with the blood, which
by its ascending Inflammation afflicts the Brain, that principal seat of life:
And this is known by the staring of the Horse, the distorting of his Eyes,
hanging of his Ears, Staggering and Giddiness, his often crying and forsaking
his Mean; and if it be wrought to a hight, his often beating himself against
the Post, Manger, or other places he can conveniently come at; biting,
stamping, and flying about; with many the like disorders.

To remedy this, speedily let him Blood in the Temple-veins; and if he bleed
not freely, there strike him in the Neck-veins; when having bled sufficiently,
Take the Roots of Gourds or wild Cucumers, Black Helebore, Rue and Mint, with
Virgo Pastoris, each a handful: boil them in Beer or fair Running-water, and
give him the liquid part very warm; and doing so three or four times, it will
purify and purge the Blood: but if you suppose it too weak for the Horse's
constitution, you may dissolve in it an ounce of well-washed Alloes: And
observe in this case, above all things, to keep him warm.

The falling-Evil, its Cause and Remedy.
This distemper is caused by a vapor that oppresses or anoys the Vital parts,
rendering the frame of the body for a time senseless, and altogether unable to
distinguish what befalls it, and has its original from an evil habit of body;
and its approach is frequently known by the coldness of the Nose and Gristles
thereabout.

The speedy, at least the best Remedy, is to let him Blood on both the
Neck-veins in the Morning when he is fasting, and then prepare a dose of the
Powder of dried Berries of Misletoe, and the Powder of Hartshorn, each an
ounce; of the Oil of Nutmeg and Pepper, each a dram: compound them in half a
pint of Canary, and give it the Horse, when you perceive the grief to be coming
on him, as warm as may be.

The sleeping-Evil; what it is, and the way to remedy it.
This is a distemper, frequently occasioned by the over-moistness of the Brain,
or rather a watery coldness contracted within the cells, which chills and numbs
the Brain, whereby the Horse becomes dozed, heavy and stupid, ever desirous to
sleep, yet still troubled with restless dreams and disorders, and owes its
original to moist feeding in Marshey-grounds, whereby abundance of phlegmatic
and watery humors have been contracted: And in this case likewise letting
Blood in both the Neck-veins is much available: But further to perfect the cure,

Take Cammomoil and Motherwort, of each a like quantity: boil them in a Gallon
of Running-water, with a pound of Treacle, and a handful of Bay Leaves, and
give the Horse a pint each Morning fasting as hot as he can endure it, keeping
him warm, and fasting for the space of an hour after; and then of Malt or
scalded Bran make him a warm Mash.

The Horse-Pestilence, and its Cure.
The Pestilence in Horses is either contracted by bad feeding, which occasions
a corruption or inflammation of the Blood whereby the Heart is afflicted, or it
happens by being in foggy and infectious Airs, or catched by contageon: And in
any of these cases,

Take Lavender a handful, the like quantity of Rue and Wormwood; as also of
Walnut-tree Leaves, and an ounce of Alloes: boil them in a quart of Water, or
three pints of Milk, till half be consumed; then add half a pound of fresh
Butter, or rather, if you can get it, half a pint of the sweetest Olive-oyl,
and straining out the liquid part, give it the Horse fasting in the Morning
blood-warm, repeating a fresh dose every other Morning for the space of a week.

For Chest-foundering, the Remedy.
To know whether your Horse be Chest-foundered, or not, observe him standing;
and if then he do as it were stand drawn up, or crimpling with his body, or
stradling, and covet much to lie down, running sometimes backward in his going,
then is it apparent he is afflicted with this grievance: To cure which,

Take Oil of Peter half an ounce, mix it with an ounce of the Oil of Cammomoil;
and so proportionably a greater quantity, as you see occasion, and bathe the
Breast with a hot Woollen cloth; and when you have in that manner chafed it as
well as you can, run a hot Iron over it to make it sink into the Skin: Do this
twice or thrice, and give the Horse a quarter of a pint of Salad-oyl, and the
like quantity of Aquavitae, warmed and well mixed together over a gentle fire.

For an Obstruction in the Bladder, or Windiness in the Bowels, use this
Approved Medicine.
Of Cake or Castle-soap take twelve ounces, scrape it so that it may be
rendered very small, adding two ounces of Dialthaea: Incorporate them well, and
make them up into balls as big as Pigeons Eggs; and when you find your Horse
afflicted, as aforesaid, dissolve one of them in a pint of Ale or Beer, and
give it him scalding-hot, or so hot as he can take it without danger, and it
will force a passage for the Urin without much difficulty: This is also good
for the Stone, or Gravel in the Kidneys.

sword and shield

The Pole-Evil, how to know and Cure.
The Pole-Evil is known by its growing bigger than ordinary on the top of the
head; where, if you find it large, take a hot Iron, and sear it in a circle
after the form of the Figure, till the Skin become as it were of a yellowish
color; then with a sharp Iron make holes in it, one large, one in the middle,
small ones circling it within the first Circle; the form of the Iron which must
not penetrate above half an Inch, you have in the Margin. The holes made as
directed, Take a piece of yellow Arsnick, to the bigness of a Pea, and divide
that, or a somewhat larger quantity, that a part may be applied to every hole
made, as aforesaid, and cover it over with black Soap; then with Hog's Lard and
Verdegrease anoint the rest of the place seared, and cover it all over with a
cloth dipped in the Oil of Turpentine; and so by the corrosive nature of the
Arsnick the contracted swelling will be so loosened, that with a little cutting
or drawing off the bottom the core or cause of the grievance may be drawn out
or taken away; and this frequently, especially according to the constitution of
the Horse, may be attempted in a week or ten days after the application; and
having washed the wound with Plantane-water, wherein a small quantity of Allom
has been dissolved, anoint it with Oil of Roses, or Ointment of Tobacco, and
cover it up close from the Air, anointing it once a day till the flesh fill up
the hollowness; and if proud flesh appear notwithstanding, scald it with Salt
and Butter.

The Fistula, how to discover and cure.
sword and shield

A Fistula is the contraction and settlement of bad humors, or infection into
one place, occasioning an Ulcerous Tumor, and is best suppressed by
Cauterizing in circling it round to prevent its further spreading, and likewise
to deny the humors that feed its access; and when you have with a hot Iron
circled it as the former, prick it full of holes with a three-square sharp
Instrument: the Figure of which, and of the Circle, take notice of in the
Margin; and so use it in all respects, as that of the Pole-Evil, if you find it
very corrupt; but if it appear shallow, mitigate the Corrosives to half the
quantity, and search it in a shorter time, letting out the Corruption, if it
will come forth by applying Lenitives, etc. And when you find it begin to heal,
anoint it first with Oil of Cammomoil, and after that to take the effects of
the fire quite away with Ointment of Marshmallows, beaten with the White of an
Egg or Spermaceti.

Hard Kernels under the Throat, how to remove.
Take half a pint of Brandy or Aquavitae, put into it a quarter of a pound of
common Soap; boil them till they become thick as a Plaster, and apply it
Plaster-wise to the place grieved; and if no store of corruption, or a
contraction of evil humors attend those Kernels, then will it sink them, so
that they will not be offensive; and if there be humors, it will break and
disperse them.

For the Navel-gall, the Remedy.
Take an indifferent fine Rag. dip it in Brandy and Sallad-oyl, well
incorporated over a gentle fire: bathe and supple well the place grieved; and
to make it penetrate the better, run it over afterward with an exceeding hot
cloth; and in often so doing the Cure will be wrought.

For a Blow, Bruise, or the like misfortune that causes a a Swelling or Tumor;
the Remedy.
If the swelling be about the Head, let the Horse blood in the Neck-vein, on
that side the misfortune befell: which done, to prevent the Farcy, or the like,

Take of Anniseeds, Rue, Turmerick and red Sage, each about an ounce: shread
them into a quart of Beer or Ale, and suffering them to infuse therein for the
space of a night: press out the next morning the liquid part very hard, and
give it him cold to drink, surfering him to fast after them for the space of
four hours; then having in readiness a charge made of Aquavitae and Soap,
spread it upon a Leather, so much as will cover the swelling, and your
expectation will be answered.

The Scratches, their Remedy.
The Scratches are a troublesome Sorrance found upon the hinder heels of a
Horse, on the Pasterns, and somewhat above, and are caused by the breaking out
of evil humors settling there: To cure which,

Take of Hen's-dung and black Soap, each two ounces: incorporate them with
Hog's-grease, or Neats-foot-oyl, over a gentle fire, till they become an
Ointment: then having dried and rubbed the Horse's heels, anoint them with it,
and bind on the Ointment, or Swathe the Legs with a warm cloth, not suffering
the Horse to come into the water: And if this prove not a sufficient Remedy at
several times using, try this more powerful:

Take Beef-broth, and bathe his Legs well therewith over night; and rubbing
them clean the next morning, take two ounces of Deer's Suet, the like quantity
of Speck-oyl, and an ounce of Verdegrease: beat them well together in half a
pint of Train-oyl; put them into an Earthen-pot on a gentle fire, and stir them
well together, and anoint the place grieved, chafing it in with a hot cloth,
keeping him out of the water and dirty ways.

For Foot-foundering, a Remedy.
Having found by the lameness or crimpling of your Horse that he is foundered,
which mostly happens by unseasohably traveling in dirty ways, and not being
well regarded upon his setting up; bleed him a little in the Thigh, or if you
can conveniently, in the Fetock-vein, and set on his Shoe hollow, the Wool or
Cotton may be thrust between, as occasion requires it; then

Take Venice, Turpentine, and spread it upon a Lock or Wad thereof, putting it
with a flat stick between the Shoe and the Hoof, the latter being well pared,
keeping it in with a piece of Leather, and renewing it every three days; and as
you see his Hoof grow again, pare him even to the quick, applying the Plaster,
and suffering him to run in soft, though not in dirty or mirey ground.

For a Canker in the Head, a Remedy.
When you find by the rawness and yellow matter that this grievance has seized
your Horse; to remedy it before it grow desperate,

Take a pint of Olive-oyl, of Burgundia-Pitch three ounces, and an ounce of
washed Turpentine: put them all into a Pipkin, and mix them together over a
gentle fire; and when they are well mixed, add an ounce of Verdegrease, and
boil them up to the thickness of a Salve, ever keeping the matter stirring; and
making a Plaster, apply it to the Canker, according to the advantage of the
place where it is situate, having first rubbed off the Scurf or Scales; and if
so it happen to be in the Nostrils, having washed it with a Sponge at the end
of a stick, dipped in Salt and Vinegar: to cleanse it, wet the Salve, and
dipping a feather therein, anoint the place grieved with it when warm, and
capable of sticking, by the like application.

For the Mangey or dry Scurvey, a Cure.
Having cleansed the place by scraping off the Scurf or Scabs, that it may lie
open to the opperation of the Medicament or Application:

Take a quarter of a pint of strong Beer, with two ounces of the Oil of
Turpentine, and well mixing them by shaking in a Viol-glass; anoint the place
grieved with a feather, tying up your Horse to prevent his unruliness: during
your so doing, and till the sharpness of its opperation be over with a strong
cord to the Rack; then blow upon it Powder of Bole-armorick, and bind the
Sorrance gently with a cloth: this you may repeat once a week, as often as you
see occasion; and when it heals, which will be signified by the returning of
the hair, then may you supple it with Ointment of Marshmallows, and wash it
with water wherein Charvil has been concocted or boiled.

The Vives, and their Remedy.
The Vives are a troublesome distemper or grievance that frequently happen
under the Ears of a Horse, and many times endanger his life: For which, in the
first place, let your Horse blood in both the Neck-veins; Then placing your
Bernacles upon his Nose to make him less sensible of pain; Shape an Iron, as
you see the form in the Margin, suffering the edge to be about the thickness of
a half Crown: Heat it red hot, and scarrifie the place upon the middle of the
swelling, from the root of the Ears, downwards to the lowest part thereof, in
the form annexed, till you perceive the Skin of a yellowish color, then
desist: And having passed over the place with a cloth, anoint it with Oil of
Roses: or for want of that, fresh Butter or Hog's Lard, keeping the place
supple by often repeating it; as also the Horse in a warm Stable, with good
diet.

For swanking in the Back, or a strain in the Kidneys, caused by indiscreet
Riding or over-burthening.

Your Horse being under these circumstances, mix well together two ounces of
Nerve-oyl, and the like quantity of the Oil of Turpentine, over a gentle fire;
and having a Sheeps-skin newly stripped off, rub it with a brush or cloth all
over the fleshey side, and clapping the Skin upon the Horse's back, especially
where the grief is, bind it on with broad Sursingles very strait, bracing it
with a Crupper behind, and Straps before; and give the Horse the Juice of
Peletory, sweetened with Sugar Candy, half a pint warm in a pint of Ale.

For any pain or foulness in the Reins or Kidneys, an excellent Scowring, etc.

Take Treacle-Jean two ounces, and Ruburb in Powder half an ounce, with an
ounce of the Juice of Hysop to qualify them: put these into a pint of Beer or
Ale when very hot, and give it the Horse fasting.

A present relief for an Attaint or overreach on the Heel, or the like.
This mis-hap comes to pass when the Horse with the Toe of his hinder Shoe
strikes the Heel just at the setting on of the Hoof, commonly called the
Overreach; and if not timely regarded, may prove dangerous, for being not only
a breaking of the flesh, but a strong bruise, it sometimes by its Rankling
perishes the Sinews, or otherwise renders the Horse lame or disabled: And in
this case clip away the hair, and the battered skin or flesh, which you will
find hang loose and useless: And having so done, wash the dirt out of it with
Water and Salt; after which anoint it with Neats foot Oil or Mutton-suet, and
then dip a wad of Flax in the Whites of Eggs, and bind it hard with a list or
soft string to the place, and renew it till you find the Sorrance healed, which
will be in a week or thereabouts.

A Cure for the Sorrance, called the Ring-bone.
This Ring-bone is an Excressence, generally growing upon the Instep, just
above the Hoof, on the forepart of the hinder-leg, and is many times as big as
a Pigeon's Egg: To remove this,



Tie up the contrary Leg of your Horse, and strike with a sharp Bodkin,
according to the form in the Margent, five or six holes in the Ring-bone, at
the edge of it, suffering the holes to be of an equal distance, and put into
them Arsnick or White Mercury, beaten into fine Powder, and with the Skin of
Mutton-suet bind the Sorrance up for the space of a day and a night, and it
will eat it away by its corrosive quality the foundation; so that the Ring-bone
being anointed with Supplements, will fall off or crumble away.

For the Water-Farcion, a Remedy.
This distemper is occasioned by the Horse's unwholesome feeding in low wet
ground, where the moisture is great, insomuch that with the Grass the Horse
takes in extraordinary quantities, which frequently occasions soft swellings
under the belly and chaps.

To cure this work, A piece of Iron in the fashion of a Fleam, and having
heated it red hot, strike it through the Skin of the Swellings, and the
contracted humors will flow thence, being an oyly-water, of color yellowish,
and sometimes greyish; and then there needs no more than to wash it with
Chamberlye as hot as can be well endured, having mixed with it the infusion of
Tobacco-stalks, and Powder of Bolearmorick.

For the Ives, a Remedy.
This distemper is found to grow like a Roll between the Neck, and the
hinder-part of the Jawbone, and is of dangerous consequence if it ascend to the
roots of the Ears.

The speediest Remedy for these, is to let the Horse bleed well in the
Neck-vein; then take Pepper, Hog's Lard and Vinegar, each half an ounce, with a
spoonful of the Juice of Savin: make them up as thick as may be; put one half
of them into one Ear, and the rest into the other; stop them in with Lint,
stitching up the Ears so fast, that he cannot shake them out for the space of
twenty four hours, and they will distill into the Head an opperative
quintessence, that will dissolve the swelling.

To take off the Film or Skin from a Horse's Eye.
To remove this Obstruction to the sight, Take a piece of lean hung Beef, or
other salt Beef: dry it in an Oven to that degree, that it may be reduced to
Powder; and do the like by a stick of Licoris: so take of them an equal
quantity, and a third part of Burnt Roach-Allom: mix them well, and each
morning blow with a Quill about a penny weight into the Horse's Eye, drawing the
lids together, if he will suffer it the better to keep in the Powder; and in so
doing every other day, for five or six days together, the Film will vanish.
This likewise will remove the Pin and Web.

A Mallender, the Remedy to Cure it.
Having rubbed it well with a cloth, mix Soap, with red Mercury precipitate;
and having anointed the place grieved therewith, take away the hair; and having
four days successively anointed it in the same manner, afterward use mollifying
Oils or Ointments to take away the heat of the former unguent; and then wash
the place with Urin or Vinegar till it be restored.

For the Palsy or Apoplexy, a Remedy.
These distempers are occasioned by the Nerves and Sinews, as also the Brain,
being afflicted with bad humors or ascending vapors; and the signs are the
stiffness of the Neck and hinder parts, the hardness of his Flanks, and the
dullness of his Eyes. To remedy which,

Take the Oil of Peter, and chafe it into those parts you perceive to be
afflicted; force it, for its more speedy penetration, with an Iron
indifferently hot, and after that give him half a pint of Peneroyal-water,
sweetened with Sugar, and cover him up warm: you may, if you can oblige him to
lie down, cover him with the reeking Litter, and gently twist a thumb-band of
the same all over his Neck.

A Farcion in the Head and Neck to Cure.
For this distemper proceeding from corrupt humors, the Neck-veins must be
breathed: Then mix the Juyces of Housleek and Hemlock a like quantity, not
exceeding two spoonfulls; adding a spoonful of Olive-oyl, and dividing them
into equal potions: put a half into each Ear, stopping it in with Cotton or
Lint, and tie up the Ears for twenty four hours, giving him at the end of three
hours a warm Mash, with a few Coreander-seeds in it.

A Linnament to cleanse a Wound, new or old.
Take Elder-roots dry, and beat them to Powder, and boil the Powder with Honey,
and a little Allomwater, and make a Pessary or Linnament; and dipping it
therein when blood-warm, wrap it round your Proble, and gently cleanse the
Wound; Washing it likewise with water, and it will cause it to fill with flesh.

For Kibed-heels, commonly called the Mules, a Remedy.
These Sorrances are no other than dry Scabs breeding upon the Horse's heels,
and so inward to the fetlock in long chinks, chops and creases, etc. and the
occasion is going in wet and dirty ground, and then heated, without any regard
or good looking to, which makes even a good Horse, when so afflicted, stiff and
unfit for service: To remedy which,

Take Calcined Tartar, and dissolve it in Water and when it is congealed in the
nature of Salt, mix it with Soap, and the Oil of Tobacco, and with it anoint
the Sorrance, washing it before and after with strong Beef-broth; and in four
or five days, with this continuance, they will be well, especially if the Chops
or Rifts are not exceeding deep.

The Quitter-bone; what it is, with its Remedy.
The Quitter-bone is either occasioned through the fretting or corroding of
Gravel under the Shoe, or by an unfortunate or careless prick with a Nail left
unregarded amongst the Sinews, which causes the humor thereby contracted to
move upward, and break out in a round hard swelling on the corrone^ of the
Hoof, and in four or five days will it break, and send forth matter from a deep
hole like an Ulcer, and is in it self very dangerous and troublesome the best
way to sink or destroy it, is to Cauterize i^ with a hot Iron, made in the
fashion of a half moon; as thus: Let it be done almost round, and quite cross
the middle overthwart, then prick it full of holes and equal distance from each
other, and put in Arsnick or Mercury, covering it over with Soap or Butter,
binding it down with a Linnament for the space of two days; and then, if you
find it black, the effects are wrought by the Poison, insomuch that you may
venture to take away the core, though it hang a little by the grisle, and lint
the hole with a lint dipped in Verdegrease and Honey well boiled together,
anointing the parts about it with Hog's Lard as a supplement till it be well.

An excellent Cure for the Blood-spavin, etc.

Take up, and knit the Vein above the grievance; and having divided it, take of
Linseed a pint, bruise it well, and fry it in a Pan with new Cow Dung; and add
more, four ounces of Hog's Lard, and two of the Juice of Hemlock: and so in the
form of a Cataplasm apply it, renewing it every day, and it will cause the Sore
to come to a head, and then by breaking it brings away the corruption.

For a Nether, Attaint, or Overreach in the Pastern-Joynt.
This Sorrance is known by a little gellied bladder on the hollow of the
Pastern-Joynt, not much differing from a Wind-gall; which though many times not
to be seen at a distance, yet may it be found and known by feeling. To cure or
remove this,

Take a small cord or list, and roll it somewhat strait from the Knee to the
Neather-Joynt, and then with a Fleam let out the corrupt matter: which being
pressed out,

Take the Whites of four Eggs, a handful of Baysalt, and two ounces of the
Juice of Hemlock: mix them well together, and dipping a Rag into them, or
rather a wadd of Flax, having first unbound the string, lay it on the place
where the swelling was, and bind it softly on; and so continue to renew it for
the space of four or five days.

For a putrefied Frush, the Cure.
Having well washed and cleansed the Foot with Man's Urin, Take of beaten Allom
a pound, and put it into a quart of the same Urin; and gathering a good
quantity of green Nettles, dry them, so that they may without difficulty be
beaten into a Powder: do the like by Pepper; and when you have after Travel, or
any Exercise, washed the place grieved with the Urin, in which the Allom is
dissolved, blow the Powder upon it, and so bind it up: And by this doing
frequently, you will find the effects answerable to your expectation.

To dissolve the humors, and thereby anticipate Diseases.
Take Sage, Rosemary, Wormwood, the Bark of the root of an Elm, or the leaves
of the Pine and Wormwood, of each a handful: stamp or shread them, and then
boil them in the Oil of Linseed till they, being pressed, become the thickness
of an Ointment, and with it as hot as may be: chafe and rub the place where you
perceive the humors to settle or begin to draw together: and by often so doing
they will disperse. Figs and Salt boiled to Gelly, with the Juice of Nettles
and Elder, have in many cases the same effects.

To soften any hard swelling or contracted hardness.
Take of Neatsfoot-oyl a quart, of the Juice of Coleworts half a pint, of the
Marrow of Hog's feet two ounces, and an ounce of the Oil of Cyprus, with half a
handful of the roots of Mallows bruised: boil or heat them over a gentle fire
till they incorporate, and become an ointment: then the roots being taken away,
put it up into a Gally-pot, and as often as you see occasion use it hot to the
grieved place.

For the Splint, Wind-gall, or Bladders of Gelly in or about any of the Joints
subject thereto.
Take Beeswax a pound, Per-rosin half a pound, Galbanum two ounces,
Sol-Armoniack an ounce, Costus three ounces, Myrrh Secundary a pound: bruise
and melt them together till they are well incorporated; and so being made into
a Salve or thick Ointment, use it Plaster-wise, by applying it to the
grievance, and you will soon find it effectual.

To cleanse any putrefied, or other Sore, the safest way.
Take Salad-oyl and tried Hog's Lard, of each a pound; Turpentine and
White-wax, of each four ounces, and six ounces of Allom-powder, and a quarter
of a pint of the Juice of Rue: make them into an Ointment over a gentle fire,
and dress the Wound therewith, as you see occasion, and it will not only
cleanse it, but fill it with sound flesh.

A Horse Planet-struck, how to Cure.
This distemper takes a Horse's limbs away on a sudden, so that they remain
for a good time in the same posture they did at the time of the seizure, he not
being able to move them: And this, though it is by the English called
Planet-struck, and by the French Surprius, yet it is no other than the effects
of heat and cold; and whether of these it is, may be thus perceived.

If it be cold, then is it discerned sometime before by his snuffling and
rattling in the head, which denotes that cold phlegmatic humors do assault the
brain: And if from heat, then it may be perceived by the dryness of the Tongue,
the scorching of the Breath, clear breathing, and the like, then is the Malady
in the blood, composed of crudities and gross humors: For the first, anoint
his Temples with the Oil of Petrolum, and give him an ounce of Leserpitum in a
pint of Canary, and half a pint of Olive-oyl, as warm as may be: And for the
latter, having blooded your Horse, give him Water and Honey, with an ounce of
Leserpetum, and two ounces of Mellion-seed bruised to Powder, and let his diet
be moderate, especially if his body abound with gross humors, that by a spare
diet they may waste and consume; though sometimes indeed by extreme fasting
this distemper happens, and then good feeding, though by degrees, is the best
remedy.

For the Poze or excessive Cold, a Remedy.
Take Conserve of Ellecampane, or else the herb, bruise or dissolve it into a
pint of Mallaga: then add an ounce of beaten Ginger, and Powder of Rosemary;
and having well warmed them over a fire, give them the Horse to drink: and so
continue to do every other Morning for a week.

To remedy or cure Hideboundness in a Horse.
This disorder of body you shall know by finding the Skin of your Horse cleave
to his Ribs and Backbone, so that you cannot without much difficulty take it
up: And this proceeds from a pining or wasting, by reason of some inward
distemper of body, or by having been bad kept, bad rid, or suffered upon a heat
to stand much in rainy weather, and be afterward unseasonably dried: To remedy
which defect, and render his Skin loose and pliable, so that he may thrive and
recover his strength,

Take of Cummin and Anniseeds each two ounces, the Powder of Licoras an ounce,
Flower of Brimstone half an ounce, and Oil of Roses a quarter of a pint: mix
these together, and heating them well in a quart of Ale, give them the Horse to
drink Morning and Evening for the space of a week, and the Remedy will prove
its sufficiency.

For a wet inward Cough, a Remedy.
This disorder proceeds from the Horse's being too much in damp foggy Airs,
whereby gross humors are engendered; which converting to Rheums, fall in such
abundance upon the Lungs, that they as it were stifle and overwhelm them in
such a manner, as renders them almost incapable of performing their office; so
that the sound by that means seems to be inward: Now to remedy this, and
prevent the danger,

Boil a peck of Barley to a Mash or Pulp; then add to it Licoras-powder two
ounces, Anniseed and Carroway-seeds, of each an ounce; sliced Dates or blew
Figs half a pound, Sugar Candy a pound, Turmerick three ounces, and two Roots
of Garlic, with a quart of Olive-oyl: and when they are boiled to a Mash,
press out the Liquid part between two Cheese-fatts, and give him a pint of it
hot for six Mornings together; and soon after Exercise him smartly, the weather
being dry, and the ground good.

For a dangerous Cough, commonly called the dry Cough.

This distemper proceeds from bad feeding or unseasonable labor, which causes
the Choleric humor to abound, and fall upon the Lungs in a hot, tough, yellow
phlegm, which clungs them up as it were, so that the Horse cannot breathe
without pain; and though he seldom coughs, yet when he does it. it is performed
with a hollow sound and much violence. Now to remedy this,

Take a handful of Cammomoil, and the like quantity of the herb Melliot, two
ounces of Licoras-powder, and three ounces of the Conserve of Red Roses, a
quarter of a pound of Honey, and two ounces of Allom: boil them in Water
wherein four ounces of Camphire has been dissolved, and give him the liquid
part to drink as hot as he may well endure it; keeping him for two hours after
fasting, and beware he catch not cold.

For the Yard of a Horse falling, a Remedy.
This happens to a Horse when he is grown feeble, either by over-labouring or
bad feeding, which cause a bad resolution in the Muscles and Tendons, so that
they refuse their office of support: And in this case,

Take a gallon of Water, boil in it two handfulls of Bay Salt, half a pound of
Carrot-seed, a good handful of Mugwort, and the like quantity of Bay Leaves:
then strain out the Liquid part, and add a quart of Old Mallago: and give him
this to drink hot, rubbing his Yard with Vinegar, wherein Nettle-seed and
Burdock-seeds have been concocted

To prevent the Mattering of the Yard.
This happens to Horses of a hot constitution, especially after covering: And
first appears by the swelling of the end of the Yard, and his being thereby
rendered incapable of drawing it into his Sheath, when soon after you will
perceive much filthy Matter issue from thence; At what time dissolve half a
pound of Allom in a pint of White Wind, and with a Syringe inject it warm into
the Yard, whereby the Yard will not only be scowred and cooled, but the humors
be driven back and dispersed.

Of the Diseases incident mostly to Mares, and known by the name of the
Pestilent-consumption.

This distemper happens to a Mare when she is near her Foaling-time, by reason
of a Phlegmatic humor that contracts about the Matrix, occasioned by gross
feeding, and is known by her dullness, pining, and desire to be Laid, and the
like: To redress which,

Take a pint of Aquavitae, half an ounce of Tobacco, and a sprig or two of
Spurg-lawrel: boil them together, and then straining out the Liquid part, give
it her fasting, and it will oblige her to cast out the Mass of Phlegm, or at
least the Cause that disturbs her: But by reason she will be somewhat sickish
when she has cast, Give her half a pint of Saladoyl, and the like quantity of
Canary, and keep her in a warm Stable with Mashes and good dry Meat a day or
two.

How a Mare that is subject to cast her Foal ought to be used.
In this case there is more than one Cause to be taken notice of, which
subjects a Mare to cast her Foal untimely, sometimes dead, and sometimes alive;
as hard Wintering, unwholesome Lodging, over-riding, sudden strains or unhappy
blows on the back, leaping hedges, or the like; together with too much fatness,
or subjection to gross humors, many times to the endangering of their lives:
Therefore when you perceive her near her time, bring her into a warm Stable, and

Take an ounce of Diapente, an ounce of Sarsaparilla, three grains of Musk, and
a peny-worth of Fennel-seeds: infuse them in a pint of Muscadel, and give them
a heating over a gentle fire, and suffer the Mare to drink the Liquid part
fasting: then dip your hand in the Oil of Myrrh, and thrust it into her Shape,
and give her wholesome Diet and good Litter: or this may be done with success at
the time of her Foaling, especially if you perceive difficulty therein, and it
will be much available in rendering her an easy delivery.

How to oblige a Mare to cast her Foal.
Now, on the contrary, if you imagine the Foal your Mare goes with is not worth
your rearing, or that she has taken Horse contrary to your desire: Then boil a
good quantity of Savin in two quarts of new Milk, adding an ounce of Ruburb,
and a small quantity of Wood-ashes: and when they are sufficiently boiled,
strain out the Liquid part, and give it the Mare to drink very hot, and then
give her a considerable heat; and in so doing two or three Mornings the
business will be effected. But consider withal, that you look well to your
Mare, least you lose both, for she must for a week afterward be kept in the
Stable, and that very warm, and with Mashes of sweet Malt-bran and Barley every
other Morning.

Of the several Fevers in a Horse, and how to Cure them, etc.

There are diverse Fevers that frequently possess the Body of a Horse, and that
at different times; as the Quotidian, Tertian and Quartan; and these are
occasioned by gross humors contracted in the blood, that inflame and disorder
the frame, and happen according to the circulation of the Blood, or domination
of Humors.

As for the first of these, it is ever the most violent, but never lasts
long, and most frequently it comes in the Spring, when the Blood begins to
enc^ease, especially to Colts and young Horses.

The signs that fore-run this, are the watering of the Eyes, and a redness as
if they were blood-shotten, short pantings, hot breath, a loathing or leaving
of Provender, stiffness in the Joints, and unwillingness to labor; And if it
so happen that it befall him at eight of the clock the one day, you may expect
it at four the next day; and the reason that is given, is the ebbing and
flowing of the blood, and its circulation. To rid him of this troublesome
companion, give him, as soon as you perceive it to begin, a warm Mash, and keep
him in motion, though in the Stable, for the space of an hour or more; then rub
him exceeding well, and

Take two quarts of Ale, a good handful of Wormwood, an ounce of Long-Pepper,
Venice-Treacle two ounces, and of Grains an ounce: add to these an ounce of the
Flower of Brimstone, and as much Rue dried and rubbed into Powder: heat it hot,
and give him it at twice, about the space of two hours difference between each
other.

The Tertian Fever is much the same in quality and condition with what I have
named, and the Symtomps the same, though it somewhat more than the other
participates of the Ague, for it at first takes him with a kind of a shaking:
Wherefore when you observe its approach,

Take of Stone-crop, an Herb so called, two handfulls; bruise it, and strain
the Juice into two quarts of Ale; drop into it then an ounce of the Oil of
Myrrh, and an ounce of Ginger beaten into Powder: make them hot, and give them
the Horse to drink, sweetened with Sugar Candy; and then Rack him a round pace
in wholesome Air, but do not sweat him that he thereby may be endangered by
contracting a cold; observing to let him drink no cold water till such time as
you find the Fit entirely gone, and that he has settled his Body by eating two
quarts of the best dried Oat^s.

As for the Quartan Fever, it is much of the nature of the two former, only it
alters the day, and often continues longer; for if a speedy remedy be not had,
it frequently continues, at diverse times, for the space of half a year or
longer: And if this happen in the Fall of the Leaf, it will be necessary to let
Blood; which done, give your Horse what is hereafter directed:

Take Oil of Bays an ounce; Coltsfoot, the Herb, a good handful; Knot-grass
roots, or Scurvey-grass roots, the like quantity; Lavender flowers, or dried
Lavender, a handful: boil them in Ale or Whitewine, and give him the Liquid
part, ordering him as for the former.

For any disease and stoppage in the Liver.
The Obstructions in the Liver frequently happen through excess of humors,
that not capable of being digested into good and wholesome blood, clog and
hinder the cavities of the passages, and by that means cause pains and
sickness. Now to remove these humors, known by the dullness of the
countenance, hanging of the head, often straining, and inward groaning,

Take Agremony, Cammomoil, Eumetory, Pursley, Woormwood, Succory, Endive, the
Seeds of Lupins, and Flowers of Mayweed, a handful; Licoris, Gentian and
Spikenard, of each an ounce: bruise them well, and boil them in a quantity
sufficient of Syder or Perry, and give it the Horse very warm, and let him walk
thereupon for the space of an hour after; and for a fortnight after be sparing
in his diet, that the humors by this means may disperse and consume.

For a Botch or Sorrance in the Groin of a Horse, a good Cure.
When by the Tumourousness of the flesh you perceive a swelling to arise in the
Groin of a Horse,

Take Shoomakers Wax, the white sort, add to an ounce of it half an ounce of
the Powder of Bilthwortroots, and as much Amoniacum, and over a gentle fire
make them into a Plaster: which being spread upon a feather, apply it to the
place till the swelling is ripe for breaking; then Lance it, and take out the
putrefaction; after that wash the Sorrance with Water wherein Allom and Honey
have been dissolved, till you find it begin to heal; then anoint it with
Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, and bind it up.

For a general Manginess, the Remedy.
This happens through the corruption of the blood, and grossness of humor,
occasioned by over-labouring, over-heating, and bad feeding, or any of these,
and may be sometimes catched by contagion from other Horses; the sign is an
extraordinary itching, which you may observe by his scrubbing, and the rising
of little Knots within the Skin: which being perceived,

Take Verdegrease two ounces, common Soap a pound, Oil of Spike two ounces,
Linseed-oyl a pint, Red-wine half a pint: incorporate them over a gentle fire,
reducing them to the thickness of an Ointment: having first let the Horse
Blood, anoint him with the Ointment, after the Scurf and Scabs are
like-likewise rubbed off: and so continue to do for a week, or so long, till
you perceive the distemper to cease by the dying of the Scabs, and the coming
of good flesh.

The Barbs, what they are, and how removed.
This troublesome Sorrance happens under the tongue of the Horse, being
composed of too long bags of flesh, like Paps or Nipples, growing as they
abound with humor more or less, and hinder the Horse much in his feeding,
putting him to no small trouble. Now to remedy it, clip them off close to the
Jaw, and

Take of Allom an ounce, Honey the like quantity, Bay Salt a handful, and the
Juice of Mint a quarter of a pint: dissolve and boil these in a quart of fair
water, and wash the roots of the Barbs till they heal. Some there are that
advise Burning them off; but in my opinion, by reason of their situation, that
is neither so easy to be done, nor safe, least the Tongue-string or small
Veins be thereby rendered useless, and consequently the Horse defective in his
feeding.

For Blood-shot Eyes, an excellent Remedy.
The Eyes by straining, blow, or super-abundance of corrupt blood becoming red
and rheumy; so that unless speedily cured, they may turn to further prejudice,
if not to blindness. To cure this,

Take the Juice of a Lemon, the crumbs of White-bread, Bole-armorick and a
rotten Apple: bruise them together, and make of them a Cattaplasm or Plaster:
Then take the Powder of the Roots of Mallows, with that of a crust of brown
Bread, and blow into the Eyes, binding over them the Plaster, or rather
Poultis: and in so doing three or four times, the Blood and Rheum will be
driven back and dispersed: but if it be so great that this cannot conquer it,
then bleed your Horse in the Temple-veins.

For any Film, Bite, or Blow in the Eye, a Remedy.
Take Copras, that which is white, a quarter of an ounce, and the like quantity
of Verdegrease: beat them to Powder, and dry them well upon a Plate or Spatula;
and after that take of it to the quantity of half a dram, and blow it into the
Eye with a quill; then close the Horse's Eye a quarter of an hour, and after
that wash it with Eye-bright-water; and so continue to do till all your Powder
is wasted, and then you will perceive a brightness in your Horse's Eye, all
grievances being vanished.

To kill Lice, or remove Flies from offending your Horse.
Take the Flower of Brimstone an ounce, Quicksilver, well killed, the like
quantity; the Oil of Spike two ounces: mix them with the Whites of two Eggs,
and then boil them in two quarts of strong Urin, and anoint the Horse
therewith, and it will prevent either the annoyance, or cure it when contracted.

To rid a Horse from any foulness or disorder in the Body.
Take of Groundsel half a handful, red Sage the like quantity, Smallage and
Wormwood each a handful: shread them small, and boil them well in a pint and a
half of Ale, into which put a quarter of a pound of fresh Butter, and an ounce
of the Powder of Mechocan, give the Liquid part to your Horse to drink as warm
as possible, and feed him with Mashes for a day afterward.

For an extraordinary Bruise or Bite.
Take of Caliminaris, quenched in White Wind, two drams; an ounce of the Juice
of Housleek, and two ounces of the Seeds of Mallows, with an ounce of
Venice-Treacle: make them up into balls as big as Walnuts, and give them the
Horse in a quarter of a pint of Salad-oyl; and at the same time apply a Plaster
of Hemlock and Barrows-grease well stamped and mixed together: And this being
done for a week together, will work strange effects in relation to a cure.

For a Horse that is troubled with the Strangling, a Cure.
Take of Elder-buds, or the Bark of the Root of that Tree, a good handful;
Wormwood, and the herb Mercury, of each half a handful, and as much wild
Tansey: boil them well in two quarts of Vinegar, and give them the Horse, that
is, the Liquid part as hot as may be, fasting.

To remedy the Swelling of a Horse upon having eaten any Infectious thing in
his Grass or Provender, that may, if not remedied, prove dangerous.

This grievance is known by the slavering of the Beast, the staring of the
Eyes, and the rising of the Belly, the beating of the Flanks, and a cold sweat:
which perceived,

Take of the Juice of Rue one pint, two quarts of Milk and a pint of Olive-oyl:
boil them together till a third part be consumed; and then sweetning it it with
brown Sugar, give it the Horse.

For a Heart-burning or Wasting, occasioned thereby.
Take the Juice of Wood Sorrel or Field-sorrel a pint, Allom-powder two ounces,
Hart's-horn an ounce, the Seeds of Pomgranets two ounces, and Spring Water a
quart: boil them well together, and strain out the Liquid part, give it the
Horse as hot as may be.

To prevent staling Blood, a Remedy.
Take of Ale a quart, the Roes of two red Herrings, and three or four Cloves of
Garlic: boil them together, and give them the Horse Morning and Evening, that
is, the Liquid part.

Another excellent Remedy for the Farcy, vulgarly called the Fashion.
Take Rue, Garlic and Cloves, of each half a handful: bruise them well, and
boil them in half a pint of Aquavitae; then dip Wool or Lint into the Liquid
part, and stop it into the Horse's Ears, binding it in: after that bruise the
Bark of the Elder, and making an incision in the Forehead, and raise the Skin
with your Pegging-horn, and stop it in under the Skin, being first dipped in
Oil of Rosemary; then give the Horse a dose of the Juice of Liverwort, mixed
with half a pint of Canary, and after that warm Mashes.

An Approved Cure for any Sinew-strain or Overreach.
Take Oil of Bays an ounce, Linseed-oyl two ounces: put them into half a pint
of Aquavitae, and being well incorporated, add Wine-Vinegar half a pint, and
boil them to the consumption of a third part, then with your hand chafe it in,
or with a warm cloth swathing it afterward to the best advantage; and in so
doing you will soon find the effects.

Diseases in the Hoof, how to remedy: And first for a Horse, that upon sundry
occasions is apt to cast his Hoof.

The cause of the Hoofs falling off is various, for sometimes it proceeds from
Gravel, and another time from the pricking of an Nail: and in these cases it
cleaves downward as the humor settles; but if it happen by any grievance on
the top of the Hoof, as the Quitter-bone, and the like, then must you look to
the top of the Hoof; and when you there perceive it begin to divide from the
flesh, or to open at any part, then take off the Shoe, open the Hoof, and pare
it as near as may be to the Sole; after which steep the foot in Neatsfoot-oyl,
and the Juice of Hemlock, in which Allom has been dissolved: then make an
Ointment after this manner:

Take of Virgins-Wax two ounces, of Verdegrease an ounce, of Per-rosin three
ounces, and Hog's Lard a quarter of a pound: to these add the Juice of green
Tobacco a quarter of a pint: make them into an Ointment, and pour it into the
divided place: which done, bind it up close with a thick Linne-cloth; and in so
often doing the flesh will be obliged to cleave to the Hoof, and render it
firm, unless it be too far gone before you attempt it.

Hoof-bound; what it is, and how to remedy it.
This grievance proceeds from some defect in the Hoof, or harm taken in the
Colt-age whilst it was tender, or by the falling down of a humor; and the
Symptoms are the flesh growing over it more than usual; the straitness or
narrowness in disproportion ^o the Leg, and the sound of hollowness being
struck with a Hammer, or other material Instrument: which being well understood,

Take Hog's Lard a pound, Soap the like quantity, ^he Juice of Baum a pound,
Bay Leaves a handful, ^he Juice of Rue a quarter of a pint: Incorporate or
concoct them well over a gentle fire, and steep ^he Hoof in the Liquid part for
the space of an hour every morning: then dip a cloth in the Oil of Petrolum,
and bind it about it.

To soften or harden a Hoof the best way.
This Experiment is fitting to be known by all Farriers, not only for the
advantage of Shooing, but for the Travel more or less of the Horse. Wherefore
in the first place, if you perceive the Hoof to be hard and brittle, standing
out, uncomly, then try it with a Butress; and if you find it brittle, and not
pliable to be pared or cut: then

Take of Lime unshaked an ounce, Common Soap the like quantity: dissolve these
into a Lie made of Ashwood-ashes; and having prepared a Cataplasm or Poultis of
Groundsel, Marshmallows, Smallage, Succory and Sallendine fried in
Neatsfoot-oyl, after the Horse's hoofs have been steeped in the Lie for the
space of an hour as warm as may well be endured, clap the Poultis to them, and
stop the bottom of the foot well with Flax dipped in Tarr.

To harden a Hoof as occasion requires.
If by going in moist ground or moist feeding the Hoof happen to be softened, so
that it will not well bare a Shoe, or be prejudicial in Traveling: then to
render it capable for either,

Take the Coals of burnt Leather a pound, the water wherein Lime has been
shaked, and hot Flint-stones quenched, two quarts; add to them a quart of
Lime-juyce, and a pound of Bay Salt, and in the Liquid part either let the
Horse stand, or with it bathe his Hoofs: after which, Take Oil of Tartar, or
that of Brimstone, and anoint them, binding a cloth over them, and suffer the
Horse to stand dry: And by thus often doing you will by experience find your
expectation answered.

For any hurt or Cankerous sore in or on the Hoof.
Take, if the season permit, a pound of black Snails; if not, other Snails of
any kind may serve the purpose; of Burdock-roots sliced the like quantity; Oil
of Cammomoil four ounces, and Olive-oyl a quart: boil them together till they
are pliable to be laid Plaster-wise to the place grieved: To which, after you
have washed the Sorrance with water wherein Elder has been boiled, apply them,
supplying those first laid with fresh every day, till you find the effects.

To oblige a Horse to carry his Ears well, the way.
This defect happens either for want of a true proportion, or by a defect of
the Nerves, which refuse to administer so great a supply of strength as may
support the Ears as they ought to stand for the sake of Ornament. Now to
strengthen the Nerves or Sinews to that degree,

Take of Bear's Fat an ounce, Comfry-juyce the like quantity, Oil of Amber a
dram, the Root of black Helebore, beaten into Powder, an ounce, and with
Beeswax half an ounce, and the Oil of Roses half a pint: make these into an
Ointment, and anoint the roots of the Horse's Ears as hot as may be well
endured, repeating it for a week together.

For the grievance called the Frounce, a Cure.
This Sorrance is also called by some a Cameroy, and is not other than small
Knobs or Bladders on the roof of the Mouth, or upon the Tongue; and the cause,
for the most part, is the Horse's feeding in wet or low Marshes in frosty
weather, or by eating unsavory Hay in which Vermin have pissed or dunged: And
further, some hold it to proceed from the Horse's licking up unsavory things,
tending to a Venomous quality. To remedy which,

Take Vinegar and Bay Salt, with the Juice of Sage, and with them, after having
let the Horse Blood in the Veins under the tongue, rub the place grieved till
the Knobs or Pimples bleed; and by often so doing they will disappear.

For a Heat, which sometimes occasions a breaking out in in the Mouth and Lips,
the Cure.
This disorder is accompanied with dryness, and proceeds from the heat of the
stomach, by surfeits, overheating, or a consuming quality; and if not timely
taken notice of, produces the infectious humor that creates the Canker: To
redress which, Bleed the the Veins in the Lips, which you may cause to appear
by bending them the contrary way: and then wash them with Salt and Vinegar,
giving the Horse water to drink wherein Coltsfoot has been boiled, or
Fenegreek-seed, with his Provender.

Wolf-teeth, what they are, and how to ease their Pair the ready way.
These Teeth are too commonly growing in the upper Jaw, next the grinders,
which many times occasion such pain, that the Horse is frustrated in hi^
eating, by being obliged to let his Provender fall ou^ of his mouth; and the
cause they are mostly subjec^ to this is, by reason they have frequently a
hollowness within subject to receive the Rheums that settle in the Jaw: To
remedy which, either draw them or Launcing the Gumms that they may bleed: wast
the Mouth each morning with Hysop-water and Allom, the latter being dissolved
in the former.

To staunch any Bleeding, a speedy way.
If by occasion of Wound or Sorrance your Horse happen to bleed excessively, so
that thereby, if not timely stopped, he may be weakened, or other ways
endangered,

Take the Wool of a Hare or Coney, dip it in Vinegar, and then strew upon it
the Powder of Calcined Egg-shells, and apply it to the place: or you may for
want of the former, dip it in Nettle-juyce and Baysalt; or apply to the Wound
or Sorrance a Poultis of Hemlock, and the Eark of Elder-root.

To supply the defect of the falling of the Crest, a Remedy.
This uncomeliness in a Horse is the leaning of the upper part of the Neck on
which the Mane grows, to one or the other side, which is caused by weakness of
the Sinews or Nerves, through a contraction of cold, or some phlegmatic humor
there engendered; or, on the other hand, upon the rising of the flesh through
extraordinary fatness. To remedy which,

Take the Oil of Petrolum two ounces, Linseed-oyl half a pint; and having well
washed the Crest with Water wherein the Roots of Mallows have been boiled, and
Allom dissolved, anoint it with the Oil; and in so continuing to do for a
month, the Skin will contract; and more especially, if upon every Application
you clap two broad pieces of Deal, or other Board, on each side; and so bind it
up in due order, and let the Horse blood in the contrary Neck-vein.

To Cure Manginess, or the like disorder, in the Crest.
Take Hog's Lard a pound, Verdegrease four ounces, Flower of Brimstone four
ounces: add to these a pint of Beef-broth very salt, and dissolve what is to be
dissolved therein: Then having rubbed off the Scabs and Scurf till they bleed,
wash the place grieved therewith as hot as may be well endured for a week
together; and lay after that a cloth dipped in green Ointment thereon. This
will also hinder the Hair from falling off, especially the former.

The Navel-gall, what it is, and its Remedy.
This grievance is no other than a bruise or hurt with an unfit or uneasy
Saddle, or that part of the back that is opposite to the Navel, and for that
cause only is so called; it is known by a soft swelling in the place bruised;
and its Cure is as follows:

Take the Whites of two Eggs, an ounce of Copras, two ounces of the Oil of
Bays, and of Marshmallows, Smallage, Groundsel and Cammomoil, each a handful:
stamp them in a Mortar, and pour the Liquids on them; by which means make them
into a Poultis, and frying them, lay them as hot as may be to the place grieved.

For a Sitfast or horney Excressence under the Saddle, whereby the Horse is
disabled from carrying it in good order as he ought.

This Sorrance appears like a piece of old Leather upon the Horse's back, and
is commonly the relick of some old bruise or desperate Saddle-gall not well
cured, and obliges the Skin to stick fast to the flesh. To cure which,

Take Oil of Vitriol, and anoint the place till it has loosened the
Excressence: after which take it off by incision, and anoint the place with
Verdegrease and Hog's Lard hot, and wash it after with the Juice of Mint till
it be new skinned: and to make the Hair come, wash it with the Juice of Cardus
Benedictus, or that of Hemlock.

For any Knob or Wen near the Saddle-skirt, or the Sides of the Horse, a Remedy.
To remove this, Wash it first with hot Wine-Lees, and afterward bathe it with
Oil of Cammomoil or Marshmallows: Then to draw it to a head, lay on a Plaster
of Stone-pitch and Turpentine; which being done, Lance it with your
sharp-pointed Fleme, and apply a Plaster of Oxecrotium to draw out the
putrefaction, and then with Hog's Lard supple it; and if the Sore be deep, Tent
it with a Linen Tent, dipped in Beeswax and Honey melted together.

For Weakness in the Back, a strengthening Remedy.
This happens frequently through Coldess, or watery humors afflicting the
Sinews, or in gelly'd matter settling in the Joints, or by his too often
covering the Mares or suchlike. Now to corroborate a Horse defective herein,

Take Horseradish Roots a pound, Bay Leaves two handfulls, the Bark of Elder
the like quantity: boil them in Man's Urin, and with the Liquid part bathe the
Back as hot as is convenient, giving him for diet Oats and Splent-beans; and
each morning fasting a ball made in this manner:

Take Licorish-powder two ounces, Hart's-horn beaten to Powder an ounce,
Fenegreek and Hysopseed stamped, of each two ounces; wet them with as much
Mallaga-wine as will make them up into balls about the bigness of Pigeon's Eggs.

For the Swelling in the Cods of a Horse naturally, or occasioned by any
Bruise, etc.

Take Dill-seeds or Fennel-seeds an ounce, the Juice of Orpin a quarter of a
pint, Bole-armorick two ounces, the Juice of Garlic the like quantity: make
these, with Hog's Lard, into an Ointment, and anoint the place grieved
therewith as warm as may be well endured.

For Burstenness, or the Rupture in a Horse.
This grievance is the breaking of the Rim or Film that holds up the Bowels
from falling into the Cods, and either happens by over-straining in riding upon
a full belly, or the Horse's leaping beyond his strength, and is by most
Farriers held incurable. But since it so happens, that a bursten Horse may,
notwithstanding in some measure, be fit for service, I shall give such
directions as may the better enable him for it.

Take your Horse to whom this misfortune is befallen, and fasten Ropes with
running Nooses to his feet; then putting Ropes through them, cast him upon soft
straw, and draw him up by casting the Ropes over a Beam in the Barn or Stable;
then with your hands gently separate the Bowels from the Stones, putting the
former in their proper place, and retaining the latter; withal, anointing the
Cods with Hog's Lard and the Juice of Endive, gently chafing them till they
begin to shrink up: Then with a soft List tie the Cod as near to the Belly as
may be, and cut out the Stone where the Film is broken, sewing up the Cod with
thread dipped in the Oil of Turpentine; and so keep your Horse for the space of
a fortnight, in a warm Stable, with heartning Diet; anointing his Cods with
Hog's Lard and Allom-powder, melted together over a gentle fire.

The Art of discovering hidden Griefs or Ailments in a Horse, and from what
they proceed.
The better to be the least couzened in Horseflesh, is to see one lead him
before you in a string to several paces; and though you cannot so know his
grief or ailment, yet if you well observe how he takes up his Legs, the defect
will appear by his favoring one more than the other: but if nothing of that
appear, then back him and ride him at all paces, so that you or your friend who
stands by may be convinced by his going how he stands affected. Now if so it
happen he sets out stiff, and handles his Legs confusedly, then does his grief
proceed from cold settlements of watery humors in or near the Joint; for which
chafe his Legs morning and evening with Aquavitae and Oil of Turpentine: But if
it proceed from heat, as Surfeits, and the like, then he will halt the more he
is ridden or chafed, by being heated; and then anoint his Limbs with
Neatsfoot-oyl, the Marrow of a' Swine: or wash them with Water wherein Copras
has been dissolved, and look he be kept in a clean warm Stable.

The Bone-spavin, what it is, etc.

This Excessence or Sorrance is a Knob of a boney substance growing under the
Joint, on the inside the hoof, as big sometimes as a Pullets Egg; and either
proceeds from the too early pressing the little bones in those parts by hard
labor, or from the settlement of bad humors fed by the master Vein that
descends to those parts. This many times is so troublesome to a Horse, that it
makes him go down lame. Now the best way to remove and cure this Sorrance, is
this:

Take a Penknife and lay open the Skin about the boney Excressence; and having
a Chisle or Knife for that purpose, strike off or pare away the bone till you
come as near as may be to the quick; Then having ready a Plaster of Beeswax
and Verdegrease well mixed by melting, bind it on, but so that it may not
afflict the Vein, and renew it every other day for the space of a week; then
with Hog's Lard cleanse and anoint it for two or three days more; and finally,
wash it with Vinegar, and bind it up that it may heal. For want of Verdegrease,
you may take the Powder of burnt Allom.

For a Haw in the Eye.
This happens most commonly by a blow or overriding, and greatly impairs the
sight: To remove which,

Take burnt Allom, and the Powder of Juniper Berries, and blow them into the
Eye, keeping it close for a quarter of an hour: and so by often doing you will
perceive the Haw loosened by its wrinkling up, then with your nails take hold
of it, and draw it forth: or if you cannot so do, continue the Powder till it
is eaten off.

For the falling out of the Fundament, a Remedy.
The falling out of the Fundament often happens by an extraordinary
Laxativeness, or a coldness contracted in the Bowels, which creates a slimey
matter: And in this case anoint it with Oil of Spike, and sprinkling on it the
Powder of Turmerick, put it up in order, and binding a string about the Tail,
bring the string between the Legs, and by fastening it to a strap cross the
shoulders, keep in the Fundament, suffering the Tail to continue so fastened
for the space of twelve hours. And this method may be used in case of the Womb,
of a Mare's falling out, etc.

To preserve a Hoof from decaying, etc.

Take half a pound of Tarr, a quart of Vinegar, half a pound of Hog's grease, a
quarter of a pint of the Juice of Garlic, two ounces of Olibanum, and as much
Beeswax: boil them together till the moisture be so far consumed, that it
becomes the thickness of an Ointment, and with it at seasonable times anoint
the Hoof; and dipping Flax into it, stop the hollow part if you find any defect
there, or suspect any will happen.

Interferring, what it is, and the Remedy.
This happens when by the unevenness of a Horse's steps, or the bad shooing; he
cuts his fore-fetlock Joint on the inside with his hinder shoe; which by its
not being well looked to, many times festers and becomes a sore Scab: To cure
which,

Take fresh Butter half a pound, Rosin the like quantity, Nerve-oyl half a
pint: melt them together, and when they are of a thickness, spread a Plaster,
and lay it to the place grieved, suppling it before with Hog's grease, or the
Oil of Cammomoil.

A false Quarter, what it is.
This is a defect in the Hoof, in such a manner, as if a piece was put in,
having on either side it a Seam or Rift, which frequently obliges the Horse to
halt on that part, and is generally caused by some prick or hurt when a Colt:
To remedy which, at least to give the Horse ease,

Take off the Shoe, and pare the Hoof on that side as much as may be, and then
supply the defect with Toe dipped in melted Turpentine and Beeswax, not over
traveling, or using your Horse to dirty ways.

The Melt on the Heel.
This is no other than a dry Scab growing on the heel, occasioned sometimes by
the Horse's standing wet and dry overlong or unseasonably, and at other times
through corrupt blood settling there: To remedy which,

Take of black Soap a quarter of a pound, Honey the like quantity: dissolve
them in a pint of Vinegar, then add the Powder of burnt Allom two ounces, and
Rye-meal a like quantity: wash the Sorrance well with water and salt, and then
spread the before mentioned materials, and apply them Plaster-wise, having
first taken off the Scurf or Scab as clean as may be; and so for a week
together continue the supplement.

An excellent Remedy for any Strain or Swelling.
Take of Aquavitae a pint, melt into it a quarter of a pound of fresh Butter,
and mix with them a quarter of a pint of the Juice of Helebore: then with the
Liquids make a Plaster of Rye-meal, and apply it as hot as may well be endured
to the place grieved: This will likewise assuage any swelling, or the like
disorder.

How to remedy the harm done a Horse by unadvisedly and unskilfully letting
Blood.
Many times a Horse being let Blood by an unskilful hand, or suffered
thereupon to take cold, or the wind to possess the empty Veins which causes
swellings in the Neck, or other disorders. To remedy it,

Take Sheeps-suet half a pound, the Juice of Hemlock half a pint, and four
ounces of the Oil of Cammomoil: which being made into an Ointment, rub and
chafe his Neck with them, as hot as may be, morning and evening, giving him
warm water to drink wherein Fennel-seeds are scattered, and cover his Neck over
with a warm cloth, giving him gentle heats.

For the Leprosy in Horses, a Remedy, with the Cause.
Take Resalgar, otherwise called Arsnick, and Hog's Lard well tried:
incorporate them to an Ointment over a gentle fire; and having drawn the
Horse's head up strait to the Rack, to prevent his disorders, anoint the place
with a feather, and suffer it for the space of two hours to soak in; and after
that boil the Roots of Burdocks in Chamber-lye, and wash with it the Ointment
clean away: which done, give the Horse meat of the best to hearten and
encourage him to endurance; and so proceed to do every other day for six days
successively.

This grievance, or dangerous Malady, befalls a Horse by extraordinary riding,
and suffering the Horse to cool, and consequently surfeit: or from the rankness
of blood, which produces evil humors, and they not timely let out, force their
way in Botches and dry Sorrances, which upon dressing must be rubbed off to
prepare the way for the Ointment.

For any disease in the Lungs, an excellent Remedy.
The Diseases in the Lungs proceed frequently from extraordinary cold and
phlegmatic humors, or, on the contrary, from hot Inflammations, caused by
Surfeits, or the like; either of which, if not timely remedied, tend to
consumption and rottenness, and are known by the working of the Ribs, and
beating of the Flanks; but more especially by his coughing weakly, and the slow
beating of what has been before mentioned, with other the like signs.

To cure these, Take of the herb Melliot, commonly called Horse-Lungwort:
bruise it in a Mortar, and squeese out the Juice to the quantity of two ounces;
of Fenegreek-seeds and Madder, each an ounce, with as much of Rosemary-seed,
and give him them, the latter being well bruised in a quart of warm Ale, every
other day, for the space of fourteen days, fasting; and after the dose, let him
have Oats washed in warm Beer and warm Mashes, keeping him in a close Stable,
without exercising him, unless in a fair clear day: Or for want of these,

Take a young Snake, open it, and put into the belly Rue and Snakeweed; shred,
with the fat of a Hedgehog, as much as the belly of the Snake, being
embowelled, will hold; and let it be roasted before a gentle fire, saving the
Oil or Dripping that falls from it carefully in an Earthen-pan; and having
shaved off the hair on the breast, anoint it with this Ointment, chafing it in
with your hot hand: and so do by renewing the Ointment as often as you see it
convenient.

For the swelling of the Horse's Legs, the Cure.
The cause of the swelling in the Legs comes through cold humors settling
therein, or overmuch riding in foul or dirty ways, over-heats or over-strains,
or by Molten-grease falling down into the Legs: And in this case having let
blood in the most convenient Veins, as near as may be to the swelling; to take
away the corrupt blood, then

Take the Lees of White Wind or Rhenish-wine half a pint, Cammomoil half a
handful, Cummin-seeds an ounce, Wheat Flour two handfulls: boil them all
together, adding in the boiling half a pint of Verjuyce, and so lay them hot as
a Poultis to the place grieved, renewing it till you find it draws the swelling
to a head: which being done,

Take Shoomakers Wax an ounce, the like quantity of Virgins Wax; half an ounce
of Bole-armorick, and half a pint of Olive-oyl; the Yolks of two Eggs, and half
a quartern of Honey: beat these well together over a gentle fire, till you
perceive them well incorporated into the thickness of a Salve; and then
spreading part of it upon Sheeps-leather, apply it Plaster-wise till the
corruption, by often renewing it, be drawn away: then wash the place with
Balm-water, and heal it up with Hog's-grease and Honey, incorporated over a
gentle fire.

The flying Worm, what it is, and how to Cure it.
This is known generally by the name of a Tetter or Ringworm, occasioned by an
extraordinary heat in the Blood, and other foul disorders creating a virrilent
or sharp firey humor, and for the most part seizes upon the Rump or Crupper of
the Horse, and frequently, by not being regarded, turns to a Canker, though
indeed it will seize; and so is found to do upon any part of the body that is
subject to flesheyness or abundance of blood, and cause the Horse to rub
himself in an extraordinary manner: and is known by the falling away of the
hair, and the Horse's continual rubbing.

To cure this, let the Horse blood as soon as may be in that part where it has
seized him; and then

Take an ounce of Verdegrease, two ounces of Burdock juice two ounces of Soot,
a quarter of an ounce of the Oil of Tartar: and with the we^ght of all these in
Hog's Lard, make them up into an Ointment, bathing it with it as hot as may be
endured: and so continue to do till the Malady ceases to spread, and
consequently dies.

Excellent Directions for the prevention of Diseases in Horses, at sundry
times, etc.

Observe in this case to bleed your Horse the beginning of April in the
Neck-veins, when the sign of Life is not in that part; and so every day in the
Month of April. give him what I order: As thus;

Take old Rye, not musty, nor any ways disordered, impaired by shrivelling up,
nor any way foul with dirt, Lome-stones, or the like, take to the quantity of a
Bushel; and having sprinkled it with the Juice of Baum, and again dried it by
spreading in the Sun; put it into an Iron boiling-pot without water, and there
by perpetual stirring, parch it to that degree that it becomes black and hard:
then take it out, and put it into a close dry place, and each day give your
Horse a quart of it, beaten to Powder, amongst his Oats: and so do in the Month
of October, likewise remembering to let him Blood: And by this means his blood
will be so well tempered, that unless some extraordinary matter happen, as
exceeding heats occasioning surfeits, too rank feeding or damp lying, the Horse
will undoubtedly be kept in a good temper of body during the whole year: And
the better to confirm him, give him this drink as soon as he is let blood, viz.

Take of White Wind a pint, infuse into it Cinnamon, Cloves and Saffron, of each
three drams; Cassa and Myrrh, of each the like quantity: let them simper over a
gentle fire for the space of an hour; and then being sweetened with Sugar Candy
or fine Sugar, give it him blood-warm fasting, and keep him warm with a cloth
for the space of two hours after without Meat.

A Cure for a sore or defective Mouth.
The sores or disorders in the Mouth are occasioned either by bad blood or
excessive colds, creating rheums and noisome vapors that afflict the palate,
for there they generally begin; and from thence descending to the Jaws, do in a
great measure obstruct the feeding, and hinder the shutting of the Mouth: Now
when it happens in the Palate only, the best expedient is to let blood in the
Mouth, by cutting the third bar, or as your discretion leads you.

The Horse being let blood, Take of strong old Cheese four ounces, and a Root
of Garlic: bruise them well, and boil them in water wherein Plantane has been
concocted, and with the Liquid part wash the Mouth and Tongue of the Horse as
hot as it may well be endured; so continuing often to do, till you find the
grievances to decrease; and if it be so far gone, that this proves not
effectual,

Take a pint of Verjuyce, a handful of Bay Salt, a quarter of a pint of the
Juice of Housleek, and a penyworth of Diascordium: boil them well, and having
washed his Mouth with Savin-water, or water wherein Savin has been concocted,
give him the beforementioned potion to drink lukewarm.

For the Mellet in the Heels, a Cure.
Take three ounces of Casteel-soap, a pound of English Honey, Allom two ounces,
and of Lime-juyce or Verjuyce a quarter of a pint, with half a handful of
Bean-flower: incorporate them over a gentle fire, and having reduced them to a
convenient thickness, bind a part of it with Leather or thick Linen upon the
place grieved, suffering it without renewal, to continue there for the space of
five days; and between each renewal wash the place well with Beef-broth,
keeping his Leg moist, and roped up, for some days after.

The Stavers, their signs, cause and cure.
This distemper is known by a dizziness in the Head, a dullness of the Eyes,
and disorderly hanging of the Jaws, and proceeds, in chief, from corrupt blood
and infectious vapors that affect the brain, and consequently put the whole
frame out of order. And this disease few Horses altogether escape.

The cure is, to let him Blood in the Temple-veins or Neck-veins; and having a
potion made after this manner, give it him hot. viz.

Take a handful of Savin, the like quantity of Rue, an ounce of Ruburb, and an
ounce of Methridate: give him these Ingredients, the Liquid part well boiled in
a quart of Spring Water, sweetened with brown Sugar or Molossus.

For the Stone, a very good Remedy.
This distemper is occasioned by gross humors, which settling in the Reins or
Bladder, do, in process of time, by the help of heat and moisture, grow to a
hardness, and so obstruct the passage of the Urin; and by grating those tender
parts, cause exceeding pain and disorder to the creature so afflicted. To
dissolve or remove the Stone so contracted,

Take the Roots of Nettles, Parsley, Fennel and Sperage, of each four ounces;
of Saxafrage and Dodder, each a handful: bruise and boil them in a quart of
White Wind, and a pint of Vinegar, until a third part be wasted: then add a
handful of Bay Salt, and half a pint of Olive-oyl, with half a pound of Honey;
and having strained out the thin part as hot as may be, let him drink it
fasting: and so continue to to do for the space of a week together, and you
will find the pains will cease.

To take away a Wen in the Neck, or any part of the Horse's Body, without
danger.
These Sorrances are generally caused by the assembling of bad humors to one
place, and their contracting into a Tumor: To remove them therefore,

Take the Oil of Bays, Water of Tartar, and Soap-boylers-Lees, mix them well;
and being very hot, dip a cloth therein, and lay it upon the place grieved;
continuing often so to do, and the humors thereby being dispersed, the
swelling will sink and disappear*

The Crownet-Scab, what it is; together with the Cure.
This is a troublesome Sorrance, being a Scab round the corners of the hoof,
very cankerous and dangerous, and frequently comes by a Horse's running in wet
and mirey ground, especially in Wintertime, whereby the cold has power to
contract the gross and disordered humors; and is known by the hairs standing
up, the unevenness of the Crownet, and the watery humor that proceeds from
thence: Wherefore to cure it,

Take Verdegrease an ounce, Rusty Bacon-fat two ounces, Powder of Hart's-horn
an ounce: wash the place with Beef-broth; and having made the beforementioned
materials into an Ointment, anoint the place hot as may be endured; and
continue so to do for a week together: after which anoint it with Oil of Bays
or Rosemary.

To draw out a Thorn or Stump, or any Iron, or sharp thing gotten into the
flesh.
If you cannot come at the cause of this kind of Sorrance, so as to draw it out
with your fingers or Pincers; then mollify the swelling or part where you
conceive it to be; and,

Take of Burgundy-pitch an ounce, and of black Soap two ounces: stamp the Roots
of Water-lillys to the quantity of both the former; and spreading them
Plaster-wise, lay them to the place a night and a day, and thereby the swelling
will not only be sunk or depressed, but the head of the Thorn or Iron will
appear to that degree, that it may be easily taken out: after which apply a
Plaster of Diaculum or Oxicrotium to bring away the festered matter, if any be
found there, and so heal it with green Ointment.

For a Strain in the Coffin-Joynt, or Socket of the Hoof.
This Sorrance happens by a sudden short slip, and is not thought of by many
Farriers, who are of the opinion, That under the hoof there can be no slip or
strain, though the contrary appears: and this is found out by taking up the
foot, and bowing the hoof from side to side; and on that side you perceive the
Horse to be pained in so doing, on that side is the danger. This being
perceived,

Take of Beef-brine a pint, and as much tried Suet; set them on the fire, and
let them consume to a third part; then add Wheat-meal and the Juice of Alehoof
or Ground Ivy half a pound, or so much that they may be made up into the
thickness of a Poultis; when having pared the hoof at the bottom to the quick,
spread some of it very hot, and stop it in with Flax: and so renew it every
other day, till you perceive by your Horse's going the grief removed; and the
better to keep it on, you may clap a cross stick under the shoe, or cover the
whole foot with a pitched cloth, or a thick sole of Leather, will do the same
office; but observe, that during the cure, you suffer him not to go in wet and
dirty ground.

For a Horse that is perpetually sick or out of order, by retaining a spice of
former surfeits, not perfectly cured.

Having let your Horse blood, take him up into a warm Stable, and prepare two
ounces of Alloes Sucatrina finely beaten to Powder; Roll them up in Butter that
has been tempered with the Juice of Rue, and give him the composition in
pellets as big as Walnuts in the morning fasting, having prepared his body for
the reception thereof, by dieting him some days before with scalded Bran and
boiled Barley, refusing on this occasion to give him hard meats till three days
after, suffering his drink to be White-water, and that very warm. Now this
White-water is no other than water wherein Flower or Bran is scattered, or
Bread finely grated and sifted, etc.

For a Cold in the Summer, when the Horse is defective in filling, or by too
rank feeding.
Take of the Powder of the Root of Scabeous an ounce and a half, of red stone
Sugar half a pound, and of Olive-oyl four ounces: add to these half a pint of
Canary, or as much as will dissolve them to a thinness, that the Horse may
easily swallow them; and so give them to him lukewarm in a Drenching-horn; and
after them a gentle heat, in such manner, that the humors may be stirred and
brought away by Excrement, of Sweat, Urin, etc. And this may be given in case
of any extraordinary over-heating, by Racing, and the like.

A through Splint or Screw-pin, what it is; together with the Cure.
This Sorrance happens on both sides of the Legs so opposite one to the other,
as if it riveted it; and from thence takes the denomination of Screw-pin, and
is a kind of a sinewy Excressence: Wherefore to remove it, for it is very
troublesome to the Horse,

Take the handle of a Hammer, or the Blood-stick, and beat it therewith on
either side, till you have reduced it to a softness: then having an ounce of
the Oil of Riggrum, or by some called Reggium, anoint it therewith, and bind a
cloth about it; and by frequent dressings the Excressence will sink, and
restore the Leg to a flatness: for want of the before mentioned Oil, Take that
of Petrollium, and it will work much the like effects.

To render a brittle Hoof firm and serviceable.
Take of the Juice of Garlic and Rue, or Herb-a-grace, of each four ounces;
Powder of burnt Roach-Allom, half a pound; Hog's-grease and new Cow Dung, of
each a pound: mix them altogether, and being made into a Poultis over a gentle
fire, apply it hot to the hoof, binding it about it, and stuffing it in under
the shoe; and in often renewing it the cure will be perfected.

To Cure the Anbury.
Sear it off with a sharp hot Iron, and having Hog's-grease and Verdegrease
well tempered together, anoint the Roots therewith at sundry times, etc.

To prevent a Horse's pissing Blood, an excellent Remedy.
Take the herb called Hart's-tongue half a handful, Piony-roots sliced an
ounce, the Juice of Bettony half a pint: boil them in stale Beer, and give them
him as hot as he is capable to endure, the Liquid part only: and so continue to
do in the morning fasting for a week together, and the defect will cease.

For a broken Knee, the Remedy.
Take Urin, heat it well, and wash the Sorrance, easing it of the Gravel, if
any be contracted, by falling, or the like: Then take Turpentine an ounce,
Rosin the like quantity, Hog's Lard two ounces, and the blades of Leeks a
handful, with two ounces of the Powder of burnt Allom: bruise the Leeks, press
out the Juice, and melt it, with the rest, to the thickness of a Salve: and
then spreading it Plaster-wise, apply it to the place grieved, anointing it
between whiles with Oil of Coreander-seeds or Anniseeds.

For the Dropsey in a Horse.
This distemper proceeds from the looseness of the flesh, occasioned by moist
and unwholesome feeding, whereby phlegmatic and watery humors are engendered in
the blood, which sweating as it were through the Veins, are retained between
the skin and the flesh, or in the spongy flesh, occasioning Tumors and
unseemly swellings: To remove which,

Take two handfulls of Parsley-seeds, the like of Anniseeds and Bay Berries,
with one handful of Juniper Berries: bruise them together in a Mortar, and
boiling them in Verjuyce, sweetened with brown Sugar; give the Horse to the
quantity of a pint to drink, first and last chafing the swelled or tumorous
places with your hand, or hard wisps of Hay: and so continuing them for a week
together, you will find the flesh become firm, and the watery humors disperse.

To join a Sinew that is cut.
Cleanse the Wound with the Juice of Nettles and white Sugar; then take the
Ointment of Tobacco, and a Plaster of Diaculum: apply them, and bind up the
Wound very strait.

For a Wound or Hurt in the Tongue, a Remedy.
This Sorrance being occasioned by the Halter o^ Bitt, in having to do with too
hard a hand: To cure it, Take of the Juice of Sallendine half a pint, as much
of that of Bugloss: heat them over a gentle fire, adding two ounces of Honey of
Roses, and as much Allom; and with them anoint the grieved place, and you will
find it quickly heal.

For the Itch in the Tail, or any other part.
This disorder proceeds from rank blood, through foul feeding: Therefore having
bled your Horse well,

Take Wood-ashes a peck, Burdock-roots a handful or two, Man's Urin two
gallons, and the like quantity of water wherein Tobacco-stalks have been
steeped: boil them up into a Lie, and with it wash the grieved part, when it is
very hot.

Another excellent Remedy for the Tetter.
Take of the Roots of Elecampane and red Dock, of each a handful: steep them a
week in Urin, adding two handfulls of Bay Salt: boil them in the Urin till from
two quarts it become one, and with it wash the Sorrance, after it has been well
rubbed and chafed, that the Liquids may the better sink in.

For a Hurt or Wring in the Withers.
This commonly happens by the straitness of the Saddle, or indiscretion of the
Rider; and is known by a Swelling or Tumor on the Back, etc. To remedy this,

Take a handful of Wheat Flour, wet it, with half a pint of White Wind
Vinegar, adding three ounces of Honey, and an ounce of Juice of Hemlock: mix
them well over a gentle fire, and apply them Plaster-wise to the place grieved:
Or for want of these,

Take Water wherein Barley and Fennel have been boiled, and wash the places
with it as warm as may well be endured.

Worms of any sort in the Body of a Horse, how to kill and remove them.
Take a handful of the tops of Broom, and of Savin the like quantity: bruise
them together with as much Featherfew, then with fresh Butter and Treacle make
them up into balls the bigness of Pigeon's Eggs; and when he is fasting in the
Morning, give him three of them, and let him fast three hours after; then give
him Oats, but refrain giving him Water till the Evening: and in this doing four
or five times, the Worms will be destroyed and evacuated.

An excellent Salve for any sort of Wound, how to make and apply it.
Take of clarified Rosin a pound, the like quantity of Beeswax, Sheeps-suet
half a pound, Frankincense and Storax, of each half an ounce; Gum-arabick four
ounces, Hog's Lard a pound and a half, and of the Juice of green Tobacco half a
pint: dissolve and melt them over a gentle fire, adding in the melting four
ounces of Turpentine, and the like quantity of Red-wine; and so boil them up
into the thickness of a Salve, by drawing off the watery part, if any remain,
and apply it Plaster-wise on Leather or thick Linen, in case of any Wound,
Sorrance, Bruise, or other affliction.

An Imposthume to ripen and cure.
The greater or lesser quantity of matter relating to the Imposthumation, may
be discerned by the heat, being more or less; as also the throbbing and
beating: Then to break it, apply the Roots of white Lillies and Marshmallows,
the Flowers or Roots of Mareblabs: bruise them, in the best wise, in a Mortar
with Hog's Lard and Wheat Flour, and Poultis-wise apply them to the swelling:
which being thereby brought to a head, Lance it; and having drained the
corruption, apply a Plaster of the before-recited Salve; and by often renewing
the Plaster, it will draw the corruption from all parts, and render the Horse
sound and safe.

For any Internal sickness, another good Remedy, never before published.
If you would have your Horse be mostly exempted from infirmities, especially
such as are Internal; after having let him Blood in due season, or as the
Malady requires it, and given him, if need require it, an opening Clyster made
of Cammomoil, Marshmallows, the Flowers of Archangel and Comfory, boiled in
Milk or Ale:

Take round Aristolochia, Gentian, and the Roots of Three-leav'd-grass, of each
two ounces; Race, Ginger, and Nutmegs, of each an ounce; the Seeds of
Cardamoms, and Juice of Hysop, of each two ounces; Indian Spikenard two drams;
Licoris an ounce; Diascordium two ounces; Raisins in the Sun a pound, and
twelve blew Figs: boil these in a Pottle of White Wind till a third part be
consumed, and give it the Horse to drink warm.

This is successfully given in case of Surfeit, Fever, Pestilence, Pains in
the Belly or Stomach, Internal bruises, Inflammations of the Liver, or
Consumption of the Lungs, and the like.

For the Ach, weakness or numb'dness of the Joints.
The occasion of this grievance comes either from an unhappy strain, or a
contraction of gellied watery humors, caused by cold, and too much moisture: To
cure and remove which Aches and Pains, etc.

Mix Acopium with Canary; and when you find it very warm, anoint the place
grieved therewith, chafing it in with your hand, or a hot cloth, and in a weeks
time it will remove the disorder, especially if it proceed from cold: but if
from a strain, Then take Aquavitae and the Flower of Brimstone, with a small
quantity of the Oil of Spike: heat them hot, and with a hot cloth anoint the
place grieved, bathing and suppling it in, swathing the place about with a
Rowler dipped in melted Beeswax and Hog's Lard.

How to stay any violent Looseness.
This disorder in the Body happens many ways, but especially by raw and
unwholesome feeding: To remedy which,

Take of the Juice of Sloes a pint, half a pint of the Juice of Sennegreen;
Bean-flower and Bole-armorick, each two ounces; Allom one ounce: boil them
together to the consumption of a third part; and then making that up with Milk,
give it the Horse fasting; and so do for three days successively.

The Lampas; what it is, and how to Cure it.
The Lampas is no other than a swelling that proceeds from rank blood, and
appears in proud flesh on the inside of the Lips: the way to destroy it is,
when you have gaged the Horse's mouth that he cannot shut it, take an Iron with
a flat top, the shape of which you find in the Margin; and heating it red-hot,
burn away the flesh; and then rub the place with a roasted Onion and Bay Salt,
and in a short time the swelling will disappear, and the Horse be better able
to eat his meat.

For the Fig in the foot of a Horse, the Cure, etc.

This Sorrance is a lump of unnatural flesh that grows upon the Frush of the
heel, in the shape of a Fig, and is frequently caused by the defect of those
that undertake to cure a wound or hurt in that part, occasioned by a stub or
thorn. And now to remove this,

Cut away so much of the hoof, that by the means of the Incision there may be a
space or difference between the Frush and the Sole: Then dip a Sponge in an
Ointment made of Verdegrease, Beeswax and Hog's Lard; and binding it hard on,
it will in three or four times so doing destroy the proud flesh, and render the
Horse's foot sound and well.

For the Flanks, a disease so called, and the way to remedy it.
This proceeds from a wrench, stroke, or pain in the Back, which causes a
swelling, etc. And to prepare it for the remedy, shave away the hair where you
find the grief: Then make a charge, and apply it; which may be made with
success after this manner:

Take Bole-armorick, Consolida Majora, Galbanum, Mastick, Per-rosin and
Apoponax, of each two ounces, or less, according to the more or lessness of the
place grieved: bruise them well to a Powder, adding of Sanguis Draconis and
Sol-Armoniack, of each three drams; Wheat-meal, and the Whites of Eggs, with so
much Vinegar as will make them into a Cataplasm or Plaster, commonly called a
Charge, and lay it warm to the place grieved, being spread upon a Sheep-skin:
And this being renewed four or five times, will effect the cure.

The Shackle-gall, and its Cure.
This is generally occasioned by the fretting of the Shackle or Fetlock, and
sometimes by Ropes with which the Horse is Teaded: To cure which,

Take a good handful of Plantane, and boil it in Milk to a softness: then take
six ounces of Allom, and two ounces of Sugar Candy, and put them in beaten to
Powder, then add as much Vinegar as will make a hard curd come on the top: then
the curd being taken off, vash the place with what remains; and then the hair
being clipped away, anoint the place with Hog's Lard, and the Powder of
Turmerick: or you may do it with the Ointment of Tobacco, or Honey, Verdegrease
and Red-wine made up into an Ointment. And this likewise is good for a galled
back, or a gall in any part of the Horse's body,

A Horse that is Gravelled, how to remedy.
When by the Horse's crimpling and lameness you perceive he is gravelled by
traveling in foul ways, take off his shoes, and search well his feet,
clearing away all the Stones or Sand you can find there: Then, to restore him,

Take Beeswax an ounce, Deers-suet, Rosin and Boar's-grease, of each an ounce,
and four ounces of the Juice of Housleek: make them into an Ointment, and apply
it hot on a wad of Flax, stopping it in.

Of Cataplasms or Poultises.
NOtwithstanding what has been mentioned, there are diverse Cataplasms or
Poultises of singular use, and as the best of this kind, Take the subsequent.

For any Swelling, Aposthume, Rankling, Wound or broken Bone, a Cataplasm or
Poultis.
Take of new Milk one pint, crumble into it white-bread, and boil it till it
becomes thick; add then the White of an Egg, and an ounce of Olive-oyl: mingle
them well together, and apply them Poultis-wise to the place grieved as hot as
conveniently may be endured.

For a Swelling in the Throat or under the Ears.
Take Neetsfoot-oyl a pint, of the leaves of Marigolds a handful, Saffron a
dram, and of white Bread four ounces: boil them together till they become the
thickness of a Poultis, and apply them hot to the place grieved.

To draw or break a Boil or Vlcerons Sore, etc.

Take the flowers of Lady-cups, the roots of Cuccowpintle, the leaves of
Burdock, and the flowers or roots of Water Lillies, of each half a handful:
boil them in a quart of Linseed-oyl, and Mash them into a smallness: which
done, apply them Plaster or Poultis-wise, binding them hot to the place grieved
as convenience directs.

An excellent Poultis to assuage any Pain or superate Tumor.
Take the leaves of Mallows half a handful, of Groundsel one handful: boil
them in Running-water till they may be made into a Mash, then add to them a
pint of Cream and two ounces of crumbled Wheaten-bread, of Mutton-suet half a
pound, Oil of Roses two ounces, and the Whites of two Eggs: boil them all till
they become the thickness of a Poultis; and in that manner apply it to the
place grieved, renewing it as you see occasion.

A Poultis to break any Infectious Sore.
Take of Lilly-roots two ounces, Marshmallows and Violet-roots, of each the
like quantity; Rye-meal and Linseed-oyl, of each four ounces; of Barley and
Wheatmeal, each an ounce: to these add two blew Figs; of the flowers of
Cammomoil half an ounce, and the bark of Elder-roots the like quantity: boil
them stamped and well bruised till they may be strained into a pulp; then add
again Barrows-grease and Oil of Almonds, of each two ounces, and apply it to
the place till you perceive it drawn to a head: after which you may Lance it,
and with a Plaster of Diaculum draw out the Infectious matter, and heal the
griewed part.

To disperse the Flux or Oppression of Blood in any part.
Take Frankincense, Alloes, Dragon's blood and Bole-armorick, of each half an
ounce, the Whites of two Eggs, and the Wool of an old Hare: mingle them well in
a pint of Aquavitae, and let them boil till they come to a thickness; then
Plaster-wise apply them to the place grieved as hot as may be endured.

For an Imposthume or sudden Swelling in any part of the Body.
Take French Barley a pound, bruise it with the like quantity of Linseed,
shread to them a handful of Marshmallows, and sees them together in a quart
of new Milk till they come to a solid thickness; then, as hot as may be
endured, apply them to the Swelling; and so continue to do for four or five
days successively.

In case of the Palsy in the Head (a disease seldom happening to Horses) apply
this Poultis, viz.

Take a large Onion, roast it well, then put to it an ounce of the Oil of
Spike, Olive-oyl and Lavender-flowers, of each two ounces; Marjorum and
Winter-savory, of each half a handful well shread: boil these, and apply them
as a Poultis, hot as may be well endured. And thus much, in brief, of things in
this kind.

AS for Balms and Balsoms, seeing they are wonderful useful on sundry
occasions, I think it not amiss to speak something more of them and their use
by way of Receipt. And first,

To heal and contract any Wound.
Take of Mummy three ounces, Alloes Epatick half the quantity, Stone-pitch two
ounces, Sarcol half an ounce, Gum-arabick and Mastick, of each a quarter of an
ounce; add to these half a pint of Aquavitae: melt and order them over a gentle
fire till they become a Balm; and then, as occasion serves, dipping a Linnament
in the contracted Medicament, apply it to the Wound as often as is convenient.

An inward Balm to destroy Worms, and heal Internal Bruises.
Take Oil of Turpentine half a pound, Myrrh, Storax and Galbanum, of each an
ounce; Cloves and Cinnamon in Powder, of each half an ounce; Deer's-suet half a
pound, and of Amber-grease a dram: make them into a Balm over a gentle fire,
and give the Horse in warm Ale the quantity of a Walnut fasting.

An excellent Balm in case of any Sprain, Internal Bruise, Swelling, Blasting,
old Sore or Gunshot.

Take of Turpentine an ounce, Galbanum two ounces, Cicatrine, Mastick, Cloves,
Galingal, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cubebs, of each an ounce, Gum of Jope half an
ounce: beat them, and well incorporate them, then distill them over a gentle
fire in a Glass; and when the thinest part is drawn off, the next will be a Red
Oil, and that is it which is to be applied with the greatest success, though
the first is wonderful efficacious and useful on many occasions.

An excellent Balm to be given a Horse inward, in case of a Consumption.
Take of the best Turpentine a pound, Pine-Rosin a fourth part, Myrrh,
Frankincense and Mastick, of each two ounces; Sarcoco^, Mace, Wood of Alloes,
of each an ounce, and of Saffron half an ounce: put them in a Glass, retort in
hot Embers; and after the Water, or the clearer part is drawn off, there will
come forth a redish Oil, which may be given him four drams in a morning
fasting, suffering him to take it in half a pint of warm Ale.

An excellent Red Water to cure Ulcers.
Make a Lie of Ashwood-ashes, that a gallon of the liquid part may be drawn
from it; and add to it a gallon of Tanners Ousey, in which no Leather has been
steeped; steep in these two pounds of Madder, and dissolve half a pound of
Roach-Allom, then let them simper over a soft fire till a third part be
consumed; after which run it through a fine Sieve, and dust into it
Bole-armorick: which done, set it again over the fire till it come to half the
quantity: and so, as you see occasion, you may wash the place grieved with it.

An excellent Water to allay any Internal heat or feverish Indispondency.
Take of Savory, Sorrel, Bugloss, Burrage and Endive, of each a handful: chop
them small, and boil them in two quarts of Running-water, scuming it till half
be consumed, and add as much Verjuyce as will make it up the first quantity:
sweeten the Liquid part with brown Sugar, and reserve it for your use, giving
the Horse half a pint at a time fasting.

In case a Horse be troubled with the Stone, an excellent Water.
Take two quarts of new Milk, and of Saxafrage, Parsley, Mint, Fennel,
Pellitory of the Wall, Mother, Thyme, green Sage and the roots of Radishes,
each an ounce: bruise the latter, adding two quarts of White Wind; and so, if
your convenience will admit, distill them, if not boil them, and strain out the
Liquid part, and give him half a pint at a time, having first scraped into it
the Powder of a roasted Nutmeg.

For any disease in the Eyes, another excellent Water, etc.

Take of Maidenhair and Ground Ivy, a handful of each, the flowers of
Archangel the like quantity, the powder of Alablaster two ounces, and of the
roots of Wormwood dried and beaten into powder an ounce: distill or well
concoct these; and when you have so done, wash the Eye grieved by dipping a
feather into the Liquid part.

An excellent Purgation for Gravel in the Bladder or Kidneys.
Of Parsley-roots take a handful, white Saxafrage and Ashen-keys, or the bark
of the Ash-tree root, of each an ounce; of Paristone, a herb so called, half a
handful; Eringo-roots sliced two ounces: boil them with half a pound of
Coreander-seeds in a gallon and a half of new Ale, and give the Horse a pint of
the Liquid part of drink as hot as he can well endure it.

For the Vlceration of the Yard, an excellent Water.
Take Spring water a gallon, quench in it a hot Iron and Flint-stones very
often: infuse into it the leaves of red Roses, or Rose-cakes, four ounces;
Pomgranet-pills, and the flowers of the same, each half an ounce; add of the
Juice Plantane and Housleek, each half a pint; of Allom and white Copras, each
half an ounce: boil them over a gentle fire, and inject the Liquid part into
the Yard with a Syringe, and it will effect in often using the Cure.

An excellent Powder for the Falling Sickness or Falling-Evil in a Horse, etc.

Take the roots of Elder, dry them in an Oven till they may be beaten into a
Powder; add the Powder of a roasted Nutmeg and Storax, each an ounce; the Ashes
of the Wool of a Fox, half an ounce; and of the Powder of Calamint a dram: mix
these well, and give him half an ounce at a time in a quarter of a pint of
Canary.

A Powder for the Ague, which frequently happens, especially to young Horses.
Take the herb Mercury, Plantane-leaves, Cardus Benedictus and Rue, of each
half a handful: dry them that they may be beaten to Powder, and give the Horse
an ounce of it in a quart of Ale, wherein two handfulls of Centaury have been
boiled, as hot as he can well endure it: and so renew the Dose as you shall
find occasion.

To purge Choler and Phlegm, an excellent Powder.
Take of Turbith an ounce, Ginger, Cinnamon, Mastick, Gallinga and Alloes.
Epatick, of each half an ounce; Diagredium, Ruburb and Seney, of each a dram:
dry, bruise, and make them into a Powder, giving the Horse the whole quantity
at two Doses in warm Ale or Milk.

An excellent Bath to allay any Swelling or suchlike disorder, especially
diseases in the Legs, occasioned by the descending of evil humors, etc.

Take the roots and bark of Pomgranet, the flowers of Comfory, and of Acorns,
each a handful; Cammomoil and Fumitory, of each a handful; black Helebore and
Hysop the like quantity: boil them in a gallon of Water, and when a third part
is consumed, apply with a Woollen-cloth the remainder to the place grieved as
hot as may be well endured.

A Bath to soften and mollify the Skin.
Take the roots of Marshmallows and white Lillies: bruise them with
Penegreek-seeds, Peletory of the Wall and Violet-leaves; the flowers of
Cammomoil and Melliot, each an ounce: Neatsfoot-oyl, the Oil of Lillies and
Hog's Lard, each four ounces; add to them all a quart of Water, boil and strain
out the Liquid part, using it as hot as may be by way of Application, etc.

To stanch Blood in any Vein or Artery.
Take Alloes Epatick and Olibanum, of each half an ounce, and the Wool of an
old Hare: bruise them with the White of an Egg, and spread them on Cottonwool,
binding them to the place, and there suffering them to continue till such time
as you find the Blood is turned back, and the Film knit together, which will be
within the space of two or three days.

An excellent Medicament to provoke a Horse to Vomit, a^ also to purge his
Belly.
Take Elder-root Rind, bruise it small, to the quantity of two ounces, the like
quantity of Spurge-lawrel and Turmerick: let them steep in a pint of White Wind
a night and a day, and give the Liquid part to the Horse very warm.

An excellent Purge, good on sundry occasions.
Take Senne, Coriander-seeds, Alloes, and the Juice of Savin, of each an ounce;
steep and bruise them in a quart of Ale, then give him the Liquid part fasting
as hot as may be well endured for two mornings successively, ordering him well
as to his Dressing and Diet, that he neither over-feed nor catch cold.

For a Joynt-sickness,
Take Ant's Eggs, together with some of the Ants, a small quantity; add the
Keys of an Ash-tree, the Roots of Briony, and those of Burdock: boil them in
Whey, and with the Liquid part anoint the Joints as hot as may be well endured,
binding up and keeping your Horse warm, etc.

For an Internal Ulcer.
Take of Beeswax four ounces, Turpentine the like quantity, Conserve of Red
Roses an ounce, Deers-suet two ounces, Storax half an ounce, Myrrh the like
quantity, and Oil of sweet Almonds, as much as will make them into a Balsom,
and give it the Horse an ounce at a time in a pint of warm Ale.

An excellent Electuary for a dangerous Cough or rattling Cold.
Take Germander, Horehound, Hysop, Agremony, Bittony, Liverwort and
Hart's-tongue, of each a handful, clean stripped and washed: boil them in
three pints of Water till they are very soft, and till the Water be consumed,
that they may be mashed into a thickness; then add the Powder of Licoris,
Elecampane-roots and Honey, so much as will make it into an Electuary: and by
so doing and giving each morning the quantity of a Walnut to your Horse
fasting, it will wonderfully help him.

Many may be farther taken notice on of this kind, but these being the rarest,
newest, and the best Approved, I hope the Practitioner will have such
satisfaction herein, that he will need no more.

CHAP. XXIII. The Symptoms of Diseases, Sorrances, Distempers, Grievances, or
the like, in general and particular, how to foresee them and prevent them; as
also to know when they happen, etc.
HAving passed over all the Material Diseases and Sorrances any ways incident,
hurtful or dangerous in the plainest, safest, and easiest Method; It now
remains that I speak something of the Symptoms of Diseases and Distempers in
general, that they may be the brieflier comprehended, and afterward give
directions for making Unguents, Salves, Poultises, Clysters, Suppositories,
Purging-potions, etc. which ought always to be kept in a readiness for sundry
uses and emergent occasions, with such reasonable directions as may add to what
has been already treated of: And of these in their order.

The Curious, as I have formerly hinted, have ever had a great regard to the
Complexion of a Horse, thereby to draw from thence more than bare conjectures
of the bodily state or constitutions relating to health or sickness. And since
too much of this kind cannot be well laid down, nor more than sufficiently
handled, I shall make these further Observations than what hitherto I have made.

The Strangles are signified by the hanging out and unseemly color of a
Horse's Tongue, and by the faintness of his breathing.

When a Horse is very thirsty, and seems very little affected toward his
Provender, then has he the symtoms of a Fever, or some hot disease that
afflicts the Heart and Liver, or else it may signify the Putrefaction of the
Lungs: but when he eats largely, and desires not much water, it denotes a cold
Liver, and that the Horse is subject to gross humors, by reason the heat
cannot concoct the quantity of nutriment as it ought; and therefore it is not
amiss to restrain him from eating altogether so much as he requires, or at
least to give it him by degrees, that it may leasurely digest.

If with exceeding greediness he devour his Meat and Drink, then beware he be
not troubled with the diseases of the Spleen, or putrefaction of the Lungs.

If the Breath of a Horse, without traveling or other force or violence, be
found very hot, or so much as is more than usual, it denotes the symptom of
some feverish disease approaching.

If the left side be much swelled, and there be no apparent cause, then
proceeds it from the disorder of the Spleen; And if the Legs on that side be
likewise swelled, then it commonly proceeds to the Dropsey.

Drivelling or noisome water descending or issuing from the Mouth or Nostrils
of a Horse, denotes the wet Cough; and if it be gellied, or the like, then it
threatens him with the Staggers.

The dullness of the Countenance, lolling of the Ears, and hanging of the Head,
are signs of the Megrim, or extraordinary pain in the Head.

If disorderly pantings appear on the Breast Sides, or any part of the Body,
then does the Horse labor under some sickness that afflicts the Heart or Liver.

If the Mouth be foul and furred, and the Tongue look yellowish, then the Lungs
are defective, and tending to a Consumption.

The hollowness of the Temples denotes either the Strangles, or that the Horse
is very old.

Shortness of Breath, hanging of the Eyelids, and beating of the Flanks,
denote a Fever.

A cold swelling under the Throat, with a rattling in the Head, signify the
approaching of the Glanders: If about the Tongue-roots small knobs appear, then
it signifies Cold, etc.

If the Horse offer to cough, and be faint in so doing, as not thoroughly able
to bring up what he offers at, then is it occasioned by the swelling or rising
of the Lungs, or oppressive Phlegm settled there, which obstructs the Lungs in
the performance of their office.

The stairing up of the hair, and hardness of the skin, with dejected looks,
and lankness of the belly, denote the Horse foundered in the body, and
sometimes the Wind, Colic, or Stone, is signified thereby; as also the
Yellows; which are all dangerous distempers in a Horse.

If the skin stick to the Ribs, so that it cannot be well raised, then the
Horse is troubled with that infirmity which we commonly call Hidebound.

An uneven stiffness in going, denotes some Strain, Wrench, cold Swelling in
the Joints, or foundering in the feet, etc.

If a Horse have a spongy Wart full of blood, it is an Anbury; If a knotty
Ulcer creeping along the Vein, it is a Farcy; If scabby or ulcerous on the
body, and about the neck, it proceeds from the Mangy; If it singly spread
abroad, and that but in one place, then is it held to be the Canker.

The Botts, or suchlike Insects in the paunch or belly of a Horse, you shall
know by the Horse's endeavoring to strike thereat with his feet, his lying
down and wallowing himself, and his often turning his head back and looking
upon his sides.

If the Horse be over-covetous to lie down on the right side, it signifies
corrupted blood settled in the Cavas of the Liver, and occasions extraordinary
heat, which by the pressure of the Liver is augmented.

A Horse's spreading, when laid down, generally denotes the approach of the
Dropsey, and his ofter groaning the Colic, or the Heart's being oppressed with
bad blood: And thus of other signs and symptoms, most, or the most part
whereof, I have in this Chapter; and what has been before mentioned, is
effectually discussed according to the best Experimental observances that have
been made. From whence I shall proceed to give Directions for sundry choice
Ointments and Salves, highly necessary to be kept in store, and used on sundry
occasions, as necessity requires; and other matters altogether as Material.

CHAP. XXIV. Directions for making and preparing Ointments, Oils, Salves,
Waters, Purgations, Poultises, Charges, Supplements, Pills, Powders, etc.
singular good in case of any Distemper or Sorrance: Many of them never before
made public.
ALthough I have mentioned many famous Ointments and Salves in the course of
the Cures, yet some there are which may indifferently serve for most Sorrances
and Griefs of any kind; and these I shall chiefly name, and direct how to make
them, because they may be gotten in a readiness, and thereby the party not be
to seek them, nor his Ingredients, when the urgency of the Horse's distemper or
grief requires the Application.

An Ointment to search any Wound or Vlcerated Sore, or any thing of the like
nature.
Take of Beeswax four ounces, Turpentine the like quantity, the Juice of
Spurg-lawrel two ounces, Deer's-suet half a pint, Verdegrease an ounce, Allom
calcined two ounces, and Hog's Lard as much as will make it into an Ointment
over a gentle fire: This, by often using, will not only search the Wound, and
discover dead, proud, or putrefied flesh, but cleanse it, and cause it to heal,
restoring the good flesh, and rendering it easy to cure.

An Ointment excellent good in case of Botches, Boils, Seab^ or the like
Sorrances.
Take the Juice of green Tobacco half a pint, of Deer's-suet a pound, the
Powder of Dandely onroots two ounces, as much of Soap-makers Ashes, and half a
pint of the Lees of Wine: make them up into an Ointment with half a pint of
Olive-oyl, and an ounce of the Oil of Petrolum.

To skin any Wound, an excellent Ointment.
Take of Dog's-grease two ounces, half the quantity of black Soap, of the
Powder of calcined Roach-Allom two drams, the Juice of Mugwort an ounce: make
them into an Ointment over a gentle fire; and when the Wound begins to fill
with flesh, anoint it over.

To mollify and assuage any Swelling, an excellent Ointment.
Take of Nut-oyl a quarter of a pint, Neatsfootoyl half a pint, and Linseed-oyl
the like quantity: add to these the Juice of Plantane a quarter of a pint, and
four ounces of the Oil of Earthworms: boil them over a gentle fire to a
convenient thickness, and apply the Ointment to the place grieved as warm as
may be well suffered, and chafe it in with your warm hand when it begins to
cool.

An excellent Ointment to cool and allay any Inflammation.
Take of the Oil of Marshmallows half a pint, the Juice of Mandrake-root two
ounces, Dog's fatt four ounces: or instead thereof that of Hog's lard,
Spermace^i two ounces, and fresh Butter a quarter of a pound: make them into an
Ointment over a gentle fire, and, as occasion serves, apply them to the place
grieved till you find the extraordinary heat abate.

An excellent Ointment, or rather Balsom, to be inwardly given a Horse for
Obstructions, Bruises, and other Ailments and Grievances.

Take of Refined or rarefied Turpentine two ounces, Stag's-suet the like
quantity, Amber-grease two scruples, Olibanum an ounce, Oil of Roses two
ounces, and a dram of the Oil of Amber: heat these gently till they
incorporate, and then take a small quantity, and with fine flower make a Paste
to the bigness of a Walnut, and give it the Horse to swallow; giving him after
it half a pint of warm Mallaga.

To make a green Ointment, proved by Experience, more effectual than what has
formerly been published.

Take the Juice of Sage two ounces, as much of that of Rue, an ounce of
Verdegrease, and of Aquavitae half a quartern: mix these over a gentle fire,
and add of the Powder of Elecampane-roots an ounce, with the Powder of white
Copras calcined half an ounce: make them into an Ointment with Oliveoyl, and
half an ounce of the Oil of Turpentine.

An excellent Remedy for the Staggers, or any Pain that suddenly takes a Horse,
sometimes to the loss of his life.

Take the fat of the Guts of a Capon two ounces, Oil of sweet Almonds two
ounces, of Olive-oyl half a pint: incorporate them well over a gentle fire,
then drop into them the Chemical Oil of Nutmeg a dram, and the like quantity of
that of Spicknard and Bay Berries; and having incorporated them farther into an
Ointment, when you perceive your Horse afflicted, dip a feather in the
Ointment, and thrust it up the nostrils of the Horse, and anoint them as high
as may be; then burn under his nose Storax on a Chafing Dish of Charcole,
placing a Tunel so over it, that the smoke may ascend into the nostrils only.
This is likewise good for any cold Rheum that afflicts the head, and will bring
away the superfluous humor.

An excellent Salve for any Wound.
Take Hog's Lard half a pound, Beeswax a pound, Stone-pitch six ounces,
unslacked Lime beaten into Powder an ounce, the Powder of dried Foxes Lungs an
ounce: make them into a Salve with two ounces of Turpentine, and apply it
Plaster-wise to any Gangreen, ulcerous Sore, Botch, Strain, Slip, Spavin, after
its being opened, or other Sorrance, and by due application it will answer your
expectation.

An approved Salve to draw any stub, thorn, or splinter of Bone or Wood out of
the flesh.
Take of Burgundia-pitch four ounces, the like quantity of Per-rosin, Nut-oyl
two ounces, and the like quantity of Linseed-oyl, and an ounce of the Juice of
Hemlock: make them into the thickness of a Salve, and apply it Plaster wise to
the grieved part till you find the head of the offensive matter; and then with
your Instrument delate the flesh, and draw it out.

To fill a Wound, Ulcer, or the like, with good flesh, an excellent Plaster.
Take Mutton-suet half a pound, the Juice of Baum a quarter of a pint, the
Ointment of Marshmallows and Groundsel, of each two ounces; burnt Allom in
Powder two ounces; Rosin half a pound, and Beeswax as much as will make it up
into a Salve.

A Salve to draw Corruption from the bottom of any Wound, or to draw a
Swelling, or any such grievance, to a head.

Take Turpentine half a pound, Linseed-oyl half a pint, Chalk beaten to Powder
an ounce, the Juice of Orpin half a quartern, Galbanum two ounces, and Oil of
Vitriol a dram: make them into a Salve, and apply them to the place grieved:
and in so doing you will find your expectation answered.

To ripen a Tumor, or assuage any Swelling, not abounding with extraordinary
humors.
Take the fat of an Urchin or Hedgehog four ounces, Tarr two ounces, old
Cheese well beaten in a Mortar four ounces, the Juice of Garlic half a quarter
of a pint, Beeswax six ounces, and Stone-pitch six ounces: make them into a
Salve, and apply the Plaster on a piece of Sheeps-leather.

An excellent Poultis for a Tumor or Swelling.
Take Linseed-oyl half a pint, the Whites of six Eggs, Bole-armorick two
ounces, Groundsel and Smallage, of each a handful well bruised in a Mortar,
Celendine and Comfory the like quantity so ordered: fry them together, and lay
them on as hot as may be. This either allays the swelling, if only fleshly,
occasioned by a stroke or Saddle-pinching, or brings it to head, in case it
proceeds from humors gathering o^ contracting in one place.

A Charge to ease a pain in the Back, or for any Sprain.
Take new Cow Dung four ounces, the roots o^ Burdock two ounces, washed and
sliced; Borage and Bugloss, of each a handful; Oil of Bays six ounces: bruise
them well together, and heating them over the fire, suffer them to be as hot as
may be well endured, and apply them as a Poultis.

To mollify any Chap or rough Sore.
Take Comfory, the roots of Scabeous, and the leaves of Plantane; boil them in
Olive-oyl, being first well bruised to a softness; then add Neatsfoot-oyl, half
the quantity of the Olive-oyl; and then strain off the Liquid part, and with it
anoint the place grieved.

For the Eyes of a Horse, afflicted by any means, an approved Water to cure or
ease them.
Take of the Juice of Pimpernel and Eyebright, of each a like quantity, both
consisting of half a pint; add to them the Powder of Lapis Calaminaris,
quenched in White Wind, an ounce, and as much of the Powder of burnt Allom; two
drams of the Calcine of Crabseyes, and as much of the powdered pith of Oysters:
dip a feather in them, well mingled by stirring, and rub it so dipped into the
Eyes.

A Water to Wash the Mouth in case of any Sorrance or defect.
Take Spring Water a pottle, Roach-Allom a pound, and English Honey the like
quantity: dissolve them unto the Water over a gentle fire, and add half a pint
of the Juice of Hysop, and the like quantity of that of Celendine or Vervine:
boil them to the consumption of a third part, and with the Water wash the
Horse's mouth as you see occasion.

A Pill good for any Internal disorder, etc.

Take of Alloes Epatick half an ounce, Powder of Ruburb the like quantity, the
Juice of Watercresses half a quarter of a pint, and the Berries of Juniper
dried and beaten into Powder an ounce: make these, with the Oil of Myrtle, into
Pills as big as hazlenuts, and give him four at a time successively in warm Ale
or new Milk every morning.

A Supplement exceeding good for any strain or grief in the Sinews, etc.

Take Bacon Lard half a pound, the Oil or Ointment of Smallage two ounces,
black Snails a handful, the Powder of Mastick two ounces: bruise and
incorporate them, and so apply them to the place grieved.

A Vomit for a Horse that has a Queesy stomach, thereby to render him a good
Appetite.
Take Spurg-lawrel a handful, Briany-root an ounce; boil them in a quart or
three pints of Water, then strain out the Liquid part; and having sweetened it
with Sugar Candy, give it him hot, and tend him that he catch not cold.

To purge Melancholy.
Take Scammony a dram, the Juice or Seeds of black Helebore two ounces:
dissolve the former in, and mingle the latter with a pint of warm Ale, and give
it him to drink fasting.

To purge Phlegm.
Take of the Juice of Ivy-leaves or berries, half an ounce; or the Decoction of
them being very strong, add the grains of Cochneal two ounces, the roots of
Fern washed and sliced two ounces, Colocinthius an omnce: make of these a
drench with White Wind; give it the Horse warm, and keep him two hours after
fasting.

CHAP. XXV. Clysters, how to make them, and on what occasion they ought to be
applied in order to their effectual working and bringing away bad humors.
SInce Clysters, in case of Internal distempers, are very necessary, I cannot
omit them, but proceed, amongst other things, to speak of such as cannot but be
useful, and especially those that are capable of purging the several humors,
or at least ways to cause an evacuation of those crudities they have contracted
in the bowels. And in this case, if your Horse is very laxative, which
frequently is occasioned by phlegmatic humors:

Take of the Juice of Pelletory of the Wail a quarter of a pint, add to it
Verjuyce and Olive-oyl, of each half a pint, and of stale Beer a quart: boil
them together to the consumption of a sixth part, and being warm, put them into
your Glister-bag, and force them up the body of the Horse; and by binding down
his Tail, suffer them to remain there, if possible, for the space of an hour,
and give him thereupon Water wherein Scabeous has been concocted.

In case of any Pestilential disease, occasioned by a choleric or firey humor.
Take of the Seeds of Colloquintida, cleared from the husks, half an ounce; the
Juice of Centaury and Wormwood, of each an ounce; Castoreum half the like
quantity; Juice of Wood Sorrel two ounces, and half a pint of Olive-oyl:
concoct them in two quarts of Water, a little sweetened with brown Sugar, and
force it into the Horse's body, using him as before is mentioned.

For any Internal distemper proceeding from Melancholy.
Take Anniseeds, and the Seeds of Mallows beaten to Powder; of each an ounce:
boil them with a small quantity of Savin in a quart of Whey or Skim-milk, then
add a quarter of a pound of fresh Butter: and so having well strained out the
Liquid part, give it him in his Fundament lukewarm.

For any distemper Internal, occasioned by sanguine, corrupt Blood, or watery
Humors, by means of bad concoction or obstruction, etc.

Take of the leaves and roots of Marshmallows a handful, Violet-leaves double
the quantity, Linseed and Coriander-seeds, of each a handful, white Lillyroots
an ounce, the Juice of Senne the like quantity with the latter: boil them in
two quarts of Water to the consumption of a third part; and then add Oil of
Olives a pint, and give it him warm Clyster-wise.

For Sickness in general, an approved Clyster.
Take of the Oil of Dill and Cammomoil, of each an ounce; the Oil of Cassa half
an ounce, the Juice of Violet-leaves two ounces: Then having concocted a good
quantity of Mallows in two quarts of Water, strain out the Liquid part, and put
the forementioned Ingredients therein, and administer them blood-warm. This,
in all violent diseases especially, is singular good.

In case of Restringency or hard Binding.
Take the Juice of Fumetory a quarter of a pint, the Syrup of Roses two ounces,
and as much of the Oil of Bays; Neatsfoot-oyl half a pint, and of the Juice of
Mulberries two ounces; add to these a pint of new Milk, and force them up the
Horse's Fundament very warm; and so upon other the like occasions.

Observe in giving of Clysters, that the quantity must in all probability be
reduced or augmented according to the quality or temperature of the Horse. Now
note, that if the Horse be never so large, and in good case, three quarts is an
extraordinary dose, and one quart an indifferent one; so that I leave it to the
discretion of the Practitioner to regulate the Liquid part as he sees
convenient, least by over-charging the Horse's bowels it burst forth before it
has opportunity to work as it ought, or by being undercharged it wants of its
force to stir the humors, and cause such an evacuation as is required. And so
submitting this to the discretion or judgment of those that shall make
experiment, I proceed to other matters altogether as necessary to be
understood, both as to what relates to the preservation of health, and remedy
of sickness.

CHAP. XXVI. Cordials, Cordial-Powders, Drinks and Drenches Purgations and
Suppositories, wonderfully conducing to the health and strength of a Horse.
Diapente, an excellent Powder in case of any cold or Pestilential disease. To
make it:
TAke Gentia Baccalani, Round Aristolochia, Myrrh and the Powder of Storax, of
each an ounce: bruise them distinctly, and pass the Powder through a fine
Sieve; and when you see occasion, give the Horse from two to four drams in
Muscadel, or other sweet Wine, as warm as may be, and keep him from catching
cold: or for want of Wine, give it him in strong Ale, but Wine is better.

An excellent Cordial-Ball to be given in case of any Internal distemper, and
especially to prevent the Consumption, or wasting any part, etc.
Take dried Foxe's Lungs an ounce, Methridate two ounces, Powder of Licoris and
that of the Seeds of Coriander, of each an ounce; the Powder of Cinnamon and
Pomgranet-seeds, of each an ounce; Sprucebeer, or the Lees of Claret, half a
pint: Thicken it with Allom-flower till the whole mass be infused therein, and
may be made up into balls as big as Walnuts; and then give him one at a time,
as you see occasion, sending after it a hot Drench of Ale or new Milk. This and
the former being put into a glass or gallypot, and close stopped up, will keep
in a dry place a twelve month.

An excellent Drench to cure any Internal distemper proceeding from any of the
four Humors of the Body, etc. especially such as are Pestilemial.
Having let your Horse blood, if necessity, by the Symptoms I have named in the
foregoing part of the book, requires it:

Take a handful of Baum, and as much Wormwood; dry them till they may be
rubbed into a Powder; mix with the Powder the Juice of Rue four ounces, the
Powder of grated Nutmeg, well dried, an ounce, four grains of the Oil of Amber,
and two of Bezora-stone: dissolve these in a quart of Ale, and give the Drench
to the Horse as hot as is convenient, and let him stand fasting two hours in a
dry Stable after them.

For want of what is before mentioned, Take Anniseed, and the Seeds of
Cardamums, of each an ounce; Bay Berries and Fenegreek-seed the like quantity,
the sifted Powder of the Roots of Elecampane two ounces, Olive-oyl half a pint,
and a pint of new Milk: mix them well together, and sweeten the Liquid part,
whilst it is seething over the fire, with white Sugar, and give it him as warm
as is convenient, ordering him as before.

Suppositories, and their Use.
This word speaks the intention of the thing, which is no other than a
preparing beforehand the Horse's body to receive a Purge or Clyster. Now for
the former,

Take Water wherein Wood Sorrel and Maidenhair, a herb so called, has been
boiled, and give it him to drink with his Provender a day before, or Water
wherein Deal Saw-dust has been boiled or steeped: the like you may do with the
Leaves of Bays or Holley, or any thing that may either open the Veins, or fix
the humor, so that it may be in a readiness for the purgation to work on.

The other is to be put up into the Horse's Fundament, after he is well raked,
to prepare him for a Clyster; as a large Candle, a roasted Onion, Garlic and
Rue, bruised and made up into a Ball with white Flower, or a Wash-ball; and
these must be suited according to the humor predominant: And in this case some
hold what I shall name to be authentic.

Take, say they, for Choler, bruised Staveacar and Savin, made into a Ball as
big as a Tennis-ball, with Honey and Bean-flower: If for Phlegm, Castle-soap, a
piece as big as a two-peny Wash-ball rolled in Powder of Ginger: If for
Melancholy, a red Onion roasted and stuck with Cloves: And lastly, for
Sanguine, or overflowing of bad humors, proceeding from the naughtiness of
the blood, make a Suppository of Honey, Bole-armorick, sweet Butter and bruised
Spermint: make them up (with Oat-meal small, ground and sifted) into a Paste:
And to keep any of these in, which must be done for the space of an hour, you
must bind down the Tail, and gently Trot your Horse; and when you perceive him
sweat, bring him into the Stable; and drawing forth what remains undissolved in
his Fundament, give him the Clyster you have prepared, and expect the success.

CHAP. XXVII. Perfumes, Baths and Purgations, what they are, and to what end
they serve; with the manner how, and under what considerations they ought to be
applied.
PErfumes are much available to remove bad scents, or noisome vapors, from the
head or stomach of a Horse; and being moderately and seasonably applied,
greatly contribute to his health: And in this case, if the Horse be afflicted
with cold diseases, or those that proceed from cold raw humors,

Take Storax and Benjamin, of each half an ounce; Olibanum and Frankincense, of
each a quarter of an ounce; Oil of Petrolum an ounce: bruise the Drugs, and
make them up in small balls as big as a pea; burn them upon a chafing dish of
Coals, so that the smoke may affect the mouth and nostrils of the Horse, and
that he may draw it in with his breath; and to make him the better so to do,
put a gag in his mouth that it may stand open.

If the Horse be troubled with giddiness in his head, which is known by the
dullness of the Eyes, burn Feathers under his nose, shavings of Leather or
Camel's Hair, or the Seeds of Fennel and Anniseeds. The Roots of Horseradish
or Ruburb will have the same effect, or any thing of strong scent, whether
Gums, Oils, Roots, Herbs, or other things of the like nature and quality.

In case of Bathing a Horse, commonly called the Horse-Bath, it is no more than
the concocting diverse, herbs that are cooling and supple; and with the Liquid
part wash and supple the place grieved, to render a limberness of the Joints,
or remove dirt, or any the like disorder or grievance, and may many times upon
a Journey be used with success to restore or refresh a tired Horse, being
applied warm to his Limbs: And the best of this kind take as follows:

Take Sorrel, Mallows, Groundsel, Cammomoil, Sperage, Sow-thistle, Comfory and
Scabeous, Endive, Bugloss and Featherfew: boil them in two gallons of
Running-water, and when you find they are sufficiently feethed, strain out the
Liquid part: or if you find your Horse much given to coldness, you may boil
them in Chamber-lye.

Directions for Purging, according to the estate and condition of your Horse.
If you perceive your Horse of a strong constitution, not impaired by disease
or want, then may you give him strong provocatives, that by a conquering
quality may prevail against the distemper; but if he be weak and infeebled,
then nature being unable to keep her station, and the potion being strong,
great injury may happen, by reason of the fixation or settlement of the gross
humors and crudities: Wherefore the sudden and violent operation not being
capable of removing them, will prey upon, and evacuate those good humors that
should strengthen and support the body: And therefore in case of weakness, a
weaker potion must be given, that by long continuance and easy working, it may
by degrees loosen and attract what is offensive. And now for a gentle Purge:

Take two ounces of Turnsole, and half an ounce of the Powder of Alloes:
dissolve them in a quart of Ale, wherein half a dozen Lawrel-leaves have been
concocted: give it him warm, and attend the working of it; giving him, the
better to hearten him, a Toast dipped in Canary about half an hour after: But
if the Horse be so strong, that he will dispense with a violent Purge; then,

Take of Colloquintida three ounces, Ruburb in Powder an ounce, Scamony two
grains: dissolve them in half a pint of the Juice of Hysop, and the like
quantity of Canary: give them the Horse very warm, and keep him stirring in a
warm Stable two hours, at least without giving him any thing; and when by a
conquering quality they prevail over the distemper, give him a warm mash, but
no hard meat till six hours after, by which time it will have done working; And
in case of cold distempers you may somewhat augment the Dose. And now as to the
Humors, if we take them distinctly, Alloes and Cassia purge Melancholy,
Colloquintida Phlegm, Ruburb Sanguine, and Scamony Choler. Nor are these the
only things that do it, but there are are diverse others; yet seeing I have
largely directed on that occasion, I shall wave them in this Chapter.

CHAP. XXVIII. Costicks, Corrosives, and Rowelling; what they are; for what
causes, and in what manner to be applied.
AS for Costicks and Corrosives, they are potable Cauterizings or Burnings,
with Oil, Water or Mineral, Chymically prepared, and sometimes contracted by
making a Wound, or breaking the Skin, with Roots and Herbs participating of a
firey nature; and these are used in eating away dead flesh, boney or spongy
Excressences; and in case of the Farcy, Mangy, Ringworm, or the like loathsome
dangerous distempers: And the chief these are,

Aquafortis, Aqua-regis, Vitriol, Oil of Tartar, Quicklime, Oil of Spike,
Arsnick or Resalgar, Aegyptiacum, Crocus-martis, Mercury, Sublimate, Copras,
Verdegrease, Allom, Recordal, and of roots and flowers.

Burdock-roots, Horseradish roots, the roots of white Lillies, Garlic,
Onions, Cuccow-pintle, Featherfew, Briany; the leaves of Coleworts, Celendine,
the great Suthernwood, Butter-flowers, Ground Ivy; the flowers of Mare-blabs,
Senna, Saxafrax-water, Lillies, Hollyhawks, Scabeous, Rue, Baresfoot or
Elebore, etc. The Application of which I leave to the discretion of the
Practitioner, to make it as he sees convenient, or consistent with the nature
of the distemper: And so proceed to speak something of Rowelling, another
necessary thing to be known.

Rowelling; what it is, and how to be performed.
Rowelling is no other than making an Incision in the flesh, or rather skin, by
taking it up with a bodkin or other instrument, so that a ring of hair, cord or
leather may be fastened in it, anointed with grease, oil, or other things
thereby to keep the skin from closing upon it, that in the nature of an Issue
the corrupt humor may be voided: And this is commonly fixed in the breast or
shoulder of a Horse for a strain, slip, or swelling. And for your better
instruction, observe as thus:

Take a Penknife, or other sharp knife, and slit the skin right down for the
length of an Inch, or more, gently raising it with a flat stick; and so do on
the other side, about half a fingers breadth distant; so that the skin being
parted from the flesh, you may run your finger quite through, and so put your
Rowel in well anointed, and turn it about every other day, freshly anointing
it. And though this be the general way of Rowelling, yet the French make a slit
or hole only, and hollow the skin from the flesh, in circle like a Crown piece;
and then cutting a piece of stiff unallom'd Leather to the bigness, with one
indifferent big hole in the middle, and four smaller ones, as the Figure in the
Margent, then anoint it with Lard or Oil of Marshmallows, and put it in so that
the Orifice may be left open for the corruption to issue out through a short
quill which they fasten therein; running likewise a Needle and Thread through
the four small holes to prevent its turning about, or wearing downwards; and so
by raising up the skin, and blowing the wind into the spongy flesh, cause the
putrefaction to gather and descend, that so by the evacuation of the humors
the grievance may find a cure; and that it may lie the closer, draw two strong
stitches overthwart, as you perceive in the second Figure, and let it continue
till you perceive the humors well evacuated; and then cutting the stitches,
take it out. And thus have I discussed the Material things relating to this
Science. From whence I proceed to other things highly necessary to be known, as
in the Second Part of this Book your discretion may direct you, etc,

The Complete MANAGERS.


The Complete FARRIER.


THE SECOND PART. Containing many Rare Experiments relating to Horses and
Horsemanship, etc. in such exactness and variety as has not hitherto been made
public to the World.
The Manner of Breaking a Horse the best way, and perfecting him in his Paces,
etc. and preserving him from danger, etc.
HAving thus far advanced in this great undertaking, as I well hope with
success; I now think it highly necessary, for the better encouragement of the
Reader, to add such rare Secrets, and other matters, as I doubt not but will
confirm him in the sincere endeavor I use to render him in the practice both
Profit and Pleasure.

Having Backed your Horse in the latter end of the fourth, or beginning of the
fifth year, and by gentle means rendered him easy and complyable, which by
rating, beating, and haring, cannot be so well brought to perfection, as by
cherishing and encouraging him, though sometimes it must be with gentle
correction, that he may be the better brought to understand himself. Then the
next thing materially to be considered, is to what use you design him, that to
the same end you may reduce him to Pace, Amble, Trot, Gallop, or the like, as
either of them may best concur to his advantage. Wherefore, that none may plead
ignorance herein, I shall treat of them in their order briefly and effectually.

When you mount a Horse with the intention before mentioned, you must, if he be
an unmanaged Horse, observe chiefly the correction or encouragement of the
Voice, Bridle, Switch, Spur, Calves of the Legs, Stirrops and the Ground; all
of these being properly used in the true Management of a Horse. But being to be
observed, as the discreet Rider shall see occasion for the best advantage, it
would be impossible for me to set down directions of this kind; though in
general I must say, that they must be done with discretion, and in season; or
else instead of redounding to the facilitating of Management, they may turn
much to its disadvantage in rendering the Horse restiff, or hardening him in the
Vice of going backward. And now as the true Amble is the justest measure a
Horse can take to ground him in, and render him sensible of all other motions;
I proceed in the first place to give directions how, and by what means he must
be brought to undertake it with ease and cheerfulness, for if the contrary
happen, he will hardly be brought to the perfection you wish.

Observe when your Horse is well broke, that he will patiently endure the Bitt
and the Rider; that you take him into Plough'd land, not too deep nor cloggy,
by reason of Clay or lying low; nor must it be done in wet weather, nor
suddenly after a shower: And here Rack him a good going pace, till he begins to
be a little warm, and feels his Legs well: And so do often morning and evening,
straining and forcing him ever now and then beyond that pace, when as you will
in a short time perceive him to fall into a kind of an Amble, but so shuffling,
that it is not fit for him long to continue it in this manner, least by custom
it becomes habitual; though in ancient times this was the way both held and
practiced, whereby the Horses were brought to the motion of Ambling. But since
time and experience has furnished us with better, it would be ingratitude not
to embrace them: And therefore, for brevity sake, passing over the various
discourses and opinions of some that hold it best for a Horse to fall out of a
Gallop into an Amble, of others that would oblige him to it by Loading him with
excessive weights; and some again, and those not a few, that would have him
brought to it by hand between two Rails; Others there are, and they more
erroneous than any I have named, who would have the Horse loaded with shoes of
extraordinary weight to force him thereto, which by often using he must
consequently be disabled to perform any motion as he ought: And indeed opinions
in this case are so many and various, that it would be endless in a manner to
trace them; many of which, though gilded with seeming possibility, I willingly
omit, and proceed to that which my Experience tells me cannot fail* if rightly
managed. Directions in performance of which, take as follows.

Having trained your Horse, by the help of the Ploughed Land, or other gentle
means, upon a considerable Rack-pace, to fall into an Amble, though he presenty
leave it again, and fall to any other motion: Then take strong new Lines made
of Hemp or Flax, about the thickness of a Jack-line, well shrunk and dried,
that they may neither reach nor shrink in using. Let them have Nooses wrought
in them at either end of these Lines; there must be two in number of so even a
length, that the least disproportion imaginable must not be found in them,
their lengths not by any means exceeding thirty seven Inches, or being under
thirty five: This done, make a soft pare of Hose or Shackles of Girthweb, lined
for that purpose, with Wool, Cotton, or soft Linen; fasten them about the
Fetlock-places of the fore and hinder Legs, or places in which Horses are
cross-barred, to prevent their leaping, and fasten them by Aglet-holes with
Leather Tabs of equal length, and let the end of a Tab so fastened come from
them about the length of eight or nine Inches, punched full of holes, to
receive the Tongue of a Buckle fit for each of them; then having buckled on
your Cords even on both sides, to the distance, or as I may term it, the Reach
of the Horse, when he stands even with his feet, and proportionably upright,
that by no means they may slip or reach. Then take Girth-web, as much as will
reach over his back, and come down to reach the cords on both sides, exactly in
the middle, wrap it round the cords, but so as it may not strain or lift them
up, nor suffer them to sink lower than their just evenness; and then fasten
them either by running a Tag through Aglet-holes made for the same purpose, or
by Pack-thread with a Packneedle; And this, called a Tramel, being one of the
best and exactest for this purpose that can be made.

Your Horse being accounter'd in the manner before mentioned, on a plain firm
ground, not over stony, move him at first gently, that he may have opportunity
to feel the Tramel, the better to avoid twitching; and so by degrees let him
fall into his Amble by moderately managing the Bridle, and holding your Switch
between his Ears that he wreth nor wry not his Neck, cherishing him with your
Voice, and giving him, when he has done well, some pleasant morsel; but by no
means put him to it beyond his ability, least it become tedious to him, and
create in him an irksomeness and dislike; and in so using him several ^ays,
that is, every other day in the week; if your ^orse be sure and good footed, he
will take plea^ure in it, and perform it without your forcing him ^o it. But by
the way observe, that if your Horse ^e of a long reach, and when he first
undertakes it, ^s consequently subject to twitches; then you may, without
offense, when he is first put to it, give him a little more liberty, least you
subject him to those twitches by sometimes forgetting himself when the Tramel
is off, which, by the Ignorant, will be taken for the String-halt; but being
well used and brought to the feeling of them, you must come to a perfect
length, least having more liberty at one time than at another, he proves a
shuffler, or varies in his Amble.

Having brought your Horse pretty well to Amble by the Tramel, insomuch that he
does it not confusedly, or against his will, either by hand or backing, you may
take him into uneven ground, and try him in such ways as you imagine you may
have occasion to Ride him in, never standing to pick or choose your ground, but
Ride him as far as is safe, according as your fancy leads you, yet not without
the Tramel fixed on one side, which you may shift as you see occasion; and when
you find him perfect, you may Ride him without, only carry the Tramel with you,
in case he make a default; the best way is to bring him back to that default,
and make him sensible that he has committed an error, which can be no better
done than by demonstration; and in so often using him, the time will come, and
that within three months at farthest, that he will be perfect in his exercise.

There is to be considered next to what has been spoken, the Trot; and that
consists in two parts, viz. the lofty and swift Trot; and although to the
latter a good Amble is naturally given, yet the former requires deliberation
and judgment. And since Experience has afforded a Rule, I think not convenient
to conceal it: which, as the best Experiment, I deliver as follows.

In this case a Horse used to the great Saddle, is the fittingest to be
undertaken, or one you design for that or the like purpose. Wherefore having
chosen your Horse, fasten on him the War-Saddle, girting it indifferently
strait; then put on a Kerb-bridle, and fastening to the Chain thereof a
Leather-strap, bring it by a Buckle to bear on the Breast Plate or Girths under
the Horse's Legs, or which of them you shall perceive most convenient, till you
bring the Neck of the Horse to bend or bear Arch-wise like the neck of a Swan:
which done, mount your Horse, and move him a Racking-pace till you find him
begin to take up his Legs round and clever, moving his Knees in a manner to his
Breast, or bringing the upper and lower spaces between the Joints to an equal
bearing; and so continue to exercise him till you find him move in that manner
according to your expectation: And then you may try him without the Straps, and
by that means perfect him as you see occasion. Now some there are, that upon
the first Backing use to Log their Horses with broad and heavy Shoes: But
these I disapprove, and chiefly for two Reasons:

First, because they greatly endamage the Hoof; and not so only, but by their
weight strain and disorder the Sinews, that a Horse must of necessity be
obliged to take up his Legs with pain, which will afterward subject him to
stiffness and stumbling. Secondly, they will endanger the Sinews by bruising
and cutting, and thereby cause the Bone-spavin, Screw-pin, Ring-bone or
Quitter-bone; All which, for the most part, proceed from the like ill
Management, and defect of Judgment in Managing, etc. But if you would perfect
him to the great Saddle, consider farther, that it is highly necessary to
manage him at the Ring, that he may be capable of stopping and turning upon the
least motion; and this Ring must be upon soft sandy ground, where having gently
circled him till you have trod out a Ring between fifty and sixty Paces in
compass, oblige him to trace it, resting him on the right, and cherishing him
on the left; stopping him likewise upon the latter, as you see occasion;
sometimes in the midst of the circle, and at other times where he began;
shifting likewise, as you see convenient, your hand, and mending your pace,
obliging him upon a full stop to retire a pace or two backward; and so from a
Trot you may fall to the Gallop, ever observing that Galloping to the right, he
leads with his left foot; and so consequently Galloping to the left, that he
leads to the right; and in so doing he will perform it with ease and delight;
when, on the contrary, if he carrys both his feet even, leading with neither,
he must do it with pain, and be apt sometimes to strike: and this is ever best
in case of a full speed upon a straight Course; and so in using convenient
Bitts and Furniture, and keeping a steady hand, you may stop him upon a full
career, and oblige him suddenly to retire, if any imminent danger be apparent,
or sometimes for your pleasure; and by suchlike management you may bring him
to the Turnings and strait Turns with little difficulty, and indeed perfect him
for any considerable Exercise; in the performance of which, he ought likewise
to be considered more than what I have formerly mentioned.
When you intend your Horse for Travel, Sport, or the like, more than what I
have already given directions as to Managing, that he may well endure, and
answer your expectation. Observe to dress him overnight in the same manner as
has been directed for the Running-horse; and having by you Dog's-grease or
Neatsfoot-oyl, anoint him therewith, especially his Joints, suppling it in with
your warm hands, or a warm cloth; and in so comforting the Nerves and Sinews,
you will oblige the Horse to hold out much the better; and in the morning give
him three quarts of well-sifted Oats, sweet and good, with a quart of Beans
split, and the husks taken off, and after them a quart of Ale: And so being
Accoutered to your mind, Ride him forth a Racking-pace, till you find his
Joints very pliable, which will be within a Mile or two Riding; then mend his
pace, and by degrees put him to either Amble, Trot or Gallop, as best shall
please you till you come to your Inn.

Being come to the end of your Stage, if the Horse sweat, take off his clothes
by degrees, and with a piece of broken Sword, Scithe or edged Lath, scrape him
all over, and after that rub him with dry wisps or woollen cloths; then pass
your hand over him, cleanse his Pasterns and Fetlocks from dirt and gravel,
pick his feet, and cast a cloth over him, and give him his potion of meat,
which must be a third part more at least than what his usual allowance is when
he stands still; and if you find him very hot within, you may give him Water
and Ale a like quantity, both being a little warmed, especially in Wintertime,
and anoint his Limbs with the same materials, and in the same manner I have
before mentioned; and if you find his breath short, give him an ounce of
Hemp Seed well bruised in a glass of Canary or warm Ale, ever forbearing to
wash your Horse when he is hot, that is, to Ride him into a Pond, or the like;
but rather, if he be exceeding dirty, warm a Pail full of Water, and with wisps
rub him gently clean; or having first rubbed off the dirt with dry wisps, you
may cleanse the rest with a Brush. And thus much I thought fit to lay down as a
supplement to what has been formerly spoken, not much different in the cases of
Ordering and Management; and so proceed to Particulars and Generals of another
nature, though tending to the same center.

CHAP. II. How the Jockies make old Horses look young; A lean Horse
artificially and naturally; how fatned by Jockies. A Remedy for Restiffness,
Neighing, and the vice of Lying down in the Water; the Art of making Stars,
Snips, Blazes, setting on false Ears, Tails, Manes, etc. with a discovery of
many other secrets.
To make a Horse that is really old seem young.
RUb his Teeth with a Pumice-stone, and the Powder of burnt Allom; which
rendering them white, take a small Iron, which being crook'd for the purpose,
burn in the tops of the two foremost Teeth small holes, so big, that a
Wheat-corn may enter on each side the neither Jaw; and on the Tushes do the
like, fining them with a Bodkin till the black Scale come off, and the Teeth in
that place look brighter than in another: which done, if the pits above the
Eyes be hollow, with a sharp Penknife or Lancet slit the skin, being before
raised, and hollowing it as much as you can by the working of your fingers: put
into the slit a Duck or Crow-quill, and blow them up one after another, that
the hollowness may fill with wind; which entering into the Cavities of the skin,
will* after having been stopped up for a time with a Plaster of Diaculum or
Beeswax fix there, till by sweat or extraordinary labor it works out: If the
Temples are crooked, which is a sign of Age, lay to either of them a Poultis of
Hemlock and Cammomoil fried in Linseed-oyl; and it will so far contract the
blood to fill them, that for many days they will appear strait And then for the
Hoof, which in case of Age will b^ seamed or rugged, Take a Rasp or File, and
havin^ well smoothed it, anoint it well with Oil of Turpentine for a day or
two, and it will look very comely But in this case the Horse must be disposed
of within a week at the farthest, or else the defects will return.

A Horse subject to lie down in the Water, how to remedy it.
In this case you must consider the Horse to be of (...) hot constitution,
begotten or produced under the fire Signs of Leo or Scorpio, or else much
overflowed with Choler, and therefore ever desirous to cool himself and thereby
rendered in a manner unserviceable: which Vice to remedy, Ride him into a water
up to his Knees, and suffer him to lie down; then having three or four lusty
fellows ready with Boots on, let them seize his head, and hold it under water
whilst another beats and belabours him: And this do till you find the Horse
almost stifled; and in repeating it three or four times, the terror of it will
so work, that the Horse will fly from the water more than ever he coveted it,
and hardly suffer himself to be watered, unless in a Pail or Trough. This
likewise may be remedied by Bleeding and Purging your Horse Spring and Fall,
whereby the Humors that occasion the extraordinary heat and disorder may not
be wanting whereon to feed or contract, having the power and force of inflaming
his body, etc.

A Tired or Restiff Horse, to remedy.
For the first of these, being subject to Tire without any extraordinary cause,
stamp a handful of Nettles, and pour the Juice into either of his Ears; and
then take a couple of small peble-stones, and put in after ^t, tying or sewing
up the Ears as advantageously as may be, and with keen Nettles rub his
Fundament; ^aying Hemlock or Ars-smart, called by many Hounds-tongue, under his
Saddle, next to his back.

If a Horse be Restiff, and refuses to go, but will run on one side, or go
backward, cramp his Stones with a cord, and bring it up between his forelegs,
giving him a twitch when you perceive him froward, and it will oblige him to
advance, especially if you keep his Reins even with a steady hand; but if a
Mare or Gelding, which yields no such advantage, be troubled with any such
Vice, you must have a Crupper with a Brass or Iron-plate fastened a little above
the Tail, through which may come two or more sharp points, like Needles, at
such time as the Crupper is moved or strained; and then when you find your
beast practice the Vice, strain the Crupper with your hand, and it will enter
the flesh, and force the beast to leap forward. This Vice generally comes by a
Horses not being backed in time, or through the ill management of the Breaker
or Rider.

To prevent the Troublesomeness of a Horse's Neighing, which may prove
disadvantageous to the Master, especially in time of War.

Take a long slip of Red cloth, dip it in the Oil of Linseed, and strew on it
the Powder of Elecampaneroots, and on that burnt Allom: fasten it round the
Horse's Tongue, as near to the Root as may be; and so long as it there remains,
you may secure your self, your Horse can make no noise. And this Art Darius the
Great Persian King, was said to use to the Horse of his Competitors for the
Kingdom, by Bribing their Grooms when the Election depended upon the Neighing
of the first Horse.

If a Horse be dull, and will not feel the Spur without much wounding, Take the
following Directions t^ make him go very nimble with or without a Spur.

Scrape off the hair in the Spurring-places on either side, lay a Plaster of
Rosin and Beeswax to soften the skin, then prick it full of holes, so that
they may just pass through it: which done, take burnt Allom and Copras, and rub
therein: or you may do it with Powder of Glass beaten very fine; and these
entering the holes, will, by a little festring, cause such a soreness, that he
will run forward upon the least touch with your heel: which having a while used
him to, you may heal the Sore with Hog's grease, Beeswax and Olive-oyl made
into an Ointment, with the Powder of Alloes.

To make a lean Horse artificially fat, or to seem so to the Buyer.
Take a Horse lean, but not extraordinary old, rub and comb him will, put him
into a warm Stable; Then,

Take a pound of Anniseeds, the like of the Powder of Licorish, half a pound of
the Flower of Brimstone, and half a pound of Dates stoned, with six ounces of
the Powder of Elecampane-roots: bruise them well together till they may be
reduced to what fineness you think convenient; then with a peck of fine Flower,
two quarts of Milk, and the Yolks of a dozen Eggs, make them up into balls as
big as Pullet's Eggs: give him four of these in a morning, and after them a
quart of new Wort, then give him half a peck of Oats, and after that a Mash
made of Bran, boiled Barley and Lupins; giving him, in all circumstances, the
like in the evening, blowing up his Flanks, and the hollowness of his Eyes,
with quills, suffering him to drink but very little, and so in a week or ten
days he will look very plump and fair to the eye; but being afterward
neglected, or kept at hard meat, the spungy kind of flesh or fat so gotten,
will suddenly fall away, and leave perhaps the unskilful buyer possessed with
an opinion, that his Horse is bewitched.

To make a lean Horse really fat, the best and cheapest way.
In this case, as in many other people are generally wedded to their opinions;
but Experience being the best Master, I shall deliver therefore what has been
faithfully proved and found effectual: And so to bring your expectation to a
period,

Take your Horse from Grass or Soil; and if the season admit, Blood and Purge
him gently, that so the crudities that hinder the kindly operation of the
nutriment may be removed: which done, rub and loosen his skin, and wash him all
over with the Decoction of Hysop, Savin, Rue and Fumitory; which will not only
cleanse him from Scurf, and other contracted filth, but render him a kindly
heat and breathing: Then give him each morning, before his hard meat, a Ball as
big as a Tennis-ball, or such a one as he can conveniently swallow, made of
Honey, Rye-flower, the Powder of Licorish, burnt Allom-powder, and the Powder
of Hart's-horn: And after his hard meat, which must be given in due proportion,
Water wherein Dandelyon-roots, Rosemary and Fennel have been concocted, and in
it Bran or Flower dusted; and let his hard meat be Oats, Splent-beans and sweet
Hay, Airing him morning and evening, and accommodating him with fresh Litter
and good Dressing; by which means, in a Month, he will be fat and lusty, have
sound and solid flesh, and be fitting for any company.

To make the Hair of a Horse that stands rough and staring, smooth and sleek.
If you would have your Horse smooth and handsome, so that your self and others
may take delight in him,

Take a French Brush and rub his hair the contrary way, fetching out by that
means the dirt and scurf; so that the Horse being freed therefrom, the hair may
lie closer and smoother; then draw your Brush and Curry-comb the right way, and
having laid the hair as smooth as it will be; then, if the weather be
seasonable, let him Blood in the Neck-veins; and after that pass over him with
your hand, or a cloth dipped in Oil of Bays, and at convenient times wash him
with the Decoction of Cammomoil, and keep him well dressed, and at good diet.

To make Hair come where it is thin, or to take it away where it is thick
The hair being thin, which is uncomely in a Horse, Take the Ashes of Fern four
ounces, the Ointment of Marshmallows two ounces, a dram of the Oil of Petrolum,
and an ounce of the Powder of Bithwortroots: wash or anoint the place with
them, mixed with a like quantity of Oil and Wine, adding thereto an ounce of
the Honey of Roses; and continue so to do for a month together: Or for want of
these, you may wash the Horse with a Lie made of the Ashes of Pease-straw,
wherein the green husks of Walnuts and Red Sage have been concocted.

To take off hair, Take Soot of Wood two ounces, Oil of Tartar two drams, the
Calcine of Egg-shells half an ounce, with an ounce of unslaked Lime: make them
into a Plaster with Oil of Spike, and apply it to the place you design to have
bare or thinner, the hair at that time being close clipped.

Stars, Blazes, Snips; what they are, and how to make them for Ornament or
Disguise in any part of the Horse where they may be conveniently situate.

These are held, by the Curious, to be great Ornaments to Horses; and therefore
many have studdied how to make them, and left sundry directions as their
Opinions, how they ought to be made. But since they vary, and many of them upon
trial have proved frivolous and ineffectual; therefore I shall only give the
approved manner and method of making things of this kind.

First then, if you would have a white Star in a Horse of a different color,
take up the skin, where you endeavor to situate it, with a Bodkin or fine
Lancet round about, or as you design the mark; and making a piece of Lead, or
diverse pieces, the better to get them into the hole, that you within side the
hollowed skin may be framed to the proportion, dipping those pieces in Oil of
Spike or Turpentine; by which means the skin being separated from the flesh,
and receiving no manner of Alumentary moisture, will shead the hair: which when
you perceive, take out the Lead, and clap it close to the flesh, having
anointed the Wound with Honey of Roses, and the next hair that comes will be of
a perfect White. Now there are those that take up the skin by running two Pins
or Bodkins cross-ways, and binding them about with a Pack-thread till the skin
be drawn up like a Purse, that so the skin may mortify: but I hold the first
the best.

To make a Black Star in a white Horse.
Take of Souters Ink half an ounce, four scruples of Oliander-wood beaten to
Powder, the Juice of Hemlock half an ounce, Oil of Ebony two drams, and Vitriol
two drams: often with these, well incorporated, anoint the designed place. Or
for want of these, Take Galls, the Rust of Iron, Oil of Tartar, and the Ashes
of Fern-roots, of each a like quantity: bruise them well together, and apply
them Plaster-wise till the hair sheads; and then observe the next that comes
will be black.

If you are desirous of a Red Star, then, Take Aquavitae and Aquafortis, of
each an equal quantity; adding two-peny weight of Quicksilver: incorporate
them as well as may be with two drams of Tartar, and as much of the Flower of
Brimstone; and by anointing the place designed therewith, the hair will become
Red, but will continue no longer so than till the casting of the Coat; at what
time you may in like manner renew it.

As for Blazes and Snips, the one is made generally on the middle of the
Forehead descending, and the other on the Muzzle, between the two Nostrils, or
somewhat higher; and may be made by the means aforesaid, in what manner and
form you shall think convenient, to imitate those that are natural ones: and so
you may change Saddle-spots. And seeing those that commonly pass for Stars are
only round spots, I have thought fit to give further directions on this
occasion.

If you intend to make an extraordinary Adornment in the front of your Horse,
you may make a star Star, as the form in the Margen, by shaping fine, flat,
though taper pieces of Lead, so that the points extending every way under the
skin, when gently raised, the basis or broad ends may meet in a center just in
the middle of the forehead, the Lead being anointed with Oil of Spike or
Tartar, and so suffer it to remain till the hair is fallen away; and then
taking out the Lead, suffer it to close, having well anointed the inside with
Dear's-suet and Oil of Roses; and so continue to do till you perceive the hair
well closed, and the white hair will come undoubtedly in the form of the
Figure, which you may make lesser or bigger at your discretion: And in this
form you may make a black Star, according to the directions for black Stars.

Some are of opinion, that a black, or any dark-colored Horse, may for
Ornament-sake have four white feet, as they usually are termed, made
artificially; and they say it may be done by the Application of the following
Cataplasm, or rather Plaster, viz.

Take Resalgar a dram in Powder, put to it a dram of the Oil of Tartar or
Vitriol, with an ounce of the Oil of Hartshorn, and two ounces of the Juice of
the Roots of Lillies, as much of that of Celendine, made up to a thickness,
with the grease of a Hedge. hog or Urchin, applied Poultis or Plaster-wise: by
which means the hair being taken up by the roots, and the flesh for a time
mortified; which may be restored by suppling Ointments, the hair will come
again as white as Milk: Nor am I much different in opinion; but this being a
thing rarely required, and seldom experienced, I leave it to be tried by those
that desire it, and proceed to other matters: But by the way I shall say thus
much, that if the feet by the aforesaid Experiment can be changed in Color,
then consequently the Tail, Ears, or any other part of the Body, by the like
application, may be the same.

To make a Blaze-Royal.
In this case, by reason of the intricacy, Lead being very difficult to frame,
or at least ways to put into the skin, so that one part may touch, and the
other not; for so it must do, or the Mark will be all of a color, with a fine
pair of Scissars cut the Figure in the Margin as near and exact as may be, to
the skin; and having made a Lie of Urin and Soap-boylers Ashes, those which
appear for the black strokes in the Figure, and which you must only cut down,
anoint; and so do three or four days, which will stay the hair in the root:
Then take Aquafortis half an ounce, Oil of Sulphur the like quantity; add to
them two drams of the Powder of Crabs-claws calcined, and with it anoint the
places with a small Pencil for four or five days successively, and the next
hair that comes in a white Horse will be inclining to black, and that in a
black Horse to white; and so in any colored Horse it will alter or change the
color proportionably. But if you would have this plain, it may be done with
Lead, as the Star will make appear; and will not only prove an excellent mark
to know a Horse by from others when at Grass, or the like, but infallibly to
describe him by when lost, that without much difficulty or charge he may be
found.

The loss of Ears, how to supply.
If your Horse has lost his Ears and thereby becomes uncomely, you may supply
them with those of a dead Horse, by sewing and glewing them on so artificially,
that the Horse by moving the roots of his Ears, shall move them as if they were
naturally his own. But as a farther mystery, some have held, and indeed it
bears the face of a possibility, that the stump of the Ears being pared, so
that being taken off to the Quick, as near the roots as may be, and the Ears of
another Horse new cut off, clapped on warm, and sewed down whilst the blood
issues from the stumps, they will by being anointed with Oil of Juniper or
Bays, by a kind of Inoculation graft themselves to the stumps or roots, and
become natural. And this they hold likewise may be done by Teeth, in putting a
Tooth just drawn into the place from whence a stump is just drawn likewise.
This also they hold may be done by the Tail of a Horse; but not having been
proved by me, I leave the Experiment to the discretion of the Reader.

False Manes there are likewise to supply such as fall off; and are not
altogether improper, because they serve for Ornament as well as the best; and
these are taken off from dead Horse's skin and roots; and being Tanned or
dried, so that the Leather becomes pliable, and may be shaved so thin on the
fleshy side, that it will sit close to the live Horse's crest, off from which
the hair is shaved or taken by the roots, with Applications, it being first
clapped on with Glue or Pitch, may be sewed to the Horse's skin, in such a
manner, that the hairs of the one, and the other rising over the seams, it will
hardly be discerned, especially at a distance.

And thus have I laid down such things as I though convenient of this kind, not
to deceive the buyer but to the end, that he knowing them, may not be deceived:
And as a caveat, bid him farther beware of Loging a lame Horse with Lead to
make him go as if he was sound: As also the Spring-saddle, which by the Rider's
leaning forward pricks the Horse so intollerably upon the bearing between the
shoulders, that if he be never so dull, he will caper and jump as if it
proceeded from his high mettle; which hidden cause frequently deceives the
unskilful.

CHAP. III. How to set a Horse off for Sale to the best advantage, by Trimming,
Washing, etc. as also directions for the Management of a Horse in Hunting,
relating to his Leaping, etc. with other things and matters worthy of note.
YOur Horse being repleat with hair on the Mane, Tail, and sometime, especially
if he be of the Dutch breed, on the Legs or Pasterns, so that thereby he
appears rough or unseemly to the eye; I say, if it so happen whereby sometimes
the unskilful Buyer without a cause is discouraged, having your Scissers,
Razor, Comb, Brush and Sponge in a readiness, as also your Tweezers or
Curling-iron, comb well his Foretop, Mane and Tail, and with your Brush and
Comb settle his Legs, if occasion require it: Then dust him over, and do the
like again after that, beginning at the Foretop with your Razor, shave away the
short bristling hairs underneath it, that cause it by the means of their
stubbornness to brustle and stand staring; as likewise those that grow
unsightly about the roots of the Ears: which done, divide the Foretop into two
equal parts, and then clip it with your Scissers aslope between, and so turn it
waving up in two divisions with your Tweezers, and fasten it with a Skewer; and
so do by his Mane and Tail, clipping off the ends of those hairs that hung
unseemly, long, or out of order, so that in a short time they will appear
comely in Waves or Ringlets; and thus, although the Mane falls two ways, you
may reduce it to one side, etc. As for the Legs, having clipped away the
superfluous hairs, smooth them down with Oil of Bays as hot as may be endured;
and in doing so two or three times, you will afterward find the hair lie close.

How to make a Ball, wherewith a Horse being well Lathered and smoothed down,
shall look exceeding sleek and comely.
Take of Cake-soap a pound, of Fulling-earth four ounces, the Lie of Wood-ashes
a pint, and Almond-flower two ounces: boil them together over a gentle fire
till they become a gellied thickness, then suffering the Mass to cool, make it
up, by drying it in an Oven or Stove, into a Ball, and with it make a Wash or
Lather of new Wort, if it may be had; or else with warm Water, and Lather him
over with it, being before well brushed down, and so suffer him to stand till
the frothy part sink of it self; and then with your hand dipped in Water
wherein Gum-arabick has been dissolved, pass over his body, and after that with
a fine Woollen-cloth, and then with your hand again till he be dry; and he will
not only appear wonderful sleek, but continue so for many days.

How to Manage a Horse in Leaping, taking a Hedge, Gate, Style, Ditch, etc.
Many have held this a difficult piece of Horsemanship, as indeed it is; for by
ill management in this affair, either the Horse or Man has been often spoiled;
and sometimes both of them together; and such accidents fall out through the
carelessness of the Rider, or ill management of the Horse. Wherefore to remedy
it, and prevent danger, let the Rider observe, that he not only sit fast
himself upon the motion of Rise, but that bearing somewhat forward to give the
Horse the more sway, he keep the Reins even and steady on either hand; but not
too hard, least the Horse rising too high, may happen to over-set or lose by
such a motion the force of the spring of his hinder Legs, and by that means be
rendered less able to cant his body, or draw them nimbly after him, which
frequently occasions a strain or slip, especially at a Ditch. And the best way
on this occasion to hold your Rod or Whip, is either between his Ears, or
somewhere out of sight, least it cause him to boggle, by inclining more to the
one hand than to the other; or for fear of being corrected, force himself
beyond his reach. As for your Legs, you ought to keep them moderately close to
his Sides, but not so close as to press his Ribs, for that will oblige him to
bate of his strength.

At a Gate or Style ever observe your distance before you suffer your Horse to
take it, which ought to be somewhat more than a Man's pace from it, least by
the overreaching of the forelegs the hinder-legs either strike or stick in
the bars, which through the sudden motion occasions an extraordinary bruise,
if not the Leg to snap short off.

As for a Ditch, rather choose to leap against a moderate rising bank, than upon
a decent or low place, because in doing the latter the Horse comes down with so
great a force, that he will be either apt to stumble on his nose, if not well
supported by a steady hand, or else to sprain or slip his shoulder.

As for the Hedge-leaping, the greatest care required is to shun the Stakes,
and the like to be done by the sharp ends of Pails, least the Horse by an
Overreach gore himself: And in this case consider both the Bank and the Ditch,
if any there be, least you force your Horse upon a thing too hard for him, and
by that means be both together left in the mire, or in a worser condition. Nor
is it convenient in Hunting to ride a Horse in places where these things are
required, unless he be managed at leisure before hand, for being upon
full-speed your Horse seeing others who are managed, undertake these matters of
difficulty; and thereby prompted to imitate them, will in spite perhaps of your
utmost endeavor to the contrary, resolutely attempt to follow them; for indeed
no Creature desires more to Emulate his like than a generous Horse, nor,
according to his understanding, is more proud of winning praise and applause:
For, as the Poet has it,

When to the Bars the Foaming Steeds are lead,
They Prancing, seem to scorn the Ground they tread:
And when the Signal's given, either flies
Like Lightning Emulous, to gain the Prize;
Whilst with their Thundering Hoofs the Earth does shake,
As when the struggling Winds a War within it make:
Nor less when loud the Bloody blast it sounds,
Do they refrain over Spears, over Death and Wounds;
Through Smoke and Flame, and every Dire attack't,
To Rush by the enraged Warriors Backed,
And face the boldest things that they dare act.
Nay, in the Noble strife each one does press,
Where Danger may his Courage most express,
To render each his Competitor less.
So that the Laurel, Conquerors put on
More by their Horses, than themselves is won.
So Great Bucephalus made it appear,
Who Alexander on his Back did bear
About the World, scattering his Bloody War.
Nor have good Horses been less famed and esteemed in all Ages. But having thus
passed over what I hope in this kind cannot be amiss, but, on the contrary,
prove profitable and necessary; I shall proceed to other Experiments, and
things that may yet add to what has been said, that no variety may be wanting
in so necessary a Work, nor any thing material be omitted.

CHAP. IV. What the Stable to keep a good Horse in ought to be; and how he
ought to be regarded; the Hoofs how to be corrected and minded in Shooing; and
upon other occasions.
AS for the Stable wherein a good Horse ought to be kept, let it ever be paved
with flat hard Stone, so well laid, that no wet can get in between to occasion,
by its long continuance, unwholesome Airs; and let it be likewise laid slantwise
shelving, or as it is vulgarly called, down hill, that so the stale may run
into a channel, provided to carry it away, having a covering of Canvass even
with the Rack, to prevent the falling of Mortar amongst the Horse's Provender:
or some are of the opinion to have it ceiled, if it be boarded over head, to
prevent the dust or hay-seeds, and many other ill-conveniences: but above all,
keep Swine and Poultry from coming into it, the scent of the one, and the dung
of the other, being very offensive. The Rack ought to be made of firm Oak, both
the Bearings and the Staves, that the Horse may have the less power to bite
them, if he be so inclined; and the Mangers be likewise made of firm Plank,
well seasoned and dried, having Pins or Wooden-pegs conveniently placed to hang
the Bridles, Saddles, Girths, Cloths, Rubbers, Combs, Brushes, and the like
materials on; observing, if convenience will permit, to have a couple of
Windows to open, one to the North, and the other to the South; opening the
first in Summer to let in the cool Air, as occasion requires; and the last in
dry Sun-shiny days in Winter, to let in the cherishing heat, or fresh and
gentle gails, which will contribute to the vivacity of the Horse, and render
him more sprightfull; and ever give him for his Litter Wheat or Rye-straw; but
of these two, the former is the best; and if you perceive him subject also to
eat his Litter, you must Muzzle him after that he has ended his Provender,
least he otherwise do contract an ill habit of body; ever giving him his
Provender in due time, with convenient opportunity to take his rest at
seasonable times: And if it so happen, as in many cases it is necessary, that
you Shoe him your self: or if done by another, in giving directions to the
best advantage, you may take the following Rules.

If it happen to be the hinder feet you undertake, then consider the Toe is
ever the tenderest part, and must be pared with a gentle hand, being left of a
convenient thickness, that it may be capable of defending the Quick from
Gravel, Sand, or being hurt by striking against hard stones; suffering the
Shoe likewise to be thicker at the Toe than in any other part; which Shoe
must be set on even and cleaver, not inclining to one part more than another,
which you must consider after your having pared the hoof to an evenness, and
struck a Nail on each side, not only by narrowly viewing it, but by suffering
the Horse to set his foot on the ground; and if any unevenness happen that is
not overgreat, it may be remedied by striking the hoof with the Hammer,
without the trouble of drawing the Nails, both your Shoe and Nails being made
of tough Iron, that they may in no-wise be subject to break, and so in a
Journey deceive your hope, the holes for the Nails being made mostly toward
the Heels, because of the weakness of the Toe.

In case the Foot has a false quarter, which looks in a manner like a piece put
in, then must the Shoe have on that part a Button, or be a little more raised
than the other on the inside, a small space from the quarter nearer to the Toe,
that thereby the stress may be taken off the quarter so defective, and the
Horse thereby rendered incapable of limping.

If by reason of the swelling or standing of the hoof inward the Horse be apt
to interfeer, then must so much of it as is convenient be taken away with a
Rasp; and in paring the outside, suffer the inside to be somewhat of the
highest, that it may oblige the Horse to tread a little outward: or if it
cannot be so well done in paring the hoof, let it be in the thickness of the
shoe on that side more than on the other, fixing the edges so close to the
hoof, that it may have no opportunity to cut or interfeer; and in case the
Horse be hoof-bound, anoint his hoofs with Oil of Turpentine, and stop his feet
with new Cow Dung fried in Olive-oyl or Hog's Lard, making him a shoe in the
form of a Half Moon, that by its openness it may be no obstruction to the
increase or stretching of the hoof: And this may suffice for the hinder-feet in
case of any reasonable hoof; From which I shall proceed to those of the
fore-feet.

In case the hoofs of the fore-feet be well placed and sound, even, firm and
tough, then any reasonable shoe will serve the turn; yet in this case must it
be pared, and kept from running to disorder; and when you have occasion to
Travel much in Winter, or in any wet season, it will not be amiss, to prevent
its fretting and expanding, to seer the edges with a Bar, or other piece of
Iron, suffering the shoe to swell no more on the toe than on the heel,
because, in this case, the heel is the tenderest part, and must, the rather of
the two, rise higher than the toe; and if the Horse be not subject to
interfeer, you may suffer the shoe, for the preservation of the hoof, to stand
a straws breadth beyond it, even every way; Nailing it on in such wise, that
the points of the Nails may stand in an even round, and seem upon their ringing
off and clenching to sink somewhat into the hoof; ever observing to keep Gravel
from under the shoes. Now there are diverse sorts of unnatural and offensive
hoofs, happening through neglect or accident; some of them that will never bear a
shoe well, and others that cannot be brought to it without much pain and
industry: And the principal of these are,

The rugged hoof, the brittle hoof, the narrow heels, the flat hoof, the broad
frush, and the crooked hoof; and to these shoes must be purposely made and
fitted, and the paring be shaped accordingly: The Particulars of which being
uncertain, or at least too tedious for this discourse, I refer them to the
Skillful Farrier, whose proper business it is to order and reduce them, so as
they may become practicable and useful.

If the hoof be damaged by reason of any Nail that lurks therein, not easily to
be found, it must by all means be looked after, and taken thence; and the place
of its abode or lodgment may be found by sundry means and ways, but chiefly by
the heat of that place more than any other, or by the Horse's shrinking up his
foot, or strike thereon, or pinch it with your Pincers.

The place being found, pull off the shoe, and open the foot gently with a
Buttress or Drawing-knife; and if you can come at it, pull it out; if not,
apply the Plaster I have mentioned for drawing out Thorns, Stubs or Splinters:
Or, for your more readiness, this:

Having in the best manner laid open the Wound, Take of Stone-pitch, Tar,
Turpentine and Beeswax, of each an ounce, and half a quarter of a pint of Juice
of Garlic: make them over a gentle fire into a Plaster, and apply them as hot
as may be endured. And sometimes it so happens, that by long continuance the
Nail in working breaks out above the hoof; and in such a case apply Honey,
Burgundypitch, and Powder of burnt Allom: or a Poultis of Mallows, Cammomoil
and Groundsel fried in Hog's Lard, and beaten up with the Whites of Eggs and
Rye-meal, and applying it as hot as may be endured; and in so often doing it
will break the Skin, so that the cause of the grievance may be removed; but by
the addition of half an ounce of Verdegrease it will bring away the Corruption,
and heal the Wound.

Critical Days, and the Observation thereon.
AND now since it may not be amiss to say something of the Critical Days,
observed by many as to Health and Sickness; which relate not only to humane
Constitutions, but those of all Creatures; I shall here incert them.

These days are accounted such wherein are manifested Alterations in relation
to Sickness or Health, Life or Death: And as for the Critick-day, it is ever
principally to be observed after the beginning of the sickness, as the
3.5.7.9.11.14.17.21.28. In which days so cursarily to be observed, no strong
Medicines or Purgations ought to be given: Nor is it convenient to let Blood,
unless great necessity require it; And other days there are in which many
Learned Men hold. If Man or Beast fall sick, he shall hardly escape, and that
not without much difficulty, which are noted to be these, viz. January 1.7.
February 3.4. March 1.4. April 8.10. May 2.7. June 10.15. July 11.13. August
3.2. September 3.10. November 3.5. December 7.10. And many add, that if any
dangerous disease happen on the 10th of August, 1st of December, or 6th of
April, it will go very near to terminate in Death. Now there are on the
contrary, other days held to be good days; and that if a disease happen on
them, there is great hopes of recovery; nay, there is great hopes of succeeding
in taking a Journey, or any Labor wherein Man or Beast is concerned; and these
are held to be the 3d and 13th of January. The 5th and 28th of February. The
3d, 22d and 30th of March. The 5th, 22d and 29th of April. The 4th and 28th of
May. The 3d and 8th of June. The 12th, 13th, and 15th of July. The 12th of
August. The 1st, 7th, 24th, and 28th of September. The 4th and 15th of October.
The 13th and 19th of November. The 23d and 26th of December. And these indeed,
by the Ancients, were held in wonderful esteem, they generally taking their
measures thereby as to what I have said in relation to them; nor are they to be
neglected or slighted by Practitioners in Physical or Chyrurgical matters,
either in relation to Man or Beast; no, nor in their undertaking, relating to
Labor, or the like, but have

Some further Considerations upon the Cause of Diseases, and how to Remove
them, Physically discussed, etc.

The cause of a Disease proceeds principally from an effect against Nature, and
happens either External or Internal; the External is that which is outwardly
visible, and consists generally of what comes by Strokes, Bruises, Wrenches,
Scalds, Shot, or any manner of Wound; Those Internal are occult, or hid within
the body, and consequently the less discernable, and are divided into an
Antecedent and Conjunction. The Conjunction is that which is nearest, and
immediately causes the Disease, and is generally held to be the Blood which
causes the Phlegm; nor is it reckoned the Antecedent does actually cause the
disease, but procures matter, and stirs it up almost to the creating a disease;
but between it and the disease are some Causes placed, viz. abundance of
humors and ill digestion; and therefore these things ought to be chiefly
considered before any one absolutely attempts to dispell the disease, by reason
diseases are first cured by removing the Cause Antecedent, and after that the
Cause Conjunct: And as for the External diseases, they ought to be known,
because they breed diseases Internal, and very much change the blood, and with
much diligence are therefore to be sought out, that so the Practitioner may be
brought to the perfect knowledge of Internal diseases; and these External
diseases are not either to be avoided or amended, but necessarily penetrate the
body, as Air infected, Meat, Drink, Labor, Sleep, Watching or Wakefulness,
Repletion and Evacuation, and some disorders that frequently happen, or to be
avoided as unnecessary; as Bruises, Strains, Slips, Wounds, Strangling, or the
like.

As for the true cause of a disease, it sometimes proceeds from corrupt matter
whereof they are generated: or when either the Sire or Dam is infected with any
disease, the corrupt quality of which flowing into the Seminal-vessels, and
transmitting the like to the creature generated making it hereditary; and at
other times it proceeds from bad usage, bad feeding, heats, colds, and many
more which I have named in the first Part. And again, as I have here hinted,
Internal diseases may proceed from External strokes, bruises, or the like. And
thus much for Physical Observations of this kind: From whence I proceed to give
an accurate relation of the Spirits, by which the frame of Life is supported:
which take as follows.

The Spirits; what they are, with their Office, etc.

The Spirit is the Aerious and subtle substance of a Body generated of the most
pure and thin Blood, and is the Original mover and supporter of the Members,
giving them power to perform their office, and is seated chiefly in the Brain
and Heart, from whence it delates it self by the means of the Nerves and
Arteries into all parts of the body, and is divided into three parts, viz.
Animal, Vital and Natural; the Animal peculiarly claims the Brain for its seat,
for there it is prepared and made, and from thence defuses it self insensible
ways to the Eyes, Ears, and the like.

The Vital Spirit is chiefly seated in the left Ventricle of the Heart, and has
its passage through the Arteries, being made of the Evaporation or
sweet-breathing of the purest blood, and is furnished with matter to rarifie it
from the Air that is drawn in by the Lungs, and by its motion through the frame
of the body is the conservation of natural heat.

The Natural Spirit is engendered in the Liver and Veins, and is wonderfully
instrumental in the concoction of the nutriment, and turning it into blood, and
then is farther employed in distributing it through the Veins that branch from
the Vena cava, into every part of the Body. And if any of these are wasted or
expulsed from its proper seat, unless it speedily return, there is no hopes of
life: And so in case of Famishing, viz. When the nutriment in the stomach is
spent, then nature preys upon the Blood, and after that upon the Humor; and
lastly, upon the Vital Spirits; at what time the Body, though alive, is past
recovery.

A further Description of the External Parts, etc.

And now, the better to describe, or at least make the Reader more sensible of
the Chyrurgecal part of this Book, I proceed to give a brief Relation of the
Material parts of a Horse's Body. As,

1. The Members are bodies, engendered of the first commixion of the Elements,
Humors and Spirits, because they are found to consist of a solid, fleshy, and
spirituous Substance; and these are distinguished by, or divided into Eight
principal Parts, as Bones, Sinews, Ligaments, Tendons, Fibers, Membranes, and
simple Flesh and Skin; to which may be joined Veins, Fat, Marrow, Arteries,
Hair, Hoofs, and the like. Now to come nearer the purpose, a Bone is of
substance Earthly, dry and hard, the better to support the frame of the Body,
and is it self nourished through little pores, by the purest fat converted
through heat into Marrow. A Gristle is likewise termed a soft and pliable Bone,
the better to strengthen and move the Members. A Ligament is a tough and more
pliable kind of a Gristle, holding or binding the Bones together. A Tendon is
the end and tail of the Arbitrary Muscles by which the Members are more easily
moved. A Fiber is a small thread, firm and strong, which Nature places in the
Muscles to create a right motion, or a motion every way; for as the right
Fibers draw forward, the Transverse put back, and the oblique hold fast. A
Membrane and a Coat differ only in this, viz. A Membrane is the name of a
Substance, and the Coat the name of an Office; for where a Membrane invests any
part, it is called a Coat. As for the Skin, it is generally called the great
Membrane, covering the whole Body, and over-casting the frame or structure
thereof, and is made spongy or porus, the better to purge out the Excremental
moisture by sweat. As for the Flesh and Fat increased by nourishment, it is
raised and produced from and by the purest sort of blood and nutriment: And
when between all these there is a concordance and agreement, then is there a
cheerfulness in the spirits, and a harmony throughout the frame of nature.

As for the Materials you ought to furnish your self withal, for the
performance of the sundry Cures I have mentioned, if you are unskilful in
knowing them, or any of them. As for the Herbs and Roots, a Herbal will direct
you; and for the Minerals, Gums, Seeds, Barks, Oils, and the like, you may
consult some Druggist: For should I go about to describe them particularly,
they would take up a large Volume; and when that was done, you not perhaps much
the wiser, unless the Portraictures were likewise displayed. Wherefore let it
suffice that I have spoken intelligibly of all things which I conceived
necessary or dependant on this Subject; and have, according to my promise,
exposed to your view, and left to your consideration sundry rare Receipts and
Experiments, never before in Print; and such as, I doubt not, will be Approved
by those that vouchsafe to try them, and turn not only to their Pleasure, but
Advantage, and be a means to preserve this Generous Creature in a state of
health and strength, and render him tractable and obedient to his Owner: And in
such hopes I remain further to serve you, as opportunity or occasion will admit.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
There are lately Printed for, and Published by, Nicholas Bodington, at the
Golden Ball in Duck-Lane, the Three useful Books following, Viz.

THE Accomplished Ladies Rich Closet of Rarities, or the Ingenious Gentlewoman
and Servant-Maids delightful Companion: Containing many Excellent things for
the Accomplishment of the Female Sex, after the exactest manner and method,
Viz. (1) The Art of Distilling. (2) Making Artificial Wines. (3) Making Syrups.
(4) Conserving, Preserving, etc. (5) Candying and Drying Fruits, etc. (6)
Confectioning. (7) Carving. (8) To make Beautifying-Waters, Oils, Pomatums,
Musk-balls, Perfumes, etc. (9) Physical and Chyrurgical Receipts. (10) The Duty
of a Wet Nurse, and to know and cure Diseases in Children, etc. (11) The
Complete Chamber-Maids Instructions in Pickling, making Spoon-meats, Washing,
Starching, taking out Spots and Stains, Scowring Gold and Silver-Lace, Washing
Lace and Point, etc. (12) The Experienced Cook-Maids Instructions for Dressing,
Garnishing, making Sawces, serving up together, with the Art of Pastery. (13)
Bills of Fare for all seasons in the Year. (14) The Accomplished Dairy-Maids
Directions for making Junkets, etc. (15) The Judicious Midwives Directions, how
Women in Travail, before and after Delivery, ought to be used; as also the
Child; and what relates to the preservation of them both.
To which is added a Second Part, Containing Directions for the Guidance of a
Young Gentlewoman as to her Behavior and seemly Deportment, from her Childhood
to her Marriage Estate. The Second Edition, with many curious Additions.
Illustrated with Cutts. Price Bound One Shilling.

The Pilgrim's Progress; from this World to that which is to come: Delivered
under the Similitude of a Dream. Wherein is discovered the Manner of his
setting out his dangerous Journey and safe Arrival at the desired Country. By
John Bunnian. Price Bound One Shilling.

The Pilgrim's Progress; from this World to that which is to come. The Second
Part. Delivered under the Similitude of a Dream. Wherein is set forth the
Manner of Christian's Wife and Children setting out their dangerous Journey and
safe Arrival at the desired Country: By John Bunnian. Price Bound One Shilling.

At Nicholas Bodington 's, the Publisher hereof, Country Chapmen, or others,
may at very Reasonable Rates be furnished with all sorts of Books, as Bibles,
Testaments, Common Prayer, and all manner of Schoolbooks, etc.


