A LETTER (Against the erection of an Altar.)

Written June 29. 1635. to the Reverend Father John L. Bishop of Chester.

BY JOHN LEY, Pastor of Great Budworth in Cheshire.

LONDON, Printed for George Lathum, at the sign of the Bishops head in Paul's
Churchyard. Anno Domini 1641.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, AND WORTHILY HONORED Gentleman, PHILIP MAINWARING,
ESQUIRE.
RIGHT WORTHY SIR,
THis short discourse ensuing (though long enough I hope to resolve the
Question proposed) is Yours by right of Dedication (now it is public) since it
was Yours before by causality of production (as a private manuscript) for your
letter to your Reverend Uncle (my honored Friend) and his to me, have been
unto it, as a Grandfather and father, from whose motion and solicitation it is
lineally descended. Accept it then (good Sir) as your own: and me with it,
whom Your immanent merit in your self, and transient benignity to me, have long
and deeply obliged to remain

Yours, to love, and serve You, with affection and fidelity. JOHN LEY.
From my lodging at the Fountain in S. Paul's Churchyard. Febr. 24. 1640.
To the Right Honorable ROBERT Lord Viscount KILLMURREY my very worthy and
much honored Lord.
Right Honorable,
IT is not without example (which for the present I shall follow as a pattern)
to dedicate to one a Letter written to another, Bishop Hall wrote an Epistle to
Mr. I. B. and dedicated it to his Father, Decad. 1. Epi. 10. page 266. He wrote
another to W. E. which he dedicated to M. Robert Iermin Dec. 4. Ep. 2. p. 308.
Another to M. T. S. and dedicated it to Sir Fulk Grevell Dec. 6. Epi. 2. p. 349.
occasion and affection, diversely inducing a diverse inscription: That directed
me to write unto the Bishop, This to give your Lordship a title in the
Publication of that I have written, as in acknowledgement of your ancient and
constant kindness to me, neither cooled by age or interposition of time or
place, nor laid aside with your honors, (which are wont to change manners) nor
requiring more observances of me, than my manifold employments would permit,
nor excepting against mine omisions of attendance on your honor, (your wisdom
and goodness truly and charitably interpreting them, rather as conformities to
my calling, than as signs of slighting, or ingratitude.) To all this your
Honor has lately added a favor (which the less I thought of it before hand,
the more I am bound for ever to remember it) in being so mindful of the
mending of my condition as to name me in a Petition to the high Court of
Parliament, as worthy of better recompense of my pains, and cost in my
pastoral charge than hitherto I have received.

Thus (my good Lord) while I am at greatest distance from you, you have drawn
my devotions nearer to you, and have cherished them to a greater vigor of
desire and endeavor to be

as really as affectionately your Lordships humble Servant JOHN LEY.
From my lodging at the Fountain in Paul's Churchyard Feb. 13. 1640.
A LETTER (Against the erection of an ALTAR.)
Written June 29. 1635. to the Reverend Father John L. Bishop of Chester.
BY JOHN LEY, Pastor of Great Budworth in Cheshire.
Right Reverend, and my very good Lord,
AMong the many things for which bad men evie such as are of eminent estate,
there is one (of special note) for which good men pity them: and it is, that
they have many who seek to serve themselves with their favor, and by flattery
hope to find what they seek; and very few who sincerely set their observances
of them, toward their interests, without a squint-eyd aspect to their own ends.

Of whether sort I have been (among those that profess themselves devoted to
your Lordship) I appeal to your experience of me, for the best part of twenty
years time, wherein you have given me occasion very often to acknowledge unto
others (as a part of your good nature, and my good hap) that while my
conscience has directed me freely to speak, your goodness (as an instance of
Nulli patientius reprehenduntur, quam qui maxim laudem merentur. Plin. ep.
Trajan. lib. 7. p. 234.
Pliny his observation) has disposed you patitiently to hear me, and to
value my speech by the justness of my cause, and validity of my reasons,
rather than by the disparity of your parts, and place, which give you great
advantage over me, both for gainsaying and prevailing.

It was the confidence which I had in He that rebukes a man, afterward shall
find more favor, than he that flattereth with the tongue, Pro. 28.23.
Solomon's prophetical promise, for the final acceptance of faithful
offices, which made me at the first more bold with your Lordship, than many
others have been; and since I have found by the Success of mine upright
intentions, in treaties with you, that I have not therein been more bold with
you, than welcome to you; I cannot but take heart to go on, as any occasion of
moment is presented unto me.

And now, my Lord, there is one of great (and as some would rather style it of
a massy) weight, which has occasioned much discourse, and many censures;
(though your Lordship, whom they most concern, be like to hear the least of
them) it is that new Structure of stone at the upper end of the old
Consistory, which Papists talk of as of an Altar, whereupon they exalt their
hopes of re-edification of their Babel among us. It was one of them, from
Master R.W. about June 18. 1635.
whom, being at Budworth, I had the first notice ^f that news; which I told
him I would not believe: for it seemed to me more strange than true, that a
Papist, dwelling at least fourteen miles from Chester, and coming thither
seldom, should know better what was done in the Cathedral, than I the
Sub-deane of the Church, who was there By occasion of my weekly Lectures upon
Fridaies at Saint Peter's.
almost every week throughout the whole year.

And I could not think (it is so Three yards and about an half in length, a
yard high. and a yard broad.
great) that it grew up (like Ion. 4.10.
Ionahs Gourd) in a night, or that it was set up, as the Temple of Solomon was
set together, without 1 Kin. 6.7.
all noise of axe, or hammer, or instrument of iron.

But at my next coming to Chester, I saw he had but too much, and too solid
ground for his report, and yet to abate from his rejoicing at the matter, I
told He was my Parishioner, and according to the 66. Canon, I had often
conference with him, in hope to win him, as I have done his brother since.
him when we met again (as I had heard by some) that it was a funeral
monument of Saint Warburghs burial in that place, which was anciently called
by the name of her Chapel: with this (for that time) I interred his triumph
under a Tombstone, which he had set up as incense on an Altar.

But when others (seriously observing the matter, and form, and situation of
it) compared all with your purpose of employment of the place to religious uses
(as they had heard) and thereupon suspected therein at least a propension to
Popery; and some said (as I was told to my face) that though your Lordship (as
Bishop) were the Author, I (as Sub-deane) was some way an Actor or approver of
that, which was so great an eyesore unto many good people. I was much
perplexed what answer to make them, though rather for you, than for my self.

Yet for you my Lord, I said (in terms of asseveration and assurance) that I
had known you long and (as you were pleased in one of your letters to me to
say) thoroughly, and yet I could never observe any thing in you, which might
induce me to doubt of your liking of a Communion Table, above an Altar, or of
your dislike of popish either building of Altars, or bowing to Altars. And I
could have said somewhat more to have made them wholly of my mind, touching
your Lordships meaning that way, but that I would not make use of any of your
secrets (without your leave) though for your defense.

But for my self, mine answer was, that if I had had any notice of such an
alteration beforehand, (and you have sometimes accounted the Deane and
Chapter, a consiliis to the Bishop) I should have done my best endeavor to
dissuade you from it, by some such reasons as these that follow.

First, Altars were at first ordained by God, and erected by men, for such
services as ceased with the Pedagogie of the Jewish Religion, and that was
chiefly for sacrifices, typifying or foreshadowing Christ to come.

Secondly, Altar (as being after his departure no more to be sacrificed either
typically or really) but of a Table. So did the Apostles and the Primitive
Church in the purest times, against whom some Heathens objected, as we find
in So did Cecilius object, as Minutius Felix brings him in in his Dialogue,
entitled, Octavius. And so did Celsus, as Origin notes, contra Cells. l. 8.
Tom. 2. p. 794.
Minutius Felix and Origin, that they had neither Temples, nor Altars, nor
Images; which place we must understand with limitation and difference: for
before their time, the Christians had 1 Cor. 11.22. Aug. quest. 57. in Levit.
places appropriate to Religious worship (which now are called Temples,
Churches, Chapels) though not always so public, that the Heathens could know
them, nor at any time such, as they conceived: (for they took a Temple for a
place wherein a Demon was enclosed, as they believed;) nor such as Bellarmine
fansied, when he defined a Temple to be Bell. l. 3. c. 4. de cultu Sanctorum.
nothing else but the place of an Altar. We must take it then in the Testimony
forealledged, that a Temple was not simply denied to the Christians in those
ancient times, but a Temple under such a particular sense and notion as has
been noted.

But for Altars and Images (in a literal and proper acception) their original
and use (for Christian Churches) are to be referred to younger times. So that
for Altars (which for the present appertain to our especial observation) we
may well say with Bishop Bp. Jewel defens. of the Apol. part 2. page 315.
Jewel, that the setting up of them is a Noveltie in our Evangelicall
Religion, whereas Communion Tables are ancient, and have been used from the
first institution of the Sacrament.

Some Papists say the contrary, upon confidence of that of the Apostle, Heb.
13.10. We have an Altar. etc. But that, as Inepti sunt qui hinc Altaria
lapidea, vel lignea, in Templis Christianorum requirunt. Par. in Heb. 13.10. p.
550.
Paraeus shows, is a foolish proof, and it seems by Habemus Altar, Heb.
13 -- quia non desunt ex Catholicis qui co loco per Altar intelligunt crucem,
aut ipsum Christum, non urgeo. Bell. de missa lib. 1. c. 45. Tom 3. page 327.
Bellarmine, that himself, and other Papists of good account with him (he may
mean Per Altar significatur Christus, de quo dicit Apostolus, Heb. ult.
Aquin. part. 3. qu. 83. art 3. ad 2.
Aquinas for one) thought little better of it, and therefore he professes not
to urge it to that purpose: yet he holds Altars to be very ancient, and pleads
for their antiquity (against an Heretic (as he calls him) who accused them of
Novelty) by an Bellar de verb. Dei nonscript. l 4. chapter 22. Tom 1. p. 83. col.
1. init.
Inscription in an old Altar; but how old the date of it was, Ni fallor aliquot
centurias annorum ante illud tempus quo dixerat Hereticus Altaria incepisse.
Ibid.
he could not tell. Brerely of the Mass, Tract. 1. Sect. 2. lib. 2. page 65.
Brerely out of Pretorius refers the original of Altars among Christians, for
the Author, to Sixtus the second; and for the age, to the year 262. then, said
he, did Sixtus the second abrogate Tables, hitherto in use, and set up Altars.

But it is not probable, that so good a man, and a Martyr, as he was, having
but a short and a troublesome time of his Bishopric (which lasted not full
three years) would be Author of such an alteration and defection from the
form and use of the Primitive Church to his time; and that it was not so
either ordained, or not so received by the Churches, will be manifest by the
answer to Bellarmines testimonies for the antiquity of Altars, out of ancient
Authors; of which he says first in general, Nullus fere veterum, qui non
meminerit Altaris Ecclesiae. Bell. de cultu Sanct. l. 3. c. 4. Tom. 2. page 341.
col. 2.
There is scarce any of them which makes not mention of the Altar; and then he
names the Canons of the Apostles, Dionys. Areopagita, Irenaeus, Athanasius,
Tertullian, Optatus, and Hier^m, and Augustine; this in his book of the
worshipping of Saints. And in his book of the Bell. l. 1. c. 16. de Missa. Tom.
3 p. 332 col. 1.
Mass he adds, Cyprian, Gregory Nazianzen, and Gregory Nyssen, Chrysostom
and Ambrose.

But of these, some be suppositious proofs, as that out of the Canons of the
Apostles, and Dionys. Areopagita: some though legitimate, as Iustine, Irenaeus,
Tertullian, and Cyprian, albeit they speak of Altars (as Tertullian de
poenitentia, where he observes Aris Dei ad geniculari. Tertul. de poenit. c.
9. Tom. 2 p. 46.
kneeling at the Altar as a part of the Penitents practice) we must not
understand them but of Communion Tables, not of Altars, in a proper acception.

And though Bell de Missa, lib. 1. c. 16 p. 332. col. 2.
Bellarmine would shift off the forecited saying of Minutius Felix, by pretense
of the privacie of the Christian profession, as though they had Altars, but
privately, out of the sight of the Heathens: yet it is plain by Origin, who
flourished not long before Minutius, in his answer to Celsus, Pro Aris nobis
esse mentem suam cuique ex qua ^ursum feruntur, vere ac infallibiliter
suaveolentis suffitus preces e pura conscientia. Orig contra Cells. lib. 8. Tom.
2. page 794.
that the Christians had neither Altars, nor Images: For Altars which belong to
our present purpose) says he, our mind serves turn, from which are sent up
the sweet incense of prayers, out of a pure conscience. Since Christians had
Temples, the Authors that mention Altars, are Optatus, Ambrose, Athanasius, the
two Gregory's, Chrysostom, Hierom, and Augustine. They are to be understood,
not of an Altar properly, but of a communion Table, as may appear by Quis
fidelium nescit in peragendis my^^eriis ipsa ligna linteamine cooperiri. Optat.
advers. Parmen. l. ^. page 166.
Optatus, (...). Eusebius. lib 1. Demonstr Evangel.
Eusebius, and Lignis Altaris ejusdem effractis immaniter cecide^unt, etc. Aug.
ep. 50. Bonif. Tom. 2. page 248.
Augustine: which, as for the matter of it, it was not made of stone, but of
wood; so, for the site of it, it was not set in the end of the Chancell, but in
the middle, at least so as it might be removed, and so placed at the Communion,
that the people might come round about it, as Bishop B. Jewel in his third
Article p. 145.
Jewel observes against Doctor Harding, and B. Morton of the Sacrament, l. 6.
p. 50. marg.
Bishop Morton in his late learned book of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

And though Bellarmine brag of the antiquity of Altars, yet (as secretly
confessing the seniority of wooden Tables before them) he is feign to say, he
insists not in his disputation upon the Altar of Non disputamus de Altari
lapideo, sed id ^mne vocamus Altar, ubi recipitur victima per verba
consecrationis effecta. Bell. de Missa, lib. 1. cap. 27. Tom. 3. p. 341.
Stone, but calls that (whatsoever it be) an Altar whereon the Sacrifice (such
as he and others, believing the mystery of iniquity, do imagine) is made by
the words of consecration. And as I doubt not but a Table may be made of stone,
so an Altar may be made of Altaria lapidea, vel lignea, in Templis
Christianorum requirunt. Paraeus in Ep. ad Heb. c. 13, ver. 10. p. 554.
wood (and for that there was a particular ordinance, Exodus 27.1. that it
should be made of Shitim wood, overlayd with brass;) and it may be moveable
too, as a Table, yea, as a Trencher, though it be of stone. For the Papists
have their Aquin. artp 3. qu 83. art. 3. ad 2. Altar portatile Papistarum,
Chamier. Tom. 4. lib. 7. c. 13. p. 387
portable Altars, made of a piece of a slate stone, light and little, for
commodious carriage from place to place, as they please. But the Altars which
give the strongest support to their superstition, are stony and fixed
fabrics, which whenever they began (for the time is uncertain) are most in
use in the Popish Churches, and required as necessary by Popish Doctors to be
of stone (else Durand. rational divin^r. l. 1. c 7. nu. 28. f. 35. b.
they may not be consecrated) as signifying Christ the Rock, and his resting in
a stony Sepulcher: and for the upper part of it, it must be of one entire
stone. All this is the determination of Aquin. part 3 qu. 83 art. 3. ad 5
Aquinas, to whose writings Aug. Hunnius in ep. ded Pio Quinto praefixa
operibus Aquinat. edit. Plant. ^an. 1569.
Pope Innocent gave the first place, after the Canon of the Scripture.

Against these our third Reason may be; Altars (properly so called) Bellarmine
and Brerely infer a litterall and a real Sacrifice. The name of an Altar in
Greek and Hebrew (says Nomen Altaris Sacrificium innuit Graece and Latin:
^el. de Missa lib. 1. c. 2. Tom. 3. page 307. col. 2. (...).
Bellarmine) does intimate a Sacrifice. Item, Altaria non consu eviss^ erigi,
nisi ob sacrificium proprie dictum: Bell. de Missa lib. 1. c. 16. sag. 332. col.
1.
Altars are not used to be set up, but for Sacrifice, properly so called.
Again (says he) Altar proprie dictum, non erigicur, nisi ad Sacrificium
proprie dictum: Bell. ibid. lib. 1. c. 14. p. 327. col. 1.
Altars properly taken, are not set up but for Sacrifice properly taken. And
again, Altaria signa evidentissima esse Sacrificii proprie dicti: Bell. de Mis.
l. 1. c. 16. p. 332.
Altars are most evident signs of a Sacrifice properly so called. Brerely of
the Moss, Tract. 1. subd. 2. p. 64, 65.
Altars and Sacrifices infer one another, says Brerely.

They make the like inference (I grant) from the name Priest, as we may see by
Bell lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 17. page 332. col. 2.
Bellarmine, who makes that title one of his topics, to prove his Sacrifice;
but not with like advantage, as they argue, from the Altar: for the one is
offered but to the ear, the other to the eye: and we see by experience, that
the Poet spoke like a Prophet, when he said, Segnius irritant animum demissa
per aures.

Quam quae sunt oculis subjectae fidelibus H^rat.


that the objects of the ear are more weak in their working, than those of
the eye: the one is but a transient word, the other is a permanent work; the
one is properly an Altar, the other notes not properly a Priest, in the
Evangelicall Church.

But what need we be troubled at the consequence of a Sacrifice upon an Altar,
when by Sacrifice we may understand that which is Orthodox in sense, and not
unwonted for use in the true Church of God? For, as many of the Ancients use
the word Altar, so do they the word Sacrifice also; yea, and some of the most
learned, and best reputed Papists, give a sound interpretation of it; as, their
Master of the Sentences, and their Angelical Doctor (the two most renowned
Rabbis in the Romish Church) who say Quaeritur si quod gerit Sacerdos proprie
dica^ur Sacrificium, ad hoc breviter dici potest vocari Sacrificium, quia
memoria est, and representatio very Sacrificii, and Sanctae Immolationis factae
in ara Crucis. P. Lumb. lib. 4. did. 12. fol. 357. p. 1.
It is therefore called a Sacrifice, because it is the memorial and
representation of the true Sacrifice of the Altar of the Cross; or (as
Bellarmine himself adds, as the joint consent of Lumbard, Aquinas, and other
Schoolmen) Vel quia habet effectum similem cum ipsa vera and reali Christi
occisione: Bell. l. 1 de Missa, c. 15. p. 331. col. 1.
because it has the like effect with a true and real sacrificing of Christ.

To which the answer may be, First, That there be but few disputing Papists
(specially since the Trent Council) that conceive so soundly of the Sacrament,
as to take it for a Sacrifice in that sense; and for Bellarmine, he shows his
dislike of it, and pleads with all his power for an Altar, and Sacrifice
properly taken.

Secondly, For the vulgar Papists, their faith is of the stamp of their
Teachers tenet, who are (as Aquin secunda secundae, q. 2. art. 6. Job 1.14.
Aquinas out of Gregory compares them together) as the Asses in Job, to the
Oxen feeding besides them, the people adhering to them with an implicit faith,
as gross in believing, as their Doctors are false in teaching of untruth; and
so Coena Domini perniciosissimo errore dici caepit Altaris Sacrame^tum, ac
tandem in Sacrificium reale, and quidem expiatorium fuit impie transmuta- d ta:
Bez. in ep. a. Heb. c. 13. v. 10
The Supper of the Lord, by a most pernicious error (as Beza notes it) is
changed into the Sacrament of the Altar, the Sacrament of the Altar into a
Sacrifice, a figurative into a real and expiatory Sacrifice. And (which is
more in it self, and more to us, as being of greater authority in our Church)
in the Art. 31.
Articles of Religion, to which we subscribe, there is one that says, The
Sacrisice of the Mass: wherein Papists say (which, as a late Haec est vulgata
opinio, quam. hic perstringit atticulvs, Fr. a St. Clar. (or rather Damport, ^s
Paul Harris calls him, in his book called, Fratres fobrii estote, p. 87, 88.)
in his book called, Deus natura and gratia, in artic. 31. page 315.
Glosser on them acknowledges, is their common opinion) that the Priests offer
up Christ for remission of guilt and pain, for the quick and the dead, is a
blasphemous sigment, and pernicious imposture.

My fourth Reason against Altars is this; Altar, or Sacrifice of the Mass, on
an Altar, has been the Altar on which they have sacrificed many a Protestant,
because they would not believe the doctrine of the Cakeincarnation (as King
James in his defense of the right of Kings, against Perron, p. 455.
King James called it) which is so senseless a conceit, that in that dispute
(as the most learned Lord Answer to the Jesuits challenge, p. 45
Primate of Armagh has complained) we are put to prove that bread is bread,
and wine is wine; a matter (one would think) that easily might be determined by
common sense: and therefore (says he) because we have to deal with men, that
will needs herein be senseless, we will refer them to Tertullians discourse
of the five senses, wishing they might be restored to their five wits again.
And yet they did, like the children of this world (wisely in their generation)
to bring them to the trial of Transubstantiation, and adoration of the breaden
God: for they that would swallow such gross absurdities, it was not like they
would make scruple of any point, either of opinion, or of practice in the
Popish Religion.

Fifthly, Altars and Idolatrous errors, have been (for the most part) married
together in the Popish Church; so they that have (in the days of reformation)
abolished the one, have demolished the other: as in the days of King Edward
the sixth.

For though in the first Communion Book (that was published by his authority
anno 1549.) there be Fol. 110 b fol. 114 b fol. 115 b fol. 116 b fol. 120 b
fol. 128 a of the Communion book printed by Edward Whitchurch, 1549.
frequent mention of an Altar, and but once of a Ib. fol. 118 a
Board or Table (and then it may be there were more Altars than Communion
Tables in the Churches of the Kingdom) yet afterward, in the year following (
viz. Fox martyrol. tom. 2. p. 699. col. 2.
1550.) he gave order for the taking down of Altars, and restoring of
Communion Tables, according to the first institution and practice of the
Primitive Church. And in the second Communion book (confirmed by Act of
Parliament) in the fifth and sixth of his reign, we find King Edwards second
Communion Book, printed by Edward Whitchurch, 1552 fol. 93. and 1^^. and 115.
constant mention of a Communion Table, with Ibid. fol. 93.
appointment, that it be placed in the body of the Church, or in the Chancell,
the Priest standing on the North side.

With this agrees the Fol. 114. of the Communion book of Q. Elizabeth, printed
1559 by Richard Grafton.
Communion book set forth in the first year of Queen Elizabeth's reign, and
those Constitutions which were made in her time: as in the book of The Book
of Canons in Qu. Elizabeth's time, page ^8. printed 1572.
Canons, published in the year 1571. the Churchwardens are charged to see,
that there be a fair joined Table, which may serve for Administration of the
holy Communion. And the Books of several Editions, both in her time, and in
the reign of King James, and our Sovereign that now is, do all agree with
that Constitution (which we have observed The end of the Rubric, at the
beginning of the Communion, in all Editions.
before) both for the Tables placing in the Church, and the Priests standing at
the Table. And the Canons of 1603 (with good conformity to the former rules)
ordain thus: Canon 82 of the book agreed upon an. 1603.
Whereas we have no doubt, but that in all Churches (of the Realm of England)
convenient and decent Tables are provided, we appoint that the same Tables
shall from time to time be kept and repaired in sufficient and seemly manner,
and covered in time of divine service, with a Carpet of silk, or other decent
stuff, and with a fair linen cloth, at the time of ministration, as
becomes that Table; and so stand, saving when the holy Communion is
administered, at which time the same shall be placed in so good sort (within the
Church or Chancell) as thereby the Minister may be more conveniently heard of
the Communicants, in his prayer and administration, and the Communicants also
more conveniently, and in more number, may communicate with the said Minister.

And if we take our prospect from the present State of our Church, as under the
guidance of my Lord of Canterbury that now is, and thence look forward toward
the future, we may have good hope (though Altars be made of stone, and Tables
but of wood) that the newest of those shall crumble into dust, and be trodden
under feet, while these shall stand up as perpetual monuments of the Primitive
Institutions of the blessed Sacrament. For the first of the Articles of his
Visitation (which as Sir Nathanael Brent his Visitor and Vicar general said in
an Assembly of the Clergy, were with especial diligence dictated or penned by
him) it is made a chife part of the Churchwardens care, that Communion Tables
shall be provided in all their Churches, and they so placed, as may be of most
use and edification. His words are these.

Whether have you in your several Churches, and Chapels, the whole Bible of
the largest volume, the Book of Common Prayer (both fairly and substantially
bound) a Font of stone set up in the ancient usual place, a convenient and
decent Communion Table, with a Carpet of silk, or some other decent stuff,
continually laid upon the same, at the time of divine service, and a fair
linen cloth thereon at the time of the receiving of the holy Communion? and
whether is the same Table placed in such convenient sort, (within the Chancell
or Church) as that the Minister may be best heard in his prayer, and
administration, and that the greatest number may communicate?

Sixthly, Altars, as Schismatic Novelties. Novelties in respect of the first
founded Churches, which were before Popery was planted; and novelties again,
in respect of the State of the chief reformed Churches, since it was
supplanted: as for ours of England, from the year 1550. (until this present)
Altars (by the most authentic Constitutions, and constant custom of our
Church) have stood excommunicated, and Tables of wood authorized in their
stead. And Schismatic, because the Canon takes it for certain and
undoubted, that there be decent and convenient Tables provided in all the
Churches of the Realm of England: and if that (which your Lordship has set
up) be an Altar (and I know not by what more proper name to call it) there is
Schism upon Schism, a division from the general, and a subdivision in our
particular Church: for in the Quire there is a Table of wood, and above that,
in the upper end of the old Consistory, an Altar of stone.

Seventhly, hereby Papists are emboldened, take heart, and hope to see their
superstition restored again, as I have heard by diverse; and he that was my
first Informer of the erection of an Altar, when I denied it (as before I have
said) replied presently (with a confident jollity) Nay, you will all of you
come to us, or to it, at the length. And some others said, The Bishop is wise,
and has good intelligence how things are like to go, and he prudently
applies himself to the times, and acts his part accordingly. And I doubt
not but much more, and somewhat worse has been said than I have heard, which
if it came to your Lordships ear (at the first hand) would happily induce your
Lordship to believe, that there is more need of double reins to keep men back,
than of a goad or spur to prick men forward to the profession of Popery,
especially in your Diocese; of a great part whereof our At Our first entry to
this Crown and Kingdom We were informed, and that too eruly, that out County
of Lancashire abounded more in Popish Recusants, than any County of England,
and thus has still continued, to our great regreat. So in His Majesty's
Declaration of lawful sports, p. 3. printed 1618. in the later edition of it,
p. 6. printed 1633.
Sovereign that late was, was informed (and that too truly) that it abounded
more with Popish Recusants, than any County of England. His Majesty had heard
of some amendment then, but now the report goes, that some go back, and those
men of some eminent note, which may be better known unto your self, than to
me; yet I have heard their Names, and can name mine Author for diverse of them.

Eighthly, hearty devotions to Almighty God, for your long and comfortable
continuance among us, this Altar (if you make the Consistory place where it is
a graduate from a Court to a Church) will be a rock of offense, and make them
as stiff against kneeling at the Sacrament, as any of their Adversaries
flexible or pliable to bow to an Altar.

We have hitherto told them, that we are clear from all suspicion of Popish
adoration, since (in the Artic. 28.
Articles of our Religion) it is expressly said, that the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper was not by Christ's ordinance to be reserved, carried about, lifted up,
or worshipped: and that for the avoiding of superstition, it was ordained by
the Church in King Edwards days, That no Fox Martyrol. tom. 2. p. 699.
wafer cake, but common bread, without any K. Edwards Communion book, fol. 221.
a
print, should be used in the administration of the Sacrament. And in the
Rubric of all our Communion books since his time, the like caution is set
down in these words: And to take away the superstition that any person has,
or might have, in the bread and wine, it shall suffice, that the bread be such
as is usual to be eaten at the Table with other meats.

But if Altars be set up, they will be more stiff in standing out against
conformity in gesture, at the Sacrament, and we that are conformable, shall be
less strong to contest with them in that particular, at least we shall do it
with less hope of good success, and more disadvantage, by their greater
jealousy, and deeper prejudice of our persuasions, wherein in former times (as
your Lordship knows) our labor has not been in vain bestowed on diverse of
them.

And is there, or can there be any thing in that heap of stones, which may
serve to repair the ruins which an Altar may make? If Altars had been
needful, the first and purest Churches would not have wanted them; if they had
been lawful, or useful, the zeal of the best reformed Churches would not
have been so set against them, so hot, and so long: so hot, as to pull them
down, so long, as all this while before noted, to keep them down below the
footstool of the Lords Table: and for a thing which they accounted naught, or
needless, or both, to make alteration, and give offense, the prudence (not the
piety only) of precedent ages has not approved.

And how needless a thing was this (to say no worse) when (if it had not been
done at all) none would ever have required a reason of the omission of it; but
being done, very many (though you hear them not) make question of it, nay,
make no question to censure and condemn it; and few there are that can give a
good interpretation of it, or make a probable Apology for it, for ought I have
yet heard, Altar (for yet I say not that it is so) it is resolved by wise men,
that it is not in the power of a particular Bishop (without warrant from the
King, or his Council under him) either to set up, or to pull down Altars;
which I the rather believe, because in King Edwards days (when they were to be
deposed, and Communion Tables set up for the service of the Sacrament) Fox
Martyrel. tom. 2. p. 699. 700
Letters in the Kings name (subscribed with the consent of nine Privy
Counselors) were directed to Bishop Ridley to that purpose, with
considerations of reason for their removal, that it might be effected without,
or with as little offense as possible might be.

In this discourse of mine, my Lord, I argue rather against that dull and dumb
text of the handycrafts man, with the over quick conceits and crafty comments
(which Popishly affected persons have set upon it) than against your
intentions, in either appointment or permission of it, because yet I know not
what they are.

And I will not presume to determine any thing without direction from your
Lordship; I know you will not say, as the Tribes of Reuben, or Gad, and half
Tribe of Manasseh did, in defense of their Altar, when the other Tribes,
suspecting a Schism, prepared to fight with them, that it is not an Altar for
burnt offerings or sacrifice, but for a witness of uniformity in Religion with
them that have them, and so plead for them, as I have showed.

For a man may sooner eat up an Altar of stone, though it were as big as a
Church, than reconcile our Church and the Romish together, whatsoever the
quirking Scotist Damport, masked under the title of Franciscus a sancta Clara,
has devised; or the flourishing Poet (whose wit outbraveth his Wi^^ers
Emblemes p. ^. of his ep. dedicat.
name) has lately fancied, touching the union in Religion. I believe Bishop B.
Hall his To. irrecrualiab.
Hall, who has proved the repugnances irreconcilable

Howsoever, you may perhaps conceive it to be of some use unto you, to clear
you from all imputation of Puritanisme, which some have (as you say, and those
that well know you, may swear) very undeservedly put up against you: and for
that purpose perhaps you raised it up, to support your Episcopal reputation
against that reproach.

Your learned and worthy Predecessor, Bishop Morton, had the same lot, for he
was accused (to King James) as a favourer of Puritanes; but he cleared
himself, first by a Letter to his Majesty, and afterward by a Book, not by
an Altar, or any alteration which might incline toward conformity to the
opposite side; and has since showed himself a vigilant watchman, and a
courageous Champion for Christ and his Church, against the whole host of
sacrificing Shavelings.

Nor will it suffice with some, to purge you from all appearance of
Puritanisme, though you should set up the Mass, with every trifle and tittle
that belongs unto it; for there were Bishops in the Council of Trent, who were
so far Hist. Council. Trid. p. 502. l 6.
Papists, and a great deal further, and yet had the name of Puritanes put upon
them; and which may be more for any subjects credit and comfort, against the
contempt of that reproach (when they do not deserve it) King James himself
(though he was the greatest enemy of such as were truly worthy of that title)
was (by some Papists) termed a Puritan, and that so rigid, as to be an enemy
to Protestants.

Thus far, my Lord, I have made bold to represent unto you, what (in my
conceit) does much concern you to consider; and for the use you will make of
it, I must recommend it to God, and your King James his works p. 343 in his
confutation of Tortus his lies.
own conscience. It may be some (if they knew what I have done) would suggest
I have herein presumed too much upon your Lordships patience and lenity. To
such I can say thus much for my self, that Tenentur subditi charitatis
corroptione Praelatos cum reverentia, and honor, and mansuetudine, admonere.
Aquin. secunda secundae 33 art. 4. conclus.
Aquinas has resolved, an inferior Clerk may sometimes admonish a Prelate;
yea, and is bound unto it, with this proviso, that it be done with reverence
and mansuetude; and that the greatest Prelates in the world have been
sometimes freely reprehended by their inferiors; as Pope Eugenius the third,
by Bernard; Pope Dorman in his disproofe of Nowels reproof: c. 13. fol 75. p.
6.
Paul the fourth, by a private person in Rome, and Pope Pius the fifth, by
Peter Soto (a Friar) Ibid.
who wrote Letters to him, wherein he admonished him freely, to take order that
Bishops, and other inferior Pastors, might be compelled to keep residence with
their charges, and threatened him with utter damnation, in the judgment of God,
unless he did so.

But there will be no need of such vigorous words, your Lordships ready
disposition to condescend to the sway of religious reason, would make it
unmannerly malapertnesse in me, if I should (especially in such an ambiguous
case wherein I know not how far your Lordship is engaged) use the fervency of
the Friar to you, who never used any Popelike perverseness or frowardness to
me.

I see my self enlarged beyond the limits of a Letter, which if you take to be
a fault, take it also for my punishment: for I had never less leisure to be
over long in my writing, than at this time; yet I cannot forbear to add
further, the proof of my hearty desire, to have you deeply indeared in the
favor of him whom the Apostle calls ((...)) the Bishop of Souls, 1 Pet.
2.25. at whose Visitation (which though it come not in haste, will be sure and
severe) I wish you may give a good account of your great charge, and that in
the mean time you may rather grow, than abate in the reverend regard of all
good men, which will either not be had, or not held, if it begin not at God;
nor will God vouchsafe to favor or honor any in such sort, who sets not an
high price on every piece or part of Religion, to secure and preserve it from
all impeachment. For (as the Aut undique religionem toll, aut usquequaque
conserva. Ci. Phil. 2. fol. 239.
Orator observed) it is no better than abandoned, if it be not every way, and
entirely maintained: and in this, so far as your Lordship is interessed more
than others, so much more acceptable (I hope) will mine advertisements of it be
unto you. If otherwise, I should find offense in stead of favor (which my
long experience of your benignity forbids me to fear) I shall be so far from
repenting me of my plain dealing with you, that (if I know mine own heart) I
think I should rather offer my self as a Sacrifice on an Altar, than leave any
part of my duty to God or your Lordship (of so great moment as this is)
unperformed. And so I rest

Your Lordships in all affectionate and humble observance, JOHN LEY.
From Budworth June 29. 1635.
A POSTSCRIPT To the precedent Letter, for further satis faction to the Reader
touching the publication of it, and some other points of moment that appertain
unto it.
THe Letter it self has showed upon what occasion it was written, and why it
is now published I shall render the reason, and this it is; Since my Which was
Ianu. 13. of this year cucrent. 1640.
coming to London, I was credibly informed, that a copy of it was brought
hither (by what means I know not) prepared for the Press, and that (either
with or without my consent) it would presently be printed. If so, said I, I had
rather make use of mine own power over it, for setting of it forth, in the way
of truth and fair daylight, than suffer it by stealth to come abroad, (and
like a non licet Pamphlet) to wander about, without due correction, and a
lawful pass.

Besides, by mine own edition of it, I may make use of a fit opportunity to
present unto the Reader some particulars, wherein he may desire a further
satisfaction, than the Letter it self (if it should come alone) could bring
unto him: which I shall sort under these several heads.

1. The Bishops Answer returned unto my Letter.

2. The late verses written as an Elegy upon the pulling down of that
stone-work, against which my Letter was directed.

3. Such discourses as since have been published in favor of Altars, and
bowing toward them, though more for the name, than for the thing it self.

1. For the first Particular, What answer the Bishop returned to my Letter when
he had read it.

That being the answer not of his hand, but of his tongue, and that many years
since I would not take upon me now to report it, without a new recourse unto
him, to rectify my remembrance thereof, lest (at such a distance of time) I
should mistake his words or meaning) and therefore the last Ianu. 23. 1640.
week, having told him (in effect) what I have related (touching the publishing
of this Letter) I desired him to inform me what I should say (as from him)
concerning that offensive structure, which was commonly called and condemned by
the name of an Altar. This said he.

When I caused it to be set up, I protest I had no thought of an Altar; and I
meant it only for a repositorie to the Preacher (in the use of a table) in that
place; which though it were somewhat near the Quire, was not used but as a
Consistory Court, and where (upon removal of the seats to the west end of the
Cathedral) the materials (whereof it was made) were found ready for such a
purpose: but hearing great offense was taken at it, I gave order for it to be
taken down, which is done accordingly.

Whereupon follows the second Particular, concerning the late verses, written
as an Ironicall Elegy upon that occasion, whereof the Title is this.

A sad complaint of the late Altar newly erected, and prepared for a new
sacrifice, by the Lord Bishop of Chester, in the upper end of the Chancell of
the Cathedral Church of Chester, in the new intended Chapel there, newly
pulled down (as it was high time.)

Then follow the verses, whereof I will select such and so many as may be a
convenient introduction to discover the difference betwixt the ground of truth,
and the descant of wit and fancy raised upon it: and they are these, I, who
from those fair banks of Tyber came,
A stranger here by nature and by name;
I, whom the reverend Father here had placed,
And with the name of Altar had me graced;
I, in whose sacred presence all men know
Every sincere devoted knee did bow
At their demure approaching: --
Am now become the object of all scorn,
My members and materials rent and torn;
Come holy Fathers of the Convocation,
See and lament my woeful desolation.
Come Deanes and Prebends (in your surplice clad)
From whose examples I much reverence had.
Loud Petty Canons come roar out your cries,
Make up your Chorus, in sad Elegies,
For my departure, stick not now to lend
Your tears to whom you once your knees did bend;
Come conducts, Choristers, and every lad,
Belch out your sighs, and screame as you were mad.


I like it well enough that as Elijah mocked the Priests of Baal, 1. Kings 18
27. So that all that set up Altars for Idolatry, or that Superstitiously bow
unto them, should have their blind devotion played upon, both in Prose and
verse, and so be sacrificed to Derision, and therefore since I see the composer
of this Poem shows a great deal of zeal against that, which my soul hates
as well as his, and from which my body is as free as his can be (for I never
yet bowed head or knee, either to or toward an Altar or holy table) I will not
call it (as some would do) a libell. But yet least the reader should suppose,
that all this smoke (or if any will call it a perfume, because they resent it
with delight, I will not contend with them) has the fire of historical truth
to produce and maintain it: I conceave it to be consonant both to good
conscience, and necessary discretion, to make a true, but brief report, in
what place the Altar stood, and what respect it had when it was erected.

The place was the same which was formerly (for many years) used for the
Consistory Court, it is the utmost room of the Cathedral eastward, betwixt
which and the Quire, there is an intermediate space (more large than it) which
is employed to no particular use, but lies open for passage round about it. In
this place (for ought I can learn) there was never any exercise of Religion
since the Churches reformation by Queen Elizabeth: and here it stood so far
from all respect of Adoration, that I verily believe it never had so much as
one Cap or Congey from any one, unless perhaps some simple Papist (seeing it
so neglected) in pure pity rather than in piety, bestowed, as an alms, some
part of his superabundant Superstition upon it; which yet I cannot think was
often done (if done at all) because the passage to it was usually locked up,
except in time of public prayer and sermon: Nor can I imagine the Bishop ever
meant (whatever other meaning he might have) that any one should bow unto it
or superstitiously direct their Adoration toward it.

And I cannot but conceive (at least of such as have been long and soundly
trained up in the truth of our Protestant Doctrine against the absurdity of
Popish Transubstantiation) that their curious and constant homage toward the
Altar (as too many phrase it) has more affinity with Hypocrisy than with
Superstition.

They that have observed some late unpleasing passages (betwixt the Bishop and
me) will marvel that I make this Apology for him, and I confess there is some
cause to move them to it; but more, as I conceive, to move me to this.

1. For that (for the most part of mine intercourse with him) I have had more
experience of favorable than of offensive dealing from him, and if that which
is best and most should not more affect me than the contrary, I should
contradict at once both my natural disposition, and Christian profession.

2. For the late difference betwixt us (which some may think I should not
easily digest) I take it for a matter of too small moment, to be the root of a
settled misconceit; for it was but about the setting down of a cipher without a
figure (The choice of a Clark for the Convocation at York.)

And for that we were thus far agreed, that he was unwilling to be crossed in
a second choice of me especially having been used to sway the Election
himself, and it may be also pre-ingaged to some other (who might have more
mind and better leisure than I had, to spend time and to take pains to little
purpose) and I was loath again to be designed the Clergies unprofitable
servant in that kind, wherein (unless I did overdoe the duty of my place if
so I could do any thing and put a double task upon my self, by giving
attendance by turns on both Convocations) I might be sure to return my talent
in a Napkin, Luke 19.20.
with no more profit by it, than he that has labored for the wind, Eccles.
5.16.

3. The third and last particular is concerning such discourses, as (since my
Letter was pend) have been published in print, in favor of Altars and bowing
toward them, though they say more for the name, than for the thing it self;
whereof, though much has been said, a little may suffice to set us right in
that point.

For that, first I take it to be a very good and safe rule of Religious worwip
(and especially pertinent to the state of the Evangelicall Church) which the
Prophet Esaias delivers in these words; In that day shall a man look to his
maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the holy one of Israel, and he shall
not look to the Altars, the work of his hands, neither shall he respect that
which his fingers have made, Esaias 17. ver. 7, 8.

Secondly, though some men's slighting both of the Lords Table, and Temple,
required a remedy to keep off contempt, both from them and the exercises of
Religion belonging to them, and that usually the manner of Reformers of
irreligious errors, is to do as Gardeners do with crooked twigs (which is to
bend them as far the contrary way, not that they should remain crooked on
either hand, but that afterward they might rest in a right consistence) yet
there was great care to be taken in this case (which some writers for Altars
seem not to regard so much as they ought) that the remedy of Profaneness might
not be such as might foment superstition, a sore which in some constitutions
does easily turn to the Gangreen of Idolatry, and is so much the more
dangerous, as there be the more subtle and sedulous agents to infect men with
it; and as they that are most infected, will the less acknowledge their own
disease, or be more unwilling to admit of the means to cure them of it: In
this respect I much feared that what ground was gotten in this way against the
Profane would be easily turned to the advantage of such as were Popish.

Thirdly, be it the Ancient Fathers as is alleged (by diverse who have
written for Altars) do frequently call the Communion Table by the name of
Altar (as they use the word Priest and Levite, and other terms of conformity
to the old Testament) yet if they were now alive again, and observed how their
language has been misapplyed to the promotion of Popery, they would (I
believe) no more approve of such expressions, as formerly were frequent in
their discourses, then we do now think it fit to use the word Tyrant for a
King, though anciently all Kings were called so, even Jupiter himself, by
(...).
Homer and others, when they meant to speak very honorably of him, or to call
our Bishops Popes, which was a common title to them all in former times, when
the Bishops of Rome were better men, than since they made it peculiar to
themselves.

Fourthly, Though the forms of Speech, and Phrases touching Altars and
Gestures, were tendered unto us in the name of the fathers (as in Altar
treatises we find them cited) very few would look so far back as to their
times, for direction in Religion, but to most (no doubt) the next precedent Age
would be the Horizon of their holy observation: for it is the manner of most,
both Papists, and other ignorant people, when they hear ^^y thing of the old
religion, to fancy none other then that of their Popish Ancestors, which in
respect of true venerable and orthodox Antiquity, is in no other sense, to be
called the old Religion, then Almanacks out of date are called old Almanacks
because they have a precedence of time though far short if old or Ancient
before that of the year current.

Fifthly, Albeit it be lawful, to call the Communion table by the name of an
Altar (for which term there has) been but too much striving of late) yet
commonly to call it so (as some do) to put the better title which is the Lords
Table out of use is not to be liked, much less to bring it into disgrace: as
he would have done, who pleading for the name Altar, against the Book called
The holy table name and thing, Trapeza in greek signifies a Table.
had a mind and meaning to call his answer to it, Trapezuntius vapulans 1. The
table man beaten: but upon better advice he bethought himself of a fitter title
for his treatise.

Sixthly, Since the Papists never, or very rarely use the word Table, but Altar
both out of too much devotion too it, and too great dis-affection of us, and
our Church, it would be convenient that we were (at least) more spareing in the
use of the word Altar, and Generally more accustomed our selves to the name
Table, the rather because since we have seemed in terms, and some other
ways, to comply with them, more then in former times, they have multiplied in
number and advanced in confidence: And it would become our humane Prudence and
Protestant zeal (for to be a Protestant is not to be a lukewarm Laodicean but
a fervent professor of sound faith, and Religion) to cut of all occasions of
their increase and encouragement, and that they may abate in both, to do what
lawfully we may for contracting of their number, and correcting of their
humor, and spirit, that (notwithstanding their desires and designs) we may
still be happy in a constant enjoyment of truth, and peace.

Lastly Comparing what I have written in the precedent letter to the Bishop,
with that I have read in the discourses for Altars set forth in print (since
the date thereof though I have intentively perused them, I find nothing in them
for Altars (either in respect of name, or thing, or use) to alter my judgment
for the negative Tenet nor to refute the reasons, which I have produced to
prove it, so that to this Postscript (to the Reader) I may sincerely subscribe
(as Mr. Chapter H.
a learned friend did to me when I requested him to present my letter to the
Bishop)

Yours usque ad Aras and contra Aras. JOHN LEY.
From my lodging at the sign of the Fountain in Paul's Church Yard. January
27. 1640.

