A REPLY TO Sr. Thomas Manwaring's ANSWER TO MY TWO BOOKS.

Written by Sr. Peter Leycester Baronet, Anno Domini, 1675.

The Second REPLY.

Together with the Case of Amicia truly Stated.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1676.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Received on the 13th. of April, 1675. a very strange kind of Book from Sir
Thomas Manwaring, then delivered unto me by his Servant; wherein I expected a
Book of Arguing to the point of the Controversy between us: But behold a book
of Railing, catching (as his usual manner is) at every small impertinent thing.

That I may the sooner come to the Book it self, I shall observe only out of
his Epistle, this one thing, How he minceth the Truth, in telling the Reader --
that my Servant did (by my Command) signify unto him in a Letter, that I would
write again, and this before Sir Thomas had Printed one word of his Reply: So
that if he find me thus Stumbling at the first, it is well if he do not take me
often Tripping before I come to my Journeys end.

Whereunto I say that he deals not clearly in his words, and declares not the
whole Truth: For it is true, that I did command my Servant to write unto him;
but what did I command him to write? Was it barely that I would then write
again? No: but to let him know, that I had then found some new Precedents which
(I conceived) would clear the point between us, and came to my knowledge since
I had published my Answer; of which I thought good to give him timely notice,
that I would add them to my Answer already Printed, which were omitted therein;
and this before his Reply was Printed, as Sir Thomas here confesses: This was
rather an amendment of my former book, then writing again de novo; for as yet
he had published no book against it, but this part of the Truth he conceals;
and if my Servant writ otherwise than to this effect, I utterly disown it to be
written by my command: But before I could get my Addenda Printed, he Published
a Reply to my Answer; wherein were so many Crimes charged upon me, that I was
forced to a Vindication of my self, which I did then put into my Addenda, yet
not so fully as I might have done: See my Addenda, p. 8. and also p. 27.

And whatsoever I have also written more, then what I first intended and
declared, I have been forced thereunto in my own defense.

And so I will now briefly come to his Book, and hope to show clearly who Trips
most in the Journey, he or I; and wherein I do Trip, it shall be readily
confessed: I think mine will not be found many, nor material to the main point;
but I believe his will be found Fundamental Errors: And I could wish that Sir
Thomas would as freely confess his Trips as I shall confess mine, then the
whole business would soon be at an end.

And herein I shall endeavor all along to avoid all abloquies, wherewith he
adoundeth as much as I can; for Calumnies and Slanders will find no place among
Wise and Good Men, and are ever inconsistent with those excellent Christian
Graces of Humility and meekness.

Mobberly, May the 18th. 1675.
A Second Reply.
Page 1. Of his Answer to my two Books.
HEre he says, that I affirm several times, that Glanvil says that Lands may
be given with any Woman in liberum maritagium: whereas he says only, they may
be given cum qualibet muliere in maritagium.

My Reply.
I did, and do yet affirm it; and have proved it too; see page 54. of my former
Reply, which yet he has not answered: nor do I believe that he can rationally
answer my Argument there: For though Glanvil has not these very words -- Lands
may be given with any Woman in liberum maritagium]; yet he says it by
Consequence, drawn clearly out of his words, lib. 7. cap. 18. which is the same
in effect.

Nor does Sir Thomas repeat Glanvil's words aright; and yet he is ready upon
all occasions to tax me with the like: the words of Glanvil, lib. 7. cap. 1.
are -- quilibet liber homo, terram habens, quandam partem terrae sua cum filia
sua, vel cum aliqua alia qualibet muliere, potest dare in maritagium -- etc.
not barely cum qualibet muliere.

Page 2. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Here he says, I tell him that I have proved Geva to be a Bastard out of an
Historian Contemporary; by which Ordericus Vitalis is meant, and yet Ordericus
says no such thing.

My Reply.
It Is true, I said so, and have proved it too: See my Answer to his Defense of
Amicia, page 34, 35. for though he has not these very words [Geva is a
Bastard], yet by sure Consequence it follows out of the words of Ordericus,
that she was a Bastard, which is all to one effect; and here is another trip of
a fallacy in Sir Thomas.

Page 2. Of his Answer to my two Books.
1. Here he also says, that I affirm the Common Law is now altered otherwise
than by Act of Parliament, without quoting any Author.

2. And also that I brag of several Precedents where Lands were given in free
Marriage with Bastards; and yet I prove not these necessary words of liberum
maritagium (as the Lord Cook calls them) were used in any of those grants, or
that any of those Persons, with whom such Lands were given, were Bastards.

My Reply.
Here is another Trip of Sir Thomas; for I have quoted the Lord Cook himself in
several Cases for it: See my Answer to his Defense of Amicia, page 23, 24, 25,
26. and yet he is not ashamed to say here, I quoted no Author for it: And I
could yet produce a number of Cases more, wherein the Law is altered without
any Act of Parliament, if it were necessary.

2. To the Second: I produced those ancient precedents to show, that those
words [in liberum maritagium] were not anciently so necessary in grants of free
Marriage, as the Lord Cook would now have them to be; and then Sir Thomas
says, that I have not proved any of those Persons with whom such Lands were
given (in free Marriage) were Bastards: Sit liber judex, as to that of Geva:
See also my former Reply, page 38. where Joan Princess of Wales is clearly
proved to be a Bastard by the Testimony of most of our Historians; but none
saying she was a lawful Daughter, and that she had Lands given her in free
Marriage by King John her Father: See my Advertisement to the Reader, at the
end of my two said Books; also my Addenda, page 3, 4. and my former Reply, page
25.

Page 3. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Here he says, I tell him Lewellyn Prince of North Wales was Divorced from his
Wife Joan, for which I can neither show Author, nor Record:

My Reply.
I do not positively affirm it: the words in my former Reply, page 44. are
these -- if she were Re-married to Audley, anno 14. Hen. 3. then it is a sure
Argument that she was Divorced; and whether she was so Married or no, 14. Hen.
3. let the Record Vouched by Vincent, be the Judge.

Here is another Trip of Sir Thomas; for he says, that I can neither show
Author, nor Record: indeed Vincent does not say she was Divorced; but he says,
she was Re-married to Audley; and so by consequence she must needs be Divorced,
Lewellyn being then alive.

But I have now published an Advertisement to the Reader at the end of my two
said Books, where I have set forth the Copy of that Record; and do find that
Vincent has clearly mistaken the Record; for it proves Robert de Audley did
Marry Joan, Daughter of Richard de Landa, but nothing at all of any Marriage
with Joan Princess of Wales.

Yet nothing hinders, but she might have been Divorced from Lewellyn, being
taken in Adultery with William de Brews; and if Sir Thomas will allow the Note
of Dr. Powel to be Authentical herein, page 315. of his Notes upon the
Welsh-History, Lewellyn had another Wife after Joan, called Eva, Daughter of
Fouk de Breant, but had no Issue by her, as he says; which could not be
without a Divorce, unless we suppose Lewellyn Married after the death of Joan,
for he survived not Joan above two or three years; and then we find him
Diseased with the Palsy, and in a dying condition, anno 1237. See Mat. Paris,
page 437. and therefore probably, if he were so Re-married at all, it was
before that declining state of his: But yet I will not positively affirm that
Joan was Divorced.

Page 3. Of his Answer ibidem.
Here he says, I have a fine way of Answering; for if I be pressed overmuch
with any point of Law, then I will tell you of my own Authority, that the Law
in such Particulars is clearly altered, though I cannot tell how, nor at what
time.

2. If it be a Record that puts me too hard to it, then I conceive the Roll
from whence the Deed is written, is mistaken in such and such words, and
miswrit therein from the Original.

3. If out of any History you tell me any thing which I cannot Answer, then I
will not suffer the words to be read as they ought to be Printed; but I will
fancy such expressions as will best suit with my turn, and also disparage the
same History, although in those matters I had formerly said I did chiefly
follow the same.

My Reply.
These are all nothing but Cavils; and whence these proceed, every man may
judge.

1. Where do I say the Law is altered on my own Authority, and do not prove it
by other Authority? it is his mistake, and though I cannot tell when precisely,
nor perhaps others neither, yet it is plain such particulars are altered, and
such alterations are not made in a day, nor all at a time; for they must have a
long time of common practice through the Nation, before it become a common Law;
and at last becomes a Law by general consent and practice by degrees.

2. I never say the Roll is mistaken, but where it is mistaken; and I remember
not that I say any Roll or Record at all is mistaken, save either that of
(Donarium) which I conceived was mis-writ for (Dotarium); and it is ill chid of
Sir Thomas (as we say Proverbially) when he himself conceives (Donarium) to be
there mis-writ for (Dovarium) page 13. or else that of Bacon's Deed: See my
Reasons in my Addenda, page 23. for rectification of which, I was promised a
sight of the Original, but I could not obtain it.

3. The third is also a great mistake: for first, I have not seen any thing out
of any History alleged, but what I have fully answered, as to the point in
difference; nor do I hinder any words to be read as they ought to be Printed;
but when there be plain errors in the Printing, and so proved to be errors by
comparing sundry other good Authors to the contrary, as (Hugh) Earl of Chester,
for (Randle) Earl of Chester, in the Welsh History, sub anno 1142. why may not
I observe the error which Sir Thomas would boulster up by an erroneous
Amendment, to ground several other gross errors and mistakes thereupon? It is
most certainly a gross mistake either in the Printer or the Copy; and not
mistaken for ( Hugh, Son to the Earl of Chester), but for ( Randle Earl of
Chester):

And then to say I disparage the Welsh History, or Dr. Powel, is another
mis-judging of me: all I said was this, -- The Welsh History is not exactly
composed throughout, nor proved by good Authority; and as I believe it true in
many things, so it has some gross mistakes; and so are some of Dr. Powels
Notes thereon full of errors, especially in his absurd Pedigree of the Earls of
Chester, and in several other things: See my former Reply, pa. 94. And I
believe every knowing man (who has perused the same) will say as much: indeed
there are few general Histories but may have some mistakes, and without
disparagement too to the Author.

Certainly, here are three or four extraordinary Trips of Sir Thomas. Now there
is nothing material here, further to be taken notice of, till we come to his
nineth page.

Page 9. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Here Sir Thomas says that I mis-recite his Argument; and that I say, that the
Lord Cook says those words [in liberum maritagium] are such words of art, and
so necessarily required, as they cannot be (understood) by words equipollent:
so hard it is to get Sir Peter either to repeat or understand aright.

My Reply.
Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus: He says, it is a hard matter to
get me repeat aright; but for the repeating of those very words of the Lord
Cook; see Sir Thomas Manwarings Law-Cases mistaken, page 3. page 10. and page
14. in all which places I have repeated them aright: So it is no hard matter to
get me repeat aright; but here indeed the word (understood) is mis-writ for
(expressed) page 4. of my former Reply; which shows it self to be a mistake in
the writing; and the very sense here, would guide a man of reason into a
rectification; but Sir Thomas will play at small game before he sit out.

And then he says, I understand not aright: why so? Because I do not say -- by
words equipollent, or amounting to as much.

Oh profound and material point! as though equipollent, or amounting to as
much, were not the same thing; or that there were more in the words (amounting
to as much) than in the word (Equipollent): let him show me the difference
between them, if he can; save only one is a Lattin word, and the other English:
so that when I had named the one, the other were not needful to be named.

Page 10. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Here he says, I mistake very much, when I say -- that Lands given in
maritagium; Habendum libere and quiet ab omni servitio versus Capitalem
Dominum, de me and haeredibus meis, -- etc. was a good grant in free Marriage,
by the words of Glanvil in those Ages, and as good as in liberum maritagium):
Why so? because Glanvil does not there, or any where else, say that Lands may
be given in free Marriage by those, or any other equipollent words, without
using the words [in liberum maritagium]: and unless he says this, he says
nothing for Sir Peter's purpose.

My Reply.
For this see page 54. of my former Reply, where I have proved it out of
Glanvils words by sure consequence, which Sir Thomas has not yet answered: Sit
Liber Index. Glanvil, lib. 7. cap. 18.

It Is true, those very words here mentioned by Sir Thomas, are not in Glanvil;
but Lands granted in maritagium, free from all Service, etc. (says Glanvil)
was a grant in free Marriage; and by sure consequence employed there out of
Glanvil, to be the words answerable to the words (in liberum maritagium), which
makes clearly for Sir Peter's purpose against Sir Thomas; for such a grant
(says Glanvil) was a grant in free Marriage, without telling us that the words
(in liberum maritagium) must be necessarily used at all: So that Sir Thomas
mistakes himself here very much, and not I.

Page 12, 13. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Here he writes down Saher de Quencyes Deed, out of my Historical Antiquities.

In which Deed (says he, page 13.) if Donarium were there mis-written for
(Doterium), it would not here signify Marriage, but Dower; and he thinks also
that the Transcriber probably did mistake (Donarium) for Dovarium; the n and u
being anciently written alike: but he says also, he got a friend carefully to
examine the same in one of the Couchir-books in the Duchy Office in Gray's Inn,
and the word is there Donarium, without any mistake at all.

My Reply.
It is true, I did intrepret in liberum Donarium in that Deed, as meant of a
Jointure in my Historical Antiquities, page 132. but upon better consideration
I conceived it might be more properly interpreted here, and understood for
free-marriage; in my former Reply, page 7, 8. and in my Book, styled Sir Thomas
Manwarings Law-Cases Mistaken, page 29. for finding Dos sometimes anciently
taken for Marriage, and finding the word (liberum) added here unto it, I did
conjecture it might have been miswritten in my Copy in liberum Donarium, for in
liberum Dotarium: and so all one as to have said in liberum maritagium; and the
rather for that we find very rarely the word in liberum donarium so applied;
nor do we usually say Lands are given in free Jointure, but in free Marriage.

But now it being in the Couchir-book in liberum Donarium without mistake, as
Sir Thomas tells us, he got a Friend to examine it, it must needs be here
interpreted for a free gift: for Saher de Quency Earl of Winchester, grants to
Robert de Quency his Son and Heir four Mannours, ad dandum in liberum Donarium
Hawisiae Sorori Comitis Cestriae, uxori ejusdem Roberti. This was soon after
the Marriage; for she was now the Wife of Robert, and these Lands were given
for a free gift to Hawise his Wife, which is all one as to have said for a free
gift in Marriage to Hawise; and a free gift in Marriage, is all one as a gift
in Free-marriage: add hereunto, that those four Manors, given in liberum
donarium, as aforesaid, accrewed to the Heirs of Hawise, to wit, to John Lacy,
Earl of Lincoln, in right of Margaret his Wife, Daughter and Heir of the said
Robert Quency and Hawise: which by Law ought to descend upon the Heirs of
Hawise, being given in free marriage: Whereunto also Roger de Quency (who
succeeded Earl of Winchester, upon the death of the aforesaid Robert de Quency,
his Elder Brother without Issue Male) released all his Right unto the Heirs of
the said Margaret: See my Historical Antiquities, page 271. whereas had those
Lands been given to Hawise in Dower or Jointure only, she could but have
enjoyed them for her self, and not to her Heirs.

But whether is the more proper interpretation thereof in this place, let
Learned men judge; I will not contend about it. Yet whereas page 15. Sir Thomas
would have the Reader to judge of my Integrity, because I did formerly
interpret the words aforesaid to be understood of a Jointure, and now upon more
serious deliberation conceive the same to be meant for a gift in free-marriage,
or a free gift in marriage, having the word liberum joined with it: I say it is
hard to censure my integrity for it: for that is well known to all the County
where we both do live; I shall make no comparisons, for those are odious, and
savor of arrogance.

Again, Sir Thomas has committed another Trip, page 10. where he expounds
Mr. Glanvils words (when he speaks of gifts in frank-marriage) cum aliqua
muliere, to be meant [with some woman]: which words he misinterpreteth
altogether; for it is there meant [with any Woman] not with some Woman: He has
the same error in his Reply to my Answer, page 40,

Page 16, 17. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Here he says, I tell him how he proves by comparing the Age of Bertred, that
Agatha could not be the Daughter of the Second William de Ferrare; wherein
(says he) I am pitifully mistaken, for he did go about no such thing; but he
did show page 3, 4, 5. that Joane, Wife of Lewellyn could not be the same Joan
which King John had by Agatha.

My Reply.
O pretty Subterfuge! has he any proof at all here, that Joan, Wife of
Lewellyn was not the same Joan which King John had by Agatha; but all his proof
there bottomed on the Age of Bertred, which could not allow Agatha to be the
Daughter of the Second William de Ferrars by Bertred's Daughter; so as to
suppose Agatha to be old enough to have Issue that Joan by King John, and that
Joan to be old enough to be Wife of Lewellyn, Anno. 1204. which is a false
ground taken from Vincent: but Speed says, Agatha was Daughter of Robert de
Ferrars, and I agree Vincent to be mistaken therein: Let me see him prove the
Princess of Wales to be no Daughter of Agatha by King John; what he says here,
is nothing to the purpose: See my former Reply, p. 18.

Page 22. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Here (after a long Oration, nothing at all material) he tells us -- would any
man think Sir Peter himself within a very few lines would be guilty of the like
offense, which I unjustly charged him withal? and a little after -- Sir Peter
would distinguish between maritagium, and maritagium Servitio obnoxium; and say
maritagium is twofold, but does not give the members of his distinction aright.

My Reply.
Here are two great Trips more of Sir Thomas, for I did neither charge him
unjustly with that distinction, which any man may read in his book, nor am I
guilty of the like offense, as he says I am: Show me, if he can, where I go
about any such a distinction as he here mentions, or say marriage is
twofold, and then give the members of my distinction so absurdly as he there
has done; I wonder he is so disingenious either to deny the one or affirm the
other: See his Answer to my Addenda, page 7. and my former Reply thereunto,
page 20, 21. I appeal to all Readers; and yet in the 19th. page of this Answer
to my two books, he tells us, it is the want of my understanding which causes
me to blame him for what he there so says, and then runs on in a long harangue
to no purpose, telling us that maritagium Servitio obnoxium is the Elder
Brother -- etc.

Page 24. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Here he says, that I indeed do tell him that those Manors ( Budiford and
Suttehele) were given to the said Lewellyn in libero maritagio: But the Deed
lately belonging to Somerford Oldfield Esquire, does prove no such thing, but
does only prove that the said Lewellyn did mistake himself, and did think that
they were given him in free-marriage, when they were not so given.

My Reply.
Oh fine, a pretty Answer indeed! for though in the Deed it be said -- Sicut
Dominus Johannes Rex ea illi dedit in libero maritagio] yet here (says Sir
Thomas) Lewellyn mistakes himself, and thought it was so given, when it was
not: it is not in the Deed (mihi dedit) but (illi dedit), and by consequence
could not be mistaken by Lewellyn only, if it were mistaken; but by all others
also then present, and especially by the Writer of the said Deed: But whether
was Lewellyn, and the Clerk that made the Deed, and all others then present,
more like to know the truth hereof, then Sir Thomas now living 450. years after
that Deed made: Every man may see the weakness of this Answer. Sure this may
stand for a Trip with a derry-down, but he has so many of them, that I shall
forget to count them all. Ere while page 3. when I am put hard to it, (says
he) then I say the Roll is mis-writ: Very well; but here he denis the very
words of the Deed, and avers against a Record, and yet gives no reason for it
neither.

What follows page 26, 27, 28, 29. are all tedious things according to his
custom, and little or nothing to the point.

But page 26. and in other places elsewhere, when any thing is said by him,
either not true, or not to the point, then it is my ignorance that runs me upon
mistakes, that I cannot fathom what he or the Lawyers do say.

1. He says, page 26. that if a man have Land given in free marriage with a
Wife, he has only Custodiam terrae cum uxore, and therefore cannot dispose of
those Lands to any Person from the right Heir.

2. So page 28, 29. he tell us that the Writ for the Livery of Budiford to
Lewellyn runs in these words, -- quod Johannes Rex ei dedit in maritagium cum
Johanna, etc. and (says he) Livery would be needless in a gift of
free-marriage, and therefore concludes, it must be only in maritagio given, not
in libero maritagio; and so Lewellyn's Deed to John Scot is mistaken; and be it
what it will, it will work nothing in this case.

My Reply.
1. To the first: For what he says, that according to the ancient Lawyers in
those elder Ages, that Lands given with a Wife in free-marriage to a man, the
Husband has only the custody of such Lands with his Wife, and therefore cannot
dispose of any of those Lands to any person from the right Heir by such a Wife.

Yet we see here, that Lewellyn did grant away de facto to John the Scot,
Budiford in free-marriage with Helen his Daughter, about 1222. which Lands King
John gave unto him in free-marriage, with Joan his Daughter, Mother of the said
Helen, by what right we cannot now tell, whether by the consent of the right
Heir by Joan, or other compensation elsewhere given; but certainly it was so
given, and Helen was right Heir to her Mother Joan, after the death of David
her Brother, without Issue.

2. To the second: As to the Writ of Livery concerning Budiford, running only
in maritagium, it hinders nothing but that the grant to Lewellyn of Budiford
might be in libero maritagio; as we see that of the Castle of Ellesmere,
granted also to Lewellyn by King John, with his said Daughter Joan in libero
maritagio, by express words: See the Deed at large in my Advertisement to the
Reader, at the end of my Book, styled Sir Thomas Manwarings Law-Cases Mistaken;
and yet the Livery of Ellesmere says only -- quod dedimus dilecto filio nostro
Lewelino in maritagio filiae nostrae: See Sir Thomas Manwarings Answer to my
Addenda, page 6. Now maritagio does as well include free marriage, as not
free-marriage, according as the Deed runs.

Page 30. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Here he says, he thinks he can make good what he said of my Partiality (which
yet he will not speak publicly) and that I will not be excused by that
contradiction of mine; to wit, That admit I were never so much partial in what
he charge me with (yet I hope what I have written, he finds it impartial to
all, so far as I go or know) would this cure his uncivil expressions toward me
in another thing? but he leaves out these last words of mine.

My Reply.
Let him find out a contradiction here if he can; but all his shifts and cavils
cannot prevail to cover the truth concerning Amicia, and which with all his art
he cannot solidly refute. So having done with this Trip, I proceed to the rest.

Page 32, 33. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Now he would fain justify a former error of his, and shows me a Deed out of
my own Book, page 143. (from which Book he fetches many things, but nothing
will help his cause) In which Deed, Randal, Duke of Britain, and Earl of
Chester granted to Andrew, Son of Mabil, and to his Heirs, sundry liberties,
etc. among which, it is there said -- nec de querela aliquia in civitate
Cestriae, vel extra, respondeant in praesentia mea, vel summi, Justitiae mei: *
upon which he puts in the Margent a special mark thus (* Note): and after he
says, Now let any Person judge whether there was not a chief Justice of
Chester in those Elder Ages.

But before page 32. he tells us most learnedly, that the word Justitia here,
is of the Masculine Gender, and gives us a rule out of the Grammar for it --

Mascula nomina in a dicuntur multa Virorum, and was sometimes in those Elder
Ages used for the Judge or Justice of Chester, which he believes I cannot deny.

My Reply.
No indeed, I cannot deny it; but why used for the Judge or Justice of Chester,
more than other Judges in those Ages? Surely it was Anciently used for any of
our Judges: Glanvil mentioning the form of Original Writs, has it thus -- quod
sit coram me vel Justitiis meis: So also Hoveden, and other of our ancient
Historians used Capitalis Justitia Angliae for the chief Justice of England:
But Bracton compiling a Book of the body of our Law in Latin, under King Henry
the third, he changed the word (Justitiis) into (Justiciariis); and sets
down the writs accordingly -- coram Justiciariis nostris: Since which time, in
all Writs and Commissions upon Record, they have been styled Justitiarij:
Lamberds Eirenarcha, lib. 1. cap. 1.

And then for his profound Observation, that Justitia is here of the Masculine
Gender, according to the Rule --

Mascula nomina in (a) dicuntur multa virorum. Yet he has left out three or
four of the next words following, which might fitly have been added to that
book of his -- Ut scriba, assecla, scurra, and rabula. But now for the words of
the Deed: It is certain, that here Earl Randle calls the Judge of Chester -- my
chef Justice; and the words of the Deed beforementioned, I conceive runs thus
in English -- That the said Andrew and his Heirs should not Answer concerning
any Suit (or Complaint) entered in the City of Chester, or without, either in
my presence, or in the presence of my chief Justice.

And it is a rare precedent (without a Parallel, I believe in this kind) that
the Earl here calls him -- my chief Justice; undoubtedly for some reason here
intended, and but accidentally neither; possibly in distinction from the Judges
of his inferior Courts: for certainly they were never called chief Justices of
Chester in those Ages by common appellation, as at this day they be called;
neither then were there more Judges of Chester than one at a time, nor does
this example prove it otherwise, nor is the Judge here styled -- Chief Justice
of Chester; only the Earl here calls him -- my Chief Justice, speaking as it
were in his own person; nor will this at all excuse the error and vain glory
of Sir Thomas, speaking so of Rafe Manwaring, and calling him as at this day we
call the Senior Judge of Chester; it was a Trip, it overslipt him; but he will
seldom acknowledge any error.

Again, This Deed was made between the year 1188. and 1200. for all that while
Randle, Earl of Chester assumed the Title of Duke of Little-Brittain in France,
which Title we see he had given to him in this Deed: But it cannot be firmly
collected that Ralf Manwaring was Judge of Chester at that very time when this
Deed was made; for he is there subscribed by the name of Ralf Manwaring only,
not styled Radulfo Manwaring Justiciario Cestriae there, as he is in many other
Deeds, and as he and all others were usually styled, while they were Judges;
and what Sir Thomas would stretch to have it so out of my Historical
Antiquities, it will not certainly follow out of my Notes, that Ralf Manwaring
was Judge of Chester all that time, from 1188. till Philip Orreby was Judge
there; nor especially all the time, while Randle was Duke of Britain; and
therefore Sir Thomas cannot certainly conclude (as he does, page 34.) that Rafe
Manwaring was Judge at that very time, when that Deed was made.

Page 35. to page 41. are things not worthy my taking notice of, nor pertinent
to the main point, and have all formerly in my other books been Answered by me
over and over again, and therefore I shall here pass them by; although, if I
would cavil (as Sir Thomas does) at every pidling thing, I could find many
errors therein.

Page 43. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Here he says, he is very confident Sir Peter cannot prove, that persons who
were under age, did then use to join with their Mothers, and to give away their
Lands of Inheritance.

2. And then after a long harangue, and writing down of Mr. Selden's words,
which I had before cited, he says page 45. (which is all the Answer he gives
to my Precedent that is material) that Earl Richard confirmed the Hyde of Land
which Droco de Andeleia had given to Abbington-Church; and a little after,
adds -- what is this to the Case of Hugh Cyvelios, who did pass away
Stivinghale to the Bishop of Chester, and his Successors for ever?

My Reply.
I say it is the very self-same Case, one as the other: for Earl Richard, and
Earl Hugh do both join with their respective Mothers, both under Age; but now
forsooth the difference he would put is this, that the one confirms another
man's grant, the other grants away certain Lands for ever I would fain know if
a grant of Lands for ever by one under Age, and joining with his Mother, be
invalid; why a confirmation of Lands, by one under age also, and joining with
his Mother, would not be invalid likewise; but this confirmation of Lands for
ever held firm, and the Lands continued to the Church of Abbington accordingly.

So we see how he doubts not but what is there said, will give all men
satisfaction, without rendering any Reason at all of the difference in those two
Cases.

And I am very confident Earl Hugh could not be twelve years old when he joined
with his Mother in the Grant of Stivinghale; and if the grant were made about
the year 1156. to wit, about two or three years after his Fathers death, I
rather think that Earl Hugh was not above eight years old when he joined in
that Grant.

But certainly Sir Thomas is far wide when he says, page 45. that Earl Hugh
was old enough to take Melyeneth-Castle, anno. 1142. or that he was 23. years
old, Anno. 1153. in which year his Father dyed: most absurd, and without any
ground at all.

But since I writ this second Reply, I have received a sure Record that proves
Earl Hugh could not be above three or four years old at the death of his
Father, Anno 1153. and will lay asleep for ever all those false suppositions of
Earl Hugh's Age; whereof see more in my Peroratio ad Lectorem, at the end of
this my second Reply.

Page 46. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Here he tells the Reader, that I gave him a Pedigree of the Barons de Monte
alto: In which I make the first Robert de Monte alto (who I said lived in King
Stephen's time) to have Issue, two Sons, Rafe and Robert, who were afterward
successively Stewards of Cheshire; all which (says he) is certainly true: [I
could wish he would as ingeniously confess all other truths alleged by me];
and then he writes out a Deed of Hugh Cyvelioc, Earl of Chester, out of my
Historical Antiquities; whereunto Robertus Dapifer de Monte-alto was a Witness.

1. And then page 48. he says, this must needs be the first Robert de
Monte-alto: and if this Deed of Earl Hugh was made immediately before the death
of this Robert, then Earl Hugh was a great deal elder than his Wife Bertred:
(why so?) For (says he) though the said Robert did live something longer than
Sir Peter does take notice of, yet he thinks it cannot be proved that he was
living any considerable time after Eustace (who was Witness to the Grant of
Stivinghale): and he knows no reason why we should conclude Eustace was slain
immediately after he was a Witness to the other Deed, or that this Robert dyed
presently after he was a Witness to this Deed.

2. He says, page 49. that he thinks it will appear that this Deed was made in
King Stephen's time; for had it been made when Henry the Second was King, it
would not have been here said -- sicut fuit tempore Henrici Regis; but sicut
fuit tempore Henrici Primi; or else here would have been some other words used,
to distinguish King Henry the first from the then King.

Page 49. Now King Stephen dying, 1154. and Bertred not born till 1157. it will
from this Deed be clear, that if the said Hugh had sealed the other Deed
immediately before King Stephen dyed, yet Earl Hugh would be at the least 24.
years older than Bertred his Wife.

My Reply.
Is not here a long Prose of his running all upon ifs and ands, without the
least ground of truth?

1. To the first: I do remember that I have seen some proof that the first
Robert de Monte-alto (as he calls him) was living 17. Stephani* what then? why
should we conclude (says he) that Eustace was slain immediately after he was a
Witness to the one Deed, or that Robert dyed presently after he was a Witness
to this other Deed?

Is not here pitiful weak reasons to bottom on? we find Eustace slain Anno.
1157. So Stow, and other Historians: as to Robert de Montealto aforesaid, I
conceive he survived Hugh Cyvelioc: I have not yet seen any thing to induce me
to think he dyed before Earl Hugh; and this Deed of Earl Hugh to the Nuns of
Bolinton, I believe was made far in the Reign of King Henry the Second, nor can
he give any reason at all to the contrary, and we find not Rafe de Monte-alto a
Witness, till Randle Blundevil's time, and that must be either in King Richard
the First's Reign, or toward the very end of Henry the Second at soonest.

2. To the second: Let him prove this Deed to be made in King Stephen's time,
and I will burn my book: as to his reason of distinguishing of one King Henry
from another, how many times do we find mention of the Henrys in old Charters,
without distinguishing at all? Sometimes they are distinguished, and sometimes
not; but not adding the word of Henrici Regis nunc, shows clearly it is meant
of Hen. 1.

3. To the third: As he proves nothing from the Deed, nor when it was made, so
his ifs signify nothing; for Earl Hugh was certainly a Child under age, when
he joined with his Mother in the Deed of Stivinghale.

And his ifs are very pretty, if Earl Hugh made this Deed to the Nuns of
Bolinton, immediately before the death of Robert de Montealto aforesaid; and
then you must take his other (if) too -- if this Deed was made in King
Stephen's time, and then you must take his third (if) too -- if Robert de
Monte-alto dyed soon after King Stephen: what then? why then Earl Hugh must be
a great deal older, at least 24. years older than Bertred his Wife.

But if these (ifs) be all false suppositions, and if Earl Hugh did make this
Deed toward the middle of the Reign of Henry the Second, and if Robert de
monte-alto outlived Earl Hugh, (all which are more reasonable to imagine than
the other ifs): what then? We may then conclude Earl Hugh was not near so much
older than Bertred his Wife, as Sir Thomas would suppose him: See what stuff he
here produces to prove nothing.

Page 49. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Here he says, that whereas I pretend to have showed that Earl Hugh could
neither be so old as he would suppose him, nor yet that the said Earl was born
in the year of Christ, 1142. Sir Thomas Answers, that any man who can but
count 20. to wit, how long it is from 1109. to 1129. or from 1110. to 1130. if
he looks on his Defense of Amicia, page 51. and on his Reply, page 61. may find
that Hugh Cyvelioc might be older than he says.

My Reply.
But whosoever views his Computation in those places, will find the same very
wild: every supposition upon the utmost possibility; and as here, so there, he
goes all upon (ifs), which cannot incline any judicious man to a belief; and
here he concludes too, but upon a bare possibility, That Earl Hugh might be
older than he now says; that is, at least 24. years older than Bertred his
Wife, which is certainly a great deceit of the Reader, to incline a belief that
a thing is so, because it is possible to be so: Does he any where prove
substantially that Earl Hugh was so much older than his Wife, more than what
may be very ordinary with other men in the like Case, or reasonably to suppose
he had a former Wife? Show me that if he can: I am sure it cannot be proved;
see my Answer to his defense of Amicia, page 48, 49. It appears clearly by the
Record in the Exchequor at Westminster, that Earl Hugh was but six years older
than Bertrey, or thereabout, which dasheth out all his Ifs for ever: See more
hereof in my Peroratio ad Lectorem, at the end of this my second Reply.

Page 50. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Here he knocks me dead, and thinks now he proves Amicia no Bastard for
certain, -- for he doubts I am no good Arithmetician, because in my Historical
Antiquities, page 137. I said I was eight years older than my Wife, and he has
taken great pains to search out the difference of our Ages, and finds I am not
much above six years older than my Wife.

My Reply.
It is true, I there said so, speaking cursorily and over-hastily without due
examination; for I then conceived she had been born in the eighth year of my
Age; but it appears now she was born in the seventh year of my Age; so that I
am by exact account only six years and two month, and about two weeks older
than my Wife.

But what is all this to Amicia? The Reader may see how he makes it his
business to catch and carp at every thing material or not material.

Page 51, to page 60. Of his Answer to my two Books.
In all this, there is little or nothing material to the main point; but he
spends much time in comparing sundry ancient Authors, to show that Matthew
Paris is misprinted in the place urged by me (to wit, in the Edition put out by
Doctor Wats, 1640. page 79.) where he says (William) Mandeveyle was taken
Prisoner at Saint Albons, sub anno. 1142. for (Geffrey) Mandeveyle.

My Reply.
I will never excuse an error, nor deny a truth: I would I could say as much
of Sir Thomas: indeed it is much that this very word should be mis-printed
above other words in Matthew Paris: I believe neither Sir Thomas, nor any other
scarcely, upon such an accidental business could have suspected it to be so,
having lighted upon the place by chance, else I should have made a stricter
enquiry; but it had reason to put him upon an enquiry.

Yet where he says, page 59. that I dealt deceitfully herein, and that I did
it purposely: This is another Trip of Sir Thomas; for had I then known it to be
mis-printed, I would never have urged it, at least without a Note upon it.

However the mis-printing of (Hugh) Earl of Chester for (Randle) in the Welsh
History, page 197. holds firm for ever: and Sir Thomas confesses it
mis-printed in this his Answer, page 52. very probably in the latter Copies,
the letter (R) standing for a word in the Original book, might be mis-written
() in the Copy; which was supposed to be Hugh, or else for certain the Original
was mistaken.

But for all this, Sir Thomas is so far from an ingenious Confession herein,
that he will justify his absurd error of computing Earl Hugh to be 41. years
old when he married Bertred; and this he grounds upon the Errata at the end of
Doctor Powels Notes on the Welsh-History aforesaid, where it is said, we must
read -- page 197. line 16. Hugh Son to the Earl of Chester.

Which amendment is certainly as far from the truth, as that already Printed,
and it is very questionable whether the said Earl Hugh ever lived to be 40.
years old, for he dyed Anno Domini, 1181. and suppose we, that he was eight
years old when his Father dyed Scilicet, 1153. (which I believe is as much as
by reasonable account any indifferent person can well judge him so to be) yet
would Earl Hugh be but 36. years old when he dyed, Anno scilicet 1181. and if
he were twelve years old at the death of his Father (which I am confident can
never be proved by good Authority) yet would Earl Hugh be but 40. years old
when he dyed: See what a shift Sir Thomas would now make, but to suppose Earl
Hugh to have a former Wife, which certainly he never had; but it appears now by
a Record, that he dyed about the Age of 32.

Again, Sir Thomas says, page 51. that I go about to disparage Doctor Powel
all I can, and that I will not suffer the Wesh History to be read, as it should
have been Printed; as also page 52. that I will now disparage the said History,
although in my Historical Antiquities touching the Kings of Wales, I did
chiefly follow the same:

This is another unkind reflection: Sit liber Judex, See page ioii. supra.
page 94. of my former Reply; my words are these -- As I believe it [that is
the Welsh-History] to be true in many things, so it has also some gross
mistakes; nor is it at all proved by good Authority, or exactly composed
through out; nor shall you therein from the beginning find all the Wives,
Children, and Bastards of the Ancient Kings and Princes of Wales clearly
Recorded; and so are Doctor Powels Notes thereon full of Errors, and especially
in his absurd Pedigree of the Earls of Chester, and in several other things.

Here is nothing but what every knowing man (who does seriously peruse the
same) will acknowledge to be true; and some mistakes may be, and are in the
writings of very Learned men, and yet no great disparagement neither: and I do
confess also, that I followed the Welsh-History in the Princes of Wales, for I
had no better, nor other to follow.

Page 60. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Having now concluded his Answer to my former Book, he tells us that in my
Latin Epistle to the Judges (which he supposes to be mine, though I vouchsafe
not to set mine name thereto) I said he was the first Instigator of this
Controversy; but whether that be so or ^o, he refers the Reader to his Epistle
before his Defense of Amicia, and to the second and third pages of his Reply.

My Reply.
But what Sir Thomas says there, was not the first time of this Controversy
between us: For he says in that Epistle, that if I would have delivered what I
did conceit about Amicia, as an uncertainty only, then I knew he would have
rested satisfied with the judgment of those many knowing persons, who dissented
from me in opinion therein.

But this was a little before my Historical Antiquities were Printed; nay he
came to Tabley About 1672.
also, purposely to desire me (hearing then that my Book was about to be
Printed) that I would put Amicia under the Title of the doubtful Issue of Earl
Hugh; when I told him that I thought it not sit to put down in my book any such
third title of doubtful Issue, for she must certainly be either lawful or
unlawful, which method I had observed in the rest. I told him also that it was
not at all doubtful unto me, for in my judgment she was certainly a Bastard:
And then he said, if I did place her under the unlawful Issue of Earl Hugh, he
would write against it, which afterward he did and I believe it had been as
good to have let it alone.

But before this, 1664 Also 1672.
we had long intercourse (some years before) by Papers between us upon this
Controversy, which Papers I have yet by me; and which (when my book was in
Printing) he desired I would not print any of them without his consent, and I
promised I would not, and I kept my word with him; and had it not been for
those passages betwixt us, I had not said near so much of it in my book as I
did, and so much for this. See my Answer to the Defense of Amicia, page 3.

Page 60. Of his Answer to my two Books.
He tells us also in the same page, that I do not put the question of Law
aright; but the point must be otherways proved then by such a frivolous
question as mine is.

My Reply.
I am sure I know not how to put it clearer to the point; videlicet, whether
Lands in those Ages might not by the ancient Law be given in free-marriage with
Bastards? for Sir Thomas says, the Deed of Services in frank-marriage with
Amice, proves she was no Bastard, because (says he) the Law will not allow
such a grant with a Bastard: I say, though at this day the Law will not allow
it, yet it would then allow such a grant in the Age when Amicia lived, as the
Law as then taken: must not now the question be -- whether the Law in those
Ages would so allow it, or no?

And yet it is no sure Argument to prove Amice no Bastard, though the Law
should not then allow such a grant; as to argue thus -- Amice had Lands given
with her in libero maritagio, ergo, Amice was no Bastard, for many irregular
Deeds may sometimes pass, which in strictness of Law might not prove
authentical: But I conceive the Law in those elder Ages would and did allow
such grants; and we plainly see he waves the question, and will not abide the
test; and it may suppose too, that the Opinions of some Lawyers (which he brags
on in his books) were procured by putting off a wrong Case.

I will also agree with him to put the other Case to the Judges, as he would
have it put; videlicet, whether the Law be not now altered in this and sundry
other particulars, from what it was in elder Ages, and that without any Act of
Parliament? for otherwise Lands would now pass with Bastards legally in libero
maritagio.

Page 61. Of his Answer to my two Books.
Here the says, that if I had been so conversant in Divinity, as I would have
the Judges to believe, it seems strange to Sir Thomas that I had not learned by
duty better to my deceased Grandmother; for we are bound to Honor all our
Parents, mediate or immediate, living or dead; and so compares my writings of
these books to the wicked act of Cham in the Scripture, who divulged the shame
of his Parent.

My Reply.
In the first place, let me observe to the Reader, that this is he who often
blames me for misrepeating, and yet runs into the same error himself, and
tells us here, that I would have the Judges to believe that I am much
conversant in Divinity; let him show me where I say so, if he can, or that I
make, or say, that I am conversant in Divinity; my words are -- I prefer
Divinity above all other Studies; this is far from saying, I am conversant in
Divinity.

In the next place, this act of mine cannot by any rational man be said to be
like that of Cham, for he revera, saw his Fathers Nakedness, and did not cover
it, but told his Brethren without: now I could not see my said Grand-mother's
nakedness in that sense, who dyed above 450. years ago; nor will any man say,
but himself, that I have uttered any scornful or disgraceful words at all
against her.

Expositors on the Fifth Commandment, tell us, it includes in it the honoring
of Kings and all in Authority over us, as well as our natural Parents, to whom
we owe honor and reverence in like manner.

And tell me, were ever any of those worthy Persons or Historians, who have
commemorated the Wises and Concubines, Children and Bastards of our Kings of
England in their Histories, ever termed Chams for the same? Nay, does not
Moses himself, in his History of Genesis, chap. 38. Record the Whoredom of
Judah (who was great Uncle to the Father of Moses) with Thamar, his Daughter in
Law, and also her Bastard-Twinns, Phares and Zarah? Nay, are not these Twinns
reckoned up in the sacred Genealogy, Matthew, Chap. 1.

How many great and most honorable Families have been descended from Bastards,
Kings, Dukes, Earls, and others?

I have heard that King James used to say, it was a good Family that had
neither Whore nor Thief a Kin to it: I am sure it is a rare Family that never
had any Bastard.

But Sir Thomas says, that in some respects I have exceeeded that Pattern of
Cham, page 62.
though I have done nothing at all like that Act of Cham; I am sure he is
Kim-Kam from the point, but he forgets his own duty, as to revilings, 1 Cor.
6.10. and follows not the Pattern of Michael the Arch angel, who durst not
take up a railing accusation against the vvorst of Antagonists, Jude verse. 9.
and so much for the Case of Divinity, which he mistakes as well as his Law.
It is as Lawful for any Historian to Record the Bastards, as Lawful Children:
It is an error not to do it.

Page 62. Of his Answer to my two Books.
1. Here he says, that in the second book which I direct to all the Judges of
England, it so falls out that there is nothing therein, but what is in my
former books, and is already Answered; though if there had, he should not have
presumed to have given any Answer thereto, because those learned Persons know
well enough what the Law was and is, in all particulars.

2. How-ever he cannot but observe how slightly I speak of the Lord Cook in my
48. page.

3. And also, how I have such light expressions in my book directed to the
Judges, as he believes were never used before by any Person of discretion to
such Reverend and Learned men; no wonder therefore if I speak coursely of him,
and tell him of so many impertinencies.

My Reply.
1. To the first, I believe there is something in that Second book, which is
not in my former books, nor yet answered by him; and though the Learned Judges
know what the Law was and is, better than either of us; yet we may with modesty
offer what we conceive is right to their more grave judgments; but it is a good
excuse.

2. To the second, I do not speak slightly of the Lord Cook in my 48. page, nor
any where else; my words there are these, -- As for the Lord Cooks citing of
Bracton or Glanvil, in the Margent, as Authority, for what he there says, if
he makes a false quotation, or such, as is not to the point, neither I nor any
man (...) else are bound to believe the Lord Cook more than any other.

So let the Reader judge whether this be not another Trip.

3. To the third: I conceive I I have no such light expressions that might not
be used to our light Controversy, or before Learned Judges, nor yet such as
were never before used by any person of discretion, as he alleges: he might
have done well to have showed what those expressions were; but perhaps, if they
had been used by such a discreet Person as himself, then they would not have
been accounted light expressions, but rather plain to the Point, not rude at
all.

Page 63. Of his Answer to my two Books.
He says here in the very Conclusion of his book -- whether he be guilty of
those [Impertinencies] or untruths, or of that opprobrious Language which I do
charge him with, let the indifferent Reader be judge; and whereas it appears
that I am resolved to have the last word, though I have nothing new to say; and
that my writing again be contrary both to my duty to my Deceased Grandmother,
and to my promise in Print: He declares that if what I shall write hereafter be
no more to the purpose than what I have said in those two last books, that he
will not appear in Print against me any more.

My Reply.
To all which I say, that I do not know that I have any where at all charged
him either with Impertinencies or Untruths, but what are so charged justly by
me, that I can suddenly call to remembrance.

And for opprobrious Language (wherein this last Answer of his far exceeds.) I
have only this to add for my self, that in my Answer to his Defense of Amicia,
I think no man can show me any one uncivil expression in the whole book; but
afterward, when he had in his following books taxed me unjustly in many
things, and carped at every thing in mine, Pertinent or Impertinent, I confess
I was more severe in my expressions in my latter books, but he led the way;
what I have said, was but in vindication of my self, for my Reputation is as
dear to me as his can be to him; and though my expressions sometimes may seem
tart, yet not so opprobrious neither as he makes them; had he kept close to the
point, and avoided his Calumnies and Cavils, and confessed his Errors more
ingeniously throughout, I should neither have had occasion to retort, nor have
Answered to them.

And what I have written above my first intention, he has forced me thereunto.

But now he will appear no more in Print against me, if what I shall write
hereafter be no more to the purpose than what I have said in those two last
books.

Whereunto I say, that for certain there is so much already said to the purpose
in them, as is not yet solidly and substantially answered by him; and herein I
submit my self to all Ingenious Readers.

Mobberley, May 28, 1675.
PERORATIO AD LECTOREM.
SInce I writ this Second Reply, I am credibly informed that Sir Thomas did
write to some of his Friends about May or June, Anno Domini, 1675. to this or
the like effect. --

I hope now the Contest between Sir Peter and me will be at end; for Mr.
Dugdale, in his Baronage of England, page 41. has delivered his Opinion on my
side: and Sir Peter having appealed to the Judges, Mr. Dugdale thereupon did
move them in the Case; and they upon mature debate determined that Amicia was
no Bastard. I have seen his last Sheet, which I have Answered, but shall not
yet Print it.

1. This Letter was showed up and down Chester, purposely to delude the easy
multitude; for since he cannot demonstrate or support the legitimacy of Amitia,
either by good Reason or Authority, Sir. Thomas used this secret practice to
gain a belief of his Cause, as supported by Opinions; whereas in truth there is
no such thing as a mature debate by our Reverend Judges in the Case of Amicia;
for as yet the Case in Law is not agreed upon by both sides, how then can there
be a mature debate, or determination of the Controversy? for Sir Thomas faith
in his Answer to my two books, page 61. that the point must be otherwise proved
than by such a frivolous question as mine is; and a little before page 60. he
says that in the Epistle Dedicatory, wherein I appeal to the Judges, I do not
put the question aright; whereas there can be no other point of Law to be
resolved as to the Controversy in hand, but this, -- Whether Lands in those
elder Ages might, and did Lawfully pass with Bastards in libero maritagio, or
no? That they might, and did so pass, I have before in my other Books clearly
proved as well by the very words of Glanvil himself, and the Law then no where
disallowing the same; as also by three sure Precedents of those Ages.

But because Sir Thomas takes this upon trust from Mr. Dugdale, I shall here in
public unmask that Letter more fully, to the undeceiving of all men.

2. As to the Opinion of Mr. Dugdale, it is true, he has delivered his opinion
for the Legitimacy of Amicia, in his Book of the Baronage of England, newly
Published, Tom. 1. page 41. And it is no more than what Sir Thomas formerly
told us in his books, That he was of that judgment before he published his said
book of the Baronage: What then? many very wife and knowing men have declared
their Opinions with me, that she was a Bastard; both Divines and Lawyers, and
other grave and understanding men; but I shall examine these things more
particularly.

3. And in the first place, I shall always desire to be understood without the
least detraction from the honor and due praise of Mr. Dugdale, of whom I have
ever had a good esteem, as a most diligent and indefatigable searcher of the
Records and Antiquities of our Nation: Sed Bernardus non videt omnia; nor
should I now have mentioned him at all for his opinion herein, but that Sir
Thomas Manwaring brings him here upon the Stage.

Only we may by the way take notice, that some years ago Mr. Dugdale did draw
up Sir Thomas Manwaring's Pedigree; wherein he puts Amicia, the Wife of Rafe
Manwaring, without her due distinction (as I conceive) of a Bastard, and is
therefore the more concerned to stickle for Sir Thomas in this Contest between
us: So that formerly he consulted some Lawyers for their Opinions in this Case
of History; for whether Bastard or no Bastard has nothing of Law in the Case,
or whether Hugh Cyvelioc Earl of Chester, had any former or other Wife besides
Bertra? these are questions to be resolved by History, Records, and Reason; but
Mr. Dugdale would now support his opinion with a point of Law, and therefore
moved some Lawyers for their opinions; but how the Case was stated, no body but
himself knows, nor what the point of Law was, wherein they delivered their
opinions: and methinks it argued some doubt within his own breast, that she was
a Bastard; otherwise why should he consult any Lawyers in the case: and in
truth, let the Law be what it will, she was certainly a Bastard, which to my
poor reason, is as plain as the Sun when it shines; but it seems he was
satisfied with the Opinions of those Lawyers, that she was Legitimate, because
(says he) it is a known Maxim in the Law, that nothing can be given in
Frankmarriage to a Bastard: but this Maxim is to be understood with a due
distinction of the times and ages, otherwise it will fail; but I shall anon
speak more of this, and of his moving the Judges in the Case; wherein I should
be glad to see what Case he put, and the resolutions of our Reverend Judges
thereon, under their hands; in the mean time I shall go on with Mr. Dugdale's
Opinion, whereon Sir Thomas so much depends.

4, In his said Book of the Baronage of England, page 34. b. he calls Robert
and Ottiwel, two Illegitimate Sons of Hugh (Surnamed Lupus) Earl of Chester;
wherein he is to be commended for speaking out, for so they were without all
doubt: Howbeit, I find not any Author hitherto, who have Written of our
ancient Earls of Chester, Commemorating either these, or any other at all, as
Bastards, to any of our ancient Earls of Chester; neither Brooks in his
Catalogue of Nobility, nor Vincent in his Gorrections of Brook, nor Milles in
his Catalogue of Honor, nor Fern in his Lacyes-Nobility, nor Powel in his
Notes on the Welsh-History, page 294. nor yet Mr. Dugdale himself, in his
Warwickshire; till here in his late book of the Baronage, he now speaks out a
little more.

5. But yet in the same page, he calls Geva (Daughter of Hugh Lupus, and Wife
of Geffry Ridel) a Legitimate Daughter not to be doubted of, because she had
Drayton-Basset given her in Free-Marriage by her Father, which could not have
been so bestowed on a Bastard, as our Learned Lawyers do clearly affirm; thus
Mr. Dugdale.

Which very Deed of Drayton-Basset to Geva, I have produced in my Historical
Antiquities, page 112. 113. as a sure Precedent that Lands did pass with
Bastards in Free-marriage in those more ancient Ages, as well as with lawful
Daughters; and have fully proved Geva to be a Bastard out of an Historian of
good Credit, and Contemporary with Geva, by sure Consequence out of his words:
See my Answer to the Defense of Amicia, page 33. to page 47. which Reasons and
Authorities are not yet solidly or rationally Answered by any, and which I
shall have occasion further to mention, when I come to the Case of Amicia truly
stated.

And here by the way, we may take notice, that these two Sticklers for Geva,
Sir Thomas Manwaring, and Mr. Dugdale, agree not in their points of Law; for
Sir Thomas will not have these words (in libero Conjugio) used in the Deed of
Drayton, to be good in Law, to make it a gift in Free-marriage, and only to
convey but an Estate for life unto Geva; because the Lord Cook affirms that a
gift in Free-marriage must be strictly tied up to the words (in libero
maritagio) and no other: See more of this in my first Reply to Sir Thomas, page
4. to page 15.

But Mr. Dugdale and his Lawyers take the words (in libero Conjugio) in the
Deed of Drayton, to be a good gift in Free-marriage; and so without doubt it
was, and in those Ages as good as in libero maritagio; and did convey an Estate
of Inheritance to the Heirs of Geva, who enjoyed Drayton accordingly.

So we see Sir Thomas and the Lord Cook are of one Opinion, and Mr. Dugdale and
his Lawyers are of another opinion; both of them against the Bastardy of Geva,
which yet is clearly collected by sure consequence out of Ordericus an
Historian, of very good Credit, and contemporary with Geva, who knew the truth
better than any man now living can possibly know, and needs no point of Law
to prove the same, and cannot be disproved by any point of Law whatsoever.

6. As to Amicia, he has these words in his said Book of the Baronage, page
41. -- That she was Daughter of Earl Hugh --

1. It sufficiently appears, not only from the grant of two Knights Fees with
her in Frank-marriage, to Rafe de Mesnilwarin, where he so terms her, but by
another Deed of Roger de Mesnilwarin, her Son, wherein he calls Randle, Earl of
Chester, his Uncle, who was Son of the said Earl Hugh.

2. As to her Legitimacy, I do not well understand how there can be any
question, it being a known Maxim in Law, that nothing can be given in
Frank-marriage to a Bastard.

3. The point being then thus briefly cleared, I shall not need to raise
further Arguments from Probabilities to back it, then to desire it may be
observed that Bertra (whom I conclude to be a second Wife) was Married unto him
when he was in years, and she her self very young: So that he having been Earl
no less than 28. years, it must necessarily follow that this Bertra was not
born till four years after he came to the Earldome; nor is it any marvel he
should then take such a young Wife, having at that time no Issue-male to
succeed him in this his great Inheritance: thus Mr. Dugdale.

1. To all which I say, first, That it plainly appears she was Daughter of Earl
Hugh; but that she was a Lawful Daughter, that no where appears; nor did the
Earl in the Deed mentioned, grant her two Knights-Fees in Frank-marriage, as is
here alleged; but he granted with her in Frank-marriage, the Service of
Gilbert, Son of Roger; to wit, the Service of three Knights-Fees, by doing to
the Earl and his Heirs, the Service of two Knights-Fees; so that the Earl
released only the Service of one Knights-Fee by this Deed; too mean a Portion
for a Lawful Daughter of the Earl of Chester, especially for the sole Daughter
and Heir by a former Wife, as Mr. Dugdale supposes her to be; so that res ipsa
loquitur, whereas the four lawful Daughters of Earl Hugh, by his Wife Bertred,
Married four of the greatest Earls then in England, and shared all the Lands of
the Earldome of Chester; and sure the Eldest Daughter by a first Wife (if the
Earl had a former Wife) ought to have had as good a Portion of Lands or Money,
as any of his Younger Daughters by a latter Wife, which for certain Amicia
never had, nor claimed.

2. To the second, the Maxim of Law, that nothing can be given in
Frank-marriage to a Bastard, is to be understood of the Law, as it is now taken
in these latter Ages; but that the Law was otherwise taken in the time of
Amicia, and those more ancient Ages, I have proved in my former books, both
from the words of Glanvil, who was Chief Justice of England, and lived in the
very Age with Amicia, as also by three clear Presidents of those former Ages;
and shall have further occasion to mention the same in the Case of Amicia
hereafter following, which I have briefly and truly stated by it self, for the
better apprehension of all men.

3. To the third: Here Mr. Dugdale concludes Bertra to be a second Wife; but
does not, nor cannot in the least prove a former Wife; much less Amicia to be
the Daughter of a former Wife.

And as to his Argument of Probability, I deny absolutely that Earl Hugh
Married Bertra when he was in years; for though he were Earl three or four
years before she was born, yet it follows not that he did Marry her when he was
in years, for he came to be Earl in his Infancy.

But that I may lay this Argument of P^obability (as he calls it) asleep for
ever, take this Record here following, out of the Roll de Dominabus Pueris, and
Puellis, remaining in the Exchequer at Westminster: Which Roll Mr. Dugdale has
there also cited in the Margent, to prove the Age of Bertrey, though not in the
Words which I have here more at large expressed: I say, take here the true
Copy of the Rcord Verbatim, which my Friend has twice examined for me, to
prevent Mistakes: viz.

Scaccarium apud Westminster. In Rotulo de Dominabus Pueris, and Puellis, de
anno 31. Hen. 2. in Custodia Rememoratoris Regis Existente, continetur (inter
alia) ut Sequitur, etc.

Cow. Lincoln.

Balteslaw-Wapentak.

Matilda Comitissa Cestriae est de donatione Domini Regis: et fuit fillia
Roberti Comitis Glocestriae filij Regis Henrici Primi, et est L annorum, and
amplius: Hujus villae Recepit Comitissa his VIII. annis: Ipsa tenet Wadinton in
dote de feodo Comitis Cestriae: et firma est XXII.libr. per annum: dict a villa
valet per annum XL. lib: Cum hoc instauramento, Scilicet, II Carucis, IIII
Vaccis, I Tauro, IIII Suibus, I Verre, Dovibus, quae ibi sunt: -- etc.

Com. Lincoln.

Jeretre-Wapentak.

Bertreia Comitissa, filia Comitis de Evereous, uxor Hugonis Comitis Cestriae,
est de donatione Domini Regis; and est XXIX annorum. Terra quam Comitissa
habet, XL. lib. Maritagium; and defectus sunt ultra mare, ideo nesciunt
Juratores quid valiant. Dominus Rex praecepit, quod ipsa haberet XL libratas
terrae Domini sui in Beltesford, Hemmingly, and Duninton: licet non habuit nisi
XXXV libratas, and X solidatas. Quia (ut dicunt) dicta terra non potest plus
valere cum Instauramento quod comitissa ibi recepit; Scilicet, V Carucis,
CCCXLI Ovibus, X Suibus, I Verre. Sed si in Duninton apponerentur CCoves, and X
sues, and I verris, tunc Valeret.

So that, by this Record it clearly appears, that as Bertrey was twenty nine
years of Age, 31. Hen. 2. 1185; So Maud (the Mother of Hugh Cyvellioc, Earl of
Chester) was aged fifty years, Anno Domini 1185. 31. Hen 2. etc.

And so Maud must be born Anno 1135. and Bertrey must be born Anno 1156.

Now it cannot be imagined, that Maud could have a Child before she was fifteen
years of Age: And then Earl Hugh could not be born till the year 1150. at
soonest. And by Consequence, Earl Hugh was about three years old when he came
to be Earl; and about six years older than his wife Bertrey.

What a monstrous and wild Computation then has Sir Thomas Manwaring made, and
upon utmost Possibilities too, supposed, in his Answer to my Addenda, page 50,
51. where he would have Earl Hugh to be 41. years old when he married his Wife
Bertrey, which Marriage he supposes to be Anno 1171? So also in his Answer to
my two Books, page 49. Whereunto see my First Reply, page 91. to page 94. See
also in my Second Reply, to his Objection in that Point, mentioned here a
little before, Pa: 46, 47.

And how could Earl Hugh now be in years (as Mr. Dugdale would have him) when
he married his Wife, supposing with Sir Thomas, the Marriage to fall Anno
Domini 1171? For, by this Record Earl Hugh would then be but 21 years old, and
his Wife about 15. years old. So this Argument of Probability is become an
Argument of Improbability of the Earl's having any former Wife.

This Record came to my hands after I had written my Second Reply: And I am
very confident, that when soever any Record, tending to this Point, concerning
Earl Hugh, or Amicia, shall hereafter, at any time, be discovered, it will
more and more illustrate the Truth of what I have written about them.

7. Having now laid asleep for ever The Argument of the Sticklers for the
Legitimacy of Amicia, drawn from the Erroneous Computation of Earl Hugh's Age;
I come now to the Letter of Sir Thomas Manwaring, before mentioned, written by
him to a Kinsman both of his and mine, and left with Throp the Stationer in
Chester, purposely to be divulged, and made known to every Man in Town: wherein
he writ. (among other things), That I having appealed to the Judges, Mr.
Dugdale had moved them in the Case: who upon Mature debate, determined, that
Amicia was no Bastard, as I was credibly informed by one who saw the Letter.

But, (as I said before) How could there be any Mature-debate, or Determination
of the Point in Controversy by our Reverend Judges, whiles as yet the Case is
not at all agreed upon between us? For, Sir Thomas waves the Question in Law,
and will not abide the Test; See page 60, 61. of his Answer to my two books.

For whether Amicia was a Bastard, or no? this Question has nothing of any Law
in the case, and therefore unfit to be put to our Reverend Judges for their
Opinions, unless also all the Records and Histories touching the same, together
with the Reasons alleged on both sides, were produced before them: It is more
proper for them to judge only upon the point of Law.

And it is granted on all hands, that Lands cannot pass with Bastards in libero
maritagio, at this day, as the Law is now taken: but in the more ancient Ages,
when the Deed to Amicia was made, Lands might and did usually pass with
Bastards in libero maritagio: I affirm it out of ancient Precedents; Sir Thomas
denies it.

Now all Deeds by the rule of Law, are to be Construed and understood according
to the time when they were made; so that there is now no other Case of Law to
be put, but this, as I put the same in my Epistle Dedicatory, to all our
Reverend and Learned Judges; to wit --

Whether in the Age of Glanvil, Lands lawfully might, and did usually pass with
Bastards in Free-Marriage, or no?

Again, I am assured from very good hands (who have lately enquired of many of
our Judges above) that there was no such thing as a mature debate and
determination, as Sir Thomas mentions in his Letter, nor their Opinions at
all delivered as yet in the Case of Amicia, now in Contest; and some of them
said, that they never had any such a question asked them, as whether in the Age
of Glanvil, Lands might Lawfully pass in Free-marriage with Bastards?

If Mr. Dugdale has moved any of the Judges in private, for their Opinions in
any point of Law about Amicia, had he but given me due notice of such his
intention, I would have met him half way, and so the Case might have been truly
stated, and the point thoroughly debated; for he being on the place, might have
those opportunities which I could not at this distance possibly have, and so
the truth would have appeared to the world.

And therefore, that I may deal above-board, I have here following, published
by it self, The Case of Amicia truly Stated, for the better apprehension and
information of all Persons; and the rather, for that Mr. Dugdale only builds
his Opinion of the Legitimacy of Amicia on the same point of Law, in his
Baronage of England.

And howbeit (as I formerly said) I left every man to his own free judgment,
thinking rather to establish my own Opinion by Authorities and good Reason,
then by other men's Opinions; so I never went about to hunt for Opinions,
especially in the Case of Amicia, (for many did concur with me without my
seeking) till after that Letter of Sir Thomas Manwaring beforementioned: for I
ever counted it an improper thing to prove a point of History by a nice point
of Law.

But I have lately made some enquiry, and am assured from very good hands, that
some of our more eminent Judges above (and I believe all of them, if they would
deliver their Opinions in the Case) do concur with me in the point of Law
aforesaid; and so do also other Eminent and Learned Lawyer here below; that in
those elder Ages, a gift in Free-Marriage, with a Bastard, was good, although
at this day our Law is otherwise taken.

So that now there is not so much as one seeming Argument of Reason left to
uphold the Legitimacy of Amicia.

Besides, one of our most eminent Heralds of our Nation, and King at Arms, is
of Opinion with me also, that Earl Hugh never had any other Wife but Bertrey,
as I have it from a sure hand, who was then present when he publicly spoke it,
whose judgment I may well bottom on; for I am sure there is no History, or
Record to prove any other Wife at all, and very many other judicious and
knowing men do concur in opinion, that Amicia was a Bastard; and so I leave it
to the judgment of all men, who are versed in Antiquities, Records, and
Histories.

And so I have done, if Sir Thomas has doee; and now I think it will be time
for both to have done.

Mobberley, December the 17th. 1675.
FINIS.
THE CASE OF AMICIA Truly Stated.

By Sir Peter Leycester, Baronet.

August the 5th. MDCLXXV.

Qui vult decipi, decipiatur. Printed in the Year, 1676.

THE CASE OF AMICIA Truly Stated.
THe Question concerning Amicia, Wife of Rafe Manwaring, and Daughter of Hugh,
Sir-named Cyvelioc, Earl of Chester, is briefly this --

Whether the said Amicia was a Bastard, or no? This is altogether a question of
History, and nothing of Law at all in the Case.

The Reasons Collected out of History, Records, and Evidences, showing her to
be a Bastard, are these --

1. It is confessed on all hands, that Amicia was no Daughter by Bertrey, the
Wife of Earl Hugh, for then she would have shared the Lands of the Earldom,
with the other Daughters by Bertrey, which for certain she did not, nor ever
claimed any part of the same, as is most manifest by the Record of 18. Hen. 3.
when all the Coheirs did implead John the Scot, then Earl of Chester, upon a
Writ de rationabili part: See my book of Historical Antiquities, page 151. as
also by the testimonies of many of our ancient Historians, who have Recorded
all those Daughters in their books.

And she could be no Daughter by any latter Wife, because Bertrey survived Earl
Hugh, her Husband: See my said book of Antiquities, page 132, and 139, and 143,
and 148.

And she could be no Daughter by any former Wife; because Earl Hugh never had
any other Wife but Bertrey? And the Sticklers for the Legitimacy of Amicia, do
confess that they cannot prove any other Wife at all; much less can they prove
Amicia to be the Daughter of any such Wife: Therefore the Earl having no other
Wife but Bertrey, and Amicia being no Daughter by Bertrey, Amicia, Daughter of
Earl Hugh, must certainly be a Bastard.

2. Earl Hugh had several other Bastards, as is evident by ancient Deeds; and
if the bare alleging that he had another Wife be sufficient without due proof,
then all his other Bastards may be made Legitimate, by saying that they were by
another Wife: And our ancient Historians, as Matthew Paris, Poly-Chronicon,
Knighton, Stow, and others, have Recorded the Lawful Children of Earl Hugh; but
not one of them mentioning Amicia in the least, nor any former Wife at all,
which some one or other of them, without doubt would have taken notice of, had
Amicia been a Legitimate Daughter.

3. Rafe Manwaring, the Husband of Amicia, was not an equal Competitor at that
time, to have Married a Lawful Daughter of the Earl of Chester; for we find the
Lawful Daughters of this Earl Hugh were Married to the greatest Earls then in
England: The Earl of Huntington, who was Brother to the King of Scotland; the
Earl of Arundel; the Earl of Darby; and the Earl of Winchester's Son and Heir;
and therefore it is more than probable, that Amicia was not a Lawful Daughter,
especially since no provision considerable was made for her, who must have been
the only Daughter and Heir of Earl Hugh, by a first Wife, as those of the
contrary opinion would make her; and if so, she ought in all Reason to have had
fully as great an Estate provided for her, as any of his Children by a latter
Wife, which certainly she never had. Wherefore res ipsa loquitur; for nothing
appears to be given unto her, save only the release of the Service of one
Knights Fee, given with her in Frank-Marriage, which sure was too small a
Portion for a Lawful Daughter of the Earl of Chester.

And thus much for the Question of History, whether Bastard, or no Bastard?

Which I submit wholly to the Judgment of all Wife and knowing men, who are
versed in Histories, Records, and Antiquities.

And many very wise and knowing men, some Divines, some Lawyers, and other
grave and understanding Persons, have herein declared that they concur in
Opinion, that Amicia was a Bastard.

But now arises another Question; for those who would have Amicia to be a
Lawful Daughter, and no Bastard (which cannot be supported either by History,
Records, or Reason) they would ground their Opinion from a point of Law; to
wit, that Lands cannot pass in Free-Marriage with a Bastard; and because Amicia
had a grant of some Services in Free-Marriage, from the Earl her Father,
therefore they conclude she was no Bastard: For all other Arguments for her
Legitimacy are so void of Reason and Authority, that all bottoms on this one
Argument; and the Question now is this --

Whether the Deed of Hugh, Earl of Chester, (wherein he granted unto Rafe
Manwaring in Free-Marriage with Amicia his Daughter, the Service of Gilbert,
Son of Roger; to wit, the Service of three Knights-Fees, by doing to the said
Earl and his Heirs the Service of two Knights-Fees,) be a sure Argument to
prove Amicia a Legitimate Daughter?

But for the better stating of the question, it is granted on both sides, that
Lands cannot now pass in Free-Marriage with a Bastard, as the Law is taken at
this day. The proper question of Law therefore in the present Case is this --

Whether by the Law, in Glanvil's time (who was chief Justice of England, under
King Henry the Second, and lived in the very Age with Amicia, when the said
Deed was made) Lands might and did usually pass in those Elder Ages in
Free-marriage, as well with Bastards as no Bastards?

The Arguments for the Affirmative part are these --

1. From the very words of Glanvil himself (who was the first after the
Norman-Conquest, who reduced the Model of our Common Law into writing) in his
Treatise de Legibus Angliae, lib. 7. cap. 1. Quilibet liber homo quandam partem
terrae suae cum filia sua vel cum aliqua alia qualibet muliere, dare potest in
maritagium, sive habuerit haeredem sive non, velit haeres vel non, imo and eo
contradicente: Also lib. 7. cap. 18. Liberum dicitur maritagium, quando aliquis
liber homo aliquam partem terrae suae dat cum aliqua muliere alicui in
maritagium, ita quod ab omni Servitio terra illa sit quieta, and a se and
haeredibus suis, versus capitalem Dominum, acquietanda.

And Bracton expressly, lib. 2. cap. 7. Quoniam terra data Bastado in
maritagium, sicut and aliis, vel Bastardo per se, in se tacitam habet
Conditionem vel expressam de reversione -- etc. See also Sir Thomas Manwaring's
Law-Cases mistaken, page 10, 11.

So that Lands might be given in Free-Marriage to any man, with any woman
whomsoever, without any exception; and if with any woman whomsoever, then
certainly with a Bastard; and Bracton more expressly, that Lands might then be
given to a Bastard in Marriage; neither are Bastards any where disallowed by
the Law, either in Glanvil or Bracton, for having Lands given in Free-marriage.

2. That the Law was so taken in the time of King John, and upwards, appears
by sundry Precedents of those elder Ages, whereby Lands were given in
Freemarriage with Bastards.

See one in my Book of Antiquities, page 112. wherein Randle, Earl of Chester
(Sir-named de Gernouns) gave unto Geva Ridel, Daughter of Earl Hugh [that was
Hugh Lupus] Drayton, in Freemarriage with the Appurtenances, even as Earl Hugh
gave the same unto her in Free-marrige: This Deed was made about the end of
Hen. I. or King Stephen.

And that Geva was a Bastard, Ordericus an Historian of good Credit, and
Contemporary with Geva, plainly shows; for lib. 4. Ecclesiasticae Historia,
page 522. He tells us that Hugh Lupus had many Bastard-Sons and
Bastard-Daughters; yet names none of them in particular, e Pellicibus plurimam
Sobolem utriusque sexus genuit, quae diversis infortunijs absorpta pene tota
periit: Exmentrudem filiam Hugonis de Claromonte Beluacensi uxorem duxit, ex
qua Ricardum Cestrensis comitatus haeredem genuit, qui jnvenis liberisque
Carens naufragio periit. So that having given an account of his Wife, and his
Son by her, who dyed young, and without Children, he would certainly have given
an Account of his other Children by his Wife, if he had had any other by her;
but ^o put it out of all doubt, he tells us afterward, lib. 10. Eccles. Hist.
page 787. Ricardus Pulcherrimus puer, quem solum ex Ermentrude filia Hugonis de
Claromonte genuit, Consulatum (Cestriae Scilicet) tenuit, so that Earl Hugh
only begot Richard on Ermentrude his Wife and then by sure consequence out of
his words, it must needs follow that Geva was was one of the Earl's Bastards,
she being no Child by Ermentrude, his Wife; which is clearly proved without a
point of Law, and cannot by any point of Law be taken off.

Again, if Geva had been a Lawful Daughter by Ermentrude, then she would have
been sole Heir to her Brother Richard, and ought to have had the Earldom of
Chester, which she never had, nor ever claimed: See this more fully in my
Answer to the Defense of Amicia, page 35. to page 40. and if and shall run to
the old Subtersuge, and say, she might be his Daughter by a former Wife, let
him prove it, and take it; and she could be no Daughter by a latter Wife,
because Ermentrudo survived Earl Hugh her Husband: See my Historical
Antiquities, page 114.

Other two Precedents we have of Lands, granted in Free-marriage with Joan,
Bastard-Daughter of King John.

1. One, wherein King John granted to Lewellyn, Prince of North Wales, in
Marriage with Joan his Daughter, the Castle of Ellesmere in Shropshire;
Tenendum ei, and haeredibus suis qui de eo and praedicta filia nostra exierint,
de nobis and haeredibus nostris in liberum maritagium; Salvis conventionibus
inter nos and ipsum de terra and eodem maritagio factis, etc. Dated Anno Sexto
Johannis Regis, 1204. See the Deed at large in the Advertisement to the Reader,
at the end of my book, styled Sir Thomas Manwaring's Law-Cases mistaken, page
53. transcribed from the Record in the Tower of London.

2. Another see in my book of Antiquities, page 152. wherein it is Covenanted
that John the Scot, Nephew of Randle, Earl of Chester and Lincoln by his eldest
Sister, shall Marry Helen, Daughter of Lewellyn, Prince of North Wales; and
that the said Lewellyn shall give to the said John in Free-Marriage all the
Manor of Budford in Warwickshire, and the Manor of Suttehele in Worcester
shire, cum omnibus Pertinentiis, sicut Dominus Johannes Rex ea illi dedit in
libero maritagio -- etc. This Deed was made about 6. Hen. 3. Anno Christi.
1222. Now that the said Joan was a Bastard-Daughter of King John, take these
several Authorities, Vincent upon Brook, page 204. Speeds History, p. 518.
Stow's Annalls Augmented by Howes, page 167, 168. Polychronicon Translated into
English by Trevisa, lib. 7. cap. 33. Cambdens Brittannia in Shropshire, page
453. also Daniel and Fabian, and Milles Catalogue of Honor, and Sir Richard
Baker's History, who do all call her base Daughter of King John; and no Author
at all calls her Lawful Daughter, or reckons her among the Daughters by any
of his Wives; some of them say she was begot by King John on Agatha de Ferrars.

And therefore these Deeds and Charters which concerned so great Persons (whom
we cannot suppose to be without Learned Council about them) are clear
Precedents, showing how the Law was then taken, and were good Deeds, conveying
the Lands with Bastards in Free-marriage in those Ages, which Lands were
quietly enjoyed accordingly, and nothing can be said against them: Many other
Precedents of like nature in those ancient Ages, might without doubt, upon
diligent search and enquiry be found out.

For as much then as it appears by the words of Glanvil, that Lands might then
be given with any Woman whomsoever in Free-marriage, and no Bastards then
excepted or disallowed by the Law, either in Glanvil or Bracton, and that clear
Precedents of those elder Ages do prove and show, that Lands did then usually
pass in Free-marriage, as well with Bastards, as Lawful Daughters; and that all
Deeds by the rule of Law, are to be construed and understood according to the
time when they were made: How can a Deed of Services, given in libero maritagio
(in the Reign of Henry the Second) with one justly suspected to be a Bastard,
be a sure Argument, or any Argument at all, to prove her Legitimate?

Wherefore it is very evident, that in those elder Ages (as the Law was then
taken in the Reign of King John, and upwards) Lands lawfully might, and usually
did pass in libero maritagio with Bastards, as well as with no Bastards,
howbeit at this day our Law will not permit the same.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 7, line 16, (...) deseased for diseased; p. 8, l. 12, you for he, p, 14,
l. 10, Index for Judex; p. 14, l. 19. The, to be expunged; p. 15, l. 9,
Doterium for Dotarium; p. 30, l. 1, Cupitalis for Capita^is; p. 48. last line,
man for men; p. 40, l. 22, 23. this this, expunge the one of them; p. 58, l.
19, 20. man man, expunge the one of them; p. 42, mispaged for 59; p. 76. in the
margent, Seaccarium for Seaccarium.


