A Letter to Dr. E. Hyde, in answer to one of his, occasioned by the late
Insurrection at Salisbury.
SIR,
IT was my resolution a good while ago (of which I am able to give a good
account, though I do not to you) never to deal with you in a private way of
writing under Seal, but to maintain a public contestatio^ with you, for all
the differences betwixt us in a fairer Character then either you or I can
write, and to make all conscientions and rational Readers judges of the right
we claim, and of the wrong we charge upon each other: And your last Letter of
March 29. rather fully confirms me in this course, then any way diverts me from
it, because (as I shall prove before I conclude mine exceptions against it) it
refers to now public affairs, (though a little before secretly carried in
the way of a Plot) both for the motive which induced you to it, and for the end
you aimed at in it. Before I come to examination and answer of the parts of it,
I will premise my general censure of the whole, which is this. In the Letter
you have showed such boldness, in asserting that against me which is untrue,
such eagerness (in exacting of me, that which is unjust) that I may well
think when you wrote it, you set aside, not only the sincerity of a Divine,
but the charity of a Christian, and the ingenuity of a Scholar. Now to the
particulars, It begins thus.

Dr. H.
Sir,
you may easily remember how much I have receded from my Wives Right of Fifts,
hitherto.


Answer, Sir, Remembrance is of a thing that has or had a being, and easy
remembrance of that which by its evidence and importance makes a strong
impression upon the memory: Your Wives right of Fifths out of the Rectory of
Brightwell (as you require them) is no such thing, but a Non ens, a mere
nothing. Colleg. Conimbricens. in lib. Aristot. de memoria and Reminiscentia c.
10. col. 18.. 13.
I will not say but you may imagine some appearance of a right, for if (as some
do) you lodge fantasy and memory both in one bed, they may be the parents of
such a phantasme. But I may rather say, Sir, You may easily remember that I
have proved your wife has no such right at all to fifths; as you claim in her
name, because I have given you reasons in print against it, which (I doubt not)
will be acknowledged valid, and sufficient (either to satisfy or silence you)
by all unpartiall Judges, who shall read them, as by many such they have been
already; whereas you neither do, nor can give any to the contrary, which may
with any color of truth be brought both to oppose or over-poise them.

And this is not my conceit alone, but his judgment likewise, whose great
parts have deservedly advanced him to high prelations of dignity and authority
above other men. For when (about the beginning of March last) I told him I had
not received a word from you, in answer to my Book sent you about the 11th. of
the last November. Nor ever shall do (said he) intimating (as then I understood
his meaning) that you were convinced by it (and therefore made no exceptions
against it, for then he knew nothing (though he be a very knowing and eminently
learned man) of that mystery of iniquity (since revealed) whereof you are
thought to have been both sooner and more confidingly acquainted, then a true
hearted English Patriot should have been, and whereby you might be not only
moved, but much heartned and heightened in your spirit, to act by Mr. D. and to
write to me your self, as of late you did.

D. H.
And how much you have receded from your sever all promises.


Answer. Just so much, neither more nor less, that is, never a whit, either
the one or the other, for I have constantly been so punctual in performance of
my promises (though to my great disadvantage, as those who best know me, will
testify for me) that I have lost more, merely to keep my word, then somebody
(I say not Dr. H.) would have done to keep his Oath: If you will not believe
me, believe your self, and then you will not be so forward to impute unto me
the breach of promise with you, which hitherto I have not made. You are my
witness, that to keep my word with my Parishioners, (without any likelihood
of benefit, or rather with apparent probability of damage to my self, from
which I might have been freed within a few hours) I refused an hundred pound
in hand for the first payment of a years rent, which I thought fully enough for
the Rectory of Brightwell. And in your Letter of the 17. of November 1653.
wherein you acknowledge the receipt of moneys from me: You say in your next
words, For which I kindly thank you, for really it is now a great courtesy
for a man to keep his word, though I cannot say but you have carefully kept
yours. Since that time, what breach of promise can you charge me with? I wish
you had given me just cause to commend your constancy in the like kind, but
instead thereof, you put me to complain of your levity and unfaithfulness, in
that you promised you would not expect the payment of Fifths above two years,
for as you said, and I have showed (page 16 of my Book) you should not need
them any longer, and now (after four years receipt of them) you are (as if you
were distempered with an hydropical thirst of covetousness) no less
Pecuniarum petax, but rather more then you were at first. You say in the same
line:

Dr. H.
And now at last you seek to recede from your agreement.


Answer. An agreement is a promise and somewhat more, and therefore to recede
from it, is worse then to recede from a single promise; so worse and worse on
your part, for this is the third stumble you take at the threshold, the four
first lines of your Letter contains three untruths, and this last is not the
least, but so much the greater as it is more expressly confuted, page 24, 25,
26, of my printed Book. That I may not take it too tenderly, that you thus
accuse me, you presently bring in an accusation against your self, saying.

Dr. H.
It was the sin of my civility (because you complained of being raised in the
contribution) to let Mr. D. offer you but 280 li. but yet in effect to give you
as good as 300 li.


Answer. For your sin of civility (if it were so) he that would not pardon
you (so seldom offending on that hand) has an harder heart toward you then I
have. But wherein showed you your civility? you say in letting Mr. D. offer but
280 li. in money: why Sir, was Mr. D. to be directed by you what he should
offer? and had you the disposal of his tongue and hand, to promise so much by
word and writing, as he did, and of his purpose for performance of what he so
promised? He is (surely too wise to take his rate from your direction, whose
interest was (as he and you conceived) wraped up in mine, if the treaty were
seriously and sincerely intendped on his part. But when I expressed my conceit,
that he was set on by you, to make me an offer, and but an offer, and that only
for your advantage, he would not then own it, with any relation unto you,
either as an efficient or final cause of any motion toward a contract betwixt
us: nor did he (in effect as you suggest) give me (you would say bid me, for he
gave me nothing) as good as 300 li. And for the reason you render of being
raised in the contribution, that might have, and in probability had, no farther
operation upon you, then was commensurate with your concupiscence, after a
large portion of the parsonage, which made you fear the fifths claimed by you
would be so much the less, as the charge was the greater upon the whole. It
was not (then) the sin of your civility, that Mr. Day made such an offer at
that time, but your sin of hypocrisy, now, in pretending it was done to
gratify me.

Dr. H.
Truth is, I should have been contented with Fifths (after that proportion) and
had rather have lost my share of 20 li. per annum, then have given the
Parishoners occasion of exacting upon you.


Answer. Truth is, It is weil Sir, that there is some truth in your Letter,
though but a word, yet is not that word so truly brought in by you as it should
be, for it leads in a sentence which no discreet man (who knows you) will
believe to be true, viz. that you had rather lose about 4 li. a year, then that
I should be raised but the eighth part of that sum in the Military Assesment.
If you look to be believed (while you so lavishly belly your self) that you
may be mistaken for a moderate man, you must find out an example for Solomon's
Aphorism Prove. 14. 15. The simple believes every word.

Dr. H.
But now (you say) since I make so ill use of all that I can do, only to try
how much I am content to suffer, it is high time for me to send this letter of
demand.


Answer. But now. etc. I must therefore henceforth expect you will be more
cursed then you have been, because you conceive you have been too kind
heretofore, yet must I not think the worse of you for all that, because you
give two reasons for the change of your dealing with me. 1. That you have done
all you can to give me content, that is your meaning (if you write sense) though
your form of words reach not so far. 2. That I have abused your goodness by
ungrateful returns, only to try the extent of your patience. He is well worthy
(I confess) to be visited with the Rod, who will not be won by the spirit of
meekness, 1 Cor. 4. 21.
and supposing me such an one, you come to this resolution, It is high time for
you to send this letter to demand, etc.

For your first reason, that you have done all you can, etc. I am sure, Sir,
you have done all you can to get all you could from me, though never so much to
my discontent and damage, and this I can aver upon 4 years dear bought
experience, of such an inordinate desire in you, as the Apostle calls, The
root of all evil. 1 Timothy 6. 10.

Your second reason is, That I have made ill use of your favorable usage of
me, only to try how much you are content to suffer. You mean this because of my
Book against the payment of a fifth part, wherein I give reasons why I resolve
to give it over, and not to pay that unrighteous Tribute any more.

But why do you say it is only to try how much you are content to suffer, what
needs that? when I know (almost ever since I knew you) you were not content
to suffer the loss of a Groat, which you might either gain or save by any
pretense of right: may I not (upon just cause) conceive so of you, when being
to pay you 19 li. 12 s. 2 d. upon very dear rates for over-worne utensils, the
first year of my coming to Br. you took the whole sum, not abating so much
as the odd twopence of so hard a bargain? and you know well enough by my Book,
that I refused to pay fifths, not to try your patience, but to free my self
from your oppression. And why do you say, Now since you make so ill use of all
that I can do: Did I make any ill use of your pretended kindness in March
last, when your Letter bears date, or in November the last year, when I sent
you my printed Acquittance the next day after I received it from London? That,
I doubt not (as I said before) is the ill use you mean. If so, why did you not
write unto me until four months after? Why were you so silent so long, when
that which so much offended you came to your notice so soon? Why was it high
time toward the latter end of March, and no sooner?

Sir (to deal plainly with you) not my self only, but all who well know you,
and are best able to judge of you, because they are men of sound judgment, not
swayed by partiality or passion, (to whom I have imparted the substance and
circumstance of Mr. Day his offer, and your demand by letter, for their opinion
on them both) unanimously conceive, and confidently say, that your Now and high
time, point (like the finger of a Dial) to the high affronts of public
authority, by the Cavaliers at Salisbury-Assizies, and their high hopes of a
general Insurrection of the people at home, and the Invasion of great forces
from Princes abroad; whereof if I should say, it is very probable you were not
ignorant (before the Plot brake out into open Rebellion) I could render
reasons, which (by judicious men) will not be thought either feigned or
frivolous, and it will not be your wisdom to urge me to prove the presumption
against you. And though you may happily say (that which you do not think) it is
but my uncharitable misconceit of you: I can truly testify that a man of worth
and note (in both Counties where you and I live) told me, you were under such
suspicion of disloyalty to the present Government, that you were to have been
secured, if some ill news (which at that time made the greatest noise) had
proved true.

But that the time of plotting, acting, and giving out hopeful expectations, of
happy success to the destructive design of your discontented party (against
the Lord Protector) and all those who (in conscience as well as in affection
were engaged with him in the same common cause) was the time when you were
animated to resume your project upon me by Mr. D. his mediation, of whom I have
no mind to say any more then his relation to you extorteth from me, and
presently upon that to send me the letter, to which I now address an answer,
may thus appear.

Upon Monday morning the 12th. of March, Sir Joseph Wagstaffe Colonel
Penruddock, etc. seized on the Judges at Salisbury, took away their Commission,
and carried the High Sheriff prisoner with them to Blanford. By the way (Sir)
I do not write this as a parcel of news to you, for I will not take upon me to
be your intelligencer, for such matters as you may know by prophecy, and I but
by History, or hearsay: I only touch that here as a Chronologicall note of
conformity betwixt their high attempts and your high demands.

Upon Tuesday morning the 13th. of March, came Mr. D. to me, with another
Gentleman, whom I forbear to name, I supposed them (as soon as I saw them) sent
by you (for no good to me) and therefore I told them, I would not speak with
them both together, but apart. So the other Gentleman withd rawing, Mr. D.
stayed and told me he came to offer me 300 li. a year for the Rectory of
Brightwell; and on Friday morning March the 16th. he sent me a letter (dated
the same day) wherein he offered the same, and named sureties, for performance
of that he offered, both in that writing and in conference, when (a few days
before) he came unto me.

I took time, until the next week, to consider of an answer to his proposal,
being doubtful, whether I had not promised to some of my chief Parishioners
(upon his falling from his own offer the year before) not to let it to any one,
but to keep it in mine own hands: and when such a promise, was remembered and
claimed by them, I told Mr. D. I was not free to accept of his offer: but if I
were, I knew not any man who would bid so much, and was so well able to make
good his word, as he was.

It seemed very strange to me, that he, who had refused to be Farmer of the
Parsonage, the last year, upon easier terms, yea who would not deal with me
for it, upon any terms (as he wrote to me The copy of this Letter is in the
last page of mine Acquittance.
the 9th. of June) should (about 8 Months after) come of his own accord, to
bid me more for it, than ever I asked. He told me, it was because I had taxed
him with breach of promise in Print: But why then did he not tender his Motion,
and tell me his reason till March 13. when that I printed, came to your hands 4
Months before, and from you the notice of it, was brought very near Mr. D.
within a while after: and it is like so intimate a friend as he, should be
informed as soon as any, especially since he was concerned in it, as well as
your self, though not so much; and for the time of this last offer, I suppose
it was rather of your choice, than his, as the reason of it might be better
known to you than to him. When I had given my negative answer to Mr. Day, the
next week after I received your letter of the 29th. of March,) in due order of
time both inrespect of the public proceedings of your party, and of your own
private negotiation, for Brightwell.

For 1 the condition of the Commonwealth, seemed on the sudden to be
strangely changed, (even to astonishment) in that so small a number of
Cavaliers, at Salish: durst raise their insurrection, to such an height as
there they did, when the solemn Assembly of the Judges, High Sheriff, with his
armed attendants, Justicee of the Peace, Grand Jury, etc. were to cast an awe
upon the whole County, then and there for such as they (so few) to affront and
outface that venerable Authority, and to bear themselves as a triumphant Army,
before they had been a militant troop, was a prodigy of presumption, which
might amaze the people (as it seems it did) into a fear both of resistance and
defense.

2 It was not probable they durst have been so rampant, but that (as has been
partly touched before) they had strong hopes.

1 That other Counties would turn Royallists and rise with them. 2 That the
Antiroyallists were so divided among themselves, that enough of them would not
unite, to make head against them. 3 That Foreign Forces would come into their
assistance. 4 That our wooden walls were so far distant, from our own Coasts,
that they could not stop them.
Suitable to such general conjectures, they gave out particular reports as Col.
Penrudduck did, encouraging others to embody in that Rebellion, by telling
them, that the Lord Fairfax had 8000, Sir William Waller 4000 (in London) ready
for the Kings service, with many more, some more probable, others but possible,
but if impossible, you have a fancy and a faith of as vast a compass, as your
Quod val^e volumus, facile credimus.
desires for the Ruin of -- and for the Restoration of -- else you would not
have believed (as you said to some body about six weeks after your party was
routed at Worcester) that 40000 Swedes were up in arms for Charles the second,
and that he was in the head of them.

But for the late Plot (which is our Theme at present) I doubt not but you
confidently conceived, it would proceed so prosperously, that your hopes and my
fears would grow apace, up to their Achme, and that the face of public
affairs, (like a picture on a furrowed table) would so frown upon me, while it
smiled upon you, that I would be afraid to make any long abode at Brightwell,
and so would soon run away and make you room, and opportunity for you thither,
and then it would be no matter how much was bidden for the Parsonage, nor what
bonds were given, for I durst not stay to claim the one, nor must be allowed
(in case of forfeiture) to sue for the other. In your prevailing this way (but
God forbid you should do so) I could not but account all my temporal
livelihood (if not my life) as utterly lost, and so not only one fifth part of
the P. of Br. but all five would be yours again. Howsoever (Sir) if that (which
was your chief end) were not attained Mr. D. his offer then (which at another
time would have been too much) might serve you for a fair color to exact the
fifths (with rigor) according to his rate, and this was a secondary end you
aimed at, if you were disappointed of the principal which you discovered by
your letter, so soon as seasonably you could, that is, the next week after I
had given my negative answer to Mr. Day: For then you wrote and sent your
letter of demand for fifths, according to the proportion of his promise. All
this sorts well with your high time in that notion which symbolizeth with the
design and doings of Sir Io. Wag. at Salisbury. Your next words are screwed up
to an unreasonable height, by the like contemporary influence and aspect.

Dr. H. It is high time (say you) to send this letter to demand what remains
still due upon your account for the year 1653, as also for some reckonings of
the years before.

Answer. If you had not been too high in your hopes of more then your right, in
a way of violence, you would not have made a demand so contrary to all reason
and conscience, as to require an account of me for arrears of the year 1653,
and for the years precedent to that, when you do or should remember that for
those years even to the year beginning, April 11, 1653, and ending April 11,
1654, I have made an account unto you (and that so exactly as if I had been to
pass it upon my Oath) and have received acquittances from you under your own
hand, in full discharge of each whole year severally, which (if you deny) I can
produce to convince you of untruth. By this unjust demand you manifestly show,
that if your party had been predominant, and I forced to sudden flight from my
present habitation, you might, and meant, to make my Books and other goods
(which I could not carry with me) liable to any demand or charge you would
please to put upon them in my name.

Dr. H.
But for this year 1654, I know the proportion I have reason to expect, viz.
after 300 li. per annum. for so much you may have for the living by Mr. Day,
and such security as you can not but approve.


Answer. If I confessed a right of fifths, due to you or yours, I should not be
unwilling to pay them in a due proportion; but you know Sir, I resolutely deny
it, and have rendered reasons of my denial, whereof you seem to take no notice,
because you have no mind to meddle with them, if you have, and please to make
an answer to them, and I cannot confute it, I will either fairly part with Br.
or freely pay a fifth part to you, according as the profits of it come into me,
but not after the proportion of 300 li. per annum. Because,

First, this is more (by above a fourth part) then ( communibus annis and
computatis computandis) I can make of it, whereof in a letter to an eminent
person (whom you know) I have showed such reasons, as any intelligent and
indifferent Judge will acknowledge both for just and weighty.

Secondly, though you and Mr. D. or you by Mr. D, raise the rate of the
Parsonage, the new Farmers bring it down, abating no less then 4 li. of 14 li.
a year, for the Tithes and other rights of the Parson, not taken in kind of
the Farm of Brightwell: for which abatement they plead by such reasons, as I
and my friend (who in such matters has ten times more knowledge then my self)
cannot readily answer.

3 Mr. D. his offer was but the acting of your device upon me, as I have
already showed, wherein he gave evidence of his good will to you, as you did of
your love to your self, and of your ill mind toward me, and if he had bin
taken at his word and made to keep it, he might well have accounted you his
dear friend, for he must needs have lost a great deal, for your sake, had he
been as punctual in his performance; (whether with or against his will) as he
was prodigal in his promise. But you thought it more likely that I should lose
all, than he any thing, by his undertaking, and I think it was no more your
meaning, really to engage so good a friend, than it was his to be so far
engaged, to his prejudice, but to entitle your self to a demand, and to
entangle me to the payment of a fourth part in stead of a fifth.

Having followed you thus far, I will not leave you, until you come to your
final period, and now you draw near unto it, in your next words, which are,

Dr. H.
Therefore having performed my part of the agreement, I expect yours.


Answer. I shall answer you here with a question or two, What agreement Sir, do
you mean? and when was it made? If you mean that of the 19th. of October at
Reading, or that of June the 13th. at Wallingford, you have an answer to them
both in the three last pages of the Book I sent you: if any of later date, say
what it was, when and where it was made, and you shall have mine assent unto it
in word and deed, or just reasons of my refusal of it.

You conclude with some good counsel to me, and that consists of two
particulars. First,

Dr. H.
Follow that Rule of Do as you would be done by.


Answer. That Rule (I grant) is a most righteous Rule, given by our blessed
Savior himself, Mat. 7. 12. and a most just standard, (if rightly understood)
whereby we must measure our minds and dealings toward others (I say) if
rightly understood, that is, when the understanding is truly informed, and the
will and desire rightly, ordered, otherwise, the application of it to practice
may prove unjust and absurd.

1. Unjust, as when a Judge on the Bench will not pass sentence upon a
Malefactor at the Bar, because he loves himself too well, to be content to be
condemned, or when a man has a faulty friend, who deserves to be punished,
and he intercedes for favor for him, to free him from the stroke of Justice,
as Agesilaus did, (when as Plutarch in his precepts of policy, p. 300. of his
Morals.
Plutarch reports) he wrote to a great Lord or Potentate for one Nicias in
this manner. If he have not transgressed deliver him for justice sake: If he
have, deliver him for my sake: but howsoever deliver him. So, no doubt, he
would have been dealt withal himself (had he been in the offenders case) but
so it was not lawful for him to do by another.

2. Absurd, as thus, A Master (as our great Master Christ Jesus makes the
comparison) when his servant comes from the field, will say unto him, Make
ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thy self, and serve me till I have eaten
and drunken, afterward thou shall eat and drink: Luke 17. 7, 8. because he
would have his servant so obsequious unto him, were it not very absurd if he
should receive the like command from his servant, and submit unto it?

But, to take and apply the Rule as you would have me, the meaning of it,
according to your mind will be this: Do as you would be done by (that is) Pay
the fifths of the Rectory of Brithwell, to Dr. H. for the use of his wife and
children, and pay them freely and fully, as you would have him do to you, were
you in his case.

I will answer you not in your way of protestation (1) in verbo Sacerdotis, but
on the faith of an Evangelicall Minister, and (if you could see into mine
heart) you should not see there a syllable or a letter contrary to what I now
profess (as in the presence of the Omniscient God) viz. that knowing what I do
of your state and mine own, and of both our relations to Brightwell, I durst
not (out of conscience) require at fifth part of the Parsonage of you, and out
of ingenuous civility (if I had not a nobler principle of operation in me then
that) I would scorn to press you with such undue demands as you do me, and to
put you to the trial of the rule you bring to me; would you, were your
condition such (as I have sincerely set down mine a page 16. ad 22. of my
printed Acquittance) be content to pay a fifth part (as you would have it) to
any one who needs it no more then you do? you know you would not, Do then but
as you would be done by: And you would do as I do, if you had no higher
thoughts of the Parsonage of Br. then I have. For though you very much advance
the value of the Benefice (as you call it) the Pastoral charge as I find it,
is so little beneficial to me, all receipts and disbursments rightly
calculated, that weighing the benefit and burden in all kinds together, I had
just cause to write thus to Mr. Vicechancellor of Oxon. November 22. 1654.

I will say thus much, and will make my word good; by my deed, if I be put to
the trial, that I am so far short of competent contentment, in that condition
wherein I am at Br. (chiefly through what I have suffered by you, and your most
and worst affected followers, that I shall be very willing to do service to any
good people elsewhere (though with a great deal less wages then I am thought
to have here, but have not) if I may have a fair call to another place, and a
conscionable discharge from this where I am.

And (which may be more to your satisfaction, if you want not faith to believe
the truth) I have made offer of all mine interest in Brightwell (without any
capitulation at all) to a man of as excellent parts, and as potent friends as
any I know, who (if he accept it) will easily acquit himself from your
unrighteous and unreasonable exaction.

Howsoever, Sir, I had rather (according to the conditions promised) resolve to
leave Brightwell, then still to work under such a rigorous Taske-master as I
have found and felt you for four years together,

The other part of your counsel to me (wherewith you close up your Letter) is:

Dr. H.
Not to give any occasion of breach, or quarrel to him, who desires to
express himself:

Your affectionate Friend to serve you. Ed. Hyde.


If a breach and quarrel be not yet made by your unjust demand, and my just
denial of fifths, with reasons for it, in print, I shall not give you any
greater occasion of it then I have done, for (for that ^^tter) I shall but deny
to pay them still, and that upon the same grounds. But if a breach and quarrel
be made already, (and I believe you take it so) your counsel comes too late,
and you should rather have proposed some means to make up the breach, to take
up the quarrel: you would seem to be peaceably disposed. when you profess a
desire to express your self mine affectionate friend to serve me. But how
feeble is your affection if it be true? for it is but a desire, a desire but to
express (that is so to show, and declare your self, that you may appear such
a friend) how false your profession, if you act contrary to it. And how should
I think otherwise, when you pretend love, and intend Law: For having heretofore
used to send to me by your friends, Mr. H. and Mr. Wh. you sent me this last
Letter by a professed Lawyer; as though thereby you meant to tell me, that if I
will not be lead by your Letter to do what you would have me, you would compel
me by Law to conformity to it; and for that Sir, you may take your course, and
when you take up the Sword, you shall not (God willing) find me unready to
betake me to my Buckler: And so I subscribe my self,

Yours to serve you (at the Bar of any Court of Justice or Equity, when you
serve me with Process to attend you there.) John Ley.
Brightwell, April 6. 1655.
ERRATA.
Page 8. line 3. read the same sum. p. 10. l. 4. r. for your return thither.

Postscript.
SIR,
YOU have (since I wrote this Letter) turned my suspicion of your professed
friendship, into undoubted assurance of your dissembling with me: By sending a
Bailiffe on Saturday, ( May 12.) to attach me, or to take Bond for my
appearance, on Monday May 14. in the Court of Common Pleas, Which sudden
warning was not by his choice but yours, as the date of your Letter of
direction to him (for serving the Sheriffs Warrant upon (...)) shows. Hereby
he that has but half an eye may see, you meant (not like a good Minister) to
disturb my preparations for the Sabbath, and (as unlike a good Christian) to
distress me by want of time to take Counsel, how to apply my self for my
just defense in the Suit commenced by you. I would not, I did not, serve you
so, when I sent you my Book against you (by a Messenger of purpose) the next
day after Ireceived it from London, that you might have as timely intelligence
of the publishing of it as I could give you. Howsoever, Sir, you may perceive
my readiness to perform my promise to you, (which was To serve you at the bar
of any Court of Justice or equity, when you serve me with Process to attend
you there) for that day (viz. Monday forementioned, though your summons were so
short) I came to Westminster where you had put (into the Court) no Declaration
against me. So forward were you to show your teeth, before you could bite;
which may give occasion of caution, and (that may be also) some cause of
security to him who sincerely subscribing to the Christian sentence of Amicos
deligere omnium est inimicos solorum Christianorum Tertul. ad Scapul. Tom. 2.
p. 162. item.
Tertullian had rather (notwithstanding your harsh and hasty dealing with him)
entitle himself your Respondent, Christianus nullius cst hostis. Ibid.
or Defendant, then your Adversary

J. Ley.

FINIS.

