A Divine HORN-BOOK OR THE FIRST FORM In the True* Theosophick School, WHEREIN
Is Taught the knowledge of Gods Great Name: Jeova in the House of Letters, as a
good help to know God in Nature and Creature* through the Chief of Sinners, the
Unworthiest of all Gods Servants, his Majesty's Loyal Subject, and every Man's
Brother.

By H. L.

Gloria in Excelsis. Am not I He that fills all things? London: Printed for
the Author. 1688.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THat God made the Ear, the sacred Scripture asserts, and shall not he hear in
our hearing? Yea, he made all things, and in through and by all our Senses, he
informs such as are Vessels fit for the Masters use; it is mere Atheism to
think God, when he had made this World, went out of it, and left it to his
Creatures to dwell in it without him* Oh no, in him we live, move, and have our
being: He is the Fountain of all Life, and is All-hearing, All-seeing,
All-smelling, All*tasting, and All-feeling, and we are and have all from him
who is and fills all things; but so far is Man gone outward and become Dust,
that he is insensible of the life of God, and knows not that God lives in
his Life; and therefore when the Scriptures say God purchased his Church with
his Blood, we understand it only imputatively; when the Scriptures say it
repented God that he made Man to dwell on the Earth, we are apt to think him to
be altogether such a one as our selves; and when we read, God is not as man,
that he should repent, then we think that all the Evil we meet with was by him
decreed, should come upon us from all Eternity: and all this, and almost every
Text else we abuse for want of knowing Man's going out of Gods will into his
own, is the real cause he ever knew Evil; and by a continual progress of going
out from God into himself, from Adam even to this day the Proverb is verified,
He that lives longest must fetch his Wood farthest: Happy days all men would
have, but few was ever persuaded to go into that Country where true happiness
is only to be found: If then it be yet possible to persuade any to return to
God, he is told demonstratively that he is not far from every one of us: we
cannot pronounce or spell one word good or bad without him, which shows the
Word, which is God, is in our mouths, as well as good thoughts proves him in
our hearts; return then to God and make him no longer serve your sins, by
harboring hard thoughts of God and thy Brother, nor speaking ill of any thing,
but study to manifest thy love to God by doing good to thy Brother, and thou
shall receive good from him that is all good: Farewell.

A God in invisibility or Tri-Une being.

b c d The 3 principles in the Divine Nature, the Divine Sol, Sul, and Mercury.

E The Word or Seed and Form of God, super-essential Jesus, whose outgoing has
been from Eternity, the word by which he made all that was made.

f g h The 3 principles of the outward nature, Sol, Sul, and Mercury.

I The unchangeable will to the begetting of his Son the brightness of his
Glory.

k l m n The 4 Forms that constitutes the Soul of the World.

O The Almighty Son of the Almighty Father, the second Person of the Trinity.

p q r s t The 5 Senses, Hearing, Seeing, Smelling, Tasting, Feeling.

V The holy Spirit Eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son, and is
God, the Divine Breath of God, who is the Life of God, and all that lives.

w x y z The 4 Elements, Fire, Air, Water, Earth.

B Aries D Taurus F Geminy H Cancer K Leo N Virgo P Libra Q Scorpio S
Sagittarius T Capricorn W Aquarius Z Pisces.


C Saturn G Jupiter L Mars M Sol R Mercury X Venus Y Luna


Signifies the Free Gift of the Father in the offering up his Son for our
offenses, and that we must crucify Sensuality ever we attain the Spirit of
Understanding.

a) Signifies God received up into Glory in the Person of the Lord Jesus, who
is called Christ.

ae) Signifies God in Christ in us, when used in the Spelling of any word, and
so does all Dipthongs.

Nine's this Worlds number,
More cannot be found,
Tenth number's God's,
He is in Nature round;
All is of God: it is but the Bark we see,
God is the Marrow and the Pith of the Tree.
By this we see, that great Jehovah dwells
In The Book of Nature, and all Words he Spells*
Nature without God, gives no sound at all;
Nature is nothing, Great Jehovah's all;
Man is but Dust, a Vapor, and is vain,
Consonants nothing, Vowels words maintain;
Nature's Gods Veil, it is his Tabernacle,
His Name's in Nature, it is both Inn and Stable.
God's Nature's Light, and she is his Back-parts,
God is the Skill by which Men find all Arts.
God is the Power, Nature is his Hand
By which all is done, he does all Command.
Then know proud Dust, what ever thou do do
In thine own will, becomes thy Sin and Woe,
For Nature's Gods, to him all Powers belong,
His Will must rule thee, or else all goes wrong;
Thou art no Priest, nor Levit, nor have Lot
Within this Land, if thou have God forgot,
Like the Gibeonites, have leave a while to dwell,
Water to draw, out of true Jacobs Well;
Hew Wood for the Levites that on God do wait,
Else an Usurper God declares thee straight;
Then Sin thy Master, he thine House pulls down,
Lays thee in Ashes, and in Sorrows drown,
Then tho tho thou gnash thy Teeth, Cry 'loud and Wail,
God hears thee not: It cannot thee avail:
He would have heard: in through and by thee*
Thou heardst thy self: with God would not agree.
Self thou hear'st still, and ever more shall do,
Each self, is self, and this most men undo.
Self's only Sin, all actions serves God,
Self is the Jailer in the true Land of Nod;
Sataurn's the Seal the King sets on the door,
Satan's thy Fiddler, he does cry and roar.
Let God then work his pleasure with his own,
Debase thy self, set Jesus on the Throne,
Then God will hear thee, and hear in thee too
See, smell, taste and feel, then all is well we do;
If thy will's Gods once, and Gods will be thine,
When Nature's gone, in God then thou shall shine,
Go where thou will, thou have an open door,
Art still in God, cause God's in thee before.
There is twelve Gates, we understand by the Signs;
There Is seven Spirits that in one Combines.
There is five Senses, three Principles is all,
God is the Center, and he is the Wall.
Creatures are Stars, and glorious to behold,
God and the Lamb can never be controlled.
Prepare thy self then for his Habitation,
By serving him in every Place and Station;
Nothing's without God: yet this World by Sin
Lives to themselves, and knows not where to find him;
Will thou yet learn? then cast thine Eye below,
See his great Name is in thy Crist-Cross-Row;
Aeiou his Great Name does spell,
Here it is known, but is not known in Hell.
Then while thou live, take it not in vain,
Least when you are dead, do feel the Helish pain.
His Name is sweet, Harmonious words do raise,
Wrath it is dumb, and never can God praise,
In him we live, and now may him adore,
One Sealed in Wrath, are dead, and know him no more*
Three East Gates.

Three South Gates.

Three West Gates.

Three North Gates.



D



F



H



K



N



P



Q



S



T



W



Z



B



C



G



L



M



R



X



Y

A

E

I

O

V

ieova



God's in the World, the World is not in God,
If out of God, you are in the Land of Nod.
An Explanation of the Table.
A E I O U bcd fgh klmn pqrst wxyz*
Note, aeiou being taken from between the Consonants, the Consonants are found
in five Divisions: The first two Divisions consist of three Letters, as
appears, bcd, and fgh. The third Division of four Letters, klmn. The fourth of
five, as pqrst. And the fifth of four, as wxyz; take then the Centeral Letters
out of each division, and they are cglmrxy, where we find just the number seven
and no more, then what remains are bdf, hkn, pqs, twz, which are twelve in
number and no more: the five Vowels being the Letters that spells the Great
Name of God Jeova, are thus placed, the Centeral Letter is I, and the first is
A, put that which in the Alphabet is first, last, and the Centeral Letter
first, and then they stand in this order, Jeova: Also this World having but the
Number nine in its Arithmetic, we understand the first division aptly shadows
out the Divine Sol, Sul, and Mercury: The next division being three, signifies
the natural Sol, Sul, and Mercury: The third division of four, shadows out the
four forms to fire, that constitutes the great Soul of the World, from whence
each Creature in the three Kingdoms of Minerals, Vegitables, and Animals, have
their immediate Life and Power of Motion, either Augmentation or Dimunition.
The fourth division being five, shadows out the five Senses which every
Creature has the Exercise of, according to its nature and property and degree
he stands in: The last division being four, rightly shadows out the four
Elements; so that God, the Divine Nature, and this whole World, is truly
discerned in the Alphabet, that this World is made living, and is maintained in
life by the Word of God, may not be denied, Christ in and through whom the Word
was made Flesh, says, I am the Life of the World: Now to suppose that God
spoke this word naked in Nature, is to leave no place for a Mediator, for the
word is God, who is the true Golden Apple, and the Divine Nature is the Silver
Picture in which the word was spoken into this World as it is Case, or Veil;
and so long as God in Christ is in this World, this World is an Adequate shadow
of the Original World, or else how should the Kingdom of Heaven be likened unto
any thing here, or we be able to understand the things that are Invisible by
the things that are seen; and by the things that are made his Eternal Power and
Godhead; that is, the maker thereof: by the 12 Signs we understand the 12
Gates of the New Jerusalem: by the 7 Planets, the 7 Spirits of God, who are the
Pillars upon which Wisdom has built her House, and stand in an Eternal Unity
of Will: by the Sun Moon and Stars we understand God to be the head of Christ,
and Christ the head of Angels and every Man, who as Stars shall shine forth in
our true Native Country, as the Angels do now, if we attain the Election,
through proving our selves to be the Called of God, by obeying his Calls, so as
to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, and so make our Calling and
Election sure. But if God in Christ were not in this World to be understood,
then our highest Number is but nine, and the ninth Plague of Egypt was
darkness; so that, as it is true, Christ is the life of the World; he is also
the light of the World, and is that light that is true, and enlightens every
man that comes into the World, and is our power of discerning; by him Kings
Reign, and Princes Decree Justice: God according to his Manifestation in the
Divine Nature, is called Christ: Christ according to his appearance in this
World's Flesh is called Man. Thus God was manifest in the Flesh.

Also, our Letters being twice 12, rightly points to the Original World, where
the Number 12 is found, and makes this Worlds Glory a shadow: And that we have
the Cross placed before the Alphabet, rightly signifies, That the Father
offered up his Son, that he might reconcile by, in, and through him, this World
from the very Foundation, or ever God could be manifest therein, before the
being of any Creature, who are shadowed out by our Letters, as may be known;
for where the use of Letters have not been, they imaged their mind by
Hierogliphicks, using Creatures instead of Letters: Also that we must Crucify
our minds to Sensuality, before we can attain the Spirit of Understanding, or
understand the Spirit veiled by the Letter: Also that we have a little a in our
Alphabet rightly shadows out God received up into Glory in the Person of our
Lord Jesus, through his Ascension to the right hand of the Majesty on high, to
appear for his Brethren that live by the same Faith, called the Faith of the
Son of God: Also all Dipthongs rightly shadows out God in Christ in us, when
used in the Spelling of any word, which should teach us it is in the power of
the word, which is God, we form our words. These things the Ancients no doubt
did well understand, who first devised the use of Letters, for it is
unreasonable to believe that they were placed in this most Exellent and
Significant Order by mere chance, though it has perchance by us been little
understood; is it to our praise, that we so little value our Ancestors, as to
throw away what we understand not, under the Notion of Popery, but ought to try
all things, and hold fast that which is good: And if the Learned will look into
this work, they may, and I quection not, but more will be found, to the glory
of God.

Also, It is seen there is but two Numeral Letters in the five Vowels that
spells the for ever Blessed Name Jeova, and they are J and V, which make the
Number six and no more, pointing out that Gods Rest is not in this World, but
that hitherto (as Christ says) The Father works in Nature, and therefore
Christ works; and till we are gathered up into the Spirit, we are strangers
to Gods Rest, and toil and labor, eating our Bread in the sweat of our Brows,
and have need of Litteral Verbal teaching: Also it is hereby evidently
understood, that all that this World gives or can give, is but Beastial, and
therefore the number of a Man, that is a Child of this World only, is 666, for
he has all the three Principles, and is a continual worker for life, so that
he cannot attain the Seventh day, but is shut up under the Covenant of works;
notwithstanding he is a worshipper, it is but in the Worldly Sanctuary he
worships, and only knows God Manifest in the outward Nature and Creature at the
best, and cannot see within the Veil; and the most, only worships the Beast or
his Image; all which is promised to be Lively Explained in our next, if this be
bid welcome: Also C being the Centeral Letter of the first division which
shadows out the Divine Sol, Sul, and Mercury, and signifies the first Planet
Saturn, which is the Coagulating Power that makes all things Visible and
Tangeable: And R the Centeral Letter of the fourth division that shadows out
the Planet Mercy, which signifies Speech. It is yet far more Evident, that God
is both the Maker of all things, and is the power of Speech; his word being the
Articulator, else no sense could be spoken by us more then by the Beast that
perishes, but through Gods word we are enabled to say, Fear God, and Honor
the King.

FINIS.

