THE LIFE OF BOETHIUS, Recommended to the AUTHOR OF THE Life of Julian,

Flebilis heu mestos cogor inire modos. Boet. Consol. Phil. lib. 1. LONDON:
Printed, and are to be sold by W. Davis in Amen-Corner near Pater Noster-Row,
MDCLXXXIII.

TO THE READER.
Though Loyal Heraclitus (who understands wit as well as any, and has showed it
also, to the cost of many a Seditious and wretched Fop) thought some months
ago, with his Friend Mr. Earnest, that telling of stories is a dull sort of
mirth; Yet I know he cannot but grant, that the alternate way is (to use Mr.
Bays's happy expression) extremely Obliging and Civil; and Civility, we see, is
a Virtue has been highly esteemed, and with the nicest exactness practiced by
the Pacqueteers, Mercuries, and rest of the SOBER and Obedient Authors of the
Times.

Meeting therefore the other day with IVLIAN's SQUIRE, who (to honor
Christianity in general, and to show also in particular, His and his Parties
Principles of Obedience) gave me the Recital of his Master's LIFE and
Adventures: I could not (methought) without an unpardonable Rudeness and
Ingratitude, omit longer the telling of my Story, which happened in a Town
which this Godly Prince once governed, and about an Age or two after his
Religious and pious End. The Squires Account is, God be thanked, now public
enough, and evinces still further the In^at^ation and Folly of the Cabal, even
as to the very thing they so earnestly design; for without a particular and
Divine Judgment, how can it be conceived, that they who seemed to idolize Oats
and Bedloe, as men of Probity, and the true Saviors of the Nation, should
still strive, by odious Reflections, and their other vain Insinuations, to draw
His Royal Highness within the Verge of the Plot, though contrary to the Oaths
even of these two Witnesses? Must not this Procedure therefore bring afresh
into men's minds the business of DON JOHN, and PRESTON the married Priest, with
the other Contradictions which are laid to the Doctor's charge by the Compend.
Staff. Memoirs, etc.
Papists, out of every Printed Trial? Will not this too give them a new
occasion to tell us, how Bedloe swore (at his Examination before the
Secretaries of State) That he knew nothing of the Plot; as also, tha^, not
having matter enough for a Charge against Whitebread and Fenwic in one Trial,
he swears them both Guilty in the next, of the highest Treasons imaginable? Nor
will these Popish Whipsters fail again to rub up our Memory, with the 2000 l.
offered him for his mere help to carry away Hill's T^y. p. 32.
^ir E. Go^frey's Body, and then flop us in the mouth with their Remarks, and
twit us, that^ according to his own Testimony, there were (besides ib. p. 31.
those who were said to do the thing) as many other persons then in the Room,
when the Jesuits showed him the Corpse, as could have in a night conveyed it,
and more Bodies than one, to the designed place or station. Thus do these
phrantic Scriblers give fresh cause of discourse, and consequently, pull down
what they would fain set up; and, in their own terms, blacken and defame the
very Justice of the Nation. But what wonder is there of it, when now, by woeful
experience, we see, no Witness, Jury, Court, Judge, Parliament, Law, or
Magistrate, can be so Sacred, that will not be presently blasphemed, if they
suit not with their Gust and Humor? This is the Treatise, (I mean that of
JULIAN) which is so particularly recommended to us by CARE; a wretch that has
not only croak'd, and disgo^g^d the utmost vid. Courant all along, and even
lately Number. 34.
Venom which his feeble and macerated Maw could distill against so many of the
best of the Gentry, and so many of the greatest of the Peers, but against the
present Heir to the Crown, nay against the v^ry K in ship it self. This is also
the Book which CURTIS so often advertizes us of, and N. 159.
vindicates too; a Villain that durst (to the amazement even of the Anarchical
and Factious) bid a POX on His Highness, in his public N. 155.
Mercury, or Intelligence. Since then the Subversion of the Go^ernment is
evidently meant by their endeavo^^ing to brand, and lay aside this Illustr^ous
Prince; for when once Kin^ship (as has been often ^appily hinted) becomes
Elective, why may not the n^xt VOTE, upon any new Freak (besides a long Train
of other Mischiefs) be for a new Line, or even downright for a Democracy and
Commonwealth? I say, since this is the Intrigue, and the word P^p^^y the
In^antation to bewitch the Inconsiderate. I doubt not but all good men will now
look upon this Morm^. or f^ightful Represe^tation, with the same Contempt that
the ^ov^rs of the Machine do thems^lv^s^ For besides the Laws, which secure the
Establish^d Religion, there are not, we know, (as appears by the survey made
some ^ew years sin^e) ^bove Twenty Th^usand Papists, or thereabo^ts, of all
Sexes and ^izes in the Kingd^m; So that, if those who are ^it to fight were
even together, and in Arms, Fifteen hundred Disciplined Soldi^rs would cut them
all to pieces. The^e impudent and Sedious Desig^s, upon pretense of Popery,
brings therefore to the re^embrance of many, the Loyalty of the Popish Party,
during This and the late King's Misfortunes; which makes it to be often
questioned, whether they are generally such Traitors, as some would have them
thought? nor does it add a little to the doubt, when they find, in the present
Pursuit, the deepest-mouth'd Hounds to be the Re^icid^s^ and those that
(without Pal^^ations and Goodmo^rows) strike at the Root and Life of the
Monarchy. For my own part, I intend by no means the De^ence of the Popish
Religion, and besee^h God to let the whole Crew see all the Errors of it; but
if Retaliation and Justice to our forementioned Historiographer, prove by
chance serviceable to their Temporal Concerns, much good may do them; for no
honest man (though never so scrupulous, will desist from prosecuting a Bur^lary,
because the Jews or Pagan^ who live among us may chance to sleep the quieter
and safer for it; And who, but a new-pre^ending Patriot, will countenance
Ryots, and the breach of the Peace, that the Matrons and Virgins of
Whetstones-Park may be the surer (forsooth^ to be dis^urb'd in Easter and
Whitsun-weeks. All that I have here further to acquaint the Reader with, is,
That, had there not been already so many smart and excellent Reflections on
this Prostigate and APO^TATE- Wri^er, yet I should never have troubled my ^^lf
with any further d^^^e^^ion of his idle and malicious Lucubrations, than the
thus giving him Story for Story, wi^h a Comment.

THE LIFE OF Boethius.
THE Calamities which Italy The Miseries of Italy.
(that Beautiful and Fertile part of the Universe) Suffered in the Fifth Century
from the Incarnation, were so great and so many, that the Ancient Historians
looked upon them as unparalled; and certainly they had some Reason to think
so, it having been the Theater on which all (that even their Poets could fan^y
Dismal by the Ravage and Inhumanity of several Barbarous People) was then
really represented. The Murders men saw, the Says and Sequestrations they
felt, and the Slavery they were reduced to, want still perchance a Pen, fu^ly
to express them; for tho they had not 1. Ri^h. Cromwell, 2^ R^mp. 3 Com. S^^e^y,
4. Long Par. 5 (...) P^r. ^^K. Ch 2d. From May 59. to May 60.
Six new Ma^ters in one Year, (as was the ^ate of a still Fortunate and
Glorious Isle, if it truly knew its own Happiness) yet they enjoyed even in
their own Memory (as appears by Prosper Aquita^us, Palmerius, and other
Chronologists) the pleasure of as many ^^roads, each Conqueror differing in
his Interests, tho never in his Pretenses and Fury. Alaric and his Goths;
Attila the Hun; Genseric the Vandal; ^igorus, King of the Alani; and Odoacer
with the Heruli (treading as it were upon the heels of each other) acted here
their Monstrous Parts: Nor did some of them fail, (as De Reb^s Goth.
Iornandes well notes) in the midst of their Depredations and Cruelties, to
vaunt, That Heaven had put them on the Employment; that is to say, In the
phrase of their younger Brethren; They came to do the Work of the Lord; and if
so, They were, doubtless, very far from the Curse of Performing it negligently.
In fine, Theodoric the Brave (and thus He is esteemed by Chron. and lib^ Var.
Cassiodorus, Vit. Sym.
Ennodius, and many of the Writers of those times) came not only with his
Ostrogoths, and a drawn Sword to Crop this kind of Rump or Fag End of these
Wild Peripatetics and Wanderers, but with a Title also; for that Kingdom was
formally given him, (as Paulus Diaconus, and De Occid. Imp^rio lib 15.
Sigonius mention) by Zeno the Eastern Emperor; who, (being ^et a Living
Member of that mighty Eagle, which once stretched her Victorious Wings over the
best Part of the habitable Earth) thought He had still, at least, the Advouzon
and ^resentation to the West. The Fortune of this Mar^ial Man answered
expectation; nor can any body in few Words ^xpress fuller the Happiness of his
Arrival, than Heylin does, when he tells us, Geog. Ital lib. 1.
That He reduced Italy which before was the Thorough-Fare of the Barbarous
Nations, and so disordered by the frequent Inundations of Lust and Rapine,
Theodori^ restores ^ap^ness to ^^ly
to such a peaceable and settled Government, that they quite lost the Memory of
their former Miseries.

His glorious Recep^^on, and En^ry into Rome.
The Entry also of this Monarch into Rome, was correspondent to the high Esteem
the World had of him; for tho that City ever surpast all others in the glorious
Reception of her great and Famous Commanders, ye^ now (as the same Sigonius
words it) De Occid. Imp. lib. 16.
Her Citizens did even outdo themselves; so that in short, He was received
with all the Acclamations and Applause that could possibly be expressed by Art as
well as by the Passions of the Inhabitants.

It Is true, Theodoric was a Goth, Theodoric a Fri^nd to all Honest Christians
and therefore the Pope and He were not of a Communion; but happening to be a
Generous Prince, and declaring himself a Friend and Patron to every Honest
Christian, all Peace and Concord ensued. Nor did his Actions and Words dif^er,
since in the very choice of his Officers and great Ministers of State, he
considered not Parties, but the Merits of his Subjects; and so among others,
sixth upon Boethius, notwithstanding his Education and known Zeal for the Roman
Religion.

Boethius was a Man (if we consider the Antiquity of his House) equal to Rome
her self, Boetius's Quality and Family.
and descended also from Ancestors, not inferior to any of her greatest
Hero's; for being a Manlius, he was of a prime Consular Family, and which is
more, Heir to the Illustrious Marcus, who, by preserving the Capitol, rescued
not onl^ the Standard or Imperial ^nsign, M M^nl^us s^ves the Standard, and
Life of the Government.
but saved the very Life it self of the Government. He had also the same Blood
warming his Charitable Breast, as ran in (...) Veins of the Renowned Torquatus;
Torquatus an E^emy to the Peoples Slav^^y.
who tearing from the neck of his Conquered Enemy, ^he ^hain, or Emblem (tho of
Gold) of the Servitude which his Country might have fallen under, made himself
by that Bravery, Author, as it were, of a Magna Charta; showing also all along
the Passion he had for their Liberties; for Worthy Men, are ever truly
Solicitous of their Fellow Subjects Freedom, and still promoting (without
By-Ends) all their Just Rights and Privileges Imaginable.

'Twere endless to repeat the Benef^t, which the whole World (being at last in
a manner subject to this Triumphant City) must needs receive by the Example and
Conduct of this thrice Noble Clan, Strict Paternal Justice.
that did Justice even upon it self, by cha^tising a Child who preferred (as
Lib. 1. Dec. 8.
Livy shows) the Capricios of his own Humor before Authority. A Great and a
Roman Action it was; notwithstanding our modern Romanists (in their Brags)
pretend to it, Popish Brags.
as boasting they are all, not only Obedient (as far as God Commands) to their
Spiritual Governors, but that their said Governors are as Circumspect and as
Severe too, against the Fanatical Illuminati, or Pretenders to Shams and
Miracles among themselves, as against those, they term Aliens, and out of the
Household of Faith. This Manlian Impartiality (which is cried up by several
Ancient Authors) pleases Florus so well, that he says, Flor. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Quis Hostem mirabitur, etc. Who could wonder, that Rome's Enemies should
yield, when she had such Generals? Nay, Livy in the 9 th. of his 1 st. Decad^
represents the said strict ^^ther, as a Captain, That would have given check to
Alexand^r himself had his ^ourse been W^stward^ a Man able, it seems, to stop
that Progress, which Novelty and sudden Accidents still bring upon an amazed
and unthinking People.

Boetius's Virtues.
Boethius being thus supereminent by the Antiquity, Fortitude, and Conduct of
his Family; no body can deem it strange, his Personal Virtues were
transcendent; for he was, as all Writers con^ess, Wise like an Oracle; Skilled
(as another Moses) in all the Learning of the Egyptians; and of a Piety
^^^^m^^ng a sincere Professor of the Holy Gospel. His Rhetoric was also of a
piece, with his other Sciences, so that the Senate chose him, of all her
Eloquent Members, to Complement the King in a set Oration at his Arrival; which
(tho it be lost) is excellent, we are sure, by being of his Composition, and
especially since it brought him into his Sovereigns good Graces, who soon
afterward found out his many and Matchless Qualities.

Theodoric (as I said) was a Christian Prince, Theodoric's Favors to the
Church.
of a healing Temper; and knowing besides, that at the Long Run, the Government
still loses by Iarrs in Religion, steered on a contrary Rhumb to the malicious
JULIAN; for instead of putting Altar against Altar, (as was the Custom of that
Hater of the Christian Name) he composed even the Papal Schism of Symmachus and
Laurentius, a^ may be seen in An. 498. vit. Sym.
Anastasius, Bib^iothecarius, and others; which plainly shows, That a gallant
and well meaning ^rince, may ( not only in Italy, and Scotland, but in England
also) deserve the Thanks of the Reverend Bishops and Clergy for his Patronage,
tho he and they should chance to differ in some Points of Faith. Neither did he
acquiesce in this one Act, but heartily carest all the good Prelates who made
application to him: So that Epiphanius Bishop of Pavia, and St. Laurence of
Milan, coming as Intercessors for some of their Flock (who had contrary to the
Edicts, Sheltered several of the Heruli, or Inveterate Whigs of that Age)
received particular Favor, and a very gracious Answer from him, as (...) ^4.
(...)
Baronius show, at large out of Ennodius. And here we may further add, that he
not only made this Epiphanius, with Victor Bishop of Turin, his Ambassadors to
the Burgundian King; as the said Ibid.
Authors have it, but constituted (as Holy Court, Life of Boethius, Sect. 4.
^ausin relates) St. Severin his Almoner, to distribute money among the Poor,
that had much suffered by the Quartering of his Army. Nay An. 523. Vir. Hormis.
Anastasius owns him as a Benefactor and Bestower of rich Gifts on the Vatican
it self. Nor was Theodoric any Laodicean or Lukewarm Prince, but on the
contrary the great Defender of the Gothic Faith, as plainly appears by his
Eager Declarations, as soon as this Emperor discountenanced that Religion in
the East. Thus then we still see, That the differences in Worship do not always
alienate a Monarchs Heart from his dissenting Ecclesiastics, and consequently,
that a Princely and Magnanimous Subject may retain a Tenderness for his
Fellows, even when they ar^ not of his Sentiments and Opinion in Spirituals.

Boethius, (as I hinted) being now known, Boethius much Honored by Theodoric.
was presently highly honored, and all the Trust imposed in Him, that a
Knowing King usually p^ts in a Wise and Faithful Minister. The business of
State too prospering not a little (as seldom it miscarries in good hands)
Theodoric increast even his Esteem of him, and therefore gave daily fresh marks
of his Royal Munificense and Bounty, as may be amply seen in Sect. 5.
Causinus. But what is durable in this fleeting World, where often Mistakes,
but oftener Envy ruins? Envy is of the Bastard line, Emulation, that Spur to
Virtue, being the Legitimate; nor goes she ever alone, as having Malice and
Cruelty still about her, for her chief Companions and Counselors. These were
the Furies that vowed the imcomparable Boetius's Overthrow, Boetius's Enemies.
and therefore presently distilled their venom into the susceptible minds of
Triguilla and Conigastus, two Eminent Goths, and the first of them in high
Favor with the King; for he was Praepositus Regiae Domus, as the said De
Consol. lib. 1. Prosa. 4.
Boethius himself styles him, to wit, Superintendent of his Royal House and
Expense.

'Twas now according to Lib. 16. The Storm begins in the Thirtieth of the Kings
Reign.
Sigonius, the year 525. which Baronius precisely calls the Thirtieth of
Theodoric's (yet Quiet and Flourishing) Reign, when the black Cloud began to
gather, and becoming at last a mighty Storm, it brought Ruin along with it, to
the Innocent, and no little Trouble even to the King and Kingdom.

'Twas in this year also when the Active and Potent Justin (and Princes of that
Calibre prove ever by the Vmbrages they give, uneasy to their Neighbors) made
his Edicts (as An. 523. 13.
Baronius writes) against the Manichaeans, Pagans and some other Dissenters in
his Dominions; which doubtless soon alarmed the Italian Goths; for being ever
sollicitous for their Brethren there, The Goths apprehend a Persecution in the
East.
(as may be seen in Theodoric's Negotiations with the Emperor) they could not
but apprehend, that the Laws would in conclusion reach their said Brethren; and
so de facto it happened the very following year.

Boethius accused.
These accidents prepossessing not a few, and with them Theodoric also,
Triguilla resolved to strike while the Iron was hot; for he was often piqu'd by
Boethius, who severely (as his own Prosa. 4. lib. ^.
Writings show) reprehended him for several ill practices; and particularly,
according to Causinus for advising the forcing the Campanians, in a scarce and
wanting year, to sell all their Corn at a low rate, for the maintenance of the
Army: an Oppression which the very Senate (that ever wished its Disbanding)
might perchance resent, and consequently punish to purpose. He went therefore,
with Conigastus, to the King, and after many Preambles (to be sure) of the
great vigilance and care of his Majesty's safety, they told him of a mighty
PLOT against his Sacred Person and Religion; adding, that Prosa. 4.
Boethius stifled the ^iscovery; Nay, that he was also in truth, the grand
Projector and Architect. Theododoric seemed greatly surpised at the Thing, but
much more at the Author, who had in so many Hazards, and in so many Accidents,
still shown the utmost Loyalty of a Subject. After some pauses, and that he was
a little recovered, they assured him there was no room for doubting, since they
had no^ only intercepted his Traiterous Letters, but that some of his Partisans
had already discovered the whole Scheme of the Design. Thereupon they
acquainted him (as Sect. 5.
Causinus mentions) that the Pope and the Emperor were in it also; and then,
producing the forged, or false Letters, as Lib. 16.
Sigonius truly terms them, they called in their Witnesses; who being examined
by Theodoric, alienated him in the end so far from Boethius, that, summoning the
Senate, and acquainting them with the Plot, they took forthwith cognizance of
that unexpected and strange Affair.

OPilio and BAsilius, The names of the Accusers.
(as Prosa. 4. lib. 1.
Boethius himself records) were the Names of the chief Accusers; Names famous
among the Ancients, for their Testimony against this Renowned Person; and
worthy to be considered also, by those Learned Caballists of our Age, who
Prying into the Arcana of the Alphabet, discover often (Men say) Strange
Mysteries, even out of the first Letters of an Appellation.

This dreadful News being once spread about the City, The King's Evidence^
carest.
who can doubt but the King's Evidence were universally applauded and carest,
especially the Accusation being, as Affairs then stood, like Manna, relishing
in every Palate. For many through their innate Loyalty, could not but be
exasperated to the utmost, at the mere Relation of Theodoric's Danger. Others
were sincerely concerned about Religion, the late mentioned Iealousies
contributing also not a little to their Distemper. Some again had such
Chymerical Idoeas of Forfitures and Confiscations in their Heads, that no body
is to wonder if they joined in the common ^ry, and Belief; Interest having
often an Influence, we know, upon the best and justest Balance. There were also
great Ministers of State we see, as Triguilla and his Associats, who satisfied
thus not only their private Revenge, but hoped to start perchance a New Hare, to
amuse and divert the Senate, from reflecting on their ill Conduct and Managery.
But who can we in all reason imagine so transported at the King's famed Escape,
as the pardoned and lately Indemnifi'd Heruli, who forsooth in outward
Profession, were of the Gothic Religion, as 5 Secul. page 369.
Gualterus shows, and being always we may be sure, on the catch (having
according to An. 494. 32.
Baronius no small Party in the Kingdom) could not but Doat on his Royal
Person, with a mode^^^^ True Protestant Zeal and Passion.

This Accident therefore put certainly that dutiful Party a-Gog; The Joy of the
Heruli
for what Prerogative, what Heir or faithful Subject to the Crown, could now,
they thought, stand the shock, when the vey noise of the Danger of Liberty and
Religion was able to ruin and defeat all Opposition. Nay supposing a Plot, it
would seem (they well knew) an Injus^ice, not to run down every body of the
Popes Communion: So that at length no Loyal nor Envied Goths should escape
their hands, since (besides the Power and Effect of downright Lies) any
ordinary Alliance, any casual Conversation, or any Neighbourly courtesy, done
to a Romanist, would be ground enough of Clamor; a Monster not to be resisted,
when once the Multitude, are thoroughly heated and enraged.

^oet^us fo^nd Guilty i^ the Senate.
Thus then (according to ^ll-probable Conjecture by the Premises) stood the
People generally affected, (every body speaking and none hearing) when
Boetius's Affair was brought into the Senate; Nor could Magic now, or any
unlawful Science be needful to find the success of it; for (as Sent. 5.
Causinus to this effect asserts) Part of the Members of that great Assembly,
fearing to be deemed Accomplices: Others being mortal Enemies to the Prisoner,
and the Rest following the Violence of the Stream and Torrent, all of them
unanimously voted him Guilty, notwithstanding the Experience they had of his
unparalled Integrity, and the insurmontable Objections against the Witnesses.

For first as to Opilio (tho I cannot positively say) that having Perjuriously
accused others, What the Witne^s we^e.
He got out of Prison, and so to a foreign Convent or Religious House, yet
Prosa. 4. lib. 1.
Boethius assures us, That he fled (after many Misdeeds) to the very Horns of
the Altar for Sanctuary, and so Stole from Ravenna to avoid a Brand or Rogues
Mark in his Forehead, which otherwise he was to undergo. In the next place as
for Basilius, the same unquestionable Author declares, Ibid.
That he was hunted for his Villainies from Court, being also over-loaden'd with
many Debts. Nay who can tell (if all Particulars had been examined and known)
but he might have then been Starving in their Marshalsea, or Common Prison,
even when the said Boethius and his Party, were pretended to be most Buisy, and
consequently (besides the Fear of him) to have stood in the greatest need of
his Help and Service.

Boethius sent to Prison.
Boethius being (as I mentioned) found Guilty, was presently sent to a close
Prison at Pavia, his Virtuous Lady (according to Sect. 5.
Causin) getting only the Liberty of bidding him Adieu. But never did he in the
whole Course of his Life (after he had once dried up the Tears caused by so
unexpected an Accident;) enjoy himself more than in that Confinement; for here
he made his near Approches to his Creator; Here he Stormed Heaven, and took it
by Violence; and here also, in imitation of Cicero (who wrote of the
Immortality of the Soul, upon the loss of his beloved Tullia) did he compose,
as Vit. Boet.
Martianus observes in his Life, that famous Treatise, De Consolatione
Philosophiae; a Book which showed the Heathen with what Transcendency and
Charms^ Morality could appear, when it once had the Advantage of the Christian
Dress, and which also discovers his own great Innocence and Candor; a grand
cause of his Writing it, as the said Martianus Ibid. His Complaints.
declare^^

His Ca^se we see was Hard from the beginning, to the and; but of all the
Particulars none seemed harder to him, than these that follow; for speaking of
the pretended Letters, and consequently of the other Accusations, He uses these
Words P^osa. 4. lib. 1.
Quarum Fraus aperta p^tnisset, si nobis ipsorum Confessione. Delatorum (quod
in omnibus Negotiis maximas vires habet) uti licuisset. The meaning of which
is; That could he have gotten Copies of his Accusers first Narratives,
Informations, Depositions, and such like Confessions, and Liberty to use them,
he would (by that mos^ Killing and convincing Evidences have made their Fraud
and Perjury Manifest. Then in the close of this Section or Paragraph He cries
out. Ibid.
Videre autem videor nefarias Sceleratorum Officinas Gaudio, Laetitiaque
fluitantes; Perditissimum quemque novis Delationum Fraudibus imminentem; jacere
Bonos nostri Discriminis terrore prostratos; Flagitiosum quemque ad audendum
Facinus Impunitate, ad efficiendum vero Praemiis incitari. That is to say
(considering the Premises) He could as it were see from his very Prison (so
many hundred of Miles from Rome) how the Nefarious and Profligate Triumphed, how
every Miscreant, stood racking his Fancy; for some new Project or other to
accuse, i. e. how to be a Principle, or at least some Collateral and
By-Witness. Again, He saw how Good Men were confounded and dismayed at the
terror of his hard chance; and lastly, how the ^lagitious were incited by
Impunity to dare at Villainies, and then by Rewards to effect them. These are
some of his Complaints.

His Enemies having now (as they thought) gained the point, The Witnesses
deemed Villains by the People.
gloried not a little in it; but presently they felt themselves at a stand, and
uneasy; for time settling the passions of the giddy Mobile, the Artifices of
Grandees, with the quality and contradictions of the Witnesses, began to be
generally considered and talked of.

Cyprianus, Cyprianus Forger of the Intercepted Letters.
a Fellow as villainous in his Pen, as Tongue, (but whether of ^he Clergy or
Laity, History is silent) was now owned, as Sect. 5.
Causin says, to be the Forger of the Letters: Nor do Authors menti^n how they
came to be interce^ted; therefore, in all probability, being directed to
Boethius by the Conspirators, they privately gave notice that such things were
upon ^he Ro^d, and so they were taken by A^thority, in the hands of the common
Post, or Messeng^r.

The King m^v'd to order Boetius's Execution.
These free and public discourses of the people, creating in ^ypriaanus and his
Partisans much trouble, they by their Patrons attaqu'd the King; telling him no
doubt, That his Evidence, or Witnesses, must, by this Clemency, be either
vilified and disbelieved; or that he himself would be deemed Unjust, or, at
least, negligent of his own, and his Subjects Safety; For, if Boethius were
Innocent, why should he be a Prisoner? If Guilty, why not Executed as a Traitor?

His life offered, i^ he would conf^s^.
Theodoric upon this presently dispatched an Officer, to examine Boethius
further, and to assure him, (as S^ct. 7.
Causin expressly says) That he should find favor, would he declare the
particulars of the Fact alleged against him; If not, he was to prepare himself
forthwith to die. But what thing in the world can we conceive able to elevate
and transport the overjoyed Prisoner, like this Message! For no sooner was it
brought him, but, standing as it were on Tip-toes, and exulting in his
unexpected good fortune, he looked upon himself now in a much happier state,
than in his former Prosperity; When, after three Consulships, and the singular
Triumph of his two Sons, he was seated between them (as all Authors have it) in
the open Theater, to receive the applause and salutation of the people. He
therefore desired the King's Officer to tell his Majesty, * That his Conscience
and Age were above Threats and Allurements; That there never having been a
Plot, he could not tell him the Particulars; That he did infinitely rejoice,
that they now began to know his Accusers so well, as to need his Confirmation
of their Testimony. Then, making a Recapitulation of their Lives and Practices,
he declared he was ready for Death, as having long expected and desired that
happy day. So that, being carried not long after to the place of Execution, and
behaving himself there with the wonted Gallantry of a Roman, and the real Piety
of a Christian, he had his Head severed from his shoulde^s. He is beheaded.


Thus fell Boethius, Glorious in Heaven, and Honored here on Earth, by all that
ever read his story, as appears by the Dystic and Epigraphie on his Tomb, which
Martianus has (with other Verses) in his praise, recommended to Posterity. His
Epitaph.
Ecce Boethus adest in Caelo magnus, and omni
Perspectus mundo, mirus habendus homo.
Lo! here entombed does Great Boethius lie;
Great, when on Earth; now Greater, in the Sky.
Nor did the Ancients style him otherwise than a Martyr, He is esteemed a
Martyr, and why.
as being not only put to death Unjustly; that is to say, in the Scripture
phrase, Propter Iustitiam, for Righteousness-sake; as also, in Odium Fidei upon
the account of the hatred his Enemies bore to his Religion; but because he
suffered ( when they once offered him his life) for that grand Commandment,
Thou shall not bear False Witness against thy Neeghhour. Let us then now
conclude with the Wise man's saying; Eccl. 1. 9
The thing that has been, is that which shall be; and that which is done, is
that which shall be done; and THERE IS NO NEW THING UNDER THE SUN.

THe story of Boethius being ended, we will now consider a little the silly
malice of our Narrative-monger, or Dwarf in wit; Dwarfs every body knows are
still great Taletellers in the most Classic and Authentic Records of Chivalry;
I say, we will a little consider his silly malice, having acted here the part
of some Witnesses (since the landing of Brute) who, to serve (as they thought)
a prsent turn, swear not only what clashes and interferes with several branches
of their former Evidence, but what plainly ruins their whole project and design.

Thus does this happy Writer make, by his foolish Illation, a Rod for himself
and friends; For, were His R. Highness a Papist, and therefore to be prosecuted
for deserting the Religion of His late Ancestors now established by Law: How
can this same Writer, I say, with his Apostate Brethren, avoid ruin and
destruction also? unless by the vile and damnable practice they use, even that
of the Simonians, Adamites, and other Old Troublers of Christian unity, who in
former times complied, as the Spanish and Portugal Jews still do, with all Laws
entrenching on their Advantage, though never so opposite to their real
Pro^ession, and Belief. Besides, this Doctri^e highly vindicates the Papists in
the beginning of the Reformation, and even the worst of their Actions here in
England, and what continually they are hitten in the teeth with; I mean Qu.
Mary's Tragical and Bloody Scene. For, if every body that peacably and modestly
differs from the Religion of a Nation out of conscience, must be presently
deemed a Julian, and one that deserves not to breathe: why should the Squire
and his turbulent Tribe blame the proceedure of that unhappy Princess, who only
according to Law, Punished those that had (in the Popish Dialect) Apostatized
from the Religion of their Ancestors; and from a Religion too warranted and
authorized (as the Queen verily thought) even by God and his Holy Word.

But our Author is not contented with collaterally blanching and defending in
this manner Popery; but quotes even the Preamble of an Act then made, which
says; J^lian's Life, p. 96.
That the Protestants, did out of their Malicious Stomachs Pray against the
Queen's Majesty, That God would turn her Heart from Idolatry to the true Faith,
or shorten her days, or take her quickly out of the Way. A Prayer (as the Act
further urges) never heard of, or read to have been used by any good Christian,
against any Prince, tho a Pagan or an Infidel. Now what can Papists say more
for themselves? Nay, does not their V^d. Reply, p. 195
Apologist urge this very unruly proceedure of the ^ro^^stants, as the Cause
(among such other pieces of Zeal) that made the Queen so severe, and
consequently recall that Toleration, which she had granted during the two first
years of her Reign. Nor has our Religious ESQVIRE any other inference from this
Villainous Citation, but to tell us to this effect; Jul^a^'s Life, p. 98
That the Popish Parliament was blinded, and mistaken; The Primit^ve Christians
not being for If's and Ands, but for IVLIAN's downright Destruction. So that
first here is a Scandal and a Lie too cast upon Christianity in general; for no
Man ^ver publicly Prayed for the Emperors Death, but only repeated the Psalms
against Idols and Idol-makers, desiring God to Judge his own Cause, to remember
his Vine, the Wild Boar, etc. as all sorts of Jews and ^hristians do, when they
suffer Persecution and Trouble. And secondly, Here is a vindication of Bonner,
and the Laws then in being; so that he wilfully Stab's FOX under the fifth
Rib, and with one ^uff Blow's up his friend CARE and all his Works: For whereas
a Papist (when pressed with that Bloodshed) used Commonly to say to his
Antagonists; Pray Sirs break not my head with Stories of Co^ks and Bulls, I
a^prove not the Transactions you mention, were all true that is Written; Now we
shall have the very same Papist (after reading our wise SQUIR^) make this pert
addi^ion, to his former Harangue; But Gentlemen, If you will have me further
speak, I refer my self to the Tale-Teller and the worst of his Gang, and let
them tell you, whither any Magistrate in England would spare me, or any good
Man pity my Sufferings, Should I Pray to God, To make the King a Papist, or
else to take him presently out of the World.

In the same manner has Old Hickeringili (that Babe of Grace, that Neophyte, or
young Convert) in the very last Leaf of his Black Nonconformist (to have it the
more in view and remembered) belsh't out the ranckestand most dangerous Notion,
that ever Popery vented against the Protestant Religion; just as if F. Parsons
or some other Notable Jesuit had had the guidance of his very Pen. His words
are these: Black Non-Conf. Pos^scrip^.
Well, this I Will say for the Pope, and a fig for him; (for we ought to give the
Devil his due, much more the Archbishop of all Bishops, the Pope.) I say, give
him his due, he builds the fabric of his Ecclesiastical policy rationally, if
the foundation were true; But Protestants do not, that confess Themselves and
their Churches fallible and f^^il, as does the Church of England in her 19th.
Article.

Now, what is the plain English of all this? Is not his intention first to make
all our Prelates Pen^ioners to the Pope, and Birds of a feather? So that, by
still adding to the Odium, (and the annual Procession of the Bishops with his
Holyness's Pageant was designed for it) he hopes the True Protestants will be
no longer contented with the bare wounding my Lord of Chichester's Coach-horses
(as they have done) but burn the whole Hierarchy, when their Head, the
ARCHBISHOP of all BISHOPS, as he maliciously styles him, is next condemned to
a Bonefire at Temple Bar, or in Smithfield.

In the next place, how will a Papist chuckle and crow at the asse^^ion; it
being what the Bellarmines, the Baronius's, the Ignatians, and the rest of
their greatest Hect^rs have ever aimed at. F^^ on ^he one side, the Church of
England is rendered by him to be a pitiful, silly thing, and no more to be
heeded or minded, than an old woman's chat, or tattle; and on the other side,
the Pope, and his ^reatures, are applauded as excellent Architects, rational in
their fabric, and in fine what not? only, out of fo^m sake, (for otherwise he
would be hanged for a downright Papist) he doubts, forsooth, whether the
foundation be so firm and solid as it should be. So that still (without the
trouble of breaking ground, and intrenching.) he gives a subtle Priest the
Counterscarp at a dash; I mean, he puts him (without more ado, upon the
desirable and ^ushious Topic of the CHURCH, a Notion, which he continually
dreams on, and is no sooner started, but he runs division without end; as the
famous Whitaker hints to the Jesuit Campian in these words: Whit. cont.
Duraeum, p. 246
Catholici vestri turbulentis aliarum disputationum procellis jactati, in isto
Ecclesiae Portu libenter acquiescunt. This is the Recipe which every Papist
makes so many brags of; which he offers to the Rich, and to the Poor; to the
Scholar, and to the Fool. This is the Hook with which he catches your Bristows,
your Bellassis, your Berkshires, and the rest of them; and this is the Bait
which they lay for the great Duchess, as well as for the low and humble
Chambermaid.

Is not then this Conventicler (for I Will never own him a Minister of the
Gospel) a rare Champion of the Reformed Religion, that shoots thus hand over
head among them he calls Protestants, even without any caution, or pre-arming
them? But what will not blind malice do? or what will not a madman venture,
who dares not only (as may be seen all along in his Scandalum magnatum) equal
himself (though a mean Parson) to a Bishop of London; but represents himself so,
that any body (that knows nothing but what the Libel says) must take him for a
far better man than the Earl of Northampton's Son; a Family not only
Illustrious for the rank it has in the Catalogue of Peers, and of Note, as
being a Compton: but to be honored and esteemed for the signal Loyalty of a
Father, for those faithful and eminent Sons; and spes crescentis Iuli, for the
hopes of a Grandson, that may perchance outvie that Noble and Great Subject,
his Great-grand-father.

Enough then of Hickeringill, an honest man one may swear when, upon a Heady
pique, he could presently herd himself with a Race of Animals, made blacker
than ^iends in his own vid. that Sermon.
Curse ye Meroz; Enough, I say, now of honest Hick, who has yet this excuse
left for himself and Mr. Julian, that several True Protestants, long before
them, have, in their very Hue's and Cry's against Popery, zealously taught
their Flock the horridest Tenets which they brand any of the Red-letter'd
Gallants with; as may be seen at large in the late King's Scotch-Declaration.
vid. that large folio Declarat


Having therefore done with JULIAN's Life, and being come now to the Section of
passive Obedience: how can I with good manners pass by this Aphorism of that
Primitive Saint, the True Protestant Mr. Goodman, in his very Page 52
Treatise Of Obedience; For there he tells us in express terms, That although
Popes, for sundry Enormities, have deposed Kings by unlaw^ul Authority; the
reason yet that moved them so to do, was Honest, Just, and meet to be received
and executed by the body of every Commonwealth Is not this an excellent way of
destroying Babylon? And are not Papists like to repent, and be ashamed of the
Principles and Actions laid to their charge, if this Puritan Divinity be true?
But Mr. Julian has out gone all his bold Predecessors many a furlong; for he
dares not only call St. Gregory's counsel of Prayers and Tears (in time of
Persecution) Julian's l^fe, page 95.
Treason: but spends several pages against this following position; ibid. page
85.
That the Gospel is a suffering Doctrine, and so far from being prejudicial to
Caesar' s Authority, that it makes him the Minister of God; and commands all
its Professors to give him, and all that are in Authority under him, their
dues; and rather to die, than resist him by force. To which he answers, That,
at this rate, under a P^pish Successor, the Lives of all Protestants shall ly
at the Mercy of any Justice of Peace; And then he runs on in his old gibbe^is^,
to the very end of the Chapter.

It Is not my intention (as I mentio^ed in the beginning) to answer him in all
particulars, for that has been amply and excellently done already; only now and
then I mmst take leave to show you the Devil by his Claw, or clove^ foot, and
consequently to let you see what a TRUE PROTESTANT is; to wit, One that cares
not what he grants or what he deny's, so it conduces (in his poor Judgment) to
his private design; which is the destruction of the Monarchy. This shall make
him therefore to paint JULIAN a Cherubin, or at least a Lamb, or very moderate
Prince; on the other side to describe the Primitive Christians (especially the
most famed for Learning and ^iet^) to be a Company or Legion of Thebean
Coxcombs, or else more Factious and Rebellious than the Fallen Angels; This
shall oblige him also to furnish the Papists (as has been showed) with Arms
both Defencive and Offencive; ane this shall cause him, like a true Huntsman,
to let the Hare (which with great eagerness and Cries he has long persu'd) get
home to her Form, that he may have (at a seasonable and Critical time) the
advantage of another chase^ And truly seeing I am talking of JULIAN, and of a
True Protestant, I must not pass by the Hugonet BLONDEL, who (to confute
forsooth Purgatory, as his Adversary V^^ Cra^^se^ against B^ondel.
Crasset shows) decry's the famous and long celebrated Prophesies of the SYBYLS
as forged, making the most Ancient Christians the Forgers, tho JULIAN himself,
who sought all manner of means to disparage Christianity, never questioned the
Books, nor taxt its professors with any Cheat.

But now before I end with JULIAN, I must tell my Reader, that the^ Popish
Writers have had the start of this his SQUIRE; for as he draws inferences from
his Master against them, with by-blows (home to purpose) against the Church of
England; so they have their Remarks too upon this famous Man, not very
advantageous I Will assure you to true Protestants. For whosoever consults
Gualterus, a Jesuit eminent for History, he shall find the four following, and
only Observations upon that Apostate; And by the way I must add this, that his
drift all along is to make the Calvinian Doctrine to agree ad amussim, even to
a hair with some old condemned Heretic or Infidel.

His first Note is, That Tabula Chron. p. 300.
IVLIAN was a Monk (for, you must know for his Security, and to avoid Suspicion
he became one) and presently with his Coul, He left Christi^nity also. so that
thus we may see, that SAINTS, who for their profit, and to serve a turn, can
(contrary to their Judgment) exteriourly comply with this or that Religion,
will at the first advantageous opportunity, not barely leave their Coul, that
is to say, their Profession, but shake hands as we see (if it be more
convenient for them) with Christianity, and all Morality too. His Second
observa^ion is; 2
That as after IVLIAN's Apostasy, He made himsely High Priest; so our Henry
the VIII. after his abandoning Popery, would be deemed Head of the Church, a
power his Successors (as he tells us) still assume. Here then we find our
Jesuit and a true Protestant (for all their noise and quarrel) to go hand in
hand; the Presbyterians and other Sectaries being as eager forsooth against the
Supremacy as a Papist; Nor has Mr. Calvin, nor Mr. Luther been less Satirical
and Touchy in that Point, than the great Guy of Warwick, the mighty Bellarmin
himself. 3 and 4.
His third and fourth Observations are, upon JULIAN's Calvinistical proceedure
in pulling down Crosses, and destroying our SAVIOURS's ^ffigies, even that
miraculous Statue ( mentioned by Eusebius) which the ^oman that had the Issue
of Blood erected in his memory. Now how exactly the English JULIANS have
imitated their Ancestors herein; We who have seen the late War, and felt the
Plagues which accompanied it, can to their eternal Honor abundantly Witness.

Nay, neither must, nor can we forget, how godly Sir W. Waller (a man Loyal in
his Father, Loyal in Himself, and a great hater of Beads, (especially those
that look like Pearl) publicly burnt the very Picture of Christ in the Palace
yard, to the horror of all good Protestants, the real, and not pretended,
Children of the Church of England. Nor are we to wonder, that those who
approved or gave a helping hand to such an action, should afterward cut and
slash His Royal Highness's Picture, or make so many desperate offers even at
the ^rown and Honor of the King Himself.

Having done with this second Section (which shows us not only the Obedient
Principles of Mr. Julian and his Fellows, but how still they promote Popery, by
their Arguments, Parallels, and In^erences) we will now hasten to the Third and
last, though he cannot be but Victorious there, especially when I my self must
already sing him an Io Poean.

The Argument of the said Section is, a Comparison between Popery and Paganism;
and so let it be; Yet in Justice I must inform my Reader, that we are not one
whit beholding to the Pilfering Squire for the Simile, seeing the Nation has
had it long ago from Vid. His Survey of Popery.
Dr. Sutcliffe, and many a grave Retailer since. In the next place, had I the
faculty of Squabling; for I confess and declare -- Timeo Danaos and dona
ferentes; I fear light it self, when it is conveyed to me by a Par^y, who under
the shelter of the deepest Execrations and Oaths, and by the Treacherous Style
of HAIL SOVEREIGN, Your most Dutiful, your most Obedient, and most Loyal
Subjects, can lay hold on their Kings Sword or Milita, th^n Seize his Royal
Person, and lastly Cut his Throat; I say had I a Squabling faculty (and such
Mountebanks afford sufficient matter) my Tongue and Hands are tied, professing
still (as I did in the beginning) That I heartily pity all the Errors of the
Papists, and will never desend them therein; Though for their Loyalty, I think
them in general very Eminent, and especially those Gallant Men I knew, during
the late Rebellion. Let then Paganism, Calvino-T^rs^ismus proves a true
Protestant a Turk.
TURCISM and all the ^alse Doctrines of Popery perish together; yet this must
not hinder me from telling the SQUIRE to his Face, That it is better be a Papist
then a true Protestant, for several reasons, besides the formentioned brand of
Mahometism. Therefore seeing many of the Cabal have made mighty Complaints, and
been extremely angry forsooth with the Church of England for this Assertion, I
think it very fit to explain and set down what She and her Loyal Children mean
by it.

But before I come to particulars, I must premise this; That no body (I suppose
thinks) unless we take Sectaries in a Lump, and together, but that the TRUE
PROTESTANT, and a GOOD ONE, (I mean a Reformed Dissenter, and a Church of
England Man) agree in more points of Faith, or differ openly in fewer, then do
a good Protestant, and a Papist; from whence arises the fallacy and surprise;
that seeing this is so, How a good Protestant can assert a thing which puts him
at such a Distance with a Presbyterian, Independent, and the rest of the Godly
Iuncto.

I answer, that Judaism and Gentilism differed in far more particulars from an
Othodox Christian, than He from any of the first Hereties; Yet many of the
Faithful Believers (in those times, and why not since) had rather been Jews or
Gentiles ( as more excusable at the last day) than Ebionits, Cerinthians, or
e^pecially Nicolaitans, so detested by God in the Rev. 2. 15
Apocalips. And here be pleased to remember, that a Man has no more inclina^ion
to Popery, by making this declaration, than he has to be SHOT, because he had
rather die so, than be HANGED. This is the Scandal which the true Saints
asperse a rational Axiom with; and I am sure in the late Rebellion both
Presbyterians and Independents did often use it against each other, whilst they
were discovering their mutual Nakedness and Villa^ies. Besides ^ince every good
Protestant, that stands in their way is Blackned by them with the odious name
of Papist; what can be more pertinently urged (after he has given the
Calumniators the lie by ^requenting the Church and Sacraments) than by thus
asserting, That it is yet better be a Papist, than a Sectary or true Protestant
(a NICKNAME of their own giving) for these, and a thousand other Reasons.

I. What Man had not rather (of the two) be of a Religion, which was once true
according to the opinion of very good Protestants (which seems to be grounded
on St. Paul's Congratulation, That the Romans 1.8.
Roman Faith was spoken of throughout the World) than of one that has been
always false and troublesome. And if a Man must believe (to Sodder up the breaks
and contradictions.) That all our opposite Sects (by uniting against the
Government) have a saving Faith; He will I fear at his Death say, Sit Anima mea
cum Philosophis; I wish my Sou^ then, with Socrates, Plato, S^neca, and such
like Philosophers.

II. The Church of Rome (according to all good Protestants too) is a true
Church, tho corrupt and diseased; for as a King remains a true one,
notwithstand his ill administration; and a Man is still a Man tho Leprous, so
this Church (they tell us) falls not by her ^rrors from being a Church, or
still having Jurisdiction. This made King James to call the Pope Vid. His work,
page 305.
Patriarch of the West; and this is the reason why the Priesthood and
Ordination of that See remains good here; and why the Church of England draws
thence her Succession and Descent; a thing zealously insisted upon by her
learned Members, and particularly by the smart and inquisitive Mr. Mason. Now
the Presbyterian Assembly (and much more that of the other Dissenters) is no
Church at all, having no Bishop, and therefore no Ordination or Sacraments: Nay
the Church of England in her Vid. Rogers, p. 86.
19th. Article defines the true Church to be, A Congregation of Faithful Men
that have the Sacraments duly administered; So that the wilful loosing this
Blessing is a Curse of the first Magnitude, depriving them that incur it, of
the very Candlestick, at least of the inestimable benefit of our Lords Supper,
which was instituted for our Refreshment and Strength, and for the remembrance
of his Passion till he comes.

III. What good Protestant would not sooner be of a Religion which converted us
from Paganism, and left (as Brit. p. 163.
Cambden says) Many Monuments of Piety and Devotion, to the Honor of God, and
the propagation of the Christian Faith; (And among these may be named Churches,
Bishoprics, Deaneries, Canonries, Colleges, etc.) I say what good Protestant
would not prefer such a Religion to One which (instead of advancing the
Christian Worship) has not only put us in constant broils, but profaned and
pulled down the very Churches themselves; and which de fa^to gobbled up and
swallowed (without the least stop or Kecking) the Lands of the Prelates, and
the other Ecclesiastical Governors? Nor would the Universities have stood two
years longer, had not God by a Miracle restored His Majesty.

IV. To come even to down right Popery, and their most ^^ightful Opinions; What
good ^r^testant would not rather with a Lutheran and a Papist believe (if Will
and Choice can make a Man believe) That Christ is corporally present after
Consecration, than as Sectaries do, That the outward part or sign of the
Sacrament is still mere Bread and Wine; a Tenet wholly opposite to our very
first Rudiments in Religion; for the public Catechism in the Common Prayer,
declares and tells us, * That the Body and Blood of Christ are verily and
indeed taken and received by the ^aithful in the Lords Supper.

V. Who had not rather Communicate under one Kind, than not at all; for several
of the true Protestants never do: Nay, in their very expressions they call the
SACRAMENTS by the name of Beggarly Elements, and Formalities beneath the Sain^s
and Regenerate.

VI. Who would not rather say AMEN to Prayers in the China or Coptic Languages,
where he is sure that the Bishops and other pious and wise Governors of the
Church framed them, than to the extemporary Vociferations of every Enthusiast;
to whom (as long experience has showed us) Tautologie and Nonsense are
Essential; And more especially when Sedition (we know) is their Aim, and
Blasphemy an usual Adjunct.

VII. Who will not deem it a less and a more pardonable error, To desire the
Prayers of a good fellow Creature, who (as it chances) hears not our Requests;
and to wish also a happy Voyage, and the speedy getting home of a friend, who
is already (it seems) at his Iourney's End (for thus in effect lies the
Insignificancy of Invocating Saints, and of Suffrages for the Dead) than in the
first place (omi^ting the many horrid Opinions of other Sects) to deny with
Vid. ^ez. Act. (...).
BEZA, and his Desciples the PRESBYTERIANS, Christ's descent into Hell, one of
the Triumphant Victories of his Death; And secondly to affirm His not d^ing for
all^ a Doctrine that (besides the Blackness of it) makes so many of their
Hypocondriacal Followers (commonly the quietest and best meaning People of the
Rout) to Hang themselves, and so ensure their Damnation out of mere fear of
being Damn'd^

And here again I must desire my Reader to remember what I have now said, dos
by no means prove any Popish opinion true, but only that the Phanatical
Doctrine is worse, and certainly what follows will yet more evidently make it
appear.

VIII. It Is better be under the lash of one spiritual Superior, than Ten
thousand Popes; Presbytery making every pragmatical Minister worse in some
respects than a Hildebrand, or any of his angry Successors; For, as to a
private man (unless he be like Wickliff, Oldcastle, and the like, very eminent
and remarkable) he will hardly or never be taken notice of by the Court of
Rome, and its great Officers; whereas, under Calvin's Iron Rod, no youthful Man
shall ^e merry; no body mus^ so much as dance; no Abigal or Handmaid shall
cramp Sir Roger with the Book of Martyrs, or play little tricks with his
Reverend Cloak, or wilfully fail perchance in well starching his mystical band,
but will be presently sent headlong to the Devil, or forced to a Penance harder
(it may be) in their opinion, than going half way to him. Then, for great
Monarchs, and great Governors, let any man judge, whether it be not first more
honorable for them to contend with a Foreign Bishop and Prince, than with an
Assembly of their meanest Subjects, both in Quality and Estate. But in the next
place, when we come to consider the peril of their sacred Persons, there is no
manner of equality in the matter; for there are even Laws in every Popish
Kingdom against the Popes Bulls, Sentences, and the like: and the entrance of
his Legates and Envoys may be legally hindered; Nay, the very Decrees of his
Councils (as we see by those of Trent) are received and unreceiv'd as Princes
order. Besides this, the stout ones have Imprisoned ruffling Popes; as did the
Emperor Charles V. and Philip the Fair of France. Others have laughed at his
Holiness's anger, and beaten him with his own Weapons; that is to say, have
opposed him with the Bishops and Clergy. Thus dealt the Venetians with Paul V.
and thus served this French King the late Alexander VII. and especially, the
present Innocent XI. whom the Gallican Church has so notably baited. Our Will.
Rufus, our Henry I^ our Edw. I. and several other of our Kings, (and reckoned
also good Sons of the Church) have disputed, and got the point of the Pope; and
whosoever reads the story of Hen. II. and King John, will find, that they had
done the like, had they not been altogether inconstan^ and irresolute. Now,
under the Presbyterian Yoke, what Prince ever contended with those Tyrants,
without the utmost shame and loss; for these Egyptian Taskmasters being at
home, and not only knowing their own strength, but (like skilful Knight
^rrants^ the defects of their Adversaries Armor, they never strike but the
Blow proves deadly, their greatest mercy being to make their ^rince sit
publicly in the Stool of Repentance; nor must their Synodical Ordinances be
disputed or disobeyed by any Governor whatsoever. These and the like vexations
made King James (who understood the Party fully) so often to repeat that true
and witty Apothegm No Bishop no King; as also be so severe with them in his
Basilicon Doron, as to incite even his hopeful Heir, the great Prince Henry
against them.

IX. Let us now come to the Deposing Doctrine; and whosoever reads but Knox,
Bucanan, Goodman, Bishop Bancro^ts dangerous Positions, the Disse^ters sayings
etc. (all written within the four Seas) Must needs aver and say that no Imp of
Hell has ever yet out done them on this Subject. Then for the Practice, DOCTOR
HEYLIN's History of Presbyterians (without the pains of searching and turning
over Volumns) plainly shows, That the proportion between the Roman and
Calvinian Heroes, in this dispute (and more especially if we consider the extent
of Jurisdiction, and the age of them) is like the Tyber to the Mediterranean;
nor are the Sain^s ever contented with the bare deposing of a Governor, but
like Turks pursue the whole Line, and which is more are never quiet till they
have altered the very Government also. But what can a man think, when we add
this aggrevation; that not only English Papists have it seems written several
Treatises against the Power of Deposing Kings, but even in Popish Countries,
the Santarelluses, the Marianas, the Schopiuses, the Bellarmins, the Suarezes,
the Becanuses, and other Books have been publicly Condemned or Burnt, as the
Vid. Compend. p 75.
Popelings themselves make appear; and which is yet much further, the very
Priests and Supporters of the Triple Crown have this very year in France (as
our News Books publish) damned the said Opinion to the pit of Hell; a thing
never yet done by any one Presbyterian Author that I know of (tho Justi^ied by
Thousands) and much further from having been openly censured in any of their
Convocations or Assemblies. Nay our Goodmanites and Cargilites will bitterly
Exclaim at the Doctrine as Antichristian in the Pope, and yet die with it in
their Mouths, and own it with their last breath as an Article of Faith. Nay how
have the party even in London labored and sweated like so many Cyclopses in
their Caves and secret Dens; and at last (thinking themselves strong and
irresistible) how openly have they declared, with the impudence of Prostitutes,
For the putting by the Heir of the Crown (the Prelude of degrading our present
Sovereign) and this notwithstanding his often hazarding his Royal Person in
defense of his King and Country.

It Is out of the hatred to Monarchy, and not out of the least fear or
apprehension of Religion, that moves them to this fury; for (as most of our
notedst Writers of the times remark) no true or pretended Authority since the
Reformation winkt more at Papists, than the loud Criers against Popery, as soon
as they got into the Saddle, or would have sooner given them Toleration, had
not the said Papists been such known and desperate Enemies to a Rep^blick.

But further, What Man in England of the least understanding or Moment, that
did not as much know the Duke's Religion since the year 74, as since that of
78. Yet till Oates's Information or Discovery (for then the whole gang were
Cock a Hoop) how did the considerablest of the harmless Lambs still run to that
compassionat Prince for favors? Did not Dr. Owen and the chief of their
respective Levites, and in fine all the eminent Men (as well Pastors as Sheep)
that found themselves agriev'd, make applications to him, tho the possibility
of his Succession (against which none of them exclaimed, till they could stand
on their own Legs) had then the same fatality and inconvenience attended it, as
at present. Nay the PLOT should raise in any Man (that does not effectively
deny it) a higher esteem and admiration of this Great Man than before; seeing
Oats and Bedlo have both Sworn, That the Conspirators ever dreaded his
knowledge of their Designs; notwithstanding it tended on the one hand to the
Establishment of his now supposed Religion, and on the other, to the exal^ing
him to the Crown it self.

But the partiality of the Saints (when any thing crosses, as they think, their
purpose) will not only damn BEDLG, but OATS too, and all his Family and
Abettors; for thus they served DUGDALE, though not long before he had been so
highly vouched (...) Oath by their Martyr COLLEGE of famous memory.

Thus too TURBER VIL was used, who^ was so serviceable, that he even carried
away the Bell from his elder Brethren, in the Trial of my L. Stafford. Thus it
has also fared with SMITH, a Man once honored with several Elogiums; and among
othe^s, with that of his great Le^rning, by reason of his Narrative, which
(like Affricanus, Asi^ticus, etc.) gave even luster and distinction to his
NAME; but now this very famous piece (as an addition to his Misfortunes) is
declared and confessed by a True Vid. No. Protestant Plo^ fi^ st part, p. 31.
Protestant to be written by a PHANATIC. But who knows, (to the honor of the
Phanatical Tribe) but they have been the Writers and Inventers too of all the
NARRATIVES? and certainly, that horrid imposition on the People of BEDLO's
Narrative of the Fires, does abundantly confirm us; CARE being the Author, and
three or four Tender-conscienc'd BOOKSELLERS the Promoters, as the
All-discovering OBSERVATOR has most fully proved.

But of all the scrupulous and conscientious Witnesses, I must needs confess
none have been so stigmatized, and hardly used, as the IRISH; for the Godly
have even made the Testimony of all the Natives of that Kingdom Proverbial; and
yet, Who but They brought these poor Men upon the Stage? Who but They fed them
with the fat things, and with the very Grapes of Canaan, till at last they put
their Teeth on edge? and Who but They were the common Vouchers and Compurgators
for their Manners, and the learned Heralds and Antiquaries ^o prove their great
Descent and Quality? Yet now, how many mean Villains, Scoundrels, Beggars,
Papists, Tories, Bog-trotters, not to be credited by any Christian, etc. were
they called, after they once appeared against the Brethren? Nay, so illuminated
were all the True Pro^estants on a sudden, that, notwithstanding the Oaths of
seven or eight of these Teigues, upon whose Testimony the Parliament voted an
IRISH PLOT; and, notwithstanding half as many Englishmen, who had (with the
general applause of the Saints) so illus^rated and made evident the English
Plot, that several were Hanged and Executed upon their Oaths; and,
notwithstanding also a pretty Paper, declared Treason by the four INNS of
COURT, and by the Loyal Addresses of most of the NATION: they brought in the
Bill IGNORAMUS, though some of the Jury were of such tender consciences, (a
thing that cannot be too often remembered, and which our Chronicles will never
forget) they could Indict, (and the Bill was also found!) no meaner a Person
than the Earl of Danby, upon the Account of one single man's Accusation, who
was then actually at the Bar for Treason, and whose Evidence plainly tended to
his own security and advantage.

But who dares or can censure a Iury-man's Conscience, say they, and their
Apologists? I answer, a MONSTER that has no Reason, no Principle, but Will;
that can think any thing a Sin, which runs counter to his Aim; and yet, to
promote it, shall (without scruple) do the same thing, and a thou^and times
worse. For were not Sir G. WAKEMAN's IVRY Middlesex^Gentlemen, and Protestants
of Account and Estates? And was it not proved to them in open Court, That
CORKER was never President of the Benedictins, contrary to Oa^es's positive
Oath? with many other by particulars, as man be seen in the printed vid. Si^^^.
Wa^e^'s Trial. p. 75
Trial. But besides this, did not Sir Philip Lloyd declare, That the said
Oats, before the Counci^ (when Sir George was first accused by him,) called
upon God, and with lifted-up hands, (being pressed to a positive Accusation by
the Board) cried, ib. p. 55.
That he knevv n^thing m^re against him, than what he (...) already accused
him of; which was only about some (...)-says from the Jesuits. Yet, for (...)
and Sir Philip's being ^ M^n of Quality; nay, a Man (...) (...) Co^^^^.
Pap^s^ rightly urges) (...) not for his head assert th(...) ^hing^ well
knowing, (...) ^ouncel, and my LORD SHAFTSB. their then President, would not
countenance a Lie; I say, notwithstanding all these circumstances, that JURY
was so calumniated by all True Protestants, that One of them (I remember)
coming upon the CHANGE next day, was houted at, and shunned as if he had been
infected, or the most infamous man alive. Nor are their Tongues and Pe^s yet
quiet in that Affair; and ^s for Sir Philip, they have thirst^d for his very
Blood ever since.

But to proceed a little further upon the same Key; what Attempts have the
Tender Consciences made upon His Royal Highness's very Honor and Life! For
first, though Oats and Bedlo (as I said before) freed that excellent Prince from
any Conspiracy against the King or his Crown; yet no sooner did Dangerfield
appear, with that most impossible story, That three of the Imprisoned Lords,
when they had already smarted for their supposed Credulity, when they had
several Popish younger Brothers at hand, and Partisans (to be sure) in any Plo^
of Theirs; and when they well saw what Rewards and Encouragements all the
Discoverers received, should yet take a common Rogue, a mere Stranger, out of
Newgate, to Kill the King. I say, no sooner did this Fellow appear with his
impossible story (and though afterward he was proved (in the Trial where he was
concerned) the greatest Recorded Villain that has been heard of, and false also
in the main particulars of his Averments; and, which is more, a Forger of an
proved by Justice Foster in Council.
Affidavit even against His Highness;) but the whole Party toiled like Bulls to
have him received for a good Witness; which would have certainly succeeded, had
not the Peers utterly rejected it, as abominable. Nay, to show further how
tender a thing a True Protestant Conscience is! they asserted in Print, vid.
that Pamphlet.
That Dangerfield' s Testimony ( though he were proved Perjured) was te be taken
against a Papist; and all this passion and heat only to Murder the first
Prince of the Blood; For the Reader must know, that Dangerfield had formerly
been with the vid. Dang Narrative
King, Duke, Lord Peterborough and Secretary Coventry, and had thereby
sufficient room to expatiate in, as True Protestants and the Spirit should
suggest. Now, seeing this hopeful Youth had been (as I said) with the King,
Duke, etc. he and his infer, That his account must be True forsooth, since it
shows (they say) he was mightily entrusted with secrets, by his having access
to such Great Persons; and yet who knows not, but the common Hangman, if he
says, he has a Treason to discover, (and Dangerfield pretended to know of a *
Presbyterian-Plot) shall have admittance to His Majesty, and to his greatest
Officers, at an easy rate.

In the next place, when this project failed, Fitz-Harys afforded a new one;
for though he were sent to Newgate by the King and Council, as being (besides
other Crimes and Suspicions) taken with a Treasonable Libel in his Pocket, yet
durst two or three City-Officers go and examine him, tho a Prisoner of State,
and committed by that Supreme Power; So that presently after, he that had
several things to say against the True Protestants, (had the King or His
Ministers encouraged such Accusers) had now God knows what to declare, not only
concerning the Popish Plot, and many Great Persons not yet accused, but even
against His Royal Highness; and how undeniable and plain an Evidence (as the
times stood) would this have been, if the Lords had received the Impeachment,
every body is fully sensible. Nay, the Peers were highly exclaimed at, because
they waved their own Jurisdiction, and left the Malefactor to the Common Law.
Nor did the men of conscience fail to threaten the King's Bench, if they dared
to meddle with him; and all this (we see) to gain a new Witness, who, by the
help of their Cries, and other Artifices, would have certainly at last
overthrown the very Government. Yet, after all this huge Clutter and Do, when
the poor Creature came to the Gallows, he sufficiently showed how he had been
tampered with, and that he knew nothing of any Plot, but what tended to the
Eternal Shame, and not Rest, of Mr. Baxter's Saints, as may be seen in Dr.
Hawkins's Narrative all along.

Lastly, (for I Will run to no more particulars at present) let any sober man
consider, what a fearful stir they would have made, and how many fatal
disorders and confusions must have ensued their improvement if Mr. THYN's
Murder had not been discovered as it was? The Horsemen of Israel (we see)
were all booted and spurred, and unanimously ready (for the Quiet again of the
Kingdom to throw the Fact on the Papists, who now have some reason (I confess)
to boast of Miracles; for had not the Assassins been miraculously taken (as it
were) in the Act, which even hindered them from the impudence of denying it,
they would have been so far from being searched after, that a man might have
run in danger of the Pillory, (especially if some tender consciences were of
his Jury) for offering so much as to suspect them. Things therefore standing
thus, how could the Popish Duke (as they call him) have escaped the new
Witnesses (that were already consulting the Coffee-houses for their Lesson)
when there was so much malice in the Party, and some small pretense for a Lie?
Nor should any of the obnoxious Ministers o^ State, nor any Courtier (Mr. Thyn
being reputed an Enemy to the Court) have mist of being hampered, no not the
King Himself been free from Calumny; and truly, some have had the impudence
already to suspect Him of knowing the whole Plot, and all its Appendices,
unless that of Pickering's Silver Bullets; for as to Sir George W^keman's Pills
and Design, Sir Philip Lloyd's being sent to his Trial by the Board, makes it
plain, and (as they think) beyond dispute.

Now, after all these cursed Defamations of His Majesty; these bloody
Conspiracies against His faithful Brother and Heir; and the many Endeavors
against His best Protestant Friends and Servants: I would ask the SQUIRE
himself, whether we have not reason to believe infallibly, and hand over head,
every PLOT, and every Story of their recommendation; and especially since we
find they can at pleasure cry down, and in effect perjure any Witness; even
those that have assured us, upon their Words and Oaths, (and what else has yet
proved it?) of a Damnable and Hellish PLOT of the PAPISTS against the KING? But
since I am comparing the Faith, Principles and Actions of the True Protestants
and the Papists, whom the said SQUIRE makes worse than Pagans: I would fain
know of him, whether the proceedure of the Papists, in the kind we are now
speaking of, was not something fairer, even in the Reign of QUEEN MARY? For in
all her Time, though she highly disliked her Sister ELIZABETH's Religion, and had
also a pique against her Person, upon the account of their Mothers Quarrel; yet
never was there one VOTE of Parliament, and much less a BILL for her EXCLUSION.
And, what is yet more, when WYAT was taken, who was a Protestant, and General,
or chief Commander in his Insurrection, He accused the said Princess ELIZABETH
as a Complotter; yet for all that, neither the Queen nor the Council would
believe him, notwithstanding the probability of the Accusation; so that, when
he was brought to the place of Execution, and finding no benefit or
encouragement by his Lie, like another Fits-Harys, He asked God and his Prince
forgiveness for that horrid Crime, and so dyed.

X. But Tenthly (to proceed with the Parall^l,) they are the better ^hrictians,
who assist their Prince and are ^riends to his Friends, than they, who still
speak ill of Dignities; who watch for every occasion to oppose and ensl^ve
their Sovereign; and who think it a sufficient cause to hate any man, and
pursue him unto Death, if he offers to stand for the King's Honor and
Prerogative. I shall not now speak what the Papists did during the late
troubles of Charles I. and II. Metamorp. lib. 13.
Vidistis enim sua narret Ulysses, I mean let Mr. Julian repeat his, and the
True Protestant Loyalty, for we have been all eye Witnesses of the Popish
actions. I say I intend not to speak what either Party did from 41 to the
King's Restoration, but what they have done since. On the one hand then, if
any Royalist or Faithful Subject stood Candidate at an Election, he had to be
sure the Voices of all the Papists there. If there happened to be any of your
Strictlands or your Swalls in the Lower House: (to wit, new Converts as the
busy Priests call them) their Votes fell ever (we see) on the Crown side. If
again any thing for the King's Advantage and Honor came to be proposed to the
Lords, let it be even the readmission of the Bishops, the Catholic Noblemen
fai^'d not (with a Nemine Contradicente) to be for it. Again if the King thinks
a War for his Honor and In^erest to be best, the Papists at home will not only
approve and abet it, but the Do^glasses and the other considerable Officers
abroad leave (at the first Comm^nd) their respective great Employments and
return. If Tangier be in distress, if Argiers troublesome, or any other
public Misfortunes appear, these Gentlemen become all on a sudden changed into
Presbyterians and Phanaticks, that is to say, they se^m Surley, Dogged and
wholly ou^ of humou^; but if any happy News arrive, whom do we find more gay
than the^, and whose Bonefire makes a greater Flame? Now on the other side (not
to speak of the actual insurrections of the True Protestants since the King's
return) what C^v^lier or known Servant to the Monarchy has been designed ^or
any Elective Office, but had his whole life ripped up, with a thou^and addi^ional
l^es and Nicknames of Papist, Pensioner, etc. on purpose to put him by the
S^ddle? What Stout Pe^r or Man of Honor crossed a Seditious Int^igue, but was
presently pointed at as a Sta^^ordian, and as unfit for any Tr^st and
Employment? In our late War what Artifices have been used to put His Majesty
upon streights; or if that miscarried, how have they rai^'d at the King's
Counselors and Advisers; so that Doleman and others of the Cabal might without
censure M^n the Enemies Ships up to Chatham; and the Fitz-Patrics and the rest
Command Boilduke and the Adjacent Coast, though it were to hinder and oppose our
Landing? As for T^ngier and Argiers the Mahometans are not ignorant of the
^rinkling and good wi^hes of their Brethren he^e; and that Coll. Sackvil and
Admiral Herbert have had many a Prayer at least many a hearty ^jaculation
offered up for their Ruin and Con^usion; seeing the King by their Galantry has
fewer Irons in the fi^e than before. No wonder then ^hey abhor all public Joy,
and that instead of contributing to the Festivity, they will put out their very
candles, and even cover their Hearths, as if William the Conqueror's
Coverfeu-Bell were still Ringing.

One ( Bonefire I must needs confess) they now Religiously observe, viz. That
on the Anniversary of Queen Elizabeth's Coronation; though they never intended by
it to show any hearty hatred to the Pope or any sincere Reverence and affection
to the memory of that great Princess, but only to vent their inveterate Malice
against the whole Line of the STUARTS, for as the Old True Protestants were
goads in the Sides, and prickles in the Eyes of Her Majesty during her whole
Reign, so their Faithful and Legitimate Children continue the same rancour by
railing at, and breaking those Laws of Hers, which, preserving the uniformity
of the Ppotestant Religion, are the certain cause of our present Peace and
Quiet. And if the mere disgracing of his good Holiness were the Design of ^he
Solemnity, the 5 th. of November would be much the fitter day; she having been
a Papist, and He thereupon an open and declared Enemy, so that every thing he
did against Her might in some manner be expected; whereas King James and He
were not at any particular odds, which renders every Plot of His against His
Majesty more reflecting and odious. But Saints care not for congruities, their
aim being only to blacken the present Royal Family, add by crying up the
Protestant, the Protestant Queen, to insinuate as if all the STUARTS were ever
Papists. But this I must acknowledge is no new thought or invention of the
Gang, but a small improvement of their Fathers practice after the Murder of
Charles I. for they then made Her our last Monarch, and therefore never (but by
accident) destroyed and pulled down any Statue Arms or Ensigns of Regality
during our Bondage under them, unless those that related to this Princely and
Glorious House.

Seeing then by their former and present Artifices the English World has
undoubted assurance of their Loyalty and Affection to the Government; it is no
marvel if they should destroy the very ^redit and belief of the late PLOT. For
who can we upon second thoughts hear^ily blame for want o^ Faith, when on the
one side the Infidel sees not only several Old Caviliers, seve^al Z^^lous
Church of England men^ and several persons (whofe whole Livelihood depends on
the King's well^are) question not a little (by reason of many strange stories
in the Narratives, and man^ evident d^sproof^s in Trials) whether His Majesty
were really in all this so long talked of danger; and especially when the
Lives, poverty, parts, and odd coming in of the Witnesses happened not ^o be
over advan^agious to their Testimony; to which may be also added that all
Protestant Emb^ssadors and Ministers smile at the Noise; nor has any Reformed
Prince or State congratulated ^is Majesty's escape, as they and their
Predecessors have always done when any of our King's were in real dan^er. I say
who can heartily bla^e the Infidel, when on the one side he sees the ^ing's
known ^riends to Hesitate, and on the other side finds all the remaining Judges
of Charles I. all that were at Retrive for Charles II. after Worcester Fight;
all th^^ were in Garrison in Haberdashers and Goldsmiths-Hall; all Venner's
Brigadeers, and in fine all mankind that are op^nly ^aters of the King and
Monarchy, wonderfully Solicitous for His Majesty's Safety, support the
Witnesses, demand with zeal Justice on the Conspirators and their ABETTERS, and
will not only go to fisty-cuffs with any man that doubts, or scratches his head
at some hard particulars, but hang him without mercy, if ever he comes under
any Jury of Theirs.

Certainly, one may with some reason doubt Miracles which Jews (and Jews that
never agreed together before, so much as in the day of the month) promote and
cr^ up; assuring us all the while, that the defense of Christianity is their
dri^t and aim. Nay, Jews too that fly in the faces of these infallible
Witnesses, and presently make them the greatest Monsters in Nature, if they
chance to accuse a Brother of any Villainy, though never so probable or plain.

To show yet further the real zeal a True Protestant bear^ to His Majesty, what
Magistrate or Magistracy asserts His Kingly Rights, whom they have not vilified
and Lampoon'd, at the very time perchance when they are running down ^ome
Servant of His Majesty, even upon pretense of his defaming the Justice of the
Nation? It Is lawful in them to rail at a Surrey Jury, if they censure Mr.
Pilkington for discrediting a fellow Citizen. They may (forsooth) without any
fault, libel some of the eminentest Gentlemen of Essex, as corrupt and
perjured, if they find Billingsgate-Hickeringill to have a black and scandalous
m^u^h Nor shall the Oxfordshire Iury-men want Judgments, if Pamphlets can
creat^ them, for condemning COLLEGE, a Traitor of as rank a smell (in a manner)
as the late Regicides themselves. For he was publicly Seditious in his words,
and he himself confessed, that he came with Horse and Arms to Oxford to guard
the Parliament against the Papists; and what that means in the mouth of one
that reckoned the Bishops Tantivies, and the rest of the King's Friends at
least Popishly inclined, may be easily imagined. 'Twas proved also against him,
that, in a Q^arrel about the Parliament, he said, he had lost blood in the
Cause, and that more ere long would be lost. He said also openly, He might (for
ought he knew) be a Colonel shortly. Again, 'twas proved, that, upon the old
sham and pretense of Protestant Religion and Property, he was a promoter (even
by distinctive Ribbons) of Ligues and Parties; That he was a disperser of
Villainous Pictures and Ballads, to the King's Dishonor; That the first Draught
of the Traiterous Libel the RARE SHOW was found in his House; That He had given
it out to be Printed; and that he justified the horrid Proceedings of the Long
Parliament, even the King's Murder, All which, and more was made out against
him, by Witnesses of unspotted Reputation; besides the many positive and
probable Treasons, sworn by Dugdale, Smith, Turbervil, and the rest of his
intimate Companions; And yet for all this, the Miscreant is vindicated by the
Party, honored with a Picture, and under i^ Verses that vilify the public
Justice in the highest degree.

But, if we come to single Persons, who has in the Nation been so harrast, and
bespattered with so many Calumnies and Lies, as Mr. L'ESTRANGE? One, if we
consider his Quality, not only of a Family still in being, and Eminent among
us, but as ancient as the Conquest; and, which is more, so Noble and Great
then, that a Princely House (to wit, that of Darby) deem^ the Title and Honor
it receives thence, as the first ^lower in its C^ronet.

If we come to his Breeding, He is a Man of ^etters, and o^ excellent
Convers^tion too. Nor was there ever a greater Master of the English Tongue,
whether we consider the clearness and variety of his Expression, or his
stupendous celerity in writing.

Then, for his Loyalty (which is his great fault, and has contracted him all
his Enemies) He sided early with the l^^e King; was in Newgate for Treason also
(as they called it) for Him; He was esteemed, in the worst of Times, by all the
Cavaliers as one of their choice Members; and as soon as the King returned, by
defending the Church He drew all the enraged Hornets about his Ears; which now
shows us further his Fidelity, since, upon the discovery of any Treachery or
^alshood in him, they might have legally excluded him from all Pardon and
Indemnity.

Lastly, for his Religion, and firmness to the Church of England, no man from
first to last ever gave g^^a^er testimony of it than he; being still in the
Cap, still in the Breach, as his disadvantageous Books to Popery show, as well
as those against the Treachercus and Apostate Children of the Church, the most
dangerous Enemies by many degrees, as the Affairs of the Nation have stood
these sev^ral years. Mr. Prance therefore got as little Credit by accusing him
for a Papist, as he did by his voluntary and open Confession to the King and
Council, That what he said of Sir E. Godfrey' s Murder, was false from Top to
Bottom. Nor could he have invented a more foolish and unlikely place than SOMER
SET-HOUSE, for Mr. L'Estrange (as a concealed Papist) ^o frequent; since
^rotestants of all conditions are daily running thither (as they do to the Jews
Synagogue) to view their Fashions and Ceremonies.

But what has this Gentleman done, to deserve their Barbarous and Republican
Usage? Why, because like a faithful East-Angle, or Nor^olk-man, OBSERVING the
Danish-Fleet on the Coast, their Hinguar and Hubba landed, King Edmond and his
Family pursued: he fires the Beacons, allarms his Fellow Subjects, and thereby
defends not only Christian Religion, but prevents also the spilling of more
Royal Blood; and therefore, I dare affirm, if ever any body saved a Kingdom by
a PEN; Mr. L'Estrange has really done it.

Besides, we are not only beholden to Mr. L'Estrange and ingenious Heraclit^s,
(who follows him close, and with long strides) for discovering the many
abominable Lies and Contrivances against Church and State, but for preventing
Ten thousand more; for these Loyal and Worthy men have (after much Fatigue and
repeated Outcries) taught the Seditiou^ Scriblers, or rather their Grave
Directors, a little Orthography; that is, to spell now and then true, a passage
not false in every word; as also, some little caution in their ill-design'd
insinuations and Comments, since they dare not proceed in their former impudent
and prodigious way of vindicating here, and defaming there, which must (had it
continued) have insensibly inflamed the whole Nation; for they now find by
woeful experrience, That Truth will out next day; and that all things are at
length, nay presently, answered to their loss.

And now I am mentioning these Excellent men, and how outrageously they have
been used by the KETTS, or True Protestant Mechanics of the Age, because they
zealously stood up (as I said) for His Majesty, and all His faithful Followers
and Servants: I cannot pass by Mr. DRYDEN's Case, since it so particularly
shows us (according to my Design) the Nature and Folly of the Herd; who, to
make some little noise, or evasion, will run down their very darling Arguments,
and most specious pretenses, without the least care or regard; for this
Gentleman^ (looking doubtless upon Neutrality or Idleness as a piece of
Ingratitude, as well to that Mighty Giver of the Talents He enjoys, as to to
the Great Monarch, who has still been so Indulgent and Kind) thought fit to
describe the Kingdoms Miseries, and their Cause in Absalon and Achitophel, The
Medal, etc.
POEMS, that convinced the very Factious in Their Judgment, and tryumph'd over
every f^culty of theirs, exc^p^ that Diabolical Will, which (as we see) resists
even GOD Himself. No sooner then had he published his happy Thoughts, which
pleased many an honest man, but the Hornets were presently about him too; and,
to give him (as they thought) his mortal wound, they printed his Elegy upon
Cromwell, with great clamor and joy; But whether they have hurt Him or
Themselves most by it, I desire the Reader to judge. For how hideously have
they bawled against every Royallist who twitted them (and that with great
Reason and Necessity) with FORTY ONE, the KING's MURDER, etc. because it
entrenched, forsooth, on the Act of Indemnity; when as that Amnesty or Pardon
never intended ( had man the power of knowing Thoughts and future Actions) the
forgiving of any, but those that were sorry for their former Crimes, and
consequently resolved to be afterward True Subjects. What impudent ^ools
therefore a^e They, who throw the said Elegy into the Author's Dish, who has
not only the genuine and true Plea of Inconsideration for himself (as being,
when he wrote it, a young Graduate, or Boy newly come to Town) but also (which
is much more) his latter apparent Duty to his King, both in Words and Actions,
ought most effectually to vindicate hi^; Whereas, no Transgressors are charged
with the late Rebellion, or any thing belonging to it, but Those who manifestly
^un now to Sanctuary with polluted hands, and with their former blackne^s of
Intention. Nay, if we consider this Accusation as to Mr. Dryden, and interpret
it verbatim, what can it mean but this? You wrote, Sir, once in praise of
Cromwell; and therefore are a ^reat Villain for opposing any body that either
writes or acts at present against your lawful King and Master; And truly, thus
in effect (that is to say, as to the matter of Fact) stands their Justice to
any one, whom they decry and calumniate.

But to draw to a conclusion for the present, (though the Subject abounds with
such Supersluit^ of Matter as to render the sterilest fancy exuberant) I will,
in imitation of the SQUIRE (having already given him Preface for Preface, Story
for Story, and Section for Section) end my Treatise^ also, with my end of
writing it; which is (I must needs say) to remind the Reader of our late
Miseries, and of our happiness by the King's Return; To let Him see the True
Protestant DESIGN, viz. That of Subverting the Gevernment, and of bringing us
again into our former Bondage under the threed-bare pretenses of the fear of
Popery; to give Him also a short account of their Religion in spec^lation and
practice; and then to show their disobedient Principles, and restlessness, who
will have even JULIAN in their mouths, when they themselves are the most
abandoned APOSTATES that ever were. And so transcendent and particular are they
herein, that notwithstanding their publicly owning themselves Seperatists,
their constantly frequenting Conventicles, their openly writing and exclaiming
against the Superstition of the Church of England, yet for the Office of a
SHERIFF shall Mr. Bethel himself go to Church, Assist at the Common Prayer, and
then not only receive the Communion at an Altar surrounded with Rails, and from
a Priest in his Surpliss but with the horrible (as they some^imes cry) and
unsufferable aggravation of Kneeling also, What Mercy therefore can the most
compassionating Government show to such a sort of People? Or what would tender
Origin (were he alive) think could become of them at the Day of Judgment? The
Papists have perchance some thing to Mo^lifie an ^asie Magistrate with, when he
really see^ both Great and Small among them, leave Employments, suffer
Confiscations, endure ^mprisonments and the like, for what what they think and
call Conscience. This also makes several good Men to commiserate not a little
the Quakers, who believing their way of Worship conformable to Gods command,
will bear afflction and loss rather than forego it; so that it is evident no
Dissenters from the Church of England have any Conscience except these two; and
therefore none but they (could the Legislative Power with prudence Indulge)
deserve any favor or connivance; all the others meeting merely out of Faction
and Interest; to the great damage of the Government.

These are the Motives (to wit Interest and Faction) that cause the SQUIRE,
(instead of quieting the minds, of his Party, and endeavouting to bring them to
their due Obedience) to declare against Gregory's Tears and Prayers, and to
instill Fear (if posible) into the Silly, and furnish at the same time the
hardened and inveterate with his best pretenses; these also moved him so
earnestly to wish, not only the unnatural tearing a ^rother out of the King's
Arms, who (humanly speaking) is His sole Bulwark and Defense; but to aim (by
His Exclusion from the Crown,) at the subversion of our most Fundamental Laws,
which must certainly have created unexpressible Troubles in our Age, and most
dismal consequences here after, and lastly, these made him so malicious against
a Prince of Valor; a Prince of His word; and a Prince of that virtue and
conduct; that His Goodness has thawed the very Orcades and Thule, and His
matchless Prudence (in spite of His late mighty disadvantages) rendered
Scotland even quiet and united, notwithstanding its turbulent temper during the
Reigns of Queen Mary, King James, Charles I. and Charles II. till now. Nay when
every thing is fully considered, the Interest he has preserved in England, and
the real Affection the Persons of Quality and Estate (both Noblemen and
Gentlemen) bear him is as great a demonstration of his Wisdom as can possibly
be imagined. Had the said SQUIRE thought of his Profession and followed the
admirable example of the present Clergy, he would instead of his villainous
JULIAN have spent his time in descanting on the Accidents of the late
Rebellion, and then remembered the Factious, that the first promoters even of a
prosperous Sedition are still left in the Lurch, whilst a new Brood (perchance
5 or 6 removes off) are they that get the Prize; for thus I am sure it happened
formerly with all the first Sticklers among the Lords, the Commons, the Army,
and the City also. I say had the SQURIE thought of his Profession and performed
his Duty, he had saved his own Reputation, and my trouble: for being an ^nglish
Subject and having seen with my own eyes the late glorious King at the Head of
a Loyal, tho unsuccessful Army, and afterward March before Another, besmeer'd
with the gore of His most faithful Servants, and conducting Him to the bloody
Theater on which He made Himself greater than the Caesar's, I cannot (^ con^ess)
but have often ^ad thought^, especially when I see the same Methods and Ph^sick
prescribed again, and many of the same Mountebanks, the present Operators and
Dispensers.

ADVERTISEMENT.
There was intended at the end of this small Treatise an Account of the
Blessings of a Commonwealth which the SQVIRE aims at, with some pretty STORIES
relating to that Precious Government, but it being thought at present too long,
it is deferred to another time,

FINIS.

