A Dialogue concerning ye Lords Supper.


A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A Minister AND HIS PARISHIONER, Concerning the LORD'S
SVPPER.

Principally designed for the Instruction of those that never yet Received.

To which are annexed Three several Discourses, Of Love to God, to our
Neighbor, and to our very Enemies.

By J. LAMB, Rector of Wheathamstead in Hartfordshire, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to their Majesty's.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1690.

To the Right Worshipful Sir John Garrard Knight. and. Bt. Sir John Witteronge Knight.
and. Bt.
To the Worshipful, James Witteronge Esquire; Godman Jenkins Esquire; Edmund Smith
Gent. Rich. Emerton Gent. Godman Jenkins Gent. Valen. Laurence Gent.


SIRS,
COnsidering our frequent Exhortations to the People, to come to the Holy
Sacrament, the many Motives, and those especially from the benefits we receive
thereby, so often inculcated and pressed upon them; and above all, considering
the example of You that are the chief and leading Men, whose Wisdom they justly
value, and have recourse to in most of their Affairs: it cannot but seem
exceeding strange, that our Communions are so very thin. If we, at any time,
desire them to give us a reason of their absence, they either decline the
question; or, if we press it, they stop our mouth by saying they are not sit,
and who will persuade them to eat and drink their own damnation? And thus they
satisfy themselves with that excuse which is indeed an aggravation of their
fault. The very truth is this, to the looser sort, the Sacrament, as all
Religion, is a thing indifferent, that I do not say, despised; to many of those
who are well inclined, (by reason of their crude and indigested notion of it)
it seems a tremendous dreadful duty that they are afraid to assist in; and to
others a mystery that is unintelligible: and thus the greatest restraint of
impiety, the strongest bond of Universal Love to God and man, is deplorably
neglected, to the prejudice of Christianity, and the great decay of Holiness.
Wherefore to reform this grievous evil amongst us, (since the efficacy of
Preaching in Country Parishes, is somewhat hindered, by reason of the
inconstancy of our hearers, through the extremity of Weather, and other causes;
and since such an effectual instruction of Families, that are scattered in
considerable distances, and are continually employed in their affairs, is
impracticable) I resolved with my self to digest the Nature, the Ends, the
Benefits, and preparation to the Holy Sacrament in as easy a method, as
familiar a Style, and as suitable to my Preaching as I could; that all
pretenses of ignorance, fear, or unfitness, may be removed for the time to
come. And I humbly beg of you to favor the design, and join your influence
upon the People, with my endeavors, that God may be glorified, his Worship
frequented, and our Souls, and the Souls of those that are under our care, that
have any relation to us, or dependence upon us, may be saved: which is the
constant Prayer and endeavor of

Sirs, Your faithful Pastor, and affectionate humble Servant, J. Lamb.
March 28. 1690.
Licensed,

Z. Isham.

Mar. 13. 1689/90.

A DIALOGUE Between a MINISTER And His PARISHIONER, Concerning the HOLY
SACRAMENT.
Parishioner. SIR, a good morning to you, I come to give you notice of a
Christning to morrow at the Church, between eleven and twelve a Clock, if you
please to be at home.


Minister. It is very well, you shall be sure to find me ready, by God's
assistance, to do mine office: and I pray present my service to my neighbor,
and tell him I commend his Conformity, Zeal and Obedience in bringing his Child
to Church; and I hope the benefit and decency thereof will invite the rest of
my Neighbors to follow his example. But, I pray, advise him to keep his time,
and get his Gossips in a readiness, that neither the Congregation, nor the
Child may be detained.


Parish. Yes, Sir, yes, as for that matter, the Gossips are bespoke already;
and for want of a better, I have promised to stand for one my self, and the
rest are at hand.


Minist. It Is very well, but I must tell you one thing, the Church enjoins that
no man stand as Godfather to a Child before he has received the Sacrament: and
I am ashamed to tell you, you never received it of me, and I am afraid you
never received it at all.


Parish. Truly; Sir, if that be the Law, my Neighbor must look him another
Gossip; for it is a folly to lie, I never did receive. I never understood what
it was you did, nor why you did it, nor what I should get by communicating with
you. I have heard your self, and many others preach upon it very learnedly, as
far as I know; sometimes exhorting us to come, sometimes pressing us to a
careful preparation of our selves, before we presume to receive, lest the
Sacrament should do us more hurt than good; sometimes upon one point, sometimes
upon another that concerned it: but my memory is very slippery; indeed I cannot
well understand a Sermon, and I remember it worse; but if I perfectly
apprehended the meaning of the duty, no man should be more constant at the
Sacrament than my self.


Min. I profess I am heartily sorry, as well for your Ignorance as neglect. But
I am glad however, that you are willing to be informed; and if you think good
to accept of my service, I will do the best I can to enlighten your mind, and
assist your preparation.


Parish. Ah, with all mine heart, but I shall never understand you, unless you
give me leave to propose such Questions to you, as arise out of mine own mind.


Min. Do so, ask me what you will.


Par. If you please, then I will begin with what I see, and so proceed to
enquire into the design and meaning of it. I observe then, that on Easter Day,
and at other particular times in the Year, the Communion Table is covered with
a linen cloth, and furnished with a Patten of Bread, and Flaggons of Wine; I
pray, Sir, what becomes of it, what does the Minister do with it?


Min. After the Service and Sermon are ended in the Church, the Minister goes
up to the Communion Table, and after a serious confession of sins, and several
Prayers and Thanksgivings, together with the Charity of the Communicants, for
the most part, first collected and offered up to God, and after a form of
blessing or consecration of the Bread and Wine, he deals to every Communicant a
morsel of that Bread to eat; and then he delivers the Cup into their hands,
that every one may drink a little of the Wine that is in it, as you may more
particularly inform your self, by reading the public Office for the Communion.


Par. Yes, this may easily be supposed, I believe as much; but I pray, Sir,
give me leave to ask you, what the Design, the Intention and End of all this is?


Min. Ah, that indeed is the thing which is chiefly to be regarded. For you
must not think that this is done for the sake of the Bread, the Wine, or the
Company, as an ordinary friendly Compotation; but it is an act of Religion,
which we are obliged to celebrate in Obedience to our Savior Jesus Christ, who
has made and ordained this breaking of Bread, and drinking of Wine together, S
Mat. 26. S. Luke ^2.
the most solemn Ordinance of the Christian Worship.


Par. To eat and to drink together, the most solemn Ordinance of the Christian
Worship! how should that be? surely there must be something farther in it, that
does not appear to the eye, there must be a reason of this Religious action,
that I at present do not apprehend, but am very desirous to be instructed in.


Min. Most certainly there is: for you know it is commonly called the
Sacrament, and the principal reason of that, Catech.
(as our Church has taught us) is this, because the outward sign, that is to
say, the whole action that is done before our eyes, by the express command of
God, preserves in memory, represents and signifies some other thing that is
invisible, some Historical passage of former times, some duty thereupon to be
performed, together with the several advantages we shall certainly receive
thereby, which are assured unto us, and conferred upon us, by the will and
appointment of God, in the due Celebration and use thereof: and thus a
Sacrament is distinguished from a bare religious Ceremony of remembrance or
instruction.


Par. I beseech you Sir, be more particular.


Min. I am very glad of your attention. Briefly then, our blessed Savior (as
you may read in the 22. of St. Luke, at the 19th. Verse) as He was eating the
Passover with his Disciples, immediately before He was betrayed, set forth and
represented to them His ensuing death upon the Cross, by breaking of Bread, and
distributing the same unto them, saying, Take, eat, this is my body which is
given for you: and by taking the Cup (full of Wine) and giving that also to
them, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood; or as Saint Matthew
recites it, Matt. 26.
This is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for you and for many for
the remission of sins: and at the same time commanded them, by the same most
proper and natural signs of blessing and breaking of Bread, pouring out of
Wine, and eating and drinking the same together, to continue a fresh
remembrance of Him, and more particularly of His death, to the end of the
World. Do this in remembrance of me, v. 19.


Par. Thus far I hope I understand you, the Death and Passion of our Blessed
Savior is that in especial manner which the outward Signs commemorate,
exhibit, and refer to. But you said that this Holy Sacrament was more than a
Religious Ceremony of Remembrance: and therefore I pray inform me in the full
intent and farther signification of it.


Min. It is very well remembered; and if you observe the words of institution,
which I but now recited, you will easily perceive that our Blessed Savior
appointed these Sacred Signs not only for a perpetual Remembrance of His Death
and Passion, but also of the ends and reason of it, as His Death was the Seal
or ratification of the New Testament, or Covenant of Grace, which God has
entered into with Man, consisting principally in this, that our sins shall be
forgiven, and our Souls shall be saved, through the satisfaction which our
Savior has made to God for us, if we on our part, believe His Gospel, rely
upon His merits, and amend our lives. For so says our Savior, Take, eat, This
is my Body, there He appoints the Commemoration of His death. Given for you,
there is the end and reason of it, which is given for you; Now, once for all,
in substance and reality, and hereafter, to the end of the World, in the sign
and figure, as often as you celebrate the Mystery. And again, This Cup is the
New Testament in my Blood: the Covenant of Grace between God and us, which was
sealed and ratified in the Death of our Savior, is revived, renewed, and
confirmed to every particular Person, in this his Holy Sacrament, that receives
it as he ought to do. You are therefore to understand the Sacrament, as a
display of the whole Religion of Christianity; God on his part signing and
sealing his Covenant of Pardon and Peace to us, and we on the other part,
covenanting with God to perform the Conditions required of us, with all
possible exactness for the time to come.


Par. I perceive then that the Holy Sacrament is a Remembrance of the
Sufferings of our Blessed Savior, together with the design and intention
thereof, the Remission of our sins. That it is a confirmation of the Covenant
of Grace on the part of God, that He will be reconciled unto us through the
blood of his Son, which is therefore called the blood of the Covenant: Heb.
10.29.
and on our part, it is a Profession of our Faith in the Mediation of Christ,
and a solemn obligation of our selves to perform the Conditions required of us.
Now, I pray, Sir, give me leave to ask you, what those benefits and Graces are,
which you said were assured unto us, and conferred upon us in the due
Celebration of this Holy Sacrament?


Min. You may easily find out that your self, if you consider what has been
said already concerning the nature of the Sacrament, and the end of its
Institution. Is it understood as the Seal and Confirmation of the Covenant of
Grace? Why then the benefits we receive thereby are no less than all the
blessings and promises of that Covenant, which is so solemnly confirmed, and
assured unto us: Namely, the pardon of our sins, upon Repentance, Grace and
strength to persevere in a course of new Obedience, and Eternal Glory in the
life to come. This New Testament, this Covenant of Grace, is sealed and
delivered to every particular Person in the Holy Sacrament: all such Persons
present, as believe the Gospel of our Savior, rely upon his Merits, and Repent
of their sins, are, at that very instant pardoned, if they persevere: So sure
as they eat that Bread, and drink that Wine in Remembrance of our Savior's
death, so sure shall they partake of His Body and Blood, that is, of all the
Blessings which were purchased for us by His Death and Passion: and this is
grounded upon the words of our Savior, Take, eat, This: i. e. this Bread,
which you are about to eat, is my Body which is given for you; and This Cup, i.
e. this Wine in the Cup which you are about to drink, is my Blood of the New
Testament. They shall not only be the signs of your Redemption by my Death; but
they shall be the thing it self; they shall be my Body and Blood: that is to
say, the intention and end of my sufferings, pardon of sins, and Eternal life,
are assured unto, and actually vested in all those, who worthily receive these
outward signs. For the Cup of Blessing which we bless, says St. Paul, 1 Cor.
10.16. Is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The Bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? Not only a Remembrance of
his Body broken, but a Communion or a participation of the Body: by which,
according to the fairest and most natural construction of the words, we can
understand no less than this, that as we bodily and carnally partake of the
Bread and Wine, which are the signs and representations of His Body that was
broken, and His Blood that was shed for us; so Morally and Spiritually we shall
also partake of the benefits, the intention and end of breaking his Body, and
shedding His Blood, the Pardon of our sins, and the Salvation of our Souls, if
we receive the same with such affections, and dispositions of mind, as we ought
to do: and this our Church has taught us in her most Excellent and
Comprehensive Catechism, That the Body and Blood of Christ are verily and
indeed taken and received, by the faithful, in the Lord's Supper. By these
Visible signs, as by the Rod in your Copyhold Courts, you have Livery and
Seisin given you, of all the blessings purchased for you by the Body and Blood
of Christ, under the Conditions of Fealty to the Lord, and the Customs, Rents,
and Services of the Manor.


Par. Methinks it is not so difficult to understand the nature of this Holy
Sacrament, and the reason of its institution as I thought it was; I am heartily
troubled that I have so long neglected it: I am convinced what an enemy I have
been to my self, and am now resolved that I will never miss an opportunity of
Receiving.


Min. But hold a little! You had best consider what you say, and what has been
said to you. For as the most nourishing of meats, received into a sick and
crazy stomach; instead of that wholesome juice, that strength and spirit which
it contains in it self, and would certainly yield and give out to the body,
does now but feed the diseases of it, and fill it fuller of evil humors; not
for want of virtue in the food, but for want of proper dispositions in the
Recipient. So also the Holy Eucharist, though it contains, and is ready to
confer, those benefits and Graces I have informed you of; yet you must not
think that it operates as a charm, by the repetition of certain words, or the
punctual celebration of the Ceremony, (as you have already been instructed) but
in a way that is Natural and Rational, that is to say, upon this Condition,
that the mind of the Receiver be duly qualified and prepared. There is
therefore more employed in this so solemn a Remembrance of our Savior's Death
and Passion, than it may be you are aware of. It will not be the Body and Blood
of Christ to every one that receives the Elements of Bread and Wine, which are
the signs thereof, but only to such as are duly qualified and prepared to
receive them. God is ready to perform his part of the Covenant, if we have
fulfilled, or are resolved to fulfill, the conditions which are required of us.


Par. I beseech you let me understand the utmost of my Duty, that I may prepare
my self as I ought to do.


Min. I will so; and because the just and necessary preparation to any action
whatsoever, depends upon, and is measured by the nature, the end, and design of
the Action it self; therefore I shall only trouble you with such preparatory
exercises, as you your self shall acknowledge to be fairly inferred from the
nature of the Holy Sacrament, as I have explained it to you.

First then, Sacrament? does the outward action represent and signify the
whole transaction of our Redemption. Begun in the Birth, continued in the Life
and Preaching of our Savior, and finished in his Death upon the Cross? Then a
Religious Commemoration hereof, implies, and supposes a sufficient explicit
knowledge of that, which we so solemnly Commemorate; because the Knowledge of
the Fact goes before the Remembrance or recollection of it, in the nature of
the thing. It is necessary therefore, that you acquaint your self distinctly
with the History of our Savior's Life and Death, contained especially in the
four Evangelists, before you can be qualified to receive.

Again, Matt. 26.26.
This (Bread) is my body, and This (Cup) is my blood of the New Testament which
is shed for many for the remission of sins, or according to S. Luke, Luke 22.19.
This Cup is the New Testament in my blood: or as S. Paul expresses it, 1 Cor.
10.16.
a Communion of the body and blood of the Lord? then this implies a competent
knowledge, at least, of the grounds and principles of the Christian Faith. And
therefore it is absolutely necessary that every Communicant be well informed:

First, transgressions, which expose us to the Anger and Justice of God, and to
those grievous punishments, annexed to his Laws, which we are neither able to
undergo nor avoid.

And Secondly, Heb. 10.10.
who, by the will of God has sanctified us, who has put us into a capacity of
Renovation, Pardon, Mercy, and Eternal Life, by the offering up of his Body
once for all, 2 Cor. 5.21.
who knew no sin himself, but was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God through him. Heb. 9.26. 1 Pet. 3.18.
Who therefore took our nature upon him, that he might be capable of bearing
our sins in his own body.

In a word, who by his death and sufferings, according to the wonderful Council
of God, to us unknown, has offered such a satisfaction to God, as with safety
to the honor of his Laws, and the Justice of his Government, he has been
pleased to accept of; and has thereupon abundantly assured us of his readiness
to be reconciled to us. So that if any difference continue still between us,
the reason thereof shall be wholly on our part. Col. 1.21. 2 Cor. 5.18.
For all things are of God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ.
That he has now restored us all to a capacity of favor, Pardon and eternal
Happiness, upon condition, that we believe and hope in his Mercy, through the
merits of his Son; Repent of all our past transgressions, and sincerely
endeavor to govern our lives by the Laws of his Gospel for the time to come.
That instead of a perfect and exact obedience, (which the best of us are not
able to perform) the purity of our hearts, and the sincerity of our intentions
shall be now accepted; and all our manifold transgressions, through humane
frailty, shall be now forgiven; through the satisfaction and intercession of
our Blessed Savior. That if we sin, as we all do, and repent and amend, as we
all should do; 1 John 2.1.
we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the Righteous, and He is the
propitiation for our sins. We have one that will plead our cause, and urge a
Right that repenting Sinners have to Pardon, Gal. 3.13.
because, by being made a curse, he has delivered us from the curse, that is,
from the punishment of the Law; Heb 7.25.
and is able to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him, seeing He
ever lives to make intercession for us. And that all this blessed Mystery of
our Redemption, through the Cross of Christ, is both signified and confirmed
unto us in the Holy Sacrament. This is my Body which is given for you. This Cup
is the New Testament in my blood. And therefore you cannot be qualified to
receive, until you understand these Principles of the Christian Faith. You
cannot be qualified to enter into Covenant with God, till you understand the
contents and articles of the Indenture.

Again, solemn Ordinance of distinction, profess and own your self to be his
disciple, 1 Cor. 10.18, 19, 20, 21, etc.
(as those who ate things offered to Idols, were understood to consent with the
Sacrifices, to own and profess the heathen gods and worship?) Does God by his
Minister offer and confirm his Covenant of Pardon to us in the blood of Christ,
and are we understood to consent with all our hearts, to accept the Conditions
with all humility and gratitude, to enter into Coveant with God our selves,
that we will perform the Conditions required of us? Then you cannot be worthy
to receive, unless you steadfastly believe his Revelation, trust entirely in his
Propositions, depend upon his Promises, and cheerfully resign your self to be
governed by his Laws. It is therefore absolutely necessary to examine well the
steddiness of your Faith, the seriousness of your Repentance, the purity of
your Intentions, and the sincerity of your Obedience, at least in serious
resolution, for the time to come; since it is evident that without these
qualifications, you profane this Holy Ordinance, whilst you make profession
solemnly of that Religion, 1 Cor. 11.26.
which you neither understand, believe, nor practice.


Par. Sir, I am clearly of your opinion, I think if we communicate in the most
solemn Ordinance of our Religion, we certainly ought to understand it, believe
it, and intend at least to practice it. But are we obliged whenever we
receive the Sacrament, to have the History, the Principles, and the Duties of
our Religion distinctly in our minds? this seems to be very hard, and almost
impossible.


Min. No surely; you mistake me very much. These ought to be confidered and
examined well, before you presume to present your self, or before you are
admitted to the Holy Table: But when you are entered, confirmed, and settled in
your Religion, there is no necessity of such a particular recollection: your
Faith will become a habit, and, if you have no doubt of any Article, you may
boldly make profession of your Faith at any time: and if you are not conscious
of any Vice you wilfully indulge, you may profess the sincerity of your heart,
and your resolution of persevering in a course of universal righteousness,
without a particular examination of your self upon the several duties of
Christianity. The ordinary preparation, after you have been thoroughly
instructed, and admitted to the Holy Table, is this; Namely, first, to consider
and weigh the doubts and scruples that are upon your mind concerning any
Branch, or Article of your Religion, if any be, and clear them fully to your
self by consideration, inctruction, and advice. And secondly, to observe your
own particular infirmities; what those evils are to which you are most
inclined, and which are aptest to prevail upon you, and are subdued with the
greatest difficulty; and how you may prevent their return for the time to come?
what business, what conversation, what occasion, what company are apt to expose
you to temptation? that so your humble resolutions and professions may be well
considered, and perfectly sincere, and with particular respect to the present
state of your Soul, with earnest desire to be better instructed, and reformed
by the grace of God.


Par. This is but reasonable indeed, and now I hope I apprehend both the nature
of the Sacrament, and the duty of the Communicant.


Min. I pray God enable you to perform it; but there is one thing more that
concerns our preparation, which must not be omitted, and that is this: Is the
Sacrament the Death and Passion of our Lord exhibited in proper signs? Is our
Savior slain before our eyes? 1 Cor. 11.26.
Is his death showed forth, represented to us till he come, as St. Paul
expresses it? then we ought to raise in our minds such a feeling sense, such a
sympathy, such passions, affections, and devotions, as the sight of such a
stupendous passage would have stirred up, and excited in us, if we had been
Spectators of it. Had we been the Disciples of our Savior, as we now profess
to be, and had we seen Him at his Trial, under his scourging, in his Agony, and
on the Cross, should we not have adored and magnified the love of God, that he
should send His only begotten Son into the world, to bear the punishment of our
sins? should we not have been astonished at the love of our blessed Savior,
that He should be contented to divest himself of all his glory for our sakes,
and humble himself, even to death upon the Cross, to save our souls? Would we
not have reflected with indignation, upon the cause of all this grief, to so
good, so great, so innocent a Person, even the sins of men? should we not have
resolved for our own part, Heb. 10.29.
never to contribute to his pain again, but to live in all Obedience, Love, and
Gratitude to God, and our Blessed Savior to the end of our lives? should we
not have made the most passionate professions of Fidelity and Constancy to him,
that has thus redeemed and purchased us by His blood? should we not have
exercised acts of faith, affiance, trust and confidence in his Word and
Promises, that if we fulfill our resolutions, and perform our duty as well as
our weak and frail condition will allow, that then we shall be accepted of Him,
received into his Favor, and made partakers of the great and precious promises
of His Gospel? and when you have considered all these things, and understand
them competently well, and have prayed to God to enlighten your mind, and purge
your soul from all corrupt affections, from every evil habit that is contrary
to his Holy nature, to his most pure and righteous Law; that you may serve and
worship him, with some degrees of knowledge, and with a sincere and perfect
heart, then you may assure your self, that you are worthy to receive, that your
Devotion will be accepted, and your Offering rewarded, that you shall have
Grace and assistance from above, to grow better and better, till you come to be
perfect in Christ Jesus. The sum of all is this, the Minister, by the command,
and in the name of God, exhibits and offers the blessings of the Gospel to the
Communicants, and they by receiving the outward signs thereof, profess
themselves the Disciples of our Lord, that they believe his Doctrine, trust in
his Mediation, hope in his Promises, and are resolved to live according to his
Laws. He then who is sincere in these his professions and resolutions receives
worthily; and he who presents himself in such a solemn manner at the Holy
Sacrament, making, and being understood to make profession of his Christian
Faith, and a solemn dedication of himself to the obedience thereof for ever,
when, at the same time, he neither understands it, regards it, or designs to
practice it, is an Hypocrite, a Prophaner, 1 Cor. ^.27.
a Blasphemer of God, and therefore eats and drinks damnation to himself;
incurs the high displeasure of God, and may therefore expect that the Judgments
of God should follow him. For for this cause many are sick and weak among you,
and many are fallen asleep, as S. Paul interprets the damnation spoken of
before, v. 30.


Par. Sir, I thank you with all mine heart, and if I be not too tedious to you,
give me leave to ask you one question more before I go.


Min. Pray ask me what you will, for I assure you, I am mightily pleased to
find you so inquisitive.


Par. What is the reason then, (since, as I understand by you, a disposition to
every Christian Grace is requisite in a worthy Communicant) that the Rubric,
^re the ^^mun^ice.
and all Divines, insist in a particular manner upon Love and Charity,
reconciling, and being reconciled to our enemies?


Min. It is well observed, they do so; yet not as exclusive of any other
duties. But indeed there is all the reason in the world to remind our
Communicants, in a more particular manner, of the duties of Love, and universal
Charity.

First, 1 John ^.10. Joh. 3.1^ Romans 5.^
For He loved us when we were yet his enemies, and sent his only begotten son
into the world, that whosoever would but believe in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life. And therefore malice, hatred, envy, and evil will, are
dispositions, radically contrary to Christianity, such as render us utterly
unfit to have any thing to do with the solemn rites of this Religion.

Moreover secondly, a Law of Love. Universal Charity is the principle and life
of our Religion, which influences the whole, and mingles it self with every
part thereof* insomuch that it is distinguished, and described by this single
Grace of Love. ^om. 13.9. ^al. 5.14. ^att. 22, ^9. ^ Joh. 3.9.23.
For love is the fulfilling of the law, says S. Paul: And Hereby, says S.
John, speaking of Love, we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our
hearts before him. And this is his commandment, that we believe on the name of
his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave us Commandment. So that
all our professions of Faith and Obedience at the Holy Table, are a
profanation of the name of God, and wholly ineffectual to us, so long as the
temper of our minds, and the dispositions of our Souls are contrary to the
Religion we profess. For unless Christ be in us, Cor. 13.
says S. Paul, that is, the Spirit of Christ, the Goodness, Love, Meekness,
Compassion, Patience, Forbearance, Condescension of Him and his Religion, We
are reprobates. Malice indeed, is an indication of a Diabolick Nature, of a
mind thoroughly vicious and degenerate. It is a temper wholly inconsistent with
a true principle of Christianity. For in this the children of God are manifest,
1 John 3 10.
and the Children of the Devil, whosoever does not Righteousness is not of God,
neither he that loves not his Brother.

Again, Therefore, Matt. 7.12.
if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother
has ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way,
first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Which
words, though they are spoken, by our Savior, with immediate respect to the
Peace Offerings for the Atonement of sins; yet the reason holds in all our
addresses to God for pardon, and has been generally applied by Divines, to the
Holy Sacrament. Here, in especial manner, we pray for, and expect his Mercy.
But is it reasonable to hope for such a favor at the hands of God, unless we
are willing to give satisfaction, to our power, for the injuries we have done
to others, and are ready to forgive offenses against our selves? Our very
nature will rebuke such a vain presumption. And our Savior has expressly taught
us, in the Parable of the Lord and his steward, that a readiness to forgive our
enemies, is indispensably necessary in order to the pardon of our own
miscarriages: The Lord forgave his steward a vast debt, but he forgetting the
goodness of his Lord to him, sues and seizes his debtors, and fellow servants,
for trivial sums. Wherefore his Lord was wroth, Matt. 18. ult.
and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto
him. So likewise, says our Savior, shall my heavenly father do to you, if ye
from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses. Nay, he
has taught us to acknowledge the reasonableness of it, in our daily prayer,
Matt. 6.
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

He then that comes to the Holy Communion with evil will or malice in his
heart, must needs be out of countenance, as a man that wants the wedding
Garment. Matt. 22.11.
But he whose soul is free from that unchristian vice, he who is an enemy to
none, but delights in the happiness of all, and is ready to assist whom he may;
he who loves his Neighbor as himself, may approach with an humble confidence:
such a suitable temper will give him courage, rational expectation, and a
modest assurance that his address will be accepted, and his sins forgiven.

Finally, S. Paul, (1 Cor. 10.16, 17.) The Cup of blessing which we bless, is
it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it
not the Communion of the body of Christ? for we being many are one bread and
one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread.

In the 16th Verse you see the Apostle affirms, that the faithful in the Holy
Sacrament communicate together, of the body and blood of Christ? The bread
which we break is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? and from thence,
in the following words, he infers the most perfect Love and Unity amongst
themselves, v. 17. For we being many are ( i. e. we ought to be) one bread and
one body, why? because we all partake of that one bread, (or loas) which words
of the Apostle may be understood in a double sense, according to the several
significations and constructions of the Holy Sacrament.

First, The first interpretation of the 16th. ver.
as this Supper of our Lord is the Christian Passover, and bears an Analogy to
the Jewish feast upon the Sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb, which they are
together, after the Priest had presented and offered it up to God. And to this
the Sacrament succeeds, and is understood as a perpetual feast upon the
Sacrifice of our Blessed Savior whose body was offered once for all: Heb.
10.10.
which body and blood we eat in the sign and figure to the end of the world, by
his own Command. Christ our Passover (says the same Apostle) is sacrificed for
us, therefore let us keep the feast, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.

Now thus to eat and drink together at the Table, The first interpretation of
the 17th. ver.
and upon the Sacrifice of our Lord, engages us to one another in the strictest
ties of Love and Charity, as children of the same Father, redeemed by the same
Lord, coheirs of the same inheritance, fed at the same Table, and nourished by
the same Loaf, which by common acceptance, and fair construction, is both a
Token, a Profession, and a solemn League of Love and Friendship.

Again, The second interpretation of the 16. v.
according to the second Notion of the Holy Sacrament, as it is an inward and
spiritual grace, a Seal of the New Testament, a confirmation of all the
blessings of the Gospel to every individual Person that accepts the terms, and
will fulfill the Counterpart, the sense of the 16th. Verse is this, viz. that
all who perform the Conditions required of them, shall as surely enjoy the
benefits of our Savior's death, as they partake of the visible signs thereof,
as they eat the Bread, and drink the Wine, by which it is showed forth and
represented. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the
blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body
of Christ? that is, of the benefits of both. Now this consent to the Conditions
of the Gospel, this entering into Covenant with God, this sincere and cheerful
dedication of our selves to the Government of our blessed Savior, which render
the Elements the Body and Blood of Christ, to the receiver is expressed in
Scripture by all such Metaphors, as denote the most entire and perfect union,
which can be possibly conceived between us, as that between the Husband and the
Wife, Ephesians. 5.23. Jo. 15.1. Jo. 10. 1 Cor. 12.27.
the Vine and the Branches, the Shepherd and the Flock, the Head and Members,
the Soul and Body; which Unity is not natural and personal, that were Blasphemy
to imagine, but Intellectual and Moral: one Vital Principle moves them, one
spirit acts and inhabits in them both: our Savior and his true Disciples have
the same opinions of what is good and evil, the same affections to every thing
that is good, the same will to proceed and act according to the most perfect
reason. Romans 8.10.
If Christ be in you, (says St. Paul) the body is dead. Now the manner of His
being in us, is explained in the former Verse, V. 9.
by His temper, spirit, and disposition. For if any man have not the spirit of
Christ, he is none of his; as in another place it is explained by his Mind,
That the same Mind may be in us, which was in him: Phil. 2.5. Ephesians. 3.17.
And again, That He may dwell in our hearts by Faith.

Now from this spiritual Union betwixt our Savior, The second interpretation
of the 17. v.
and those who worthily receive the Sacrament, that is, who have resigned
themselves to the obedience of the Gospel, the Apostle infers the most entire
and perfect unity of the whole body of faithful Christians amongst themselves.
Ye are, says he, united to Christ, by eating His Body, and drinking His Blood,
He becomes a principle of new life to every one that receives the Sacrament as
he ought to do. Now, says he, the union is the very same, and upon the same
account, between the faithful amongst themselves. For, carrying on the
Metaphor, We being many are one body, and one bread, V. 17.
because we are all partakers of that one bread.

We all receive nourishment from the same root, and are therefore vitally
united to one another; We are all made to drink, (speaking of the Cup in the
holy Sacrament) into one spirit. All which, laying aside the Allegory, is thus
to be understood, that forasmuch as all sincere and faithful Christians have
entered themselves into the same Society, undertaken the same institution and
rule of life, consent and agree in the same mind, affections, desires, and
converfation, therefore they are morally united to one another, as well as to
our blessed Savior. For our Savior is not divided, He is one and the same in
his Nature, his Life, his Gospel, his Laws, and Promises; so that if
innumerable individuals devote themselves to the belief of his Propositions, to
the love and obedience of his instructions, if they resign themselves, their
wills and affections to his Command, Jo. 17.21
whereby they become in a Moral sense united to him; these of necessity, by the
same Moral unity, are joined and knit amongst themselves. One common soul and
spirit acts and influences them all, they have parted from their own private
will and conduct, and resolved themselves into the guidance of another, whose
Law is immoveably perfect, and the same to every particular person. There must
be therefore an Universal, and entire consent in their opinions, desires, and
course of life, as being derived from one and the same unalterable Law. Iph.
4.15.
They grow up into him in all things, says St. Paul, which is the head even
Christ. And thus the unity of all sincere and faithful Christians with Christ,
and with one another, may be easily understood of all: and yet it is as real,
as strict, and proper as the Metaphor, in the Text before us, by which it is
expressed: namely, the unity of innumerable Particles of Flower (by the balm or
leaven which pervades and binds them all) in one Lump or Loaf. For we being
many are one body, and one bread, V. 17.
for we are all partakers of that one bread.

The Conclusion then is this, that if all the faithful Christians upon earth,
are as the several parts of the same loaf, if they are members one of another,
if they receive their vital influence from the same root, 1 Cor. 12.20.
if they are moved and acted by the same principle, then we ought, that is, we
must, we can do no other than love one another entirely: no love like that
which sympathy and consent of will creates: or to speak more properly, love is
not the creature of sympathy and consent, but sympathy and consent of Will, are
Love; they are the thing it self, they cannot be distinguished. And therefore
without Charity, without entire and perfect Love amongst our selves, we cannot
be united to Christ, we cannot have eaten his Body or drunk his Blood. The
Elements will be no more, to such as these, nay less, than common bread and
wine. We cannot be the members of the mystical body of Christ, so long as we
are separated from one another by the least degree of malice and evil will, for
no man ever hated his own flesh. He then that loves not, 1 John 4 8.
knows not God, (has no true principle of Religion) for God is love.

Upon all these accounts it is, that the Holy Sacrament has been always
esteemed a token of Unity, a bond of Charity, and a symbol of peace and concord.

And hence it was, that in former times the Communicants brought their
Offerings to the Minister, Fruits of the earth, or any Viands for
entertainment, which, when the Sacrament was ended, were eaten as a common
feast, by all degrees and ranks promiscuously, without respect to place or
quality. And this was the feast of Charity, ^ Pet. 2.13.
mentioned by S. Jude v. 12. and was concluded with a kiss, in token of entire
and perfect friendship.

But these pure and innocent Ceremonies being soon abused, were afterward
disused: Nevertheless we have something like them still continued in our
Church, namely, in the Collection that is ordinarily made for the poor; and,
after the Communion, in eating and drinking what remains of the Consecrated
Elements in the Church, Rubr.
without distinction of persons, but, as the custom is, the meanest persons are
invited to be the chief partakers of it.


Par. Sir, I hope I understand you, and I am heartily glad that I did not
receive before I was instructed; and I find upon the matter, that it requires
both time and retirement to prepare our selves as we ought to do, and the first
time more especially; but I will endeavor, by God's assistance, to follow your
directions.


Min. You have made a very good inference from our whole discourse; the reason
of the action, and the solemnity of this most sacred Ordinance, the several
parts of our Religion which it has respect to, require a very strict
examination of our Knowledge, Repentance, Affections, purposes and desires,
that so our apprehensions of the thing, and the intention of our mind, may bear
a proportion to the outward action, to the design, the words, and the gestures
of the service. Our devotion, as you have heard, is to be exercised upon every
part of Christianity, our particular defects are here to be bewailed; the
several graces of Faith, Hope, and Love, universal Love toward God and Man,
are to be exerted in this solemnity: and therefore it is very necessary to
withdraw our selves from the world, and retire into our selves, some time
before we receive.

That we may recollect the principles, sin that so easily besets us, that has
the advantage of our natural complexion, violent inclination, or present
profit: what methods we have taken, or may take for the future, to subdue it;
what improvements we have made since we last received, and how we have kept our
resolutions.

That we may sufficiently bewail our failings,

That we may excite and stir up our devotions by proper Meditations.

But to say how long, how many hours, or days, or weeks a man ought to spend in
Meditation and Prayer, before he may presume to receive; or to what degree of
Knowledge and Virtue he must attain, is both impossible, and unnecessary. Do
you but remember that competent knowledge, and great integrity, with an hearty
desire to grow in Grace, and the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, 2 Pet. 3.18.
is the true preparation of the Soul, and you shall be able, with Sobriety, to
judge for your self. He that wants this, is not fit to receive; but he that is
thus qualified, is a worthy Communicant, though his knowledge may not be so
distinct and clear, or his virtues so shining and perfect, as some other
Christians possibly may be. Has not God encouraged persons of weak Faith, and a
frail virtue, provided it be true, to hope for his acceptance? Aatt. 12.20.
For he will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, (says
our Savior) that is, he will support it and inflame it by the influences of
his Grace; if we have but the first beginnings of Holiness, an hearty liking of
it, and desire after it; he will nourish it, and bring it to perfection. Aatt
7.7.5.6.
For to them that knock it shall be opened. They that ask shall have. They that
hunger and thirst after righteousness shall be filled. No man therefore that is
inquisitive to know, and sincere in practice, has any reason to be discouraged.
For the Grace and assistance which God has promised, he bestows, and infuses
into the hearts of men, as by the immediate influences of his Spirit upon the
Soul, so especially, through his Word and Sacraments. It is certain we cannot
be too well prepared, but we may be too scrupulous about the degrees of
Knowledge and Virtue, which are the indispensable conditions of our acceptance.
We may prevent our growth in Grace, by thinking our selves unfit to use the
means thereof. An hearty desire of perfection, with such endeavors,
Improvements, Devotions and preparations, as our capacity and opportunity will
permit, entitle us to the use, and to the benefits of the Holy Sacraments. For
how could they be said to be the means of Grace, if none but persons already
vested with it in great degrees, were allowed to use them. So that the sincere,
though imperfect Christian, at the present, has a particular propriety in the
Holy Sacrament, because they are appointed of God, to be the means of obtaining
that, which these especially want. For I am not come, Matt. 9.12, 13.
says our Savior, to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. And again,
The whole need not a Physician, but the sick. Not that there are any so
righteous, as not to need Repentance, or so whole as not to need a Physician;
but the more confirmed and established Men are in a course of Obedience to God,
the more they are under the power of Religion, and the longer they have so
continued; These, comparatively speaking, have the less occasion to use the
means.

I say not this to encourage carelessness, or indifference in the worship of
God, in any. God knows the frailties of the best are so great, and so many,
that there is little fear of diverting a good Man from the worship of God,
because of the comfort and support he feels therein, and the great necessity in
this state of uncertainty and war that he finds thereof: But since our Savior
allows it, I would, by His own similitudes, expel and dissipate all fatal
scruples out of the minds of the sincere, though young Beginners in Religion.


Par. Sir, I thank you for your pains, and I hope they are not ill bestowed; by
the Grace of God you shall see the good effect thereof in a little time.


Min. Ay, that is the end of all. I pray God confirm your Resolutions, and be
sure you let me see you as often as you can, that I may explain, or enlarge
upon any Article of our Discourse, or refresh your Memory, as occasion may
require.


THE END.
Proper Prayers, suited to the foregoing Account of the Holy Sacrament.
A Preparatory Prayer.
OAlmighty God! although thy Councils are unsearchable, Romans 11.33.
and thy ways past finding out, though neither I nor the Angels of thy presence
shall ever comprehend the mystery of Man's Redemption through Jesus Christ; 1
Pet. 1.12.
yet it is enough for me, that thus it is revealed; and therefore I believe
with all mine heart, I adore the mystery, and resolve my hope and trust into
the merits of the Cross. I will now and ever implore thy Pardon, Grace, and
Assistance, for His sake alone, whose Body was broken, and whose Blood was shed
for the Remission of my sins, mine only Savior and Redeemer. And O that I
might meet my Lord this day, in the appointed Signs, and Sacrament of his
Passion, with an heart as sted fast in the Faith, as if I had seen his
Miracles; as full of Love, as if I had been healed of my diseases by his Power;
as full of Joy, as if Himself had said unto me, Be of good cheer, thy sins are
all forgiven; Matt. 9.2.
as constant in my Resolutions against all Impiety and sin, as if I had seen my
Lord in his Agony, and heard Him say, My God, my God, why have Thou forsaken
me! Matt. 27.46.
O Lord encourage my sincere desires, and enable me to perform the intended
duties, with these, and all such holy dispositions as Thou requirest of me;
assist my weakness by thy power, support and strengthen all those Graces which
Thou have begun, and perfect them, at last, in habits of Obedience, Love, and
Praise through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A short Ejaculation upon the receiving of the Bread.
O Lord, I am a sinful man, Matt. 8.8.
not worthy that thou should come under my roof. O cleanse my soul from all
impurity and filth, make me fit to receive so glorious a guest, and then abide
and dwell in me for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A short Ejaculation upon receiving of the Cup.
Lord, Mar. 9.24.
I believe, help thou mine unbelief; that the Bread which I eat, and the Wine
which I drink, thus blessed and given by thy Command, may be indeed the Body
and Blood of Christ to me, the Seal of my Pardon, and the earnest of Eternal
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer to be said immediately after you have received the Elements.
O Most merciful God and Father! How wonderful is Thy love to me a wretched
sinner, that Thou now vouchsafest to receive me as a guest to thine own Table,
and have fed me with the Bread of Heaven! Joh. 6.55.
That thou should make an offer of peace and reconciliation to me! That Thou
should never be weary of showing mercy! That the blood of our Savior should
be salutary still, and exhibited for ever, to the relief of all that are
willing to be healed! Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful of him, Psalm.
8.4.
or the Son of Man that Thou so regardest him! O make me worthy of this
inestimable blessing; purify my thoughts, rectify my will, sanctify mine
affections, strengthen my resolutions, that I may go on from one degree of
grace unto another, Col. 1.28. Mat. 25.23.
till I come to be perfect in Christ Jesus: that I may improve my Talent, and
be the better sensible for every Sacrament I receive, till my Faith shall at
last be perfected in Vision, and the Communion of thy Body and Blood, shall be
finally resolved into the full enjoyment of thine Eternal Deity, O Blessed
Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer to be said in your Closet after your return from the Holy Communion.
O Eternal God! Ps. 7.9. Rev. 2.23. Ps. 51.6.
That searchest the hearts, and triest the reins of men! Thou that requirest
truth in the inner parts! O purge my soul from all Hypocrisy and guile, that I
may now, and always, serve thee with that sincerity and purity as I ought to
do! O Lord, I hope my inward self, my very soul and heart did indite the
Praises, Prayers, and Vows of my Tongue this day before thee. O thou that
remembrest whereof we are made, Ps. 103 14.
and considerest that we are but men! Heb 4.15.
O Thou our great High Priest, who art touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, accept of my good intentions, and forgive the coldness of my
Devotions, and the remisness of my mind, the wandering of my thoughts, and the
many imperfections of this, and of all mine Holy things! and, O Lord, I beseech
thee continue upon my soul that Holy disposition, that Religious sense, which,
by thy Grace, I have been affected with this day; that I may be united to thy
self in the same affections and desires; Col. 3.3.
that my life may be hid with Christ in God, that when Christ who is our life
shall appear, I may appear with him in Glory; to whom with the Father and the
Holy Spirit be ascribed all Honor, Praise, Might, Majesty, Dominion and
Obedience, now and for evermore. Amen.

General Prayers to be said at any time.
A Confession of Sins.
O Eternal God! Heb. 1.3.
Thou art the Almighty Creator, and wise disposer of all things; Thou have been
very gracious unto me from my youth up until now; Thou have blessed me with
every thing that is necessary for the instruction of my soul, and for the
support and pleasure of my life. O what obligations have thou laid upon me, by
thy particular Grace and favor toward me, to serve thee all the days of my
life with a perfect heart?

What then shall I say unto Thee, O Thou that art the Judge of men? How have I
requited thee for all the benefits Thou have done unto me? I blush and am
ashamed to appear before thee; Ps. 139.8. Amos 9.2, 3, 4. Ps. 51.3.
but I cannot fly from thy presence; I will therefore acknowledge my
transgressions, and mine iniquities I will not hide. How have I employed my
childhood and youth in trifles? How has my mind been filled and possessed with
vanity? How impatient, and yet how frivolous have I been in my desires, how
foolish in all mine actions? How insensible of my duty to thy Sacred Majesty,
how cold in my Devotions, how negligent of Instruction, how indifferent to
sober Counsels? How have I preferred the profit, the pomp, and pleasures of the
World, before my duty to God, my neighbor, and my self? O Lord, I am very
sensible, that my sins are more in number, than the hairs of my head, more in
weight than I am able to bear. Mine only hope is in Thy mercy, mine only refuge
are Thy Gracious Promises of pardon and favor to repenting sinners, through
the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ, our only Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

A Prayer for Pardon.
O Most Holy and Righteous God! I humbly prostrate my self before thy Glorious
Majesty, to acknowledge and bewail my many and grievous sins, which I have
committed against Thee: Jam. 3.
I do not know how often I have offended. The sense of my miscarriages is very
sharp upon my spirit, and the apprehension of Thy just displeasure is very
terrible. But Thou have invited all that travel, Matt. 11 28.
and are heavy laden, to come unto Thee, and have promised to refresh them.
Thou have laid help upon one that is mighty to save, Ps. 89.19
even the Lamb that was slain from the beginning of the World: ^^h. 1.
He has born our griefs and carried our sorrows, ^^i. 53.
and on Him is laid the iniquities of us all. Lord, of thine infinite mercies,
wash away my sins in the blood of my dear Redeemer; nail them to his Cross,
bury them in his Grave, that they may never rise in Judgment against me, to
accuse and terrify my Conscience here, or condemn me to everlasting punishment
in the life to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Resolution.
O Eternal God! I acknowledge and adore Thy Goodness toward me, that Thou have
made me a reasonable Creature, that I am not driven by necessity, as other
Beings are, Genesis 1.26.
but am created in the Image of God himself.

O how just and reasonable is it, that we should glorify our bountiful Creator
with all the faculties which He has given us? O God, I bewail mine own defects
of Duty toward Thee; I have not improved mine opportunities of knowledge; I
have been contented to know but little, and have practiced less; my mind has
been employed and satisfied in trifling objects, my will has followed after
vanity, and God has not been in all my thoughts. Psalm. 10.


But now, O Lord, I am very sensible of my folly, as well as of my sin, and I
am resolved for the time to come, Psalm. 119.
to run the way of Thy Commandments, when Thou shall enlarge mine heart. I do
most sincerely and devoutly offer and present my self, my soul and body, Romans
12.^
a lively reasonable sacrifice unto Thee: I unfeignedly resolve that sin shall
no more have dominion over me, Romans 6.1^
I will not yield my members instruments of unrighteousness to sin, but I will
yield my self to God. Psalm. 96.^
I will endeavor to affect my mind with the beauty of holiness, till I Love by
thine affections, choose what Thou proposest, believe what Thou revealest,
expect Thy promises, and entirely resign my self to the obedience of thy Law:
Lord, of thy Goodness accept mine offering, have mercy and compassion upon me,
pity mine infirmities, consider my Contrition, accept my Repentance, encourage
my sincerity, and restore me to Thy Grace and favor, through Jesus Christ my
Lord and only Savior. Amen.

An Act of Hope.
ALmighty and most merciful Father! Thou art Infinite in all Perfections, the
Author and Fountain of all the scattered excellencies in the World! ^m. 1.16.
as Thou art just to punish Wickedness, (...). 145.9.
so Thy Mercy is over all thy Works: Thou remembrest that we are but men; (...)
103.14.
Thou considerest the various temptations, to which we are exposed, the
weakness of our reason, the violence of our passions, the treachery of our
hearts, (...). 17.9.
the infirmities of our Bodies, and all the imperfections of our present state.
Thou art not therefore extreme to mark what we do amiss; Thou art slow to
anger, full of compassion, Exo. 34.4
and abundant in goodness and truth; Ezekiel. 18.23.
Thou have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, but, if at any time the
wicked will turn away from his sins, and do that which is lawful and right,
Thou have promised that he shall surely live, he shall not die, that iniquity
shall not be his ruin. Thou, O blessed Jesus, Ephesians. 1.14 Heb. 9.12 2 Pet. 2.1^
1 Cor. 6.20. 1 John 1.^ Heb. 7.2^
have purchased pardon and redemption for us, at the price of Thy precious
blood; Thou art the propitiation for our sins, our Advocate and only Mediator,
who art able to save to the utmost, all that come unto God by Thee, seeing Thou
ever live to make intercession for us. I know, O Lord, that never a word
shall fail that Thou have spoken, 1 King. ^.56.
and therefore I will never add the sin of distrust to the number of mine
offenses; but I will always worship before my God, with the most honorable
thoughts, the most worthy apprehensions I can conceive or frame. Lord, make me
truly penitent for what is past, perfect in the purposes of mine heart, sincere
in the professions of my Tongue, and diligent to live thereafter for the time
to come, and then I will humbly hope in the promises of thy Gospel, and serve
thee without fear, ^uk. 1.74.
O blessed God, by the assistance of thy most holy and eternal Spirit. Amen.

A Prayer for Divine Assistance and increase of Grace.
MOST Glorious and Blessed God! Thou art Infinite in all perfections, thy Will
is pure, and all thine Excellencies are unchangeable. But though thou have been
pleased to derive upon us some small degrees of thy glorious Nature, though we
act for the sake of such ends as we our selves propose and choose; yet our
faculties are weak, our sensitive appetites impose upon our reason, The law of
our members prevails upon the law of our mind, ^om 7.15, 16, etc.
that we cannot do the thing that we would. O work in me, O Lord, what thou
would have me both to will and do: ^hil. 2.13.
assist me by thy Grace, that the power of evil habits may decay and dye in me,
that the life of God and all the Graces of the Holy Spirit, may grow more
vigorous and strong! Break not, O Lord, Mat. 12.20
the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, but assist my weakness,
strengthen my faint desires, encourage my sincerity, confirm my Faith, inflame
my Love, cherish mine Hope, and enlarge my Charity: support me under all my
conflicts, and carry me through all temptations, that I may cheerfully do and
suffer whatsoever pleases thee. Matt. 5 6. Psalm. 63.1.84.2.42.1. Phil. 3.14.
O how I hunger and thirst after righteousness! how my soul longs after God!
how cheerfully could I leave all things that hinder me behind, and press
forwards for the prize of the high calling of God in Jesus Christ, if by any
means I may attain the resurrection of the dead. O perfect what thou have
begun, Ephesians. 3.47. Gal. 4.19. Ps. 73.24.
dwell in mine heart by faith, and form thy self in me. Guide me by thy
counsels here, and receive me at last into thine everlasting glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer for a due intention of Mind, in the Celebration of Religious Duties.
O Father of Mercies, and God of all our Consolations! It was Thine own
essential Goodness that first inclined thee to create us, that thou might
communicate thy self unto us, and exercise thy Grace and Bounty upon us. Thou
have given us all the assurances that our hearts can wish, That thou delightest
to do us good, and that thine ears are open to our prayers. 1 Pet 3.12.
How justly then art thou the desire and the Worship of all nations? O that I
could praise thee with understanding, and recount thine Excellencies with that
Sense and Adoration as I ought! O that I could make my Prayers unto thee with a
perfect Heart, with true desire and suitable endeavor! that in all the
Solemnities of Religion, I could approach thy presence with such an holy frame,
with such a temper and affection of mind as the duty may require! But, O Lord,
I cannot enough bewail mine own formality and deadness in things Divine and
Spiritual. How difficult do I find it, to raise in my mind a lively sense of
God, even in the most solemn duties? How hard it is to bring my Soul to such a
perfect Unity, to such an entire concurrence as it ought to have with the
outward celebrations of Religion? But, O blessed Jesus, who once did pity and
forgive the infirmities of thine own disciples, Matt. 26.45.
who could not watch with thee an hour, have mercy upon me! Warm mine
Affections by the irradiations of thy Love, refine my Nature, and raise me
above the body. Enlighten my Mind that I may know Thee; correct the
perverseness of my Will, that I may cheerfully obey Thee; mortify all mine
inordinate desires, that I may prefer and choose Thee; heal all my bodily
distempers, ease my worldly cares, subdue mine unruly passions, and preserve me
from too strong temptations, that my Mind may be always steady and composed,
always fit to serve Thee here, that I may sing an eternal Hallelujah to thy
Praise hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer to be said, by well meaning persons, under any dejection or
despondencies of Mind.
O Most Merciful God and Father! Thou correctest, Jer. 10.24.
but it is with judgment not thine anger, that thou should bring us to
nothing; Heb. 12.6.
thou chastenest every son whom thou do receive: All the evils that we suffer
in the world, are the directions of thy Wisdom for our Good. Heb. 12.10.
I therefore bless thy Holy Name for all thy Fatherly corrections, wherewith in
Mercy thou have ever visited me. And I humbly implore thy Divine Assistance,
that I may now behave my self with the most entire and perfect resignation to
thy Will, under that confusion, fear, and terror of mind, which thou art
pleased to lay upon me. I rejoice in the midst of this sore affliction, (as it
is a token of thy care and Love) how severely soever it may affect me. Lord,
bring me nearer to thy self, and preserve me steadfast in my duty to the end,
how sharp soever the means may be. But, O most gracious Father! if the hiding
of thy Countenance from me for a time, has wrought those happy effects upon me,
for which thy Wisdom and Goodness did design it; Restore me, O restore me, for
Jesus Christ his sake, to a sense of thy Love, to peace in my Mind again. Ps
6.6.
I am weary of my groaning, all the night long do I water my couch with my
tears, my Soul is disquieted within me, sunk down into the dust of death, even
into the pit of hell. Visit me, O God, Ps. 106.4.
with thy salvation, cause thine Holy Spirit to descend into mine heart, that
he may defend and guard me in all my trials, support and quiet my dejected
Mind: Is. 50 2. 59.1. Matt 8.8.
Thy hand is not shortened that it cannot save; say but the word, O Lord, and
thy servant shall be healed. O how would I magnify thy Glory, imitate thy
Life, and obey thy Will, if Thou should be pleased to trust me with Health
and Peace again.

Lord, pardon, and hear the importunity of thy servant; my heart is full, Psalm.
6.4.55.5.142.1. Psalm. 60.1. Lam. 5.20, 21.
my soul also is sore troubled. Lord, how long will thou punish me? O turn Thee
again, and have mercy upon me; consider my complaint, and let my crying come
unto Thee! O how cheerfully would I do or suffer any thing, whereby I might
testify the sincerity of mine Adoration, Love, and Duty to Thy Sacred Majesty!
I have none in Heaven but God, Ps. 73.25.
and there is none upon Earth that I desire in comparison of Thee! O when shall
I feel that joy and peace in my mind, which Thou have promised to those that
Love Thy Law? Ps 119 165.
O when will thou dispel those clouds of diffidence and fear, which depress and
trouble me, even now, that I find in my self the most sincere desires to do my
duty in the World! Yet not my will, Matt. 26.42.
O Lord, but Thine be done; here I am, do with me whatsoever pleases Thee;
Though Thou should slay me, yet will I trust in Thee. I throw my self into
the Arms of Thy mercy, beseeching Thee to lay no more upon me, than Thou shall
enable me to bear; 1 Cor. 10.13.
and all I beg upon the alone Account of the Merits and Mediation of Jesus
Christ, my Lord and only Savior. Amen.

A Prayer for Protection, with Thanksgiving.
O Eternal God! Thou art the Almighty Father of the world; I was created by thy
Power, and am preserved by thy Wisdom and Goodness: I am truly sensible of Thy
particular Grace and favor toward me, in all the periods and states of life,
through which I have passed * Mention here the particular blessings of your
condition, whether in pious Parents, or in hopeful Children, prosperous estate,
faithful friends, bountiful benefactors, good busband, discreet or virtuo^
wife, etc.
. O blessed God, affect my mind as it ought to be, with a sense of thy bounty
and beneficence, that I may rely upon Thy Providence for the time to come; that
I may be wholly resigned to Thy most blessed Will, and fully satisfied under
all Thy dispensations toward me. Endue me, O Lord, with all those gifts and
graces, that may enable me to acquit my self as I ought to do, in all the
conditions of life, which thou shall be pleased to call me to; open mine
understanding, rectify mine errors, quicken my diligence, strengthen my faith,
and with my capacities enlarge my Charity, that Thou may still continue to be
gracious to me, to direct my Counsel, to preserve my health, to guide my hand,
and to bless me in all my ways and works, through Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose
most holy name and words, I conclude mine imperfect prayers, saying, Our
Father, etc.

THE END.
Matthew. xxii. 37, 38, 39. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

This is the first and great Commandment.

And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.


THE Immortality of the Soul, and a future state of Bliss or Misery, according
as our actions in the flesh have been good or evil; are the common Notions, the
indeleble Opinions, the universal expectation of Mankind. And therefore a
distinct and perfect knowledge of Religion, or of such an Institution of Faith
and Manners, as will certainly be accepted of God, procure his favor here, and
everlasting blessedness in the Life to come, is a matter of the highest
concernment to us. No reasonable Man, that believes a future Judgment, with the
consequent Rewards and Punishments, can find any peace or contentment in his
Mind, till by a clear understanding of his duty, and a firm resolution to
fulfill it, he has founded to himself, a rational hope of a happy life in the
other World.

But though the thing it self has been always steddily believed, yet a
consistent regular account of this future Life was never stated; nor the
methods by which it might certainly be obtained, which so much concerns us,
discovered to the World: till the light of the Gentiles, and the glory of
Israel appeared, to give us the knowledge of Salvation.

Even the Jews had no distinct and clear conception of the Life to come. The
opinions of the Pharisees themselves concerning it, (who were the most zealous
assertors of it) were very absurd and sensual; insomuch that Josephus compares
the heaven of the Phanisees to that of the Greeks, who dreamed of fortunate
Islands, replenished with all imaginable delights of the Body, quick and more
curious appetites, and more perfect objects of satisfaction.

But by the Ministry of our Blessed Savior, Life and Immortality are brought
to light, proposed intelligibly, and asserted with Divine Authority. Hence the
Pharisees having heard of the Wisdom of our Savior, that he had put the
Sadducees to silence, cleared the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and was able to
answer all the doubts and questions concerning the life to come, sent a Lawyer,
from amongst themselves, V. 35.
to make an experiment of his Judgment, who enquires of our Savior, under the
style of Master; Which is the great Commandment? Jesus said unto him, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self.

The Text is a general Account of the way and method, whereby we may attain
everlasting life; of such a conversation and course of action here, as will
procure to us everlasting blessedness in the world to come.

And all the Duties, Qualities, and Habits, which are required of us, as
conditions of Eternal life, are comprehended by our Savior under these Two
Heads.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God, etc.

Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul,
and with all thy Mind: This is the first and great Commandment. And in the
handling of this copious Argument, I shall confine my thoughts to this
following Method.

First,

Secondly, of Love to God. First, With all the Heart, and with all the Soul:
And Secondly, With all the Mind.

Thirdly, Love of God with all the Heart, and with all the Soul, and with all
the Mind, may be said to be the First and Great Commandment.

Fourthly, Love to God, by several motives, couched and implied in this one
word, Thou shall love the Lord thy God.

Fifthly and Lastly,

I begin with the first of these, Thou shall love the Lord thy God. To Love, is
to take delight and pleasure in the Object, with a desire of such an enjoyment
of it, as the nature of the thing will bear, and Reason will permit; and the
causes, or reasons of such Delight and Desire, are only two, (however various
the objects, about which they are exercised, may be) namely, an opinion of
personal excellency in the object it self, or a sense of kindness, or benefits
received from it. These are the only Principles of Love; these are the only
causes of all the delight and desire in the world, that is voluntary and
chosen. Persons, it is true, may be, and very frequently are mistaken, in their
apprehensions of beauty and goodness, whereby this best, and most agreeable
passion of love, is too often exercised upon unworthy objects, pursued and
enjoyed after an unreasonable manner. But notwithstanding that, whether the
object be wisely chosen or foolishly, whether the beauty apprehended, be real,
or imaginary, wheresoever delight and desire are, there beauty, or goodness in
the object, is, however, apprehended and supposed.

And from this general account of the nature and Principles of Love, we may
most firmly establish the notion of Love to God. Wherefore then to Love the
Lord our God, is so to apprehend the excellencies of the Divine nature, his
absolute perfections in themselves, and his infinite grace, and goodness
toward us, as that we most sincerely and heartily admire and adore his
Majesty, and earnestly desire the most intimate enjoyment of Him, and the most
perfect union with Him, that we are capable of. This is the nature of the Duty
in the general.

And the Qualifications with which it ought to be exercised, are three, with
all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind.

The Text is taken out of Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thine Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Might. St. Mark, Luke
10.27.
and St. Luke express it, with all thy Strength. And because of this
indifferent variation of the phrase, and because the same thing is sometimes
expressed by one of these phrases only, as with all thy Heart, 1 Samuel 7.3.
Sometimes the Heart and Soul without the Mind or Strength, as in the 2 Kings
23.3. Therefore some Expositors consider the Heart, the Soul, and Mind, as
words of the same, or of equal signification, accumulated only to press, and
inculcate the duty more effectually upon us, but not as a Climax of perfection
in the practice of it.

But because we may observe a real and material difference, in the common use
and acceptance of the words, expressing the degrees of Intention, and desire,
in the acts and operations of the Soul; and because it will very much
administer to the just explication of the duty, therefore I shall presume, and
with good authority, to consider the Heart, the Soul and Mind, as
qualifications of gradual Excellency, as a Scale of Perfection, in the practice
and exercise of Love to God.

And first, With all thy Heart: By the Heart, according to the usual
signification of that Metaphor, we understand Integrity, Sincerity of
affection; Ye have obeyed from the heart, Romans 6.17. the form of doctrine that
was delivered you, that is, sincerely, and without hypocrisy. And innumerable
other places.

Secondly, with all thy Soul, that is, Sincere, but grounded well, proceeding
from Causes proper and considered; not with Passion only, but with Judgment.
The Soul here may be understood of Reason and Discretion, whereby we
distinguish of Good and Evil, base and worthy, and to whose determinations the
Will, Desires, and instruments of Action are obedient.

Thirdly, with all thy Mind. Mind, may be understood the more Spiritual
Principle in Man, whereby he feels, and enjoys the truth of such Propositions,
as Reason, by comparing one thing with another, shall discover. Reason is, as
it were, an Artificial, Mechanical deduction of Conclusions from Premises, but
the Mind enjoys them really, by an entire agreement with the Proposition. And
upon this account the wicked, in Scripture, are said to be (...), such as are
able to collect the truths of Religion, or any other Propositions, by
Scholastic inference; but the Pious and Regenerate have an inward sensation of
things Intellectual and Divine, and are therefore called (...), to whose Body
and Soul, is added Mind or Spirit.

Wherefore then, to Love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy
Soul, and with all thy Mind, is sincerely to Adore and Delight in God, from a
distinct perception, from an inward sensation as well of his absolute
Perfections in themselves, as of His infinite Bounty and Goodness toward us.
And thus I have explained the Terms, and stated the Nature of the duty in
general.

I proceed, of Love to God, First, with all our Heart, and with all our Soul;
Secondly, with all our Mind.

And First, the particular acts, Love of God with all the Heart, and with all
the Soul, are chiefly these,

First, weight and measure, according to the degrees of beauty, and excellence
in the object. As he readily acknowledges whatsoever worth or goodness he any
where discerns, so he suffers not his Passion and desire to go before his
understanding.

But God is a Being that exists of himself, in whom is implied whatsoever can
be supposed to be, and in whom all being is resolved, as into its proper and
most perfect cause. Defect supposes impotence and control, but Omnipotence
implies the most absolute perfection. Desire of Good when known is necessary.
But can any instance of goodness or perfection be hid from his knowledge, or
kept from his possession, who is the cause of all things?

Wherefore then, since all perfections are essential to this first and Original
Good; one of the necessary acts of Love to such a being is the preference of
him to all other Beings whatsoever. If our Love of God be with all the Soul,
with judgment and understanding, then we know that there is none in heaven but
God, and none upon earth to be desired in comparison of Him; That he is the
fountain of all the imperfect excellencies of all created Beings; that he is
the most constant, and the most potent friend and benefactor; who made us by
his Power, and sustains us by his Providence, guides us by his Council, assists
us by his Spirit; pities our Weakness, pardons our Sins, and is ready, at last,
to receive us into Glory. Wheresoever therefore, He is understood, all other
objects, habits, and desires, will necessarily fall before him. For whatsoever
beauty or goodness may be found in any other object, they are all derived from
God, in whom all fullness dwells. That is the first.

with all the Heart, and with all the Soul; is a steadfast Faith in whatsoever
he reveals. A sincere affection is apt, in its nature, to beget an unreasonable
credulity. It is very difficult to persuade our selves that our friend, whose
happiness we know is our greatest pleasure, should abuse our Passion by deceit
and guile, to sport or private ends: and therefore, notwithstanding all the
infirmities of humane Nature, all the insincerities which may proceed from
wicked dispositions, and violent temptations; yet Love creates an entire and
perfect confidence in one another. How much more if our Love of God be with all
our Heart and Soul, shall we believe his Word, and rely upon his Promises?
because he is Truth it self, and cannot be deceived: he is Wisdom it self, and
cannot propose or promise at adventure; he is Power it self, and can bring into
act whatsoever he decrees; He is Goodness it self, and neither can, nor will
deceive us. If therefore our Love of God be sincere, and with understanding,
the most entire and perfect confidence in his Word and Promises are necessary.
We shall inquire into his Will, study his Laws, submit our apprehensions to his
determinations, and steadfastly believe whatsoever he reveals. If there arise
among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. and gives you a
sign or a wonder, and the sign or wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto
thee, saying, go after other gods which thou have not known, and serve them,
thou shall not hearken to that Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, for the Lord
thy God proves thee to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your
heart, and with all your soul. The adhering firmly to the Word of God, though a
Wonder should be wrought in confirmation of a contrary doctrine, is made a test
of our Love of God, by God himself. That is the Second.

Love of God, with all the heart, and with all the Soul, is such an imitation
of the Divine Perfections, as our present state, and capacity will permit.

Self-love, or a desire of being happy and perfect in the kind, is the
necessary inclination, or the first principle of every being. And therefore
whatsoever Good or excellence we clearly understand, as essential to, or
perfective of our being, or conducible to the ease and convenience of our life,
we cannot choose but desire the possession of it. It is not so properly an act
of reason, as an instinct of nature. But if we love the Lord our God with all
our Heart and Soul, with sincerity and understanding, we shall discern the
beauty, capacity, and perfection of our own nature, in the Qualities and the
life of the first, and most perfect of rational Beings; and shall therefore
necessarily desire to imitate those Divine virtues which we so adore and love.
The abstracted essence of God is impossible to be comprehended by a finite
understanding, but we judge of the Divinity, as of all things else, by effects
and operations, by his works of Creation and Providence, by his Universal
righteousness, wisdom, purity, and goodness, so visible in the government of
the World. If we therefore apprehend and admire these glorious Attributes of
God, we shall endeavor to transcribe his Copy, and model our Souls according
to this Exemplar; because the resolution of the mind, that such a quality is
worthy and excellent, includes desire and imitation: we shall endeavor to be
holy, as God is holy, in all our conversation, that as he is, so we may be in
the World, wise in the management of our ends, just in our dealings, merciful
to the distressed, ready to forgive our enemies, in all things aspiring after
the Divine perfections, and setting the Life of God before us, as the Rule of
our Conversation: That Is the Third.

Love of God with all the Heart, and with all the Soul, is a constant uniform
Obedience to his Will.

What a cheerful flexibility, what a readiness to do any thing that may be
grateful and pleasant to each other, may be observed in the love of equals? If
therefore love has such a power, where the authority is precarious only, and by
consent; how much more will the Love of God oblige us to the most diligent
observance of His will, forasmuch as the love of our Superiors includes
obedience in its nature. No man can entirely love a Prince, or a Father, that
does not approve and obey his Precepts; and therefore St. John defines the Love
of God by keeping his Commandments, 1 John 5.3. This is the Love of God, that
we keep his Commandments. We cannot add to infinite perfection, we cannot
oblige Him in any real services, who is already Lord of all; there remains
therefore no possible testimony of our Love to God, without the resignation of
our opinions, desires, and actions to his will. This is all we have to offer:
If a man Love me, (says our Savior) he will keep my words: (Joh. 14.23.) and,
he that has my Commandments and does them, he it is that loves me.

Would it not be the greatest solecism in love, if our friend should prescribe
us a method of happiness, promise his assistance, assure us of success, and we
should receive it civilly, applaud his judgment, believe all he says, but never
proceed to accomplish the methods he proposes? Hence those who live in
disobedience to the Laws of God are said to hate Him: Exodus 20.6.

Indeed, if we have any true conceptions of the Divine perfections, which love
supposes, we know that God is infinite in wisdom to direct and guide us;
infinite in goodness, and will suit his commands to our abilities; full of
mercy and compassion, and will pity our weakness, and pardon our failings.

If therefore love, wheresoever it is sincere, is apt to create an extravagant
desire of pleasing the object, even with the utmost hazard, and sometimes by
unlawful practices, by humouring vices, flattering deformities, serving the
basest ends, any thing indeed that they think may gratify the person. How much
more will the love of God oblige us to the strictest care and observance of His
will, because we know that His will is perfect; He can command us nothing, nor
can he be pleased with any thing, that is not truly Good. He cannot be giddy
and inconstant, frequish and uncertain, humorsome and hard to be pleased, as
imperfect objects are; but He will receive our addresses, and accept our
services. He will enable us to obey him, and make the best construction of all
our sincere endeavors, and at last complete our love in the everlasting
enjoyment of Himself. That Is the 4th.

the Love of God with all the heart and with all the Soul, is the most hearty
sorrow whenever we shall offend him, with an earnest desire to be reconciled.

Whosoever loves, will endeavor to recommend himself, by an obliging
deportment, to the good opinion of the object; pursues a kind acceptance, waits
a suitable return, and expects at length the enjoyment of his hopes. If
therefore he has given any just occasion of Offense, by omitting what was
necessary to be done, or by doing any thing that was contrary to his
Pretensions, or inconsistent with his Love, it must needs affect him with
indignation against himself, that he should bring his own sincerity into
question, injure the person, whose happiness is his greatest Joy, retard his
progress toward that end he chiefly aims at, and superinduce a Cloud upon that
Sun, by whose influence he lives.

Thus also in respect of God, if we love him with Understanding, we cannot but
pursue his favor, and most earnestly desire to be loved again; because we know
that our Love of God, if it be sincere and pure, will be returned in the most
ravishing delights: we know that his Love is Life; that it is not an empty
Passion, but exerted in the most substantial effects, and happy instances. And
therefore that we should have sinned against him, must needs be the most
insupportable affliction; because in proportion to the nature of our offense,
our chief design of obtaining his favor, and the light of his countenance will
be hindered; and all our work, of so great importance, may be to begin again.
And as we shall be deeply sensible of our offense, so shall we also be very
sollicitous to be reconciled.

One of the most essential acts of Love, is a desire of the good opinion of the
object; nor is any thing more directly contrary to that Passion, than stoutness
and indifference. No man can sit down and be satisfied under the displeasure of
his friend, till he has acknowledged his offense, dimulced his anger by suitable
mediations, and all such other acts, as reason in his case, will suggest unto
him.

Thus as our Love of God will make us very careful to obtain and preserve his
favor, so shall we also be extremely solicitous, in case of offenses, to be
reconciled. If our love of God was ever real, it can never be withdrawn: when
once we have understood, and have been warmed with the love of God, it is not
possible, in the nature of the thing, that we should ever be reduced to
indifference; for the glory of God is immutable, and his Beauty perfect, which
where they are understood, will of necessity both attract, and continue Desire
and Love, as being the only object that can fully delight and satisfy the
faculty. Neither is this all, but we know moreover, that we cannot be happy
without his Love: if He hide his face we are wretched and undone; that
Impartial Justice toward offenders, is as certain an Attribute of God, as
Infinite Goodness. Nothing therefore can discourage us, we shall never give
over our Confessions and Tears, our Vows and Resolutions, and the tender of all
such satisfactions as are possible for us to make, till we have reason to hope,
that our sins are pardoned, and our persons are again received into his favor.

These are the essential parts, the necessary acts of Love to God, viz. That we
prefer Him to all other objects whatsoever, believe his Word, and rely upon his
Promises, imitate his Life, and obey his Laws, be deeply sorrowful whenever
we offend him, and earnestly endeavor to be reconciled. All these several
expressions are of the essence of Love, and flow from the nature of the thing.

And so I proceed, as I proposed, with all thy Mind. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy Mind.

In the explication of the Words, it has been already noted, that the Love of
God with all the soul, is such an adoration of God, as proceeds from a sense of
the Glories and excellencies of His Being, as they are apprehended by reason,
and inferred from his Definition, Nature and Operations; but the Love of God
with all the mind, is with a more quick, and sensible perception of the Divine
perfections, with reason improved into a more lively apprehension of the object.

A young Philosopher shall acknowledge the benefits of frugality, suppose, or
of any other Virtue, and shall be able himself to deduce the advantages of it,
by the rules of Logic, and shall believe his deductions to be regular and true.
But a man of Age and Experience, besides what reason suggests, from causes to
effects, has a sense and feeling of the thing, he is affected with it; it has
seized and taken possession of him, he is one with the Notion. Thus Reason
infers the Perfections of God, from necessary Principles, the Judgment is
satisfied, and the Will performs such acts, as are suitable and consonant to
such opinions and apprehensions of the Soul: But he whose knowledge has
affected his mind, not only knows, believes, and acts accordingly; but he has
also a more quick and sensible perception and enjoyment of the Divine
Perfections, by an inexplicable agreement, harmony and delight; he is one with
them, ravished and overcome of Desire and Love. And the particular acts implied
in the Love of God with all the Mind are chiefly Three.

The first is frequent Meditation, Knowledge and perfect our Love. For since it
is impossible to discover a blemish in absolute perfection, the more we pry
into Him, the more of necessity, we shall love him. Whosoever then is affected
sensibly, and in his Mind, with the love of God, will separate considerable
portions of his time, for the contemplation of the Divine Perfections; He will
abstract his mind from sensible things, that it may be purer, and more free,
more apt to apprehend, more easily impressed by objects Divine and Spiritual.
Nothing hinders our clearer Knowledge, and more ardent love of God, but the
prepossession of our affections, by the beauty and goodness of the World. These
we converse with, these we admire and court; but as for the infinite
perfections of God, we believe them, as the Doctrine of the Church, and hope to
enjoy them through the merits of Christ, according to the Tradition of the
Fathers. We resolve that God is incomprehensible, as indeed He is: and
therefore we never endeavor to find out so much of his beauty, as by a due
disposition of Soul, without revelation or ecstasie, we might.

Whereas if our lives were more retired, castigate and sober, our spirits would
be purer, our minds more quick and vigorous, objects Divine and Spiritual would
be more agreeable, more easily felt, and enjoyed by us.

It were easy to consider particulars, and show how a due intention of mind
upon the attributes of God, will more sensibly affect us. Do we adore Him for
so much of his Infinite Goodness, as appears at the first view, in the general,
or toward our selves? How much more should we be affected, if we look it
round, and consider thoroughly this perfection of the will of God? That God who
is Omnipotent, and under no control, should be bounded in his Will, by the
Laws of Goodness, Righteousness and Mercy. That He should vouchsafe to
communicate his own likeness, and subject the whole Creation to the use and
convenience of Man; that He should love us when we were his enemies, and
restore our corrupted nature to its first integrity, by the passion of his only
Son. That He should still follow us with kindness, wait to be gracious, not
easily provoked, longer before He punishes. That his love to Man should be
equal, and universal, but managed with the most perfect wisdom; diffused more
warm, and lively where it is necessary; withdrawn and eclipsed, as the temper
of the subject may require it: and all this, without any cause, or motive from
without himself, but it is the pure effort, and energy of his own nature, no
sudden passion to beget it, no slight, mistaken injury, no pride or envy to
withdraw it, but goodness, sincere and pure, equal and impartial, exerted with
the most perfect wisdom toward the whole Creation, from the beginning of the
world, till time shall be no more. O the depth of the riches both of the Wisdom
and Goodness of God! These depths, and these riches of his goodness, are not to
be understood, but by a due intention of the mind. But whosoever thus exerts
his Mind, his utmost self, in the contemplation of God, will love Him with his
Mind too, because Desire and Love are always equal to our knowledge. That is
the First.

The Second particular implied in the Love of God with all our Mind,

Desire of conversation with the object is a necessary act of Love. The nearer
we approach it, the more we expect to be pleased; and when once we have
attained to an intimate conversation, then all our previous passion and desire
is perfected; We now enjoy the object in continual assurances of mutual
affection, we communicate our hopes and fears, our Joys and griefs, we consult,
advise, and assist each other; and this indeed was the end at first proposed.
Thus also in respect of God, wheresoever the Glories of his nature are
apprehended, there the humble profession of our Love, the desire of his
acceptance, the discovery of our needs, the opening of our hearts, the
imploring his assistance, the expression of our passion in Hallelujahs, and
Songs of Praise, will follow of necessity. Where these are wanting, there can
be no opinion of the Goodness and Omniscience, of the Wisdom and Power of God.

But if our love of God be with all the Mind, with a more quick sensation of
these perfections, acts of Religion will be our greatest pleasure, our most
ravishing Delight: For by these we converse with that invisible Majesty, we
adore, receive returns and pledges of his love, assurances of his favor, and
encouragement in our choice. That Is the Second.

The last particular act implied in the love of God with all the Mind,

Desire of the most intimate union, (according as the object is capable of
being enjoyed) is a necessary part of love. And in respect of God, there is no
one thing that the Scriptures do more plainly assert and inculcate, than the
union of pious Men with God. Good men are said to be joined, (...), glued to
the Lord, and to be one spirit, to dwell in Christ, to put on Christ, to be as
closely united as the Vine and branches, as husband and wife, as the foundation
and the building, as the Soul and body. Finally, as God, and our blessed
Savior: for so our Savior prays, Joh 17.21.
that those whom thou have given me may be One, as thou Father art in me, and I
in Thee, that they also may be one in us.

May be one in us not essentially, or hypostatically, but in the consent of
their will, in likeness of disposition, temper and design; as if they were
acted by the same Principle; and in this, the proper unity of Souls consists.
And thus our Savior explains the Unity of Believers with himself, by bringing
forth the fruits of righteousness, John 15.15.

Indeed, the effects of this Union, the delights and pleasures which fill the
minds of those who are thus united to God, are ineffable, and therefore,
according to S. Paul, Ephesians. 5.32. it is a great mystery.

Whosoever therefore loves the Lord his God with all his mind, with clearer
knowledge, and more pure desire, will be impatient of a perfect Union, of the
most full and satisfying fruition of God in Heaven. The more we know of God,
the more our Souls will desire him, because he is absolutely perfect, and
therefore we are sure to be for ever entertained with fresh discoveries of
Beauty and Glory. Enjoyment will inflame our desire, till our Souls shall be
wholly resolved into the object. O how despicable will all the World appear,
even Lise it self, in comparison of a more perfect participation of the Divine
Nature! How earnestly shall we expect, till our Knowledge shall be improved
into its utmost capacity, that we may see him face to face! How shall we long
for such a complete enjoyment as shall not be allayed by infirmities and sins,
by temptations and despondencies, by natural corruptions and impure affections;
but continue for ever, vigorous and fruitful, constant and indissoluble!

And as these higher and more perfect degrees of Knowledge, and desire, ought
to be pursued as a duty; so they are sometimes bestowed upon the diligent and
sincere, as a reward. God is pleased to manifest himself unto them, to raise
their desires, and refresh them with returns of his Love, and cause them to
drink of the rivers of His pleasure.

But if we never attain to this more spiritual frame; if our minds, through
worldly impediments shall never be improved into a distinct and clear
perception of the Attributes of God: Yet if our love of God be with competent
knowledge, and great sincerity, if it be fruitful in the necessary acts of
Imitation, Faith, Obedience, and the rest, it will be rewarded, and made
perfect hereafter, though it never arrive at the more perfect Knowledge and
Desire of God here.

And thus I have considered the particular parts, the necessary acts and
exercises of love to God: First, with all thy Heart and with all thy Soul,
secondly, with all thy Mind.

And the duty so particularly stated and examined, this above all the Commands
of God, This is the first and great Commandment. And this was the Third head of
discourse proposed.

It is first in the disposition of God himself. Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. Deuteronomy. 6.5.

It is first in the order of Nature,

It is first in respect of the Object,

It is first in respect of Amplitude and Capacity,

And the Duty being found so Honorable in its order,

The distinct understanding of the Divine Perfections, requiring such intention
and purity of Mind, such a concurrence of circumstances, as are competent to
very few, therefore our Savior urges the duty of love to God by an Argument
that falls under Sense, and is easily understood of all, that is to say, our
Relation to God, Thou shall love the Lord thy God.

Though God is infinitely perfect, yet he vouchsased to impart his likeness,
and form a relation to himself, that he might exercise his Goodness upon us,
and make us happy.

First, freely, and for the sake of ends, understanding clearly, loving
regularly, capable of Arts, Philosophy, Policy, and Religion, and are sure to
live for ever.

Secondly, pitied our follies, and redeemed us, by the blood of his Son, from
the captivity of sin, from our miserable servitude under the Tyranny of our
selves, our irregular lusts and passions, and restored us to the rectitude of
our Will, to the Love and Obedience of himself again.

Thirdly, Thou shall therefore love the Lord thy God.

What therefore now remains, Affections, which are never idle, never
indifferent, upon this most perfect Object; of whom our opinion shall never
vary, our desire shall never cool, enjoyment never clog; where our reception
shall be gracious, and our passion encouraged; whose kindness is immutable, and
whose Love is Operative: It is Strength in Difficulties, in Hazards Wisdom, in
Temptations Victory, in Distress a Refuge, in Fears a Support, in Death
everlasting Life: to which of his Mercy may He bring us all, for Jesus Christ
his sake the Righteous: To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed
all Honor, Praise and Obedience, now and for evermore. Amen.

Matthew. xxii. 39, 40. And the Second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self.

On these Two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.


THE Pharisees envying the Fame of our Savior's Wisdom, and fearing the
success of his doctrine, and the revolt of the Jews, V. 15.
took counsel together how they might entangle him in his talk; and resolved
upon a Question of State to be proposed unto him; Is it lawful to pay tribute
to Caesar or not? V. 17.
To which they knew a direct and positive answer, would either betray him into
the high dipleasure of the King, or at least into the hatred of the Potent
Faction of Herodians. But our Savior, who knew their thoughts, defeated their
malice, by such a prudent and inoffensive answer, as neither Party could except
against, viz. Render therefore unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, V. 22.
and unto God the things that are God's! and when they heard these words, they
marvelled, and left him, and went their way; V. 23.
and the same day the Sadducees came to him also, who indeed believe no future
state at all, but they dissembled their opinion for the present, and pretended
to consult our Savior, as if they sincerely desired his Judgment, in a case
concerning the Resurrection of the dead, but, in truth, with intent to expose
the doctrine it self; Namely, if a Woman have seven Husbands upon Earth, V. 28.
in the Resurrection whose of the seven shall she be? In answer to which, our
Savior corrects their false and gross opinion of the future life, and shows
them their ignorance of the state of the question they proposed; For in the
Resurrection they neither marry, V. 30.
nor are given in marriage; and thus with the same most perfect wisdom, he
astonishes the multitude, V. 33, 34.
and put the Sadducees to silence too. Last of all, a Lawyer having heard of
the wisdom of our Savior, that he had put the Sadducees to silence, and was
able to answer all the doubts and Questions concerning the life to come,
inquires of our Savior, under the style of Master, V. 36.
Which is the great Commandment? Jesus says unto him,

This is the First and the Great Commandment;

Which words are a general Account of the Way and Method, whereby we may attain
everlasting life; of such a conversation and course of action here, as will
procure to us everlasting blessedness in the World to come.

And all the duties, qualities, and habits, which are required of us, as
conditions of Eternal life, are comprehended, by our Savior, under these Two
Heads:

Thou shall love the Lord thy God, etc.

And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. On
these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.

In the handling of this useful and necessary Argument, I shall confine my
Discourse to this following Method:

First, loving our Neighbor as our selves.

Secondly, Thy Neighbor.

Thirdly, and the second is like unto it.

Fourthly, On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.

Fifthly and Lastly,

I begin with the first of these, viz. the explication of the duty; what is
understood by Loving our Neighbor as our selves? and that I may proceed more
clearly, I shall briefly consider these Three Things.

First, our Neighbor?

Secondly, Loving our Neighbor?

Thirdly, Loving our Neighbor as our selves?

And first, by our Neighbor, the whole Society of humane Kind, every Man that
lives. Amongst the Jews indeed, this word was never understood to comprehend
the Gentiles, but however it was used indifferently for any Israelite, as in
the Ninth Commandment, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor;
Exodus 20.
and again, Thou shall not stand against the life of thy Neighbor, Lev. 19.18.
that is, of any Jew, though not of any Man, for they hated the Gentiles, and
esteemed them accursed.

But under the dispensation of the Gospel, our Charity is enlarged to every
individual Person, over the face of the whole Earth; and therefore our Savior
declares expressly, that the good Samaritan was Neighbor to the Jew that was
wounded, St. Luke 12.38. And St. Paul reciting this very passage, Romans 13.8.
changes the word Neighbor for that of Another, a word of the most indefinite
signification of any that is used, He that loves another has fulfilled the
Law, for all duties are comprehended in this saying, namely, V. 9.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. This for the object of the duty,
our Neighbor, every man.

I proceed, as I proposed, love his Neighbor?

And forasmuch as all Mankind are made the object of our love, it would be
absurd to explain the nature of that love, by such intimate acts of affection
and desire, as arise from a chosen friendship, or a near Relation; but our
definition of universal Love ought to be very general, that it may be
practicable in the utmost, and the true extent thereof, as a duty that reaches
to the farthest corners of the Earth, and is exercised upon Persons and
Countries we never saw or heard of, as well as upon those with whom we do
converse.

To love our Neighbor then, or the whole Society of Humane nature, wheresoever
dispersed and scattered about the World, is, sincerely and heartily to desire
and wish the happiness of every Man; to be contented and pleased that our
Brethren should share with us, in all the blessings and advantages we are
capable of enjoying; to promote our own particular good, with safety and regard
to the interest of the whole: In a word, to Love our Neighbor, is to prosecute
a public interest, to consent and assist, with all our hearts, in the mutual
good of one another. That is the Second.

I proceed, Loving our Neighbor as our selves.

To Love our Neighbor is the Duty; to love our Neighbor as our selves, is the
Rule or measure in the practice of it, or the qualification with which it
ought to be exercised. And there cannot surely be a better, or a more easy
copy proposed to our Imitation. A Rule that is so straight and perfect in it
self, and impossible to be mistaken by us. Self-love is the first, and most
evident principle of our being; every man understands and feels the nature of
it, how sincere and pure it is; how vigorous and strong, how constant and
immovable. But thus are we enjoined by our Savior, to love our Neighbor,
even as our selves; with the same most ardent desires, with the same sincere
endeavors, to divert impendent evils, and procure all possible good to others,
as we would do to our selves. This in general.

More particularly I shall consider the words, (...), as thy self, in a double
sense.

First, extent and latitude that we love our selves.

Secondly, manner that we love our selves; to pursue his good with the same
affections and dispositions of mind, that we find in our selves, in the
prosecution of our own.

First,

All our possibilities of happiness are contained and comprehended in these
four particulars, viz. our Soul, our Life, our Estate and Reputation. Every man
has a tender respect for these; it is the business of our Lives, and the object
of our Reason, to become as happy in all these several capacities, as we can;
no man chooses folly or iniquity, disgrace or poverty, diseases or death,
simply, and under the proper notion of them; but, according to our measure of
knowledge, and the opinion that we have of things, we endeavor to avoid them
as evil, and procure the good that is contrary thereunto. Wherefore then to
love our Neighbor as our selves, according to this interpretation of the
words, is to desire his good, as we do our own, in all his several capacities;
to be really pleased with his happiness in any of his interests, and ready to
assist him according to our power.

First, in the interest of his Soul; his eyes, with David, run down with tears,
because men keep not the Law of God. He is ready to communicate his Knowledge,
to give his Counsel, to instruct the ignorant, to recall the erring, to reprove
the foolish, (...), as S. Paul says of himself, Not seeking his own profit, but
the profit of many, that they may be saved.

To love our Neighbor as our selves, ^. These. 4.6
not defrauding or oppressing his Neighbor in any matter. Neither is he
indifferent only to his Neighbors interest, doing no unhandsom thing to any
man, but he positively seeks and studies his Neighbors weal. He rejoices at
any opportunity of doing kindnesses to men, he receives and addresses the
complaints of the Oppressed, visits the Sick, clothes the Naked, feeds the
Hungry, he is ready to distribute, Romans 12.
and is given to hospitality. According to S. Paul's description of a
Charitable man, 1 Cor. 13. (to which we shall have a particular respect, in our
present disquisition.) v. 5. (...), Charity seeks not his own, is not
circumscribed within the narrow compass of his own advantage; is not frozen
into dry sterility, but fruitful and abounding in acts of Mercy and
Beneficence. He considers himself, as a member of the one Society of humane
Nature; and therefore, as a partner with all the World, he prosecutes a public
interest, is glad of the prosperity of those above him, obliging, by all the
arts of Civility, and handsome conversation, to those on a level with him,
ready to support the weak, and assist the needy.

And as he is kind to all, so he is not easily provoked into displeasure
against any man. He is not quick and forward to discern the injuries and
ingratitude of brutish people; he is not apt to aggravate, but excuse a fault;
he is ready to believe that it proceeded of mistake, of rashness or
inadvertency, rather than of malice or evil will. For so says the Apostle,
(...), v. 4. Love is of a gentle, easy disposition, believes, hops all
things, (...), he is not presently in a flame or fever, but resents an injury
with a calm and steady mind, and studies no revenge; for Charity will cover the
multitude of sins. Pro. 10 12. Pet. 4.8.


Thirdly, To love our Neighbor as our selves, implies a regard to his Fame and
Reputation. A good name is better than life it self, says Solomon. We prefer it
to all other interests whatsoever, by the instincts of our very Nature. No man
can endure to be represented ill, because it is the parent of contempt and
neglect, which of all other things is the most abhorred. And therefore a man of
universal Charity, will be tender of his Neighbors Credit. He heartily wishes
that all men would behave themselves as they ought to do, and live with
decency, and honor in the World. Charity rejoices not in the wickedness of
the wicked, but rejoices in the truth, that is, in the upright conversation of
men; so Grotius upon the place.

He is more ready to discern the virtues and excellencies of others, than his
own. He cheerfully acknowledges worth, and allows sufficient praise wheresoever
it is due. He puts the best interpretation upon any action that the nature of
the thing will bear. He judges no man till he understands the course of his
Conversation, nor any particular action, till he knows the circumstances and
affections of it. ( Affectus tuus imponit nomen operi tuo, as S. Ambrose speaks
de offic.) He follows the rule of Epictetus, (...), Ench.
does any man drink much wine? say not that he drinks to a debauch, but,
simply, that he uses to drink much; because the same action may proceed from a
good, as well as from an evil cause. He that strikes another, (as Simplicius in
his Exposition of the place) may do him good, and he that feeds him may be his
enemy: He that steals, as the case may be, may do no ill, and he that relieves
another may do unjustly. And therefore a charitable man is ever slow, and
sparing of his censures, (...), he hops all things, and is willing to believe
the best.

His Ears are shut to idle tales, and evil reflections upon any man; or if he
is forced to hear them, he endeavors to stifle the report, and clear the
imputation, that, if it be possible, it may stop with him. He is troubled for
so much of it as he finds to be true; and with an angry countenance, he drives
away the back biters tongue (says Solomon) as the North wind drives away
rain. Pro. 25.23
And thus by covering a transgression he seeks love, Prove. 17.9.

Fourthly and Lastly,

Haughtiness, or elation of mind, proceeds from an undue account, a distinct
unreasonable opinion of our selves above our Neighbors. And all morose and
supercilious conversation, are the effects of conceitedness and pride, of
discontent and jealousy, that we are not valued according to the price we have
set upon our selves. But a man that is frank and ingenuous, that loves his
Neighbor as himself, treats and uses every man with the cheerfulness and
civility of a friend. His own desires and expectations from his betters, are
the measure of his deportment toward those below him.

He then that loves his Neighbor as himself, will be easy of access,
courteous and sincere in speech, civil and obliging in all his conversation
with him. Since he is a friend to all, he will not ruffle, provoke, or
discourage any man; (...), Charity is benign, yielding and complaisant, knows
no supercilium, (...), he is not full of himself, V. 4.
he is not puffed up.

This is, to love our Neighbor as our selves, as we understand it of loving
him in all the several instances wherein we love our selves; comprehended
chiefly under his Soul, his Life, his Estate and Reputation.

But, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, not only obliges us to have a
true respect to all his interests, but to love him also after the same manner,
that we love our selves; to pursue his good, with the same affections, and
dispositions of mind, which we find in our selves in the prosecution of our own.

It is always to be supposed that the Rule or Exemplar is more excellent than
the Copy. The love of a Man to himself is so unmixt and pure, the unity so
perfect, that it is not possible he should confer it upon another in the same
degree, unless he could really and naturally unite him to himself.

Thus God Almighty is proposed to us, the most imperfect of rational Beings, as
the Pattern of our Virtue, Be ye Holy as God is Holy, 1 Pet. 1.24.
says St. Peter: Be ye perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect, St. Matt. 5.
ult. But in these, and several other places, we must not understand the
Particle (...), as denoting an exact Identity, but only that our Principle be
sincere, our virtue true, though far inferior in degree.

Wherefore in our present case, the qualification of the duty, as thy self,
though it may not import an equality of love, which is impossible; yet, at
least, it signifies that we love our Neighbor with the same kind of
affections, and dispositions of mind, with which we love our selves: and
therefore Erasmus expounds the words by perinde ac teipsum, in like manner as
thou love thy self.

First, enjoy, or endure the event of his designs. And thus we are enjoined to
love our Neighbor, as our selves; Not only to do him no hurt in any interest,
neither yet to do him service only; but to be inwardly moved and affected with
his case; that we be Men of Bowels, 1 Pet. 1.22.
apt to be wrought into pity, compassion, and desire to do him good, into Joy
and delight at any prosperous event.

Secondly, thou shall love thy Neighbor even as thy self, with fervency of
affection, with a Zeal for his Good. It is not a tender expression, a friendly
wish, an unwilling word, a cold essay, that fulfils the duty; but a cheerful
service, ready motions, effectual assistances: that we be patient to hear, and
willing to understand and be concerned, in a case that is worthy of us: that we
lay it to our heart, and put it forward, according to discretion, by our
counsel, our friend, our person, our purse, as the occasion may require, for
thus we love our selves with passion and solicitude.

Thirdly, With constancy, as our selves, all the days of our life. This duty of
universal love is never perfected. It is not enough that we have been useful
and beneficial in some particular instance: but we must never stop, never
contract our selves, never imagine that we have paid this debt of universal
Charity; but so long as we have ability and opportunity, so long as we have
objects before us, that is, so long as we live, we must dilate and expatiate
our selves to the benefit of our Neighbor; for Thou shall love him as thy
self; as well in all the several instances wherein thou love thy self, as
with the same affections and dispositions of thy mind; with tenderness and
passion, with fervency and Zeal, with steddiness and constancy.

And thus, as briefly as I could, I have explained the duty of universal Love;
and by comparing the temper of our Souls, and the course of our conversation,
with the rules and measures I have now laid down, we may know infallibly,
whether we are endowed with this grace of Charity, or no; whether we love our
neighbor as our selves.

Are we pleased with the practice of Virtue, or any worthy quality, wheresoever
we discern it? or rather are not the infirmities, nay, the debaucheries of Men,
our delight and sport?

Do we govern our desires and aims by the rules of equity and love? Do we use
no tricks, no mines, no unhandsome arts, to circumvent another?

Are we content that every Man should prosper and be happy? Are we ready for
every good work? Do the Loins of the poor bless us, Job 31.20.
are they warmed with the fleeces of our wool? Job 31.20.22.22.
Do we govern our Authority over inferior Men with Justice? Do we not trouble
our own flesh? Prove. 11.17. Do we not rob the poor, because he is poor, and
oppress the afflicted in the gate?

May it not be said of us, as Solomon complains, (Eccles. 4.1.) On the side of
the oppressor there was power, but the oppressed had no Comforter.

Are we willing to discern, and praise the virtues of our Neighbor, and to
hide his faults?

Can we cheerfully hear the Commendation of another, and not embase the
Character by some malicious insinuation?

Does not our Soul desire evil, Pro. 21.10.
and does our neighbor find any favor in our eyes?

Are we civil and ingenuous in our Carriage toward all? Are we meek and
approachable, sincere and plain, gentle and easy to be entreated?

Are we never weary of well doing, never discouraged by our own mistakes in
objects, by the tricks and deceits that may, sometimes, be put upon us, by the
ingratitude of those we have obliged; or the disappointments of those from whom
we had expectation; by the errors that a Zealous Charity may run into, or the
censures of unworthy Men, to which it may sometimes be exposed? Do we center in
a sense of Duty, and the sincerity of our principle and design, resolving never
to look back or faint, but persevere in a steady course of universal Charity to
the end? This is to love thy neighbor as thy self.

And so I proceed, as I proposed, Thy neighbor.

We are obliged to prosecute a public interest, to be kind and compassionate
to all, because we are neighbors; and that implies,

First, The Necessity of the thing: To love our neighbor as our selves, is our
real Interest, because of our Cohabitation and necessary converse with one
another.

No affection or property of humane nature is more evident, than a disposition
to Society.

Our innate impresses of natural Affection, Goodness and Compassion; our
passions of Desire and Love, our abilities of inventing useful Art, our faculty
of Speech, which is peculiar to Man, and what only serves the purposes of
Society, do all suppose it: and the impotence and inability of man, in a loose
and separate state, to perfect his capacities, to satisfy his natural desires,
nay, to support and defend his life, demonstrate it.

But without an hearty consent in the mutual good of one another, without
policy and a public interest, Society would be dangerous and useless, black
and uncomfortable solitude our only refuge, (...). Reason, without Goodness, is
mischievous subtlety, and would prove the greatest instrument of evil in the
World. The fierceness of the Leopard, and the strength of the Lion, would not
be so dreadful as the understanding of Rational Nature devoid of Justice. Every
man would be against his Brother, our life would be a state of war, a continual
hostility. Here an attempt by force, there by subtlety and circumvention, every
where distrust and fears, guards and preparations of defense.

So that according to the Principles of our Nature, and the design of our
Being, we are one Society, one interest, one common happiness is amongst us all.

And no man that separates himself from the Community, and proposes with
himself, to stand on his own legs, and acquire whatsoever pleases him, by any
means, without respect to others, can ever prosper or be safe; because he can
never hope to be endured. Every man has a tender respect for his Life, his
Honor, and his Interest, which, whenever they are forcibly invaded, will
provoke him to retaliate the injury. No man can expect with reason, to be
treated more civilly himself, than he treats his neighbor. Such a conceit is
Vanity, there is no foundation for such a deference in Nature: but he raises
the whole Society against himself; and how he should acquit himself in such an
unequal combat, is not easy to imagine. And therefore, Qui se amat, hunc, and
alios sic amare, Epist. 6. Lips. in Loc.
(says Seneca) nec sibi sed toti genitum se credere mundo. He that loves
himself will love his neighbor, and consider himself as born for the benefit
of the World. He that hates his brother, says S. John, (1 Ep. 2.11.) walks in
darkness, but he that loves his brother abides in the light. The Metaphor of
light and darkness, signifies the knowledge, or ignorance, of our interest: the
selfish man is as wretched as those who are blind, or travel in the dark,
exposed to grievous evils, dangerous precipices, sharp and rugged ways, But he
that loves his brother abides in the light; acts wisely, proceeds with
confidence and good success, lives safely and securely, (...), there is no
danger of his stumbling, of his offending others, or being himself offended.

The Second motive to universal Love and Charity, thy Neighbor, is the
propriety in, and the relation that we have to one another. He is thy Neighbor.

All Mankind are of the same extraction and original; sons of the same God. Vno
patre conditi, una matre tanquam fratres uterini editi, as the Father speaks
(S. Ambrose) stamped with the same Divine Image, equally inspirited with the
breath of God. The meanest man in the world agrees with him that is the
greatest, in that that is truly Great and Noble in him, his Reason and
Understanding.

Wherefore then, since we are all children of the same Family, and, which is
more, professors of the same most holy Faith, Citizens with the Saints, of the
household of Faith, (Ephesians. 2.19.) Nay farther, since our union is more intimate,
and we are members one of another, (Ephesians. 4.25.) we ought to love as brethren;
to sympathize as parts of the same body, to be easily touched with a sense of
each others evils, forasmuch as the case of our Neighbor is, in a moral sense,
our own; and we are stupid, if we neglect it. There is something of our selves
in every man; the same Divine Principle inlivens us, the same blood runs in all
our veins: We have therefore a propriety, a real interest in one another. So
that to love thy Neighbor is indeed to love thy self. That is the second.

Thirdly, humane Nature, must of necessity be full of ease and pleasure. The
Soul exults, and enjoys her self, in the practice of them, as her proper acts
and operations. As, on the other hand, an irrational course of proceeding is
unnatural, and therefore a violence to our frame and constitution, as poison or
the sharpest pains are to the body.

But to love our Neighbor as our selves, is not so properly a rational act, a
thing that is fit to be done, as, Reason it self, our essential difference, our
very form.

To pursue the satisfaction of naturai desires by strength, by craft, or by any
means, is the property of Beings merely sensitive. But there is no other notion
of humane Nature, than that of making a distinction of actions; nor of Rational
Ends, but Good; nor of Good, but public Interest. And therefore universal
Love, or a regard to others, as well as to our selves, is the perfection of our
Being. For let our distinctions, otherwise, be never so many, or so great, yet
if our Will by nature, be unbounded, there is no Essential difference between
us and Brutes. Hence Love, according to St. John, is the very definition of God
himself, who is the standard of Rational perfection: 1 John 4.8. Beloved, Let
us love one another, for God is Love.

How easy then would all Men be in this their most Divine and perfect state?
What a confidence would Love create, what delight, what trust, what assurance,
what a free and cheerful intercourse? No Man would be diffident of his
Neighbor, as averse to his interest, or cross him as an enemy; but we should
enjoy the unvaluable blessings of society with ease and peace.

But a Man of a shrivelled, narrow spirit, that is wholly resolved into
himself, proceeds against universal Law and Right; Rows against the stream,
with difficulty and fear, with perplexity and danger: he cannot live alone, and
yet he can never be sure of the good will of those with whom he must converse:
he is always practicing hypocrisy, and must accomplish himself with arts of
disguise, and tricks of deceit, that undiscerned, which is impossible, he may
deceive the World. He is under a perpetual constraint in the management of his
conversation, for fear he should be betrayed into that shame, confusion and
hazard, which attend the detection of base designs, and which they deserve, who
depart from this Royal Law, of Love thy Neighbor as thy self: a Law which in
the practice of it would put a new face upon the World, would banish gnawing
cares and angry fears, and give sincerity and cheerfulness to every
countenance. There could be no misery amongst Men. We should all be happy in
one another, and anticipate that concord, harmony, and love, which are supposed
to constitute the joys of Heaven.

And thus I have explained the duty of universal Love, and considered the
beauty and necessity thereof, from the words, Thy Neighbor. Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self.

It now remains that I should represent the likeness of this Command, and the
second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.

First, office of Love.

Secondly,

Thirdly, He that loves God will love his Brother also, 1 John 4.20. As Philo
truly says of moral virtues in the general, they follow and are linked together.

As also, Lastly, On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.

(...), They consent and agree with these. St. Paul interprets the word by
(...), Romans 13.9. If there be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended
in this saying, namely, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. This is the
end, the scope, and the design of the Law and the Prophets. All the Precepts of
the Jewish, and the Christian Religion have their ground and existence in these
two, and into these they are finally resolved; out of these universals, flow
all the particulars of both Religions.

And therefore for a Conclusion of the whole, I shall only pray to God,

If we heartily believe the Being of a God, we cannot but desire his favor;
and to such as these, no blessing can be compared with a clear revelation,
without distinct and certain knowledge of our duty; because we then are free
from anxious fears, and doubts about the nature of Religion; We aim at a steady
end, without the mazes, and uncertain wanderings of Imagination. We run within
the lines, the ground is set out, and the Goal is before our eyes. Our whole
intention may be taken up in accomplishing our minds with the love of God and
Man; the rode to happiness is plain and easy. This is the Law and the Prophets.

And O! that we could be persuaded to lay aside all false opinions of Religion;
and believe our Savior, and accept him upon his own conditions: that we would
pursue the favor of God and everlasting happiness in the way of universal
Charity. For, believe it, no Faith, no Creed, no Church Communion, no outward
Sanctimony, no external Piety, without the Love of God, and Man, will avail us
any thing in the Day of Judgment; No, though we should be honored with the
power of working Miracles; and should cast out Devils in the Name of Christ,
yet unless we cloth the Naked, visit the Sick, assist whom we may, and pity
all, we shall surely be shut out, with, Depart from me, I know ye not: Matt. 7.
ult.

Let us therefore be persuaded, since so much depends upon it, to set our
selves industriously upon the practice of these Duties, that we may procure to
our selves universal love and peace; the good will of God and Man in this
present life, and everlasting Glory in the World to come.

To which, God of his mercy bring us all, for Jesus Christ his sake the
Righteous, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all Honor, Glory,
Praise, and Love, now and for evermore. Amen.

Romans xii. 21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.


TO gratify the present passion or desire by fraud, by force, or by any means
whatsoever, without respect to right or wrong, to good or evil, is the
essential difference of irrational brutal Nature. But to look before us, to act
for the sake of ends; to do, or to forbear, as the event and consequence of the
thing shall appear to be good or evil to us; is the distinction, the property,
indeed, the definition of reasonable creatures. But because the reasonable
faculty in man (who is the most imperfect in the kind) is obscured and
prejudiced, by the unaccountable union of the Soul and Body, in our present
state; therefore God, who is Wisdom it self, has at several times, but at last,
and especially by his Son, in that most perfect institution of Reason, as well
as of Religion, contained in his holy Gospel, assisted our weakness, cleared
our notions; drawn out and set on work those eternal principles of Truth and
Goodness, which may be undiscerned, but can never be separated from our own
minds.

And amongst all the excellent rules of Wisdom and Practice therein contained,
there is none of so high, so exalted a nature as the love of Enemies; for this
alone is proposed under the style and character of Divine Perfection. Be ye
therefore perfect as your father which is in heaven is perfect, S. Matthew. 5.
ult. A Precept which, through the prejudice of our passion, and the depth of
its reason, is not easily understood, hardly received, more hardly practiced;
yet in truth it is every way our interest, as well as an indispensable duty,
and therefore if thine enemy hunger, V. 20,
feed him; if he thirst, give him drink, for in so doing thou shall heap coals
of fire upon his head. Be not overcome of evil,

The Judaizing Christians, Eus. l. 2. c. 12. Meg. Eccles. His. Cent. 1. l. 2.
c. 5.
and the Gnostics, had extremely perverted the Christian Religion, by
asserting the obligation of the Ceremonial Law, the lawfulness of a dissembled
Apostasy, and a liberty of indulging any Lust or Vice we shall be addicted to.
Now to hinder the spreading of these pernicious Doctrines, and to assert the
Truth and Purity of the Christian Religion, against those false and spurious
accounts, which they had given of it, S. Paul insinuates, is his chief design
in this his Epistle to the Romans, Chapter 1.16.

And First, shadow of a more perfect institution of Religion, which in after
time should be established: Chapter 2.

That that time is now accomplished, Chapter 8.

Finally,

And therefore, as the use of the whole Discourse, I beseech you Brethren, by
the mercies of God, Chapter 12.1. That ye present your bodies, all your bodily
corrupt affections and desires, a Living Sacrifice, a whole burnt-offering to
God; That ye entirely resign your selves, and suffer your Religion to have its
last design and end upon you: V. 2.
And be not conformed to this World, (for so the Apostle proceeds to
particulars) But be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds; with fervent
Piety and Devotion toward God, V. 11. with sincere and universal Charity
toward Men, extending even to the love of Enemies, in the words of my Text,
For if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink, etc. Be not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. These words are a Precept of
universal obligation, which concerns our behavior, under injuries received, Be
not overcome of evil; and our deportment to wards those who injure us: but
overcome evil with good.

And first, Be not overcome of evil. We are not obliged to a Stoical
insensibility; To destroy our Passions is no perfection, but a debility, and
sickness of the mind: but to command them, to keep them within their bounds, to
exercise them upon proper Objects, and to a just degree, is the honor of a
Man, and the duty of a Christian. The Command it self, Be not overcome of evil,
supposes, and allows a sense of the injury, but obliges us to govern our
resentments by the rules of reason; to mold our spirits into a temper of
meekness; kindness, and condescension; that we may be then most pleasant to our
selves, when we stand in the greatest need of counsel and advice; that no
provocation may be able to discompose our minds, or transport us into frequish,
indecent words, or actions, much less into meditations of Revenge: But that we
receive the injury with Patience, consider it sedately, construe it fairly,
excuse it ingenuously, or if the malice be too plain to be hid, then to refer
the Judgment of your cause to God: Be not overcome of evil. But overcome evil
with good. In the former clause, (...), Be not overcome of evil, is understood
of the injury received; but evil in the latter clause, overcome evil with good,
has respect to the injurious person. Conquer your enemy by kindness; bring him
to confession of his baseness, to repentance, to offers of satisfaction, to the
very same submission, even from his heart, which you would propose to your self
to force him to, if you could conquer, and disarm him in the open Field. If
thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink, for in so doing
thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head; be not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with good. And thus much for the Explication of the duty, and the
sense of the words: By which we may see, that it has no relation at all to
Government, or the punishment of Offenders against the peace of the public;
Nor to the resentments of Princes, or the Wars and Peace of Nations. Nor
lastly, to the defense of our Persons, our lives and fortunes, against the
assaults and outrages of wicked men. These are Considerations of another
nature, with which our present argument is not in the least concerned. But the
Duty of the Text concerns the moderation of our Passions, under any opprobrious
words, or ill designs, which have been spoke, or formed against us: and obliges
us to forbear revenge; to seek no private, illegal satisfaction for any such
injury received; that we do not therefore become his enemy, because he seems to
be ours; that we harbor no ill will, ill wishes, or ill designs against him,
but endeavor to reconcile him to a state of amity and friendship, by a
readiness to oblige and serve him. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil
with good.

And for the clearer illustration of this most perfect Precept of our Religion,
I shall briefly consider these Four Things.

First, The indispensible Obligation of the Duty, by the express Command of God.

Secondly, The fitness and necessity of the thing considered in it self.

Thirdly, The rewards and benefits, which will accompany the practice of it.

Fourthly, and Lastly, The possibility of performing it.

And first of all, This Duty, That we be not overcome of evil, but overcome
evil with good, is indispensably required.

It is not to be understood as a Council of perfection, as a glorious
unattainable temper, which we are not obliged to pursue; but it is a positive
Duty, an express Command, in which we are no more at liberty, than in any other
precept of our Religion. S. Paul designedly in this, and the following
Chapters, collects and repeats the principal duties of Christianity, V. 2.
or what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. And amongst the
rest he mentions the love of enemies: V. 20.
and upon this he insists and stays for several Verses, as being a duty more
unwillingly received, and inforces at last, in the words of my Text, Be not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. And our Savior himself, in the
5. of S. Matthew. proposes and urges, the love of our enemies, after the same
manner, and under the same form, as he does the rest of his precepts, without
any dispensation or indulgence whatsoever, v. 44. But I say unto you, love your
enemies.

Indeed there is no one duty of our Religion more strictly enjoined, more
frequently inculcated, or pressed by a greater variety of cogent arguments,
than that before us.

The very Spirit of Christianity is meekness, and mutual condescension; Col.
3.8.
and therefore we are obliged to put away all anger, wrath and malice; to
suffer all things, to be kind, Jam. 1.19
to think no evil: 1 Cor. 13.5
to be patient toward all men, to render to no man evil for evil, or railing
for railing, 1 Pet. 3 9
but contrariwise blessing. To put on as the elect of God, Col. 3.12
bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind; meekness, long-suffering,
forbearing one another, Ephesians. 4.31
forgiving one another; if any man have a quarrel against any, even as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven us. And all this is enforced upon us, by the
terrible sanction of God's everlasting anger toward us: For if ye forgive not
men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly father forgive you, S. Matthew.
6.15. Nothing, says S. Chrysostom, is more odious to God, than a man that is
thirsty of revenge; Hom. 27. ^n Genes.
the mischief of this sin is such, that it deprives a man of the benefit of
God's mercy, and will not suffer it to have any place upon him.

And thus we see, that to restrain our Passion, to be meek in Spirit, slow of
resentment, dead to revenge, easy to forgive, and ready to oblige an enemy, is
an indispensable duty of our Religion.

If it be objected, that our Savior seems to curse the Cities of Capernaum,
Chorazin, and Bethsaida, because they withstood his doctrine, S. Matthew. 11. Woe
unto you Chorazin, woe unto Bethsaida, and thou Capernaum, which art exalted
unto heaven, shall be brought down to hell. Or that S. Paul cursed Alexander
upon a private personal injury offered to himself, in his Second Epistle to
Tim. 4.14. the Lord reward him according to his works. Or that the most holy
Saints have taken a liberty of imprecating evil upon their enemies, Psalm. 109.
They compassed me about with words of hatred, they rewarded me evil for good,
and hatred for my good will: let his days be few, and let another take his
office: let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow; let his children
be vagabonds and beg their bread, let the extortioner consume all that he has:
as he loved cursing, so let it come upon him.

If the practice, I say, of our Savior, and of those holy Saints, seem
contrary to the precepts of love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you. S. Augustine's resolution of that question is
sufficient, who observes how common it is in Scripture, to foretell the event of
future evils, under the form of an imprecation. So that all such places as I
have now recited, are to be understood, not as the wishes of the speaker, but
as Prophecies of what will certainly come upon them. And as for that of S.
Paul, He observes that he says not reddat, let the Lord, but reddet dominus,
the Lord will reward him for it. There is therefore no indulgence to be found,
no dispensation allowed; it is positively required, That we be not overcome of
evil, but overcome evil with good.

And indeed, there is nothing more fit and reasonable in it self; and this was
the second head of discourse proposed.

As the benefits of cohabitation and Society are great, so has it also this
inevitable inconvenience, that amongst so many persons, of different humors,
diverse interests, and various designs; Justice and Honesty will be violated,
private and open injuries will be offered; there are always some that will be
ready to build their reputation, or fortune, upon the ruin of other men. Even
common Conversation cannot be so cautiously maintained, so discreetly managed,
but disgusts and piques will often happen. It is impossible then but offenses
will come. The Air will as soon be fixed, and the Sea reduced to rest; as
humane Conversation should be altogether free from occasions of offense. Either
therefore we must learn this lesson of meekness, and mutual condescension, or
prepare our selves for a continual state of war.

If we can neither hide our resentments prudently, nor bear them patiently, we
may lay aside all hope of living peaceably in the World. Our whole life will be
spent in vindicating our real, or supposed injuries one upon another. Every man
would be against his Neighbor, till, in time, that kind would be destroyed. So
that if we were not obliged to restrain our Passion, and pass over injuries by
the Laws of our Religion; the very necessities of our Nature and Being, would
direct us to it. And therefore, a wise man, says Solomon, deferreth his anger,
it is his glory to pass over a transgression, Prove. 19.11.

Indeed Revenge is the most unreasonable thing in the World. It is contrary to
all the principles of Justice and equity, that any man (where it may possibly
be avoided) should be Party, Witness, Judge, and Executioner in his own Cause.
Every man is partial to himself; and we are then most weak and unfit to judge,
when we are ruffled and provoked: that little stock of Reason that we are
masters of, is apt to be overborn by the Violence of Passion. Even Jupiter
himself, though he might dart his favorable rays of his own accord, yet he
could not send out his Thunderbolts, without the consent and Counsel of the
gods. Indeed, the imperfection of the humane nature is such, that it is not fit
to be trusted with a liberty of revenging injuries at discretion. Such a power
can never be proper, never safe, but in the hands of God, Romans 12.19.
whose vengeance is, and to whom it belongs to repay: Who is infinite in
knowledge, and cannot be mistaken in a circumstance; who is infinitely just and
good, and therefore loves and pities the offender. That is the Second.

And as the return of good for evil is indispensibly required, And this was the
third Head of Discourse proposed.

The very Command it self, That we overcome evil with good, is an
unquestionable security to us, that by returning good for evil, we shall surely
conquer, and subdue the Injurer.

So that the reward of meekness, or a patient suffering of injuries, is not
only that general peace of Conscience, and tranquillity of mind, which
accompany the practice of all Virtue, and which will especially arise from the
submission of our will to God, in this most difficult instance, so contrary to
our own corrupt desires: nor is it only that great reward in Heaven, which our
Savior has promised to those who patiently bear reproach, St. Matt. 5. which
changes the injury into a Crown, Hom. 16. ad 1 Cor. 6.
and makes us like to God, as St. Chrysostom observes.

But the benefit of Patience, and the Reward of returning good for evil, is
present and more immediate; all that is designed or hoped for by revenge, will
more probably, and far more effectually be obtained, by meekness and
forbearance.

What is it that we propose to our selves by revenge? Is it the Vindication of
our honor, that we may teach the Aggressor how much he was mistaken in his
Man? that we may be known hereafter to be Men of spirit? and procure to our
selves respect, or fear at least? or, is it the reparation of the Injury
sustained; and the prevention of the like attempts hereafter, by returning a
greater load of evil upon the injurer, than he had brought on us? Why, both
these ends of honor and satisfaction, will be more commodiously attained by
courtesy and kindness, than by deep resentments and revenge.

For suppose you have success, suppose you subdue your enemy, expose him,
afflict him, bring him on his knees; yet if the account be fairly adjusted, you
will find your self as far from any real satisfaction now, as you was before;
because it cost you more than it was worth. You say, says Seneca, de Ira, Lib.
1.
you cannot bear an injury; it is false: He that can bear anger, can bear an
injury. There cannot be a greater torment to one's self, than a thirst of
Revenge. What tumult and confusion does it raise in our minds? what horrid
apprehensions, what impatience of desire, what a perfect discontent, till our
end be accomplished? How is a Man unmann'd, and forsaken of himself, that is
under the power of this unreasonable passion? How do the thoughts of the Person
disorder him? How is he struck at the sight of him? his Eyes distorted, his
Visage changed, his Joints infeebled, as if he were acted by an evil spirit? He
that nourishes a desire of revenge, Hom 41. in Act. Apost.
says St. Chrysostom, carries a Lictor always about him, to scourge and lash
him, a glowing fire to torment him, that will never suffer his Soul to rest. So
true is that of St. Ambrose, Offic. Li. 1.
Vincitur ab inimico qui se vindicat, non vincit. He is subdued and conquered,
that revenges himself upon his adversary. So that, upon the matter, there is no
substantial satisfaction to be hoped for by revenge; Nor indeed any Honor,
Esteem, or true Reputation to be gained thereby.

All that we propose by Revenge, is to approve our selves to be Men of
tenderness and resolution, that we expect to be used with caution and civility;
that we are no vile, or abject persons, no proper subjects of derision and
contempt: and this, it may be, you may make good.

But, did not the Violence of your Passion, did not your Resentment, with all
your practice upon it, dishonor and expose you more, than the Conquest of your
Enemy could do you Credit?

Is any thing so contemptible as a Man in passion? St. Chrysostom (as well as
Seneca) compares him to a mad Man. The symptoms, says he, of madness and anger
are the same: a bold and threatening countenance, restless and involuntary
motions, change of color, deep and frequent sighs are the signs of madness;
and Heat of blood, Redness of face, trembling Lips, gnashing Teeth, Convulsive
Joints, abrupt and stammering Speech, Sen. de Ira L. 1. C. 1.
with an horrid ugly Visage, are the symptoms and effects of anger. And
therefore he concludes, that it is hard to say, whether anger be a Vice more
detestable, or more deformed.

If therefore, whilst a Man asserts his courage, he exposes his Wisdom, it may
easily be resolved, what right, upon the matter, he has done to his honor.

But after all, the success is doubtful, the design may be detected, the
Revenge prevented, the enemy more insolent, injuries repeated, and your Honor
more exposed: so that the study of Revenge is very uncertain in the event; or
if it succeeds, the satisfaction that it brings, is as dear, as it is imperfect.

But by meekness, bearing patiently, and returning good for evil, we shall
attain our ends upon our enemy, more easily, more certainly, and with better
reputation. For Patience under an injury received, lessens the evil of it to
ones self. The evil of an injury consists in our sense, and apprehension of it;
but if we are not affected by it, it loses its edge and force upon us.
Resentment certainly inflames, but never cures the Wound: it aggravates the
pain, and afflicts us more than the injury it self. If we sit down with
patience, says Tertullian, We are not hurt; and if we are not hurt, there is
then no occasion of Revenge.

Besides, as patience prevents the evil of an injury to ones self, so is it
also a great and a real revenge upon our enemy: His design is to discompose and
vex us, to irritate and provoke us; but if we contemn and slight his essays,
his end is frustrated, and he is the greatest sufferer, in that he cannot move
us. Son.
The Anvil suffers nothing by the heavy blows that are laid upon it, but the
hand of him that strikes is benumbed and strained.

This then is certainly the noblest, as well as the strictest satisfaction we
can take; this is the surest proof that we are men of honor. To bluster and be
dreadful, is no perfection or commendation in any Being; perfect motions are
easy and familiar, but whirlwinds and earthquakes are therefore dreadful,
because they are unnatural. Steddiness, immobility, not to be affected by any
thing without it self, are instances of perfection. The higher and more perfect
Regions are undisturbed, free from tumults, clouds and tempests. They are the
inferior Regions, that are affected by every vapor.

He then is the brave and gallant Man, that despises an injury, and scorns to
submit to an affront. Quem injuria non incurvat. But to study Revenge, is to
complain and sink under a wound: it is at the best, but a refuge of shame, and
the sanctuary of a doubtful reputation. Nor is it honorable only in it self,
strictly and rationally considered; but our enemy shall understand it so; He
shall as really submit himself, be as effectually subdued, by the return of
good for evil, as if we had entirely subjected him by force: for so says the
Apostle in the Verse before my Text; if thine enemy hunger, V. 20.
feed him; if he thirst give him drink: for in so doing, thou shall heap coals
of fire upon his head. By such an unexpected kindness, we shall work upon him,
mollify and melt him into Repentance, submission, and desires of an
everlasting friendship. By Revenge a quarrel is prolonged; but Patience, and
the return of good for evil, are apt to work upon the roughest temper. The
sweetness and gentleness of the humane Nature are lost and hid, for a time,
under a cloud of Passion and Anger; but by yielding to it, by giving room, we
shall dissipate the vapor, and the man will return to himself again.

And thus it appears that the practice of Meekness, Patience, and forgiving
Injuries, how difficult soever it may seem to persons under the prejudice of
false opinions, and the power of evil habits, is nevertheless our interest and
our honor, as well as an indispensable duty: so true is that of Solomon, He
that is slow to anger, Pro. 14.29.16.32.
is of great understanding. And again, He that is slow to wrath is better than
the mighty; and he that rules his spirit, than he that takes a City. That is
the Third.

And if to overcome our enemy by kindness be commanded of God, if it be
reasonable in it self, if it be truly great and noble; if it be rewarded with
Victory and Honor, it cannot be doubted, but, Fourthly and Lastly, it is
possible to be performed.

It Is true, our mind is under great disadvantages in our present state, and
therefore we can never hope to attain the perfection of any Virtue; but we are
as free in respect of our irascible passions, as we are in the rest: We are no
more driven or necessitated in this, than in any other of the powers and
faculties of our Souls; and therefore undoubtedly we may restrain this passion,
in a good degree, if we are not wanting to our selves. Our passions are subject
naturally, by the design and order of our frame; and therefore it cannot be so
difficult, as it is apprehended, to oblige them to their proper places. They
are the servants of our Understandings, and although it is impossible, indeed
unnecessary, to destroy them, because our Passions and our Reason, though they
are really distinct, yet they are never to be separated. To resolve of an
object that it is evil, and to detest and hate it, are acts of the mind,
formed, of necessity, together. Yet if we be careful we may maintain the
precedence and authority of our reason, for in this consists that Dominion over
our selves, our choice, and actions, which give us the denomination of
reasonable creatures.

The truth of it is, we are apt to indulge and nourish this Passion of Anger,
we are willing to believe that it becomes us to be tender and sensible, fierce
and implacable; to slight the most valuable thing, even Life it self, and
sacrifice it to a punctilio of mistaken Honor. And now that we have cherished
this Passion for many years, exercised our selves continually in it, yielded to
all the extravagancies of it; now we hope to excuse our selves, by pleading the
impossibility of restraining it. Difficult indeed we have made it to our
selves, but the difficulty is superinduced and adventitious; and therefore
still, if we would take the pains to master our Spirit, as perhaps we have done
to elate and exalt it, we may be successful in a good degree. Resolution, says
Seneca, upon the like occasion, will pass over all impediments. No affections
of the mind are so fierce and obstinate, Sen. de Ira, Lib. 1.
so much themselves, but they may be tamed by Discipline. Reason duly
exercised, will conquer any passion. In our present case, Let a Man but
consider, till his mind be affected with the evil, and unreasonableness of
Revenge, and he will be quickly able to forbear it.

Let him that is tempted to anger, say, (it is St. Chrysostom's advice.) What
can I do to you, 4 Hom. in John. c. 1.
both my tongue and my hands are tied up by another; and this would be matter
of Philosophy, a temper to them both.

Let him meditate on his own infirmities, and abate a little, of that too high
opinion, which perhaps he may have of himself.

Let him remember how unguarded his own behavior many time may be; how much he
may stand in need of forgiveness himself.

Let him consider, that no Man is invincible, that he may meet with those that
are as obstinate and wilful as himself. And when once these causes, namely,
Pride, Self-will, and Humor are removed, we shall return of course to the
Lenity and Goodness of the humane nature: a great many injuries will vanish
into nothing; Great ones will appear indifferent, and the greatest may be
easily supported.

Finally, Let us set before us the Examples of great and holy Men, who when
their enemies have been under their power, when they might have taken their
utmost revenge upon them, have passed over all their injuries and affronts with
neglect and pity. And thus we may encourage our selves by the experience and
success of others, as well as by the reason of the thing. Time would fail me to
tell of Joseph, David, Job, the Publican, St. Stephen, and the rest, whose
stories are recorded in the Holy Scripture; it is enough, Heb. 12.1.
that we look unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despised the shame; and prayed for
those who insulted over him, and slew him, Father, forgive them, for they know
not what they do. If you say, says Saint Augustine, How shall I ever hope to do
as our Lord has done? Consider where he did it, on the Cross, T. 10. 2da. fer.
in Rog. Sermon. 1.
where he acted altogether as a man, and proposed himself to our imitation.

And now, I hope, upon the strength of so many considerable Motives, we may be
all persuaded, at least, to attempt the mastery of our selves. The end is so
considerable, and the means so reasonable and likely to attain it, that our
best endeavors will be both justified, and rewarded. It may be difficult at
first, to change a habit, that is riveted by long indulgence; but pertinacity
and time will overcome it. Nature delights and hastens to throw off all
obstructions; and when once we have made a little way, we shall then proceed,
secundo flumine, and be over-joyed at the recovery of our primitive, our proper
disposition.

Besides, the ready assistances of God, who will facilitate our difficulties,
assist us by his Wisdom, support us by his Power, and refresh us by the
irradiations of his Love, till the Victory be obtained: and we, at last,
triumph in that most Perfect and Eternal state of Bliss, which is prepared for
those, who by patient continuance in well doing, Romans 2.
seek for Glory and Immortality.

To which, of his mercy, may he bring us all, for Jesus Christ his sake, the
Righteous; To whom, with the Father, and the blessed Spirit, be ascribed all
Honor, Glory, Praise, Dominion and Obedience, now and for ever.

Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for W. Kettilby.
A Sermon preached before the King at Windsor, June 13. 1680. on Matt. xvi. 26.
A Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, Feb. 5. 1681. on Ps. 119. 165. The
Liberty of Humane Nature discussed, stated and limited; in a Sermon on 1 Cor.
6.12. A Sermon preached before the King and Queen at Whitehal. Jan. 19. 1689.
on Prove. 22.4. All four by the Rev. Mr. J. Lamb. Mr. Hesketh's serious
exhortation to frequent Communion. Octav. -- 's Case of Eating and Drinking
unworthily. Oct. -- 's Piety the best Rule of Orthodoxy. Religion the
Perfection of Man. Oct. Pattern of pure and undefiled Religion. Exposition on
the Church Catechism. The Faith and practice of a Church of England man. Edit.
3. Bishop Overal's Convocation Book, MDCVI. concerning the Government of God's
Catholic Church, and the Kingd. of the whole world.

