AN HANDFVLL OF GLEANINGS out of the BOOK OF EXODUS.

Probable solution of some of the mainest scruples, and explanation of the
hardest places of that BOOK. Scarcely given by any heretofore.

By JOHN LIGHTFOOT, Staffordiensis, Minister of the Gospel at St. Bartholmew
Exchange, London.

LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his shop
at the sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1643.

TO My Dear, Loving, and deservedly esteemed Friends, the Inhabitants of
Bartholmew Exchange, LONDON, Truth and Peace, Grace and Glory.
I Must ever mention both in private to God, and in public to the world, the
love and favor which J have received from your Congregation, how when J was
unknown, ye owned me, when a stranger, ye took me in, when exiled from mine
own, ye made me yours; and that not only with extraordinary readiness, when
we first did meet, but with constant and continued tenderness since our
meeting: I shall ever strive to the utmost of my desires, and indevours, to
make acknowledgement of such receipts, and what J shall fail of in those, to
make them up in prayers, and thanks. This present mite that is tendered to
you, accept as pledge and earnes^ of all these, the value of it is. as small as
the volume; but what it wants of worth and Learning, conceive to be supplied
with observance and gratitude. The multitude of Expositions upon this Book of
Exodus, has made this of mine so very little; for to set down what they had
done before, were an idle labor, and to find out something that they had not
set down, was a labor as difficult; what I have done here in this kind, J
refer to the Reader; although J my self be settled and satisfied in the most
of them, yet shall J not put them upon the belief of any, further than their
due examination, and strength of reason shall make their way.

From my House in the upper end of Moore-Lane. November. 28. 1643. Yours, ever
ready to observe and serve you in the Lord, J. L.

AN HANDFVLL OF GLEANINGS out of the BOOK OF EXODUS.
SECT. I. Israel afflicted in Egypt about 120. years.
FROM the giving of the promise to Abraham, Genesis 12. to the deliverance out of
Egypt, and the giving of the Law, were 430 years, Exodus 12. 40. Gal. ^. 17.

This sum of years divided it self into two equal parts, for half of it
was spent before their going into Egypt, and half of it in their being there.
Two hundred and fifteen years were taken up before they went into Egypt,
thus: From the promise given to Abraham, to the birth of Isaac, five and twenty
years; compare Genesis 12. 4. with Genesis 21. 5. From the birth of Is^ac to the
birth of Jacob, three^core, Genesis 25. 26. from thence to their going down into
Egypt a hundred and thirty, Genesis 27. 9. The other two hundred and fifteen
years they spent in Egypt, namely ninety four, before the death of Levi the
longe^liver of all the twelve Tribes, and a hundred twenty one betwixt his
death and their deliverance.

For Levi and Joseph were both borne in the seven years of Jacobs second
apprentiship, Genesis 29 and 30. Levi in the fourth, and Joseph in the seventh, so
that there were three years between them: Now Joseph when his Father and
brethren came down into Egypt, was nine and thirty years old. Compare Genesis
41. 46. 51. and 45. 6. And then was Levi forty three. And Levi lived an hundred
thirty and seven years, Exod^ 6. 16. out of which those forty three being
deducted which he had spent before their coming down into Egypt, it
appears they were in Egypt ninety four years before his death: And those
ninety four being deducted out of the two hundred and fifteen, which they
spent in that land, it appears also that a hundred twenty one years passed
betwix^ his death and their delivery, and till his death they felt no
^ffliction, Ex^d. 1. 6, 7, 8.

SECT. II. The 88. and 89. Psalms, penned in the time of this affliction.
THese two Psalms, are the oldest pieces of writing that the World has to
show, for they were penned many years before the birth of Moses, by two men
that felt and groaned under this bondage and affliction of Egypt, Heman and
Ethan, two Sons of Zerah, 1 Chronicles. 2. 6. In Psalm 88. Heman deploreth the
distress and misery of Israel in Egypt in most passionate measures; and
therefore titles his Elegy, Gnal Mahalath Leannoth, concerning sickness by
affliction, and accordingly he and his brethren are called the Sons of Mahol,
1 King. 4. 31. In Psalm. 89. Ethan from the promise, Genesis 15. sings joyfully
their deliverance, that the raging of the Red Sea should be ruled, verse. 9. and
Rahab or Egypt should be broken in pieces, verse. 10. and that the people
should hear the joyful sound of the Law, verse. 15.

Object. But David is named frequently in the Psalm, who was not borne of many
hundreds of years after Ethan was dead.

Answ. 1. This might be done Proplietically, as Samuel is thought to be named
by Mosos, Psalm. 99. 6. for thae Psalm according to a rule of the Hebrews, is
h^ld to have been made by him.

2. It will be found in Scripture, that when some holy men endued with the
Spirit of God, have left pieces of writings behind them, indicted by the Spirit,
others that have lived in after times, endued with the same gift of Prophecy,
have taken those ancient pieces in hand, and have flourished upon them, ^s
present, past, or future occasions did require. To this purpose, compare Psalm.
18. and 1 Samuel 22. Obadiah, and Jer. 49. 14. and 1 Chronicles. 16. and Psalm. 96. and
105. and 2 Pet. 2. and the Epistle of Saint Jude. So this piece of Ethan being
of incomparable antiquity, and singing of the delivery from Egypt, in after
times, that it might be made fit to be sung in the Temple, it is taken in hand
by some divine Penman, and that ground work of his, is wrought upon, and his
Song set to an higher key; namely, that whereas he treated only of the bodily
deliverance from Egypt, it is wound up so high as to reach the Spiritual
delivery by Christ, and therefore David is so often named from whence he should
come.

SECT. III. The words of the Hebrew Midwives not a^lye, but a glorious
consession of their faith.
THEY were Hebrew Midwives, but Egyptian Women. For Pharaoh that in an ungodly
Council had devised and concluded upon all ways, whereby to keep the
Israelites under, would not in such a design as this, use Israelitish women,
who he knew were parties in the cause against him; but he intrusteth it with
women of his own Nation. They are named for their honor, as Mark. 14. 9. that
wheresoever the Gospel or the Doctrine of Salvation should be Preached, this
faith and fact of theirs should be published in memorial of them.

The Midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not as the
Egyptian women, for they are lively, etc. These words of theirs proceeded from
the same faith, from whence had proceeded their work of charity, the childrens
preservation. And so far are they from being a lie, that they are so glorious
a confession of their faith in God, that we find not many that have gone
beyond it. And the things they spoke of, so far from false, that they were
most admirably and miraculously true and really done. They saw in very deed
the immediate hand and help of God, plainly and really showed to the Hebrew
women in their labor, and that whereas other women naturally in that case are
weak, fainting, and long in pain, these were strong, lively, and soon
delivered. For as the strength of the promise showed it self in the Males of
Israel, in that, the more they were pressed under servitude, and afflicted, the
more were they able for generation, verse. 2. Act. 7. 17. So did the strength of
the promise show it self upon the women, in that they were delivered of their
children with a supernatural and extraordinary ease and quickness: Therefore
the Midwives boldly stand out to Pharaoh, to the venture of a Martyrdom, and
plainly tell him, that since they were not in travel as other women, but
lively, and strong, and had soon done, it could be nothing but the immediate
hand of God with them, which hand they are resolved they will not oppose for
all his command, lest they should be found to fight against God. For this
confession so resolutely and gloriously made before Pharaoh, and for their fact
answerable; God made them houses, because they feared him, verse. 21. that is,
married them into the Congregation of Israel, and built up Israelitish Families
by them.

SECT. IV. Moses his birth, supernatural. Exodus 2. 2.
MOSES was borne when his mother by the course of nature was past
childbearing: For if Levi begat Jochebed at an hundred years old, which is
hardly to be conceived, as Genesis 17. 17. yet is Jochebed within two of
fourscore when she bare Moses. But it was more then probable that she was
borne long before Levi was an hundred, unless we will have Levi to be above
half a hundred years childlesse, betwlxt the birth of Merari and Jochebed:
And thus the birth of Moses was one degree more miraculous, then the miraculous
and supernatural birth of the other children of the Hebrew Women, and so was
his brother Aarons not much less wondrous. She then having a goodly child,
at so great an age, saw the special hand of God in it, and therefore labors
his preservation against Pharaohs decree: for by Faith she knew he would be
preserved for some special instrument of Gods glory, but the manner of his
preservation she knew not yet.

SECT. V. Our Saviors allegation of Exodus 3. 6. in Luke 20. 37. cleared.
MOSES in Midian, under the retiredness of a Pastoral life, gives himself
unto contemplation of divine things; in one of those raptures, God himself
appears visibly to him in deed; and that in a flaming fire, now he is about
to perform the promise, as he appreared to Abraham when he made it? and it
came to pass, when the Sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking
furnace, and a burning Lamp that passed between those pieces. In the same day
the Lord made a Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 15. 17, 18.

The words which Christ here uses to Moses in the bush, he urges again to
the Jews, whereby to evince the Resurrection, Luke 20. 37. And that the dead
are raised, even Moses showed at the bush, when he calls the Lord, the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, for he is not a God of the
dead, but of the living: which words indeed do infer the resurrection as
they lie in themselves, but far more clearly, if they be laid to, and
compared with the Jews own doctrine and position.

Rabbi Simeon Ben Jo^hai says, the holy blessed God names not his name on the
righteous in their life, but after their death, as it is said, to the Saints
that are in the earth, Psalm. 16. 3. When are they Saints? when they are laid in
the earth: For all the days that they live, the holy blessed God joyneth not
his name to them: And why? because the holy blessed God trusts them, not that
evil affections will not make them to err; but when they be dead, the holy
blessed God names his name upon them: But behold we find that he names his
name on Isaac the righteous whilst he lives, for so he says to Jacob, I am
the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac. Rabbi Barachiah, and
our Doctors: our Doctors say, He saw his dust, as it was gathered upon the
Altar, and Rabbi Barachiah says, since he was blind of his eyes, he is reputed
as dead, because he was shut up in the midst of the house. Rabbi Tanch. in Genesis
28. Rabbi Menahem in Exodus 3.

SECT. VI. The power of Miracles, Habbak. 3. 2. and Acts 19. 2. explained.
THe gift of Prophecy or Foretelling things to come had been in the Church
since the fall of Adam, and now are Miracles added because of unbelief: For
observe that when Moses says, Behold they will not believe, the Lord
immediately answer, What is that in thine hand? This double faculty being given
here to Moses the first Prophet of the Church of Israel, it also descended to a
succession of Prophets in that Congregation from time to time. But with this
excellent gift it was also given Moses himself to know, and so likewise them
that did succeed, that they had this double power not from themselves, but from
another: Moses his stammering tongue taught himself and them so much for
Prophecy, and his leprous hand taught so much for Miracles. This succession of
Prophets began from Samuel and ended in the death of Christ, Acts 3. 24. Not
that there were not Prophets betwixt Moses and Samuel, but because they were
not expressed by name, as also because vision in that space of time was
exceeding rare, 1 Samuel 3. 1.

Now from the beginning of the rule of Samuel to the beginning of the
captivity in Babel, were four hundred and ninety years; and from the end of
that captivity to the end of Christ's life upon earth, were four hundred and
ninety years more. The seventie years of captivity between, which were the
seventh part of either of these two Numbers, that lay on either side; are
called by Habbakkuk, The midst of years, namely from the beginning of
Prophecy in Samuel to the sealing of Prophecy in the death of Christ. Revive
thy work in the midst of the years, in the midst of the years make known.
Then was it justly to be feared that the spirit of Prophecy would quite have
ceased from Israel when they were captived among the Heathen. This made the
Prophet to pray so earnestly, that God would preserve alive, or revive his
work of Miracles in the midst of years, and in those times of captivity,
that he would make known things to come by that gift of Prophecy. And he was
heard in what he prayed for, and his supplication took effect, in the most
propheticke and powerful Spirit of Daniel.

The Jews had an old maxim, that after the death of Zachary, Malachi and
those last Prophets, the Spirit of God departed from Israel and went up. So
that from thence forward, prediction of future things and working of miracles
were rarities among them. To this aimed the answer of those holy ones, Acts 19.
2. We have not so much as heard whether there be any holy Ghost. Not (...) they
doubted of such a person in the Trinity, but that whereas they had learned in
their Schools, that the holy Ghost departed away after the death of Malachi,
they had never yet heard, whether he was restored again in his gifts of
Prophecy and Miracles till now or no.

SECT. VII. The two first Miracles, Exodus 4.
1. THe turning of Moses rod into a Serpent, did utterly disclaim any power of
the Devil in these wonders which he was to work, which power only the
Magicians wrought by: For as a Serpent was the fittest Emblem of the Devil,
as Genesis 3. and Revel. 12. 9. So was it a sign that Moses did not these
Miracles by the power of the Devil, but had a power over and beyond him, when
he can thus deal with the Serpent at his pleasure, as to make his rod a
Serpent, and the Serpent a rod as he sees good.

Yet is it worth the observing, that he is commanded to take it by the tail,
verse. 9. for to meddle with the Serpents head belonged not to Moses, but to
Christ that spoke to him out of the bush, as Genesis 3. 15.

His rod at Sinai is said to be turned into Nabash, a common and ordinary Snake
or Serpent; but when he casts it down before Phara^h, it becomes Tannin,
Chap. 7. 10. a Serpent of the greatest dimensions, belike a Crocodile, which
beast the Egyptians adored, and to whose jaws they had exposed the poor
Hebrew Infants in the River.

2. His leprous hand disclaimed also any power of Moses his own in these
wonders which he wrought, for it was not possible that so great things should
be done by that impure and unclean hand, but by a greater.

3. Both of these Miracles which were the first that were done by any Prophet
in the world, did more specially refer to the Miracles of that great Prophet
that should come into the world, by whose power these Miracles were done by
Moses at this time. For as it belonged to him only to cast out the power of
the Devil out of the soul, and to heal the soul of the leprosy of sin, so
was it reserved for him first, to cast out the Devil out of the body, and to
heal the leprosy of the body. For though the Prophets from Moses to Christ
had the gift of doing Miracles, and performed wonders many of them in an high
degree, yet could never any of them or any other cast out a Devil or heal a
Leper till the great Prophet came. Elisha indeed directed Naaman how he should
be healed, but he neither touched him nor came out to him at all, that he might
show that it was not his power, but such cures were reserved for Christ to come.

SECT. VIII. Moses in danger of death, because of distrust. Exodus 4. 24.
THE fault of Moses that brought him into this danger, was not the
uncircumcision of his Son, as it is commonly held, for that had been
dispensable withal in him, as it was with thousands afterward of the
Israelites in the Wilderness, but his fault was grievous diffidence and
distrust. For this is that that makes him so much so off, and so earnestly to
decline so glorious and honorable a message as the Lord would send him on, and
this was that that brought him into this danger of death, when he was even
going on this message. Observe therefore his evasions, and how they sound
exceeding hollow and empty of belief. First, Who am I that I should go to
Pharaoh? cap. 3. 11. This the Lord answers, I will be with thee, and this my
appearing to thee may be an undoubted token to th^e that I have sent thee.
verse. 12.

Secondly, But who shall I say has sent me? for forty years ago, they
refused me, saying, Who made thee a Prince and a Ruler over us? cap. 4. 1. This
scruple the Lord removes by giving him the power of miracles.

Thirdly, But I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken
to me, for though I may work miracles upon others, yet is not this wrought
upon my self, that I speak any whit better then I did before. This receives
this answer, I will be with thy mouth, verse. 10. 11. 12.

Fourthly, But I pray thee send by that hand that thou will send or stretch
out, verse. 13. for thou saydest to me, I will stretch out mine hand, and smite
Egypt, etc. Chap. 3. 20. Now therefore I pray thee stretch out this hand of
thine, for the hand of man is not able to perform it. At this the Lords anger
was kindled against him, and that deservedly. For in this he denied the mystery
of the redemption which was to be wrought by a man, the Godhead going al^ng
with him.

Now it is time for Moses to set for Egypt when he sees God angry at his
excusing: he does so, but he takes his diffidence along with him, in that he
takes his wife and children with him. One would think that had been a
special piece of charity, but it being looked into, will prove a special
piece of distrust.

For when God appears to him, at the very first, he gives him assurance of
the peoples delivery, and that they should come in their journeyes to that very
place, When thou have brought the people forth out of Egypt ye shall serve God
upon this mountain. Chap. 3. 12.

Now if Moses had believed certainly this promise, and that undoubtedly he and
the people should come thither, he would never have taken wife and children
with him to trouble them and himself in so long a journey, and in so earnest a
business, but would have left them still with Jethro, till he and Israel
should march up to them. But this he feared, that this his journey would be to
no effect, that Israel would accept of none, and therefore should obtain no
delivery, that this message would produce nothing, unless danger to himself,
and that while he spoke of delivering others, he might incur bondage
himself, so that if he left wife and children behind him, it was odds he
should never see them again. And therefore to make sure work he will take
them with him, and for this his distrust the Lord meets him, and seeks to kill
him.

Nor was this distrust and diffidence little or small in him, but if the
circumstances be considered, it will appear to be very great, and his want of
faith exceeding much.

Zipporah his wife was now lying in Childbed, a weak woman but lately
delivered, and therefore far unfit for so long a journey, and the newborn
child as unfit, if not unfitter then she: and yet Mother and child in this
weak case, must travel to the hazard of both their lives, for he durst not
leave them behind him for fear he and they should never meet again: For this
it is that Zipporah twice calls him a bloody husband: before the child's
circumcision, and after: before, because he had hazzarded both their lives in
bringing them forth, both of them being in their blouth and blood: and after,
because she through him was put to Circumcise the child, which bloodinesse a
tender mother must needs abhor: and for this also is the word circumcisions
in the plural number, verse. 26. A bloody husband, Lemuloth, because of the
circumcisions.

SECT. IX. Zipporah but very lately delivered of her child.
THat Zipporah was so lately delivered of child, is plain by observing these
things.

First, that Jethro her Father was circumcised both he and his household, for he
was a Midianite, a Son of Abraham, by Ke^^rah, and all Abraham's children
after the flesh were circumcised, and that not by usurpation or unwarrantable
imitation, but by the bond and tie of the institution: therefore though Moses
had been absent never so long, or never so far off, yet would Jethro have
taken care of the child's circumcision on the eight day: but now the child may
not stay, till he be eight days old, and whole again upon his circumcision,
but must travel young and uncircumcised as he is.

Secondly, observe the child's name, which was usually given at Circumcision,
and if the child were older then we speak of, then had he been so long
without a name, or had had another name then Eliezer.

Thirdly, he called his name Eliezer, for the God of my fathers, said he, has
been mine help and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh, Chap. 18. 4. Now
Moses was not secure of Pharaohs sword, till just at his setting for Egypt. For
after he came from Horeb into Midian again, the Lord tells him that all those
are dead which sought his life, verse. 19. This does aggravate his diffidence
the more. Who though he had seen such wonders at Horeb, and heard of other
wonders done for him by God in Egypt, in cutting off his enemies there, yet
durst he not trust the promise of God, for his returning to his wife and
children, but will take them along with him. For this God brings him into
danger of his life visibly, which Zipp^rah poor woman thought to have been
for the uncircumcision of her Son, therefore she takes and circumciseth him:
but Moses being conscious of his own infidelity or distrust, in this so great
a danger, rubbeth up his faith again, and the peril refineth it as silver, so
that now he betaketh himself wholly to God, by confidence in the promise, and
to express this his faith, he calls his Son when the mother had
circumcised him, Eliezer, God is mine helper; so that I shall escape danger
from Pharaoh and the Egyptians in this mine errand: And the Lord saw his
faith, and let him go.

SECT. X. Of the name Jehovah, and how it was unknown to the Fathers, Exodus 6.
3.
THis is the uncommunicable name of God, not given at any time unto the
Creature, Esaias 42. 8.

This name in its sound and letters was known unto the Fathers, yea even in
its signification. Abraham calls mount Moriah, Jehovah Jireh, Genesis 22. 14.

Isaac called upon the name of Jehovah, Chap. 26. 25. And Jacob says; Jehovah
thy God has brought it to me, Chap. 27. 20.

The name Jehovah signifies three things,

First, Gods eternal being in himself, without dependence or mixture, upon,
or with any other thing. For his being undependent, it is rendered, the first,
and the last; and which is, and which was, and which is to come.

For his being without mixture, or composition, it is said here, (...): Not, By
my name Jehovah was I known: Nor, My name Jehovah was known: But, My name
Jehovah, I was known, to show that God and his name are not two things, united
by composition, but one and the same thing.

Secondly, Jehovah betokens Gods giving of being to the Creature. To this
purpose, it is observeable, that God is never called Jehovah, till all the
Creation be perfected, and every thing have received its being, Genesis 2. 4.

So in all the speeches that pass between Job and his friends, God is never
called Jehovah but once, where mention is made of the Creatures receiving their
being, Job 12. 10.

Thirdly, Jehovah signifies the faithfulness of God in his promise, and in
this sense it is rendered, Amen, true and faithful. In this sense it is set
after so many commands, Thou shall, or thou shall not do thus and thus, I am
Jehovah.

And in all these significations it is justly prefixed before all the
Commandments, Exodus 20. I am Jehovah thy God.

As this name is not communicable to any Cr^ature, but only appropriate to the
Godhead, so it is severally given to every Person in the Trinity.

First, to the Father, Psalm. 110. 1. For he is the fountain of being in
himself.

Secondly, to the Son, Jer. 23. 6. For he is the giver of being to the
Cr^ature.

Thirdly, to the Holy Ghost: compare Esaias 6. 8, 9, 10. with Act. 28. 25, 26.
For he is the Spirit of Truth, and giver of being to the promise.

The name Jehovah, and the significancy of it to the utmost, did the holy
Fathers know before Moses. But they saw not experience of the last
signification named, namely the faithfulness of God in his promise made to
Abraham concerning his delivery of his seed from bondage, and bringing them
into a Land flowing with milk and honey: God gave them the promise by the name
of El Shaddai, God Omnipotent: and they relied upon his omnipotency, because he
that promised was able to perform: but they beheld it afar of, and tasted not
of my p^rformance of it, but now will I show my self Jehovah, faithful to
bring to pass and accomplish what I promised.

SECT. XI. Putiel, Exodus 6. 25.
MAny, and the most of them far fetched, notations are given upon this name:
and when all is said of it that can be said, the last resolution lies but in a
conjecture; and then may we guess as well as others.

Eliezer married his wife in Egypt, and of the Egyptian Idiom does this name
of her Father seem as probably to sound as of any other.

Now among the Egyptian names or titles, these two things may be observed.

First, That among them, Gentry, Nobility, and Royalty, seem to have been
denoted and distinguished by these increasing Syllables, Phar, Phara, and
Phara* oh. The Gentry by phar, as Poti-phar a Captain, Genesis 41. 45. The
Nobility by phara, as Poti-phara, a Prince, Genesis 41 45. And Majesty by
Phara-oh, the common name of all their Kings.

There was another title of dignity given to the governor of the Jews in
Alexandria in that Land, in after times, namely Alabarcha, as is to be seen in
Josephus: which though he and others would derive from (...), Salt, yet since
we are yet to seek for the latter part of the word, it may as probably be
conceived to be compounded of the Article Al, so common in the Arabicke tongue,
and Abrech which has relation to dignity and honor, Exodus 41. 43.

Secondly, The Egyptians delighted to affix or join to their names and
titles, the word Poti, or Puti, whether in memorial of their Uncle Put, Genesis
10. 6. or in reverence of some Diety of that name, or for what else is not so
easily resolved, as it may be conceived they did the thing, by the names
forecited, Potiphar, and Potiphara, and of the same nature seems to be
Puti-el, the word that is now in hand.

This Putiel therefore may seem to have been some convert Egyptian, [imagine
him to have been of the posterity of Puti-ph^ra, among whom Joseph had sowed
the seeds of true Religion] who changing his Idolatry, and irreligiousnesse for
the worship of the true God, did also change the latter part of his name Phera,
into the name of that God which he now professed, and instead of Puti-phera, to
be called Puti-el. The best resolution, as was said before, that can be given
in this point, can be but conjectures, and in a matter of this nature, it is as
excusable if we err, as difficult to hit at a right.

SECT. XII. Of Moses words, Glory over me. Exodus 8. 9.
THe Plagues of Egypt began answerable to their sins, the waters wherein the
childrens blood had been shed, and they poor souls sprawled for life, are
now turned into blood, and scrawle with frogs.

The former Plague of blood, was not so smart as the other of Frogs, for by
digging they found fresh water, and so had that remedy against that plague. But
they had none against the frogs, for they came into every place, and seized
upon all the victuals that lay in their way, and devoured them; nay they spared
not to raven upon men themselves: Therefore the Psalmist says, Frogs destroyed
them.

Yet for all this does Pharaoh make but a mock at Jehovah in all this his
doing: and scornefully and in derision, bids Mose^ and Aaron try what Jehovah
could do for the removing of them: To whom Moses answers, Glory over me, mock
me hardly wit^ my Jehovah, yet appoint when I shall pray, and I will pray, tha^
thou may know that there is none like my Jehovah. And Pharaoh appoints him
the next day for his prayer, which he would never have put off so long, had he
in earnest thought that Jehovah could have removed them upon Moses prayer.

SECT. XIII. The Plague of Lice. The speech of the Sorcerers, This is the
finger of God, Exodus 8. 19. not a confession of the Lord, but an hideous and
horrid blasphemy.
AT the Plague of Lice, the Sorcerers are put to a nonplus, and in the least
creature can do nothing, for [besides that it was the will of God, to bring
their devices to naught, and to show himself maximum in minimis] if they
should have imitated this miracle, they must have done two things: first, they
must have produced dust, and then of the dust, lice, for the text says, That
all the dust of the Land became lice, throughout all the Land of Egypt, ver.
17. Neither of which they can do, and therefore say, This is the finger of
God. For the understanding of these their words, observe these things.

First, That in the two foregoing Plagues of blood and Frogs, Moses gave
warning of them before they came, but of this he did not.

Secondly, That the Lice were also in the land where Israel dwelt, as well as
in other parts of Egypt, for there is no severing betwixt Goshen and Egypt
mentioned, till the next Plague of Flies, In that day, I will sever the Land of
Goshen. in which my people dwell, And I will put a division between my people,
and thy perple, ver. 22, 23, whereas none had been put before.

For when Moses turned the waters of Egypt into blood, the Sorcerers did so
also with their enchantments, and turned the waters of Goshen into blood
likewise. Here Pharaoh thinks his Sorcerers have matched the Jehovah that
Moses so talked of, and that they could do as much against his people, as he
could do against theirs.

And so when Moses from Jehovah brought Frogs upon Egypt, the Magitians also
by their enchantments bring Frog^ likewise upon Goshen, and still they think
their God is hard enough for Isreal's Jehovah.

Thus is blood and Frogs through all the Land of Goshen, but neither were these
real blood or frogs, nor wa^ this any punishment at all upon Israel, for it
was not from the Lord, but only vain delusions permitted by the Lord, that at
last he might catch the crafty in their own net.

But when the Plague of Lice comes, it comes also upon Goshen from the Lord
himself, and this is a plague indeed upon his own people, laid upon them by
him, as well as upon Egypt: For Israel that had partaken in so many of Aegypts
sins, must also think to partake in some of her punishments.

For this it is, why the man of God in Psalm. 78. reckoning up the Plagues of
Egypt, never mentions the Plague of Lice: because that was equally a Plague
to Israel, as to the Egyptians, they had both blood and frogs as well as
they, but not as really, nor from God, and therefore no plague to them.

Thirdly, The Egyptians acknowledged a supreme great Deity, whom they thought
they adored in their petty deities, whom they worshipped. For when they adored
an Ox, a Dog, a Crocodile, etc. they adored not the carcass, but the good
qualities that in these creatures conduced to their benefit and good, so says
Eusebius, that whatsoever was helpefull, or furthered the good of humanelife,
that they accounted a Deity.

Fourthly, They accounted not of Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, but as a
petty, trivial God, such as every Nation had one or more of, that that God
could do something, as they saw in the blood and frogs, but could do no
more, if so much, as theirs, Chap. 5. 2. Who is Jehovah that I should obey him?
I know not Jehovah, neither will I let Israel go. So that the Magicians words,
This is the finger of God, come from them reasoning thus: When blood and
frogs came, Moses gave warning of them before, from his Jehovah, but these
Lice come and he never gave warning; Hence it is plain, this is none of
Jehovahs doing, otherwise would Moses have known it before, but now he did
not. Again, when the Hebrews Jehovah brought blood and frogs upon our land, he
brought none upon theirs, but spared his own people: but this Plague of Lice
is also upon them, as soon as upon us, and without our doing: And therefore
this cannot be Jehovah, for he would not plague his own people, but this is
done by the finger of El^^im the great deity, and the Jehovah of the Hebrews
is a God of no value.

SECT. XIIII. The Plague of Boyles, Exodus 9. 9. Two contrary Plagues in one.
MOses and A^ron must take their handfuls of ashes out of the Furnace, that
whence Israel had had their sore affliction, Egypt might receive their
corporal punishment. Moses is to scatter the four handfals into the air
toward the four quarters of heaven, hereupon a double miracle followed. 1.
That so little or few as^es were multiplied so as to fly throughout all the
Land of Aegyp^ and to light upon every man and beast in it. 2. That lighting on
them, it was a Plague to them in their bodies.

As the Miracle was double, so was the Plague.

1. The Ashes became She^in, that is, a burning itch, or an inflamed Scab: for
so the word signifies, as is plain, Job 2. 7, 8. where the holy man's body is
struck with Shehin, such an intolerable dry hot itch, that his nails would
not serve to scratch enough, but he is glad to get a potsheard to skrub
himself.

2. This Itch had also blaines and boiles brok^ out with it, [and so Jobs had
not] so that the Egyptians were vexed at once, with intolerable itch and
intolerable ach: Their itch called upon them to scratch and skrub, and yet they
could not do so, for the soreness and aching of their boiles.

In the five preceding Plagues, the obduration of Pharaohs heart is attributed
to himself, in these five forward, it is attributed to God: And justly [when
being punished for his sins, he hardens his heart so many times] is his
heart hardened so many times that he sins for a punishment.

SECT. XV. The Plague of darkness, Exodus 10. Why first named, Psalm. 105. 28.
AS the men of the old world, of Sodom and the Jews at the death of Christ,
were struck with darkness, before they entered into utter darkness; so it
is with the Egyptians here.

This Plague lay upon them three days, namely, the eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth days of the month Nisan. For upon the conclusion of the
darkness, Moses being sent for to Pharaoh gives him such distaste that he
charge him never to come into his presence again, which Moses says he will
not do, I will see thy face again no more: but before he goes out of the
presence, he gives him warning concerning the slaughter of the first borne to
be that night, Chap. 11. Verse. 4. by which it is clear that the darkness
ended on the Passover day in the morning.

Quest. Why then seeing it was the ninth plague in number, has Psalm. 105. set
it first?

Answ. Because it was the most terrible of all the Plagues that came upon them.
For those that had gone before had plagued only their land, or cattle, or
bodies; that that came after, light not upon all, but only on the first borne,
but this is a Plague even to the very mind and conscience, and universally so
to them all.

It was not their sitting in darkness and not stirring about their business
for three days together, that plagued them so much, for this had been no
great ^orment, but their torture was, that in this darkness they saw
fearful apparitions of Fiends and Devils, and horrible visions, which so
hideously affrighted and even distracted them, that they were as it were in
Hell already. For observe that Pharaoh that had been nothing at all moved in a
manner with all the plagues that went before, is so stirred with this, that he
sends for Moses as soon as ever the darkness is over, and permits him to
depart, Exodus 10. 24. which mere sitting in darkness could not have wrought
him to, but those terrors which he saw in the dark.

Hence it is that Psalm. 78. 49. names not the plague of darkness by its
name, but in the place where it should come, he mentions that which was the
very quintessence of it. He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger,
wrath, and indignation and trouble, by sending evil Angels among them.

SECT. XVI. Israel circumcised in the three days darkness. He sent
darkness and made it dark, and they rebelled not against his word, Psalm.
105. 28.
THis latter clause, they rebelled not against his word, is to be understood of
Israel, who in this plague of darkness performed some special part of
obedience: And that upon inquiry will be found to be their undergoing of
circumcision. For they had followed the Idols of Egypt, and in Idolatry were
become like the Egyptians, so were they also in uncircumcision. For when
Joshuah had circumcised them at their entrance into Canaan, he says, I have
rolled away from you the reproach of Egypt, Josh. 5. 9. or that wherein y^e
were like unto the Egyptians uncircumcised to your reproach.

But when God ordains the Passover, he gives charge for circumcision, for
no uncircumcised person must eat thereof, Exodus 12. 48.

Then was required a general circumcision of all the people, or at least of
the most of them, for all were uncircumcised, unless it was some few that were
more constant to the Covenant of their God. And that there was a general
Circumcision in Egypt, is inferred in the forenamed place, Joshu. 5. where God
commands Joshua to Circumcise the people a second time, which infers that
there was a first time when they were circumcised with a general Circumcision
as they were that second time. But in Egypt must this first Circumcision be,
for the Text in that very place tells, that in the Wilderness there was no
Circumcision at all.

Whilst then Israel sat sore of their Circumcision, God closes up Egypt in
three days darkness, and in horror, that they might not take the
opportunity against his people.

SECT. XVII. The beginning of the year changed. Exodus 12. 1.
THe world from her creation hitherto, had begun her years in Tisri or
September, which was the time, of the year when she was created. This will
easily be showed [against those that maintain the world did begin in March]
by these reasons.

1. From Exodus 23. 16. The feast of in gathering in the end of the year.

2. From Joel 2. 23. The latter rain in the first month.

3. Had Adam been created in March he had had no fruits ripe for his food,
but in Autumn they were ready for him.

4. Should the months before the passover be reckoned to begin from March, it
will follow that the general deluge increased in the heat of Summer, and
abated and dried up in the deep and moist of Winter.

5. Had the year begun from March from the beginning, it had had been
unnecessary to have commanded them to begin it thence, who never knew where to
begin it else.

From the creation then the years began from September, but here upon a work
greater in figure, as which represented the redemption by Christ, the beginning
is translated to March. And this is the first Commandment given to Israel by
Moses.

As that old account began from an Equinox, so must this, but not alike; That
began exactly from the Equinox day, this from the first new Moon after, and
not from that day, unless that day was the new Moon. The fourth day of the
worlds creation was both Equinox and new Moon: and though the years after
began from that day of the Sun, yet were they counted by the months of the
Moon.

Their year then beginning thus from a new Moon it plainly speaks for it
self that it was reckoned by Lunary months, which falling short eleven days
of the year of the Sun, every third year was leap year, or intercalary of
a month added of 33. days, which was called Veadar: So that howsoever it is
said that Solomon had twelve special officers for the twelve months of the
year, it means the ordinary year, and not the Embolimquan or leap year:
for that year, those twelve in their several months served so much the
longer, as that the added months might be made up by them and not a new
officer chosen, for that month, who should have no employment when that month
was over till three years after.

The equity or life of this Law that their years should begin from March or
Ahib was because the preaching of the Gospel should begin, and the redemption
be consummate from that time. For it was just at that time of the year when
John began to baptize, which was the beginning of the Gospel, Mark. 1. 1^ Acts
1. 22. And it was at that time of the year when our Savior suffered, and
fulfilled that which this presigured, our redemption.

SECT. XVIII. Particulars concerning the Passover, Exodus 12.
1. THE Paschall Lamb was Christ's body in a figure. Compare Exodus 12. 46. with
John 19. 36. and to this it is that the word hoc, in the words of our Savior,
Hoc est corpus meum, had reference and respect. They had but newly eaten the
Pasteover Lamb, and that had been the body of Christ Sacra mentally to the
Jews hitherto: but now Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake it, and told
them that this hence forward must be his body under the Gospel in that same
manner that the paschall Lamb had been his body under the Law.

Secondly, the Lamb must not be eaten raw, verse. 9. which would never have
been forbidden, if the very raw flesh and blood of Christ, as it was upon the
Cross, were eaten in the Sacrament, as transubstantiation dreameth, for then
had the raw Passover represented it the better. And especially among those
People who sometimes used to eat raw flesh in their hasty meals as the Jews
did.

Necessity sometimes transfers the Passover to another month, but never
further then the next. So the first Passover but o^e, was kept by some on the
fourteenth day of the second month, because uncleanness by a dead corpse
necessitated them to foregoe it at the right time, Number. 9. 11. And so the last
Passover but one that we read of before the Captivity was kept in the second
month, 2 Chronicles. 30. 2. because Hezekiah coming to his Crown but just in the
beginning of the year, or very little before, could not procure the Temple,
and the Priests to be sanctified and purged sufficiently, and the People to be
assembled against the right Passover day, See 2 Chronicles. 29. 3.

This translation of the Feast a month out of its place, did the more enforce
its significancy of things future then of things past; as rather recording the
death of Christ to come, then their delivery from Egypt: for the force of the
commemoration of that was infeebled much, when it hit not upon the very night.
Again, this mooveablenesse of this Feast, which so nearly represented the
death of our Savior, received its equity when our Savior dyed, not upon the
very Passover day, but deferred the Sacrificing of himself to a day after.

Object. But it seems that Christ did not eat his Passover on the
fourteenth day, For Job. 18. 28. The Jews went not into the Judgment Hall,
lest they should be defiled: but that they might eat the Passover.

Now it is most apparent that our Savior had eaten the Passover, over night:
which as soon as he had done he was apprehended, and arraigned all night, and
the next morning early he is brought to Pilate, into whose house the Jews
durst not come for fear of defiling, but that they might eat the Passover:
so that it appears that either Christ or the Jews hit not upon the right
Passover day enjoined by the Law, either he a day too soon, or they a day
too late.

Answ. Neither the one nor the other. For the text expressly says, that Jesus
ate his Passover, and the Jews theirs upon the same night, which was on the
fourteenth day at even.

Mat. 26. 17. Now the first day of the Feast of unleavened bread, the Disciples
came to Jesus, saying unto him, Where will thou that we prepare for thee to
eat the Passover?

Mark. 14. 12. The first day of unleavened bread when they killed the
Passover, So Luke 22. 7.

So that the Passover which the Jews reserved themselves to the eating of,
when they durst not enter into Pilates Judgment Hall for fear of defiling, is
not to be understood of the Paschall Lamb, which they had eaten the evening
past, but of the Passover bullock where of mention is made, Dent. 16. 2. 2 Chronicles. 35. 7, 8, 9.

Now these bullocks were indeed slain at Passover time, but not for the
Passover beast properly taken, for that must be of a Lamb or kid unalterably:
but these bullocks were slain as attendants upon the Paschall, from the nature
of which Sacrifice they differed in these particulars.

First, the Paschall Lamb was always, and all of him rost^d: these were
sodden, 2 Chronicles. 35. 13.

Secondly, the Paschall Lamb was roasted whole, and eaten without breaking the
bones, these were broken peecemeale, and so parted among the people.

The Paschall Lamb was a necessary service to which they were bound by
command: these were arbitrary according to their stay in Jerusalem in the
Passover week; for if they would they might return home the next morning
after the Paschall Lamb was eaten, Deuteronomy. 16. 7. and then they needed no
bullock to be killed for their diet the rest of the Feast: but if they stayed
any more days of the feast at Jerusalem then the first, then was not their
diet arbitrary to eat any thing what they would, but they must eat of these
bullockes because their diet must be holy at that time. Hence resulteth
another difference betwixt the Paschall Lamb, and these, which is this; that
these were not of the first institution of the Passover, nor had they any
bullockes slain at the Passover in Egypt, but Lambs only.

SECT. XIX. That the Supper in Job. 13. was not the Passover Supper.
FIRST, It is very commonly held that the Supper in John 13. was the Passover
Supper, and that Judas stayed not the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, for that
our Savior having dipped a sop into the bitter or sour sauce, which they used
to the Paschall Lamb, and given it to him, Satan with it entering into him, he
packed him away with, What thou do do quickly: An opinion mistaken in the
groundwork that it builds upon, and consequently in the structure built upon
it. For that that was no passover at all, the Evangelist makes it most plain
in ver. 1. when he says, it was before the Feast of the Passover, and Matthen
in Chap. 26. 2. tells, it was two days before, and indeed, two miles from
Jerusalem, namely in Betbany: The serious Harmonizing of the four Evangelists
together, at this place, will make this most clear.

Secondly, if then it were not the Passover Supper, there can be no Paschall
Lamb looked for at it, nor no Haroseth, or sauce of bitter herbs to eat it
with, but the meat that they were then eating, and the sauce in which our
Savior dipped the sop, was ordinary meat, and ordinary sauce.

Thirdly, Judas when he was packed away with his Quod facis fac cito, went not
from Jerusalem to G^thsemani, where Christ was apprehended by him on the
Passover night, but he went from Be^hany to Jerusalem, to bargain with the
chief Pri^st, for his betraying, which when he had done, he returned to
Be^hany again.

SECT. XX. Borrowing Egyptian Jewels, Exodus 12. 35, 36.
IT may be equally questionable, whether Israel showed less honesty in
borrowing what they meant not to restore, or Egypt less wisdom, in lending
what they knew would not be restored?

For the first, it is easily answered, that they had the express warrant of
God, who cannot command unrighteousness, and whom to obey in all things is
piety.

The second is as easily resolved thus, that Idolaters, in the worship of their
Idols, used to deck themselves with Jewels, and Eare-rings, and fine things,
thereby to make them as they thought the more acceptable, to their fine decked
deity. So do the Egyptians now conceive of Israel, that seeing they desired
these their fine knacks, being now going to sacrifice, they intended to
sacrifice to the Egyptian gods, as they had done heretofore, and they thought,
sure there can be no danger of departing the Land, because they still adhere to
our Religion. For Moses had but still spoken of going but three days journey
into the Wilderness to worship.

SECT. XXI. Rameses, and Succoth, ver. 37.
THe most famous of the Deities of Egypt, was their Goddess Isis, mentioned
in all Heathen Authors, of her does the last syllable in Raam-ses, and
Rame-ses, seem to sound, as being Towns that bare the name of this Goddess,
and importing the Town, or Temple, or some such thing of Isis. For that which
the Egyptians called Ses, or Sis, other languages in pronouncing would augment
with a vowell before, for so was it ordinary. Egypt at home was called Cophti,
but forainers did call it Esophti, and so it came to be Egypti. So the Sea that
lay among the Gentiles of Greece, was in Hebrew Mare Goiim, the Sea of the
Gentiles, but other Nations would put E before, and so it came to be called
EGoiim or EGaeum. The Syrian and Arabicke Testaments, and the writing of Jewish
Authors are full of examples of this nature. Succoth, is held to have been so
called, because Israel here lodged and pitched their tents in their March out
of Egypt: but they marched too much in suspicion of Pharaohs pursuit, to
settle a Camp, and to pitch tents so near him. But it rather seems to have
taken denomination from the cloud of glory coming upon them in this place,
which was as a covering to them, Psalm. 105. 39.

This their Divine conducter, stayed with them till Moses death, save that it
was taken up for a while, because of the golden calfe: at Moses death it
departed from them; for when they are to march through Jordan, the Arc is to
lead the way, which while the cloud was with them it never did, but went in the
body and very heat of the Army.

As the cloud departed at the death of Moses the first Prophet, so is it
restored and seen apparently at the sealing of the great Prophet, Luke 9. 30.

SECT. XXII. The decree at Marab, Exodus 15: 25.
SHam Sam lo hhok umishpat: There he set a decree, and a judgment for them:
God is beginning now to compose and platform the people into a settled policy,
which while they were under the fear and danger of Pbaraoh could not be done;
And here he passes a decree and judgment upon them, what they must look for
in the wilderness, according to their dealing with him. If they will
diligently hearken to his words, etc. he will heal and keep them free from
diseases, as he healed those brackish waters, and of bitter had made them
sweet; but if otherwise, they must expect accordingly. Those that have obscured
this place by questioning whether this Ordinance at Marah, were for the
Sabbath, or for the red Cow, or for the trial of the suspected Wife, or for
the dimensum of their diet in the Wilderness, have made obscurity where there
is none at all, and have supposed this to have been an Ordinance whereafter
Israel was to walk, whereas it was rather a decree whereafter God would deal
with them according to their walking; And answerably seem the latter words,
Vesham Nissahu, to bear this sense, for there he had tried them.

The word Hhok, is taken in a signification agreeable to this, Psalm. 2. 7. I
declare it for a decree, that since the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my
Son, etc. That therefore, ye Kings, and Potentates, etc. submit to the
obedience of him, or else his anger will shortly kindle, etc.

SECT. XXIII. That this story of Jethro is misplaced, and why.
THat this story is misplaced, is plain by these things: First, Jethro, Moses
father in Law, took a burnt offering, and sacrifices for God, ver. 12.
Secondly, Now on the morrow, Moses sat to judge the people, verse. 13. and made
them know the Statutes of God, and his Laws, verse. 16.

But as the story lies here, there was no Tabernacle nor Altar for Sacrifice
yet built; Neither as yet did Moses know the Statutes and Laws of God
himself, for as yet they are not come to Sinai.

Thirdly, Moses himself tells that the choosing of Judges and Elders, which
was done upon Jethroes Counsel, was not till their departing from Sinai. The
Lord your God spoke unto us in Horeb, saying, You have dwelt long enough in
this mountain, etc. And I spoke unto you at that time, s^ying, I am not able
to bear you my self alone, etc. Deuteronomy. 1. from verse. 7. to 19.

So that this story should lie at the 10 of Numbers, and come in betwixt the
tenth and eleventh verses of that chapter, and the story to be conceived thus.
When Moses had received all the Laws which God would give him at Sinai, from
Exodus 20. to the Law of the silver Trumpets, which was the last, Number. 10. then
came Jetbro, and brought Moses wife and children, and seeing him toyling in
judgment, he advises him to choose Judges to ease him; which being done, ere
long the cloud removed, and they must flit from Sinai, ver. 11. When they are
ranked to march, Moses desires Hobab or Jethro his Father in Law to go along
with him, which he denies, but returns to his own Country, Number. 10. 29, 30.
31, 32. compared with the last verse of this Chapter. Thus lies the order of
the story. Now, the reason why it is misplaced is this. In the last verse of
the preceding Chapter, there is a perpetual curse decreed against Amalek, The
Lord has sworn that the Lord will have war with Amalek, from generation to
generation. Now the Midianites and Amalekites lived so promiscuously together,
that they were as one people, and the Kenites, or the family of Jethro, dwelt
in the midst of them, 1 Samuel 15. 6. Therefore that it might be observed that
Jethro fell not under that curse of Amalek, Moses brings him in coming to
the Camp of Israel, and to God, as soon as ever the curse is uttered, that
every eye might presently observe that Jethro was exempted from it.

Object. But Moses and Israel, by this account lay almost a twelve month at
Sinai, before his wife and children came at him, and can this be thought, that
they should be so unnatural one to another?

Answer. This was Moses his doing, not of unnaturalness, but piety, to
restrain their coming, till his great task of receiving and giving the Law,
and building the Tabernacle was over; Letters and Vi^its passed betwixt them
there is no doubt, and they kept at distance thus by consent for a season.

That letters passed may be collected from verse. 6. 7. And Jethro, Moses Father
in law, said unto Moses, I Jethro thy Vather in law, come to thee. And Moses
went out to meet his Father in law. Jethro said not thus to Moses his face, I
am come to thee: For then why or how upon this tidings, could Moses go forth
to meet him, when they spoke face to face already? Nor could this speech be
delivered by a messenger, for it had been an improper and senseless speech of
a messenger to say, I Jethro come to thee: but this Jethro himself tells
Moses by letter, before he comes at him, whereupon Moses goes forth to meet
him.

SECT. XXIIII. Isreal's march from Rephidim to Sinai. Saint Paul explained. 1
Cor. 10. 4.
Quest. HOw can it be said that they departed from Rephidim, and came to Sinai,
whereas Rephidim and Sinai were all one? For every one knows that the
mountain whereon the Law was given is called Horeb and Sinai, indifferently:
as Exodus 19. 18. compared with Malach. 4. 4. Now when they were at Rephidim,
chap. 17. 1. they were at Horeb, verse. 2. So that to go from Rephidim to
Sinai, is to go from Horeb to Horeb.

Answ. The hill on which the Law was given had indeed two names, and as
Bellonius says, two tops, the one side of it was called Horeb, from the rocky
drought of it, being utterly devoid of water: The other side was called Sinai,
from the bushes and brambles that grew upon it, in one of which Moses saw the
Lord in a flame of fire; if so be it took not the name from Sini the son of
Canaan, Genesis 10. Now when Israel lay at Rephidim they lay upon Horeb side, and
there out of the droughty rock, Moses m^raculously brings forth water. Their
march from Rephidim is at the skirts of the hill from Horeb to Sinai side of
the mountain. And in the same sense is Paul to be understood, 1 Cor. 10. 4.
They drank of the Rock that followed them. Not that the Rock stirred and
went along with them, but that the water which miraculously gushed out of the
one side of the hill Horeb, ran along with them as they marched at the foot of
the hill, till they came to the other side of the hill Sinai. And so is Moses
himself to be understood. I cast the dust of the golden Calfe into the brook
that descended out of the Mount. Deuteronomy. 9. 21. Not that the brook gushed out of
the mount on that side on which the Calfe was erected, but on the other, and at
the skirt of the hill came running to that.

SECT. XXV. The Station and Posture of Israel before Sinai, Exodus 19.
ON the first day of the month Sivan, which was toward the middle of our May,
in the year of the world 2513. they come from Rephidim to Sinai, and pitch in
their maine body, more especially on the South and South East side of the
Mount, See Deuteronomy. 33. 2. and compare the situation of S^ir in the point of the
Compass.

In three parts or squadrons did their Camp sit down before it.

1. Next to the hill pitched the Elders or 70. heads of the chief families
which had gone into Egypt, these are called the house of Jacob, Verse. 3. as
Genesis 46. 27.

2. Next behind them pitched the people in their maine body, consisting of so
many hundred thousands: these are called the children of Israel, Verse. 3. And
this distinction is observed, Verse. 7. 8. And Moses called the Elders, etc. And
all the people answered.

3. On the outside of all lay the mixed multitude or the Egyptians that had
joined to them and came out with them.

On the second day of the month, and of their arrival there Moses goes up
into the mountain, being called up by the Lord, Verse. 3. and when he comes
down tells the people the words of the Lord, Verse. 5. If ye will hear my
voice indeed and keep my Covenant, ye shall be my peculiar people: To which
the people even before they know what the Commandments of the Lord would be,
do promise to obey and hearken, not by rash undertaking to perform they knew
not what, as some have been bold to tax them, nor yet presuming upon their
own ability to keep the Law, as others have concluded upon them; but having
been trained up from their infancy, and instructed in the doctrine of Faith,
they piously conclude, when God comes to give them a Law and to make a
covenant with them, that God would not cross himself in the Doctrine of
salvation, but that the Law that he would now give them should be a Law
conducing and leading to Faith still, a Schoolmaster to Christ, and not an
extinguisher of the doctrine of salvation by him.

On the third day of the month Moses goes up into the mountain again, Verse.
9. and is charged to sanctify the people, which accordingly is done on that
day; and on the fourth and fifth, and on the sixth day in the morning the ten
Commandments are given.

SECT. XXVI. The Jews Tenet concerning the Law. Talm. in Maccoth. Rab.
Abhuhahh Ner. 1.
THe whole Law, say they, was given to Moses in six hundred and thirteen
precepts. David in the fifteenth Psalm brings them all within the compass
of eleven. 1. To walk uprightly. 2. To work righteousness. 3. To speak
truth in the heart. 4. Not to slander. 5. Not to wrong a Neighbor. 6. Not to
entertain or raise an ill report. 7. To vi^i^^e a reprobate. 8. To honor them
that fear the Lord. 9. That alter^th not his oath. 10. Not to lend to usury.
11. Not to take bribes against the innocent.

The Propbet Isaiah brings these to six, in Chap. 33. 15. 1. To walk justly.
2. To speak righteously. 3. To refuse gain of oppression. 4. To shake hands
from taking bribes. 5. To stop the ears from hearing of blood. 5. To shut the
eyes from seeing of evil.

Micab reduces all to three, Chap. 6. 8. 1. To do justly. 2. To love mercy.
3. To walk humbly with God. Isaiah again to two, Chap. 56. 1. 1. Keep
judgment. 2. Do justice. Am^s to one, Chap. 5. 4. Seek me. Habakkuk also
brings all to one, Chap. 2. 4. The just by his Faith shall live. Thus the Jews
witness against themselves while they conclude that Faith is the sum of the
Law, and yet they stand altogether upon works; A testimony from Jews
exceedingly r^markable.

SECT. XXVII. Articles of a believing Jews Creed collected out of Moses Law.
1. I Believe that salvation is by Faith, not by Works.

When the Talmudick Jews make such a confession as is mentioned instantly
before, wherein they reduce all the tenor and marrow of the Law under this one
doctrine of living by Faith, Hab. 2. 4. The just by his Faith shall live: it is
no wonder if the more ancient and more holy Jews under the Law looked for
salvation, not by their own merits and works, but only by Faith: This
fundamental point of Religion they might readily learn by these two things.

1. From the impossibility of their keeping the Law, which their consciences
could not but convince them of, by their disabiliti^ to hear it, and by their
daily carriage.

2. In that they saw the holiest of their men, and the holiest of their
services, to receive sanctity, not from themselves, but from another. So they
saw that the Priest [who was or should be at least the holiest man amongst
them] was sanctified by his garments, and that the sacrifices were sanctified
by the Altar. From these premises they could not but conclude, that no man, nor
his best service could be accepted as holy in it self, but must be sanctified
by another.

2. I believe that there is no salvation without reconciliation with God, and
no reconciliation without satisfaction.

The first part of this Article is so plain that nature might teach it, and so
might it the latter also; and laying hereto Moses his lex talionis, eye for
eye, tooth for tooth, it made it doubtless.

3. I believe that satisfaction shall once be made.

This they might see by their daily sacrifice, aiming at a time when there
should full satisfaction be made, which these poor things could not do. No
less did their Iubilee year intimate when men in debt and bondage were
quitted; The very time of the year, when the Iubilee year began, calling all
Israel to think of a Jubilee from sin and Satan's bondage, into which mankind
fell at the same time of the year.

4. I believe that satisfaction for sin shall be made by a man.

This is answerable to reason that as a man sinned, so a man should satisfy:
but Moses Law about redemption of land by a kinsman, taught Israel to expect
that one that should be akin in the flesh to mankind, should redeem for him
morgaged heaven: (...) in Hebrew is both a kinsman and a Redeemer.

5. I believe that he shall be more then a man.

This they learned from the common service about the Tabernacle, wherein the
high Priest, a man as fully hallowed and sanctified as man could be, for his
outward function; yet did he offer and offer again for the people and
himself, and yet they were unclean still. This read a Lecture to every ones
apprehension, that a mere man could not do the deed of satisfaction, but he
must be more.

6. I believe the redeemer must also be God as well as man.

The disabilitie of beasts to make satisfaction, they saw by their dying in
sacrifice one after another, and yet man's conscience cleansed never the better.
The unabilitie of man we saw before: The next then that is likely to do this
work are Angels. But them Israel saw in the Tabernacle curtains spectators
only and not actors in the time and work of reconciliation. From hence they
might gather that it must be God dwelling with man in one person, as the cloud,
the glory of God never parted from the Arc.

7. I believe that man's Redeemer shall die to make satisfaction.

This they saw from their continued bloody sacrifices, and from the covenants
made, and all things purged by blood. This the heedlesse manslayer might take
heed of, and see that as by the death of the high Priest he was restored to
liberty, so should mankind be by the death of the highest Priest to the
glorious liberty of the sons of God. Their delivery from Egypt by the death
of a Lamb taught them no less.

8. I believe that he shall not die for his own sins, but for man's.

Every sacrifice read this lecture, when the most harmless of beasts and
birds were offered.

9. I believe that he shall overcome death.

This Israel saw by necessary conclusion, that if Christ should fall under
death, he did no more then men had done before. His resurrection they saw in
Aarons Rod, Manna, Scapegoate, Sparrow, etc.

10. I believe to be saved by laying hold upon his merits.

Laying their right hand upon the head of every beast that they brought to be
offered up taught them, that their sins were to be imputed to another, and
the laying hold on the horns of the Altar, being sanctuary or refuge from
vengeance, taught them that another merits were to be imputed to them, yet
that all offenders were not saved by the Altar, Exodus 21. 12. 1 King. 2. 29.
the fault not being in the Altar but in the offender, it is easy to see what
that signified unto them.

Thus far^e each holy Israelite was a Christian in this point of doctrine, by
earnest study finding these points under the veil of Moses. The ignorant were
taught this by the learned every Sabbath day, having the Scriptures read and
expounded unto them. From these groundworkes of Moses, and the Prophets
Commentaries thereupon concerning the Messiah, came the schools of the Jews
to be so well versed in that point, that their Scholars do mention his very
name Jesus: the time of his birth in Tisri: the space of his preaching three
years and a half: the year of his death they year of Jubilee, and diverse
such particulars to be found in their Authors, though they knew him not when he
came amongst them.

SECT. XXVIII. The Covenant made with Israel: They not sworn by it to the ten
Commandments, Exodus 24.
When Israel cannot endure to hear the ten Commandments given, it was ready
to conclude, that they could much less keep them. Therefore God gives Moses
privately fifty seven precepts besides, namely Ceremonial and Judicial: to
all which the people are the next morning after the giving of the ten
Commandments, sworn and entered into Covenant, and these made them a
Ceremonial and singular people. About which these things are observable.

1. That they entered into Covenant to a written Law, Chap. 24. 4. And Moses
wrote all the words of the Lord, etc. Against tradions.

2. That here was a book written forty days before the writing of the two
tables: Against them that hold that the first letters that were seen in the
world, were the writing of God in those Tables. And we have seen before also
two pieces of writing before this of Moses, viz. the 88. and 89. Psalms: And
of equal antiquity with them, or not much less was the penning of the book
of Job, most probably written by Elibu one of the Speakers in it, as may be
conjectured from Chap. 32. 15, 16, 17. and some other probability.

3. That this first Covenant was made with water, and blood, and figurative
language: For the twelve pillars that represented the people are called the
people, Exodus 24. 4. 8. As the words in the second Covenant, this my body, are
to be understood in such another sense.

4. That the ten Commandments were not written in the book of that Covenant,
but only those 57. precepts mentioned before.

For 1. The Lord gives the other precepts, because the people could not
receive the ten: for could they have received and observed those as they ought,
they must never have had any parcel of a Law more: as if Adam had kept the
Moral Law, he had never needed to have heard of the promise; and so if we
could but receive the same Law as we should, we had never needed the Gospel.
Now it is most unlike that since God gave them those other commands, because
they could not receive the ten, that he would mingle the ten and them together
in the Covenant.

2. It is not imaginable that God would ever cause a people to swear to the
performance of a Law which they could not endure so much as to hear.

3. The ten Commandments needed not to be read by Moses to the people, seeing
they had all heard them from the mouth of the Lord but the day before.

4. Had they been written and laid up in this book, what necessity had there
been of their writing and laying up in the Tables of stone?

5. Had Moses read the ten Commandments in the beginning of his book, why
should he repeat some of them again at the latter end, as Exodus 23. 12.

Let such ruminate upon this, which hold and maintain that the Sabbath as it
stands in the fourth Commandment, is only the Jewish Sabbath, and
consequently Ceremouiall. And let those good men that have stood for the day of
the Lord against the other, consider whether they have not lost ground, in
granting that the fourth Commandment instituted the Jewish Sabbath. For,

First, The Jews were not sworn to the Decalogue at all, and so not the
Sabbath as it stands there, but only to the fifty seven precepts written in
Moses his book, and to the Sabbath as it was there, Exodus 23. 12.

Secondly, The end of the Ceremonial Sabbath of the Jews was in remembrance
of their delivery out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. but the moral Sabbath of the two
Tables is in commemoration of Gods resting from the works of the Creation.
Exodus 20. 10. 11.

SECT. XXIX. The punishment of Israel for the golden Calse. Exodus 32.
ISRAEL cannot be so long without Moses, as Moses can be without meat. The
fire still burns on the top of mount Sinai, out of which they had so lately
received the Law, and yet so suddenly do they break the greatest
Commandment of that Law to extremity: of Egyptian Jewels, they make an
Egyptian Idol, because thinking Moses had been lost, they intended to return
for Egypt.

Grievous was the sin, for which they must look for grievous punishment,
which lighted upon them in diverse kinds.

First, the Cloud of Glory, their divine conductor, departs from the camp,
which was now become profane and unclean.

Secondly, the Tables Moses breaks before their face, as showing them most
unworthy of the Covenant.

Thirdly, The building of the Tabernacle, the evidence, that God would dwell
among them, is adjourned and put off, for now they had made themselves unworthy.

Fourthly, for this sin God gave them up to worship all the host of heaven,
Act. 7. 42.

Fifthly, Moses bruiseth the Cal^e to Powder, and straweth it upon the waters,
and makes the People drink. Here spiritual fornication comes under the
same trial that carnal did. Number. 5. 24. These that were guilty of this
Idolatry the water thus dr^nke, made their belly to swell, and to give a
visible sign and token of their guilt: then sets Moses the Levites to slay
every one whose bellies they found thus swelled, which thing they did with that
zeal and sincerity that they spared neither Father, nor Brother of their own,
if they found him guilty.

In this slaughter there fell about three thousand, these were ringleaders and
chief agents in this abomination, and therefore made thus exemplary in their
punishment: upon the rest of the People the Lord sent a Plague, verse. 35.

A^ron had first felt the smart in this destruction, had his action in this
business been as voluntary as was theirs, but what he did, he did in fear
of his life.

SECT. XXX. That Moses fasted three Fasts of forty days apeece.
IT is a doubt of no small import: Why seeing it pleased God to appoint the
Feast of expiation, the solemn Feast of Humiliation, in that month of the
year, in which sin entered into the World, why he also did not appoint it
upon the same day in which sin entered, viz. the sixth day of the month, but
on the tenth.

The reason of this is to be found out by observing Moses his Fasts in the
mount, and the conclusion of the last of them.

That he fasted thrice forty days, is not so frequently observed, as it easily
may be concluded from his own words.

The first Fast in Exodus 24. 18. And Moses was in the mountain forty days and
forty nights: At the end of these days they made the golden Calfe.

The second Fast, Exodus 32. 30, 31. It came to pass on the morrow that Moses
said unto the People, Ye have sinned a great sin^e, and now I will go up into
the mount, etc. and Moses returned unto the Lord, etc. which he explaineth,
Deuteronomy. 9. 18. I fell down^ before the Lord, as at the first, forty days and
forty nights, etc.

The third Fast when he goes up with the new hewed Tables. Ex^d. 34. 28. And
he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights, etc.

All which being reckoned together from the day after the giving of the ten
Commandments, or from the seventh day of the month Sivan, it will be found
that his last fast, when he had obtained pardon for Israel, and the Tables
renewed, ended on the tenth day of Tisri: on which day he came down with the
glad tidings of reconciliation: in mem^riall of which, that day was ever after
observed for the Feast of expiation: upon the tyding^ of this, and of the
making of the Tabernacle the People begin to dispose of their tents, and to
build them booths, because it will be long ere the work be finished, and they
remove from Sinai: for this the fifteenth day of the month is instituted for
the feast of Tabernacles, ever after.

Hence forward is the Tabernacle begun, and is half a yeer^ in making within a
very little.

SECT. XXXI. The sornte, or Idea, and representation of the Tabernacle.
THe form and fabrick^ of the Tabernacle is thrice re^earsed in the pattern,
in the making, and in the setting up, as if by this threefold coard of
description, the Holy Ghost would draw all to a serious observation.

Moses saw a glorious Tabernacle pitched in Mount Sinai to be the pattern of
his, as his was to be the pattern of a more glorious: According to the exact
form of this that he saw, was he to make his: This taught Moses and Israel,
that the making and service of their Tabernacle, did only serve to the
Pattern and shadow of heavenly things, Heb. 8. 5. Christ is the true
Tabernacle, by, and in whom God dwells among men. Joh. 2. 21. Heb. 9. 11. Now
as there was a Tabernacle pitched before God in Sinai, before there was one
made in Israel, so was Christ's inca^nation in the decree of God, long before he
was exhibited in the flesh. Upon the making of Moses his Tabernacle, this in
the mount vanished, as that of Moses was to do upon the coming of the true
one, Christ.

The Tabernacle was Isreal's moveable Temple, and so at every flitting might
teach them to look for one that should not be moved. It consisted of three
parts, the holiest, the holy, and the Court, as our Churches do, of the
Chancell, Church, and Churchy^rd. It was always pitched East and West,
whenever it was set down, as our Churches stand, but with this difference,
that the chiefest place in the Tabernacle, or holiest of all, answering to our
Chancels, stood Westward, and Israel worshipped with their faces Westward,
because they would not imitate the Heathen, who worshipped toward the
Sunrising. And in their services looked always toward us Gentiles in the
West, as expecting us to be joined to their God with them.

SECT. XXXII. The dimensions of the Tabernacle.
THe Tabernacle was thirty cubits long, for twenty plankes of a cubit and a
half breadth apeece made one side, or the length of it, and it was ten cubits
broad, as shall appe^re hereafter. But first observe these two things.

First, That those which are translated boards, were indeed planks of a good
thickness, even of nine inches thick apeece, for it is said, in the fastening
of the sides of the Tabernacle, that a bar of Shittim wood, ran through the
thickness of the boards, as they stood edging oneto another. Now this bar
was no small one, for it was the chief strength of the side, and therefore
must have a large hole bored to run through, and consequently, it must be a
thick planke that would bear such a hole, and not an inch, or two inch board.

Secondly, The cubi^ by which the Tabornacle is measured, was but half a yard,
or the common cubit, and not the Sanctuary or holy cubit, which was a full
yard. For, first, it is said that every planke was a cubi^ and a hal^e broad;
if this were a yard and a half, do but imagine where plankes of such a
breadth should be had: Secondly, every planke was ten cubits long; if this were
ten yards, imagine how they should be carried: Thirdly, every two silver Bases
were as long as a planke was broad; now two talents would fall short of
reaching to a yard and an half. Lastly, the Altar of burnt offering was three
cubits high; if this were three yards, who could reach to serve at it? These
things considered, you find that the cubit here spoken of, is but half a
yard, and this will help well in measuring all the things to be spoken of
after.

SECT. XXXIII. The peoples contribution to the silver foundation: and its form
and posture.
MEasure out in your imagination, an unequal square, or a plot of ground, of
thirty cubits, or fifteen yards long, and of ten cubits or five yards broad,
such was the compass of the Tabernacle betwixt Wall and Wall. The Foundation
was of massy pieces of silver, showing the solidity and purity of the truth,
whereupon the Church is founded; Of these massy pieces there were an hundred in
all, and in every piece was a talent of silver. Every man in Israel from twenty
years old and upward, was to give half a Shekell, toward these foundation
pieces, whereas for other things they were not bound to a setsumme, but to give
what their hearts moved them. This might teach them, that to the fundamentals
of their Religion, they were all bound, but to other things, each one according
to the gift given him. Their manner of giving half a Shekell, you find Exodus
36. 26, 27, 28. thus. There were numbered of Israel, from twenty years old, and
upward, six hundred thousand, and three thousand five hundred and fifty men.
Reckon thus; The Talent of the Sanctuary, contained 120 pound, the pound 25
shekels, or 50 half shekels, so that every Talent contained 3000. shekels, or
6000. halves: so that six hundred thousand half shekels, given by six
hundred thousand men, do amount to a hundred talents: Now there were three
thousand five hundred and fifty men besides, which gave so many half shekels,
or one thousand seven hundred seventy five whole ones, with which were made the
hooks of pillars, etc. Exodus 38. 28. These hundred Talents of silver were thus
wrought. Each one was cast into a solid piece of thirteen inches and a half
long, and nine inches square; in the side that lay upward was a morteise hole,
near unto the end, now two and two were laid close together, end to end, and
the morteises were not in the ends that joined, but in the outmost ends.

Now every planke, whereof the sides were made, was in height five yards, but
in breadth three quarters, just as broad as two of these pieces of silver were
long, at the foot of the planke, at either corner was a tenon made, the planke
being cut down, or abating so much between the tenons, as the tenons
themselves were in length, so that when the tenons were shrunk in the
morteises, the middle of the planke settled upon the pieces or Bases.

SECT. XXXIV. The walls and juncture of the Tabernacle.
THese silver Bases then were thus laid: forty at the South side, forty at the
North side, and sixteen at the West end, laid as close together as was
possible, so that though there were so many pieces, yet was it but one entire
foundation; Here are fourscore and fifteen of the hundred talents disposed
of, in the two sides and the West end, what became of the four talents
remaining, and of the East end, we shall see hereafter.

These Bases thus laid, the plankes were set in them, one plank taking up two
Bases, twenty plankes making the South side, and twenty the North, and eight
the West end; these were five yards long apeece, and so when they were set up,
they made the Tabernacle five yards and a little more, high upon the walls; Now
for the making of these plankes sure, and to stand steadfast, the two corner
plankes were great helps, of which first, you remember the length of the
sides, namely fifteen yards or twenty plankes, of three quarters breadth
apeece. The West end had six plankes entire, besides a planke at either
corner, joynting end and sides together. These corner plankes were of the same
breadth that all the other were, and thus set: The middle of the breadth of the
one Planke, was laid close to the end of the South side, or to that planke that
was furthest West, so that a quarter of a yard of the breadth of the corner
planke, was inward, to make up the Tabernacle breadth, a quarter was taken up
with the thickness of the side planke to which it joined, and a quarter lay
outward.

Thus at the South-west, just so was it at the North-west corner. Then count;
the two corner plankes were inward a quarter of a yard apeece, and the six
plankes that stood between them of three quarters apeece, behold five yards,
just the breadth of the house between wall and wall. These corners knit end
and side together, and were strength of the building, as Christ is of his
Church, making Jews and Gentiles one spiritual Temple.

Besides these corners strengthening the Fabric, there were seven bonds to
make all sure. First, plankes to plankes were close joynted at the foot, so
that the Text calls them (...), or twins. Secondly, each planke was linked to
the next, at the top, with a golden link. Thirdly, on the side, staples of
Gold were fastened in every planke, so that four bars of Shittim wood,
overlaid with Gold, were carried in the staples, from one end of the Tabernacle
to another. Besides these, there was also another bar of the same wood, that
ran from end to end, through the body or thickness of the plankes, a hole
being bored through each planke for the purpose. By these bars Christ is
fitly resembled, who is conveyed throughout the whole Scripture, in the rings
of diverse passages and stories; In the fourth Chapter of the Ephesians, there
are seven bonds that bind the Church to unity; First, one body; secondly, one
spirit; thirdly, one hope of our calling; fourthly, one Lord; fifthly, one
Faith; sixthly, one Baptism; seventhly, one God and Father of all.

Now view in imagination the body of the Tabernacle, as it stands only planked
[without any more addition to it] with plankes of Shittim wood. The length
fifteen yards from end to end, the breadth five yards from side to side. The
sides and West end planked up five yards high and somewhat more, the foundation
of those plankes, massy pieces of silver: The top of the house, and the East
end left open, till they be covered hereafter: First then of the covering of
the top, and sides, and West end.

SECT. XXXV. Of the Curtains of the Tabernacle.
THe Tabernacle was bounded with Curtains [as lightest for carriage] which
Curtains covered top and sides. These Curtains were Tapestry work: The
ground was of fine yarne dyed blew, Purple, and Scarlet, woven together; the
embroydery was of Pictures of Cherubims.

These Curtains were in number ten, each one being twenty eight cubits, or
fourteen yards long, and four cubits or two yards broad: They were sewed
together five Curtains in one piece, and five in another: so that they made
two large pieces of Tapestry of fourteen yards long, and ten yards broad.
These two pieces are called couplings, Exodus 26. 5. And these two were thus
joined together. In the edge of either, were made fifty loopes of blew tape,
one answerable or correspondent to another; or one over against another; and
with fifty hooks or clasps of gold, he linked the loopes together, and so the
two maine pieces were made one covering or Tabernacle, Exodus 36. 13.

Quest. Why were not all the ten Curtains sewed together on one piece, but
five and five sewed together, to make two pieces, and then those two thus
looped together with a button or claspe of gold?

Answ. First, the Tabernacle consisted of two parts; the holy place, and the
most holy: which two were divided one from another by a veil; of which
hereafter: Now according to this division of the house, was also the division
of the curtains. For Exodus 26. 32. it is plain that the veil that parted the
holy from the most holy, was hung just under these golden claspes that knit the
five and five Curtains together: So that five Curtains lay over the holy
place, and the other five over the most holy, but with this difference: The
holy place was ten yards long, and the five Curtains sewed together were just
so broad, and so they covered only the top and sides, but hung not down at
the end, which was Eastward; but the most holy was but five yards long, and the
five Curtains over, that did not only cover the top, but also hung down at
the West end, to the silver bases.

Secondly, the looping together of the Curtains, five and five on a piece,
with a golden tie, does sweetly resemble the uniting of the two natures in
Christ, divinity and humanity, into one person, which two natures were not
confounded, as Curtains sewed together, but were sweetly knit together by
golden and ineffable union.

Thirdly, this might also fully signify the two Churches of Jews and
Gentiles, knit together by Christ, that so they make but one spiritual
Tabernacle.

Now come and measure the Curtains again, imagining them thrown length way
over the Tabernacle: they were fourteen yards long, and twenty yards broad,
when they were all sewed and looped together: This breadth covered the length
of the building, which was fifteen yards, and it hung down behind the West
end, even to the foundation. The East end was still left open. Of the length of
them, five yards were taken up in covering the flat top of the house, which was
five yards broad between wall and wall: A quarter of a yard was taken up on
either side, with covering the thickness of the plankes: so that on either
side they hung down four yards and one quarter, which was three quarters of a
yard short of the silver foundation, or little less.

SECT. XXXVI. Of the Goate-haire Curtains.
TO help this defect, as also to shelter the rich Curtains from weather, were
made Curtains of Goats hair, eleven in number; in breadth each one two
yards, as was the breadth of other, but being one Curtain more then the other,
they were two yards broader then the other, when they were all coupled
together. Each Curtain was thirty cubits, or fifteen yards long, and
consequently a yardlonger then those spoken of before. These were sewed, six
together on one piece, and five on another. These two maine pieces were linked
together, with fifty claspes of brass, as the other were with fifty of gold.
But when these curtains were laid upon the other over the Tabernacle, they
were not so laid as these brazen loopes, did light just upon the golden ones,
over the veil, but three quarters of a yard more Westward, so that the five
curtains that went West did reach to the ground, and half a curtain to spare,
Exodus 26. 12. The other six that lay East, reached to the end, covered the
pillars whereon that veil hung, and they hung half a curtain breadth, or a
yard over the entrance. Their length of fifteen: yards reached half a yard
lower on either side, than the other curtains did, and yet they came not to
the ground by a quarter of a yard, so that the silver foundations were always
plain to be seen, every where but at the West end.

Thus had the Tabernacle two coverings of curtains; yet both these on the flat
roof would not hold out raines, and weather, wherefore there was made for the
top a covering of Rams skins dyed red, signifying well the blood of Christ
the shelter of the Church.

Above that was also another covering of Tahash skins, a beast not perfectly
known what he was, but well Englished, a Badger, and guessed well because of
his during hide. Thus if you view this building erected, and thus covered, you
see the silver foundation always open to view. Half a yard above that hid
only under one curtain: all the side above that under two, and the top with
four.

SECT. XXXVII. Of the most holy place.
THe Priests entered into the Tabernacle at the East end of it, and so must we;
where pace up ten yards forward, and you come to the veil which parted
between the Holy place, and the most Holy of all. The Holiest place of all,
was filled and furnished before the veil was hung up, and so it shall be first
handled. This place was five yards long, five yards high, and five yards broad;
a perfect square, the figure of firmness, herein fitly signifying Heaven.

In this place, at the West end, stood the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord of
all the world, Joh. 3. 11. typifying Christ, by whom God is come into Covenant
with Gentiles as well as Jews.

The Arc was made like a Chest, hollow, that it might receive things within
it. It was a yard and a quarter long, and three quarters broad, and three
quarters high, made of Shittim boards, and it was gilded both within and
without, representing Christ's purity, both in inward thoughts and outward
actions. It had no feet, but the bottom stood upon the ground, a figure of
Christ's abasing himself upon the earth. On the outside of the uppermost brink
was made a Golden Crown round about, representing [say the Jewes] the Crown of
the Law, but most fitly, Christ Crowned with glory. At each corner was struck
in, a staple or ^ing of Gold, wherein were put two staves of Shittim wood
gilded over, to bear the Arc withal, which staves were never to be taken
out, but there to stay continually, teaching the Priests, as some say, to be
ready pressed for their service: but rather shadowing out Christ's Deity,
supporting his humanity, never to be parted from it. Now for the cover of this
chest, or Arc, it was made of pure Gold, beaten or formed to the just length
and breadth of the Arc, that when it was laid on it touched the Golden Crown
round about. At either end was made a Cherub, or the form of an Angel, like a
child, standing bowed, with wings reaching over the Arc, so that the wings of
one Cherub touched the wings of another. They were of Gold, beaten out of the
same piece that the cover of the Arc was of. Their faces were one to another,
and both toward to the cover of the Arc. This cover both by the Old and New
Testament, is called the Propitiatory, vulgarly in our English, the Mercy-seat.
So called, because from hence God mercifully spoke to his People. View this
part well, and you see Christ fully.

First, the two Cherubims bowed toward the Mercy-seat. So all Angels to Christ.

Secondly, They looked each at other, but both toward the Mercy-seat. So both
Testaments Old and New, look each at other, and both at Christ. So do the two
Churches, of Jews and Gentiles.

Thirdly, This covered the Law: so does Christ that it plead not against his
people to condemn them.

Fourthly, God speaks to Israel from hence, so God by Christ to us, Heb. 1. 2.

SECT. XXXVIII. Of the Holy place without the veil.
THus was the Sanctum Sanctorum, or the most holy of all: for fabric and
furniture. To separate this from the holy place was hung up a veil, of the
same stuff and work that the rich curtains of the Tabernacle were: The
hanging up of this veil was thus: Just under the golden claspes that linked
the curtains together, were set up four pillars of Shittim wood gilded over,
upon four Bases of silver, such as the plankes stood upon, and these make up
the hundred pieces, or Talents spoken of before: The pillars stood a yard from
each other, and the two outmost stood a yard from the walk; at the top of each
pillar was fastened a golden hook, on the which the veil hung, five yards
broad, and five yards high; This veil represented Christ's flesh or humanity,
celebrated by four Evangelists, the four Pillars that bear up that story.

This place without the veil was ten yards long and five yards broad: Into
this might the Priests come, and Moses the Prince by a special warrant. The
furniture of this was, the Shewbread Table, the golden Candlestick, and the
gilded Altar.

SECT. XXXIX. The Table of Shewbread.
ON the P^iests right hand, as he walked up this place was the Table of
Shewbread, of this form and matter, and for this end.

A Table frame was made two cubits long, and a cubit broad, and a cubit and a
half high; the matter of it was Shittim wood all overlaid with Gold: Equal
with the top of the frame was a curious wrought border of gold, of a hand
breadth; the higher edge equal with the top of the frame, and the border so
broad below; on the higher edge of this border was set a golden Crown, which
went quite about the frame, and within this Crown was the cover laid; At each
corner or foot was fastened a staple or ring of gold, close by the lower edge of
the golden border. As the feet, so these rings were four, wherein were put
staves of Shittim wood gilt with gold, to bear the Table.

Upon this Table were set twelve Cakes or Loaves, resembling the twelve Tribes,
who had their daily bread from God. As on Aarons shoulders, six and six names
of Tribes, so on this Table six and six Cakes, for the Tribes were set one upon
another. Each Cake had in it two Omers, which measure was significative. For so
much Manna every Israelite gathered against the Sabbath in the Wilderness,
Exodus 16. and on the Sabbath were these Cakes set on the Table, to put Israel
in mind by the very measure and day of their sustenance in the Wilderness.
These Cakes were called the bread of faces, and the Table, the Table of faces,
because they were set before God continually; showing that Isreal's provision
was from and before God.

Under the lowest Cake was (...)
a golden dish wherein that Cake lay, and between every Cake was (...)
a golden dish: on the top of either row lay (...)
a golden dish whelmed down; and upon that stood (...)
a dish of Gold with Frankincense in it. These told Israel of Gods special
providence toward every several Tribe.

SECT. XL. The Golden Candlestick.
OVer against this Table on the South side or on the left hand stood the golden
Candlestick of one massy piece. The form of it was thus; The foot of it was
of Gold, from which there went up a shaft straight, which was the middle light;
(...) the foot was a golden dish wrought Almond wise, and a little above that a
golden knop, and above that a golden flower.

Then issued out two branches on either side one, which were carried bowed in
equal rate till they might be brought up straight to be as high as the middle
shaft out of which they proceeded. Upon either of these branches were wrought
three golden Cups Almond-wise, that is, on sharp Scollop shell fashion, for
ornament; above which was a golden knop or bosse, and above that a golden
flower, and near above that the socket wherein the light was to be set. Thus
were these two lowest branches: Above which, in the middle shaft was a golden
bosse, and then out came two branches more in formejust like the other; above
the coming out of which in the shaft was another knop or bosse, and out came
two others like the former; from thence the shaft upward was decked with three
golden Scollop cups or dishes, a knop and flower. Thus the head of all the
branches stood in an equal height and distance. Here were seven golden
Candlesticks representing the seven Spirits of the Messiah, spoken of Esaias 11.
2. 3. and from thence by the Talmudists and Apocalyptique. The variety of
sevens here might remember Israel of the seven days of Creation. As the twelve
Cakes represented the twelve Tribes, so the light of the Candlestick set
before them, signified the light of the Law whereby they were to be guided: And
the lights always standing here, as well as the Loaves there, tell Israel that
they have as much need of this as of their daily su^tenance.

SECT. XLI. The Altar of Incense.
Between the Candlestick and the Table stood the Altar of Incense: fitly
teaching that it is the incense of prayer that sanctifies both our spiritual
food signified by the light of the Candles, and our bodily food by the loaves.
This Altar was made of Shittim wood, overlaid with gold: It was a cubit long,
as much broad, and two cubits high. At each corner it had a horn, made of the
same piece with the corner post; Horns, top and side were all gilded with
gold: On the end of the frame upward was set a (...)
golden Crown; at the foot of which Crown, on either side were struck two
golden rings or staples, in which were put two staves of Shittim wood, overlaid
with gold to bear this Altar withal. This Altar was set near the veil, just
in the midst of the breadth of the room [before the midst of the Arc
which was within the vaile] distant from either wall two yards and a quarter.
On the north side of it stood the Table, which being set length way to the
wall, took up half a yard of the breadth of the house: so between it and the
Altar was a passage or way a yard and quarter broad. The Candlestick was of
the same br^adth with his branches spread, that the Table was oflength, and so
was set over against it, showing five inches between every socket wanting one
inch at the whole: This being set as far from the wall as the outmost edge of
the Table that stood on the other side of the house, afforded the same space
between the Al^ar and it that the Table did. Thus was the furniture of this
place called the Holy. Go^ into it at the East end, and look just before you,
and there is the veil and golden Altar: on your right hand nigh the veil
twelve loaves on a golden Table: on your left hand seven Lamps burning in
seven golden Candlesticks made of one piece, by which you see golden snuffers
and dishes for the cleansing of the Lamps morning and night. Look upon the
walls on either side, and you see nothing but gold; over your head, and there
you behold pictures of Cherubims curiously wrought in rich Curtains: It is not
fit every eye should see so rich a room; therefore to prevent this, the east
end had a hanging like the veil within, of the same dimensions, and of the
same matterials wrought with needle. This was hung upon five Pillars of Shittim
wood overlaid with gold, each Pillar was fastened in a base of brass, and at
the top had a golden hook on which the covering hung.

Quest. Whether was the veil hung within the Pillars or without?

Answ. Without, so that it hid the Pillars from the view of the people, else
had not the building been uniforme, all the Timber of the housebeing hid with
hangings, and this not. Thus was the Tabernacle made, with all the furniture of
it; Now are we to consider the outmost part of it, or the Court of the people.

SECT. XLII. Of the Court of the people.
THis Fabric of the Tabernacle was enclosed with another pale of curtains
hanging round about it. On the South side of the house, twenty cubits distant
from the house, were set a row of Shittim Pillars, twenty in number: Each
Pillar was set in a base of brass distant from each other five cubits,
counting from the middle of one Pillar to another. So that the twenty made a
length of an hundred cubits: in each Pillar was struck a hook of silver, and
each Pillar had a border of silver wrought about it. Thus were they on the
South side, just so were they on the North. At the West end, 35. cubits from
the house were set ten Pillars in the same manner and distance, making the
breadth of the Count fifty cubits at either end, for just in the middle, the
house took up ten cubits breadth: just so were the Pillars set at the East
end, at the same distance from the house, and from one another. On the sides
upon the hooks of the Pillars were hangings fastened, made of linen well
twisted, of an hundred cubits in length and five in height, at the west end
were the like, just half so long, and just so high: At the East end there was
some difference, for that had three pieces to make it up. On either side of the
entrance was a piece hung of fifteen cubits long, and of the same height: Just
in the middle was a piece of twenty cubits long; of the same height with the
other hangings, but of more rich stuff; for whereas the other were made only
of linen, this was of the same stuff that the rich c^rtaines were, curiously
wrought with the needle. To fasten these hangings that they might not fly up
in the lower end, there were cords fastened to them, and these cords tied to
brazen pins, which pins were fastened in the ground, and so made all sure. Thus
were also the curtains that covered the house served with pins of the same
metal, with cords fastened to them in like manner, to prevent the like
inconvenience. So was the Court called the Court of the people, because into
this the people had entrance, as well as the Priests and Levites.

SECT. XLIII. Of the Altar of Burnt Offerings.
IN the Court of the people stood the Altar of burnt sacrifice up toward the
Tabernacle, that the people might stand to beho d the sacrifice offered, with
their faces toward the holy place; only the Laver stood above the Altar
between it and the Tab^^nacle.

This Altar was made of Shittim wood, five cubits or two yards and a half
long, and as much broad, and one yard and a half high, thus made: First a
strong frame like the frame of a Table of these dimensions: The open places in
the frame were made up with boards. All this bulk was overlaid with brass, at
each corner was a horn made of the same wood and piece that each corner post
was of. Thus stood it hollow, and within the hollow, just in the middle
between bottom and top, was set a brazen grate, made in manner of a net, that
the Ashes might fall through; upon this grate the fire burnt continually and
never went out. At each corner of this grate was a brazen ring, which at each
corner came through the Altar frame and hung out of the frame; in these rings
were ^^aves of Shittim wood overlaid with brass, put, which made the frame,
and the grate sure together, and so were they also carried together.

To this Altar belonged diverse appurtenances made of brass: As first brazen
Pans, in which they carried forth the Ashes of the Altar. As also brazen
shovels to scrape the Ashes together. Then brazen bason^ wherein to take the
blood of the sacrifice: Brazen hooks, with which they turned the burning
pieces into the fire if any part lay out, that so every part might be surely
burnt. Lastly, brazen dishes or Censors, in which the Priests took burning
coals from the Altar to carry into the Holy place, there to offer incense.

SECT. XLIIII. Of the Laver for water.
IN this court also stood a vessel of brass, upon a foot or base of brass,
in which vessel water was kept for the Priests washing themselves, etc. The
form of this is not expressed in the Text, therefore we will look only at
the matter and the end. This vessel was made of brazen bright pieces, which
the women used to look their faces in: and out of this piece water was taken
when a suspected woman was to be tried. The end why this was set so nigh the
Altar was, that the Priests might wash themselves when they went about the
service of the Tabernacle, and that they might wash some part of the
sacrifices. This Laver fitly resembled the water of Baptism that admits us to
sacred Mysteries, and chiefly the blood of Christ that cleanses us from al
filthiness of flesh and spirit.

SECT. XLVI. High Priests Garments.
NExt unto his flesh he had a coat wrought checker work, this reached down to
his heels: such a coat as this each one (...)
of his sons had, Exodus 39. 27. This was made of fine linen: and it was
girded to him about his loins, with a needle-wrought girdle, of diverse colors.

About this he put another coat, called the coat of the Ephod, because the
Ephod, being put upon this did gird it. This (...)
coat was all of one stuff and color, namely of fine yarne dyed purple. This
coat he put not on after the ordinary fashion of putting on coats which were
open before, but this he put on like a Surplesse, over his head, for it had a
hole in the top wherethrough he put his head, and this hole was edged about
with an edging of the same stuff woven in, that the hole should not rent. At
the skirts of this coat, were made Pomegranates of linen and woollen of
diverse colors, and Bells of gold, so that there were a Bell and a Pomegranate,
a Bell and a Pomegranate, round about: This coat was not so long as the under
coat, for then the Bells would have drawn on the ground, and would not have
been heard, which to have missed had been death to Aaron: this represented to
the Priests, that the sound of good doctrine, and fruit of good living, must
always be about them, as these Bells and Pomegranates: This coat also did
fitly resemble Christ's humane nature. First, as this was of one stuff without
mixture, so that, without corruption. Secondly, as this was put on after an
extraordinary manner, so Christ put on humanity by an extraordinary conception
and generation. Thirdly, as was the edge about the hole to keep it from
renting, such was the unseparable union of Christ's two natures. Fourthly, as
were the Bells and Pomegranates, such were his life and doctrine.

SECT. XLVII. High Priests Ephod.
ABove this he put the Ephod, the materials of which were fine yarne or threads
dyed blew, and purple, and scarlet, and (...)
with every thread of these, was twisted a thread of gold, fitly showing the
purity and holiness of the Priest in every action, as also most fitly
resembling the luster of the deity shining in each of Christ's humane actions.

The word Ephod, does generally signify any thing that girdeth a man, so the
word originally signifies. More particularly it betokens garments or other
things used in divine servic^: So Samuel ministered before Eli in a linen
Ephod, or a linen coat girded to him. So David when he brought up the Arc to
Jerusalem, being desirous to be as Priest-like as he might, he was clothed
with such a garment, a linen Ephod: So the abomination which Gideon made Judge.
8. 27. is called an Ephod. Because he made it to resemble that Ephod which he
had seen upon the High Priest at Shiloh. Most especially the Ephod signifies
the upmost garment of the High Priest when he served at the Altar or
Tabernacle. The form of this was somewhat like the aprons which some workmen
wear, tied over their shoulders and covering their breast: Such was this, a
rich piece of stuff, of the materials before named, the breadth of the
Priests breast; at either side it had a shoulder piece of the same piece, which
went over the Priests shoulders and were fastened behind one to another: Before
his breast the piece came down to his paps, and there was the lower edge of
it, upon which was woven a piece to gird it withal, of the same stuff and
piece, so that it was girded over his paps or heart; whence John speaks, when
he says, he saw Christ girded about the Paps with a golden girdle, Apoc. 1.
13. Upon the shoulder pe^ces were two precious s^ones set in ouches of gold,
one on the one side, and another on the other. The stones were (...) or Beryll,
vulgarly Onyx, the stone which among the twelve belonged to Joseph. In these
two stones were engraven the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, ^ixe on one
and ^ixe on another.

Thus when the Priest appeared before the Lord, he bare the charge of all
Israel upon his shoulders: A full resemblance of Christ.

Upon the shoulder pieces likewise were two bosses of gold near to these
stones, unto which the gold chains that tied the Breast Plate to the Ephod,
were made so fast that they might not part one from another. Thus was the
curious work of the Ephod, with its girdle and other appurtenances, a full
signification of the pr^ciousnesse, and yet heavy charge of the Priesthood.

SECT. XLVIII. The Breast Plate.
Upon the Ephod was the Breast Plate fastened; it was called the Breast Plate of
Judgment, because from it God answered (...)
by Urim and Thummim, Numb. 27. 21. The materials of this were the same that
the Ephods were, viz. Fine yarne or thread, of various colors, and a thread of
gold twisted with each, which thread woven together, made as it were cloth of
gold. This Breast Plate was of this clo^th, of such a piece, as when it was
foulded double, was a just square of a span every way: Thus as the best part of
all the Tabernacle, viz. the most holy, was a perfect square, so is the best
piece of Aarons garments. This piece was double, because of the weight of the
ston^s in it, which required that it should be strong.

In this piece were twelve precious stones, set in four rows, three in a row,
every stone bearing upon it the Name of a Tribe.

First, 1 Reuben, 2 Simeon, 3 Levi.

Second, 1 Judah, 2 Issachar, 3 Zabulun.

Third, 1 Dan, 2 Naphthali, 3 G^d.

Fourth, 1 Asher, 2 Joseph, 3 Benjamin.

SECT. XLIX. Of the Urim and Thummim.
THat Urim and Thummim should be nothing but the name Jehovah written and put
into the Breast Plate, as some have held, ^avours more of exorcisme than a
divine Oracle.

Or that the luster, or dimnesse of the twelve stones should be the Oracle, as
others, is as strange a fancy as the former, if we consider the particulars of
Answers that have been given: As among others, that of David's, Whither shall I
go? the Vrim answered, to Hebron.

This impossibility others having espied, have averred that the Vrim consisted
of the names of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the Twelve Tribes, and that when
a question was asked, the letters that served to give the answer, either rose
up above the others, or else met strangely together, and made words to give an
answer. But if the letter T^th were to be spelled in the answer, where was it
to be had?

Leaving then these and other conjectures, let us see what light the Scripture
will give us concerning these things.

First, Urim and Thummim were not two things, but one and the same thing, and
for this reason, they are called sometime by by a single name, Number. 27. 21. 1 Samuel 28. 6. etc.

Secondly, the stones in the High Priests breast plate, are called the Urim and
Thummim, Exodus 28. 30.

Thirdly, when God answered by Urim and Thummim, the answer was not given by
any appearance in the stones, but by the mouth of the Priest. Number. 27. 21.

Fourthly, the Priest when he was to receive his answer, was to have the Ephod
on, 1 Samuel 23. 9.

Lastly, the Priest when he was to receive an answer, stood before the Arc,
Judge. 20. 27. 28.

The manner then of inquiring of the Lord by Urim and Thummim, was thus.

The things to be inquired of must be of weight and generality: for the stones
represented the Judgment of all the people, Exodus 28. 30. therefore the
inquiry by them must concern the general: Such was the general question at
Shiloh, Judge. 1. 2. Who shall first set upon the Canaanites? Such was that of
all Israel: Shall I go up against my Brother Benjamin? Judge. 20. 23. and
diverse others.

When such a scruple was to be resolved, it was told to the High Priest what he
should ask: So did David wish Abin^tech the High Priest at Nob to enquire
whether his journey should prosper, 1 Samuel 22. 10. So did the Danites to the
fained Idolatrous High Priest, Judge. 18. 5. The Priest knowing what to ask,
put on the Ephod and Breast Plate, which hung unseparably at it. This do
David's words mean, when he says to Abiathar the Priest, Bring hither the
Ephod, 1 Samuel 23. 9. And for this it was that Abiathar made sure of the Ephod,
when he fled from bleeding Nob, 1 Samuel 23. 6. Without the stones on his breast,
the Priest enquired not: for the stones represented Israel, and when the Priest
brought them before the Lord, he brought as it were Israel and their matters
before him. To go without these was to go without his errand. If Saul's
conscience could have told him of no other cause whyGod would not answer him,
as it might many, yet he might see this to be one reason undoubted, viz.
Because though he had the Arc near him, yet had he neither High Priest nor
Ephod; and seeing his cross in this that he could not be answered, his
conscience might tell him what he did when he slew the Priests of the Lord.

When the Priest knew what to enquire about, and had put on these habiliments,
he went and stood before the Ark of the Lord, and enquired about the matter,
and the Lord answered him from off the Propitiatory from between the
Cherubims, and so the Priest answered the People. Now there was some difference
in the Priests manner of inquiring, according to the situation of the Arc,
when the Tabernacle was up, the Priest went into the holy Place, and stood
close by the veil which parted the holy from the most holy, and there
inquired, and God from between the Cherubims which were within the veil, gave
him an answer.

But when the Tabernacle was down, or the Arc distant from the Tabernacle,
traveling up and down, then did the Priest in his Robes stand before the
Arc, as it stood covered with the curtains, and enquired, and the answer was
given him, in behalf of Israel whom God saw on his breast: For this reason the
stones, for whose sakes the perfect light of resolution was given, are called
the perfect light or Urim and Thummim, and the answer given from the Priests
month is called the answer by Urim and Thummim.

David once enquired of the Priest, having the Ephod, but wanting the Arc, and
God answered him, and showed him that God was not bound to means. On the
contrary Saul once enquired of the Arc, wanting the Ephod, and God answered
him not, showing him how God honored his Priests whom Saul had dishonored,
even to the Sword.

Thus have we seen the Breast-plates form, richness and glory. Form,
fouresquare a span every way: the richness, it was set with twelve precious
stones: the glory, that for the sake of these stones, that is, for their sakes
whose names these stones bare, God revealed secrets to his people. See this
breast plate fastened to the Ephod, and you see Aaron the High Priest arrayed in
his glorious garments. At each corner of the breast plate, was a golden ring
fastened. On the upper side of the piece, just upon the edge, was laid a little
golden chain, which ran like an edging lace upon the edge, and was brought
through the two rings which were at either corner one, and the ends of the
chains were made fast to bosses or loopes of gold which were on the shoulder
pieces of the Ephod by the Onyx stones. At the lower edge of the breast plate
was an edging chain, carried just in the same manner that the other was,
through two gold rings, and the chains tied to the embroidered girdle of the
Ephod, as the other were to the shoulder pieces. Breast Plate and Ephod might
not be parted, no more then might the Staves and Arc.

SECT. L. The erection of the Tabernacle.
IN the year of the World two thousand five hundred and fourteen, which was
the second year current of Isreal's departure out of Egypt, in the month
Abi^, or the first month Stilo novo, in the first day of the month, Moses set
up the Sanctuary under mount Sinai, and this was the manner of his setting it
up.

He laid the silver foundations in their ranks, and in them he set up the
plankes and strengthened them with the five bars, linking them also together
at the top with a golden haspe. He set up the four Pillars in the house
whereon to hang the veil, and the five pillars at the East end whereon to hang
that veil also. He set the Arc in the most holy place, hanging up the veil
before it. In the holy place he set the Table and Shewbread on the North side,
and the Candlestick on the South, and the Altar of perfume, just in the middle
betwixt them: And at the East end he hung up the veil to keep these things
from vulgar eyes.

The Altar and Laver he set up before the entrance, and encompassed them, and
the Tabernacle it self with a pale of hangings round about.

Thus was the Sanctuary erected, and was lovely to them that beheld it, being
the glory and the strength of Israel. Then did the cloud of glory flit from off
the Tent of Moses, and lighted upon the Sanctuary, and dwelt there more
gloriously then on the other.

And thus ends Exodus in a cloud, under which we are to look for a more
perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, nor of this building, in which the
Godhead should dwell bodily.

FINIS.
Judico Libellum hunc (cui titulus, A Handful of Gleanings out of the Book of
Exodus) insigni doctrina refertum, summa cum utilitate imprimendum.

Ja. Cranford.


