A TRVE and EXACT HISTORY Of the Island of BARBADOS. Illustrated with a Mapp of
the Island, as also the Principal Trees and Plants there, set forth in their
due Proportions and Shapes, drawn out by their several and respective Scales.
Together with the Ingenio that makes the Sugar, with the Plots of the several
Houses, Rooms, and other places, that are used in the whole process of
Sugar-making; viz, the Grinding-room, the Boyling-room, the Filling-room, the
Curing-house, Still-house, and Furnaces; All cut in Copper. By RICHARD LIGON
Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard: 1657.

To my most Honored, and highly esteemed Friend, Dr BRIAN DUPPA, Ld Bp of
SALISBVRIE.
Honored Sir,
THE first and last time you gave me the favor to kiss your hands, since my
return from the Southern and Western parts of the World, you were pleased to
make some enquiries of me, concerning the Island of Barbados, a place you much
desired to be satisfied in: But, by reason my stay was but short, I could give
You but a slight and scant relation, of the many particulars you were desirous
to be informed in; so that for the present, I rather poynted at, then gave a
home-satisfaction, to what was most fit to be known, of the Beauties and Riches
of that place. Whereupon you were pleased to impose on me a task, (very unfit
for me to undertake, being one altogether unlettered) to deliver in writing,
the sum of all I knew, concerning that Island. Though I were sufficiently
conscious of mine own inabilities; yet, my obedience to your commands, led me
on, to give you a private satisfaction, in a thing you so earnestly desired,
which was all I aimed at: But, upon perusal of it, you were pleased to give me
a far greater encouragement, then I expected, with your allowance for the
publishing of it, for the common benefit of those, who intend to spend their
times, and venture their fortunes upon such undertakings* so that I wanted but
means or friends, for the putting it forth; but, those two being absent, it has
layne in the dark this two years. You were then likewise pleased, to cast your
eyes upon some pieces of Limning, which I had done since my return, (by my
memory only) of the Trees, Plants, and Fruits, which I had seen growing upon
that place; things in themselves of infinite beauty, but losing much of their
life and luster, by my ill handling; yet, you were pleased to afford them an
approbation, beyond their value, which gave me an ambition, to do somewhat in
that kind, more like a Master; and to that purpose, was designing a piece of
Landscape, and one of Story, wherein I meant to express the postures of the
Negres, in their several kinds of Sports and Labors; and with it, the
beauties of the Vegetables, that do adorn that place, in the highest perfection
I could: But presently after, being cast into Prison, I was deprived both of
light and loneliness, two main helpers in that Art; and so being disabled to
discern or judge of Colors, I was compelled to express my designs in Black
and White: So that now you will find exposed to your view, a piece of wild
Grotesco, or loose extravagant Drolorie, rather than a Regular piece of Story
or Landscape.

Rough drawn, and unproportionably stell'd, though it be, I here present it;
which, though it be but as a Drop to the Ocean, or a Mite to the treasury of
your Knowledge; yet, in obedience to your commands, which have a powerful
operation on me, I could do no less then give you an account of what I had
done, howweak and unperfect soever. And so begging pardon for the faults
committed, both in the Language, and ill contrivance of my Discourse, I humbly
take my leave, and rest.

Honored Sir, Your most humble Servant: R. LIGON.
Upper Bench Prison, July 12th 1653.
The Letter of the Bishop of Sar. to me then in Prison, after he had perused my
Book.
SIR,
YOU can best tell, with what pleasure you past over your Voyage to the
Barbados: But, whatsoever it was, your dangers at Sea, and your long sickness
on Land, had been enough to sour it, had not the condition of the times made
any place more acceptable, than your Native Country. But, the pleasure which
you have given me, in reading this Narrative, is without all these mixtures:
For, without any hardship at all, I have in a few days gone the same voyage,
viewed the Island, weighed all the Commodities and Incommodities of it; and all
this with so much pleasure, that I cannot, without great injustice, forbear
telling you, that though I have read formerly many Relations of other parts of
the World, I never yet met with so exact a piece, as this of yours. Your
diligence has been great in so short a time, to make these Observations; but,
your expressions of them are such, as show, that no ingenious Art has escaped
you. You say, that in your younger time, you acquainted your self with Music
and Painting; and had you not said so, the reading of this Book would have made
me say it for you; for, it is so Musically made up, and all the descriptions so
Drawn to the life, that I know no Painting beyond it. And for the question you
put to me, whether you should publish it or no, I desire you would make no
doubt of it; for first, I know none that has written of this Argument before;
and next, I am persuaded, that having read this Description of yours, none that
come after will venture upon it. Only, I have one request to you, that your
kindness to me, (who without any design, gave you the occasion of doing it)
may not lead you into such an insufferable error, as to choose me out as a fit
person to inscribe it to, who am so much in the shade, that I must not own my
self. I am willing to believe, that though Honor be at this time at a very
low Ebb, and, by the iniquity of the times, is much fallen within the Banks;
yet, the Channel is not so dry, but you may meet there with some Noble
person, that may with more advantage, take you and your Book into the same
Cock-boat with him, and keep you this Winter both from cold and hunger. And
therefore, in great earnestness I desire you, to look over your Catalogue of
Friends; and, though you cannot find one that loves you better, yet, to make
choice of him, that can protect you better. And so with my prayers for you,
that your afflictions here may be so managed by you, as to lead you to Joys
hereafter, I rest.

Your most affectionate Friend, Br. Sar.
Richmond, September. 5th. 1653.
To my much Honored and Ingenuous Cousin, Mr Richard Ligon, upon his Relation
of his Voyage to the Barbados.
SInce you vouchsafe me sight, I needs must fall,
To actual sin against your Original,
Should I not more then tacitly express
It Is worth, as well as mine own thankfulness.
Omissive duties, and committed facts
In man, you know, an equal guilt contracts.
And (though your judge should know the several Arts,
Both what the College and the Court imparts:
And Jurates ought to be like the twelve Signs,
Such Asterismes, where Sol himself confines)
A common Suffrage nerethelesse may aim,
(Not to give verdict) b^t the gift proclaim.
That judgment let me enter. They indite,
That here is vast profit, mixed with high delight;
That what is supposed a Narrative, will be
To him that reads, a Natural History.
For in that Horison, your pen does miss,
Nor Heaven, Earth, Sea, nor ought that in them is.
Not a new Star can escape your Observation,
Nor the least Insect pass your Contemplation.
Nor use you shortness, nor prolixity;
But first describe, then speak its property.
Me thinks, as Pliny, you are their Relator;
And are as Adam too, their Nomenclator.
For, to your Insects, Birds, and Vegetives,
You give not known, but due Appellatives.
Their rich descriptions, when you paint, I see
Colors so lively, and such Symmetry:
But that I Have seen the hand, that guides the quill,
A Pencill use, 'twere scarce in Limning skill.
And when you descant richly, thus, I see
Composed in several parts, and all agree,
How Chords and Discords too, you do devise,
From Sympathies, and from Antipathies.
Your Fuges and Points into a Canon twine,
All true to the Ground, that is your main design:
And all Concentring to so sweet an Air,
Would ravish Philomels, make Swans despair.
Your skill above famed Orpheus I advance,
Since thus your Creatures Play, his did but Dance.
To such as only seek their benefit,
You do infallibly discover it:
You show therein, 3000l. will clear
No less then 7000l. a year.
And that not in a juggling Chymick sense,
But drawn from reason and experience.
The Site, Clime, Food, the Customs, Laws, and Trade,
To each inquisitor is open laid.
Your Georgick strain seems to extract the marrow
Of Marcus, Cato, Columel, and Varro;
As if that there you had the grouth and age
Of a Palmeto, to improve each page*
And with so great an art and industry,
As if you would studied naught but Husbandry.
When of your Vegetives you make relation,
You rather make than speak of a Plantation,
Your leaves affording shape, taste, and delight
To th'Sense, the fruit gives to the Appetite.
If Pythagorean Doctrine were Divine,
I would be transmigrated to your Pine.
The Cane or Mine, (that makes that Spot of ground
As rich, as any 'twixt the Poles is found)
Is here so full and happily expressed:
You Candy that, which does preserve the rest:
And its Ingenio seems to be a Lecture
(As it is described) o'th Art of Architecture.
The Texture of the whole you have move so nice,
Your fine spun thread, warpt, wooft with Artifice.
It seems a Landscape enrich Tapestry,
Embroidered with Natures Novelty,
Attireing all in such a lovely Dress,
Rich, Genuine, and full of Courtlinesse:
That as Great Britain sometimes I have seen,
So you have Barbados drawn just like a Queen.
GEORGE WALSHE.

A TRUE AND EXACT HISTORY OF THE ISLAND OF BARBADOS.
HAving been Censured by some (whose Judgments I cannot control, and
therefore am glad to allow) for my weakness and Indiscretion, that having
never made proof of the Sea's operation, and the several faces that watery
Element puts on, and the changes and chances that happen there, from Smooth to
Rough, from Rough to Raging Seas, and High going Billows, (which are killing
to some Constitutions,) should in the last Scene of my life, undertake to run
so long a Risco from England to the Barbados; And truly I should without their
help conclude my self guilty of that Censure, had I not the refuge of an old
proverb to fly to, which is, (Need makes the old wife trot:) for having lost
(by a Barbarous Riot) all that I had gotten by the painful travells and cares
of my youth; by which means I was stripped and rifled of all I had, left
destitute of a subsistence, and brought to such an Exigent, as I must famish or
fly; and looking about for friends, who are the best supporters in so
staggering a condition, found none, or very few, whom griefs and afflictions
had not deprest, or worn out, Banishment absented, or Death devoured; so that
in stead of these near and Native comforters, I found my self a stranger in
my own Country, and therefore resolved to lay hold on the first opportunity
that might convoy me to any other part of the World, how far distant soever,
rather then abide here. I continued not many weeks in this expectation, when a
friend, as willing to shift his ground as I, gave me an Overture which I
accepted, and so upon the sixteenth day of June 1647. we embarked in the
Downs, on the good Ship called the Achilles; a vessel of 350 tons the Mr.
Thomas Crowder of London; and no sooner were we all aboard, but we presently
weighed Anchor, and put to Sea; in so cold weather as at that time of the
year, I have not felt the like; and continued so till we came to Falmouth
Harbor: where we put in, and rested for a night; but in our passage thither,
were very uncertain upon what Coast we were, by reason of the unsteadinesse
of the winds, and cloudinesse of the weather; so that I perceived more
troubles and doubts in the Seamen in that short passage, than in all the voyage
after. But, the weather clearing up, the Master and Mates drew out several
plots and Landscapes: which they had formerly taken upon the Coast of France
and England, (which are of great use in the narrow Seas,) by which they were
well assured where they were; for there they seldom use Loggline, or
Backstaffe, but attend only the Tides* Compass, and Card; nor is there any
use of other directors in so narrow a room. We were (as I remember) about 10.
days sailing to Falmouth, and had with us a small ship of about 180. tons,
called the Nonesuch; of which Captain Middleton was owner, a very good seaman,
and a Planter in Barbados: but himself then remaining in London.

The next day we put to Sea, and continued our course to the South-west, (with
somewhat a Scant wind,) partly to avoid the high going Billows of the Bay of
Biskey: but chiefly to stand aloof from Pirates and Pickaronoes: which are
very frequent upon the Coasts of Spain, and Barbary; and as we past along, I
perceived a difference in the way of our Ships: for in slack winds, our
consort the Nonesuch would run us out of sight in four or five hours
sail; but in strong and stiff winds, we did the like with her. So that I
guest the larger the sails, the swifter the way; provided, they were alike
built in the model of their keeles, but I leave that to be resolved by the
Seamen, or that Admirable Architect of Moving-Horses, Mr. Pe^t.

About the Latitude of 45. degrees, we met with a Ship coming from Guinny,
but bound for London; the Captains name was Blague, a very civil Gentleman who
halde us, came aboard us, and invited diverse Gentlemen that were there aboard
his ship: which was a Friggot of about 400. tons, her loading Gold and
Elephants teeth; the Man was exceeding civil to us, and gave to every
Gentleman of our Company, a present of such rarities as he brought from Guinny,
and Binny. We stayed together almost a whole day, the weather being very calm,
and almost no wind at all; in the evening, a fresh breese began to blow, which
served us both in our several ways, and so saluting each other with our
ordinance we took leave.

About this time, our Consort the Nonesuch parted with us, she directly for
the Carribby Islands, we for St. Jago, one of the Islands of Cape Verd; where we
were to trade for Negros, Horses, and Cattle; which we were to sell at the
Barbados. So, keeping our course about 80. Leagues from the Coast of Spain and
Barba^ie, the first land we discovered, was the I Will of Porto Santo; which
lies in 33. degrees to the Noreward; which we left of our Larboard side: When
presently after, we had sight of the Maderas, which we sayld close by, and had
a full view of the place; so Rocky, and Mountainous, and the ground so
miserably burnt with the Sun, as we could perceive no part of it either Hill or
Valley, that had the least appearance of green, nor any tree bigger then a
small Hathorne and very few of those. Between this and three inconsiderable
Islands called the Deserts, which appeared to us like the tops of large
buildings; no unevenness or risings and fallings, but level as the top of a
large Church or Barn; but burnt worse then the other, so that instead of the
fresh and lively greenes, other Countries put on at this time of the year:
these were apparelled with Russets, or at best Phyliamorts. But it fell out
that this year the summer was there hotter then usually, and the Sea men that
were with us, gave us to understand, that they never had seen it so burnt as
now, and that the Leeward part of it was, at other times, exceeding fruitful
and pleasant, abounding with all sorts of excellent fruits, Corn, Wine, Oil,
and the best Sugars; with Horses, Cattle, Sheep, Goats, Hogs, Poultrey; of
all sorts, and the best sorts of Seafish. These Islands lie near 33. degrees
to the Noreward.

Having past between these (leaving the Maderas on of our Starboard side) we
found a constant trade-wind to carry us to the Southward, When the next Island
that came in our view, was Bona Vista; but at such a distance, as we could
hardly discern colors, but the general Landscape of the hills seemed to one
very beautiful, gently rising and falling, without Rocks or high precipices.

This Island is famous, for excellent Salt, and for Horses, which in one
property, excel all that ever I have seen; their hooves being to that degree
of hardness, and toughness, that we ride them at the Barbados, down sharp
and steepie Rocks, without shoes; and no Goats go surer upon the sides of
Rocks and Hills then they; and many of them very strong and clean limbed.

This Island, we left ten Leagues, or thereabouts on our Larboard side, and
next to it, the I Will of May; famous for store of excellent Salt.

The last of those Islands was Palma; a land so high, as after we first
discovered it; which was in the morning; we thought to have reached it that
night, but found our selves far short of it, next morning, though we had a
full gaile all that night: so much is the eye deceived in Land which lies high.
This Island is about 28 degrees to the Noreward, and from it to the Isles of Cape
Verd about 13 degrees a long way to be silent, for there is no land between
and therefore I purpose to entertain you with some Sea delights; for there is
no place so void and empty, where some lawful pleasure is not to be had, for
a man that has a free heart, and a good Conscience. But these Sea-pleasures
are so mixed with Cruelties, as the trouble of the one, abates much the delight
of the other, for here we see the great ones, eat up the little ones, as they
do at Land, and with as little remorse; yet laying that consideration aside
the Chase affords some pleasure to the eyes: for some kinds of fishes show
themselves above water, for a long while together. I have seen 20 Porpisces
very large of that kind, Cross the Prow of our Ship, one behind another in so
steady and constant a course, in chase of some other fishes; as I have seen a
kennell of large Hounds, in Windsor Forest, in the chase of a Stag; one
following another directly in a track; and the only difference I find is,
these do not spend their mouths, but what they want in that is supplied by
the goodness of their noses; for they never are at a fault, but go constantly
on. The Dolphins likewise pursue the flying Fish, forcing them to leave their
known watery Elements, and fly to an unknown one, where they meet with as
merciless enemies; for there are birds that attend the rising of those fishes;
and if they be within distance, seldom fail to make them their own. These
birds, and no other but of their kind, love to straggle so far from land; so
that it may be doubted, whether the sea may not be counted their natural
home; for we see them 500 leagues from any land, at Sun setting; and so it is
not possible they should recover land that night; and on the waves they cannot
rest, without great hazard. I have seen them sometimes light, and sit upon the
waves, but with such Caution: for fear of being taken in by a fish, as her
rest is very unsafe; unless when she is covered by the nights dark wings. This
Bird, is a kind of sea Hawke, somewhat bigger then a Lanner, and of that
color; but of a far freer wing, and of a longer continuance; and when she is
weary, she finds resting places, if the Seas be Calm; for then the ^urtles lie
and sleep upon the waves, for a long time together; and upon their backs they
sit, and sleep securely; and there, mute, prune, and oil their feathers; rouse,
and do all their Offices of nature, and have room enough for all, for some of
those Turtles are a yeard broad in the back: we took one with our long Boat,
as he lay sleeping on the water, whose body afforded all the Gentlemen, and
Officers of the Ship, a very plentiful meal; and was the best meat we tasted,
all the time we were at Sea. There are of these kinds of Fishes but two sorts,
that continue in the main; the Loggerhead Turtle, and the Hawks bill Turtle,
of which sorts, the latter is the best, and of that kind ours was that we
took. There is a third kind, called the Green Turtle which are of a leffer
Magnitude, but far excelling the other two, in wholesomnesse, and Rareness of
taste; but of them hereafter for I have no mind to part so leightly, with the
forenamed Birds of prey: For having been bred a Faulconer in my youth, I cannot
but admire the admirable swiftness of wing these birds make. They mount
sometimes upon the train, to so lofty a pitch: as, if a Faucon were there,
She might be allowed a double Cancellere in her stooping to her game: they do
it at one entire down come. Her ordinary flying for her own pleasure, and not
for prey* is commonly more free then the best Haggard Faulcon, that I have ever
seen; but the continuance of it makes it the more admirable. At the times they
grow hungry, they attend the Dolphins, who are their Spaniels; and where they
perceive the water to move, they know they are in Chase, of the flying fish;
and being near them, they rise like Coveys of Partridges by 12 and 16 in a
Covey, and fly as far as young Partridges, that are farkers, and in their
flight these birds make them their quarry.

These frighted fishes, sometimes in the night have crossed our ship, and being
stopped by the shroudes, have fallen down; and with their bodieswe have baited
hooks, and taken their pursuers the Dolphins; which we have found very
excellent meat, being dressed by a good hand, with Wine, Spice, and sweet herbs,
which we never wanted. So here we have excellent hauking, no ^eare of losing
our hawk, by going out at Cheik, or to a village to Poult, and yet eat of the
quarrie, and sometimes of the Spaniells, which is an advantage the best
faulconers miss at Land. As for the hunting here, we only see the Chase, but
suffer the hounds to flesh themselves upon the quarrie, or it may be, a royal
fish, such a one as may fill a dish to furnish Neptunes table, and by that
means we are cosen'd of our quarry. So that as I ever thought on Land, I find
the same at Sea, Hawking to be the better sport. I had almost forgot, to tell
what kind of fish this flying fish is, which is the cause of such excellent
sport, both in himself and others, he is just like a Pilchard, but his fins
larger, both in breadth and length, and as long as they are wett, so long he
flies; and for their mortal enemies the birds, they continue with us from 33.
degrees til we come to 15. and then leave us.

At which time and place, another kind undertakes us, not much bigger then a
Castrill; and as near that color as may be, but of another manner of flying:
for these fly close to the water, and turn about every wave; so that we
often lose sight of them, by interposing of the waves, and think sometimes that
a wave has overwhelmed her. The pleasure she gives the eye, is by the
giddiness of her flying, and often seems to be lost: and yet (contrary to our
expectation) appears again. But I will trouble you no longer with the
inhabitants of the Plyant Air, but dive into the Deep, to try what pleasure
that Element affords to give you delight.

There is a Fish called a Sharke, which he as is a common enemy to Sailors and
all others that venture, in Calmes, to commit their naked bodies to the sea
(for he often bites off Legs, sometimes Arms, and now and then swallows the
whole body, if the Fish be great): So when the Sailors take them, they use
them accordingly. Sometimes by putting out their eyes, and throwing them over
board; sometimes by mangling and cutting their bodies, finns, and tails, making
them a prey to others, who were merciless Tyrants themselves; And in this kind
of justice they are very Accurate.

Many of these fishes we took; some by striking with harping Irons, some with
Fishgigs, some with hooks; and amongst the rest, one very large, which
followed the Ship four hours, before we went about to take him; and
perceived before him, a little Fish which they call the Pilot Fish; This little
guide of his, swims sometimes a yeard before him, sometimes more or less, at
his pleasure; and in his greatest-adversity often cleaves to him, and like a
dear friend, sticks ^losest when he needs him most: for when he is taken,
this little fish, never fayles to fasten himself to his head, or some part
near that, and resolves to dye with him. The experience of this we found not
only in this great fish, but in all the rest we had formerly taken, for we
never took the one without the other. And the Engine we took this great Sharke
with, was a large Hook, baited with a piece of Beef; which he received into his
mouth, his belly being turned upwards, for his mouth being short of his snout a
good deal, he could not take it conveniently, his back being upward, by reason
his snout drove the line before it, but as soon as we perceived the bait to be
swallowed, we gave a sudden pull, which fastened the hook so, as we were sure
the weight of his body would not tear it out, We drew him up, and laid him in
the Wast of the Ship, where none durst abide, but the Seamen who dare do any
thing.

We had aboard diverse mastive Dogs, and amongst them, one so large and
fierce, as I have seldom seen any like him; this Dog flew to him with the
greatest Courage that might be, but could take no hold of him, by reason of his
large roundnesse and sliminesse; but if by chance he got hold of one of his
^innes, the Sharke would throw him from ^ide to side of the Ship, as if he had
been nothing; and doubtless if he had encountered him in his own Element, the
Sea, he would have made quick work with him.

Diverse of this kind we took, but none so large; he was about 16 foot long,
and 10 foot about the middle. Other fishes were took, as the Bonito, the
Spanish Maquerell, the Albucore, Dolphin, etc. which we found excellent meat,
but especially the Albucore, which is a fish of such a shape, as it pleased me
much to look on. Those we took were not much above a yard long, with forked
tails, the gristles very firm and strong, and the body near that, no bigger
then a man's wrist; but suddenly growing upward to such a greatness, as I have
seldom seen any like him, and so strong withal, as a sayler a very strong
man, holding one of them fast by the gill, when this fish moved but his tail
to get loose, gave such a spring, as he had like to have put his arm out of
joint. These kind of fishes, in a clear Sunshine evening, delight themselves
and us, by trying which of them can leap highest above water, so that it is a
pretty pastime, to see fishes so large, and gloriously colored, show
themselves so far above their natural Element, whose shapes and colors gave
such variety. But this sport we saw not often.

I will trouble you no more, with mentioning the variety of shapes and colors
of fishes, till I come to St. Jago; only one, and that a very small one; for
his body is not much bigger then a large Pomegranate, and yet his faculties are
such, as may draw more eyes to look on him and more minds to consider him,
then the Vast Whale: for though it be true, that his large body, appearing
above the surface of the water being in calmes a smooth leavell superficies,
and suddenly appearing, is one of the strangest and most monstrous sights that
can be in nature; (and the more admirable, when he is incounted by his two
mortal enemies, the Sword and Theshal fishes. For to shake them off, he leapes
more then his own length, above water, and in his fall, beats the sea with
such violence, as the froth and foame is seen a quarter of an hour after,
White, as when it is beaten by a strong West wind against a Rock; and at other
times, spouts out the water in great quantities; the height of an ordinary
Steeple.) Yet this great masterpiece of Nature, is not in my opinion so full
of wonder, nor does raise the consideration to such a height: as this little
fish the ^arvill, who can when he pleases, enjoy himself with his neighbor
fishes, under water; And when he putts on a resolution to try his fortune in
another Element, the Air, he rises to the top of the sea, let the billow go
never so high, and there without the help of a say^er, Raises up his maine
Mast, spreads his sails, which he makes of his own sinews, fits his Rudder
and Ballast, and begins his voyage; But to what Coast he is bound, or what
trafique he intends, himself and He that made him only can tell. Fishes there
are none to prey on, nor flies, and therefore it is not for food he travailes; I
have seen them 500 leagues from any land, if his voyage be to any Port, he must
have a long time and much patience to get thither; if to sea, he is there
already; in one thing he has the advantage of any ship that ever sailed: for
he can go nearer the wind by a point, then the most yare Friggot that ever was
built. Which shows how far Nature can exceed Art. Another advantage he has,
that in the greatest Tempest, he never fears drowning. Compass, nor Card he
needs not, for he is never out of his way; whether then his voyage be for
pleasure or profit we are yet to seek.

But before we arive at our next Harbor, St Jago, one of the Isles of Cape
Verd, and now revolted from the King of Spain, to the Portugal; Let me tell
you, one little observation I made of the Ships way; which in slack winds,
and dark nights, we saw nothing under water, but darkness* but in stiff
winds, and strong gayles, we saw perfectly the keele of the Ship; and fishes
playing underneath, as lighted by a torch, and yet the nights of equal
darkness. Which put me in mind of a point of Philosophy I had heard discourst
of, among the Learned; That in the Air, Rough hard bodies, meeting with one
another, by violent strokes, Rarifie the Air, so as to make fire. So here,
the ship being of a hard substance, and in a violent motion, meeting with the
strong resistance of the waves: (who though they be not hard, yet they are
rough, by reason of their saltnes,) do cause a light, though no fire, and I
may guess, that that light would be fire, were it not quenched by the sea, in
the instant it is made; which in his own Element, has the greater power and
predominancie.

But before we came to St Jago, we were to have visited a small Island called
Soll; by the entreaty of a Portugal we carried with us, whose name was
Bernardo Mendes de Sousa; who pretended, to have a great part of the Island (if
not the whole) to be his own; but for that, it lay somewhat out of our way,
and we could not recover it, by reason the wind was Cross; and partly for
that we were informed by some of the Sailors, who told us it was uninhabited
by any, but Goats, Dogs, and the like; and we guest, he would (out of a vain
glory) show us something that he Called his. But the Master, who well knew the
Condition of the place, would not lose so much time to no purpose. Which gave
some coffeehouse to the Portugal, which he expressed in his Countenance, by
a sullen dogged look, till we came to St Jago. But that was but a whetstone,
to sharpen a worse humor he was big with; for though our Merchants redeemed
him out of prison in London, intending him a Main director in the whole
voyage; whose Credulous ears he highly abused, by telling them, That the
Padre Vagado (Chief Governor of St Jago) was his brother, and that by the
power he had with him, to lay all trade open, for Negroes, Horses, and Cattle,
which were there Contrabanded goods; By which persuasion, they gave him the
power and Command of the ship and goods. But he intended nothing less then
the performance of that trust, but instead of it, meant to make prey of both,
and of our Liberties, and probably lives to boot, if we had not bin very
wary of him.

The first thing we perceived in him, was a strange look he put on, when we
came nere the Island; which caused us to suspect some great and bad design he
was bent on, (for being Jolly and very good Company all the voyage, to change
his Countenance when we were nere the place where we hoped to enjoy our
selves with happiness and Contentment, was a presage of some evil intent to
be put in practice, which howerly we expected; and were all at gaze what part
of it was first to be acted; which he (more speedily then he needed)
discovered, and it was thus.

Our water, being a good part spent in our passage thither, and we being to
make new and large provisions for the remaynder of our Voyage, carrying horses
and Cattle with us: which we were to take in there; he Commanded the Master
by the power he had over him, to send a shore all the empty Caske he had
aboard; with intent to detayne them; and so make us comply, by little and
little to his ends. But the Master absolutely denied the Landing our great
Caske, but told him he would send our quarter Caskes, in our long boat, and so
by making often returns, to fill our Pipes and Buts. But finding himself at a
loss in this design, thought good to keep us from any water at all; and so
appointed our men, to dig in the valley under the Padres house, where he was
well assured no Springs of water were to be found. But some of our men, who
spoke good Spanish, by their enquiries heard, That there was a very good well
on the other side of the hill, under the Castle, and were brought to the sight
of it by some of the Country people; Which when he perceived we had knowledge
of, he was much out of Countenance, and used his best eloquence to make us
believe he had never heard of that Well.

So finding that this practice would not serve his turn, he tried another: and
that was was to command our Master, to carry a shore, that part of the
Cargosoone that was consigned for that place, which was Cloth, Bays, Stuffes
of several kinds, Linen Cloth, Hats with broad brims, such as Spaniards use
to wear, and were made in London purposely to put off there, and these goods
being valued, when they were received at Land, there should be a return made,
in Horses, and Cattle. But as we had Cause to suspect him for the Cask, so we
had for the Cargo, and so returned him this answer, that we would not land any
of our goods, without receiving the like value in Cattle; and so by parcells to
receive the one, and deliver the other,

On which message, we sent the Purser of our ship, that spoke good Spanish; But
Bernardo, being vexed to the height that his Plot was discovered, kept him
prisoner. We sent another to demand him which was like wise detayned, then we
sent 3 or 4 more and some of the soldiers of the Castle gave fire upon them,
So that we resolved to weigh Anchor and put to Sea for a week or ten days
and return in the night (the weather being dark and fit for our purpose) and
surprise the Padres house with 50 Musketeers which we could muster very well
of the Gentlemen and other passengers in the ship, and some of the Sailors, and
take the Padre Vagago, and Bernardo Mendes de Sousa, and carry them to the
Barbados. But the Padre not knowing of this design in Bernardo, sent to us a
very kind message inviting himself aboard our ship, receiving hostages from
us, and so upon treaty with him aboard, settled a trade, and got our
prisoners releast; whereupon we were invited to his house or rather his Rock,
for it was most part of it formed in a Rock, with a sleep and very high
precipice.

But I am mislead into this digression by this wicked Portugal, whose unlucky
Countenance before we came to the Island, gave me the occasion to say somewhat
of him, and his miscariage in the Island, before I came at it.

But when we came within sight of it, it appeared to us full of high and steep
Rocks, (the highest of which were mere stone, without any soyleat all) and
they of so great a height, as we seldom saw the tops, whilst we lay before it;
being interposed by mists, and Clouds: which rise and darken the sky in the
time of the Turnado. But the day we had the first sight of it, being very
clear; and we being at a competent distance, had a perfect view of it). But
those of the second altitude, appeared not so white, but had a grayish color,
as if covered with light and sandy earth. But the lowest of those, seemed
rather Hills, than Rocks; but yet so russet, as we were in doubt whether
grass did ever grow on them. But when we came within distance of discerning
colors perfectly; we expected the valleys, as it opened to us, would have
afforded our eyes a richer prospect, with more variety of colors, but we found
very little or no amendment, only the trees of Coconuts, with some other that
were large and beautiful, whose tops (giving amply proportionable shadows to
their roots) held their greenness and were extreme beautiful. But the time
of our stay there, being the Turnado, when the sun (being in his return from
the Tropique of Cancer, to that of Capricorn, to visit and refresh the
Southern world,) became Zenith to the inhabitants of that part of the world;
which is about the beginning of August: At which time the raines fall in
abundance, and is accounted winter, to those parts where the Zenith is, and we
staying there 19 or 20 days, (the rain falling a good part of that time,) we
perceived the valleys to put on new liveries: so fresh, so full of various
greens, intermixed with flowers of several kinds, some growing on stalks, some
on trees, so full of variety, of the most beautiful colors, as if nature had
made choice of that place to show her Master piece. So that, having feasted our
eyes with this delighted object, we desired to try whether their smell was as
pleasant and odoriferous, as their beauty was admirable; and to satisfy our
selves of this curiosity, would willingly have gone a shore but we were
advised to stay a little, till we were better assured of our Portugal
Bernardo. Which stay, gave us time to take a view of the Harbor or Bay, which
they call the Pry, and is about a league over from land to land. And, as I
guest, somewhat more; from the points of land, to the bottom; and, as we
enter, we leave a small Island on our Larboard side.

This Bay or Pry, lies to the Leeward of the Island; by reason whereof we found
so great, so insufferable heat, as you will hardly imagine that bodies coming
out of cold Climates, could endure such scorching without being suffocated.

I had in a Cabinet two pieces of hard wax, in the hold of the ship both
mel^ed and clave together; and the Cement of that Cabinet, that was made to
hold the Ink, melted and became flat.

So that finding the Air so torridly hot, I thought good to make trial of the
water; and I leapt into the sea, which appeared to my sense no more colder than
the Air; than the Queens bath (at Ba^he) is hotter in June here in England.

At the bottom, or inward part of the Pry, there appeared to us, a fair round
rising hill, near half the breadth of the Pry, not much unlike the How at
Pl^mouth, with a valley on either side; And on the brow of the Hill toward the
right hand, a very high and steep precipice of a rock; in which stood the
house of the Padre Vagado, fixed on the top of the rock. A house fit enough for
such a Master; for though he were the chief Commander of the Island: yet by his
port and house he kept he was more like a Hermit then a Governor. His family
consisting of a Mollotto of his own getting, three Negroes, a Fiddler, and a
Wench. Himself a man grave enough to be wise, but certainly of no great
learning; for upon the differences between Bernardo and us, Colonel Modiford
writ him a letter in Latin, which he did his best endeavor to answer but fell
two bows short in substance and language, and though his Quarrel were to us,
yet he revenged himself on Priscian, whose head he broke 3 or 4 times in his
letter.

The first time we saw him, was at his own house, by his own invitation: to
which almost inaccessible habitation, when we had climed with infinite
difficulty; and indeed so painful and violent was our motion: (our legs
finding the motion of elevation, much more violent then of distention,) as we
were almost scalded within, and the torrid heat of the Sun, being then our
Zenith, did so scald us without, as we were in fitter condition to be fricased
for the Padres dinner, then to eat any dinner our selves.

Being painfully and pipeing hot, arrived at this exalted mansion; we found
none to entertain us but Bernardo; whose countenance was not so well
reconciled to himself, as to give us a hearty welcome. He told us that the
Padre was gone forth about some affairs of the Island, but would return time
enough to dinner. And whilst we were staying there, expecting his coming, we
thought good not to be idle, for the structure of that Fabric, did not
minister to our eyes much of delight. Only that it had a faier prospect to
sea. So we walked along upon that round hill, enquiring what we could of the
place; and were informed that there had been formerly a very stately Town,
beautified with fair buildings, and streets so contrived, as to make the best
use of such a prospect; But burnt and demolisht by Sr. Francis Drake, in the
time of the wars, between Queen Elizabeth, and the King of Spain, which made
us give more reverence to the place; for that some of our Countrymen had there
sacrificed their lives for the Honor of our Nation.

About the hour that our stomachs told us, it was full high time to pay Nature
her due, we looked about us, and perceived at a good distance, a horse coming
toward us, with a man on his back, as hard as his heels could carry him; and
within a very little time, made a sudden stop at the Padres house, from whose
back (being taken by two Negroes,) was set on the ground a great fat man, with
a gown on his back, his face not so black as to be counted a Mollotto, yet I
believe full out as black as the Knight of the Sun; his eyes blacker if
possible, and so far sunk into his head, as with a large pin you might have
pricked them out in the nappe of his neck. Upon his a lighting we perceived
him very much discomposed, for the pace he rid, was not his usual manner of
riding, as by our enquiry afterward we understood; and that he very seldom rid
at all, but his business having held him over long, caused him to take horse,
who intended to come a foot; and being m^^^nted, (and he none of the best
horsemen,) was made subject to the will of his horse; which being a Barbe, and
very swift of foot, coming toward the place where he was kept, ran with
such violence, as it was a wonder his burden had not been cast by the way; for
the Horse having a bit in his mouth, and the stirrops being extreme short, as
the manner of their riding there is, if he had ever checked him with the bridle,
that he had been put to bound, he had undoubtedly laid him on the ground. But
the rider that thought of nothing more, then holding fast by the pummell with
both hands, was miraculously preserved.

In this great discomposure, he was taken off by two Negroes, and set on his
own legs: but in such a trance, as for some minutes, he was not in a Condition
to speak to us: So sensible an impression had the fear of falling made in
him. But being at last come to himself, he made his address to us, and in his
language bid us welcome, beginning to excuse his too long stay: to redeem which
fault, he had put himself in such a hazard, as in his whole life he had not
known the like. We answered, that it argued a great respect and civilitie to
us, that he would expose his gravitie, which was accustomed to a moderate pace,
to such a swiftnes of motion, as might in any kind endanger his health, or
hazard his person. But he being a man much reserved, and slow of language, said
no more; but brought us into his house; which was upon a Level at the
entrance, but the other side of the Rooms a steep precipice, and some of the
rooms like galleries-such as are in the meanest Innes upon London-way. There
were not in the house above 4 rooms, besides two galleries and a Kitchen; and
those all on a flower; and the flowers of earth, not so much as made Level,
nor soeeven as to deserve sweeping; and the most of them were justly dealt
withal: for they had no more then they deserved, both above and below; for the
Cobwebs served for hangings, and frying pans and gred-irons for pictures.

By this equipage, you may guess what the trading is of this Island, when the
Governor is thus accoutred; but by and by, a Cloth was laid, of Calico, with
4 or 5 Napkins of the same, to serve a dozen men. The first Course was set on
the table, usherd in by the Padre himself, (Bernardo, the Mollotto, and
Negroes following after,) with every one a dish of fruit, 6 in all; the first
was Millions, Plantines the second, the third Bonanos, the 4 of Guavers, the 5
of Prickled Pears, the 6 the Custard Apple: but to fill up the table, and make
the feast yet more sumptuous, the Padre sent his Mollotto, into his own
Chamber, for a dish which he reserved for the Close of all the rest; Three
Pines in a dish, which were the first that ever I had seen, and as far
beyond the best fruit that grows in England, as the best Abricot is beyond
the worst Slow or Crab.

Having well refresht our selves with these excellent fruits, we drank a
glass or two of Red Sack; a kind of wine growing in the Maderas; very
strong, but not very pleasant; for in this Island, there is made noe wine at
all; nor as I think any of grapes, so near the Line upon Islands in all the
world. Having made an end of our fruit, the dishes were taken away, and
another Course fetched in; which was of flesh, fish, and sallets; the sallets
being first placed upon the table* which I took great heed of, being all
Novelties to me, but the best and most favourie herbs that ever I tasted, very
well seasoned with salt, Oil, and the best vinagre. Several sorts we had, but
not mixed, but in several dishes, all strange, and all excellent* The first
dish of flesh, was a leg of young sturke, or a wild Calfe, of a year old;
which was of the Color of stags flesh, and tasted very like it, full of Nerves
and sinews, strong meat and very well Condited: boyld tender, and the sauce of
savorie herbs, with Spanish Vinagre. Turkyes and Hens we had roasted; a gigget
of young goat, fish in abundance of several kinds, whose names I have
forgotten, Snappers, gray and red; Cavallos, Carpions, etc: with others of rare
colors and shapes, too many to be named in this leaf; some fried in oil, and
eaten hot, some souc't, some marinated: of all these we tasted, and were much
delighted.

Dinner being near half done, (the Padre, Bernardo, and the other black
atendants, waiting on us;) in comes an old fellow, whose complexion was raised
out of the red Sack; for near that Color it was: his head and beard milk
white, his Countenance bold and Cheerful, a Lute in his hand, and plaide us
for a Noveltie, The Passame sares galiard; a tune in great esteem, in Harry
the fourths days; for when Sir John Fal^taff makes his Amors to Mistress
Doll Tear-sheet, Sneake and his Company, the admired fiddlers of that age,
plays this tune, which put a thought into my head, that if time and tune be
the Composits of Music, what a long time this tune had in sailing from
England to this place. But we being sufficiently satisfied with this kind of
harmony, desired a song; which he performed in as Antique a manner; both
favoring much of Antiquity; no Graces, double relishes, Frillos, Grops or
Piarro torte's, but plain as a packstaffe; his Lute too, was but of ten
strings, and that was in fashion in King David's days; so that the raritie of
this Antique piece, pleased me beyond measure.

Dinner being ended, and the Padre well near weary of his waiting, we rose,
and made room for better Company; for now the Padre, and his black mistress
were to take their turns; A Negro of the greatest beauty and majesty
together: that ever I saw in one woman. Her stature large, and excellently
shaped, well favored, full eye'd, and admirably graced; she wore on her head a
roll of green taffatie, stripped with white and Philiamort, made up in manner of
a Turban; and over that a slight veil, which she took off at pleasure. On
her body next her linen, a Peticoate of Orange Tawny and Sky Color; not done
with Strait stripes, but waved; and upon that* a mantle of purple silk,
ingrayld with straw Color. This Man^le was large, and tied with a knot of
very broad black Ribbon, with a rich Jewel on her right shoulder, which came
under her left arm, and so hung loose and carelessly, almost to the ground. On
her Legs, she wore buskins of wetched Silk, decked with Silver lace, and
Fringe; Her shoes, of white Leather, lac't with sky color; and pinkt between
those laces. In her ears, she wore Large Pendants, about her n^ck; and on her
arms, fair Pearls. But her eyes were her richest Jewels: for they were the
largest, and most oriental, that I have ever seen,

Seeing all these perfections in her only at passage, but not yet heard her
Speak; I was resolved after dinner, to make an Essay* what a present of rich
silver silk and gold Ribbon would do, to persuade her to open her lips:
Partly out of a Curiosity, to see whether her teeth were exactly white, and
clean, as I hoped they were; for it is a general opinion, that all Negroes
have white teeth; but that is a Common error, for the black and white, being so
near together, they set off on another with the greater advantage. But look
nearer to them, and you shall find those teeth, which at a distance appeared
rarely white, are yellow and foul. This knowledge wrought this Curiosity in
me, but it was not the main end of my inquiry; for there was now, but one
thing more, to set her off in my opinioni, the rarest black swanne that I had
ever seen, and that was her language, and graceful delivery of that, which was
to unite and confirm a perfection in all the rest. And to that end I took a
Gentleman that spoke good Spanish with me, and awaited her coming out, which
was with far greater majesty, and gracefulness, then I have seen Queen Anne,
descend from the Chair of State, to dance the Measures with a Baron of
England, at a Mask in the Banqueting house. And truly, had her followers and
friends, with other perquisits (that ought to be the attendants on such a state
and beauty) waited on her, I had made a stop, and gone no farther. But finding
her but slightly attended, and considering she was but the Padres Mistres, and
therefore the more accessible, I made my addresses to her, by my interpreter;
and told her, I had some Trifles made by the people of England, which for their
value were not worthy her acceptance, yet for their Novelty, they might be of
some esteem, such having bin worn by the great Queens of Europe, and entreated
her to vouchsafe to receive them. She with much gravity, and reserv'dness,
opened the paper; but when she looked on them, the Colors pleased her so, as
she put her gravity into the loveliest smile that I have ever seen. And then
showed her rows of pearls, so clean, white, Orient, and well shaped, as
Neptunes Court was never paved with such as these; and to show whether was
whiter, or more Orient, those or the whites of her eyes, she turned them up,
and gave me such a look, as was a sufficient return for a far greater present,
and withal wished, I would think of somewhat wherein she might pleasure me, and
I should find her both ready and willing. And so with a graceful bow of her
neck, she took her way toward her own house; which was not above a stones cast
from the Padres. Other addresses were not to be made, without the dislike of
the Padre, for they are there as jealous of their Mistrisses, as the Italians
of their wives.

In the afternoon we took leave, and went aboard; where we remained three or
four days; about which time, some passengers of the ship, who had no great
store of linen for shift, desired leave to go ashoare and took diverse women
along with them, to wash their linen. But (it seemed) the Portugalls, and
Negroes too, found them handsome and fit for their turns, and were a little
Rude, I cannot say Ravished them; for the Major part of them, being taken from
Bridewell, Turnboule street, and such like places of education, were better
natured then to suffer such violence; yet complaints were made, when they came
aboard, both of such abuses, and stealing their linen.

But such a praise they gave of the place, as we all were desirous to see it:
for, after the Rain, every day gave an increase to the beauty of the place, by
the budding out of new fruits and flowers.

This was the valley on the left side of the Hill, more spacious and beautiful
by much than that on the right hand, where the Padre dwelt. The next day, a
dozen Gentlemen of our company, resolved to go and see this so much admired
valley, and when our Sailors with their long boat went to fetch water, (as
daily they did,) we went along with them: and landed there, in as high going
Billows, as I have ever seen, so near the land. Much ado we had, to be carried
to land though on men's backs, and yet the grapple came as near the shore as
they durst bring it, for bulging against the bottom.

No sooner were we landed, but the Captain of the Castle, with one soldier
with him; came toward us, with a slow formal pace; who desired to speak
with one of us alone. Colonel Modiford, being the chief man in the Company,
went with an Interpreter to meet him; and being at the distance of speech,
desired to know his pleasure; which he told him was this. That he understood
diverse of our women had bin ashoare, the day before; and received some injury,
from the people of the Island, and that it was conceived, we were come Armed
to take revenge on those that did the affront. He therefore advised us, either
to make speedy return to the boat that brought us: or to send back our
svvords and pistols, and commit our selves to his protection; and if one of
those were not presently put in act, we should in a very short time have all
our throats Cut.

We told him we had no intention of revenge for any vvrong done, and that the
only cause of our landing, was to see the beauty of the place we had heard so
much Commended, by our people that were ashore, of which they had given a very
large testimony, both of the pleasantness and fruitfulness of it, and that our
visit was out of love, both to the place and people. But for sending our
weapons back to the boat, we desired his pardon; for this reason, that the
Billovvs going so very high at that time, we could not send them to the boat
without being dipped in the Sea water, which would spoil them; and the most
of them, being rich svvords, and pistols, we were loath to have their beauty
covered with rust, which the salt water would be the occasion of. We
desired rather, that he would Command a soldier of his, to stay with a man of
ours, and keep them safe, till our return; which he being content to do, we
committed our selves to his protection, who put a guard upon us of 10
Soldiers, part Portugalls part Negroes; the most part of either kind, as
proper men as I have seen, and as handsomely clothed.

Their garments made with much Art, and all seemed to be done by the Tailor;
the Coverings for their heads, were not unlike Helmits; of blew and white
stripped silk, some tawny, and yellow, others of other sorts of Colors; but
all of one fashion, their doublets close to their bodies, with Cassocks, made
of the fashion of the Kings guard: loose sleeves, which came to their elbowes;
but large and gathered so as to sit loose from their arms; with four large
skirts, reaching down to the middle of their thighs; but these of a different
color from their suits, their breeches indifferently large, coming down below
the knee; and the upper part, so wrought with Whalebones within, as to keep
them hollow, fromtouching their backs; to avoid heat, which they were much
troubled with; upon their legs, buskins of the color of their suits, yet some
made a difference: their shoes Colored for the most part; some white, but
very few black. Their weapons, as Swords, Pistols, Muskets, Pikes, and
Partisans, kept very bright, and worn comelily and gracefully; which argued a
decency in the Commander, as their awful respect did of his austeritie.

Being now under a Guard, we marched into this valley, one of the delightfullest
places that I have ever seen, for besides the high and lofty trees, as the
Palmeto, Royal, Coco, Cedar, Locust, Masticke, Mangrave* Bully, Redwood,
Pickled yellow wood, Cassia, Fistula, Calibash, Cherry, Figgtree, whose body is
large enough for timber, Cittrons, Custard apple, Gnavers, Macow, Cipres,
Oranges, Limons, Lymes, Pomegranat, A^otto, Prickled apple, Prickled pear,
Papa, these and more may be accounted wood: and yet a good part of them bearing
excellent fruit; But then there are of a lesser sort, that bear the rarest
fruit; whose bodies cannot be accounted wood, as the Plantine, Pine, Bonano,
Milon, water Milon, etc. and some few grapes, but those inconsiderable, by
reason they can never make wine: because they have no winter, and so by that
means, they can never ripe together, but one is green, another ripe, another
rotten, which reason will ever hold, that no wine can be made on Islands, where
there is no winter: or within twenty degrees of the line on either side. I have
heard that wine is made in the East Indies, within less then fifteen Degrees;
but it is of the Palm tree; out of whose body, they draw both wine and oil;
which wine will not keep above a day, but no wine of grapes, for the reasons
before said, Other kinds of trees, we found good to smell to, as Myrtle,
Jesaman, Tamarisk, with a tree somewhat of that bigness, bearing a very
beautiful flower. The first half next the stalk, of a deep yellow or gold
color; the other half, being the larger, of a rich Scarlet: shaped like a
Garnation, and when the flowers fall off, there grows a Cod, with 7 or 8 seeds
in it, diverse of which, we carried to the Barbados, and planted there: and they
grew and multiplied abundantly, and they call them there, the St. Jago flower,
which is a beautiful, but no sweet flower.

From these woods of pleasant trees, we saw flying diverse birds, some one way,
some another, of the fairest, and most beautiful colors, that can be imagined
in Nature: others whose Colors and shapes come short of these, did so excel
in sweetness, and loudness of voice, as our Nightingals in England, are short
of them, in either of those two properties; but in variety of tunes, our birds
are beyond them, for in that they are defective.

In this valley of pleasure, adorned as you have heard, we marched with our
Guard, fair and softly, near a quarter of a mile; before we came to the much
praised fountain; from whence we fetched our water. The circle whereof, was
about 60 foot, the Diameter about 20 from the ground to the top of the Well,
(which was of freestone,) 3 foot and a half; from thence within, down to the
surface of the water, about 15 foot. The spring it self, not so much to be
praised for the excellency of the taste, though clear enough, as for the
Nymphs that repair thither. For whilst we stayed there seeing the Sailors full
their Casks; and withal Contemplating the glory of the place: there appeard to
our view, many pretty young Negro Virgins, playing about the Well. But amongst
those; two, that came down with either of them a natural Pitcher, a Calibash
upon their arm, to fetch water from this fountain. Creatures, of such shapes,
as would have puzzelld Albert Durer, the great Mr of Proportion, but to have
imitated; and Tition, or Andrea de Sarta, for softnes of muscles, and
Curiosity of Coloring, though with a studied diligence; and a love both to
the party and the work. To express all the perfections of Nature, and Parts,
these Virgins were owners of, would ask a more skillfull pen, or pencill then
mine; Sure I am, though all were excellent, their motions were the highest, and
that is a beauty no painter can express, and therefore my pen may well be
silent; yet a word or two, would not be amiss, to express the difference
between these, and those of high Africa; as of Morcoco, Guinny, Binny, Cut^how,
Angola, Aethiopia, and Mauritania, or those that dwell nere the River of
Gambia, who are thick lipt, short nos^d, and commonly low foreheads. But these,
are composed of such features, as would mar the judgment of the best
Paynters, to undertake to mend. Wanton, as the soil that bred them, sweet as
the fruits they fed on; for being come so near, as their motions, and graces
might perfectly be discerned, I guest that Nature could not, without help of
Art, frame such accomplished beauties not only of colors, and favor, but of
motion too, which is the highest part of beauty. If dancing had bin in fashion
in this Island, I might have been persuaded, that they had bin taught those
motions, by some who had studied that Art. But considering the Padre's Music
to be the best the Island afforded, I could not but cast away that thought, and
attribute all to pure nature; Innocent, as youthful, their ages about 15.
Seeing their beauties so fresh and youthful, withal the perfections I have
named, I thought good to try, whether the uttering of their language, would be
as sweet and harmonious, as their other parts were comely. And by the help of
a Gentleman that spoke Portugal, I accosted them; and began to praise their
beauties, shapes, and manner of dressings; which was extremely pretty. Their
hair not shorn as the Negroes in the places I have named, close to their
heads; nor in quarters, and mases, as they use to wear it, which is ridiculous
to all that see them, but themselves: But in a due proportion of length, so as
having their shotenings by the natural Curles, they appeared as wiers, and
artificial dressings to their faces. On the sides of their Cheeks, they plat
little of it, of purpose to tie small Ribbon; or some small beads, of white
Amber, or blew bugle, sometimes of the rare flowers that grow there; Their
ears hung with Pendants, their necks and arms adorned with bracelets of
Counterfeit pearls, and blew bugle; such as the Portugalls bestow on them, for
these are free Negroes, and wear upon the small of one of their legs, the
badge of their freedom; which is a small piece of silver, or tin, as big as
the stale of a spoone; which comes round about the leg: and by reason of the
smoothnes, and lightness, is no impediment to their going. Their clothes, were
petticoates of Stripped silk, next to their linen, which reach to their middle
leg: and upon that a mantle, of blew taffitie, tied with a Ribbon on the right
shoulder: which coming under the left arm, hung down carelessly somewhat lower
then the petticoate, so as a great part of the natural beauty, of their
backs and necks before, lay open to the view, their breast round, firm, and
beautifully shaped.

Upon my addresses to them, they appeard a little disturbed; and whispered to
one another, but had not the Confidence to speak aloud I had in my hat, a
piece of silver and silk Ribbon, which I perceived their well shaped eyes,
often to dart at; but their modesties would not give them Confidence to ask. I
took it out, and divided it between them, which they accepted with much
alacrity; and in return, drank to one another my health in the liquor of the
pure fountain, which I perceived by their wantons miles, and jesticulations,
and casting their eyes toward me: when they thought they had expressed enough
they would take in their Countenances, and put themselves in the modestest
postures that could be, but we having brought a Cafe of bottles, of English
spirits, with us; I called for some, and drunk a health to them, in a small
dram cup; and gave it to one of them; which they smelt to, and finding it
too strong for their temper, poured some of it into one of their Calibashes:
and put to it as much water, as would temper it to their palats; they drank
again, but all this would not give them the Confidence to speak, but, in
mute language, and extreme pretty motions, showed, they wanted neither wit nor
discretion, to make an answer. But it seemed, it was not the fashion there, for
young Maids to speak to strangers, in so public a place.

I thought I had been sufficiently armed with the perfections I found in the
Padre's Mistress, as to be free from the darts of any other Beauty of that
place, and in so short a time: But I found the difference between young fresh
Beauties, and those that are made up with the addition of State and Majesty:
For though they counsel and persuade our Loves; yet, young Beauties force, and
so commit rapes upon our affections. In sum, had not my heart been fixed fast
in my breast, and dwelt there above sixty years, and therefore loath to leave
his long kept habitation, I had undoubtedly left it between them for a Legacy.
For, so equal were there Beauties, and my Love, as it was not, nor could be,
particular to either.

I have heard it a question disputed, whether if a Horse, being placed at an
equal distance, between two bottles of hey, equally good; and his appetite
being equally fixed upon either: Whether that Horse must not necessarily
starve. For, if he feed on either, it must argue, that his appetite was more
fixed on that; or else, that bottle was better than the other. Otherwise, what
should move him to chose one before the other?

In this posture was I, with my two Mistresses; or rather, my two halves of one
Mistress: for, had they been conjoined, and so made one, the point of my Love
had met there; but, being divided, and my affection not forked, it was
impossible to fix, but in one Center.

In this doubtful condition, I took my leave, with an assurance, that I should
never find two such parallel Paragons, in my whole search through the World:
And the reason of their so great likeness and luster, was, they were Sisters
and Twins; as I was after informed by a Hermit, that came often to visit us,
when we came on land, as we often did, and not far off from his Cell.

But you will think it strange, that a man of my age and gravity, should have
so much to do with Beauty and Love: But I have three arguments to protect me.
The first is, I have in my younger days, been much inclined to Painting, in
which Art, color, favor, and shape is exercised; and these Beauties, being a
proper subject of all these perfections, (being in themselves perfect) I could
not but consider them with a studied diligence.

Next, I had been long at Sea, without setting foot on any Land; and that has
a property, to make all Land-objects beautiful; and these being in the highest
degree paramount, could not but surprise my fancy. Besides, the place being
extreme beautiful and lovely, could not but secretly harbor in it the Spirit
of Love, a passion not to be governed. And therefore I hope, you will pardon my
wild extravagancy.

But the main reason of this flying out, is, I had little else to say: for the
Island, being a place of very little or no traffic, could not afford much of
discourse. Cattle they have very good, and large, which they sell at very easy
rates; and likewise Horses, of excellent shapes and mettle; but they are
contrabanded goods, and whosoever deals in them, (without special license)
forfeits both Ship and Goods, if they have power to compel them.

But I believe, they have not, being partly informed by the Hermit, who came
often to us, to hear news, and beg somewhat of us; which being obtained, he
would not stick to impart somewhat of the weakness of the Island, that would
have cost him dear, if it had been known to the Padre. And some of that which
he informed us, was, that the Forts, and Block-houses, on either side the Prye,
on which we saw the appearance of Ordnances, good store, and large; but we
understood by him, that those Forts were neither regular, nor the Guns Brass
or Iron, but such as Henry the Eighth took Bulloyne with; and this we found by
experience to be true: For, upon our first difference with Barnardo, and the
Padre, we weyed Anchor, and removed our selves out of the distance of the
Castle, which stood in the bottom of the Prye; and expected to have been shot
at from those Forts and Block-houses, but saw no fire given; and if they had
been furnished with such Artillery as would have reached us, we should
certainly have heard from them.

We also enquired of our Intelligencer, the Hermit, what Trades or
Manufactures were practiced there; but were answered, that they were few, and
inconsiderable; Sugar, Sweetmeats, and Coco-nuts, being the greatest trade
they had. Yet by the Padres leave, we carried away with us 50 head of Cattle,
and 8 Horses, which Barnardo made us pay double for; the usual price being 25
s. a piece, for which he made us pay 50 s. and for Horses, 10 l. a piece, which
others have had for 4 or 5 l. But he was content, we should rate our
commodities accordingly, and so we were no great losers by the exchange.

Having dispatched our business, we got leave to go ashore, upon the little
Island, at the entrance of the Prye, there to cut and pull grass, for our
Horses and Cattle, which we made up into hay; a work quickly done, where so
much Sunshine was our helper. It being perfectly dried, we stowed it in the
ship, which was our last work, and so wayed Anchor, and hoysed Sail, steering
our course for the Barbados, leaving Bernardo (according to his own desire)
behind us; having but 2 Degrees to the southward to vary, in the running of
620 Leagues Westward. St. Jago lying in 15. and the Barbados in 13 Degrees and
30 Minutes, to the Northward of the Line.

There are seven more Islands, which are called the Islands of Cape Verd: viz. S.
Michaels, St. Vincents, St. Anthonies, St. Lucia, Bravo, Fogo, and Soll: Some
of which are much larger, but none so considerable, as this of St. Jago.

As we lay at Anchor in the entrance of the Prye, we perceived at Sunset,
between the Sun and us, the Island called Fogo; which was at such a distance, as
none of us could discern it all the day, till that hour; and then the Island
interposing between the Sun and us, we saw it perfectly, shaped like the
nether half of a Sugar loaf, the upper half being cut off eeven; and in the
midst of the top of that, a smoke and fire rising out, from which we guest it
took its name.

About the tenth of August, we put out to Sea; and as we sailed, we left the
Island of our Starbord-side, and did not part with the sight of it, till we
discerned a little Town, near to the shore, which, we were told, was the best
in the Island, and a place meant for the chief Port, for all Traffic in the
Island; but by means of a great mischief, that Ships were subject to in that
Harbor, it was almost totally deserted: For the Sea there, was so rocky in the
bottom, and those rocks so thick together, and sharp withal, as they cut the
Cables off near to the Anchor, and so the Anchor often left in the bottom.
There was a Dutchman that lay there but three days, and in that little stay,
lost two Anchors. From this Island to the Barbados, we account 620 Leagues;
which, by reason of the constancy of the Winds, which blow seldom in any
other point, than Nore-east and By-east, they have usually sailed it in 16 or
17 days. But we, for that it was the time of Tornado, when the winds chop
about into the South, were somewhat retarded in our passage, and made it twenty
two days ere we came thither; and many have made it a far longer time. For, in
the time of Tornado, the clouds interpose so thick, and darken the sky so
much, as we are not able to make an observation for a fortnight together; and
so being doubtful of our Latitude, dare not make the best use of our Sails
and way, for fear of slipping by the Island; and being past it, can hardly beat
it up again, without putting out into the Main, and so by painful traverses,
recover our selves to the Eastward of the Island, and then fall back again, by
the due Latitude upon it, at 13 Degrees and 30 Minutes.

Besides this pains, and loss of time, when we miss the Island, we many times
run hazards, by falling upon the Leeward Islands, in the night, of which the Bay
of Merixo is well stored.

In this long reach, (which may be called a voyage it self) I had only two
things to make the way seem short; the one was Pleasure, the other Business;
that of Pleasure, was, to view the Heavens, and the beauty of them, which were
objects of so great glory, as the Inhabitants of the World, from 40 Degrees to
either Pole, can never be witness of. And this happens at the time, when the
Turnado is with those of that Latitude, where we were. For the clouds being
exhaled in great quantities, some thick and gross, some thin and aeriall, and
being hurled and rolled about with great and lesser curles, the Sun then and
there being far brighter, then with us here in England, caused such glorious
colors to rest upon those Clouds, as it is not possible to be believed, by him
that has not seen it, nor can imagination frame so great a beauty: And the
reason is, the neernesse and propinquity of the place we are in, which makes us
see the glory of the Sun, and of those Stars too, which move in that Horizon,
much more perfectly, then at a further distance. The proof of this I found, by
looking on the Stars, that appear large and bright to us in England, which
being seen there, do not only lose much of their light, but of their magnitude.
For instance; There is little Star, called Auriga, near the Charles Wain, which
in England I have seen very perfectly, in bright nights; but at that distance,
I could never see it in the clearest night, though I have often attempted it.
And upon my return to England, I found it as I left it; which argues, that it
was no decay or impediment in my sight, that made me lose it, but only the
distance of place. I deny not, but a better sight then mine, may see this Star
Auriga at the Barbados; but then, so good a sight may see it more perfectly in
England than I can; and so the comparison holds. But another reason, to prove
the Celestial Bodies brighter at nearer distance, is, That the Moon being near
the Full, (at which time it gives a plentiful light) I have observed in the
night, (the Sun having been set two hours, or thereabouts) and at such a time,
as the Clouds being in a fit Position, to reflect the beams which the Moon then
gives, to the place where you are, you shall see a perfect Rainbow in the
night. But this does not happen at all times, though there be Clouds, for the
beams to rest on; but only to such as are in an angle, where these beams
reflect, and meet in a just point.

Diverse new Constellations we found, to the Southward, which in our Horizon are
never seen; and amongst them, one, which we call the Cruser^s, which is made up
of four Stars, which stand almost square, or rather like the claws of a Birds
foot; and the Seamen told us, that two of them point at the South Pole, as the
Painters of the Charles Wain, do to the North Star. But the South Pole cannot
be seen by us, that come from the Northern parts, till we be under the Line,
and then we see both North and South; as we do the Sun in morning and evening,
at six and six. And thus much for Pleasure.

Now for Business, it was only this: To inform my self, the best I could, of
the account the Master and his Mates kept, of the Ships way, both for Compass,
Card, and Logline, together with the observations at noon, by that excellent
and useful Instrument, the Back-staffe, by which we know to a mile, the
Latitude we are in; and if we had an Instrument, to find out the Longitude as
perfectly, every man might guide a Ship, that could but keep an account.

To the knowledge of this great secret, of the Ships Course, diverse Gentlemen
of our company applied themselves very diligently; for the Master was not
froward, to communicate his skill to all that were of his Mess. And to such a
proficiency we were grown, as to lay a wager with the Boat-swain, a very good
Seaman, upon the first sight of the Island of Barbados. He laid, we should not
see it till the afternoon, or late in the evening. We, that we should make it
before noon. Whether it were chance, or our skilfulnesse, I know not, but we
won the wager, which was a couple of very fat Hens, which we caused to be
dressed, and eat them in sight of the Island, with a double joy: first, that we
had won the wager; next, that we were grown so near our wished Harbor.

Being now come in sight of this happy Island, the nearer we came, the more
beautiful it appeared to our eyes; for that being in it self extremely
beautiful, was best discerned, and best judged of, when our eyes became full
Masters of the object. There we saw the high, large, and lofty Trees, with
their spreading Branches, and flourishing tops, seemed to be beholding to the
earth and roots, that gave them such plenty of sap for their nourishment, as to
grow to that perfection of beauty and largeness. Whilst they, in gratitude,
return their cool shade, to secure and shelter them from the Suns heat, which,
without it, would scorch and dry away. So that bounty and goodness in the
one, and gratefulness in the other, serve to make up this beauty, which
otherwise would lie empty and waste. And truly these vegetatives, may teach
both the sensible and reasonable Creatures, what it is that makes up wealth,
beauty, and all harmony in that Leviathan, a well governed Commonwealth: Where
the Mighty men, and Rulers of the earth, by their prudent and careful
protection, secure them from harms; whilst they retribute their pains, and
faithful obedience, to serve them in all just Commands. And both these,
interchangeably and mutually in love, which is the Cord that binds up all
imperfect Harmony. And where these are wanting, the roots dry, and leaves fall
away, and a general decay, and devastation ensues. Witness the woeful
experience of these sad times we live in.

Being now come to the distance of two or three leagues, my first observation
was, the form of the Island in general, which is highest in the middle; by
which commodity of situation, the inhabitants within, have these advantages; a
free prospect to sea, and a reception of pure refreshing air, and breezes that
come from thence; the plantations overlooking one another so; as the most
inland parts, are not bard nor restrained the liberties of their view to sea,
by those that dwell between them and it. For as we past along near the shore,
the plantations appeared to us one above another: like several stories in
stately buildings, which afforded us a large proportion of delight. So that we
begged of the Master, to take down those of his sails, that gave the ship the
greatest motion, that we might not be deprived on a sudden, of a sight we all
were so much pleased with But our Cattle and Horses (who were under hatches;
and therefore no partners of this object*) having devoured all their fodder,
and were now ready to come to that necessity, as the next thing to be thought
on, was to plane deal boards, and feed them with the shavings; Which deadly
hunger, caused such lowing and bellowing of the poor Cattle, as their cry
stopped the Masters ears, so as the smoothest, and most persuasive language,
we could use: could not force a passage, but with all the haste he could, put
into Carlils Bay; which is the best in the Island, where we found riding at
Anchor, 22 good ships, with boats playing two and fro, with Sails and Oats,
which carried commodities from place to place: so quick stirring, and numerous:
as I have seen it below the bridge at London.

Yet notwithstanding all this appearance of trade, the Inhabitants of the
Islands, and shipping two were so grieviously visited with the plague, (or as
killing a disease,) that before a month was expired after our Arivall, the
living were hardly able to bury the dead. Whether it were brought thither in
shipping: (for in long voyages, diseases grow at Sea, and takes away many
passengers, and those diseases prove contagious,) or by the distempers of the
people of the Island: who by theill diet they keep, and drinking strong waters,
bring diseases upon themselves, was not certainly known. But I have this reason
to believe the latter: because for one woman that dyed, there were ten men;
and the men were the greater deboystes.

In this sad time, we arrived in the Island; and it was a doubt whether this
disease, or famine threatened most; There being a general scarcity of Victuals
throughout the whole Island.

Our intention at first, was not to stay long there, but only to sell our
goods, Cattle, and Horses; and so away to Antigoa; where we intended to plant:
but the ships being (for the most part) infected with this disease, and our
selves being unprovided of hands for a new plantation (by reason of the
miscarying of a ship, which set ou^ before us from Plymouth, a month before,
with men victuals, and all utensell's fitted for a plantation, we were
compelled to stay longer in the Island than we attended. Besides, the ship we
came in, was consigned to another part in Africa, called Cu^chew, to trade for
Negroes.

But during the time of our stay there, we made enquires of some small
plantation to rest us on, til the times became better, and fitter for our
remove; with intent to make use of those few hands we had, to settle that, till
we had supplies, and new directions from England.

And so upon discourse with some of the most knowing men of the Island, we found
that it was far better, for a man that had money, goods, or Credit, to
purchase a plantation there ready furnished, and stockt with Servants, Slaves,
Horses, Cattle, Assinigoes, Camels, etc. with a sugar work, and an Ingenio:
than to begin upon a place, where land is to be had for nothing, but a trivial
Rent, and to endure all hardships, and a tedious expectation, of what profit or
pleasure may arise, in many years patience: and that, not to be expected,
without large and frequent supplies from England; and yet fare, and labor
hard. This knowledge, was a spur to set on Colonel Modiford, who had both
goods and credit, to make enquiry for such a purchase, which in very few days
he lighted on; making a visit to the Governonr Mr. Phillip Bell, met there with
Major William Hilliard, an eminent planter of the Island, and a Councellor, who
had been long there, and was now desirous to suck in some of the sweet air of
England: And glad to find a man likely to perform with him, took him home to
his house, and began to treat with him, for half the plantation upon which he
lived; which had in it 500 Acres of Land, with a fair dwelling house, an
Ingenio placed in a room of 400 foot square; a boiling house, filling room,
Cisterns, and Still-house; with a Carding house, of 100 foot long, and 40 foot
broad; with stables, Smiths forge, and rooms to lay provisions, of Corn, and
Bonavist; Houses for Negroes and Indian slaves, with 96 Negroes, and three
Indian women, with their Children; 28 Christians, 45 Cattle for work, 8 Milch
Cowes, a dosen Horses and Mares, 16 Assinigoes.

After a Months treaty, the bargain was concluded, and Colonel Modiford was to
pay for the Moity of this plantation, 7000 l; to be paid, 1000 l in hand, the
rest 2000 l. a time, at six and six months, and Colonel Modiford to receive
the profit of half the plantation as it rose, keeping the account together,
both of the expense and profit.

In this plantation of 500 acres of land, there was employed for sugar somewhat
more then 200 acres; above 80 acres for pasture, 120 for wood, ^0 for Tobacco,
5 for Ginger, as many for Cotton wool, and 70 acres for provisions; viz. Corn,
Potatoes, Plantines, Cassavie, and Bonavist; some few acres of which for
fruit; viz. Pines, Plantines, Milions, Bonanoes, Gnavers Water Milions,
Oranges; Limons, Limes, etc. most of these only for the table.

Upon this plantation I lived with these two partners a while, But with Colonel
Modiford* three years; for the other went for England, and left Colonel
Modiford to manage the employment alone; and I to give what assistance I could
for the benefit of both: which I did, partly at their requests, and partly at
the instance of Mr. Thomas Kendall, who reposed much confidence in me, in case
Colonel Modiford should miscarry in the Voyage.

I only speak thus much, that you may perceive, I had time enough to improve my
self, in the knowledge of the managment of a Plantation of this bulk; and
therefore, you may give the more credit in what I am to say, concerning the
profit and value of this Plantation, which I intend as a Scale, for those that
go upon the like; or to vary it to greater or less proportions, at their
pleasure. And indeed, I wanted no tutridge, in the learning this mystery; for,
to do him right, I hold Collonell Modiford as able, to undertake and perform
such a charge, as any I know. And therefore I might (according to my ability)
be able to say something, which I will, as briefly as I can, deliver to you, in
such plain language as I have.

But before I come to say any thing of the Island, as it wa^ when I arrived
there, I will beg leave, to deliver you a word or two, what has been told me
by the most ancient Planters, that we found there, and what they had by
tradition from their Predecessors. For, few or none of them that first set foot
there, were now living.

About the year a Ship of Sir William Curteens, returning from Ternambock in
Brasill, being driven by foul weather upon this coast, chanced to fall upon
this Island, which is not far out of the way, being the most windwardly Island of
all the ^arribbies, (^obago only excepted;) and Anchoring before it, stayed
some time, to inform themselves of the nature of the place; which they found
by trials in several parts, to be so overgrown with Wood, as there could be
found no Champions, or Sa^annas for men to dwell in; nor found they any beasts
to inhabit there, only Hogs, and those in abundance: the Portugalls having long
before, put some ashore for breed, in case they should at any time be driven by
foul weather, to be cast upon the Island, they might there find fresh meat, to
serve them upon such an extremity: And the fruits and roots that grew there,
afforded them so great plenty of food, as they multiplied abundantly. So that
the Natives of the leeward Islands, that were at the distance of sight, coming
thither in their Cannoas, and Periagos, and finding such Game to hunt, as these
hogs, and the flesh so sweet and excellent in taste, they came often thither a
hunting, and stayed sometimes a month together, and so returned again at
pleasure, leaving behind them certain tokens of their being there, which were,
Pots, of several sizes, in which they boiled their meat, made of clay, so
finely tempered, and turned with such art, as I have not seen any like them,
for finenesse of mettle, and curiosity of turning, in England. This information
I received from the Planters in Barbados. But being here a Prisoner, in the
Upper Bench Prison, my chance was to meet with an ancient Captain, and one of
those that first landed on the Island; and had the managing of a good part of
the Island, under William late Earl of Pembrok, before my Lord of Carlisle
begged it of King James. This Captain Canon (for so was his name) informed me
for certain, that this was a gross mistake in the Planters, and that no
Indians ever came there: But those Pots were brought by the Negres, which they
fetched from Angola, and some other parts of Africa; and that he had seen them
make of them at Angola, with the greatest art that may be. Though I am willing
to believe this Captain, who delivered upon his knowledge, that the Negres
brought some Pots thither, and very finely and artificially made; yet, it does
not hinder any man from believing, that the Indians brought some too; and who
knows, which were the most exactly made. For, it is certain, that from some
part of the Island, you may see (in a clear day) St. Vincents perfectly: And if
we can see them, why may not they see us; and they will certainly venture to
any place they see, so far as they know they can reach before night, setting
out very early in the morning. But I leave you to credit which of these you
please, either, or both.

But I have a great inclination to believe, the Indians have been there, for
this reason, that the Island of St. Vincents, lying in the same Climate with
this of ^arbado^s, the Clay may be of the same nature and quality; and they,
having the skill to bring their Clay to so fine a temp^^, as to burn and not
break, may show us the way, to temper ours of the Barbados so, as we may make
Bricks to burn, without chopping or cracking; which those of Angola, being far
off, and it may be, their Clay of different temper, cannot help us in. And it
is no hard matter, to procure an Indian or two, to come from that Island, and
give us direction, which would be of infinite use and advantage, to our
buildings in Barbados. But this digression must not lead me out of the way of
my business.

This discovery being made, and advice given to their friends in England, other
Ships were sent, with men, provisions, and working tools, to cut down the
Woods, and clear the ground, so as they might plant provisions to keep them
alive, which, till then, they found but straglingly amongst the Woods. But
having cleared some part of it, they planted Potatoes, Plat^^nes, and Mayes,
with some other fruits; which, with the Hogs-flesh they found, served only to
keep life and soul together. And their supplies from England coming so slow,
and so uncertainly, they were often driven to great extremities: And the
Tobacco that grew there, so earthy and worthless, as it could give them little
or no return from England, or elsewhere; so that for a while they lingered on
in a lamentable condition. For, the Woods were so thick and most of the Trees
so large and massy, as they were not to be fallen with so few hands; and when
they were laid along, the branches were so thick and boisterous, as required
more help, and those strong and active men, to lop and remove them off the
ground. At the time we came first there, we found both Potatoes, Maies, and
Bona^^^s, planted between the boughs, the Trees lying along upon the ground;
so far short was the ground then of being cleared. Yet, we found Indico
planted, and so well ordered, as it sold in London at very good rates; and
their Cotton wool, and Fustick wood, proved very good and staple commodities.
So that having these four sorts of goods to traffic with, some ships were
invited (in hope of gain by that trade) to come and visit them, bringing for
exchange, such commodities as they wanted, working Tools, Iron, Steel, Clothes,
Shirts, and Drawers, Hose and Shoes, Hats, and more Hands. So that beginning to
taste the sweet of this Trade, they se^ themselves hard to work, and lived in
much better condition.

But when the Canes, had been planted three or four years, they found that to
be the main Plant, to improve the value of the whole Island: And so, bent all
their endeavors to advance their knowledge in the planting, and making Sugar:
Which knowledge, though they studied hard, was long a learning. But I will
forbear to say any thing of that, till I bring in the Plants; where you shall
find not only the color, shape, and quality of this Plant, but the worth and
value of it, together the whole process of the great work of Sugar-making,
which is the thing I mainly aim at: But, in my way to that, I will give you a
slight description or view, of the Island in general: and first, of the
Situation,

# The Situation.
It were a crime,not to believe, but that you are well verst in the knowledge
of all parts of the known habitable world; and I shall seem impertinent; if I
go about to inform you of the situation of this Island. But, because there have
been some disputes between Seamen, whether it lie in bare 13 Degrees, or in 13
Degrees and 30 Minutes, I shall easily be led by the most voices, of the most
able Seamen, to give for granted, that Carlisle Bay, which is the Harbor where
most of them put in, is 13 Degrees and 30 Minutes from the Line, to the
Northern Latitude.

This Bay is, without exception, the best in the Island, and is somewhat more
then a league over; and from the points of Land to the bottom of the Bay, is
twice as much.

Upon the most inward part of the Bay, stands the Town, which is about the
bigness of Hou^slo, and is called the Bridge; for that a long Bridge was made
at first over a little nook of the Sea, which was rather a Bog then Sea.

A Town ill situate; for if they had considered health, as they did
convenience, they would never have set it there; or, if they had any intention
at first, to have built a Town there, they could not have been so improvident,
as not to forsee the main inconveniences that must ensue, by making choice of
so unhealthy a place to live in. But, one house being set up, another was
erected, and so a third, and a fourth, till at last it came to take the name of
a Town; Diverse Storehouses being there built, to stow their goods in, for
their convenience, being near the Harbor. But the main oversight was, to build
their Town upon so unwholesome a place. For, the ground being somewhat lower
within the Land, than the Sea-banks are, the spring-Tides flow over, and there
remains, making a great part of that flat, a kind of Bog or Morost, which
vents out so loathsome a savor, as cannot but breed ill blood, and is (no
doubt) the occasion of much sickness to those that live there.

At the time of our arrival, and a month or two after, the sickness reigned
so extremely, as the living could hardly bury the dead; and for that this place
was near to them, they threw the dead carcases into the bog, which infected so
the water, as diverse that drunk of it were absolutely poisoned, and dyed in few
hours after; but others, taking warning by their harms, forbear to taste any
more of it.

The ground on either side the Bay, (but chiefly that to the Eastward) is much
firmer, and lies higher; and, I believe, they will in time, remove the Town
upon that ground, for their habitations, though they suffer the Storehouses to
remain where they are, for their convenience. But the other situation, may be
made with some charge as convenient as that, and abundantly more healthful.

Three Bays there are more of note in this Island; one, to the Eastward of
this, which they call Austin's Bay, not in commemoration of any Saint, but of a
wild mad drunken fellow, whose lewd and extravagant carriage, made him
infamous in the Island; and his Plantation standing near this Bay, it was called
by his name. The other two are to the West of Carlisle Bay; and the first is
called Mackfields Bay, the other Spikes Bay; but neither of these three are
environed with Land, as Carlisle Bay is: but being to the Leeward of the Island,
and good Anchorage, they seldom are in danger; unless in the time of Turnado,
when the wind turns about to the South; and then, if they be not well ^oor'd,
they are subject to fall foul on one another, and sometimes driven aground.
For, the Leeward part of the Island being rather shelvie then rockie, they
seldom or never are cast away.

# The Extent.
The length and breadth of this Island,I must deliver you only upon trust; for,
I could not go my self about it, being full of other business, but I had some
speech with the antientest, and most knowing Surveyer there, one Captain Swann,
who told me, that he once took an exact plot of the whole Island, but it was
commanded out of his hands by the then Governor, Sir Henry Hunks, who carried
it into England* since which time, neither himself, nor any other, to his
knowledge, had taken any; nor did he believe, there was any extant. I desired
him yet that he would rub up his memory, and take a little pains in the survey
of his Papers, to try what could be found out there, that might give me some
light in the extent of the Island, which he promised to do; and within a while
after, told me, that he had found by some Papers, that lay scattered in his
Study, the length of it; but for the breadth, it was very uncertain, by reason
of the nooks and corners that reached out into the Sea, so that it must of
necessity be broad in some places, and narrow in others. I desired then to
know, how many miles the broadest, and how few the narrowest parts might be. He
told me, that he guest, the broadest place could not be above seventeen miles,
nor the narrowest under twelve; and that the length, he was assured, was twenty
eight miles. Out of these uncertain grounds, it was a hard matter to conclude
upon any certainties; and therefore the evenest way I can go, is, upon a
Medium, between twelve and seventeen; and, I will be as modest as I can in my
computation; and take but 14. which is less then the Medium, and multiply 14.
which is supposed to be the breadth, by 28. which is assured to be the length,
and they make 392 square miles in the Island. Beyond this, my enquiries could
not reach, and therefore was compelled to make my estimate upon this bare
Supposition. But, for the form of the Superficies of the Island, I am utterly
ignorant; and for the Upright, I have given it you in my first view of the
Island, that it rises highest in the middle.

# The Length of days.
When the Sun is in the Aequinoctiall, or within 10 Degrees of either side, we
find little change in the days length; for at six and six the Sun rises and
sets: but when he is near the Tropic of Capricorn, and is 37 Degrees from us,
we find a difference; for then, the day is somewhat shorter, and we perceive
that shortning, to begin about the end of October; the Crepusculum being then
not much longer then at other times, which is not half the length, as it is
with us in England.

At the time of new (...), we find both her Corners equally high, when the Sun
is near us; but when it is at the distance of 37 Degrees to the Southward, we
find some difference; for then it hangs not so equal, but one end is higher
then the other, by reason of the position we are in.

Temperature of the air.
Eight months of the year,the weather is very hot, yet not so scalding, but
that servants, both Christians, and slaves, labor and travel ten hours in a
day.

As the Sun rises, there rise with him cool breezes of wind, and the higher
and hotter the sun shines, the stronger and cooler the breezes are, and blow
always from the Nore East, and by East, except in the time of the Turnado: And
then it sometimes chops about into the South, for an hour or two, and then
returns again to the same point where it was. The other four months it is
not so hot, but is near the temper of the air in England, in the middle of
May, and though in the hot seasons we sweat much, yet we do not find that
faintness, that we find here, in the end of July, or beginning of August.
With this great heat, there is such a moisture, as must of necessity cause the
air to be very unwholesome.

We are seldom dry or thirsty, unless we overheat our bodies with
extraordinary labor, or drinking strong drinks; as of our English spirits,
which we carry over, of french Brandy, or the drink of the Island, which is
made of the skimmings of the Coppers, that boil the Sugar, which they call
kill-Divell. And though some of these be needful if they be used with temper;
yet the immoderate use of them, over-heats the body, which causes Costivenesse,
and Tortions in the bowels; which is a disease very frequent there; and hardly
cured, and of which many have dyed, but certainly, strong drinks are very
requisite, where so much heat is; for the spirits being exhausted with much
sweating, the inner parts are left cold and faint, and shall need comforting,
and reviving. Besides, our bodies having bin used to colder Clymates, find a
debility, and a great failing in the vigor, and sprightliness we have in
colder Climats; our blood too, is thinner and paler than in our own Countries.
Nor is the meat so well relisht as in England; but flat and insipid, the hogs
flesh only excepted, which is indeed the best of that kind that I think is
in the world.

Our Horses and Cattle seldom drink, and when they do, it is in very small
quantities; except such as have their bodies over heated with working.

This moisture of the air, causes all our knives, etweese, keys, needles,
swords, and ammunition, to rust; and that in an instant for take your knife to
the grindstone, and grind away all the rust; which done, wipe it dry, and put
it up into your sheath, and so into your pocket, and in a very little time,
draw it out; and you shall find it beginning to rust all over; which in more
time, will eat deep into the steel, and spoil the blade. Our locks too, that
are not often made use of, will rust in the wards, and so become useless, and
Clocks, and Watches will seldom or never go true; and all this occasioned by
the moystnesse of the Air. And this we found at fe^: for before we came near
this Island, we perceived a kind of weather, which is neither rain nor mist,
and continued with us sometimes four or five days together, which the seamen
call a Heysey weather, and rises to such a height, as though the sun shine
out bright, yet we cannot see his body, till nine a clock in the morning, nor
after three in the afternoon. And we see the sky over our heads clear: a
close and very unhealthull weather, and no pleasure at all in it.

This great heat and moisture together, is certainly the occasion that the
trees and plants grow to such vast height, and largeness as they are.

# How watered.
There is nothing in this Island so much wanting, as Springs and Rivers of
water; there being but very few, and those very small and inconsiderable. I know
but only one River, and that may rather be termed a Lake, then a River; The
Springs that run into it, are never able to fill it, they are so small;
outfall to Sea it has none; but at spring tides, the Sea comes in and fills it;
and at Nepe tides, it cannot run out again, the sea-banks being higher than
it. But some of it issues out through the Sands, and leaves behind it a mixed
water, of fresh and salt: at the time the tide comes in, it brings with it some
fishes, which are content to remain there; being better pleased to live in
this mixed water, then in the Salt. Colonel Humphrey Walrond, who is owner of
the land of both sides, and therefore of it; has told me, that he has taken
fishes there, as big as Salmons, which have been overgrown with fat, as you
have seen Porpisces; but extremely sweet and firm.

But it has not been often, that such fish, or any other, have bin taken in
that place, by reason the whole Lake is filled with trees and roots.

So that no Net can be drawn, nor any Hook laid; for they will wind the lines
about the roots, and so get away; or the lines break in pulling up, being
fastened to the roots.

This River, or Lake, reaches not within the Land above twelve score yards, or
a flight shot at most; and there is no part of it so broad, but you may cast a
Coyte over it.

The spring tides there, seldom rise above four or five foot upright: there
come from the sea into these small bibling rivolets, little Lobsters, but
wanting the great claws before, which are the sweetest and fullest of fish,
that I have seen; Chicester Lobsters are not to be compared to them.

But the water which the people of this Island most rely upon, is rain water;
which they keep in ponds, that have descents of ground to them, so that what
falls on other ground, may run thither. And the place in which the Pond is
set, must be low, and claye in the bottom: or if it be not naturally of Clay,
it must be made so. For if it find any Leake to the rocky part, it gets
between those clifts, and sinks in an instant. About the end of December, these
ponds are filled; and with the help it has by the weekly showrs that fall,
they continue so, yet sometimes they feel a want. This pond water, they use
upon all occasions, and to all purposes; to boil their meat, to make their
drink, to wash their linen, for it will bear soape. But one thing seemed to
me a little loathsome, and that was the Negroes washing themselves in the
Ponds, in hot weather; whose bodies have none of the sweetest savours. But the
planters are pleased to say, that the Sun with his virtuall heat, draws up
all noisome vapors, and so the waters become rarefied, and pure again. But it
was a great satisfaction to me, that a little Rivulet was near us, from whence
we fetched daily, as much as served us, both for meat, and drink.

In these ponds, I have never seen any small fish, fry, or any thing that lives
or moves in it, except some flies that fall into it; but the water is clear and
well tasted. And because their Cattle shall not be in danger of miring or
drowning, the best Husbands rail in a part of the Pond, where it is of a
competent depth, for the water to stand, and pave that in the bottom with
stone; and so the Cattle neither raise the mud, nor sink in with their feet;
and so the water comes clear to them.

Water they save likewise from their houses, by gutters at the eves, which
carry it down to cisterns. And the water which is kept there, being within the
limits of their houses, many of which are built in manner of Fortifications,
and have Lines, Bulwarks, and Ba^tians to defend themselves, in case there
should be any uproar or commotion in the Island, either by the Christian
servants, or Negre slaves; serves them for drink whilst they are besieged; as
also, to throw down upon the naked bodies of the Negres, scalding hot; which is
as good a defense against their underminings, as any other weapons.

If any tumult or disorder be in the Island, the next neighbor to it,
discharges a Musket, which gives the Alarm to the whole Island; for, upon the
report of that, the next shoots, and so the next, and next, till it go through
the Island: Upon which warning, they make ready.

# Meat and Drink for supportation of life.
Bread, which is accounted the staff, or main supporter of man's life, has not
here that full taste it has in England; but yet they account it nourishing and
strengthening. It is made of the root of a small tree or shrub, which they call
^assavie; the manner of his grouth I will let alone, till I come to speak of
Trees and Plants in general.

His root only, which we are now to consider, (because our bread is made of it)
is large and round, like the body of a small Still or retort; and as we gather
it, we cut sticks that grow nearest to it, of the same tree, which we put into
the ground, and they grow. And as we gather, we plant. This root, before it
come to be eaten, suffers a strange conversion; for, being an absolute poison
when it is gathered, by good ordering, comes to be wholesome and nourishing; and
the manner of doing it, is this: They wash the outside of the root clean, and
lean it against a Wheel, whose sole is about a foot broad, and covered with
Latin, made rough like a large Grater. The Wheel to be turned about with a
foot, as a Cutler turns his Wheel. And as it grates the root, it falls down in
a large Trough, which is the receiver appointed for that purpose. This root
thus grated, is as rank poison, as can be made by the art of an Apothecary, of
the most venomous simples he can put together: but being put into a strong
piece of double Canvas, or Sackcloth, and pressed hard, that all the juice be
squeezed out, and then opened upon a cloth, and dried in the Sun, it is ready
to make bread. And thus it is done.

They have a piece of Iron, which I guess is cast round, the diameter of
which, is about twenty inches, a little hollowed in the middle, not unlike the
mould that the Spectacle makers grind their glasses on, but not so much
concave as that; about half an inch thick at the brim or verge, but thicker
toward the middle, with three feet like a pot, about six inches high, that
fire may be underneath. To such a temper they heat this Pone, (as they call it)
as to bake, but not burn. When it is made thus hot, the Indians, whom we trust
to make it, because they are best acquainted with it, cast the meal upon the
Pone, the whole breadth of it, and put it down with their hands, and it will
presently stick together: And when they think that side almost enough, with a
thing like a Battle-dore, they turn the other; and so turn and re-turn it so
often, till it be enough, which is presently done. So they lay this Cake upon a
flat board, and make another, and so another, till they have made enough for
the whole Family. This bread they made, when we came first there, as thick as a
pancake; but after that, they grew to a higher degree of curiosity, and made it
as thin as a wafer, and yet purely white and crispe, as a new made wafer. Salt
they never use in it, which I wonder at; for the bread being tastlesse of it
self, they should give it some little seasoning. There is no way it eats so
well, as in milk, and there it tastes like Almonds. They offer to make
Pie-crust, but very few attain to the skill of that; for, as you work it up
with your hand, or roll it out with a roller, it will always crackle and chop,
so that it will not be raised to hold any liquor, neither with, nor without,
butter or eggs.

But after many trials, and as often failings, at last, I learnt the secret of
an Indian woman, who showed me the right way of it, and that was, by searsing
it very fine, (and it will fall out as fine, as the finest wheat flour in
England) if not finer. Yet, this is not all the secret, for all this will not
cure the cracking. But this is the main skill of the business: Set water on
the fire in a skillet, and put to it as much of this fine flower, as will
temper it to the thickness of starch or pap; and let it boil a little, keeping
it stirring with a slice; and mix this with the mass of flower you mean to
make into pye-crust, which being very well mingled, and wrought together, you
may add what cost you will of butter and eggs, and it will rise and stand nere
as well as our past in England.

But those that have not Cows, and cannot make butter upon the place, but must
make use of such as is brought from England or Holland, were better leave it
out, and be content to eat their pie-crust dry. Yet I make a main difference,
between butter that is brought from either of those places, in respect of the
times it is brought. For, if a ship set out from England in November, and that
ship arive at the Barbados at the middle, or near the end of December, when
the Sun is at the farthest distance, the butter may come thither in very good
condition; and being set in cool places, may retain the taste for a while: But,
if the ship set out in Spring or Summer, that brings this butter, it is not
then to be endured, it is so restie and loathsome. Nor can Cheese be brought
from thence without spoil, at that time of the year, except you put it in
oil. Neither are Candles to be brought, for the whole barrel will stick
together in one lump, and stinck so profoundly, as neither Rats nor mice will
come near them, much less eat of them. For which reason, the Planters, who are
much troubled with this annoyance, as also, for that these candles cannot be
taken out of the barrel whole, nor will stand in the candlestick without
drooping, and hanging down; they burn for the most part wax lights, which they
make themselves, of wax they fetch from Africa, and have it at a reasonable
rate, there being no Bees in the Barbados.

But I am too apt to fly out in extravagant digressions; for, the thing I went
to speak of, was bread only, and the several kinds of it; and having said as
much of the bread of Cassavie as I know, I will give you one word of another
kind of bread they make, which is a mixed sort of bread, and is made of the
flower of Mayes and Cassavie mixed together; for the Maies it self will make no
bread, it is so extreme heavy and lumpish: But these two being mixed, they make
it into large Cakes, two inches thick; and that, in my opinion, tastes the
likest to English bread of any.

But the Negres use the Mayes another way, which is, toasting the ears of it at
the fire, and so eating it warm off the ear. And we have a way, to feed our
Christian servants with this Maies, which is, by pounding it in a large Mortar,
and boiling it in water, to the thickness of Frumentie; and so put in a Tray
such a quantity, as will serve a mess of seven or eight people; give it them
cold, and scarce afford them salt with it. This we call Lob-lollie. But the
Negres, when they come to be fed with this, are much discontented, and cry
out, O! O! no more Lob-lob.

The third sort of bread we use, is only Potatoes, which are chosen out of the
dryest and largest they can chose: And at the time we first came, there was
little else used, at many good Planters Tables in the Island. And these are all
the sorts of bread that I know growing upon the place.

Drink of Mobbie.
The next thing that comes in order, is Drink, which being made of several
materials, afford more variety in the description. The first, and that which
is most used in the Island, is Mobbie, a drink made of Potatoes, and thus done.
Put the Potatoes into a tub of water, and, with a broom, stir them up and down,
till they are washed clean; then take them out, and put them into a large iron
or brass pot, such as you boil beef in, in England; and put to them as much
water, as will only cover a quarter part of them; and cover the top of the pot
with a piece of thick canvas doubled, or such cloth as sacks are made with,
covering it close, that the steam go not out. Then make a little fire
underneath, so much only as will cause these roots to stew; and when they are
soft, take them out, and with your hands, squeeze, break, and mash them very
small, in fair water; letting them stay there, till the water has drawn and
sucked out all the spirit of the roots, which will be done in an hour or two.
Then put the liquor and roots into a large woollen bag, like a jelly-bag,
poynted at the bottom; and let it run through that, into a Jar, and within two
hours it will begin to work. Cover it, and let it stand till the next day, and
then it is fit to be drunk. And as you will have it stronger or smaller, put in
greater or lesser quantities of roots; some make it so strong, as to be drunk
with small quantities But the drink it self, being temperately made, does not
at all fly up into the head, but is a sprightly thirst-quenching drink. If it
be put up in small casks, as Rundlets, or Firkins, it will last four or five
days good, and drink much more sprightly then out of the Jar. I cannot liken
it to any thing so near, as Rhenish-wine in the Must; but it is short of it in
the strength of the spirit, and finenesse of the taste.

There are two several layers, in which these roots grow; one makes the skins
of the Potatoes white, the other red: And where the red roots grow, the Mobbie
will be red like Claret Wine; the other white.

Though this be the drink most generally used in the Island, yet I cannot
commend the wholsomnesse of it* for, the most part of the roots have a moist
quality in them, and are the cause of Hydropicke humors. Mr. Phillip Bell,
then the Governor of the Island told me that when he was Governor of the I Will
of Providence, that there chanced some Spaniards to land there, and tast^ng of
this drink, wondered that any of those that continually drink it were alive;
so unwholesome and Hydropicke he conceived this drink to be.

Perino.
Another drink they have which is accounted much wholesomer, though not
altogether so pleasant, and that is Perino;a drink which the Indians make for
their own drinking, and is made of the Cassavy root, which I told you is a
strong poison; and this they cause their old wives, who have a small remainder
of teeth to chaw and spit out into water, (for the better breaking and
macerating of the root). This juice in three or four hours will work, and
purge it self of the poisonous quality.

Having showed, you in the making of Bread, that the moisture being pressed out,
which is accounted the poisonous quality that root has, by drying and baking,
it is made useful and wholesome, and now having the juice and root both used,
and both these put into water, which is moist, I know not which way to
reconcile these direct contraryes, but this; that the poison of the old women's
breath and teeth having been tainted with many several poxes, (a disease
common amongst them, though they have many and the best cures for it,) are such
opposites to the poison of the Cassavie, as they bend their forces so
vehemently one against another, as they both spend their poisonous qualities in
that conflict; and so the relict of them both, becomes less unwholesome; and
the water, which is in it self pure, casts out the remainder of the ill
qualities they leave behind: which is manifested by the extraordinary working,
which is far beyond that of Beer, Wine, or Sider with us in Europe. This
drink will keep a month or two, being put into barrels, and tastes the likest to
English beer of any drink we have there.

# Grippo.
Grippo is a third sort of drink, but few make it well; it was never my chance
to taste it, which made me the less curious to enquire after it.

# Punch.
Punch is a fourth sort, and of that I have drunk; it is made of water and
sugar put together, which in ten days standing will be very strong, and fit
for laborers.

# Plum-drinke.
A fifth, is made of wild Plumbs, which grow here in great abundance, upon
very large trees, which being pressed, and strayned, give a very sharp, and
pognant flaver; but there is not much of it made, because of the trouble of
making it, and they are not there very indulgent to their palats.

# Plantine-drinke.
But the drink of the Plantine, is far beyond all these; gathering them full
ripe, and in the height of their sweetness, we pill off the skin, and mash
them in water well boiled; and after we have let them stay there a night, we
strain it, and bottle it up, and in a week drink it; and it is very strong and
pleasant drink, but it is to be drunk sparingly, for it is much stronger then
Sack, and is apt to mount up into the head.

The seventh sort of drink is that we make of the skimming of sugar, which is
infinitely strong, but not very pleasant in taste; it is common, and therefore
the less esteemed; the value of it is half a Crown a gallon, the people drink
much of it, indeed too much; for it often lays them asleep on the ground, and
that is accounted a very unwholesome lodging.

# Beveridge.
The eighth sort of drink is Beveridge, made of spring water^ white sugar, and
juice of Orenges, and this is not only pleasant but wholesome.

# Wine of Pines.
The last and best sort of drink that this Island or the world affords, is the
incomparable wine of Pines; And is certainly the Nectar which the Gods drunk;
for on earth there is none like it; and that is made of the pure juice of the
fruit it self, without commixture of water, or any other creature, having in
it self, a natural compound of all tastes excellent, that the world can
yield. This drink is too pure to keep long; in three or four days it will be
fine; it is made by pressing the fruit and strayning the liquor, and it is kept
in bottles.

Having given you a taste of the Bread, and Drink this Island affords, which
will serve any man's palate, that is not over curious; I could tell you what we
have of both sorts that is brought to us from other parts of the world; as
Biskets, both fine and coorse, Barrels of meal close put up; which comes to us
very sweet from England, and Holland; of which we make Bread, Pye-crust, and
Puddings. And for drink good English Beer, French and Spanish Wines, with
others, some from the Maderas, some from Fiall, one of the Islands of Asores; So
we cannot justly complain of want, either of bread or drink, and, from
England, spirits, some of Anniseeds, some of Mint, some of Wormwood, etc. And
from France, Brandy, which is extreme strong, but accounted very wholesome.

# Meat of all kinds.
Having given you a just account, as near as my memory will serve of the bread
and drink of this Island: The next thing is the several sorts of meat we have
there; and because Hogs flesh is the most general meat, and indeed the best
the Island affords, I will begin with that, which is (without question) as good,
as any can be of that kind: for their feeding being as good, as can grow any
where, the flesh must needs be answerable; fruit, the nuts of Locust, Pompians
of a rare kind, almost as sweet as Milions, the bodies of the Plantines, and
Bonanoes, Sugarcanes, and Mayes, being their daily food.

When we came first upon the Island, I perceived the sties they made to hold
them, were trees, with the ends lying cross upon one another, and the
enclosure they made, was not large enough to hold the numbers of Hogs were in
them, with convenient distance to play and stir themselves for their health,
and pleasure; so that they were in a manner pesterd, and choakt up, with their
own stink, which is sure the most noisome of any other beast, and by reason of
the Suns heat much worse; I have smelt the stink of one of those sties down
the wind, near a mile, through all the wood: and the crouding and thrusting
them so close together, was certainly the cause of their want of health, which
much hindered their growth; So that they were neither so large, nor their flesh
so sweet, as when they were wild, and at their own liberty, and choice of
feeding.

For I have heard Major Hilliard say: that at their first coming there, they
found Hogs, that one of them weighed (the intrals being taken out, and the
head off) 400 weight. And now at the time of my being there, the most sort of
those, that were in ours and our neighbors styes, were hardly so big as the
ordinary swine in England. So finding this decay in their grouth, by stowing
them too close together, I advised Collonell Modiford to make a larger stye,
and to wall it about with stone; which he did, and made it a mile about, so
that it was rather a Park than a Stye; and set it on the side of a dry Hill,
the greatest part Rock, with a competent Pond of water in the bottom; and
placed it between his two Plantations, that from either, food might be brought,
and cast over to them, with great convenience: And made several divisions in
the Park, for the Sowes with Pigg, with little houses standing shelving, that
their foulness by gutters might fall away, and they lie dry; Other divisions
for the Barrow-Hoggs, and some for Boars.

This good ordering caused them to grow so large and fat, as they wanted very
little of their largnesse when they were wild. They are the sweetest flesh of
that kind, that ever I tasted, and the lovliest to look on in a dish, either
boiled, roasted, or baked: With a little help of art. I will deceive a very
good palate, with a shoulder of it for Mutton, or a leg for Veal, taking off
the skin, with which they were wont to make minc't Pies, seasoning it with
salt, cloves, and mace, and some sweet herbs minc't. And being baked, and taken
out of the Oven, opening the lid, put in a dramme-cup of kill-devill; and being
stirred together, set it on the Table; and that they called a Calvesfoot pie;
and, till I knew what it was made of, I thought it very good meat. When I came
first upon the Island, I found the Pork dressed the plain ways of boiling,
roasting, and sometimes baking: But I gave them some tastes of my Cookery, in
hashing, and fricaseing this flesh; and they all were much taken with it; and
in a week, every one was practicing the art of Cookery. And indeed, no flesh
tastes so well in Collops, Hashes, or Fricases, as this. And when I baked it, I
always laid a Side of a young Goat underneath, and a side of a Shot (which is
a young Hog of a quarter old) a top. And this, well seasoned, and well baked,
is as good meat, as the best Pasty of Fallow-Deer, that ever I tasted.

In the coolest time of the year, I have made an essay to powder it, and hang
it up for Bacon: But there is such loss in it, as it is very ill husbandry to
practice it; for, it must be cut through in so many places, to let the salt in,
as when it is to be dressed, much goes to waste. And therefore I made no more
attempts that way. But a little corning with salt, makes this flesh very
savoury, either boiled or roasted.

About Christmas, we kill a Boar, and of the sides of it, make three or four
collers of Brawne; for then the weather is so cool, as, with some art, it may
be kept sweet a week: and to make the souc't drink give it the speedier and
quicker seasoning, we make it of Mobbie, with store of Salt, Limons, and Lymes,
sliced in it, with some Nutmeg, which gives it an excellent flaver.

Beef, we have very seldom any, that feeds upon the soil of this place,
except it be of Gods killing, (as they term it); for very few are killed
there by men's hands; it were too ill husbandry, for they cost too dear, and
they cannot be spared from their work, which they must advance by all the means
they can. Such a Planter as Collonell James Drax (who lives like a Prince) may
kill now and then one; but very few in the Island did so when I was there.

The next to Swines-flesh in goodness, are Turkies, large, fat, and full of
gravie. Next to them, Pullen or Donghill-foule* and last of all,
Muscovia-Ducks, which being larded with the fat of this Porke, (being seasoned
with pepper and salt) are an excellent bak'd-meat. All these, with their Eggs
and Chickens, we eat.

Turtle-Doves the have of two sorts, and both very good meat; but there is a
sort of Pigeons, which come from the leeward Islands at one time of the year,
and it is in September; and stay till Christmas be past, and then return again:
But very many of them nere make returns, to tell news of the good fruit they
found there: For, they are so fat, and of such excellent tastes, as many
foulers kill them with guns, upon the trees; and some of them are so fat, as
their weight with the fall, causes them to burst in pieces. They are good
roasted, boylld, or baked, but best cut in halves, and stewed; to which
Cookery, there needs no liquor, for their own gravie will abundantly serve to
stew them.

Rabbets we have, but tame ones, and they have but faint tastes, more like a
Chicken then a Rabbet.

And though they have diverse other Birds, which I will not forget to recount in
their due times, and place; yet, none for food for the Table, which is the
business I tend at this present. Other flesh-meat, I do not remember.

Now for fish, though the Island stands as all Islands do, environed with the
Sea, (and therefore is not like to be unfurnish't of that provision) yet, the
Planters are so good husbands, and tend their profits so much, as they will not
spare a Negres absence so long, as to go to the Bridge and fetch it. And the
Fishermen seeing their fish lie upon their hands, and stink, (which it will do
in less then six hours) forbear to go to Sea to take it; only so much as they
can have present vent for, at the Taverns at the Bridge; and thither the
Planters come, when they have a mind to feast themselves with fish, to Mr.
Jobsons, or Joan Fullers, where they have it well dressed; for they were both my
Pupills. Butter they seldom have, that will beat thick; but in stead of that,
we are fain to use vinegar and spice, and much of it fried in oil, and eaten
hot; and some marinated, and souc't in pickle, and eaten cold. Collonell
Humphrey Walrond has the advantage of all the Planters in the Island, for,
having a Plantation near the Sea, he has of his own a Saint to catch fish
withal, which his own servants and slaves put out to Sea, and, twice or thrice
a week, bring home all sorts of such small and great fishes, as are near the
shore; amongst which, some are very large, and excellently well tasted. For, he
being a Gentleman, that had been bred with much freedom, liberty, and plenty,
in England, could not set his mind so earnestly upon his profit, as to forget
his accustomed lawful pleasures, but would have his Table well furnished, with
all sorts of good meat the Land and Sea afforded; and as freely bid his friends
welcome to it. And I, as the poorest of his friends, in a lingering sickness,
and near death, found such a charity with him, as I shall never forget to pay
my thanks for, to the last hour of my life; and I shall account it as a a great
happiness, (if ever it fall in the compass of my power) to be servicable to
him or his, as any thing that can befall me in the world.

Amongst other fishes that were taken by his Saine, (as the Snappers, red and
gray, Cavallos, Maquerells, Mullets, Cony-fish, with diverse others, firm and
excellent sweet fish) he took four, that were about a yard long at the least,
all at one draught, and, to that length, bigger grown then Salmonds, of the
rarest color that ever I beheld; from the back-finne, which is the middle of
the fish, to the end of the tail, the purest grasse-green that ever I saw, and
as shining as Satine: but the finns and tai^^dapled or spotted with as pure a
hair-colour, and from the back-finn to the head, pure hair colour-dapled with
green; the scales as big for the most part, as a halfe-crown piece of silver.
This fish is no fish of prey, but lives by what he finds in the bottom of the
Sea, as I perceived by what was in his maw. An excellent sweet fish; I dressed
them several ways, and all proved excellent. There is one fish wanting to
this Island, whose kinds are very frequent upon most of the Charibby and
Lucaick-Ilands; and that is the green Turtle, which is the best food the Sea
affords, and the greatest store of them; but I have seen very few of that kind
in the Barbados, and those neither fat nor kindly; and the reason is, there
are no shelves nor sands to lay their eggs, or to air themselves on: For,
these fishes delight to be on the sands, and can remain there twelve hours, all
the time the Tide is out; and then suffer themselves to be carried away by the
return of the next Tide. They take infinite numbers of them, by turning them on
their backs with staves, where they lie till they are fetched away. A large
Turtle will have in her body half a bushel of eggs, which she lays in the
sand, and that being warm, they are hatched in the heat.

When you are to kill one of these fishes, the manner is, to lay him on his
back on a table, and when he sees you come with a knife in your hand to kill
him, he vapors out the grievousest sighs, that ever you heard any creature
make, and sheds as large tears as a Stag, that has a far greater body, and
larger eyes. He has a joint or crevis, about an inch within the utmost edge of
his shell, which goes round about his body, from his head to his tail, on his
belly-side; into which joint or crevis, you put your knife, beginning at the
hea^, and so rip up that side, and then do as much to the other; then lifting
up his belly, which we call his Calipee, we lay open all his bowels, and
taking them out, come next to his heart, which has three distinct points, but
all meet above where the fat is; and if you take it out, and lay it in a dish,
it will stir and pant ten hours after the fish is dead. Sure, there is no
creature on the Earth, nor in the Seas, that enjoyes life with so much
sweetness and delight, as this poor fish the Turtle; nor none more delicate in
taste, and more nourishing, then he.

Next to the flesh and fish this Island affords, it is fit to consider what
Quelquechoses there are to be found, that may serve to furnish out a Table of
such Viands, as are there to be had; which are eggs several ways, viz pocht,
and laid upon sippits of bread, soakt in butter and juice of limes, and sugar,
with plumpt currens strewed upon them, and cloves, mace, and cinnamon beaten,
strewed on that, with a little salt. Eggs boiled and roasted, fried with
Collops, of the fat of Pork well powdered. Buttered eggs, an Amulet of eggs,
with the juice of Limes and sugar, a Froize, and a Tansey; Custards, as good as
any at my Lord Mayors Table; Chees-cakes, Puffes, second Porrage, which is
cream boiled to a height, with yelke of eggs, and seasoned with sugar, and
spice, Jelly which we make of the flesh of young piggs, calves feet, and a
cock, and is excellent good, but must presently be eaten for it will not last.
Cream alone, and some done several ways, of which there is great variety,
having Lymons, Lymes, and Oranges ready at hand; and some wherein we put
Plantines, Gnavers and Bonanoes, stewed, or preserved with sugar, and the same
fruits also preserved and put in dishes by themselves, without Cream; and for
a whetstone, to pull on a cup of wine, we have dried Neats tongues, brought
from new and old England; and from Holland, Westalia bacon, and Caviare; as
also pickled Herring, and Maquerell, which we have from new England, and from
Virginie Botargo of which sort I have eaten the best at Colonel Draxes that
ever I tasted.

The fruits that this Island affords, I have already named, and therefore it
will be needless to name them twice; you may take your choice, whether you
will have them set on the Table before or after meat; they use as they do in
Italy, to eat them before meat.

The victuals brought from foreign parts are these, Beef which we have from
Holland, from Old and New England, Virginie, and some from Russia; and yet
comes to us sweet. Porke from all these places, with the most sorts of salt
fish; as Ling, Haberdine, Cod, poor-John, pickled Marquerels, pickled Herrings,
all very good. Sturgeon from New England, but so ill Cookt, as it is hardly to
be eaten; for they want the skill both of boiling and seasoning it; they first
overboyle it, and next over salt it, and so the fish being over tender by
boiling, the salt frets and eats upon it all the way; for when we come to open
it, being carried far from the Bridge, and shaken in the carriage: there is
scarce a whole piece, but the Sturgeon and pickle all in a mash, and so
vehemently salt, as I could never eat any of it, but at Colonel Wallronds
plantationit it is less broken.

Pickled Turtle, we have from the Leeward Islands, but so uncleanly ordered, as
we could hardly find in our hearts to eat it; for they gather the Salt and
Sand together, for haste, upon the Island where it is taken up, as; though we
wash it never so well, yet the grit cracks in our teeth; it has a taste being
salted, almost as ill as puffins, which we have from the Isles of Silly, but
this kind of food, is only for servants; sometimes the Negroes get a little,
but seldom the one or the other did eat any bone meat, at our first coming
thither.

But now at my coming away from thence, it was much bettered, for by the care
and good Husbandry of the Planters, there was greater plenty, both of the
victuals they were wont to eat, as Potatoes, Bonavist, Loblolly, as also of
the bone meat, viz. Porke, salt Fish; and powdered beef, which came thither by
sea, from foreign parts, in so much as the Negroes were allowed each man two
Maquerels a week and every woman one; which were given out to them on Saturday
in the evening, after they had their allowance of Plantines, which was every
one a large bunch, or two little ones, to serve them for a weeks provision; and
if any cattle dyed by mischance, or by any disease: the servants eat the
bodies, and the Negroes the skins, head, and intrails which was divided
amongst them by the overseers; or if any horse, then the whole bodies of them
were distributed amongst the Negroes, and that they thought a high feast, with
which, never poor souls were more contented; and the drink to the servants
with this diet, nothing but Mobbie, and sometimes a little Beveridge; but the
Negroes nothing but fair water. And now I think, I have given you a just
account of the victuals that feeds the Masters, the servants, and the slaves of
this Island: and now you see the provision the Island affords, give me leave to
show you what feasts they can (when they will) make for their friends, upon
their Plantations, which that I may the better do, I will make two bills of
fare; the one for an Inland Plantation, the other for a Plantation near the
sea, of such meat and such plenty of that, as I have seen and eaten of, at
either of those Plantations; And for the Inland Plantation, I will make choice
of Colonel James Draxes, at whose Table I have found well dressed, these
following meats; for the first Course whereof there has been two messes of
meat and both equally good, and this feast is always when he kills a beef,
which he feeds extremely fat, giving him a dozen acres of Bonavist to go loose
in, and due times of watering.

First then (because beef being the greatest rarity in the Island, especially
such as this is) I will begin with it, and of that sort there are these dishes
at either mess, a Rompe boiled, a Chine roasted, a large piece of the breast
roasted, the Cheeks baked, of which is a dish to either mess, the tongue and
part of the tripes minc't for Pyes, seasoned with sweet Herbs finely mi^c't,
suet, Spice and Currants; the legs, pallets and other ingredients for an Olio
Podrido to either mess, a dish of Marrow bones, so here are 14 dishes at the
Table and all of beef: and this he intends as the great Regalio, to which he
invites his fellow planters; who having well eaten of it, the dishes are taken
away, and another Course brought in, which is a Potato pudding, a dish of Scots
Collips of a leg of Porke, as good as any in the world, a fricacy of the
same, a dish of boiled Chickens, a shoulder of a young Goat dressed with his
blood and time, a Kid with a pudding in his belly, a sucking pig, which is
there the fattest whitest and sweetest in the world, with the pognant sauce of
the brains, salt, sage, and Nutmeg done with Claret wine, a shoulder of mutton
which is there a rare dish, a Pasty of the side of a young Goat, and a side of
a fat young Shot upon it, well seasoned with Pepper and salt, and with some
Nutmeg, a loyne of Veale, to which there wants no sauce being so well furnished
with Oranges, Lymons, and Lymes, three young Turkies in a dish, two Capons, of
which sort I have seen some extreme large and very fat, two henns with eggs
in a dish, four Ducklings, eight Turtle doves, and three Rabbets; and for cold
baked meats, two Muscovie Ducks larded, and seasoned well with pepper and salt:
and these being taken off the Table, another course is set on, and that is of
Westphalia or Spanish bacon, dried Neats Tongues, Botargo, pickled Oysters,
Caviare, Anchoves Olives, and (intermixed with these) Custards, Creams, some
alone, some with preserves of Plantines, Bonano Gnavers, put in, and those
preserved alone by themselves, Cheese-cakes, Puffes, which are to be made with
English flower, and bread; for the Cassavie will not serve for this kind of
Cookerie; sometimes Tansies, sometimes Froizes, or Amulets, and for fruit,
Plantines, Bonanoes, Gnavers, Milions, prickled Pear, Anchove Pear, prickled
Apple, Custard Apple, water Milions, and Pines worth all that went before. To
this meat you seldom fail of this drink, Mobbie, Beveridge, Brandy,
kill-Divell, Drink of the Plantine, Claret wine, White wine, and Renish wine,
S^erry, Canary, Red sack, wine of Fi^ll, with all Spirits that come from
England; and with all this, you shall find as cheerful a look, and as hearty
a welcome, as any man can give to his best friends. And so much for a Feast of
an inland Plantation.

Now for a Plantation near the Sea, which shall be Collonell Walrond's, he
being the best seated for a Feast, of any I know: I must say this, that though
he be wanting in the first Course, which is Beef; yet, it will be plentifully
supplied in the last, which is Fish; and that the other wants. And though
Collonell Walrond, have not that infinite store of the provisions Collonell
Drax abounds in; yet, he is not wanting in all the kinds he has, unless it be
Sheep, Goats, and Beef, and so for all the sorts of meats, that are in my Bill
of Fare, in Collonell Drax his Feast, you shall find the same in Collonell
Walronds, except these three, and these are supplied with all these sorts of
fish I shall name, to wit, Mulle^s, Maquerells, Parrat fish, Snappers, red and
gray, Cavallos, Terbums, Crabs, Lobsters, and Cony fish, with diverse sorts
more, for which we have no names. And having these rare kinds of fishes, 'twere
a vain superfluity, to make use of all those dishes I have named before, but
only such as shall serve to fill up the Table; and when he has the ordering it,
you must expect to have it excellent; his fancy and contrivance of a Feast,
being as far beyond any man's there, as the place where he dwells is better
situate, for such a purpose. And his Land touching the Sea, his House being
not half a quarter of a mile from it, and not interposed by any unlevell
ground, all rarities that are brought to the Island, from any part of the world,
are taken up, brought to him, and stowed in his Cellars, in two hours time, and
that in the night; as, Wine, of all kinds, Oil, Olives, Capers, Sturgeon, Neats
tongues, Anchoves, Caviare, Botargo, with all sorts of salted meats, both flesh
and fish for his Family; as, Beef, Pork, English Pease, Ling, Haberdine, Cod,
poor John, and Jerkin Beef, which is hufled, and slasht through, hung up and
dried in the Sun; no salt at all put to it. And thus ordered in Hispaniola, as
hot a place as Barbados, and yet it will keep longer then powdered Beef, and
is as dry as Stock Fish, and just such meat for flesh, as that is for fish,
and as little nourishment in it; but it fills the belly, and serves the turn,
where no other meat is. Though some of these may be brought to the inland
Plantations well conditioned; yet, the Wines cannot possibly come good; for the
ways are such, as no Carts can pass; and to bring up a But of Sack, or a
Hogshead of any other Wine, upon Negres backs, will very hardly be done in a
night, so long a time it requires, to hand it up and down the Gullies; and if
it be carried in the daytime, the Sun will heat and taint it, so as it will
lose much of his spirit and pure taste; and if it be drawn out in bottles at
the Bridge, the spirits fly away in the drawing, and you shall find a very
great difference in the taste and quickness of it. Oil will endure the
carriage better then Wine, but over much heat will abate something of the
purity, and excellent taste it has naturally. And for Olives, it is well known,
that jogging in the carriage causes them to bruise one another; and some of
them being bruised, will grow rotten, and infect the rest. So that Wine, Oil
and Olives, cannot possibly be brought to such Plantations, as are eight or ten
miles from the Bridge; and from thence, the most part of these commodities are
to be fetched. So that you may imagine, what advantage Collonell Walrond has,
of any inland Plantation, having these materials, which are the main Regalia's
in a Feast, and his own contrivance to boot, besides all I have formerly named,
concerning raw and preserved fruits, with all the other Quelquechoses. And thus
much I thought good to say for the honor of the Island, which is no more then
truth; because I have heard it slighted by some, that seemed to know much of
it.

# Commodities Exported.
About a hundred sail of Ships yearly visit this Island, and receive, during the
time of their stay in the Harbors, for their sustenance, the native Victuals
growing in the Island, such as I have already named; besides what they carry
away, and what is carried away by Planters of the I Will, that visit other parts
of the world. The commodities this Island trades in, are Indico, Cotten-wool,
Tobacco, Sugar, Ginger, and Fustick-wood.

# Commodities Imported.
The Commodities these Ships bring to this Island, are, Servants and Slaves,
both men and women; Horses, Cattle, Assinigoes, Camells, Utensills for boiling
Sugar, as, Coppers, Taches, Goudges, and Sockets; all manner of working tools
for Tradesmen, as, Carpenters, Joyners, Smiths, Masons, Mill-wrights,
Wheel-wrights, Tinkers, Coopers, etc. Iron, Steel, Lead, Brass, Pew^er, Cloth
of all kinds, both Linen and Woollen; Stuffs, Hatts, Hose, Shoos, Gloves,
Swords, knives, Locks, Keys, etc. Victuals of all kinds, that will endure the
Sea, in so long a voyage. Olives, Capers, Anchoves, salted Flesh and Fish,
pickled Maquerells and Herrings, Wine of all sorts, and the boon Beer, d'
Angleterre.

# What Buildings we found at our first coming upon the Island.
I had it in my thought before I came there, what kind of Buildings would be
fit for a Country, that was so much troubled with heat, as I have heard this
was; and did expect to find thick walls, high roofes, and deep cellers; but
found neither the one nor the other, but clean contrary; timber houses, with
low roofes, so low, as for the most part of them, I could hardly stand upright
with my hat on, and no cellars at all: besides, another course they took, which
was more wonder to me than all that; which was, stopping, or barring out the
wind, which should give them the greatest comfort, when they were near stifled
with heat. For, the wind blowing always one way, which was Eastwardly, they
should have made all the openings they could to the East, thereby to let in the
cool breezes, to refresh them when the heat of the day came. But they, clean
contrary, closed up all their houses to the East, and opened all to the West;
so that in the afternoones, when the Sun came to the West, those little low
roofed rooms were like Stoves, or heated Ovens. And truly, in a very hot day,
it might raise a doubt, whether so much heat without, and so much tobacco and
kill-devill within, might not set the house a fire; for these three ingredients
are strong motives to provoke it, and they were ever there.

But at last I found by them, the reasons of this strange preposterous manner
of building, which was grounded upon the weakest and silliest foundation that
could be: For they alleged, that at the times of rain, which was very often,
the wind drove the rain in at their windows so fast, as the houses within were
much annoyed with it; for having no glass to keep it out, they could seldom
sit or lie dry; and so being constrained to keep out the air on that side,
for fear of letting in the water, would open the West ends of their houses so
wide, (as was beyond the proportion of windows to repair that want) and so let
in the fire; not considering at all, that there was such a thing as shutters
for windows* to keep out the rain that hurt them, and let in the wind to
refresh them, and do them good at their pleasure. But this was a consideration
laid aside by all, or the most part of the meaner fort of Planters* But at last
I found the true reason, was their poverty and indigence, which wanted the
means to make such conveniences; and so, being compelled by that, had rather
suffer painfully, and patiently abide this inconvenience, than sell or part
with any of their goods, to prevent so great a mischief: So loath poor people
are to part with that, which is their next immediate help, to support them in
their great want of sustenance. For, at that lock they often were, and some
good Planters too, that fared very hard, when we came first into the Island. So
that hard labor, and want of victuals, had so much deprest their spirits, as
they were come to a declining and yielding condition. Nor can this be called
slothfulness or sluggishnesse in them, as some will have it, but a decay of
their spirits, by long and tedious hard labor, slight feeding, and ill
lodging, which is able to wear out and quell the best spirit of the world.

# What materials grow in the Island fit to build with, which may be called the
Elements of Architecture. And first, for Timber.
The Locust is a tree of such a growth, both for length and bigness, as may
serve for beams in a very large room: I have seen many of them, whose straight
bodies are above fifty foot high, the diameter of the stem or body, three foot
and half. The timber of this tree is a hard close substance, heavy, but
firm, and not apt to bend, somewhat hard for tools to cut; brittle, but
lasting* Mastick, not altogether so large as he, but of a tougher substance,
and not accounted so brittle. The Bully-tree wants something of the largnesse
of these, but in his other qualities goes beyond either; for, he is full out as
lasting, and as strong, but not so heavy, nor so hard for tools to work. The
Redwood and prickled yellow wood, good for posts or beams, and are lighter then
the Locust; both are accounted very lasting, and good for building. The Cedar
is, without control, the best of all; but by reason it works smoth, and looks
beautiful, we use it most in Wainscot, Tables, and Stools. Other timber we
have, as the Iron-wood, and another sort, which are excellent good to endure
wet and dry; and of those we make Shingles, which being such a kind of wood,
as will not warpe nor rive, are the best coverings for a house that can be,
full out as good as Tiles, and lie lighter upon the Rafters.

# Stone fit for Building.
We have two sorts of Stone, and either will serve indifferently well in
building: The one we find on sides of small Hills, and it lies as ours do in
England, in Quarries; but they are very small, rough, and ill shaped, some of
them porous, like Honey combs; but being burnt, they make excellent Lyme, the
whitest and firmest when it is dry, that I have seen; and by the help of this,
we make the better shift with our ill shaped stone; for this lime binds it
fast together, and keeps it firm to endure the weather. Other Stone we have,
which we find in great Rocks, and massy pieces in the ground; but so soft, as
with your finger you may bore a hole into it; and this softness gives us the
means of cutting it with two-handed sawes, which being hard, we could not so
easily do, and the easiness causes the expedition; for by that, we the more
speedily fit it for our walls, taking a just breadth of the walls, and cutting
it accordingly; so that we need very little hewing. This stone, as we cut it
in the quarry, is no harder then ordinary mortar, but being set out in the
weather, by pieces as we cut it, grows indifferently hard, and is able to
bear all the weight that lies on it, and the longer it lies, the harder it
grows. Many essays we made, whilst I was there, for the making and burning of
bricks, but never could attain to the perfection of it; and the reason was,
the over fatness of the clay, which would always crackle and break, when it
felt the great heat of the fire in the Clampe; and by no means could we find
the true temper of it, though we made often trialls. There was an ingenious Jew
upon the Island, whose name was Solomon, that undertook to teach the making of
it;yet for all that, when it came to the touch his wisdom failed, and we were
deceived in our expectation, I doubt not but there is a way of tempering, to
make it far better then ours in England; for the pots which we find in the
Island, wherein the Indians boiled their Porke, were of the same kind of Clay,
and they were the best and finest tempered ware of earth that ever I saw. If we
could find the true temper of it, a great advantage might be made to the Island;
for the air being moist, the stones often sweat, and by their moisture rot the
timbers they touch, which to prevent we cover the ends of our beams and girders
with boards, pitched on both sides, but the walls being made of bricks, or but
lined with brick, would be much the wholesomer; and besides keep our wainescot
from rotting. Hangings we dare not use, for being spoyld by Ants, and eaten by
the Cockroaches, and Rats, yet some of the planters that meant to handsome in
their houses, were minded to send for gilt^ leather, and hang their rooms with
that, which they were more then persuaded those vermin would not eat; and in
that resolution I left them.

Carpenters, and Masons, were newly come upon the Island, and some of these very
great Masters in their Art: and such as could draw a plot, and pursue the
design they framed with great diligence, and beautify the tops of their
dootes, windows, and Chimney pieces, very pretily; but not many of those nor
is it needful that there should be many, for though the Planters talk of
building houses, and wish them up, yet when they weigh the want of those hands
in their sugar work, that must be employed in their building, they fall back,
and put on their considering caps. I drew out at least twenty plots when I came
first into the Islands which they all liked well enough, and yet but two of them
used, one by Captain Midleton, and one by Captain Standfast, and those were
the two best houses, I left finished in the Island when I came away. Cellars I
would not make under ground, unless the house be set on the side of a Hill;
for though the air be moist above, yet I found it by experience much moyster
under ground; so that no moist thing can be set there, but it will in a very
short time grow moldy, and rotten; and if for coolness you think to keep any
raw flesh, it will much sooner taint there, then being hung up in a garret,
where the sun continually shines upon it. Nay the pipe-staves hoops, and heads
of barrels, and hogsheads, will grow moldy and rotten: Pavements and
foundations of bricks would much help this with glass windows, to keep out
the air.

If I were to build a house for my self in that place, I would have a third
part of my building to be of an East and West line, and the other two thirds to
cross that, at the West end: in a North and South line, and this latter to be
a story higher than that of the East and West line, so that at four a clock in
the afternoon, the higher buildings will begin to shade the other, and so
afford more and more shade to my East and West building till night; and not
only to the house, but to all the walks that I make on either side that
building, and then I would raise my foundation of that part of my house wherein
my best rooms were three foot above ground; leaving it hollow underneath for
Ventiducts, which I would have come into every room in the house, and by that
means you shall feel the cool breese all the day, and in the evening, when
they slacken, a cool shade from my North and South building, both which are
great refreshings, in ho^ Countries: and according to this Model, I drew many
plots, of several sises and Contrivances, but they did not or would not
understand them: at last I grew weary of casting stones against the wind, and
so gave over.

# The number and nature of the inhabitants.
It were somewhat difficult, to give you an exact account, of the number of
persons upon the Island; there being such store of shipping that brings
passengers daily to the place, but it has been conjectured, by those that are
long acquainted, and best seen in the knowledge of the Island, that there are
not less then 50 thousand souls, besides Negroes; and some of them who began
upon small fortunes, are now risen to very great and vast estates.

The Island is divided into three sorts of men, viz. Masters, Servants, and
slaves. The slaves and their posterity, being subject to their Masters for
ever, are kept and preserved with greater care then the servants, who are
theirs but for five years, according to the law of the Island. So that for the
time, the servants have the worser lives, for they are put to very hard labor,
ill lodging, and their diet very slight. When we came first on the Island, some
Planters themselves did not eat bone meat, above twice a week: the rest of
the seven days, Potatoes, Loblolly, and Bonavist. But the servants no bone
meat at all, unless an Ox dyed: and then they were feasted, as long as that
lasted, And till they had planted good store of Plantines, the Negroes were fed
with this kind of food; but most of it Bonavist, and Loblolly, with some ears
of Mayes toasted, which food (especially Loblolly,) gave them much discontent:
But when they had Plantines enough to serve them, they were heard no more to
complain; for it is a food they take great delight in, and their manner of
dressing and eating it, is this: it is gathered for them (somewhat before it be
ripe, for so they desire to have it,) upon Saturday, by the keeper of the
Plantine grove; who is an able Negro, and knows well the number of those that
are to be fed with this fruit; and as he gathers, lays them all together,
till they fetch them away, which is about five a clock in the after noon, for
that day they break off work sooner by an hour: partly for this purpose, and
partly for that the fire in the furnaces is to be put out, and the Ingenio and
the rooms made clean; beside; they are to wash, shave and trim themselves
against Sunday. But it is a lovely sight to see a hundred handsome Negroes, men
and women, with every one a grasse-green bunch of these fruits on their heads,
every bunch twice as big as their heads, all coming in a train one after
another, the black and green so well becoming one another. Having brought this
fruit home to their own houses, and pilling off the skin of so much as they
will use, they boil it in water, making it into balls, and so they eat it. One
bunch a week is a Negres allowance. To this, no bread nor drink, but water.
Their lodging at night a board, with nothing under, nor any thing a top of
them. They are happy people, whom so little contents. Very good servants, if
they be not spoiled by the English. But more of them hereafter.

As for the usage of the Servants, it is much as the Master is, merciful or
cruel; Those that are merciful, treat their Servants well, both in their
meat, drink, and lodging, and give them such work, as is not unfit for
Christians to do. But if the Masters be cruel, the Servants have very
wearisome and miserable lives. Upon the arrival of any ship, that brings
servants to the Island, the Planters go aboard; and having bought such of them
as they like, send them with a guide to his Plantation; and being come, commands
them instantly to make their Cabins, which they not knowing how to do, are to
be advised by other or their servants, that are their seniors; but, if they be
churlish, and will not show them, or if materials be wanting, to make them
Cabins, then they are to lie on the ground that night. These Cabins are to be
made of sticks, withs, and Plantine leaves, under some little shade that may
keep the rain off; Their suppers being a few Potatoes for meat, and water or
Mobbie for drink. The next day they are rung out with a Bell to work, at six a
clock in the morning, with a severe Overseer to command them, till the Bell
ring again, which is at eleven a clock; and then they return, and are set to
dinner, either with a mess of Lob-lollie, Bonavist, or Potatoes. At one a
clock, they are rung out again to the field, there to work till six, and then
home again, to a supper of the same. And if it chance to rain, and wet them
through, they have no shift, but must lie so all night. If they put off their
cloths, the cold of the night will strike into them; and if they be not strong
men, this ill lodging will put them into a sickness: if they complain, they
are beaten by the Overseer; if they resist, their time is doubled. I have seen
an Overseer beat a Servant with a cane about the head, till the blood has
followed, for a fault that is not worth the speaking of; and yet he must have
patience, or worse will follow. Truly, I have seen such cruelty there done to
Servants, as I did not think one Christian could have done to another. But, as
discreeter and better natured men have come to rule there, the servants lives
have been much bettered; for now, most of the servants lie in Hamocks, and in
warm rooms, and when they come in wet, have shift of shirts and drawers, which
is all the cloths they were, and are fed with bone meat twice or thrice a week
Collonell W^lrond seeing his servants when they came home, toyled with their
labor, and wet through with their sweating, thought that shifting of their
linen not sufficient refreshing, nor warmth for their bodies, their pores
being much opened by their sweating; and therefore resolved to send into
England for rug-Gownes, such as poor people wear in Hospitalls, that so when
they had shifted themselves, they might put on those Gowns, and lie down and
rest them in their Hamocks: For the Hamocks being but thin, and they having
nothing on but shirts and drawers, when they awaked out of their sleeps, they
found themselves very cold; and a cold taken there, is harder to be recovered,
than in England, by how much the body is infeebled by the great toil, and the
Sun's heat, which cannot but very much exhaust the spirits of bodies
unaccustomed to it. But this care and charity of Collonell Walrond's, lost him
nothing in the conclusion; for, he got such love of his servants, as they
thought all too little they could do for him; and the love of the servants
there, is of much concernment to the Masters, not only in their diligent and
painful labor, but in fore seeing and preventing mischiefs that often
happen, by the carelessnesse and slothfulness of retchlesse servants;
sometimes by laying fire so negligently, as whole lands of Canes and Houses
too, are burnt down and consumed, to the utter ruin and undoing of their
Masters: For, the materials there being all combustible, and apt to take fire,
a little oversight, as the fire of a Tobacco-pipe, being knocked out against a
dry stump of a tree, has set it on fire, and the wind fanning that fire, if a
land of Canes be but near, and they once take fire, all that are down the wind
will be burnt up. Water there is none to quench it, or if it were, a hundred
Negres with buckets were not able to do it; so violent and spreading a fire
this is, and such a noise it makes, as if two Armies, with a thousand shot of
either side, were continually giving fire, every knot of every Cane, giving as
great a report as a Pistol. So that there is no way to stop the going on of
this flame, but by cutting down and removing all the Canes that grow before it,
for the breadth of twenty or thirty foot down the wind, and there the Negres
to stand and beat out the fire, as it creeps upon the ground, where the Canes
are cut down. And I have seen some Negres so earnest to stop this fire, as with
their naked feet to tread, and with their naked bodies to tumble, and roll upon
it; so little they regard their own smart or safety, in respect of their
Masters benefit. The year before I came away, there were two eminent Planters
in the Island, that with such an accident as this, lost at least 10000 l.
sterling, in the value of the Canes that were burnt; the one, Mr. James
Holduppe, the other, Mr. Constantine Silvester: And the latter had not only his
Canes, but his house burnt down to the ground. This, and much more mischief
has been done, by the negligence and wilfulness of servants. And yet some
cruel Masters will provoke their Servants so, by extreme ill usage, and often
and cruel beating them, as they grow desperate, and so join together to
revenge themselves upon them.

A little before I came from thence, there was such a combination amongst them,
as the like was never seen there before. Their sufferings being grown to a
great height, and their daily complainings to one another (of the intolerable
burdens they labored under) being spread throughout the Island; at the last,
some amongst them, whose spirits were not able to endure such slavery, resolved
to break through it, or die in the act; and so conspired with some others of
their acquaintance, whose sufferings were equal, if not above theirs; and
their spirits no way inferior, resolved to draw as many of the discontented
party into this plot, as possibly they could; and those of this persuasion,
were the greatest numbers of servants in the Island. So that a day was appointed
to fall upon their Masters, and cut all their throats, and by that means, to
make themselves not only freemen, but Masters of the Island. And so closely was
this plot carried, as no discovery was made, till the day before they were to
put it in act: And then one of them, either by the failing of his courage, or
some new obligation from the love of his Master, revealed this long plotted
conspiracy; and so by this timely advertisment, the Masters were saved: Justice
Hethersall (whose servant this was) sending Letters to all his friends, and
they to theirs, and so one to another, till they were all secured; and, by
examination, found out the greatest part of them; whereof eighteen of the
principal men in the conspiracy, and they the first leaders and contrivers of
the plot, were put to death, for example to the rest. And the reason why they
made examples of so many, was, they found these so haughty in their
resolutions, and so incorrigible, as they were like enough to become actors in
a second plot; and so they thought good to secure them; and for the rest, to
have a special eye over them.

# Negres.
It has been accounted a strange thing, that the Negres, being more then double
the numbers of the Christians that are there, and they accounted a bloody
people, where they think they have power or advantages; and the more bloody, by
how much they are more fearful than others: that these should not commit some
horrid massacre upon the Christians, thereby to enfranchise themselves, and
become Masters of the Island. But there are three reasons that take away this
wonder; the one is, They are not suffered to touch or handle any weapons: The
other, That they are held in such awe and slavery, as they are fearful to
appear in any daring act; and seeing the mustering of our men, and hearing
their Gunshot, (than which nothing is more terrible to them) their spirits are
subjugated to so low a condition, as they dare not look up to any bold attempt.
Besides these, there is a third reason, which stops all designs of that kind,
and that is, They are fetched from several parts of Africa, who speak
several languages, and by that means, one of them understands not another:
For, some of them are fetched from Guinny and Binny, some from Cutchew, some
from Angola, and some from the River of Gambra. And in some of these places
where petty Kingdoms are, they sell their Subjects, and such as they take in
Battle, whom they make slaves; and some mean men sell their Servants, their
Children, and sometimes their Wives; and think all good traffic, for such
commodities as our Merchants sends them.

When they are brought to us, the Planters buy them out of the Ship, where they
find them stark naked, and therefore can not be deceived in any outward
infirmity. They choose them as they do Horses in a Market; the strongest,
youthfullest, and most beautiful, yield the greatest prices. Thirty pound
sterling is a price for the best man Negre; and twenty five, twenty six, or
twenty seven pound for a Woman; the Children are at easier rates. And we buy
them so, as the sexes may be equal; for, if they have more men then women, the
men who are unmarried will come to their Masters, and complain, that they
cannot live without Wives, and desire him, they may have Wives. And he tells
them, that the next ship that comes, he will buy them Wives, which satisfies
them for the present; and so they expect the good time: which the Master
performing with them, the bravest fellow is to choose first, and so in order,
as they are in place; and every one of them knows his better, and gives him
the precedence, as Cowes do one another, in passing through a narrow gate; for,
the most of them are as near beasts as may be, setting their souls aside.
Religion they know none; yet most of them acknowledge a God, as appears by
their motions and gestures: For, if one of them do another wrong, and he cannot
revenge himself, he looks up to Heaven for vengeance, and holds up both his
hands, as if the power must come from thence, that must do him right. Chaste
they are as any people under the Sun; for, when the men and women are together
naked, they never cast their eyes toward the parts that ought to be covered;
and those amongst us, that have Breeches and Petticoats, I never saw so much as
a kiss, or embrace, or a wanton giance with their eyes between them. Jealous
they are of their Wives, and hold it for a great injury and scorn, if another
man make the least courtship to his Wife. And if any of their Wives have two
Children at a birth, they conclude her false to his Bed, and so no more ado
but hang her. We had an excellent Negre in the Plantation, whose name was
Macow, and was our chief Musician; a very valiant man, and was keeper of our
Plantine-groave. This Negres Wife was brought to bed of two Children, and her
Husband, as their manner is, had provided a cord to hang her. But the Overseer
finding what he was about to do, informed the Master of it, who sent for Macow,
to dissuade him from this cruel act, of murdering his Wife, and used all
persuasions that possibly he could, to let him see, that such double births are
in Nature, and that diverse presidents were to be found amongst us of the like;
so that we rather praised our Wives, for their fertility, than blamed them for
their falsenesse. But this prevailed little with him, upon whom custom had
taken so deep an impression; but resolved, the next thing he did, should be to
hang her. Which when the Master perceived, and that the ignorance of the man,
should take away the life of the woman, who was innocent of the crime her
Husband condemned her for, told him plainly, that if he hanged her, he himself
should be hanged by her, upon the same bough; and therefore wished him to
consider what he did. This threatening wrought more with him, then all the
reasons of Philosophy that could be given him; and so let her alone; but he
never cared much for her afterward, but chose another which he liked better.
For the Planters there deny not a slave, that is a brave fellow, and one that
has extraordinary qualities, two or three Wives, and above that number they
seldom go: But no woman is allowed above one Husband.

At the time the wife is to be brought a bed, her husband removes his board,
(which is his bed) to another room (for many several divisions they have, in
their little houses,) and none above six foot square) And leaves his wife to
God, and her good fortune, in the room, and upon the board alone, and calls a
neighbor to come to her, who gives little help to her deliverie, but when the
child is borne, (which she calls her Pickaninnie) she helps to make a little
fire nere her feet and that serves instead of Possets, Broaths, and Caudles. In
a fortnight, this woman is at work with her Pickaninny at her back, as merry a
soul as any is there: If the overseer be discreet, she is suffered to rest
her self a little more then ordinary; but if not, she is compelled to do as
others do. Times they have of suckling their Children in the fields, and
refreshing themselves; and good reason, for they carry burdens on their backs;
and yet work too. Some women, whose Pickaninnies are three years old, will, as
they work at weeding, which is a stooping work, suffer the he Pickaninnie,
to sit astride upon their backs, like St. George a horse back; and there spur
his mother with his heels, and sings and crows on her back, clapping his
hands, as if he meant to fly; which the mother is so pleased with, as she
continues her painful stooping posture, longer then she would do, rather than
discompose her Joviall Pickaninnie of his pleasure, so glad she is to see him
merry. The work which the women do, is most of it weeding, a stooping and
painful work; at noon and night they are called home by the ring of a Bell,
where they have two hours time for their repast at noone; and at night, they
rest from six, till six a Clock next morning.

On Sunday they rest, and have the whole day at their pleasure; and the most of
them use it as a day of rest and pleasure; but some of them who will make
benefit of that days liberty, go where the Mangrave trees grow, and gather
the bark of which they make ropes, which they trucke away for other
Commodity, as shirts and drawers.

In the afternoons on Sundays, they have their music, which is of kettle
drums, and those of several sises; upon the smallest the best musician plays,
and the other come in as Chorasses: the drum all men know, has but one tone;
and therefore variety of tunes have little to do in this music; and yet so
strangely they vary their time, as it is a pleasure to the most curious ears,
and it was to me one of the strangest noyses that ever I heard made of one
tone; and if they had the variety of tune, which gives the greater scope in
music, as they have of time, they would do wonders in that Art. And if I had
not fallen sick before my coming away, at least seven months in one sickness, I
had given them some hints of tunes, which being understood, would have served
as a great addition to their harmony; for time without tune, is not an eighth
part of the science of Music.

I found Macow very apt for it of himself, and one day coming into the house,
(which none of the Negroes use to do, unless an Officer, as he was,) he found
me playing on a Theorbo, and sinking to it which he hearkened very attentively
to; and when I had done took the Theorbo in his hand, and struck one string,
stopping it by degrees upon every fret, and finding the notes to vary, till it
came to the body of the instrument; and that the nearer the body of the
instrument he stopped, the smaller or higher the sound was, which he found was by
the shortning of the string, considered with himself, how he might make some
trial of this experiment upon such an instrument as he could come by; having
no hope ever to have any instrument of this kind to practice on. In a day or
two after, walking in the Plantine grove, to refresh me in that cool shade, and
to delight my self with the sight of those plants, which are so beautiful, as
though they left a fresh impression in me when I parted with them, yet upon a
review, something is discerned in their beauty more then I remembered at
parting: which caused me to make often repair thither; I found this Negro
(whose office it was to attend there) being the keeper of that grove, sitting
on the ground, and before him a piece of large timber, upon which he had laid
cross, six Billets, and having a handsaw and a hatchet by him, would cut the
billets by little and little, till he had brought them to the tunes, he would
fit them to; for the shorter they were, the higher the Notes which he tried by
knocking upon the ends of them with a stick, which he had in his hand. When I
found him at it, I took the stick out of his hand, and tried the sound, finding
the six billets to have six distinct notes, one above another, which put me
in a wonder, how he of himself, should without teaching do so much. I then
showed him the difference between flats and sharpes, which he presently
apprehended, as between Fa, and Mi^ and he would have cut two more billets to
those tunes, but I had then no time to see it done, and so left him to his own
enquiries. I say this much to let you see that some of these people are capable
of learning Arts.

Another, of another kind of speculation I found; but more ingenious then he:
and this man with three or four more, were to attend me into the woods, to
cut Church ways, for I was employed sometimes upon public works; and those
men were excellent Axe-men, and because there were many gullies in the way,
which were impassable, and by that means I was compelled to make traverses, up
and down in the wood; and was by that in danger to miss of the point to which
I was to make my passage to the Church, and therefore was feign to take a
Compass with me, which was a Circumferenter, to make my traverses the more
exact, and indeed without which, it could not be done, setting up the
Circumferenter, and observing the Needle: This Negre Sambo comes to me, and
seeing the needle wag, desired to know the reason of its stirring, and whether
it were alive: I told him no, but it stood upon a point, and for a while it
would stir, but by and by stand still, which he observed and found it to be
true.

The next question was, why it stood one way, and would not remove to any other
point, I told him that it would stand no way but North and South, and upon that
showed him the four Cardinal points of the compass, East, West, North, South,
which he presently learnt by heart, and promised me never to forget it. His
last question was, why it would stand North, I gave this reason, because of the
huge Rocks of Loadstone that were in the North part of the world, which had a
quality to draw Iron to it; and this Needle being of Iron, and touched with a
Loadstone, it would always stand that way.

This point of Philosophy was a little too hard for him, and so he stood in a
strange muse; which to put him out of, I bad him reach his ax, and put it near
to the Compass, and remove it about; and as he did so, the Needle turned with
it, which put him in the greatest admiration that ever I saw a man, and so
quite gave over his questions, and desired me, that he might be made a
Christian; for, he thought to be a Christian, was to be endued with all those
knowledges he wanted.

I promised to do my best endeavor; and when I came home, spoke to the Master
of the Plantation, and told him, that poor Sambo desired much to be a
Christian. But his answer was, That the people of that Island were governed by
the Laws of England, and by those Laws, we could not make a Christian a
Slave. I told him, my request was far different from that, for I desired him to
make a Slave a Christian. His answer was, That it was true, there was a great
difference in that: But, being once a Christian, he could no more account him a
Slave, and so lose the hold they had of them as Slaves, by making them
Christians; and by that means should open such a gap, as all the Planters in
the Island would curse him. So I was struck mute, and poor Sambo kept out of the
Church; as ingenious, as honest, and as good a natur*d poor soul, as ever wore
black, or eat green.

On Sundaies in the afternoon, their Music plays, and to dancing they go, the
men by themselves, and the women by themselves, no mixed dancing. Their motions
are rather what they aim at, than what they do; and by that means, transgress
the less upon the Sunday; their hands having more of motion than their feet,
and their heads more than their hands. They may dance a whole day, and near
heat themselves; yet, now and then, one of the activest amongst them will leap
bolt upright, and fall in his place again, but without cutting a capre. When
they have danced an hour or two, the men fall to wrestle, (the Music playing
all the while) and their manner of wrestling is, to stand like two Cocks, with
heads as low as their hipps; and thrusting their heads one against another,
hoping to catch one another by the leg, which sometimes they do: But if both
parties be weary, and that they cannot get that advantage, then they raise
their heads, by pressing hard one against another, and so having nothing to
take hold of but their bare flesh, they close, and grasp one another about the
middle, and have one another in the hug, and then a fair fall is given on the
back. And thus two or three couples of them are engaged at once, for an hour
together, the women looking on: for when the men begin to wrestle, the women
leave of their dancing, and come to be spectatours of the sport.

When any of them die, they dig a grave, and at evening they bury him, clapping
and wringing their hands, and making a doleful sound with their voices. They
are a people of a timorous and fearful disposition, and consequently bloody,
when they find advantages. If any of them commit a fault, give him present
punishment, but do not threaten him; for if you do, it is an even lay, he will
go and hang himself, to avoid the punishment.

What their other opinions are in matter of Religion, I know not; but
certainly, they are not altogether of the sect of the Saddu^es: For, they
believe a Resurrection, and that they shall go into their own Country again,
and have their youth renewed. And lodging this opinion in their hearts, they
make it an ordinary practice, upon any great fright, or threatening of their
Masters, to hang them selves.

But Collonell Walrond having lost three or four of his best Negres this way,
and in a very little time, caused one of their heads to be cut off, and set
upon a pole a dozen foot high; and having done that, caused all his Negres to
come forth, and march round about this head, and bid them look on it, whether
this were not the head of such an one that hanged himself. Which they
acknowledging, he then told them, That they were in a main error, in thinking
they went into their own Countries, after they were dead; for, this man's head
was here, as they all were witnesses of; and how was it possible, the body
could go without a head. Being convinced by this sad, yet lively spectacle,
they changed their opinions; and after that, no more hanged themselves.

When they are sick, there are two remedies that cure them; the one, an
outward, the other, an inward medicine. The outward medicine is a thing they
call N^gre-oyle, and it is made in Barbary, yellow it is as Bees wax, but soft
as butter. When they feel themselves ill, they call for some of that, and
anoint their bodies, as their breasts, bellies, and sides, and in two days
they are perfectly well. But this does the greatest cures upon such, as have
bruises or strains in their bodies. The inward medicine is taken, when they
find any weakness or decay in their spirits and stomachs, and then a dram or
two of killdevill revives and comforts them much.

I have been very strict, in observing the shapes of these people; and for the
men, they are very well timber'd, that is, broad between the shoulders, full
breasted, well filleted, and clean legged, and may hold good with Albert Durers
rules, who allows twice the length of the head, to the breadth of the
shoulders; and twice the length of the face, to the breadth of the hipps, and
according to this rule these men are shaped. But the women not; for the same
great Master of Proportions, allows to each woman, twice the length of the
face to the breadth of the shoulders, and twice the length of her own head to
the breadth of the hipps. And in that, these women are faulty; for I have seen
very few of them, whose hipps have been broader then their shoulders, unless
they have been very fat. The young Maids have ordinarily very large breasts,
which stand strutting out so hard and firm, as no leaping, jumping, or
stirring, will cause them to shake any more, then the brawnes of their arms.
But when they come to be old, and have had five or six Children, their breasts
hang down below their navells, so that when they stoop at their common work of
weeding, they hang almost down to the ground, that at a distance, you would
think they had six legs: And the reason of this is, they tie the clothes about
their Children's backs, which comes upon their breasts, which by pressing very
hard, causes them to hang down to that length. Their Children, when they are
first born, have the palms of their hands and the soles of their feet, of a
whitish color, and the sight of their eyes of a bluish color, not unlike the
eyes of a young Kitling; but, as they grow older, they become black.

Their way of reckoning their ages, or any other notable accident they would
remember, is by the Moon; and so accounting from the time of their Childrens
births, the time they were brought out of their own Country, or the time of
their being taken Prisoners, by some Prince or Potentate of their own Country,
or any other notorious accidents, that they are resolved to remember, they
account by the Moon; as, so many Moons since one of these, and so many Moons
since another; and this account they keep as long as they can: But if any of
them live long, their Arithmetic fails them, and then they are at a dead
fault, and so give over the chase, wanting the skill to hunt counter. For what
can poor people do, that are without Letters and Numbers, which is the soul of
all business that is acted by Mortals, upon the Clobe of this World.

Some of them, who have been bred up amongst the Portugalls, have some
extraordinary qualities, which the others have not; as singing and fencing. I
have seen some of these Portugal Negres, at Collonell James Draxes, play at
Rapier and Dagger very skilfully, with their Stooka dos, their Imbrocados, and
their Passes: And at single Rapier too, after the manner of Charanza, with such
comeliness; as, if the skill had been wanting, the motions would have pleased
you; but they were skillful too, which I perceived by their binding with their
points, and nimble and subtle avoidings with their bodies, and the advantages
the strongest man had in the close, which the other avoided by the nimblenesse
and skilfulnesse of his motion. For, in this Science, I had bin so well versed
in my youth, as I was now able to be a competent Judge. Upon their first
appearance upon the Stage, they march toward one another, with a slow
majestic pace, and a bold commanding look, as if they meant both to conquer;
and coming near together, they shake hands, and embrace one another, with a
cheerful look. But their retreat is much quicker then their advance, and,
being at first distance, change their countenance, and put themselves into
their posture; and so after a pass or two, retire, and then to it again: And
when they have done their play, they embrace, shake hands, and putting on their
smoother countenances, give their respects to their Master, and so go off. For
their Singing, I cannot much commend that, having heard so good in Europe; but
for their voices, I have heard many of them very loud and sweet.

Excellent Swimmers and Diverse they are, both men and women. Collonell Drax
(who was not so strict an observer of Sundaies, as to deny himself lawful
recreations) would sometimes, to show me sport, upon that day in the afternoon,
send for one of the Muscovia Ducks, and have her put into his largest Pond, and
calling for some of his best swimming Negres, commanded them to swim and take
this Duck; but forbad them to dive, for if they were not barred that play, they
would rise up under the Duck, and take her as she swome, or meet her in her
diving, and so the sport would have too quick an end. but that play being
forbidden, the duck would make them good sport for they are stronger ducks, and
better Diverse by far then ours: and in this chase, there was much of
pleasure, to see the various swimmings of the Negroes; some the ordinary
ways, upon their bellies, some on their backs, some by striking out their
right leg and left arm, and then turning on the other side, and changing
both their leg and arm, which is a stronger and swifter way of swimming,
then any of the others: and while we were seeing this sport, and observing the
diversities, of their swimmings, a Negro maid, who was not there at the
beginning of the sport; and therefore heard nothing of the forbidding them to
dive, put off her peticoate behind a bush, that was at one end of the Pond, and
closely sunk down into the water, and at one diving got to the Duck, pulled her
under water, and went back again the same way she came to the bush, all at one
dive. We all thought the Duck had dived: and expected her appearance above
water, but nothing could be seen, till the subtilty was discovered, by a
Christian that saw her go in, and so the duck was taken from her. But the trick
being so finely and so closely done, I begged that the Duck might be given her
again, which was granted, and the young girl much pleased.

Though there be a mark set upon these people, which will hardly ever be wiped
off, as of their cruelties when they have advantages, and of their fearfulness
and falsnesse; yet no rule so general but has his acception: for I believe,
and I have strong motives to cause me to be of that persuasion, that there are
as honest, faithful, and conscionable people amongst them, as amongst those of
Europe, or any other part of the world.

A hint of this, I will give you in a lively example; and it was in a time when
Victuals were scarce, and Plantins were not then so frequently planted, as to
afford them enough. So that some of the high spirited and turbulent amongst
them, began to mutiny, and had a plot, secretly to be revenged on their
Master, and one or two of these were Firemen that made the fires in the
furnaces, who were never without store of dry wood by them. These villains,
were resolved to make fire to such part of the boiling house, as they were sure
would fire the rest, and so burn all, and yet seem ignorant of the fact, as a
thing done by accident. But this plot was discovered, by some of the others who
hated mischief, as much as they loved it; and so traduc't them to their
Master, and brought in so many witnesses against them, as they were forced to
confess, what they meant should have been put in act the next night: so giving
them condign punishment, the Master gave order to the overseer that the rest
should have a days liberty to themselves and their wives, to do what they
would; and withal to allow them a double proportion of victual for three
days, both which they refused: which we all wondered at knowing well how much
they loved their liberties, and their meat, having been lately pincht of the
one, and not having overmuch of the other; and therefore being doubtful what
their meaning was in this, suspecting some discontent amongst them, sent for
three or four of the best of them, and desired to know why they refused this
favor that was offered them, but received such an answer: as we little
expected; for they told us, it was not sullenness, or slighting the gratuitie
their Master bestowed on them, but they would not accept any thing as a
recompense for doing that which became them in their duties to due, nor would
they have him think, it was hope of reward, that made them to accuse their
fellow servants, but an act of Justice, which they thought themselves bound in
duty to do, and they thought themselves sufficiently rewarded in the Act. The
substance of this, in such language as they had, they delivered, and poor Sambo
was the Orator; by whose example the others were led both in the discovery of
the Plot, and refuseall of the gratuitie. And withal they said, that if it
pleased their Master, at any time, to bestow a voluntary boon upon them, be it
never so slight, they would willingly and thankfully accept it: and this act
might have beseem'd the best Christians, though some of them were denied
Christianity; when they earnestly sought it. Let others have what opinion they
please, yet I am of this belief; that there are to be found amongst them, some
who are as morally honest, as Conscionable, as humble, as loving to their
friends, and as loyal to their Masters, as any that live under the sun, and
one reason they have to be so, is, they set no great value upon their lives:
And this is all I can remember concerning the Negroes, except of their games,
which I could never learn, because they wanted language to teach me.

As for the Indians, we have but few, and those fetched from other Countries;
some from the neighboring Islands, some from the Maine, which we make slaves:
the women who are better verst in ordering the Cassavie and making bread, then
the Negroes, we imploye for that purpose, as also for making Mobbie: the men we
use for footmen, and killing of fish which they are good at; with their own
bows and arrows they will go out; and in a days time, kill as much fish, as
will serve a family of a dozen persons, two or three days, if you can keep the
fish so long. They are very active men, and apt to learn any thing, sooner
then the Negroes; and as different from them in shape, almost as in color; the
men very broad shouldered, deep breasted, with large heads, and their faces
almost three square, broad about the eyes and temples, and sharp at the
chinne, their skins some of them brown, some a bright Bay, they are much
craftier, and subtiler then the Negroes; and in their nature falser; but in
their bodies more active, their women have very small breasts, and have more of
the shape of the Europeans then the Negroes, their hair black and long, a
great part whereof hangs down upon their backs, as low as their hanches, with
a large lock hanging over either breast, which seldom or never curles: clothes
they scorn to wear, especially if they be well shaped; a girdle they use of
tape, covered with little smooth shells of fishes, white, and from their flank
of one side, to their flank on the other side, a fringe of blew Bugle; which
hangs so low as to cover their privities. We had an Indian woman, a slave in
the house, who was of excellent shape and color, for it was a pure bright bay;
small breasts, with the nipls of a porphyrie color, this woman would not be
wooed by any means to wear Clothes. She chanced to be with Child, by a
Christian servant, and lodging in the Indian house, amongst other women of her
own Country, where the Christian servants, both men and women came; and being
very great, and that her time was come to be delivered, loath to fall in labor
before the men, walked down to a Wood, in which was a Pond of water, and there
by the side of the Pond, brought her self a bed; and presently washing her
Child in some of the water of the Pond, lap'd it up in such ^ags, as she had
begged of the Christians; and in three hours time came home, with her Child in
her arms, a lusly Boy, frolic and lively.

This Indian dwelling near the Seacoast, upon the Main, an English ship put in
to a Bay, and sent some of her men a shore, to try what victuals or water they
could find, for in some distress they were: But the Indians perceiving them
to go up so far into the Country, as they were sure they could not make a safe
retreat, intercepted them in their return, and fell upon them, chasing them
into a Wood, and being dispersed there, some were taken, and some killed: but a
young man amongst them straggling from the rest, was met by this Indian Maid,
who upon the first sight fell in love with him, and hid him close from her
Countrymen (the Indians) in a Cave, and there fed him, till they could safely
go down to the shore, where the ship lay at anchor, expecting the return of
their friends. But at last, seeing them upon the shore, sent the Longboat for
them, took them aboard, and brought them away. But the youth, when he came
ashore in the Barbados, forgot the kindness of the poor maid, that had
ventured her life for his safety, and sold her for a slave, who was as free
born as he: And so poor Yarico for her love, lost her liberty.

Now for the Masters, I have yet said but little, nor am able to say half of
what they deserve. They are men of great abilities and parts, otherwise they
could not go through, with such great works as they undertake; the managing of
one of their Plantations, being a work of such a latitude, as will require a
very good head-peece, to put in order, and continue it so.

I can name a Planter there, that feeds daily two hundred mouths, and keeps
them in such order, as there are no mutinies amongst themi and yet of several
nations. All these are to be employed in their several abilities, so as no one
be idle. The first work to be considered, is Weeding, for unless that be done,
all else (and the Planter too) will be undone; and if that be neglected but a
little time, it will be a hard matter to recover it again, so fast will the
weeds grow there. But the ground being kept clean, it is fit to bear any thing
that Country will afford. After weeding comes Planting, and they account two
seasons in the year best, and that is, May and November; but Canes are to be
planted at all times, that they may come in, one field after another;
otherwise, the work will stand still. And commonly they have in a field that is
planted together, at one time ten or a dozen acres. This work of planting and
weeding, the Master himself is to see done; unless he have a very trusty and
able Overseer; and without such a one, he will have too much to do. The next
thing he is to consider, is the Ingenio, and what belongs to that; as, the
Ingenio it self, which is the Primum Mobile of the whole work, the
Boyling-house, with the Coppers and Furnaces, the Filling room, the
Still-house, and Cureing-house; and in all these, there are great casualties.
If any thing in the Rollers, as the Goudges, Sockets, Sweeps, Cogs, or
Braytrees, be at fault, the whole work stands still; or in the Boyling-house,
if the Frame which holds the Coppers, (and is made of Clinkers, fastened with
plaster of Paris) if by the violence of the heat from the Furnaces, these
Frames crack or break, there is a stop in the work, till that be mended. Or if
any of the Coppers have a mischance, and be burnt, a new one must presently be
had, or there is a stay in the work. Or if the mouths of the Furnaces, (which
are made of a sort of stone, which we have from England, and we call it there,
high gate stone) if that, by the violence of the fire, be softened, that it
moulder away, there must new be provided, and laid in with much art, or it will
not be. Or if the bars of Iron, which are in the flower of the Furnace, when
they are red hot, (as continually they are) the fire-man, throw great shides of
wood in the mouths of the Furnaces, hard and carelessly, the weight of those
logs, will bend or break those bars, (though strongly made) and there is no
repairing them, without the work stand still; for all these depend upon one
another, as wheels in a Clock. Or if the Stills be at fault, the kill-devill
cannot be made. But the main impediment and stop of all, is the loss of our
Cattle, and amongst them, there are such diseases, as I have known in one
Plantation, thirty that have died in two days. And I have heard, that a
Planter, an eminent man there, that cleared a dozen acres of ground, and railed
it about for pasture, with intention, as soon as the grass was grown to a
great height, to put in his working Oxen; which accordingly he did, and in one
night fifty of them dyed; so that such a loss as this, is able to undo a
Planter, that is not very well grounded. What it is that breeds these diseases,
we cannot find, unless some of the Plants have a poisonous quality; nor have
we yet found out cures for these diseases; Chickens guts being the best remedy
was then known, and those being chopped or minc't, and given them in a horn, with
some liquor mixed to moisten it, was thought the best remedy; yet it recovered
very few. Our Horses too have killing diseases amongst them, and some of them
have been recovered by Glisters, which we give them in pipes, or large seringes
made of wood, for the same purpose. For, the common diseases, both of Cattle
and Horses, are obstructions and bindings in their bowels; and so lingering a
disease it is, to those that recover, as they are almost worn to nothing before
they get well. So that if any of these stops continue long, or the Cattle
cannot be recruited in a reasonable time, the work is at a stand; and by that
means, the Canes grow over ripe, and will in a very short time have their juice
dried up, and will not be worth the grinding.

Now to recruit these Cattle, Horses, Camells, and Assinigos, who are all
liable to these mischances and decaies, Merchants must be consulted, ships
provided, and a competent Cargo of goods adventured, to make new voyages to
foreign parts, to supply those losses; and when that is done, the casualties
at Sea are to be considered, and those happen several ways, either by
shipwreck, piracy, or fire. A Master of a ship, and a man accounted both able,
stout, and honest, having transported goods of several kinds, from England to
a part of Africa, the River of Gambra, and had there exchanged his Commodities
for Negres, which was that he intended to make his voyage of, caused them all
to be shipped, and did not, as the manner is, shakle one to another, and make
them sure; but having an opinion of their honesty and faithfulness to him, as
they had promised; and he being a credulous man, and himself good natured and
merciful, suffered them to go loose, and they being double the number of those
in the ship, found their advantages, got weapons in their hands, and fell upon
the Sailors, knocking them on the heads, and cutting their throats so fast, as
the Master found they were all lost, out of any possibility of saving; and so
went down into the Hold, and blew all up with himself; and this was before
they got out of the River. These, and several other ways there will happen,
that extremely retard the work of Suger-making.

Now let us consider how many things there are to be thought on, that go to the
actuating this great work, and how many cares to prevent the mischances, that
are incident to the retarding, if not the frustrating of the whole work; and
you will find them wise and provident men, that go on and prosper in a work,
that depends upon so many contingents.

This I say, to stop those men's mouths, that lie here, at home, and expect
great profit in their adventures, and never consider, through what difficulty,
industry, and pains it is acquired* And thus much I thought good to say, of
the abilities of the Planters.

The next thing is, of their natures and dispositions, which I found compliable
in a high degree to all virtues, that those of the best sort of Gentlemen call
Excellent ^ as, Civilly entreating of Strangers, with communicating to them any
thing within the compass of their knowledge, that might be beneficial to
them, in any undertaking amongst them, and assisting them in it, giving them
harbor for themselves and servants. And if their intentions were to buy
Plantations, to make diligent inquiries for such as they desired, and to drive
the bargain as near the wind for their advantages, as possibly they could, and
to put themselves in some travells, in settling the business: Or, if that could
not do them service, to recommend them to any friend they had, that lay more
fit and convenient for their purpose. Loving, friendly, and hospitable one to
another; and though they are of several Persuasions, yet, their discretions
ordered every thing so well, as there never were any fallings out between them:
which to prevent, some of them of the better sort, made a Law amongst
themselves, that whosoever named the word Roundhead or Cavalier, should give to
all those that heard him, a Shot and a Turkey, to be eaten at his house that
made the forfeiture; which sometimes was done purposely, that they might enjoy
the company of one another; and sometimes this Shot and this Turkey would draw
on a dozen dishes more, if company were accordingly: So frank, so loving, and
so good natured were these Gentlemen one to another; and to express their
affections yet higher, they had particular names one to another, as, Neighbor,
Friend, Brother, Sister* So that I perceived nothing wanting, that might make
up a firm and lasting friendship amongst them; though after I came away, it
was otherwise.

Sports and exercises they never used any, as Bowling, Shooting, Hunting, or
Hawking; for indeed there are no places fit for the two first exercises, the
Country being so Rocky, uneven and full of stumps of trees: and for the other
two, they want game; for there are no kind of wild beasts in the Island, nor any
foul fit to hawk at; besides the Country is so woody, as there is no Champian
to fly in; Pheasants, Partridges, Heathpoults, Quails, or Rayles, never set
foot upon this ground, unless they were brought there; and if so, they never
lived and for Hawks, I never saw but two, and those the merriest stirrers that
ever I saw fly; the one of them was in an evening just at sun setting, which
is the time the Bats rise, and so are to a good height; and at a downecome,
this Barbary faulcon took one of them and carried it away.

# Tame beasts that are living on the Island. Camels.
If I shall begin with the largest first I must name Camells, and these are
very useful beasts, but very few will live upon the Island: diverse have had
them brought over, but few know how to diet them. Captain Higginbotham had
four or five, which were of excellent use, not only of carrying down sugar to
the bridge,but of bringing from thence hogsheads of Wine, Beer, or Vinegar,
which horses cannot do, nor can Carts pass for Gullies, and Negroes cannot
carry it, for the reasons before mentioned; a good Camel will carry 1600 l.
weight, and go the surest of any beast.

# Horses.
We have from several parts of the world, England, Holland, Bonavista, the
Isles of Cape Verd, Virginie, New England, and some from one of the Leeward
Islands in the Carribbies called Currissa, besides some we breed and very strong
and good mettled, bold and fit to charge on: these horses we use either for the
Ingenio, or the Saddle, seldom or never for carrying sugar, the gullies being
so steep.

# Oxen, Bulls, and Cowes.
We have from the several places I have named, but chiefly Bulls, from the I Will
of May, and Bonavista; which are Cattle, being well taught, will work the
orderliest that I have seen any. With these, we have Cowes, and some of them we
use for the Payle, and some for the Ingenio, some we breed, and have speedier
increase then in Europe, for here a Calfe will bring a Calfe in fourteen
months; and if it were not for the diseases that take away our Cattle, we
should not need to fetch any from foreign parts.

# Assinigoes.
Are here of exceeding great use in the Island, in carrying our sugars down to
the bridge which by reason of the gullies, the Horses cannot do: besides when
the great raines fall the ways are so deep, and full of roots, as when a horse
puts in his leg between two roots, he can hardly pull it out again, having a
great weight on his back; and if he fall, it is hard lifting him up. Whereas the
Assinigoes pick and choose their way, and sometimes choose out little ways in
the wood, such as they know are fit for them to pass, which horses cannot do,
because the ways are too narrow for them, or if they were not, they would want
much the wit of the Assinigoes, to pick and choose their way. And if by chance
the Assinigoes fall, two Negroes are able to help him up, and we seldom use
more then two, for assistance to the Christian that has the charge of the
carriages. One of these Assinigoes will carry 150 weight of sugar; some of the
strongest 200 weight; our Planters have been very desirous if it were possible
to get Mules there, for they would be of excellent use, in carrying their
sugars, and working in the Ingenio; but they had got none when I was there, but
they were making trialls, either to get some of those, or some large Horse
Assinigoes, to breed with the Mares of that Country.

# Hogs.
We have here in abundance, but not wild or loose, for if they were they would
do more harm then their bodies are worth; they are enclosed, and every man
knows his own, those that rear them to sell, do commonly sell them for a groat
a pound; weighing them alive; sometimes six pence if flesh be dear. There was
a Planter in the Island, that came to his neighbor and said to him: Neighbor I
hear you have lately bought good store of servants, out of the last ship that
came from England, and I hear withal, that you want provisions, I have great
want of a woman servant; and would be glad to make an exchange; If you will let
me have some of your woman's flesh, you shall have some of my hoggs flesh; so
the price was set a groat a pound for the hogs flesh, and six pence for the
Woman's flesh. The scales were set up, and the Planter had a Maid that was
extreme fat, lasie, and good for nothing* Her name was Honor; The man brought
a great fat sow, and put it in one scale: and Honor was put in the other, but
when he saw how much the Maid outwayed his Sow: he broke off the bargain, and
would not go on: though such a case as this, may seldom happen, yet it is an
ordinary thing there, to sell their servants to one another for the time they
have to serve; and in exchange, receive any commodities that are in the Island;
I have said as much already of the largeness weight and goodness of these hogs
as is needful, and therefore I shall need no more.

# Sheep*
We have here, but very few; and those do not like well the pasture, being very
unfit for them; a sour tough and saplesse grass, and some poisonous plant
they find, which breeds diseases amongst them, and so they dye away, they never
are fat, and we thought a while the reason had been, their too much heat with
their wool, and so got them often sho^ne; but that would not cure them, yet the
Ews bear always two Lambs, their flesh when we tried any of them, had a very
faint taste, so that I do not think they are fit to be bred or kept in that
Country: other sheep we have there, which are brought from Guinny and Binny,
and those have hair growing on them, instead of wool; and liker Goats then
sheep, yet their flesh is tasted more like mutton then the other.

# Goats.
We have in greater plenty, and they prosper far better then the sheep, and I
find little difference in the taste of their flesh, and the Goats here; they
live for the most part in the woods, sometimes in the pasture, but are always
inclos^d in a fence, that they do not trespass upon their neighbors ground;
for whosoever finds Hog or Goat of his neighbors, either in his Canes, Corn,
Potatoes, Bonavist, or Plantines, may by the laws of the Island shoot him
through with a Gun, and kill him; but then he must presently send to the owner,
to let him know where he is.

# Birds.
The Birds of this place (setting two aside) are hardly worth the pains of
describing;yet, in order, as I did the Beasts, I will set them down. The
biggest is a direct Bussard, but somewhat less then our gray Bussards in
England, somewhat swifter of wing; and the only good they do, is, sometimes to
kill the Rats. The next to him in bigness, is the larger Turtle Dove, and of
them, there is great store in the Island: it is a much handsomer bird, both in
shape and color, then ours in England, and is very good meat. Next to her is
the lesser Turtle, a far finer bird then she, but of a contrary shape; for this
is of the shape of a Partridge, but her plumidge gray, and a red brown under
the wings; a pretier bird I do not know, of so few glorious colors; her tune
like the other. The next is a bird like a Thrush, of a melancholy look, her
feathers never smooth, but always ruffled, as if she were muing, her head
down, her shoulders up, as if her neck were broke. This bird has for three or
four notes, the loudest and sweetest, that ever I heard; if she had variety,
certainly no bird could go beyond her; she looks always, as if she were sick
or melancholy.

Another there is, not much unlike a Wren, but big as a Thrush; and this is a
merry and jolly, as the other is sad; and as she sits on a stick, jets, and
lifts up her train, looking with so earnest and merry a countenance, as if she
would invite you to come to her, and will sit till you come very near her. This
bird I never heard sing. The nex^ ^ Blackbird, with white eyes, and that so
ill becomes her, as she is accounted an unhandsome bird; her voice harsh,
somewhat like our Jay in England; they go in great flocks, and are harmefull
birds, for they are great devourers of corn, and blossoms of trees, and the
Planters wish them destroyed, though they know not which way. They are a kind
of Stares, for they walk, and do not hop as other birds. One thing I observe in
these birds, which I never saw in any but them, and that is, when they fly,
they put their train into several postures; one while they keep it straight,
as other birds; sometimes they turn it edge-waies, as the tail of a fish, and
by and by put it three square, with the covering feather a top, and the sides
downwards. The next is of the color of a Feldefare, but the head seems too
big for her body, and for that reason they call her a Counselor; her flying is
extreme wanton; and for her tune, it is such as I have not heard any like her,
not for the sweetness, but the strangeness of it; for she performs that with
her voice, that no instrument can play, nor no voice sing, but hers; and that
is, quarter notes, her song being composed of five tones, and every one a
quarter of a note higher then other. Mr. John Coprario, a rare composer of
Music, and my dear friend, told me once, that he was studying a curiosity in
music, that no man had ever attempted to do; and that was, of quarter notes;
but he not being able to go through with it, gave it over: But if he had lived
to have gone with me to the Barbados, this bird should have taught him. Under
this size, there are none considerable; Sparrowes, Haysocks, Finches, yellow
Hamers, Titnies, and diverse others of that sort, for which I have no names. But
the last and strangest of all, is, that which we call the huming Bird, much
less then a Wren, not much bigger then a humble Be, her body long, her wings
small and sharp, of a sullen sad green, no pleasant colors on her; her manner
of feeding is, just as a Be, putting her bill into a blossom or a flower,
tastes as lightly as a Be, never sitting, but purring with her wings, all the
time she stays with the flower; and the motion of her wings are as nimble and
swift, as a Be: We have no way to take her, but by shooting sand out of a gun
at her, which mazes her for the present, that you may take her up; but there is
no way to keep her alive, her feeding being such, as none can give her but her
self. Now for the Birds that live upon the outward verge of the Island, I have
not much to say. Sometimes Teals come to our Ponds, three or four couple
together, but never go away; for when we see them, we take a gun, and coming
near, shoot them, and the report of the gun frights, and makes those that are
alive fly away, and fetch one turn, and come back to see their fellows dead,
and alight to them, and so we shoot and shoot again till all be killed; for
they will always come back to see their dead friends. The like we do with
those birds we call Oxen and Kine, which come to us in like manner. Small
Swallows we have now and then, but somewhat different from ours in color.

But there is a Bird they call, a Man of war, and he is much bigger than a
Heron, and flies out to Sea upon discoveries, (for they never light upon the
Sea) to see what ships are coming to the Island; and when they return, the
Ilanders look out, and say, A ship is coming, and find it true. I have seen
one of them, as high as I could look, to meet us twenty leagues from land; and
some others, almost as big as Ducks, that in an evening came in a flock of
twenty, or there about, and they made diverse turns about the ship, a little
before Sunsetting; and when it grew dark, they lighted upon the ribs of the
ship, and with little nooses of packthred, the sailors caught them; they were
very fat and good.

Though the Bat be no Bird, yet she flies with wings, and always a little
before Sunsetting, at which time they come out of holes, chimneys, and hollow
trees, and will raise them to a great height, feeding themselves with flies
that they find in the air, at that time of the evening.

# Of lesser Animals and Insects.
Having done with Beasts and Birds, we will enquire what other lesser Animalls
or Insects there are upon the Island, of which, Snakes are the chief, because
the largest; and I have seen some of those a yard and a half long. The only
harm they do, is to our Pigeon houses, and milk-panns; so that if we leave any
hole in the bottom of the house, where they can come in, they will get to the
nests, and devour the young Pigeons, if they be not over big. And yet it is
strange to see, what great morsells they will swallow; slide they will up
against a wall, if it be but perpendicular; but if it be declining outward,
they cannot get up, but will fall back ten foot high, if they be hindered by any
stooping of the wall; for which reason we make jetties, near the top of such
rooms, as we will keep them out of; they have climbed six foot high upon the
outside of a wall, come in at a window, down on the inside, skim our
milk-pannes, and away again: Till we took one of them there, we knew not by
what means our pannes were thus skim'd. They never sting any body, nor is there
any venomous beast in the Island. The next to these are Scorpions, of which,
some of them are as big as Ratts, smooth, and colored like a Snake, somewhat
blewer, their bellies inclining to yellow, very nimble and quick to avoid their
pursuers: yet, the Snakes will now and then take them, between whom there is a
great conflict, before the quarrel be decided; for, the Scorpions that are
large, are very strong, and will maintain the fight sometimes half an hour; I
have seen them wrestle together a good part of that time: But in conclusion,
the Snakes get the better, and devour the other. These Scorpions were never
known to hurt man or beast. Toads or Frogs we have none.

Lizards we had in great plenty, but the Cats kill them so fast in the houses,
as they are much lessened in their number. This little Animal loves much to be
where men are, and are delighted to stand and gaze in their faces, and hearken
to their discourse. These with us, I think, are different from those of Europe;
the bodies of ours are about four inches long, the tail near as much, headed
not much unlike a Snake; their color, when they are pleased, a pure
grasse-green on the back, bluish toward the side, and yellowish on the belly;
four legs, and those very nimble: When they see at distance some of their own
kind, that they are angry with* they swell a little bigger, and change their
color, from green to russet or hair-colour, which abates much of their beauty;
for, their green is very plea^ant and beautiful: Cold they are as Frogs. Next
to these are Cockroches, a creature of the bigness and shape of a Beetle; but
of a pure hair-colour, which would set him off the better, if he had not an
ugly wabling gate, but that makes him unhandsome. He appears in the evening
when it is dark, and will, when he pleases, fly to your bed, when he finds you
sleeping, and bite your skin, till he fetch blood, if you do not wake; and if
you take a Candle to search for him, he shifts away and hides himself, as the
Pu^nices do in Italy. The Negres, who have thick skins, and by reason of their
hard labor, sleep foundly at night, are bitten so, as far as the breadth of
both your hands together, their skins are rac't, as if it were done with a
currie-comb. Next to these tormentors, are Musketos, who bite and sting worse
then the Gnats and Stouts, that sting Cattle in England, (and are commonly felt
in marish ground). And next to them Meriwings, and they are of so small a sise,
and so thin and aereall, as you can hardly discern them, but by the noise of
their wings, which is like a small bugle horn, at a great distance: Where they
sting, there will rise a little knob, as big as a pease, and last so a whole
day; the mark will not be gone in twenty four hours. Caterpillars we have
sometimes in abundance, and they do very great harm; for, they light upon the
leaves of our Potatoes, which we call Slips, and eat them all away, and come so
low, as to eat of the Root too: And the only remedy we have, is, to drive a
flock of Turkies into the place where they are, and they will devour them. The
harms these vermin do us, is double; first, in the slips, which is the food
we give our Horses, and is cast into the rack; and in our Potatoes, being the
root of these slips, which we our selves feed upon.

Flies we have of so many kinds, (from two inches long with the great horns,
which we keep in boxes, and are showed by John Tredescan amongst his rarities)
to the least Atome, as it would be a weary work to set them down; as also the
sudden production of them, from Nothing to Maggets, from Maggets to Flies; and
there is not only a race of all these kinds, that go on in a generation, but
upon new occasions, new kinds; as, after a great downfall of rain, when the
ground has been extremely moistened; and softened with the water, I have walked
out upon a dry walk (which I made my self) in an evening, and there came
about me an army of such flies, as I had never seen before, nor after; and they
rose, as I conceived, out of the earth: They were as big bodied as Bees, but
far larger wings; harm they did us none, but only lighted on us; their color
between ash color and purple.

The next of these moving little Animalls are Ants, or Pismires, and those are
but of a small sise, but great in industry; and that which gives them means to
attain to their ends, is, they have all one soul. If I should say, they are
here or there, I should do them wrong; for they are every where, under ground,
where any hollow or loose earth is, amongst the roots of trees, upon the
bodies, branches, leaves, and fruit of all trees, in all places without the
houses and within, upon the sides, walls, windows, and roofes without; and on
the floores, side-walls, sealings, and windows within; tables, cupbords, beds,
stools, all are covered with them, so that they are a kind of Ubiquitaries.
The Cockroaches are their mortal enemies, and though they are not able to do
them any mischief, being living, (by reason they are far stronger and mightier
then a hundred of them, and if they should force any one of them with
multitudes, he has the liberty of his wings to make his escape) yet, when they
find him dead, they will divide him amongst them into Atoms; and to that
purpose, they carry him home to their houses or nests. We sometimes kill a
Cockroach, and throw him on the ground, and mark what they will do with him;
his body is bigger then a hundred of them, and yet they will find the means to
take hold of him, and lift him up; and having him above ground, away they carry
him, and some go by as ready assistants, if any be weary; and some are the
Officers that lead and show the way to the hole into which he must pass; and
if the Van curriers perceive, that the body of the Cockroach lies cross, and
will not pass through the hole, or arch, through which they mean to carry him,
order is given, and the body turned endwise, and this done a foot before they
come to the hole, and that without any stop or stay; and this is observable,
that they never pull contrary ways.

Those that are curious, and will prevent their coming on their Tables,
Cupbords, or Beds, have little hollowes of timber, filled with water, for the
feet of these to stand in; but all this will not serve their turn; for they
will some of them, go up to the sieling, and let themselves fall upon the
teasters of the Beds, Cupbords, and Tables.

To prevent them from coming on our shelves where our meat is kept, we hang
them to the roof by ropes, and tar those roapes, and the roofes over them,
as also the strings of our Hamacks, for which reason we avoid them better in
Hamacks then in beds.

Sometimes when we try conclusions upon them; we take the Carpet off the Table,
and shake it, so that all the Ants drop off, and rub down the legs and feet of
those tables, (which stood not in water) and having done so: we lay on the
Carpet again, and set upon it a Sallet dish, or Trencher, with sugar in it,
which some of them in the room will presently smell, and make toward it as
fast as they can, which is a long journey; for he must begin at the foot of the
table, and come as high as the inside of the Carpet, and so go down to the
bottom and up of the outside of the Carpet, before he gets on the table, and
then to the sugar, which he smells to; and having found it, returns again the
same way, without taking any for his pains, and enformes all his friends of
this booty; who come in thousands, and ten thousands, and in an instant,
fetch it all away; and when they are thickest upon the table, clap a large
book, (or any thing fit for that purpose) upon them, so hard as to kill all
that are under it, and when you have done so, take away the book, and leave
them to themselves, but a quarter of an hour, and when you come again, you
shall find all those bodies carried away. Other trials we make of their
Ingenuity, as this. Take a Pewter dish, and fill it half full of water, into
which put a little Gally pot filled with Sugar, and the Ants will presently
find it, and come upon the Table; but when they perceive it environed with
water, they try about the brims of the dish, where the Gally pot is nearest,
and there the most venturous amongst them, commits him self to the water,
though he be conscious how ill a swimmer he is, and is drowned in the
adventure: the next is not warned by his example, but ventures too; and is
alike drowned: and many more, so that there is a small foundation of their
bodies to venture on; and then they come faster then ever, and so make a bridge
of their own bodies, for their friends to pass on; neglecting their lives for
the good of the public; for before they make an end, they will make way for
the rest, and become Masters of the Prize; I had a little white sugar which I
desired to keep from them, and was devising which way to do it, and I knocked a
Nail in the beam of the room, and fastened to it a brown thread, at the lower
end of which thread, I tied a large shell of a fish; which being hollow I put
the sugar in; and locked the door, thinking it safe; but when I returned, I
found three quarters of my sugar gone, and the Ants in abundance, ascending and
descending, like the Angels on Jacobs Ladder, as I have seen it painted, so
that I found no place safe, from these more then busy Creatures.

Another sorts of Ants there are, but nothing so numerous or harmfull as the
other, but larger by far; these build great nests, as big as Be hives,
against a wall, or a tree, of Clay and Lome, sometimes within doors, and in it
several little Mansions, such as Bees make for themselves, but nothing so
curious; these the Cockroaches and Lizards meet withal, way-laying them near
their nests, and feed upon them: which to prevent they make from thence, many
and several galleries that reach some of them six or seven yards several
ways, of the same earth they do their nests; so that for such a distance as
that, they are not to be perceived, by any of their enemies, and commonly,
their Avenues go out amongst leaves, or moss, or some other Covert, that they
may not be perceived; but the most of these are in the woods; for we have
destroyed their nests, and their galleries within doors so often, as they are
weary of building, and so quit the house, I can say nothing of these, but that
they are the quickest at their work of building, of any little Creatures that
ever I saw. Spiders we have, the beautifullest and largest that I have seen,
and the most curious in their webs; they are not at all Poisonous.

One sort more of these harmefull Animals there are, which we call Chegoes; and
these are so little that you would hardly think them able to do any harm at
all, and yet these will do more mischief then the Ants, and if they were as
numerous as harmefull, there were no enduring of them; they are of a shape, not
much unlike a Louse, but no bigger then a mite that breeds in cheese, his
color bluish: an Indian has laid one of them, on a sheet of white paper, and
with my spectacles on I could hardly discern him; yet this very little Enemy,
can and will do much mischief to mankind. This vermin will get thorough your
Stocken, and in a pore of your skin, in some part of your feet, commonly
under the nayl of your toes, and there make a habitation to lay his off spring,
as big as a small Tare, or the bag of a Be, which will cause you to go
very lame, and put you to much smarting pain. The Indian women have the best
skill to take them out, which they do by putting in, a small poynted Pinn^, or
Needle, at the hole where he came in, and winding the point about the bag
loosen him from the flesh, and so take him out. He is of a bluish color, and
is seen through the skin, but the Negroes whose skinns are of that color
(or near it) are in ill case, for they cannot find where they are; by which
means they are many of them very lame: some of these Chegoes are poisonous,
and after they are taken out, the Orifice in which they lay, will fester and
rankle for a fortnight after they are gone. I have had ten taken out of my
feet in a morning, by the most unfortunate Yarico an Indian woman.

Some kind of Animals more there are in the woods, which because I never saw I
cannot speak their forms: some of them I guess are no bigger than Crickets;
they lie all day in holes and hollow trees, and as soon as the Sun is down,
they begin their tunes, which are neither singing nor crying, but the shrillest
voices that ever I heard: nothing can be so nearly resembl'd to it, as the
mouths of a pack of small beagles at a distance; and so lively, and chirping
the noise is, as nothing can be more delightful to the ears, if there were
not too much of it, for the music has no intermission till morning, and then
all is hushed.

I had forgotten amongst my fishes to mention Crabs; but because this kind of
them live upon the land, I might very well overslip them and now bring them in,
amongst these Animals: they are small Crabs, such as women sell by dozens in
baskets in the streets, and of that color raw and alive, as these are boiled,
which is of a reddish color. These Crabs are coming from the Sea all the year
long, (except in March) they hide themselves in holes, and in houses, and
sometimes in hollow trees; and into every part of the Island they come,
sometimes we meet them going up stairs in the night, sometimes in our low
rooms, sometimes in our Gardens, where they eat the berbs. We hold them not
good meat: But the Negres will often upon Sundaies go a Crabbing, and think
them very great dainties when they are boiled. These Crabs in March come all
out of their holes, and march down toward the Sea in such multitudes, as to
cover a great part of the ground where they go, and no hedge, wall, or house
can stop them, but they will over. As we ride, our Horses tread on them, they
are so thick on the ground. And they have this sense, to go the nearest way to
the Sea, from the place where they are, and nothing can stop or stay them, but
death. It Is the time I guess they go to breed.

# Trees.
Having past through all the reasonable and sensitives Creatures of this
Island,I come now to say somewhat of the Vegetables, as of Trees: and of those
there are such infinite varieties, as to mention all, were to loose my self in
a wood; for, it were impossible for any one in the time I stayed there, (though
he studied nothing else) to give an account of the particulars. And therefore I
will only mention such, as for beauty or use, are of most and greatest esteem
in the Island.

# Physick-Nut.
And for that there is none of more use than the Physick-Nut, I will begin
first with that, which though the name seem to promise health, yet, it has
poison lodged secretly within, and that poison may bring health, being
physically applied, and in fit times and seasons. The reason why I think it
poisonous, is, because Cattle will not brouse, nor feed on the leaves, nor
willingly come near the shade. This tree will grow to be eighteen foot high,
but we have a way to employ it; as for beauty and use, there are none such in
the Island. This tree (which is of the height as I have told you) has many
springs, of four, five, and six foot long; we lop them one after another, and
as we take off the branches, cut stakes of them, about four foot and a half
long, and stick them in the ground an inch deep, and no more, close to one
another in the manner of Paliffadoes; and so, with a rail of either side, to
keep them eeven, and here and there a spur or braket on either side, to keep
them steedy for a month; by which time, they will not only gather roots to
strengthen them, and hold them up, but leaves to cover their tops, and so even
and smooth they fall, as to cover the tops of themselves, at least two foot and
a half downward: and will in a month more, be so firmly rooted in the earth,
as you may remove your railes and brakets, to assist those that are planted
after them, in other places. These leaves being large, smooth, and beautifully
shaped, and of a full green, appear to your eyes like so much green Satin,
hanged on a rail or line, so eeven and so smooth they hang naturally.

The stems will grow apace, but more in their bigness then their height, (for
you may if you please, keep them at this height, by cutting off the tops) and
in a while they will not only touch, but imbody themselves one into another;
and then they become as strong and useful a fence, as any can be made, so
close, as to keep in Conies, and keep out Rats; for, neither Cattle nor Vermin
love to come near it. And as it is a beautiful and useful fence, for Gardens
and Orchards, and to keep in Conies, Turkies, Muscovia Ducks, and Dunghill
foul, that cannot fly over, (having one wing clipped) so it serves us for
singular use, in fencing about all our Pastures, or what other ground we would
enclose: For, our fences being all made of fallen trees, with the ends laid
cross one upon another, and many of those trees such wood, as were apt to rot
and decay, by extreme moisture, and violent heat; and the Planters having found
the most of them were rotten and decayed, and to make new fences of that kind
impossible, by reason the timbers and trees that grew very near that place,
were employed in making those fences, (for as they made them, the timber stood
in their way, and no more ado but cut them down, and lay them in their places
without further removing) and removes of so great trees as they were, not to be
done with few and weak hands: So that they were come to a great strait, and
knew not which way, nor how, to renew these fences; some of the Pastures having
no less then three thousand two hundred sixty eight trees to encompasse them.
At last, they thought upon this way, of making new fences, which is the most
commodious that can be imagined. And so they gathered all the Physick-nuts they
could, and sowed them, and made large Nurseries of them, which as soon as they
grew to any strength, they removed, and planted them so, as making a slight
hedge between the old fence and the Pasture, that Cattle might not tread them
down, being young and tender, they planted them between; and in four years time
they grew so strong, as they were of sufficient ability to defend themselves,
and became a very sufficient fence to keep in or out the strongest Bulls in the
Pasture. And then, all the wood of the old fence being dry, and fit for the
Furnaces, was cut in short pieces, cleft, and sent home by the Assinigos; and
part was gathered together, and made into Charcoals, for fuel at home, and
for the Smiths Forge, for we have there no Sea-coales. Besides this, there is
another use of this Plant, and that is Physical: Take five of the kernells,
and eat them in a morning fasting, and they are a Vomit and Purge; but the body
must be strong that takes so many: three will serve a body that is easy to
work on: I my self took five of them, and they gave me twelve vomits, and
above twenty stools, which was too great an evacuation in a hot Country, where
the body is weak, and the spirits exhausted by continual sweating.

But I saw a stronger man there take them before me, and they wrought
moderately with him; but, finding a weaker constitution to work on, they had
the more powerful operation.

This Nut, as it grows on the tree, is like a white Pear-plumb, and of a
yellowish color, with a pulpe on it, as much as a Plumb; but that being taken
off, there remains a stone, of a blackish color, and within that, a kernel,
and in that kernel, in the parting it in two halves, as our Hazle nuts in
England, will part in the middle longwise, you shall find a thin filme, which
looks of a faint Carnation, which color is easily discerned, the rest of the
kernel being so perfectly white; Take out that filme, and you may eat the nut
safely, without any operation at all, and it is as sweet, as a Jordan-Almond.
This filme is perfectly discerned, when the nut is new gathered; but I have
looked on them which have been longer kept, after I brought them into England,
and I find the Carnation color quite gone, but the kernel retains still his
operation, both in Vomit and Purge.

The leaves are shaped not much unlike a Vine leaf, but thrice as big, and
much thicker, and fuller green.

# Poison tree.
The poisoned tree, though I cannot commend for her virtues, yet for her
beauties I can. She is almost as large every way as the Locust, but not of that
manner of growing; her leaves full out as large and beautiful, as the
Lawrells, and so like, as not to be known assunder. The people that have lived
long there, say, it is not wholesome to be under the shade of this tree. The
fellers, as they cut them down, are very careful of their eyes; and those that
have Cipers, put it over their faces; for if any of the sap fly into their
eyes, they become blind for a month. A Negre had two Horses to walk, which
were left with him by two Gentlemen; and the Horses beginning to fight, the
Negre was afeard, and let them go; and they running into the wood together,
struck at one another, and their heels hitting some young trees of this kind,
struck the poisonous juice into one another eyes, and so their blindness
parted the fray, and they were both led home stone blind, and continued so a
month, all the hair and skin pilling off their faces. Yet, of this timber we
make all, or the most part, of the Pots we cure our Sugar in; for, being sawed,
and the boards dried in the Sun, the poison vapors out.

And as this tree's poison is in her sap, so the Mantionell's is in her fruit,
which they account as high a poison, as that of the Cassavie. The fruit is like
an apple John, and it is said to be one of those poisons, wherewith the Indian
Caniballs invenome their Arrows.

# Cassavie.
And now I have named the Cassavie, it is fit it come in the rank of poisons,
though with good ordering it makes bread. It Is rather a shrub then a tree, the
sprigs, few of them bigger then a broom-staffe, crooked and ill shaped; but no
matter for that, for the leaves are so thick, as to cover them; and they grow
in tufts or bunches, and ever an odd one, as, 5. 7. 9. or 11. every leaf an
inch broad, and six or seven inches long; dark green, and turning backward from
the foreside. Their Roots I have set down already, their bigness, and manner
of growth, with the use of them.

# Coloquintida.
Coloquintida is as beautiful a fruit, as any you can see, of the bigness of
an Ostrages egg; a fruit of so ill a taste, as a spoonful of the liquor mars
a whole pot of pottage; the rind smooth, with various greens, interlac'd with
murries, yellowes, and faint carnations.

# Cassia-fistula.
Next to this shall be the Cassia fistula, which is a tree that will grow the
most, in the least time, of any that ever I knew: I set one of the seeds,
(which is but a small seed) and in a years time, it grew to be eight foot high,
and as large and big in the stem, as an ordinary Rattoon you walk withal: The
leaf of this tree is like that of an Ash, but much longer, and of a darker
color; the fruit, when it is ripe, just of the color of a black pudding, and
shaped as like, but longer. I have seen of them above 16 inches long; the pulp
of it is purgative, and a great cooler of the reins.

# The poisoned Cane.
Now because we will have all, or as many of the poisonous and Physical trees
and plants together as we can, that they may not trouble another leaf, we will
put in a plant amongst the trees, and that is so like a sugar Cane as hardly to
be discerned, the one from the other: and this Plant has this quality, that
whosoever chews it, and sucks in any of the juice, will have his tongue, mouth,
and throat, so swelled as to take away the faculty of speech for two days, and
no remedy that I know but patience.

# Tamarine.
Tamarine trees were but newly planted in the Island, at the time I came away,
and the Palm tree (so much admired for her two rare virtues of Oil and Wine)
was newly begun to be planted, the plant being brought us from the East Indies,
but the Wine she brings may rather be called a pleasant drink, then to assume
the name of Wine: it is thus gathered, they cut the bark in such a part of the
tree, where a bottle may fitly be placed, and the liquor being received into
this bottle, it will keep very good for a day and no longer but is a very
delicious kind of liquor.

# Fruit trees.
The poisonous trees and plants being past over: it is now fit to mention such
as will make amends, and put our mouths in taste, but not too suddenly to fall
upon the best, I will begin with the most contemptible fruits which are in the
Island, the Fig tree and Cherry-tree, which have savory names, but in their
natures neither useful, nor well tasted. Fig tree.
The Fig tree being very large, but bears a small fruit, and those of so mean
a condition, as I never saw any one eat of them, and the leaves not at all of
the shape of our Fig leaves, nor the fifth part so large, the body of the tree
I have seen as large as; an ordinary Elm here in England.

# Cherry tree.
The Cherry tree is not altogether so large, the fruit as useless and insipid:
but the color something resembling a Cherry, and the shape not much unlike;
which caused the planters to call it by that name.

The next to these shall be fruits, rather for sauce then meat, to whet our
appetites to those that follow after; and these are the Citrons, Oranges,
Lymons, Lyme.

The Citron is a small tree, though she bear a great fruit; and so ill matched
they are, as the fruit pulls it down to the ground, and most of the fruit
touches, and bears upon the ground; the stalk of a dark color, the leaf
shaped like that of the Limon, but of a very dark green: these fruits we had in
great abundance, when first we came there, but were all cast away, by reason we
had none but Muscavado sugar, and that is not fit to preserve with; besides
there were very few then that had the skill to do them.

# Orange.
The Orange trees do not prosper here, nor are the fruits so kindly as those of
Bern udos: large they are and full of juice, but not so delicious as those of
that Island; besides they are very full of seeds, and their rinds neither so
deep, and pure an Orange Tawny, nor so thick, and therefore not so fit to
preserve: the trees seldom last above seven years in their prime, and then
decay.

Limon.
The Limon tree is much better shaped and larger, but this fruit is but here
and there, straggling in the Island. I have seen some of the fruit large, and
very full of juice, with a fragrant smell: the leaves both of these and the
Orange trees, I shall not need to mention being so well known in England.

# Lime-tree.
The Lime tree is like a thick Hollybush in England, and as full of prickles:
if you make a hedge of them, about your house, it is sufficient proof against
the Negres; whose naked bodies cannot possible enter it, and it is an
extraordinary sure fence against Cattle; it commonly grows seven or eight
foot high, extremely thick of leaves and fruit, and of prickles; the leaves not
unlike those of a Limon tree, the fruit so like as not to be discerned, at the
distance of three yeards, but only that it is less, but in the taste of the
rind and juice, extremely different, much fitter for sauce then the Limon, but
not so good to eat alone.

# Prickled apple.
The Prickled apple, grows on a tree extremely thick leaved, and those leaves
large, and of a deep green, shaped not much unlike the leaf of a Wallnut tree
in England: this fruit is shaped like the heart of an Ox, and much about that
bigness; a faint green on the outside, with many prickles on it, the taste very
like a musty Limon.

# Prickled Pear.
The next in order, shall be the Prickled pear, much purer in taste and better
formed; the fruit being not unlike in shape to a Greenfield-peare, and of a
faint green, intermixed with some yellow near the stalk; but the body of a mixed
red, partly Crimson, partly Stammell, with prickled spots of yellow, the end of
it growing somewhat larger then the middle, at which end, is a round spot of a
murrey color, the breadth of an inch, and circular with a Center in the middle,
and a small circle about it, and from that circle within, lines drawn to the
utmost (...) of that round Murrey spot, with faint circles between the small
circle and the largest, upon that Murrey spot.

These lines and circles, of a color no more different in lightness from the
murry, then only to be discerned, and a little yellower color.

# Pomegranate.
The Pomegranate is a beautiful tree the leaves small, with a green mixed with
Olive color, the blossom large, well shaped, and of a pure Scarlet color;
the fruit not so large there, as those we have from Spain. The young trees
being set in rows, and planted thick make a very good hedge, being clipped eeven
a top with Garden shears. The fruit is very well known to you and therefore I
shall need say nothing of that, and these are all the remarkable fruits that
grow on trees, and are proper to this Island, that I can remember, though I
believe there are many more.

# Papa.
The Papa is but a small tree, her bark of a faint willow color, her leaves
large, and of the shape of the Physic nut tree, but of the color of her own
bark, the branches grow out four or five of one height, and spread almost
level from the place where they bud out; to the ends of the branches, and
about two foot higher, such other branches spreading in the same manner, and if
the tree grow to a greater height then ordinary, a story or two more of these
bows: the top handsomely The Prickled Pear
depiction of prickly pear (fruit) The Blossom of the Pomegranate
depiction of pomegranate (blossom) page. 70.

formed to the branches, the fruit somewhat bigger then Turnips, growing close
to the body of the tree, where the branches grow, and are somewhat a fainter
Willow, then either the body, branches, or leaves. The tree, though it may be
accounted wood, yet the softest that yet I ever saw; for, with my knife, I can
cut down a tree as big as a man's leg at one chop^* The fruit we boil, and serve
it up with powdered pork, as we do turnips in England; but the turnip is far the
more savoury fruit.

# Gnaver.
The Gnaver grows on a Tree, bodied and leaved like a Cherry-tree, but the
leaves somewhat larger and stiffer; the fruit of the bigness of a small Limon,
and near that color, only the upper end somewhat blunter then the Limon; the
rind about the thickness of the rind of a Limon, but soft, and of a delicate
taste; it holds within a pulpie substance, full of small seeds, like a fig,
some of them white within, and some of a stammell color. These seeds have this
property, that when they have past through the body, wheresoever they are laid
down, they grow. A Planter, and an eminent man in the Island, seeing his
Daughter by chance about her natural business, called to her: Plant even,
Daughter, plant even. She answered: If you do not like 'em, remove 'em, Father,
remove 'em. These fruits have different tastes, some rank, some sweet; so that
one would give a reason of this variety, which was, according to the several
constitutions they had past through, some having a milder, some a stronger
savor.

This tree does much harm in our Plantations; for the Cattle eating of them,
let fall their loads every where, and so they grow in aburdance, and do much
harm to the Pastures, and much pains and labor is taken to destroy them. They
are the best fruits preserved of any, the seeds being taken out, and the rind
only preserved.

Coco.
I have been told by some Planters in the Island, that Coco-trees grow there,and
they are such men as I give credit to, but I never saw any; yet, I may venture
to tell what shapes they bear, having been well acquainted with them at the
Island of St. Jago, where there grew very many of them. They seldom are above
80. or 90 foot high, some a 100. The branches of these come out in several
parts of the tree, leaving spaces between the heights; but the greatest
quantity is at top, and that top always stoops a little; but the Nuts grow
where the lower boughs break out.

These Nuts are of several sises, the most of them as big as a large
football, with a green skin without, and between that and the shell, a pulpy
substance, which when it is dry, is like the rind of the Mangrave tree, of
which they make roaps, or (to bring the resemblance a little nearer) like hemp
kurds. This Nut-shell is near half an inch thick, which we commonly cut at one
end, a hole as big as a thirty shilling piece, and we find the shell full of a
clear and pure tasted liquor, very delicious, but not very wholesome. This shell
is li^'d within with a substance as thick as it self, a white color, and
tastes sweeter then the best french Walnut, and of that softness. The color
of the leaves of this tree, are like the Olive leaves.

Custard-Apple.
The Custard apple grows on a tree full of branches and large leaves,and is a
lively and lusty tree to look on; the fruit, when it is ripe, as big as the
largest Pomewater, but just of the color of a Warden. When it is ripe, we
gather it, and keep it one day, and then it is fit to be eaten. We cut a hole
at the lesser end, (that it may stand the firmer in the dish) so big, as that a
spoon may go in with ease, and with the spoon eat it. Never was excellent
Custard more like it self, then this to it; only this addition, which make it
transcend all Custards that art can make, though of natural ingredients; and
that is, a fruity taste, which makes it strange and admirable. Many seeds there
are in it, but so smooth, as you may put them out of your mouth with some
pleasure.

Anchovie-Pear.
'Twas never my luck to see any of those trees, that bear the Anchovie-Pears,
nor to taste of the fruit,and therefore can give you no account of that tree;
only to let you know, that there is such a tree in the Island.

# Trees of mixed kinds.
The Macow is one of the strangest trees, the Island affords; the body and
branches being stuck all over with prickles, of the finest forms that I have
seen.

Macow.
They are black as jet, or Ebony polished; the sises, from one to seven inches
long, sharp at the point, with proportionable increasings, from that part where
it grows to the tree or bough, and waved, as I have seen some swords, from the
point to the hilts, the finest natural pick tooths that can grow. I brought a
large bundle with me, but had them picked out of my Box by the way. This tree is
about the largeness of an ordinary Willow, the leaves of that color and
shape, but extremely stiff and hard.

It bears at top a large tuffe of fruit, which we call Apples, but they are not
a fruit to be eaten; their color as their leaves, willow-green, and just such
for shape as the Cyprus tree bears. Sure, Nature found this tree to some great
purpose, she is so armed; for neither man nor beast can touch her, without
being wounded. She is well shaped, her body straight, her branches well
proportioned, her top round.

# Date tree.
Next to this in color are Date-trees, but the leaves somewhat longer. The
shape of this tree I cannot give you, having never seen any old enough to bear
the name of a tree, but sprigs rising from the root, at least ten foot high.

# Mangrave.
The Mangrave is a tree of such note, as she must not be forgotten; for, though
she be not of the tall and lusty sort of trees, yet, she is of great extent;
for, there drops from her limbs a kind of Gum, which hangs together one drop
after another, till it touch the ground, and then takes root, and makes an
addition to the tree. So that if all these may be said to be one and the same
tree* we may say, that a Mangrave tree may very well hide a troop of Horse. The
bark of this tree being well ordered, will make very strong roaps, and the
Indians make it as fine as flax, and spin it into fine thread, whereof they make
Hamocks, and diverse other things they wear: and I have heard, the linen they
wear is made of this bark, as also their chaires and stools.

# Calibash.
The Calibash tree bears leaves of the fullest and richest green, of any that I
know, and the greatest plenty of leaves; her fruit not for food, it is for the
most part as big as that of the Coco, round as a ball, green as the leaves of
the same tree, smooth and shining, and their manner of growing is so close to
the body, and the largest of the boughs, as to touch them so, that till it be
pulled or cut off, we cannot perceive any stalk it has. Of this round ball, we
make dishes, bowls and caps; for, being hollow within, as the Coco-nut, we
employ them for several uses, as they are of different sises; some for dishes,
some for cups, some for basins, and some of the largest to carry water in, as
we do Goards, with handles a top, as that of a kettle, for they are smoother,
and much stronger then they. These look very beautifully on the tree, and to me
the more beautiful, by how much they were the more strange; for, by their firm
and close touching the trees, without any appearance of stalks, they seem to
cleave, rather then grow to the trees.

# Bay tree.
One, and but one tree in this Island have I seen, that bears an English name,
and that is the Bay tree, whose leaves are so aromatic, as three or four of
them will amply supply the place of Cloves, Mace, and Cinnamon, in dressing any
dish of meat where that is required. It differs nothing in shape or color from
ours in England.

Timber trees.
The Cedar is without question the most useful timber in the Island;for being
strong, lasting, and not very heavy, it is good for building; but by reason of
the smoothness and fairness of the grain, there is much of it used in
Wainscots, Chairs, Stools, and other Utensils within doors; but, as they grow,
I never saw any of them beautifully shaped, the leaves just like those of the
Ash in England, but somewhat bigger.

# Mastick.
The Mastick is a tree very tall, but the body slender, and therefore Nature
has provided means to support her; for, she has spurs or brackets above seven
foot from the ground, which are fixed or engrafted in the body; and some of the
spurs reach out from the tree to the root, so broad, as that tables have been
made of a round form, above three foot and a half diameter. Some trees have
two, some three of these spurrs. This tree has commonly a double top, one side
being somewhat higher then the other. The fruit is like none of the rest, it is
of a stammell color, and has neither skin nor stone; but it is more like a
Cancre then a Fruit, and is accounted unwholsom, and therefore no man tastes
it: it is, I believe, the seed of the tree, for we see none other. The leaves of
this tree grow of such a height, as till they fall down, we can give no
judgment of them. The timber of of this tree is ranked amongst the fourth sort,
three being better then it. I have seen the bodies of these trees near sixty
foot high.

# Bully.
The Bully tree is less then the Mastick, and bears a fruit like a Bullis in
England; her body straight, and well shaped; her branches proportionable, her
timber excellent and lasting.

# Redwood.
Redwood is a handsome tree, but not so lofty as the Mastick, excellent timber
to work, for it is not so hard as some others, which is the cause they seldom
break their tools in working it, and that is the reason the workmen commend
it above others. It Is a midling tree for sise, the body about two foot and a
half diameter.

# Prickled yellow-wood
This is accounted as good as the Red-wood in all respects, and is a strong and
lasting timber, good for building, and for all uses within doors.

# Iron wood.
Iron wood is called so, for the extreme hardness; and with that hardness it
has such a heaviness, as they seldom use it in building; besides, the workmen
complain that it breaks all their tools. It Is good for any use without doors,
for neither Sun nor rain can any ways mollify it. It Is much used for Coggs to
the Rollers.

# Lignum vitae.
Lignum vitae they use now and then for the same purpose, when the other is
away; but having no bowling in that Country, little is used: They send it
commonly for England, where we employ it to several uses; as, for making
Bowls, Cabinets, Tables, and Tablemen.

# Locust.
The Locust is a tree, not unfitly to be resembled to a Tuscan Pillar, plain,
massy, and rural, like a well lim'd labourer; for, the burden it bears being
heavy and ponderous, ought to have a body proportionably built, to bear so
great a weight. That rare Architect, Vitruvius, taking a pattern from Trees, to
make his most exact Pillars, rejects the wreathed, vined, and figured Columns;
and that Columna Atticurges, mentioned by himself, to have been a squared
Pillar; and those that are swelled in the middle, as if sick of a Tympany or
Dropsy; and chooses rather the straightest, most exact, and best sis'd to bear
the burden that lies on them. So, looking on these trees, and finding them so
exactly to answer in proportion to the Tuscan Pillars, I could not but make the
resemblance the other way: For, Pillars cannot be more like Trees, then these
Trees are like Tuscan Pillars, as he describes them. I have seen a Locust (and
not one, but many) that has been four foot diameter in the body, near the
root, and for fifty foot high has lessened so proportionably, as if it had
taken pattern by the ancient Remainders, which Philander was so precise in
measuring, which is a third part of the whole shaft upward, and is accounted as
the most graceful diminution. The head to this body is so proportionable, as
you cannot say, it is too heavy or too leight; the branches large, the sprigs,
leaves, and nuts so thick, as to stop all eyesight from passing through, and
so eeven at top, as you would think you might walk upon it, and not sink in.
The Nuts are for the most part three inches and a half long, and about two
inches broad, and somewhat more then an inch thick; the shell somewhat thicker
then a half crown piece, of a russet Umbre, or hair color; the leaves bigger
than those that grow upon the Ash in England: I shall not mention the timber,
having given it in my Buildings. The Kernells are three or four in every nut,
and between those, a kind of light pulpie substance, such as is in a
Hazle-nut, before the kernel be grown to the full bigness: In times of great
famine there, the poor people have eaten them for sustenance: But, of all
tastes, I do not like them.

# Bastard-Locust.
Another Locust there is, which they call the bastard-Locust. This looks fair,
but will not last.

Palmeto the less.
There is a tree called the Palmeto, growing near the Seacoast, which being a
sandy light ground,does not afford that substance of mould, to make a large
tree; nor shall you find in that low part of the Island, any considerable trees
fit for building, which is a main want and hinderance to them that would build
there; for, there is no means to transport any from the high lands, by reason
of the unpassableness of the ways; the body of this tree I have seen about 45
or 50 foot high, the Diameter seldom above 15 or 16 inches, the rind of a pure
ash color, full of wrinkles, the leaves about two foot and a half long, in
bunches, just as if you took twenty large flaggs, with their flat sides
together, and tied them at the broader ends. With these bunches they thatch
houses, laying every bunch by himself on the lathes, somewhat to overhang one
another, as tiles do. This is a very close kind of thatch, keeps dry and is
very lasting, and looking up to them on the inside of the room, they are the
prettiest becoming figures that I have seen of that kind, these leaves grow
out no where but at the tops of the trees.

# Palmeto Royal.
Another kind of Palmeto there is, which as it has an addition to the name, has
likewise an addition to the nature: for I believe there is not a more Royal or
Magnificent tree growing on the earth, for beauty and largeness, not to be
paralelled; and excels, so abundantly in those two properties and perfections,
all the rest, as if you had ever seen her, you could not choose but fall in love
with her; I Am sure I was extremely much, and upon good and Antique Authority:
For if Xerxes strange Lydian love the Plantane tree, was loved for her age, why
may not I love this for her largeness? I believe there are more women loved for
their largeness then their age, if they have beauty for an addition, as this
has; and therefore I am resolved in that point, to go along with the multitude,
who run very much that way: but how to set her out in her true shape and
color, without a Pencill, would ask a better Pen then mine; yet I will
deliver her dimensions as near truth as I can, and for her beauty much will
arise out of that. But first I will beg leave of you to show her in her
Infancy, which is about ten or twelve years old, at which time she is about
seventeen foot high, her body and her branches, and that part which touches the
ground, not unlike an Inkhorne, which I have seen turned in Ivory, round at the
bottom and bellied like that part which holds the Ink; and the stem or body
of the tree, growing less, as that part which holds the Pens, but turned by a
more skillful workman; and some of this body, part tawny, part purple, with
rings of white and green mixed, that go about her; and these rings at six
inches distance. This stem, to be about six foot and a half high, upon which
grows the bottom of the stalks, thin as leaves of Parchment, enwrapping one
another so close as to make a continued stem, of the same bigness, for two foot
and a half above the other, every one of those filmes or skins, bearing a
stalk, which lessens so insensibly, from the skin to the point as none but
the greater former of all beauty can make the like.

These stalks or branches, are of several lengths, those that are the most
inward, are the highest; and every one of those stalks adorned with leaves,
beginning a little from the filmes to the point, and all these leaves like
Cylinders, sharp at either end, and biggest in the middle: that part of the
stem which is the enwrappings of the filmes of a pure grass green, shining as
parchment dyed green, and slickt with a slick-stone, and all the branches with
the leaves, of a full grass green spreading every way, and the highest of them
eight foot above the green stem, the other in order to make a well shaped Top,
to so beautiful a stem. The branches sprout forth from the middle, or
intrinsic part of the tree, one at once; and that wrapped up so close as it is
rather like a Pike then a branch with leaves, and that Pike always bends
toward the East; but being opened by the Suns heat spreads the leaves abroad,
at which time the outmost or eldest branch or sprig below withers and hangs
down, and pulls with it the filme that bears it, and so both it and the filme
which holds it up turn of a ruslet color and hang down like a dead leaf,
till the wind blows them off; by which time the Pike above is become a branch,
with all its leaves opened; then comes forth another Pike, and then the next
outmost branch and filme below, falls away as the former, and so the tree
grows so much hig^er* as that branch took room, and so a pike and a dead
leaf, a pike and a dead leaf, till she be advanced to her full height which
will not be till 100 years be accomplished: about thirty or forty years old,
she will bear fruit, but long before that time, changes her shape, her belly
being lessened partly by the multiplicity of roots, she shoots down into the
earth (nature foreseeing how great a weight they were to bear, and how great a
stress they were to suffer, when the winds take hold of so large a head, as
they were to be crowned with) and partly by thrusting out sustenance and
substance, to raise and advance the stem or body (for out of this belly which
is the storehouse of all this good it comes) so that now she becomes taper,
with no more lessning then a well shaped arrow, and full out as straight, her
body then being of a bright Ash color, with some dapples of green, the filmes
a top retaining their smoothness and greenness, only a little variation in the
shape, and that is a little swelling near the place that touches the stem or
body, not much unlike an Urinall, so that the swelling that was in the body, is
now raised up to the filmes or skinns above. But at this age, the branches
stand not so upright, as when the tree was in her minority, but has as great
beauty in the stooping and declension, as she had in the rising of her
branches, when her youth thrusts them forth with greater violence and vigor,
and yet they had then some little stooping near the points. And now there is an
addition to her beauty by two green studds, or supporters, that rise out of her
sides, near the place where the filmes join to the tree, and they are about
three foot long, small at the place from whence they grow, but bigger upwards,
purely green and not unlike the Iron that Glasiers use to melt their Sawder
with.

One grows on one side of the tree, the other on the other side, and between
these two of the same height, on either side the tree, a bush upon which the
fruit grows, which are of the bigness of large French grapes, some green, some
yellow, some purple, and when they come to be purple, they are ripe, and in a
while fall down, and then they yellow becomes purple, and the green yellow; and
so take their turns, till the tree gives over bearing. These fruits we can
hardly come by being of so great a height, nor is it any great matter: for the
taste is not pleasant; but the Hoggs find them very agreeable to their palats
for those that eat of them grow suddenly fat. I have seen an Negre with two
short ropes clyme the tree, and gather the fruit, about this depiction of royal
palm The Young Palmeto Royal
A Scale of 8 foot

page. 76.

time, she is 80 foot high, and continues that form, without variation; only
as she grows older, so taller and larger; and has always green, yellow, and
purple fruit, succeeding one another; whether there be blossoms, I know not,
for I never went so high as to look. This sort of trees I have seen of all
^ises, from ten, to two hundred foot high; and I have been told by some of the
ancient Planters, that when they came first upon the Island, they have seen some
of them three hundred foot high: And some reasons I have to persuade me to
believe it; for, amongst those that I have seen growing, which I have guest to
be two hundred foot high, the bodies of which I measured, and found to be but
sixteen inches diameter. And I once found in a wood, a tree lying, which seemed
to have been long fallen; for, the young wood was so grown about her, as
standing at one end, I could not see the other: But, having a couple of Negres
with me, that were axe-men, I caused them to cut away the wood that grew about
the tree, that I might come to the other end, which I thought would never be
done, she was so long, and yet a great part of her cut off, and carried away. I
measured the diameter of her stem, and found it to be ^5 inches.

Now if we go by the rule of Three, and say, If 16 inches diamiter make 200
foot high, what shall 25 inches? And by this rule we shall prove her to be 312
foot high. But the branches of this tree were all carried away, so that I could
see none of them. But I have measured a branch of one of those trees of 200
foot high, and found it 25 foot 16 200 25 312 200 25 312 39
long. So then, by the same Rule: If 200 foot high bear a branch of 25 foot
long, what shall a Treee of 312 foot high do? And I see by the same Rule, it
appears to be 39 foot long And one of these trees, after she comes to bear
fruit, will have no less then 20 branches at once, (but many more in her
nonage) and half of them hold this length. I have seen a branch of one of
these small trees of 200 foot high, fallen down, and blown from the tree in the
falling, twenty paces off, which has made me admire from whence it should come:
For, the tree being of so great a height, the branches lose much of their
bigness and length by their distance: But, lying on the ground, where we can
take the just measure, we find what they are. And it is an admirable thing, to
see the form of this spring of branch, which is not above two inches broad
where it joins to the film, and is lessening of the breadth from that end to
the point, which is twenty five foot long, so insensible, as it is not possible
to discern where the diminution is. So smooth, so eeven, so firm and tough, as
though it be not wood, it is much stronger, and ables to endure the weather, or
any kind of bending. The leaves that grow upon this stalk, are all of them
(unless toward the points) two foot long; that part which touches the stalk,
small, but strong enough to bear the leaf, and has a little short stalk, to
which the leaf grows, which leaf is as exactly formed as the stalk, growing
by degrees, to make two inches broad in the middle, and losing that breadth
insensibly to the point. These leaves are thin, but tough enough, to endure the
strongest wind that blows, without being broken, and not above four inches
distant one from another; which multiplicity of leaves, makes the beauty of the
tree the fuller. About the time this tree parts with her belly, and grows to a
slender kind of shape, she draws up amongst her roots some of the soil that
bred her, about two foot higher than the level of ground that is near it; and
by reason it is held in by an infinity of small roots, that come from the body,
it there remains firm, and falls not down; the outside of this earth is about
a foot round about, broader than the diameter of the tree; so that if the
diameter of the tree be a foot, the diameter of this earth is three foot at
top, but somewhat more below; for the sides are not so steep, as to hold one
breadth above and below. If this earth were beautiful, smooth, and large
enough, it might be called the Pedistan to that Corinthian Pillar, the Palmeto
Royal. But what is wanting in the Pedistall, is supplied in the dimensions of
the Pillar; for, the Corinthian Pillar is allowed for length but nine of her
own diameters, and this will not ask leave to take 150. which makes her the
more beautiful, since the strength she has, is able to support the weight she
bears: And for the Architrave, Frize, and Cornise, they are not to be compared
with the beauty of the head of this Pillar, together with the fruit and
supporters. And I believe, if Vitruvius himself had ever bin where this Pillar
grew, he would have changed all his deckings and garnishings of Pillars,
according to the form of this. And though the Corinthian Pillar be a Column
laciviously decked, like a Curtesan, and therein participating (as all
inventions do) of the place where they were first born; (Corinth having been
without controversy, one of the wantonnest Towns in the world) yet, this wants
nothing of her beauty, and yet is chaste, which makes her the more admirable,
and the more worthy to be prised. One thing more I have to say of this tree,
which is not only the root that brings forth all this beauty, but the root of
much admiration and wonder; that, being a tree of that height, bearing a top of
so vast an extent, as from the point of the branches of one side, to the point
of the stalk on the other side, to be 78 foot, upon which, the wind cannot but
have a main power and force; yet, I never saw any of them blown down, nor any
root of this tree bigger then a Swans quill: but there are many of them, and
they fasten themselves in the Rocks, which hold them very firm. The wood of
this tree is so extreme hard, and tough withal, as most of the axes that are
employed to fell them, are broken in the work; and they are well enough served,
for cutting down such beauty. The use our Planters made of them at first
coming, before they knew how to make shingles, was, to saw the bodies of these
trees to such lengths, as might reach from the ridge pole, to the Eves of the
house; for, they were hollow, and then sawing them long-wise, there were two
concaves, which they laid together, setting the hollow sides depiction of royal
palm The Old Palmeto Royal
This plant here expressed is of the least Magnitude being buta foot in diametre,
and the height some what less then 100 times his own diametre; But there have
bin some growing upon the Island, which have bin two foot diametre, and have bin
150 times their own diametre, which is 300 foot high.

A scale of 30 feet

page. 78.

upward; and where they close, one to cover them, with the hollow side
downward, and so the whole house over. And this was the use they made of the
bodies of these Trees, for which, very many of them were destroyed.

But, I doubt, I have tired you with naming so many trees, and therefore I will
give over; but, with this rule, that which way soever I have traveled, (from
the place I dwelt) either East, West, North, or South, (but four miles distant)
I have still found trees, such as I had never seen before, and not one of those
I have named, and many of them extremely large and beautiful. And the nearer
the middle of the Island, the larger the trees, and the leaves: so that from
trees of a hundred foot high, to a diminution of twenty; and from leaves of
eighteen inches long, with a proportionable breadth to that length, to the small
ones of half an inch, which most of the trees bear that are near the Bridge,
and, I think, near the Sea, every where you shall find many, and the most
such. And the reason I have given before; the land in the highest part of the
Island, being very rich mould, and that near the Sea being a sandy light earth.
And in the partings or twists of the branches of those trees, (which I have not
named) such excrescences grow out, as are strange for their forms, and no
doubt medicinable in their natures; such as is our Misleto, or Polypodium, and
much larger, and more frequent; but we want skillful men, to find out their
virtues.

# Plants that bear fruit. Ginger.
There are (besides the Bay Leaves, which, as I told you, might serve for
Cloves, Mace, and Cinnamon) two sorts of spices, Ginger, and red-Pepper: The
Ginger being a root which brings forth blades, not unlike in shape to the
blades of Wheat, but broader and thicker, for they cover the ground so, as you
cannot see any part of it. They are of a popinjay color, the blossom a pure
scarlet. When it is ripe* we dig up the roots, (cutting off the blades) and put
them into the hands of an Overseer, who sets many of the young Negres to scrape
them, with little knives, or small iron spuds, ground to an edge. They are to
scrape all the outward skin off, to kill the spirit; for, without that, it will
perpetually grow. Those that have Ginger, and not hands to dress it thus, are
compelled to scald it, to kill the spirit; and that Ginger is nothing so good
as the other, for it will be hard as wood, and black; whereas the scrapt Ginger
is white and soft, and has a cleaner and quicker taste.

# Red Pepper
There is of this kind two sorts, the one so like a child's Coral, as not to
be discerned at the distance of two paces; a crimson and scarlet mixed, the
fruit about three inches long, and shines more then the best polisht Coral.
The other, of the same color, and glistering as much, but shaped like a large
button of a Cloak; both of one and the same quality; both so violently strong,
as when we break but the skin, it sends out such a vapor into our lungs, as we
fall all a coughing, which lasts a quarter of an hour after the fruit is
removed; but, as long as we are garbling it, we never give over. This Spice the
Spaniards love, and will have it in all their meat, that they intend to have
picant; for a greater Hough goo is not in the world. Garlic is faint and cool
to it. It grows on a little shrub, no bigger then a Goosbery-bush.

Cucumber.
Having inflamed this leaf with a burning heat,it is, fit to apply a Cooler,
lest it fall on fire; and that is such a one, as is cold in the third degree, a
Cucumber; of which kind we have excellent good, from the beginning of November
to the end of February; but after* that, the weather grows too hot. They serve
as Sallets cold, with Oil, Vinegar, and Pepper; and hot, being stewed, or
fried, of which we make Sauce for Mutton, Pork, Turkeyes, or Muscovia Ducks.
Geese I never saw but two in the Island, and those were at the Governors house.

# Millons.
Millons we have likewise for those four months; but before or after, the
weather is too hot. They are for the most part larger than here in England. I
have seen them cut four inches thick; they eat moister then here they do, which
makes them the less wholesome. We take no other care (after the seeds are put
into the ground) but to weed them. I have seen of them sixteen inches long.

# Water-Millon.
The Water Millon there, is one of the goodliest fruits that grows. I have
seen of them, big as a Cloakbag, with a suit of clothes in it; purely green,
engrayl'd with straw color; And so wanton Nature is, in disposing those
figures, as though they be upon all parts of the fruit; yet, they vary and flow
so infinitely, as no inch of square or circle is to be found upon the rind,
that is like one another, and the whole rind as smooth as polisht glass.
Where they put out upon the ground, there they lie; for the Vine they grow by,
has not strength to remove them. This fruit within is not unlike an Apple for
color; but for taste, not like any fruit I know in England, waterish, and
wallowish; yet the people there eat strange quantities of it, two or three
pieces, big, as if cut round about a twelve-penny loaf, an inch thick: They
hold it rarely cooling to the body, and excellent for the stone. The seeds are
of themselves so strong a Purple, as to dye that part of the fruit it touches,
of the same color; and till they do so, the fruit is not full ripe: They
account the largest, best. Extremely full of seeds they are, which in the
eating slip out with such ease, as they are not at all troublesome.

# Grapes.
Grapes we have in the Island, and they are indifferently well tasted, but they
are never ripe together; some may be picked out to make Wine, but it will be so
small a quantity, as it will not be worth the while. There is always some
green, some ripe, some rotten grapes in the bunch.

# Plantine.
Though the Plantine bear not the most delitious fruit that grows on this
Island; yet, for that she is of great use, and beauty too, and for many other
rarities that she excells other Plants in, I shall endeavor to do her right in
my description. And first, for the manner of planting; we put a root into the
ground, six inches deep, and in a very short time, there will comeforth three
or four sprouts, whereof one has the precedence, and holds that advantage, (as
the prime Hawke does in an Ayery). And as this sprout grows, it springs from
the intrinsic part of the stem, and the out-leaves hang down and rot; but
still new ones come within, and rise up as the Palmeto does, like a a pike,
which opened with the Sun, becomes a leaf; and about the time it comes to be
eight or ten foot high, the pikes, (and consequently depiction of plantain The
Plantine
A Scale of: 8: foot

Blossomd
page 80

the leaves) will be of their full bigness, and so (as others grow) continue
that bigness, till the last sprout come forth; which is the soul of the Plant,
and will never be a leaf, but is the stem upon which the fruit must grow.
About the time the leaves come to their full bigness, they rot no more, but
continue in their full beauty; a rich green, with stripes of yellow so
intermixed, as hardly to be discerned where they are. These leaves are the most
of them above six foot long, and two foot broad; smooth, shining, and stiff as
a Laurel leaf; and from the middle of the leaf to the end, such a fall, as a
feather has, in a well shaped plume. But, as all these leaves came out in a
pike, so that pike ever bends a little toward the East, though as soon as it
becomes a a leaf, chooses any point of the Compass to lean to; and so in a
due proportion, hangs round about the stem. At the time it comes to be of the
full height, the uppermost leaves will be fifteen or sixteen foot high, and
then you shall perceive the stem upon which the fruit must grow, more then a
foot higher than the rest, with a green bunch at top; which bunch has such a
weight, as to make it stoop by degrees, till it be but seven foot from the
ground; and then the green leaves which held the blossom in, open, and show
the blossom it self, which is of a pure purple, and as big as the heart of a
Stagg, and of that shape, with the point downwards, and so continues, without
opening the leaves, till it be ready to fall off; and when it falls, pulls with
it above a foot of the stalk that held it, which is covered with yellow
blossoms. This purple blossom, when it fell, I guess to be a pound weight,
besides the stalk it took along with it. After this is fallen, the fruit grows
out from that end which remained; and as it grows, turns up toward the stalk
that bears it, much like a Grapple, that holds the Longboat of a Ship; or, as
a dozen large fish-hooks tied together, turning up several ways; each turning
up of that fruit being seven or eight inches long, and as bigg as a large
Battoon you walk with. In six months, this Plant will be grown, and this fruit
ripe, which is a pleasant, wholesome, and nourishing fruit, yellow, when it is
ripe: But the Negres choose to have it green, for they eat it boiled, and it is
the only food they live upon. Our manner of eating it, is, when it is full
ripe, take off the skin, which will come off with much ease, and then the fruit
looks yellow, with a froath upon it, but the fruit firm. When it is gathered,
we cut down the Plant, and give it to the Hoggs, for it will never bear more.
The body of this plant is soft, skin within skin, like an Onyon, and between
the skins, water issues forth as you cut it. In three months, another sprout
will come to bear, and so another, and another, for ever; for, we never plant
twice. Groaves we make of these plants, of twenty acres of ground, and plant
them at such distances, and in such rows, as you do Cherry-trees in Kent, so
that we walk under the leaves, as under the Arches in St. Faith's Church under
Paul's, free from sun and rain.

# Wild Plantine.
The wild Plantine grows much as the other does, but the leaves not so broad,
and more upright, the fruit not to be eaten; of a scarlet color, and almost
three square. I know no use of this fruit or leaves, but to look on.

# Bonano.
The Bonano differs nothing from the Plantine, in the body and leaves but only
this, that the leaves are somewhat less, and the body has here and there some
blackish spots, the blossom no bigger then a large bud of a Rose; of a faint
purple, and Ash color mixed, the stalk that bears it, adorned with small
blossoms, of ^everall colors; when they fall off, there comes out of the
fruit, which does not turn back as the Plantines do, but stand outright like a
bunch of puddings, all near of a length, and each of them between four and
five inches long. This fruit is of a sweeter taste then the Plantine; and for
that reason the Negroes will not meddle with them, nor with any fruit that has
a sweet taste; but we find them as good to stew, or preserve as the Plantine,
and will look and taste more like Quince. This tree wants little of the beauty
of the Plantine, as she appears upon the ground, in her full growth; and though
her fruit be not so useful a food for the belly, as that of the Plantine, yet
she has somewhat to delight the eyes, which the other wants, and that is the
picture of Christ upon the Cross; so lively expressed, as no Limner can do it
(with one color) more exactly; and this is seen, when you cut the fruit just
cross as you do the root of Fern, to find a spread Eagle: but this is much
more perfect, the head hanging down, the arms extended to the full length,
with some little elevation; and the feet cross one upon another.

This I will speak as an Artist; let a very excellent Limner, paint a Crucifix,
only with one color, in limning; and let his touches be as sharp, and as
masterly as he pleases, the figure no bigger then this, which is about an inch
long, and remove that picture at such a distance from the eye, as to loose some
of the Curiosity, and dainty touches of the work, so as the outmost stels, or
profile of the figure, may be perfectly discerned, and at such a distance; the
figure in the fruit of the Bonano, shall seem as perfect as it: much may be
said upon this subject by better wits* and abler souls then mine: My
contemplation being only this, that since those men dwelling in that place
professing the names of Christians, and denying to preach to those poor
ignorant harmless souls the Negroes, the doctrine of Christ Crucified, which
might convert many of them to his worship, he himself has set up his own
Cross, to reproach these men, who rather then they will loose the hold they
have of them us slaves, will deny them the benefit and blessing of being
Christians. Otherwise why is this figure set up, for these to look on, that
never heard of Christ, and God never made any thing useless or in vain.

# Pine.
Now to close up all that can be said of fruits, I must name the Pine; for in
that single name; all that is excellent in a superlative degree; for beauty and
taste, is totally and summarily included: and if it were here to speak for it
self, it would save me much labor, and do it self much right. It Is true,
that it takes up double the time the Plantine does, in bringing forth the
fruit* for ti^ a full year before it be ripe, but when it comes to be eaten,
nothing of rare taste can be thought on that is not there; nor is it
imaginable, that so full a Harmony of tastes can be raised, out of so many
parts, and all distinguishable. But before I come to say any thing of that, I
will give you some little hints of her shape, and manner of growth, which
though I must acknowledge depiction of banana tree The Bonano with the fruit
ripe
The Blossom
A scale of 8 feet

page. 82.

my self to be downright lame, in the expression; yet rather then you shall
lose all, I will endeavor to represent some of her beauties, in such faint
expressions as I have. A Slip taken from the body of this plant, and set in the
ground, will not presently take root, but the Crown that grows upon the fruit
it self will sooner come to perfection then it; and will have much more beauty
all the time of growing. In a quarter of a year, it will be a foot high, and
then the leaves will be about 7 or 8 inches long, which appear to your eyes
like Semi-Circles: the middle being a little hollow, so as I have seen a french
sword, that is made for lightness and strength. The color for the most part,
frost upon green, intermixed with Carnation, and upon the edges of the leaves,
teeth like those upon Sawes; and these are pure incarnadine. The leaves fall
over one another, as they are placed higher on the stem; the points of the
lowest, touching the ground; in a quarter of a year more, you shall perceive on
the top of the stem a Blossom, as large as the largest Carnation, but of
different colors, very small flakes, Carnation, Crimson and Scarlet,
intermixed, some yellow, some blew leaves, and some Peach Color, intermixed with
Purple, Sky color, and Orange tawny, Gridaline, and Gingeline, white and
Philyamort. So that the Blossom may be said to represent many of the varieties
to the sight, which the fruit does to the taste, these colors, will continue a
week or ten days, and then wither and fall away, under which there will
appear, a little bunch of the bigness of a Wallnut; which has in it, all these
colors mixed, which in the blossom were dispersed; and so grows bigger for two
months more, before it shows the perfect shape; which is somewhat of an Ovall
form; but blunt at either end; and at the upper end, grows out a Crown of
leaves, much like those below for color, but more beautiful; some of the
leaves of this Crown, six inches long; the out leaves, shorter by degrees. This
fruit is enclosed with a rind, which begins with a screw at the stalk, and so
goes round till it comes to the top, or Crown, gently rising, which screw is
about of an inch broad; and the figures, that are imbrodred upon that screw
near of that dimension, and divisions between. And it falls out so, as those
divisions, are never over one another in the screw, but are always under the
middle of the figures above, those figures do vary so in the coloring as if
you see an hundred Pines, they are not one like another and every one of those
figures, has a little tuft or beard, some of green some yellow, some Ash
color* some Carnation. There are two sorts of Pines, the King and Queen Pine:
The Queen is far more delicate, and has her colors of all greens, with their
shadows intermixed, with faint Carnations, but most of all frost upon green,
and Sea greens. The King Pine, has for the most part, all sorts of yellows,
with their shadows intermixed with grass greens, and is commonly the larger
Pine. I have seen some of them 14 inches long, and six inches in the diametre;
they never grow to be above four foot high, but the most of them having heavy
bodies, and slender stalks, lean down and rest upon the ground. Some there
are, that stand upright, and have coming out of the stem, below, some sprouts
of their own kind, that leave fruits which jet^ out from the stem a little, and
then rise upright I have seen a dozen of these, round about the prime fruit,
but not so high as the bottom of that, and the whole Plant together, shows
like a Father in the middle, and a dosen Children round about him; and all
those will take their turns to be ripe, and all very good. When this fruit is
grown to a ripeness, you shall perceive it by the smell, which is as far
beyond the smell of our choicest fruits of Europe, as the taste is beyond
theirs. When we gather them, we leave some of the stalk to take hold by; and
when we come to eat them, we first cut off the crown, and send that out to be
planted; and then with a knife, pare off the rind, which is so beautiful, as
it grieves us to rob the fruit of such an ornament; nor would we do it, but to
enjoy the precious substance it contains; like a Thief, that breaks a
beautiful Cabinet, which he would forbear to do, but for the treasure he
expects to find within. The rind being taken off, we lay the fruit in a dish,
and cut it in slices, half an inch thick; and as the knife goes in, there
issues out of the pores of the fruit, a liquor, clear as Rock-water, near about
six spoonfulls, which is eaten with a spoon; and as you taste it, you find it
in a high degree delicious, but so mild, as you can distinguish no taste all;
but when you bite a piece of the fruit, it is so violently sharp, as you would
think it would fetch all the skin off your mouth; but, before your tongue have
made a second trial upon your palate, you shall perceive such a sweetness to
follow, as perfectly to cure that vigorous sharpness; and between these two
extremes, of sharp and sweet, lies the relish and flaver of all fruits that are
excellent; and those tastes will change and flow so fast upon your palate, as
your fancy can hardly keep way with them, to distinguish the one from the
other: and this at least to a tenth examination, for so long the Echo will
last. This fruit within, is near of the color of an Abricot not full ripe, and
eats crispe and short as that does; but it is full of pores, and those of such
forms and colors, as it is a very beautiful sight to look on, and invites the
appetite beyond measure. Of this fruit you may eat plentifully, without any
danger of surfeting I have had many thoughts, which way this fruit might be
brought into England, but cannot satisfy my self in any; preserved it cannot
be, whole; for, the rind is so firm and tough, as no Sugar can enter in; and
if you divide it in pieces, (the fruit being full of pores) all the pure taste
will boil out. It Is true, that the Dutch preserve them at Fernambock, and send
them home; but they are such as are young, and their rind soft and tender: But
those never came to their full taste, nor can we know by the taste of them,
what the others are. From the B^rmudoes, some have been brought hither in their
full ripeness and perfection, where there has been a quick passage,and the
fruits taken in the nick of time; but, that happens very seldom. But, that
they should be brought from the Barbados, is impossible, by reason of the
several Climates between. We brought in the ship seventeen of several
grouths, but all rotten, before we came half the way.

Sugar Canes, with the manner of planting; of their grouth, time of ripeness,
with the whole process of Sugar-making.
Though I have said as much as is fit, and no more than truth, of the beauty
and taste of these formentioned Trees and Plants, beyond which, the Sun with
his masculine force cannot beget, nor the teeming Earth bear; all which are
proper and peculiar to the Island; for diagram of sugar cane mill (ground plan)
An Index to the Platform or Superficies of an Ingenio, that grinds or squeezes
the Sugar.
A THe ground-plat, upon which the Posts or Pillars stand, that bear up the
house, or the Intercolumniation between those Pillars. B The Pillars or Posts
themselves. C The wall between the Mill-house and Boyling-house. D The Circle
or Circumference, where the Horses and Cattle go, which draw the Rollers about.
E The Sweeps, to which the Horses and Cattle are fastened, that draw about the
Rollers, F The Frame of the Ingenio. G The Brackets or Butteresses, that
support that Frame. H The Door, that goes down stairs to the Boyling-house. I
The Cistern, into which the Liquor runs from the Ingenio, immediately after it
is ground, and is carried in a Pipe under ground to this Cistern, where it
remains not above a day at most. K The Cistern that holds the Temper, which is
a Liquor made with ashes, steept in water, and is no other than the Lie we wash
withal in England. This Temper, we straw in the three last Coppers, as the
Sugar boyles, without which, it would never Corn, or be any thing but a Syrope;
but the salt and tartarousnesse of this Temper, causes it to turn, as Milk
does, when any sour or sharp liquor is put into it; and a very small quantity
does the work. L The Boyling-house,. The five black Rounds are the Coppers, in
which the Sugar is boiled, of which, the largest is called the Clarifying
Copper, and the least, the Tatch. M The Cooling Cistern, which the Sugar is put
into, presently after it is taken off the fire, and there kept till it be
Milk-warm; and then it is to be put into Pots made of boards, sixteen inches
square above, and so grow taper to a point downward; the Pot is commonly about
thirty inches long, and will hold thirty or thirty five pounds of Sugar. N The
Door of the Filling-room. O The Room it self, into which the Pots are set,
being filled, till the Sugar grow cold and hard, which will be in two days and
two nights, and then they are carried away to the Cureing-house. P The tops of
the Pots, of sixteen inches square, and stand between two stantions of timber,
which are girded together in several places, with wood or iron, and are
thirteen or fourteen inches assunders; so that the tops of the Pots being
sixteen inches, cannot slip between, but are held up four foot from the ground.
Q The Frame where the Coppers stand, which is raised above the flower or level
of the room, about a foot and a half, and is made of Dutch Bricks, which they
call Klinkers, and plaster of Paris. And besides the Coppers, there are made
small Gutters, which convey the skimmings of the three lesser Coppers, down to
the Still-house, whereof the strong Spirit is made, which they call
kill-devill, and the skimmings of the two greater Coppers are conveyed another
way, as worthless and good for nothing. R The Door that goes down the stairs
to the fire-room, where the Furnaces are, which cause the Coppers to boil; and
though they cannot be expressed here, by reason they are under the Coppers; yet,
I have made small semi-circles, to let you see where they are, behind the
partition wall, which divides the fire-room from the boyling-house; which wall
goes to the top of the house, and is marked with the Letter (c) as the other
walls are. S A little Gutter made in the wall, from the Cistern that holds the
first Liquor, to the clarifying Copper, and from thence is conveyed to the
other Coppers, with Ladles that hold a gallon a piece, by the hands of Negres
that attend that work day and night, shifting both Negres and Cattle every four
hours, who also convey the skimmings of the three lesser Coppers down to the
Still-house, there to be twice distilled; the first time it comes over the
helm, it is but small, and is called Low-wines; but the second time, it comes
off the strongest Spirit or Liquor that is potable. T All Windows. U The
Fire-room, where the Furnaces are, that make the Coppers boil. W The
Still-house. X The Cistern that holds the skimmings, till it begin to be sour,
till when, it will not come over the helm. Y The two Stills in the
Still-house. Z The Semi-circles, that show where about the Furnaces stand.


Place this after Folio 84.

The superfities or Plottforme of the Ingenio that grinds or squeeses the canes
which make the sugar
A scales of 40 foot



diagram of sugar cane mill (elevation) The upright of the Ingenio or Mill that
squeeses or grinds the Sugar Canes ^
a. the foundation or plates of the house which must be of massey and lasting
timber. b. the frame of the Ingenio c. the planks that be are up the Rollers d.
the suporter or propp that bears upp those planks e. the Rollers themselves f.
the shaft that is grafted into the middle roller which turns both the other g.
the swepes that come over all ye work and reach to ye Circle where the horses
and Cattle draw. h. the Bracketts that keep the frame from shakeing whereof
there must be 8. i. the sides of the house which are strong posts or studds
which bear up the house and are plact at ten foot distance with Bracke^
above and below to strengthen them forbearing up the plates of the house above.
k. the out Brackets that keep the posts from starting orbuc^ l. the great
Beam to which the Shaft of the middle Roller is let in by a goudg in a sockett
and goes cross the middle of the house m. the Brackets that support the great
beam and likewise all the Roof of the house n. the Roof or cover of the
house.


A scale of 40 foot



diagram of sugar curing house (floor plan, first floor) The first Story of
the Cureing house where the potts stand which hold the Sugar and is 8. foot a
inches from the ground having 14. steps to rise of 7. inches to a stepp.
In this story is 924 potts and they use to have another story above this
which will hold above 600. potts more

The Index of the Cureing house.
a. the room where they knock out the sugar when it is cured, or made into
whites, and is called the knocking room; when they knock it out for
muscavados, they find the middle of the pott well colored, but the upper and
nether parts, of a bro^^er, color the topp frothy and light, the bottom very
brown and full of Molosses, both which they set aside to be boyld again with
the Mosses in the Cisterns of which they make Penneles, which though it be a
worse kind of sugar in the spending yet you will hardly know it from the
second sort of Muscove sugar b. the two doors c. the passages between the
potts upon the flour above d. the great passage in the middle of the rome from
end to end e. the topps of the potts which are. 16. inches square and hang
between stantions of timber borne up by very strong and Massy studs or posts,
and girded or bract together with Iron plates or wood, the length of the potts
are 26. or 28. inches long made taper downward, and hold about 30. pound of
sugar. f. the walls of the room which is 100. foot long and 40. foot broad
within, they have some times a story of potts above this.


a Scale of 40. foot

diagram of sugar curing house (floor plan, ground floor) The ground room of
the Cureing house of the place where the gutters ly which. convey ye Molosses to
ye Cisterns
The Index to the ground room.
a. the knocking room. b. the doors c. the vacuitie between the gutters d.
the Cisterns of which there are 4. which hold the Moloses till they boil it
which commonly they do one day in a week. e. all the gutters that convay the
Molosses down to the Cisterns. f. the walls of the room which are to be
accounted two foot thick, (...) there are seldom any windows in the Cureing
house, for the moist air is an enemy to the cure of the sugar rather bring
panns of well kindled coals into the room espetially in moist and raynie
wether.


page 84



depiction of queen pine The Queen Pine.
page 84

they were planted there by the great Gardener of the World. Yet, there is one
brought thither as a stranger, from beyond the Line, which has a property
beyond them all; and that is the Sugar-Cane, which though it has but one single
taste, yet, that full sweetness has such a benign faculty, as to preserve all
the rest from corruption, which, without it, would taint and become rotten; and
not only the fruits of this Island, but of the world, which is a special
pre-eminence due to this Plant, above all others, that the earth or world can
boast of. And that I may the more fully and amply set her off, I will give you
all the observations I made, from my first arrival on the Island, when planting
there, was but in its infancy, and but faintly understood, to the time I left
the place, when it was grown to a high perfection.

At the time we landed on this Island, which was in the beginning of September,
1647. we were informed, partly by those Planters we found there, and partly by
our own observations, that the great work of Sugar-making, was but newly
practiced by the inhabitants there. Some of the most industrious men, having
gotten Plants from Fernambock, a place in Brasill, and made trial of them at
the Barbados; and finding them to grow, they planted more and more, as they
grew and multiplied on the place, till they had such a considerable number, as
they were worth the while to set up a very small Ingenio, and so make trial
what Sugar could be made upon that soil. But, the secrets of the work being not
well understood, the Sugars they made were very inconsiderable, and little
worth, for two or three years. But they finding their errors by their daily
practice, began a little to mend; and, by new directions from Brasil, sometimes
by strangers, and now and then by their own people, (who being covetous of the
knowledge of a thing, which so much concerned them in their particulars, and
for the general good of the whole Island) were content sometimes to make a
voyage thither, to improve their knowledge in a thing they so much desired.
Being now made much abler to make their queries, of the secrets of that
mystery, by how much their often failings, had put them to often stops and
nonplusses in the work. And so returning with more Plants, and better
Knowledge, they went on upon fresh hopes, but still short, of what they should
be more skillful in: for, at our arrival there, we found them ignorant in
three main points, that much conduced to the work; viz. The manner of Planting,
the time of Gathering, and the right placing of their Coppers in their
Furnaces; as also, the true way of covering their Rollers, with plates or Bars
of Iron: All which being rightly done, advance much in the performance of the
main work. At the time of our arrival there, we found many Sugar-works set up,
and at work; but yet the Sugars they made, were but bare Muscavadoes, and few
of them Merchantable commodities; so moist, and full of molosses, and so ill
cured, as they were hardly worth the bringing home for England. But about the
time I left the Island, which was in 1650. they were much bettered; for then
they had the skill to know when the Canes were ripe, which was not, till they
were fifteen months old; and before, they gathered them at twelve, which was a
main disadvantage to the making good Sugar; for, the liquor wanting of the
sweetness it ought to have, caused the Sugars to be lean, and unfit to keep.
Besides, they were grown greater proficients, both in boiling and curing them,
and had learnt the knowledge of making them white, such as you call Lump Sugars
here in England; but not so excellent as those they make in Brasill, nor is
there any likelihood they can ever make such: the land there being better, and
lying in a Continent, must needs have constanter and steadier weather, and the
Air much drier and purer, than it can be in so small an Island, as that of
Barbados. And now, seeing this commodity, Sugar, has gotten so much the start
of all the rest of those, that were held the staple Commodities of the Island,
and so much over-top't them, as they are for the most part slighted and
neglected. And, for that few in England know the trouble and care of making it,
I think it convenient, in the first place, to acquaint you, as far as my memory
will serve, with the whole process of the work of Sugar-making, which is now
grown the soul of Trade in this Island. And leaving to trouble you and my self,
with relating the errors our Predecessors so long wandered in, I will in brief
set down the right and best way they practiced, when I left the Island, which, I
think, will admit of no greater or farther improvement.

But, before I will begin with that, I will let you see, how much the land
there has been advanced in the profit, since the work of Sugar began, to the
time of our landing there, which was not above five or six years: For, before
the work began, this Plantation of Major Hilliards, of five hundred acres,
could have been purchased for four hundred pound sterling; and now the half of
this Plantation, with the half of the Stock upon it, was sold for seven
thousand pound sterling and it is evident, that all the land there, which has
been employed to that work, has found the like improvement. And, I believe,
when the small Plantations in poor men's hands, of ten, twenty, or thirty acres,
which are too small to lay to that work, be bought up by great men, and put
together, into Plantations of five, six, or seven hundred acres, that two
thirds of the Island will be fit for Plantations of Sugar, which will make it
one of the richest Spots of earth under the Sun.

And now, since I have put my self upon this Discovery, I think it fit to let
you know the nature of the Plant, the right way of planting it, the manner of
growth, the time of growing to ripeness, the manner of cutting, bringing home,
the place where to lay them, being brought home, the time they may lie there,
without spoil, the manner of grinding or squeezing them, the conveyance of the
liquor to the Cisterns, how long it may stay there without harm, the manner of
boiling and skimming, with the conveyance of the skimmings into the Cisterns,
in the Still-house, the manner of distilling it, which makes the strongest
Spirits that men can drink, with the temper to be put in; what the temper is,
the time of cooling the Sugar before it be put into the Pots; the time it
stays in the Cureing house, before it be good Muscavado Sugar. And last, the
making of it into Whites, which we call Lump-Sugar.

First then, it is fit to set down, what manner of place is to be chosen, to
set this Sugar-work, or Ingenio, upon; and it must be the brow of a small hill,
that has within the compass of eighty foot, twelve foot descent, viz. from
the grinding place, which is the highest ground, and stands upon a flat, to the
Still house, and that by these descents: From the grinding place to the boiling
house, four foot and a half, from thence to the fire-room, seven foot and a
half; and some little descent to the Still house. And the reason of these
descent^ are these; the top of the Cistern, into which the first liquor runs,
is, and must be, somewhat lower than the Pipe that convaies it, and that is a
little under ground. Then, the liquor which runs from that Cistern must vent it
self at the bottom, otherwise it cannot run all out; and that Cistern is two
foot and a half deep: and so, running upon a little descent, to the clarifying
Copper, which is a foot and a half above the flower of the Boiling house, (and
so is the whole Frame, where all the Coppers stand); it must of necessity fall
out, that the flower of the Boiling house must be below the flower of the Mill
house, four foot and a half. Then admit the largest Copper be a foot and a
half deep, the bottom of the Copper will be lower then the flower of the
Boyling-house, by a foot; the bottom of the Furnaces must be three foot below
the Coppers; and the holes under the Furnaces, into which the ashes fall, is
three foot below the bottom of the Furnaces: A little more fall is required to
the Still-house, and so the account is made up. Upon what place the Sugar-work
is to be set, I have drawn two Plots, that express more than language can do,
to which I refer you. And so I have done with the Ingenio, and now to the work
I promised, which I shall be brief in.

When I first arrived upon the Island, it was in my purpose, to observe their
several manners of planting and husbandily there; and because this Plant was
of greatest value and esteem, I desired first the knowledge of it. I saw by the
growth, as well as by what I had been told, that it was a strong and lusty
Plant, and so vigorous, as where it grew, to forbid all Weeds to grow very near
it; so thirstily it sucked the earth for nourishment, to maintain its own
health and gallantry.

But the Planters, though they knew this to be true, yet, by their manner of
Planting, did not rightly pursue their own knowledge; for their manner was, to
dig small holes, at three foot distance, or there about, and put in the Plants
endwise, with a little stooping, so that each Plant brought not forth above
three or four sprouts at the most, and they being all fastened to one root,
when they grew large, tall, and heavy, and storms of wind and rain came, (and
those raines there, fall with much violence and weight) the roots were
loosened* and the Canes lodged, and so became rotten, and unfit for service in
making good Sugar. And besides, the roots being far assunder, weeds grew up
between, and worse then all weeds, Withs, which are of a stronger grouth then
the Canes, and do much mischief where they are; for, they wind about them,
and pull them down to the ground, as disdaining to see a prouder Plant than
themselves. But experience taught us, that this way of planting was most
pernicious, and therefore were resolved to try another, which is, without
question, the best, and that is, by digging a small trench of six-inches broad,
and as much deep, in a straight line, the whole length of the land you mean to
plant, laying the earth on one side the trench as you make it; then lay two
Canes along the bottom of the trench, one by another, and so continue them the
whole length of the trench, to the lands end, and cover them with the earth you
laid by; and at two foot distance, another of the same, and so a third, and
fourth, till you have finished all the land you intend to plant at that time:
For, you must not plant too much at once, but have it to grow ripe
successively, that your work may come in order, to keep you still doing; for,
if it should be ripe altogether, you are not able to work it so; and then for
want of cutting, they would rot, and grow to loss: By planting it thus along,
two together, every knot will have a sprout, and so a particular root, and by
the means of that, be the more firmer fixed in the ground, and the better able
to endure the wind and weather, and by their thick growing together, be the
stronger to support one another. By that time they have been in the ground a
month, you shall perceive them to appear, like a land of green Wheat in
England, that is high enough to hide a Hare; and in a month more, two foot high
at least. But upon the first months growth, those that are careful, and the
best husbands, command their Overseers to search, if any weeds have taken root,
and destroy them, or if any of the Plants fail, and supply them; for where the
Plants are wanting, weeds will grow; for, the ground is too virtuous to be
idle. Or, if any Withs grow in those vacant places, they will spread very far,
and do much harm, pulling down all the Canes they can reach to. If this
husbandry be not used when the Canes are young, it will be too late to find a
remedy; for, when they are grown to a height, the blades will become rough and
sharp in the sides, and so cut the skins of the Negres, as the blood will
follow; for their bodies, legs, and feet, being uncloathed and bare, cannot
enter the Canes without smart and loss of blood, which they will not endure.
Besides, if the Overseers stay too long, before they repair these void places,
by new Plants, they will never be ripe together, which is a very great harm to
the whole field, for which there is but one remedy, and that almost as ill as
the disease, which is, by burning the whole field, by which they lose all the
time they have grown: But the roots continuing secure from the fire, there
arises a new spring altogether; so that to repair this loss of time, they have
only this recompense, which is, by burning an army of the main enemies to their
profit, Rats, which do infinite harm in the Island, by gnawing the Canes, which
presently after will rot, and become unservicable in the work of Sugar. And
that they may do this justice the more severely, they begin to make their fire
at the outsides of that land of Canes they mean to burn, and so drive them to
the middle, where at last the fire comes, and burns them all; and this great
execution they put often in practice, without Assizes or Sessions; for, there
are not so great enemies to the Canes, as these Vermin; as also to the Houses,
where they lay up their stores of Corn and other provisions; and likewise in
dwelling houses for their victuals. For, when the great down-falls of rain
come, which is in November and December, and in the time of the Turnado, they
leave the field, and shelter themselves in the dwelling houses where they do
much mischief.

The Canes with their tops or blades, do commonly grow to be eight foot high;
the Canes themselves, are commonly five or six foot, (I have seen some double
that length but it is but seldom) the bodies of them, about an inch diametre,
the knots about five or six inches distant one from another, many times three
or four inches, some more, some less, for there is no certain rule for that;
the color of the blades, and tops, pure grass green; but the Canes themselves,
when they are ripe of a deep Popinjay; and then they yield the greater
quantity, and fuller, and sweeter juice. The manner of cutting them is with
little hand-bills, about six inches from the ground; at which time they divide
the tops, from the Canes, which they do with the same bills, at one stroke;
and then holding the Canes by the upper end: they strip off all the blades that
grow by the sides of the Canes, which tops and blades, are bound up in faggots,
and put into Carts, to carry home; for without these, our Horses and Cattle are
not able to work, the pasture being so extreme harsh and sapless, but with
these they are very well nourisht, and kept in heart. The Canes we likewise
bind up in faggots, at the same time, and those are commonly brought home upon
the backs of Assinigoes, and we use the fashion of Devo^shire, in that kind of
Husbandry, (for there we learnt it) which is small pack-saddles, and crookes,
which serve our purposes very fitly, laying upon each Crook a faggot and one a
top, so that each Assinigo carries his three faggots; and being accustomed to
go between the field and the place where they are to unload, will of themselves
make their returns, without a guide; So understanding this little beast is in
performing his duty. The place where they unload, is a little platform of
ground, which is contiguous to the Mill-house, which they call a Barbycu; about
30 foot long, and 10 foot broad; done about with a double rail, to keep the
Canes from falling out of that room; where one, or two, or more, (who have
other work to do in the Mill house,) when they see the Assinigoes coming, and
make a stop there, are ready to unloade them, and so turning them back again,
they go immediately to the field, there to take in fresh loading; so that they
may not unfitly be compared to Bees; the one fetching home honey, the other
sugar: being laid on the Barbycu, we work them out clean, and leave none to
grow stale, for if they should be more then two days old, the juice will grow
sower, and then they will not be fit to work, for their soureness will infect
the rest; The longest time they stay, after they are cut, to the time of
grinding, is from Saturday evening, to Monday morning, at one or two a clock;
and the necessity of Sunday coming between, (upon which we do not work) causes
us to stay so long, which otherwise we would not do. The manner of grinding
them, is this, the Horses and Cattle being put to their tackle: they go about,
and by their force turn (by the sweeps) the middle roller; which being Cog'd
to the other two, at both ends, turn them about; and they all three, turning
upon their Centres, which are of Brass and Steel go very easily of themselves,
and so easy, as a man's taking hold, of one of the sweeps, with his hand will
turn all the rollers about with much ease. But when the Canes are put in
between the rollers, it is a good draught for five Oxen or Horses; a Negre puts
in the Canes of one side, and the rollers draw them through to the other side,
where another Negre s^ands, and receives them; and returns them back on the
other side of the middle roller, which draws the other way. So that having
past twice through, that is forth and back, it is conceived all the juice is
pressed out; yet the Spaniards have a press, after both the former grindings, to
press out the remainder of the liquor, but they having but small works in
Spain, make the most of it, whilst we having far greater quantities, are loath
to be at that trouble. The Canes having past to and again, there are young
Negre girls, that carry them away, and lay them on a heap, at the distance of
six score paces or there abouts; where they make a large hill, if the work
have continued long: under the rollers, there is a receiver, as big as a large
Tray; into which the liquor falls, and stays not there, but runs under ground
in a pipe or gutter of lead, covered over close, which pipe or gutter, carries
it into the Cistern, which is fixed near the stairs, as you go down from the
Mill-house to the boiling house. But it must not remain in that Cisterne above
one day, lest it grow sower; from thence it is to pass through a gutter, (fixed
to the wall) to the Clarifying Copper, as there is occasion to use it, and as
the work goes on, and as it Clarifies in the first Copper, and the skumme
rises, it is conveyed away by a passage, or gutter for that purpose; as also of
the second Copper, both which skimmings, are not esteemed worth the labor of
stilling; because the skum is dirtie and gross: But the skimmings of the other
three Coppers, are conveyed down to the Still-house, there to remain in the
Cisterns, till it be a little sower, for till then it will not come over the
helm. This liquor is removed, as it is refined, from one Copper to another,
and the more Coppers it passes through, the finer and purer it is, being
continually drawn up, and keel'd by ladles, and skim'd by skimmers, in the
Negres hands, till at last it comes to the tach, where it must have much
labor, in keeling and stirring, and as it boyles, there is thrown into the
four last Coppers, a liquor made of water and Withs which they call Temper,
without which, the Sugar would continue a Clammy substance and never kerne. The
quantities they put in are small, but being of a ^art quality it turns the
ripeness and clamminesse of the Sugar to cruddle and separate: which you will
find, by taking out some drops of it, to Candy, and suddenly to grow hard; and
then it has enough of the fire. Upon which Essay they presently pour two
spoonfulls of Sallet Oil into the tach, and then immediately it gives over to
bubble or rise. So after much keeling, they take it out of the tach, by the
ladles they use there, and put it into ladles that are of greater receipt, with
two handles, and by them remove it into the cooling Cisterne, near the stayers
that goes to the fire room: But as they remove the last part of the liquor out
of the tach, they do it with all the celerity they can; and suddenly cast in
cold water, to cool the Copper from burning, for the fire in the furnace,
continues still in the same heat: and so when that water is removed out again
by the Ladles, they are in the same degree careful, and quick, as soon as the
last Ladle full is taken out, to throw in some of the liquor of the next Copper
to keep the tach from burning, and so fil^ it up out of the next, and that out
of the third, and that out of the fourth, and that out of the Clarifying
Copper, and so from the Cistern, and so from the Mill-house or Ingenio. And so
the work goes on, from Monday morning at one a clock, till Saturday night, (at
which time the fire in the Furnaces are put out) all hours of the day and
night, with fresh supplies of Men* Horses, and Cattle. The Liquor being come to
such a coolness, as it is fit to be put into the Pots, they bring them near
the Cooler, and stopping first the sharp end of the Pot (which is the bottom)
with Plantine leaves, (and the passage there no bigger, then a man's finger will
go in at) they fill the Pot, and set it between the stantions, in the filling
room, where it stays till it be thorough cold, which will be in two days and
two nights; and then if the Sugar be good, knock upon it with the knuckle of
your finger, as you would do upon an earthen pot, to try whether it be whole,
and it will give a sound; but if the Sugar be very ill, it will neither be very
hard, nor give any sound. It is then to be removed into the Cureing house, and
set between stantions there: But first, the stopples are to be pulled out of
the bottom of the pots, that the Molosses may vent it self at that hole, and
so drop down upon a gutter of board, hollowed in the middle, which conveyeth
the Molosses from one to another, till it be come into the Cisterns, of which
there is commonly four, at either corner one; and there remains, till it rise
to a good quantity, and then they boil it again, and of that they make Peneles,
a kind of Sugar somewhat inferior to the Muscavado; but yet will sweeten
indifferently well, and some of it very well colored. The pots being thus
opened at the bottoms, the Molosses drops out, but so slowly, as hardly to vent
it self in a month* in which time, the Sugar ought to be well ^ur'de; and
therefore they thought fit, to thrust a spike of wood in at the bottom, that
should reach to the top, hoping by that means, to make way for the Molosses to
have the speedier passage: But they found little amendment in the purging, and
the reason was this, the spike as it went in, pressed the Sugar so hard, as it
stopped all pores of passage for the Molosses. So finding no good to come of
this, they devised another way, and that was by making an augure of Iron, which
instrument cuts his way, without pressing the Sugar, and by that means the
Molosses had a free passage, without any obstruction at all. And so the Sugar
was well cured in a month. As for the manner of using it, after it is cured,
you shall find it set down in my Index, to the plot of the Cureing house. And
this is the whole process of making the Muscavado-Sugar, whereof some is
better, and some worse, as the Canes are; for, ill Canes can never make good
Sugar.

I call those ill, that are gathered either before or after the time of such
ripeness, or are eaten by Rats, and so consequently rotten, or pulled down by
Withes, or lodged by foul weather, either of which, will serve to spoil such
Sugar as is made of them. At the time they expect it should be well cured, they
take the pots from the stantions in the Curing-house, and bring them to the
knocking room, which you shall find upon the plot of the cureing house; and
turning it upside down, they knock the pot hard against the ground, and the
Sugar comes whole out, as a bullet out of a mold; and when it is out, you may
perceive three sorts of colors in the pot, the tops somewhat brownish, and of
a frothy light substance; the bottom of a much darker color, but heavy,
gross, moist, and full of molosses; both which they out away, and reserve to
be boiled again, with the molosses for peneles: The middle part, which is more
then two thirds of the whole pot, and looks of a bright color, dry and
sweet, they lay by it self, and send it down daily upon the backs of
Assinigoes and Camells, in leather baggs, with a tarr'd cloth over, to their
Storehouses at the Bridge, there to be put in Caskes and Chests, to be ship't
away for England, or any other parts of the World, where the best market is.
Though this care be taken, and this course used, by the best husbands, and
those that respect their credits, as, Collonell James Drax, Collonell Walrond,
Mr. Raynes, and some others that I know there; yet, the greater number, when
they knock out their Sugars, let all go together, both bottom and top, and so
let the better bear out the worse. But, when they come to the Merchant to be
sold, they will not give above 3 l. 10 s. for the one; and for the other, above
6 l. 4 s. And those that use this care, have such credit with the Buyer, as
they scarce open the Cask to make a trial; so well they are assured of the
goodness of the Sugars they make; as, of Collonell James Drax, Collonell
Walrond, Mr. Raines, and some others in the Island that I know.

I have yet said nothing of making white Sugars, but that is much quicker said
than done: For, though the Muscavado Sugar, require but a months time to make
it so, after it is boiled; yet, the Whites require four months, and it is only
this. Take clay, and temper it with water, to the thickness of Frumenty, or
Pease-pottage, and pour it on the top of the Muscavado Sugar, as it stands in
the pot, in the Cureing-house, and there let it remain four months; and if the
clay crack and open, that the air come in, close it up with some of the same,
either with your hand, or a small Trowell. And when you knock open these pots,
you shall find a difference, both in the color and goodness, of the top and
bottom, being but to such a degree, as may be ranked with Muscavadoes; but the
middle, perfect White, and excellent Lump-Sugar, the best of which will sell in
London for 20 d. a pound.

I do not remember I have left unsaid any thing, that conduces to the work of
Sugar-making, unless it be, sometimes after great rains, (which moisten the
air more then ordinary) to lay it out upon fair days in the Sun, upon
clothes, or in the knocking room, and sometimes to bring in pans of coals, well
kindled, into the Cureing-house. If I have omitted any thing here, you shall
find it supplied in the Indexes of my Plots.

As for distilling the skimmings, which run down to the Still-house, from the
three lesser Coppers, it is only this: After it has remained in the Cisterns,
which my plot shows you in the Still-house, till it be a little sour, (for
till then, the Spirits will not rise in the Still) the first Spirit that comes
off, is a small Liquor, which we call low-Wines, which Liquor we put into the
Still* and draw it off a gain; and of that comes so strong a Spirit, as a
candle being brought to a (...) distance, to the bung of a Hogshead or But,
where it is kept, the ^pirits will ^^ie to it, and taking hold of it* bring the
fire down to the vessel, and set all a fire, which immediately breaks the
vessel, and becomes a flame, burning all about it that is combustible matter.

We lost an excellent Negre by such an accident, who bringing a Jar of this
Spirit, from the Still-house, to the Drink-room, in the night, not knowing the
force of the liquor he carried, brought the candle somewhat nearer than he
ought, that he might the better see how to put it into the Funnell, which
conveyed it into the Butt. But the Spirit being stirred by that motion, flew
out, and got hold of the flame of the Candle, and so set all on fire, and burnt
the poor Negre to death, who was an excellent servant. And if he had in the
instant of firing, clapped his hand upon the bung; all had been saved; but he
that knew not that cure, lost the whole vessel of Spirits, and his life to
boot. So that upon this misadventure, a strict command was given, that none of
those Spirits should be brought to the Drink-room ever after in the night, nor
no fire or candle ever to come in there.

This drink, though it had the ill hap to kill one Negre, yet it has had the
virtue to cure many; for when they are ill, with taking cold, (which often they
are) and very well they may, having nothing under them in the night but a
board, upon which they lie, nor any thing to cover them: And though the days
be hot, the nights are cold, and that change cannot but work upon their bodies,
though they be hardy people. Besides, coming home hot and sweating in the
evening, sitting or lying down, must needs be the occasion of taking cold, and
sometimes breeds sicknesses amongst them, which when they feel, they complain
to the Apothecary of the Plantation, which we call Doctor, and he gives them
every one a dram cup of this Spirit, and that is a present cure. And as this
drink is of great use, to cure and refresh the poor Negres, whom we ought to
have a special care of, by the labor of whose hands, our profit is brought
in; so is it helpful to our Christian Servants too; for, when their spirits
are exhausted, by their hard labor, and sweating in the Sun, ten hours every
day, they find their stomachs debilitated, and much weakened in their vigor
every way, a dram or two of this Spirit, is a great comfort and refreshing to
them. This drink is also a commodity of good value in the Plantation; for we
send it down to the Bridge, and there put it off to those that retail it. Some
they sell to the Ships, and is transported into foreign parts, and drunk by
the way. Some they sell to such Planters, as have no Sugar-works of their own,
yet drink excessively of it, for they buy it at easy rates; half a crown a
gallon was the price, the time that I was there; but they were then purposing
to raise the price to a deerer rate. They make weekly, as long as they work, of
such a Plantation as this 30 l. sterling, besides what is drunk by their
servants and slaves.

And now for a close of this work of Sugar, I will let you see, by way of
estimate, to what a Revenue this Island is raised; and, in my opinion, not
improbable. If you will be pleased to look back to the extent of the Island, you
shall find, by taking a medium of the length and breadth of it, that there is
contained in the Island 392 square miles; ^ out of which we will substract a
third part, which is the most remote part of the Island from the Bridge, where
all, or the most part of Trade is, which by many deep and steep Gullies
interposing, the passage is in a manner stopped: besides, the Land there is not
so rich and fit to bear Canes as the other; but may be very useful for
planting provisions of Corn, Yeams, Bonavista, Cassavie, Potatoes; and likewise
of Fruits, as, Oranges, Limons, Lymes, Plantines, Bonanoes; as also, for
breeding Hoggs, Sheep, Goats, Cattle, and Poultry, to furnish the rest of the
Island, that want those Commodities. For which reasons, we will substract a
third part from 392. and that is 130. and so the remaining ^ ^ is 262 square
miles; the greatest part of which may be laid to Sugar-works, and some to be
allowed and set out for small Plantations, which are not able to raise a
Sugar-work or set up an Ingenio, by reason of the paucity of acres, being not
above twenty, thirty, or forty acres in a Plantation; but these will be fit to
bear Tobacco, Ginger, Cotten-wool, Maies, Yeames, and Potatoes; as also for
breeding Hoggs. But most of these will in short time, be bought up by great
men, and laid together, into Plantations of five, six, and seven hundred
acres. And then we may make our computation thus, viz. A mile square will
contain 640 acres of land, and here we see is 262 acres, being ^ of the Island.
So then, we multiply 262. by 640. and the product will amount unto 167680. Now
we will put the case, that some of those men that have small Plantations, will
not sell them, but keep them for provisions, which they may live plentifully
upon; for those provisions they raise, will sell at good rates; for which use,
we will set out thirty thousand acres. So then we substract 30000 acres from
167680, and there will remain 137680 acres, to be for Sugar-works; out of
which, ^ may be planted with Canes, the other ^ for Wood, Pasture, and
Provisions, which must support the Plantations, according to the scale of
Collonell Modiford's Plantation, as I ^ said before. Now these two fifts are,
as you see 55072 acres, and an acre of good Canes will yield 4000 pound weight
of Sugar, and none will yield less then 2000 weight; but we will take a
Medium, and rest upon 3000 weight, upon which we will make our computation, and
set our price upon the Sugar, according to the lowest rates, which shall be 3
d. per pound, as it is Muscavado, to be sold upon the Island, at the Bridge. In
fifteen months the Canes will be ripe, and in a month more, they will be well
cured, and ready to be cast up, and stowed in the Warehouse. So here, we make
our computation upon the place, and say, 3000 threepences is 37 l. 10 s. ten
acres of which is 375 l. sterling. So then we say, if 10 acres of Canes will
produce 375 l. what shall 55072. which is the number of acres contained upon
the ^ of the land, allotted for Sugar Plantations, upon which the Canes must
grow: and by the Rule of 3. we find, that it amounts to 2665200. in sixteen
months: Now add four months more to the time of cureing, and ^ making it into
whites, which is that we call Lump-Sugar in England, and then the price will be
doubled to 4130400. out of which we will abate ^ for waste, and what is cut off
from the tops and bottoms of the pots, which will be good Muscavadoes; but we
will abate for that, and waste ^ which is 1032600. and that we will substract
from 4130400. and there remains 3097800. which is the total of the revenue of
Sugars, that grow on the Barbados for twenty months, and accounted there, upon
the Island, at the Bridge. But if you will run the Hazards of the Sea, as all
Merchants do, and bring it for England, it will sell in London, for 12 d. the
pound, and so it is doubled again; and then it will amount to 6195600* and in
two months time more it will be in England. Now you see what a vast Revenew
this little spot of ground can produce in 22 months time; And so I have done
with this plant, only one touch more, to conclude with all; as Musicians, that
first play a Preludium, next a Lesson, and then a Saraband; which is the life
and spirit of all the rest. So having played you a short Preludium, to this
long and tedious lesson of Sugar and Sugar-making, I do think fit to give you a
Saraband, with my best Touches at last; which shall be only this, that as this
plant has a faculty, to preserve all fruits, that grow in the world, from
corruption and putrefaction; So it has a virtue, being rightly applied, to
preserve us men in our healths and fortunes too. Doctor Bu^ler one of the most
learned and famous Physicians that this Nation, or the world ever bred, was
wont to say that* If Sugar can preserve both Pears and Plumbs,
Why can it not preserve as well ^ur Lungs?
And that it might work the same effect on himself, he always drank in his
Claret wine, great store of the best refined Sugar, and also prescribed it
several ways to his Patients, for Colds, Coughs, and Catarrs; which are
diseases, that reign much in cold Climats, especially in Islands, where the Air
is moyster then in Continents; and so much for our Health.

Now for our fortunes, they are not only preserved, but made by the powerful
operation of this plant.

Colonel James Drax, whose beginning upon that Island, was founded upon a stock
not exceeding 300 l. sterling, has raised his fortune to such a height, as I
have heard him say, that he would not look toward England, with a purpose to
remain there, the rest of his life, till he were able to purchase an estate,
of ten thousand pound land yearly; which he hoped in few years to accomplish,
with what he was then owner of; and all by this plant of Sugar. Colonel Thomas
Modi^ord, has often told me, that he had taken a Resolution to himself, not to
set his face for England, till he made his voyage, and employment there, worth
him a hundred thousand pounds sterling; and all by this Sugar plant. And these,
were men of as piercing sights, and profound judgments, as any I have known in
that way of management. Now if such Estates as these, may be raised, by the
well ordering this plant, by Industrious and painful men, why may not such
estates, by careful keeping, and orderly and moderate expending, be preserved,
in their posterities, to the tenth Generation; and all by the sweet Negotiation
of Sugar?

One Vegetable we have on the Island, which will neither become the name of a
Tree, nor a Plant; and that is a With; which is in some respect, the
harmefullest weed that can grow; for it pulls down all that it can reach to,
Canes, and all other small plants, it makes nothing of; if it be suffered to
look up in a Garden, it will wind about all Herbs and Plants that have stalks,
pull them down and destroy them; or if it find the way into any Orchard, it
will clime up by the bodies of the trees, into the branches, and there inwrap
them so, as to draw them (as it were) into a purse, (for out of the maine
stalk, hundreds of small sprigs will grow;) and if any other tree be so near as
to touch it, it will find the way to it, and pull the tops of them together,
and utterly disfigure the trees, and hinder the growth of the fruit; and if you
cut the maine stalk below, near the root in hope to kill it, the moisture above
in the branches, will thrust down a vine into the ground, and get a new root:
Nay this is not all the mischief, for it will reach the highest timber, and
involve and enwrap so the branches, as to hinder their growths, and many times
fasten one tree to another, that one shall hinder the growth of another. A
couple of Colonel D^axes Axemen, were felling a tree, and about the time it
began to bend, that they perceived which way it would fall, got clear on the
other side, and thought themselves safe: But this being fastened to another, by
strong withes, pulled a great branch of that tree after it, which fell upon the
fellers, and bruised them so, as they hardly escaped with their lives. Clear a
passage of ten foot broad, that goes between a wood and a land of Canes
overnight, and come next morning, and you shall find the way crossed all over
with Withs, and got near the Canes; So that if you had left your visit till
the next day, they had gotten into the Canes, and then it would be too late to
help; for when they are mixed with them, you cannot destroy the one without the
other, for wheresoever they touch ground they get new roots, and so creep into
every place, and as they go pull down all. These harmefull Withs, have, with
all these vices, some virtues. They serve for all uses, where roaps or cords
are required, as for binding our Wood and Canes into faggots, or what else
roapes are needful for; and without them we were in ill condition, for we have
not any wood fit to make hoops for hogsheads, barrels, tubbs, or what not; and
we can have them of what length and bigness we please, and they are for that
use very good.

Several kinds of these Withs there are, some that bear fruit, somewhat
bigger then the Cod of a Bean, which being divided longwise with a sharp
knife, you shall perceive the most various and beautifullest Colors that can
be, and so well matched, as to make up a very great beauty.

Fell a dosen acres of wood, going on in a straight line, and when the ground
is cleared, the side of that wood you left standing, will be likewise in the
same strait line, and in a few years these Withs will mount, to the tops of the
trees, which are for the most part, eighty or 100. foot high, and from that top
to the ground, on the outside of the wood, all will be covered with leaves, and
those are broad, green, and shining, so that if you be absent from the place
two or three years, and look to find a wood, you find a fair green Curtain,
300 paces long, and 80 foot high, which is as pretty a deceptio visus, as you
can find any where* and this is one of the pleasantest Vis^os in the Island, the
same things are done in the mouths or entrances of Caves, where you shall find
a Cave large enough to hold 500 men, and the mouth of it, covered with a green
curtain, 40 foot high, and 200 foot long; and so close a Curtain it is (the
vines being wrapped and interwove one into another) as without putting it aside,
you can hardly have light to read by.

These Caves are very frequent in the Island, and of several dimensions, some
small, others extremely large and Capacious: The runaway Negres, often shelter
themselves in these Coverts, for a long time and in the night range abroad the
Country, and steal Pigs, Plantins, Potatoes, and Pullin, and bring it there;
and feast all day, upon what they stole the night before; and the nights being
dark, and their bodies black, they escape undiscerned.

There is nothing in that Country, so useful as Liam Hounds, to find out
these thieves. I have gone into diverse of those Caves, to try what kind of
air is to be found there; and have felt it so close, and moist with all, as my
breath was near stopped; and I do believe, if I should remain there but one
night, I should never come out again.

I have often wondered, why such vast Caves and Rocks should not afford some
springs of water; the air which touches them, being so very moist; for we see
in England, where Rocks are, Springs of water issue out; and sometimes (when
wet weather is) the moisture hangs upon the Rocks in drops, and so runns down
and finds a way to vent it self, into small bibling Springs; But here it does
not so, though the Air be much moyster than in England; But certainly the
reason is the extraordinary dryness, and spunginesse of the stone; which sucks
up all moisture that touches it; and yet it is never satisfied.

I had it in my thoughts, to make an Essay, what Sir Francis Bacons experiment
solitary, touching the making of Artificial Springs would do; but troughs of
that stone, being of so dry and spungy a quality, would never have been fit for
it, besides we have no brakes growing there, which is one of the materials used
in that experiment.

Another sort of Withs we have, but they are made of the gum of trees, which
falls from the boughs, drop after drop, one hanging by another, till they
touch ground; from whence they receive some nourishment, which gives them power
to grow larger, and if it happen that three or four of them, come down so nere
one another as to touch and the wind twist them together, they appear so like
ropes, as they cannot be discerned five paces off, whether it be a rope or a
with. I have seen of these of several sises, from the smallest whip cord to
the greatest Cable of the Sovereign; and the most of those timber trees I have
named, has them; some four, some five, some half a dozen, hanging down like
Bell ropes, from the branches to the ground, which was a sight of much rarity
to me at first coming.

# Aloes.
Aloes we have growing here, very good, and it is a beautiful plant; the leaves
four inches broad, of an inch thick, and about a foot and a half long; with
prickles on each side, and the last sprout which rises up in the middle, bears
yellow flowers, one above another, and those flowers are higher then any of the
leaves, by two foot; These thick leaves we take, and cut them through, and out
of them issue the Aloes, which we set in the Sun, and that will rarifie it, and
make it fit to keep. But it is the first coming which we save; for, if we let
it run too long, the second running will be much worse; but, before that comes,
we throw away the leaf. The leaves of this Plant, (which we call semper vivens
in England, and grows near the fire in Kitchins, hung up to a beam, with an
oiled clout about the root) with the inner bark of Elder, and some other
ingredients, boiled in Sallet-oyle, is the best medicine in the world for a
burn or a scald, being presently applied; and for that the medicine is beyond
all that ever was, for that cure, I will set it down, and it is this.

Take Semper vivens, Plantine leaves, and the green rind of Elder, of each
alike quantity, and boil them in Sallet-oyle, so much as will draw out all that
tincture by boiling; then strain the Oil well out, and put it on the fire
again, and put to it a small quantity of spirit of Wine, and so much yellow
Wax, as will bring it to the consistance of a Liniment.

One other Plant we have, and that is the Sensible plant, which closes the
leaves upon any touch with your hand, or that end of your staff by which you
hold, and in a little time will open again.

# Flowers.
There are very few Flowers in the Island, and none of them sweet; as, the white
Lilly, which grows in the woods, and is much a fairer flower then ours; as
also a red Lilly, of the same bigness; but neither of them sweet. The St. Jago
flower is very beautiful, but of a nauseous savor. One more we have, and that
must not be forgotten for the rarity, because it opens, when all else close,
when the Sun goes down; and for that reason we call it, the flower of the Moon:
It grows in great tuffs, the leaves almost in the form of a Heart, the point
turning back, the flower somewhat bigger then a Primrose, but of the purest
purple that ever I beheld. When this flower falls off, the seed appears, which
is black, with an eye of purple; shaped, and of the sise of a small button, so
finely wrought, and tough withal, as it might serve very well to trim a suit
of apparel.

I know no herbs naturally growing in the Island, that have not been brought
thither from other parts, but Purcelane; and that grows so universally, as the
overmuch plenty makes it disesteemed; and we destroy it as a Weed that cumbers
the ground.

English Herbs and Roots.
Rosemary, Time, Winter Savory, sweet Marjerom, pot Marjerom,
Parsley,Penniroyall, Camomile, Sage, Tansie, Lavender, Lavender-Cotten,
Garlic, Onyons, Colworts, Cabbage, Turnips, Redishes, Marigolds, Lettice,
Taragon, Southernwood. All these I carried with me in seeds, and all grew and
prospered well. Leek-Seed I had, which appeared to me very fresh and good; but
it never came up. Rose trees we have, but they never bear flowers.

There is a Root, of which some of the Negres brought the Seeds, and planted
there, and they grew: It Is a very large Root, dry, and well tasted; the manner
of planting it is, to make little hills, as big as Mole-hills, and plant the
seed a top, and as soon as it puts forth the stalks they turn down to the
ground, on either side, and then as they touch it, they thrust up a stalk, not
unlike an Asparagus, but of a purple color. These being gathered, and eaten as
a Sallet, with oil, vinegar, and salt, will serve an ordinary pallet, where no
better is to be had: But the root truly is very good meat, boiled with powdered
pork, and eaten with butter, vinegar, and pepper. Most of these roots are as
large, as three of the biggest Turnips we have in England. We carried diverse of
them to Sea, for our provision, which stood us in good stead, and would have
served us plentifully in our great want of victuals; but the Rats (of which we
had infinite numbers aboard) robbed us of the most part.

# Strength of the Island by Nature to Seaward.
That part of the Island which lies to the windeward, and is part East, part
North, the storms and stiff winds coming from those points, have so washed
away all earthly substance, as there remains nothing but steep Rocks; and the
Sea being very deep on that side, the Anchors will hardly touch the bottom,
though the Cables be long; so that what Ship soever rides on that side, comes
at her own peril. Contrarily, if any Ship be under Sail, on the Leeward side,
and goes but so far out, as to lose the shelter of the Island, it is certain to
be carried away down to the leeward Islands, and then it will be a very hard
work to beat it up again, without putting out into the Main. So that there can
hardly be any safe landing, but where the Harbors and Baies are, which lie to
the Southwest; and those places are so defensible by Nature, as with small
costs, they may be very strongly fortified. But they have been much neglected
by the Proprietor, for which reason, (and some others) the Planters refused to
call him by that name. There was a Gentleman in the Island, who pretended to be
a Soldier, and an Ingeneer, Captain Burrows.
that undertook to fortify all the landing places, and to furnish them with
such store of Artillery, as should be sufficient to defend them; provided, he
might have the Excise paid to him for seven years, which was promised by the
Governor and Assembly. Whereupon he went to work, and made such a Fort, as
when abler Ingeneers came upon the Island, they found to be most pernicious;
for, commanding all the Harbor, and not of strength to defend it self, if it
were taken by an enemy, might do much harm to the land-ward. So that at my
coming from thence, they were pulling it down, and instead of it, to make
Trenches, and Rampires, with Pallisadoes, Horn-works, Curtains, and
Counter-scarfes; and having left a very good Fortification of standing wood,
round about the Island, near the Sea, these were thought as much as needed for
their defense, against the landing of any foreign Forces, and for their
strength within.

# Strength of the Island within land.
They built three Forts, one for a Magazine, to lay their Amonition, and Powder
in; the other two, to make their retreats upon all occasions. At my coming
from thence, they were ab^e to muster ten thousand Foot, as good men, and as
resolute, as any in the world, and a thousand good Horse; and this was the
strength of the Island about the time I came away.

# How Governed, and how Divided.
They Govern there by the Laws of England, for all Criminal, Civil,
Martial, Ecclesiastical, and Maritime affairs.

This Law is administered by a Governor, and ten of his Council, four Courts
of ordinary Justice, in Civil causes, which divide the land in four Circuits;
Justices of Peace, Constables, Churchwardens, and Tithing-men: five Sessions in
the year, for trial of Criminal causes, and all Appeals from inferior
Courts, in Civil causes. And when the Governor pleases to call an Assembly,
for the supreme Court of all, for the last Appeals, for making new Laws, and
abolishing old, according to occasion, in nature of the Parliament of England,
and accordingly consists of the Governor, as Supreme, his Council, in nature
of the Peers, and two Burgesses chosen by every Parish for the rest. The Island
is divided into eleven Parishes No Tithes paid to the Minister, but a yearly
allowance of a pound of Tobacco, upon an acre of every man's land, besides
certain Church-duties, of Marriages, Christenings, and Burialls.

A standing Commission there was also, for punishing Adultery and Fornication,
though rarely put in execution.

Something would be said concerning the seasons of the year; but it is little,
and therefore will be the least troublesome. Four months in the year, the weather
is colder then the other eight, and those are November, December, January, and
February; yet they are hotter than with us in May. There is no general Fall of
the leaf, every Tree having a particular fall to himself; as if two Locusts
stands at the distance of a stones cast, they have not their falls at one time;
one Locust will let fall the leaves in January, another in March, a third in
July, a fourth in September; and so all months one kind of Trees, having their
several times of falling: But if any month falls more leaves then other, it is
February; for so in my nicest observation I found it. The leaves we find
fallen under the trees, being the most of them large and stiff, when they were
growing, and having many veins, which go from the middle stalk, to the
uppermost extent of the leaf, when the thin part of the leaf is rotten and
consumed, those veins appear like Anatomies, with the strangest works and
beautifullest forms that I have seen, fit to be kept as a rarity, in the
Cabinets of the greatest Princes. As also the Negres heads, which we find in
the sands, and they are about two inches long, with a forehead, eyes, nose,
mouth, chin, and part of the neck; I cannot perceive any root by which they
grow, but find them always loose in the sand; nor is it a fruit that falls
from any tree, for then we should find it growing; black it is as jet, but
from whence it comes, no man knows.

# Mines.
Mines there are none in this Island, not so much as of Coal, for which reason,
we preserve our Woods as much as we can.

We find flowing out of a Rock, in one part of the Island, an unctuous
substance, somewhat like Tar, which is thought to have many virtues yet
unknown; but is already discovered, to be excellent good to stop a flux, by
drinking it; but, by anointing, for all aches and bruises; and so subtle it
is, as being put into the palm of the hand, and rubbed there, it will work
through the back.

Another gummy substance there is, black, and hard as pitch, and is used as
pitch; it is called Mountjack.

Having given you in my Bills of Fare, a particular of such Viands, as this
Island afforded, for supportation of life, and somewhat for delight too, as far
as concerns the Table; yet, what are you the better for all this, when you
must be scorch't up from morning till night with the torrid heat of the sun;
So as in that twelve hours, you hardly can find two, in which you can enjoy
your self with contentment. [Most of this Paragraph is mentioned before.]
Or how can you expect to find heat, or warmth in your stomach, to digest that
meat, when the sun has exhausted your heat and spirits so, to your outer
parts, as you are chilled and numbed within? For which reason, you are
compelled to take such remedies, as are almost as ill as the disease; liquors
so strong, as to take away the breath as it goes down, and red pepper for
spice, which wants little of the heat of a fire-coale; and all these will
hardly draw in the heat, which the sun draws out; and part of this deficiency
is occasioned by the improvidence, or inconsideration of the Inhabitants, who
build their dwellings, rather like stoves, then houses; for the most of them,
are made of timber, low rooft keeping out the wind, letting in the sun, when
they have means to have it otherwise; for I will undertake to contrive a house
so, as no one shall have just cause to complain of any excessive heat; and
that which gives this great remedy, shall bring with it the greatest beauty
that can be looked on. The Palmetoes, which being placed (as I will give you
directions in my plot) in convenient order, shall interpose so between the sun
and house, as to keep it continually in the shade; and to have that shade at
such a distance, as very little heat shall be felt, in any time of the day: For
shades that are made by the highest tre^s, are undoubtedly the coolest, and
freshest, by reason it keeps the heat farthest off. Besides this, there are
many advantages to be made, in the contrivance of the house; for I see the
Planters there, never consider which way they build their houses, so they get
them up; which is the cause that many of them, are so insufferably hot, as
neither themselves, nor any other, can remain in them without sweltring.

First then, we will consider what the errors are in their contrivances, that
we may be the better able to show the best way to mend them; A single house
that is built long-wise, and upon a North and South line, has these
disadvantages: the sun shines upon the East side-walls from six a clock till
eight, so as the beams rest flat upon that side, for two hours. And the beams
resting upon a flat or oblique line (as that is,) gives a greater heat, then
upon a diagonall, which glaunces the beams aside. As a tennis ball, struck
against the side walls of the Court, glauncing, hi^s with less force, then
when it feels the full resistance of the end wall, where it is met with a flat
oblique line: So the Sun beams, the more directly they are opposed by any flat
body, the more violently they burn. This side-wall being warmed; the sun gets
higher, and shines hotter, and then the rafters become the oblique line, which
is thinner, and less able to resist the beams; and the covering being
shingles, receives the heat quicker, and re^aines it longer, than tiles would
do, so that for the whole forenoon, that side of the roof, receives as much
heat, as the sun can give, and so passes over to the other side, giving it so
much the more in the afternoon, as is increast by warming the house and Air
all the morning before, and so the Oven being heat on both sides, what can you
expect, but that those within, should be sufficiently bak^: and so much the
more, for that the wind is kept out, that should come to cool it, by shutting
up all passages, that may let it in, which they always do, for fear the
rain come with it; and letting in the sun at the West end, where and when, it
shines hottest. Therefore this kind of building is most pernicious to those
that love their health, which is the comfort of their lives: but you will say,
that a double house will lessen much of this heat, by reason that the West side
is not visited by the sun in the morning nor the East in the afternoon; I do
confess that to be some little remedy, but not much, for the double roofes
being open to the sun, in oblique lines, a great part of the forenoon; and
being reflected from one side to another, when it comes to the Meridian (and
before and after, at least two hours,) with the scorching heat it gives to the
gutter, which is between them, and is in the middle of the house from end to
end, will so warm the East side of the house, as all the shade it has in the
afternoon will not cool it, nor make it habitable; and then you may guess in
what a temper the West side is.

Whereas, if you build your house upon an East and West line, you have these
advantages, that in the morning, the sun never shines in or near an oblique
line, (which is upon the East end of your house,) above two hours, and that is
from six to eight a clock; and as much in the afternoon, and not all that time
neither; and upon the roof it can never shine in an oblique line, but glancing
on both sides, cast off the heat very much; I do confess that I love a double
house, much better then a single, but if it have a double cover, that is, two
gable ends, and a gutter between, though it be built up an East and West line:
yet the sun (which must lie upon it all the heat of the day) will so multiply
the heat, by reflecting the beams from inside to inside, and so violently upon
the gutter, from both, which you know must be in the middle of the house, from
end to end, as you shall feel that heat above, too sensibly in the ground
stories below, though your sieling be a foot thick, and your stories sixteen
foot high. Therefore if I build a double house, I must order it so, as to have
the division between either room of a strong wall, or of Dorique Pillars Archt
from one to another; and, in each intercolumniation, a square stud of stone,
for the better strengthening and supporting of the Arches above; for I would
have the rooms Archt over with stone, and the innermost points of the Arches,
to test upon the Pillars, and the whole house to be covered with Couples and
Rafters, and upon that shingles, the Ridge Pole of the house: running along
over the Pillars so that the covering is to serve both Arches, that covers your
rooms: by which means there is but one Gable end, which will glaunce off the
scorching beams of the sun of either side, as, with the help of the Arches
underneath, there will be little heat felt in the rooms below. But then a
maine care must be had, to the side walls, that the girders be strong, and very
well Dove-tayld, one into another, upon the Dorique pillars, or partition
walls; and well erampt with Iron, or else the rafters being of that length,
will thrust out the side walls by reason the Arches will hinder the Couplets,
from coming so low as to keep the rafters steady, from opening at the bottom.
For prevention of this great mischief, it will be very needful, to have
strong Butteresses without, and those being placed just against the Couples,
will be of main concern to the side-walls. If you make the breadth of your
house fifty foot, allowing two foot to the partition, and two foot to either of
the side-walls above, (but more below) which is six foot in all, you will have
remaining forty four foot, which being equally divided, will afford twenty two
foot for the breadth of either room; you may for the length allow what you
please. But this I speak by permission, and not by direction. But, I will send
you a Plot with this, and an Index annexed to it, of such a house as I would
build for pleasure and convenience, if I were to live there, and had money
enough to bestow; and I believe, with such conveniences and advantages, for
shade and coolness, as few people in those Western parts, have studied, or
ever thought on.

And now I have as near as I can, delivered the sum of all I know of the Island
of Barbados, both for Pleasures and Profits, Commodities and Incommodities,
Sicknesses and Healthfulnesse. So that it may be expected what I can say, to
persuade or dissuade any, that have a desire to go and live there. But before I
give a full answer to that, I must enquire and be informed, of what disposition
the party is, that has this design; If it be such a one as loves the
pleasures of Europe, (or particularly of England) and the great varieties of
those, let him never come there; for they are thing he shall be sure to miss.
But, if he can find in himself a willingness, to change the pleasures which
he enjoyed in a Temperate, for such as he shall find in a Torrid Zone, he may
light upon some that will give him an exchange, with some advantage.

And for the pleasures of England, let us consider what they are, that we may
be the better able to judge, how far they are consistent with the Climate of
Barbados, and what gainers or losers they will be by the exchange, that make
the adventure; and by the knowledge and well weighing of that, invite or deter
those, that are the great lovers and admirers of those delights, to come there,
or stay away.

And amongst the sports and recreations that the people of England exercise
most for their healths, without doors, they are Coursing, Hunting, and Hawking.

And for the Greyhound, though he be complete in all his shapes that are
accounted excellent, headed like a Snake, neckt like a Drake, backed like a
Beam, sided like a Breme, tail'd like a Rat, footed like a Cat, deep breasted,
with large phillets and gaskins, excellently winded, with all else may style
him perfect, and of a right race: Yet, what of all this, if the Country afford
no Game to course at; or if there were, that would amount to nothing; for, in
the running of twelve score yards, they will either bruise their bodies against
stumps of trees, or break their necks down the steep falls of Gullies, which
are there too common.

And for the Huntsman and his Hounds, they will find themselves at a dead
fault, before they begin; for, upon this soil, no Stag, with his lofty well
shaped head, and active body, has ever set his nimble feet; and Herds of Vallow
Deer, were never put to make a stand upon this ground; the nimble Roe-Buck, nor
the subtle Fox, the Badger, Otter, or the fearful Hare, have ever run their
Mases in these Woods. And then, what use of Hounds?

Only one kind are useful here, and those are Liam Hounds, to guide us to
the runaway Negres, who, as I told you, harbor themselves in Woods and Caves,
living upon pillage for many months together.

And for the Faulconer, though his Hawk have reached such excellencies, as may
exalt her praise as high, as her wings can raise her body; yet, she must be
taken down to a bare Lure. And the painful and skillful Faulconer, who has
applied himself solely to the humor of the brave Bird he carries, who must be
courted as a Mistress, be she never so froward, and like a coy Mistress, will
take check at any thing, when her liberty gives her license; and though by a
painful and studied diligence, he have reclaimed her so, as to fly at what,
and when, and where, and how she is directed; and she, by her own practice and
observation, has learnt to know, which Spaniell lies, and which tells truth,
that accordingly she may slight the one, and regard the other; and with this,
has all other qualities that are excellent, in so noble and heroic a Bird:
Yet, this painful diligence in the Faulconer, this rare perfection in the
Hawk, will be of little use, where there is neither Champion to fly in,
Brooks to fly over, nor Game to fly at. No mountie at a Hieron, to cause the
lusty Jerfaulcon to raise her to a loss of her self, from the eyes of her
Keeper, till by many dangerous thorows, she bind with her Quarrie, and both
come tumbling down together. No teem of Ducks, or bunch of Teales, to cause the
high flying Haggard make her stooping, and strike her Quarrie dead. And for the
Ostringer, though his well-man'd Goshauk, or her bold mate the Tarcell, draw a
Covert nere so well; yet, no Eye of Phesants will spring, or porch in these
woods.

The Eagle and the Sacre sure, here ever miss their prey.
Since Bustard and the Barnacle, are never in the way.
No Tarcel draws a Covert here, no Lanner sits at mark;
No Merline flies a Partridge near, no Hobbie dares a Lark.
Another pleasure, the better sort of the people of England take delight in,
which, in my opinion, may be rather called a toil then a pleasure, and that is
Race-Horses, forcing poor beasts beyond their power, who were given us for our
moderate use. These exercises are too violent for hot Countries, and therefore
we will forget them.

Shooting and Bowling may very well be used here; but at Butts only, and in
Bares, or close Allies, for the turfe here will never be fine enough for a
Green, nor the ground soft enough, for an Arrow to fall on. Amongst all the
sports without doors, that are used in England, these two are only sufferable
in the Barbados. But for the sports within the house, they may all be used
there, as, all sorts of Gaming, viz. Chesse, Tables, Cards, Dice, Shovel-abord,
Billiards; and some kinds of Dances, but none of those that are laborious, as
high and lofty Capers, with Turns above ground; these are too violent for hot
Countries.

Some other kinds of pleasures they have in England, which are not so fully
enjoyed in the Barbados, as, smooth Champion to walk or ride on, with variety
of Landscapes, at several distances; all there being hemmed in with Wood, and
those trees so tall and lofty, as to hinder and bar the view so much, as (upon
a level or plain) no Horison can be seen. But upon the sides of Hills, which
look toward the Sea, your eye may range as far that way, as the globicall
roundnesse of that watery Element will give way to; but that once seen, the eye
is satisfied, and variety in that object there is none; for no shipping pass
that way, but such as arive at the Island. It Is true, that Woods made up of such
beautiful Trees as grow there, are pleasant things to look on, and afford a
very plentiful delight to the eyes; but when you are so enclosed, as hardly to
look out, you will find too quick and too full a satiety in that pleasure. But
as the Woods are cut down, the Landscapes will appear at farther distances.

Now for the beauty of the Heavens, they are as far transcending all we ever
saw in England, or elsewhere 40 Degrees without the Line, on either side, as
the land-objects of the Barbados are short of ours in Europe. So he that can
content himself with the beauties of the Heavens, may there be sufficiently
satisfied. But we Mortals, that till and love the earth, because our selves
are made up of the same mold, take pleasure sometimes to look downward, upon
the fruits and effects of our own labors; and when we find them thrive by
the blessings of the great Creator, we look up to give thanks, where we find
so great a glory, as to put us into astonishment and admiration.

Now for the smelling sense, though we have the blossoms of the Orange, Limon,
Lyme, Cittron, Pomgranate, with the smell of that admirable fruit the Pine, and
others: yet when we consider the infinite variety of the Flowers of England,
both for beauty and savor, there is no comparison between them; and the
flowers there, are very few in number, and in smell, not to be allowed in
competition with ours of England: For, since the differences between the Houses
of York and Lancaster have been laid aside, no red nor white Rose have grown
there; but the Lillies have taken up the quarrel, and strive in as high a
contest there, as the Roses have done in England; for, they are the fairest and
purest, that I have ever seen, both red and white, but no sweet smell. He that
could transplant the flowers of England to the Barbados, would do a rare work,
but I fear to little purpose: For, though the virtuall beams of the Sun, give
growth and life to all the Plants and Flowers it shines on; yet, the influence
is at several distances, and so the productions vary; some flowers must be
warmed, some toasted, and some almost scalded; and to transpose these, and set
them in contrary places, were to strive against nature. It Is true, that the
Herbs of England grow and thrive there, by reason they are stronger, and better
able to endure that change; but Flowers, that are of a more tender, nature,
will not endure so great heat as they find there. But to repair this sense,
some will say, that Perfumes brought out of Europe, will plentifully supply us:
But that will not at all avail us, for what with the heat and moisture of the
air, it is all drawn out, as by my own experience I found it to be most true,
though I lapp'd them close up in papers; and put them in drawers of a Cabinet,
where no air could find passage, they were so close and for Past^lls, they
lost both their smell and taste.

As for Music, and such sounds as please the ear, they wish some supplies may
come from England, both for Instruments and voices, to delight that sense, that
sometimes when they are (...) out with their labor, they may have some
refreshment by their ears; and to that end, they had a purpose to send for the
Music, that were wont to play at the Black ^^yars, and to allow them a
competent salary, to make them live as happily there, as they had done in
England: And had not extreme weakness, by a miserable long sickness, made me
incapable of my undertaking, they had employed me in the business, as the
likeliest to prevail with those men, whose persons and qualities were well
known to me in England. And though I found at Barbados some, who had musical
minds; yet, I found others, whose souls were so (...) upon, and so rive^^ed to
the earth, and the profits that arise out of it, as their souls were lifted no
higher; and those men think* and have been heard to say, that three whip Sawes,
going all at once in a Frame or Pit, is the best and sweetest music that can
enter their ears; and to hear a Cow of their own low, or an Assinigo bray* no
sound can please them better. But these men's souls were never lifted up so
high, as to hear the music of the Spears, nor to be judges of that Science,
as it is practiced here on earth; and therefore we will leave them to their own
earthly delights.

For the sense of feeling, it can be applied but two ways, either in doing or
suffering; the poor Negres and Christian servants, find it perfectly upon
their heads and shoulders, by the hands of their severe Overseers; so that
little pleasure is given the sense, by this coercive kind of feeling, more then
a plaster for a broken Pa^e; but, this is but a passive kind of feeling: But
take it in the highest, and most active way it can be applied, which is upon
the skins of women, and they are so sweaty and clammy, as the hand cannot pass
over, without being glued and dimented in the passage or motion; and by that
means, little pleasure is given to, or received by the agent or the patient:
and therefore if this sense be neither pleased in doing nor suffering, we may
decline it as useless in a Country, where down of Swans, or wool of Beaver is
wanting.

Now for the sense of Tasting, I do confess, it receives a more home
satisfaction, then all the rest, by reason of the fruits that grow there; so
that the Epicure cannot be deceived, if he take a long journey to please his
palate, finding all excellent tastes the world has, comprehended in one single
fruit, the Pine. And would not any Prince be content to reduce his base coin,
into Ingoti of pure gold. And so much shall serve touching the Barbados.

Some men I have known in England, whose bodies are so strong and able to
endure cold, as no weather fits them so well as frost and snow; such Iron
bodies would be fit for a Plantation in Russia: For, there is no traceing Hares
under the Line, nor sliding on the Ice under either Tropic. Others there are
that have heard of the pleasures of Barbados, but are loath to leave the
pleasures of England behind them. These are of a sluggish humor, and are
altogether unfit for so noble an undertaking; but if any such shall happen to
come there, he shall be transmitted to the innumerable Army of Pismires, and
Ants, to sting him with such a reproof, as he shall with himself any where
rather then amongst them. So much is a sluggard detested in a Country, where
Industry and Activity is to be exercised. The Dwarf may come there, and twice
a year vie in competition with the Giant: for set them both together upon a
level superficies, and at noone, you shall not know by their shadows who is
the tallest man.

The Voluptuous man, who thinks the day not long enough for him to take his
pleasure. Nor the sleepie man who thinks the longest night too short for him to
dream out his delights, are not fit to repose and solace themselves upon this
Island; for in the whole compass of the Zodiac, they shall neither find St.
Barnabies day, or St. Lucies night, the Sun running an eeven course, is there
an indifferent Arbiter of the differences which are between those two Saints,
and like a just and clear sighted Judge, reconciles those extremes to a
Medium, of 12 and 12 hours, which equality of time is utterly inconsistent to
the humors and dispositions of these men.

But I speak this, to such as have their fancies so Aereall, and refined as not
to be pleased with ordinary delight; but think to build and settle a felicity
here: above the ordinary level of mankind. Such spirits, are too volatile to
fix on business; and therefore I will leave them out, as useless in this
Commonwealth. But such as are made of middle earth: and can be content to wave
those pleasures, which stand as Blocks, and Percullisses, in their way; and are
indeed, the main Remoras in their passage to their profits. Such may here find
moderate delights, with moderate labor, and those taken moderately will
conduce much to their healths, and they that have industry, to employ that
well, may make it the Ladder to clyme to a high degree, of Wealth and
opulencie, in this sweet Negotiation of Sugar, provided they have a competent
stock to begin with; such I mean as may settle them in a Sugar-work, and less
then 14000 l. sterling, will not do that: in a Plantation of 500 acres of land,
with a proportionable stock of Servants, Slaves, Horses, Camels, Cattle,
Assinigoes, with an Ingenio, and all other houseing, thereunto belonging; such
as I have formerly named.

But one will say, why should any man that has 14000 l. in his purse, need to
run so long a Risco, as from hence to the Barbados: when he may live with
ease and plenty at home; to such a one I answer, that every drone can sit and
eat the Honey of his own Hive: But he that can by his own Industry, and
activity, (having youth and strength to friends,) raise his fortune, from a
small beginning to a very great one, and in his passage to that, do good to
the public, and be charitable to the poor, and this to be accomplished in a
few years, deserves much more commendation and applause. And shall find his
bread, gotten by his painful and honest labor and industry, eat sweeter by
much, than his that only minds his ease, and his belly.

Now having said this much, I hold it my duty, to give what directions I can,
to further any one that shall go about to improve his stock, in this way of
Adventure; and if he please to hearken to my directions, he shall find they are
no Impossibilities, upon which I ground my Computations: the greatest will be,
to find a friend for a Correspondent, that can be really honest, faithful and
Industrious, and having arrived at that happiness, (which is the chiefest,)
all the rest will be easy; and I shall let you see that without the help of
Magic or Enchantment, this great Purchase of 14000 l. will be made with 3000
l. stock, and thus to be ordered.

One thousand pound, is enough to venture at first, because we that are here in
England, know not what commodities they want most in the Barbados, and to send
a great Cargo of unnecessary things, were to have them lie upon our hands to
loss. This 1000 l, I would have thus laid out: 100 l. in Linen Cloth, as
Canvas and Kentings, which you may buy here in London, of French Merchants, at
reasonable rates; and you may hire poor Journy-men Taylers, here in the City,
that will for very small wages, make that Canvas into Drawers, and Petticoats,
for men and women Negres. And part of the Canvas, and the whole of the
Kentings, for shirts and drawers for the Christian men Servants, and smocks and
peticoates for the women. Some other sorts of Linen, as Holland or Dowlace,
will be there very useful, for shirts and smocks for the Planters themselves,
with their Wives and Children. One hundred pounds more, I would have bestowed,
part on woollen cloth, both fine and coorse, part on Devonshire Carsies, and
other fashionable stuffes, such as will well endure wearing. Upon Monmoth Capps
I would have bestowed 25 l. you may bespeak them there in Wales, and have them
sent up to London, by the waynes at easy rates. Forty pound I think fit to
bestow on Irish Ruggs such as are made at Killkennie, and Irish stockings, and
these are to be had at St. James's fair at Bristow; the stockings are to be
worn in the day, by the Christian servants, the Ruggs to cast about them when
they come home at night, sweating and wearied, with their labor; to lap about
them, when they rest themselves on their Hamacks at night, than which nothing
is more needful, for the reasons I have formerly given. And these may either
be shipped at Bristow, if a ship be ready bound for Barbados, or sent to London
by waynes which is a cheap way of conveyance. Fifty pound I wish may be
bestowed on shoes, and some boots, to be made at Northampton and sent to
London in dry fates, by Carts; but a special care must be taken, that they may
be made large, for they will shrink very much when they come into hot Climats.
They are to be made of several sises, for men women and children; they must be
kept dry and close, or else the moistness of the Air will cause them to
mould. Gloves will sell well there, and I would have of all kinds, and all
sises, that are thin; but the most useful, are those of tanned leather, for
they will wash and not shrink in the wetting, and wear very long and soople;
you may provide your self of these, at Evil, Ilemister and Ilchester, in
Somerset shire; at reasonable rates. Fifteen pound I would bestow in these
Commodities. In fashionable Hats and Bands, both black and colored, of
several sises and qualities, I would have thirty pounds bestowed. Black Ribbon
for mourning, is much worn there, by reason their mortality is greater; and
therefore upon that commodity I would bestow twenty pound; and as much in
Colored, of several sises and colors. For Silks and Sattins, with gold and
silver-Lace, we will leave that alone, till we have better advice; for they are
casual Commodities.

Having now made provision for the back, it is fit to consider the belly, which
having no ears, is fitter to be done for, then talked to; and therefore we will
do the best we can, to fill it with such provisions, as will best brook the
Sea, and hot Climates: Such are Beef, well pickled, and well conditioned, in
which I would bestow 100 l. In Pork 50 l. in Pease for the voyage, 10 l. In
Fish, as Ling, Haberdine, Green-fish, and Stock Fish, 40 l. In Biscuit for the
voyage, 10 l. Cases of Spirits 40 l. Wine 150 l. Strong Beer 50 l. Oil Olive
30 l. Butter 30 l. And Candles must not be forgotten, because they light us to
our suppers, and our beds.

The next thing to be thought on, is Utensills, and working Tools, such are
whip-Sawes, two-handed Sawes, hand-Sawes, Files of several sises and shapes;
Axes, for felling and for hewing; Hatchets, that will fit Carpenters, Joyners,
and Coopers; Chisells, but no Mallets, for the wood is harder there to make
them: Adzes, of several sises, Pick-axes, and Mat-hooks; Howes of all sises,
but chiefly small ones, to be used with one hand, for with them, the small
Negres weed the ground: Plains, Gages, and Augurs of all sises; hand-Bills, for
the Negres to cut the Canes; drawing-Knives, for Joyners. Upon these Utensills
I would bestow 60 l. Upon Iron, Steel, and small Iron pots, for the Negres to
boil their meat, I would bestow 40 l. And those are to be had in Southsex very
cheap, and sent to London in Carts, at time of year, when the ways are dry
and hard. Nails of all sorts, with Hooks, Hinges, and Cramps of Iron; and they
are to be had at Bromigham in Staffordshire, much cheaper then in London* And
upon that Commodity I would bestow 30 l. In Sowes of Lead 20 l. in Powder and
Shot 20 l. If you can get Servants to go with you, they will turn to good
account, but chiefly if they be Tradesmen, as, Carpenters, Joyners, Masons,
Smiths, Paviers, and Coopers. The Ballast of the Ship, as also of all Ships
that trade there, I would have of Sea-coales, well chosen, for it is a
commodity was much wanting when I was there, and will be every day more and
more, as the Wood decays: The value I would have bestowed on that, is 50 l.
which will buy 45 Chauldron, or more, according to the burden of the Ship. And
now upon the whole, I have outstript my computation 145 l. but there will be no
loss in that; for, I doubt not, (if it please God to give a blessing to our
endeavors) but in twelve or fourteen months, to sell the goods, and double the
Cargo; and, if you can stay to make the best of your Market, you may make three
for one.

This Cargo, well got together, I could wish to be ship't in good order, about
the beginning of November, and then by the grace of God, the Ship may arrive at
the Barbados (if she make no stay by the way) about the middle of December;
and it is an ordinary course to sail thither in six weeks: Coming thither in
that cool time of the year, your Victuals will be in good condition to be
removed into a Storehouse, which your Correspondent (who, I account, goes
along with it) must provide as speedily as he can, before the Sun makes his
return from the Southern Tropic; for then the weather will grow hot, and some
of your Goods, as, Butter, Oil, Candles, and all your Liquors, will take harm
in the remove.

The Goods being stowed in a Ware^house, or Ware houses, your Correspondent
must reserve a handsome room for a Shop, where his servants must attend; for
then his Customers will come about him, and he must be careful whom he trusts;
for, as there are some good, so there are many bad pay-masters; for which
reason, he must provide himself of a Horse, and ride into the Country to get
acquaintance; and half a dosen good acquaintance, will be able to enform him,
how the pulse beats of all the rest: As also by enquiries, he will find, what
prices the Goods bear, which he carries with him, and sell them accordingly;
and what valews Sugars bear, that he be not deceived in that Commodity, wherein
there is very great care to be had, in taking none but what is very good and
Merchantable, and in keeping it dry in good Casks, that no wet or moist air
come to it; and so as he makes his exchanges, and receives in his Sugars, or
what other commodities he trades for, they lie ^eady to send away for England,
as he finds occasion, the delivering of the one, making room for the other;
for Ships will be every month, some or other, coming for England. If he can
transport all his goods, raised upon the Cargo, in eighteen months, it will be
very well. This Cargo being doubled at the Barbados, that returned back, will
produce at least 50 percent. And then your Cargo, which was 1145 l. at setting
out, and being doubled there to 2290 l. will be at your return for England 3435
l. of which I will allow for freight, and all other charges 335 l. so there
remains to account 3100 l. clear. By which time, I will take for granted, that
your Correspondent has bargained, and gone through for a Plantation, which we
will presuppose to be of five hundred acres, Stock't as I have formetly laid
down* (for we must fix upon one, that our computations may be accordingly) if
it be more or less, the price must be answerable, and the Produce accordingly.
And therefore as we began, we will make this our scale, that 14000 l. is to be
paid, for a Plantation of 500 acres Stock't. Before this time, I doubt not, but
he is also grown so well verst in the traffic of the Island, as to give you
advice, what Commodities are fittest for your next Cargo; and according to that
instruction, you are to provide, and to come your self along with it.

By this time, I hope, your remaining 1855 l. by good employment in England, is
raised to 2000 l. So then you have 5100 l. to put into a new Cargo, which I
would not have you venture in one Bottom. But if it please God, that no ill
chance happen, that Cargo of 5100 l. having then time enough to make your best
Market, may very well double, and 1000 l. over; which 1000 l. I will allow to go
out for freight, and all other charges. So then, your Cargo of 5100 l. being
but doubled, will amount unto 10200 l. But this Cargo being large, will require
three years time to sell; so that if you make your bargain for 14000 l. to be
paid for this Plantation, you will be allowed three days of payment; the first
shall be of 4000 l. to be paid in a year after you are settled in your
Plantation; 5000 l. more at the end of the year following, and 5000 l. at the
end of the year then next following. And no man will doubt such payment, that
sees a visible Cargo upon the Island of 10200 l. and the produce of the
Plantation to boot. Now you see which way this purchase is made up, viz. 4000
l. the first payment, 5000 l. the second, and so there remains upon your Cargo
1200 l. toward payment of the last 5000 l. and by that time, the profit of
your Plantation will raise that with advantage; and then you have your
Plantation clear, and freed of all debts. And we will account at the lowest
rate, that if two hundred acres of your five hundred, be planted with Canes,
and every Acre bear but three thousand weight of Sugar, valuing the Sugar but
at three pence per pound, which is thirty seven pound ten shillings every acre,
then two hundred acres will produce 7500 l. in sixteen months; that is, fifteen
months for the Canes to grow and be ripe, and a month to Cure the Sugar that is
made.

But if you stay four months longer, your Muscavado Sugar, which I valued at
three pence per pound, will be Whites, and then the price will be doubled, and
that you see is 15000 l. Out of which we will abate part for waste, and for the
tops and bottomes of the Pots, ^ which may be ranked with the Muscavadoes, and
that is 3750 l. and then there remains 11250 l. to which we will add the value
of the Drink, that is made of the skimmings, at 120 l. per month, which in
twenty months comes to 2400 l. and then the whole revenue will amount unto
13650 l. in twenty months. But this profit must come successively in, as the
Sugars are made, and they work all the year, except in November and December,
when the great downfalls of rain come: and if they pave the ways, between the
Canes, for the Slids and Assinigoes to pass, they may work then too; for,
little else hinders them, but the unpassablenesse of the ways.

So then you see, that upon the venturing, and well husbanding of 300 l. stock,
you are settled in a revenue of 682 l. a month, of which months we will account
13 in a year, so that after your work is set in order, and that you will
account the yearly revenue, you will find it 886^6l. per Annum.

Now let us consider, what the certain charge will be yearly, to keep the
Plantation in the condition we receive it, which we will suppose to be
completely furnished, with all that is necessary thereunto: And first, of all
manner of houseing, as convenient dwelling houses, the Mill-house, or
Grinding-house where the sugar is pressed out; the boyling-house, with five
sufficient Coppers for boiling, and one or two for cooling, with all Utensills,
that belong to the Mill, and boyling-house* the filling room, with stantions;
the Still-house with two sufficient Stills, and receivers to hold the drink,
with Cisterns to all these rooms, for holding liquor, and temper; the Cureing
house filled with stantions, two stories high, and commonly in it seventeen or
eighteen hundred pots for cureing; the Smiths forge, with room to lay coals,
Iron, and steel; the Carpenter, and Joyners houses, where they lodge and lay
their tools, and much of their fine work; with sufficient storehouses, to lay
such provision* as we receive from foreign parts, as Beef, Pork, Fish,
Turtle; and also to keep our drink which is made of the sugar, to the repairing
of all which, the premises with the Appurtenances, we will allow no less then
500 l. Per Annum.

To this, there is yet more to be added: for though we breed both Negres,
Horses, and Cattle; yet that increase, will not supply the moderate decays*
which we find in all those; especially in our Horses and Cattle, therefore we
will allow for that 500 l. Per Annum.

The next thing we are to consider is, the feeding of our servants and slaves,
over and above the provisions which the Plantations bear, and that will be no
great matter, for they are not often fed with bone-meat; But we will allow to
the Christian servants, (which are not above thirty in number,) four barrels
of Beef, and as much of Porke yearly, with two barrels of salt Fish, and 500
poore-Johns, which we have from New England, four barrels of Turtle, and as
many of pickled Makerels, and two of Herrings, for the Negres; all which I have
computed, and find they will amount unto 100 l, or there abouts; besides the
fruit which will be no great matter; for you must be sure to have a Factor,
both at New England and Virginia, to provide you of all Commodities those
places afford, that are useful to your plantation; or else your charge will be
treble. As from New England, Beef, Porke, Fish, of all sorts, dried and
pickled; from Virginia live-Cattle, Beef and Tobacco; for theirs at Barbados
is the worst I think that grows in the world; And for Cattle, no place lies
nearer to provide themselves, and the Virginians cannot have a better market to
sell them; for an Ox of 5 l. pound price at Virginie, will yield 25 l. there.

But to go on with our computation: for as we have given order for feeding our
people, so we must for their clothing; and first for the Christians, which we
will account to be thirty in number whereof ^ shall be men, and ^ women, that
we may make our computation the more exact; and for the men, (which are twenty
in number,) we will allow one for the supreme Overseer, who is to receive and
give directions, to all the subordinate Overseers, which we allow to be five
more; and those he appoynts to go out with several Gangs, some ten, some
twenty, more or less, according to the ability of the overseer he so
imployes; and these are to go out upon several Employments, as he gives them
directions, some to weed, some to plant, some to fall wood, some to cleave it,
some to saw it into boards, some to fetch home, some to cut Canes, others to
attend the Ingenio, Boyling-house, Still-house, and Cureing-house; some for
Harvest, to cut the Maies, (of which we have three Crops every year,) others
to gather Provisions, of Bonavist, Maies, Yeames, Potatoes, Cassavie, and
dress it at fit times for their dinners and suppers, for the Christian
servants; the Negres always dressing their own meat themselves, in their
little Pots, which is only Plantines, boiled or roasted, and some ears of
Maies toasted, at the fire; and now and then a Makerell a piece, or two
Herrings.

The Prime Overseer may very well deserve Fifty pounds Per Annum, or the value
in such Commodities as he likes, that are growing upon the Plantation; for he
is a man that the master may allow sometimes to sit at his own Table, and
therefore must be clad accordingly. The other five of the Overseers, are to be
accounted in the rank of Servants, whose freedom is not yet purchased, by
their five years service, according to the custom of the Island. And for their
clothing, they shall be allowed three shirts together, to every man for
shifts, which will very well last half a year, and then as many more. And the
like proportion for drawers, and for shoes, every month a pair, that is
twelve pair a year; six pair of stockings yearly, and three Monmouth Capps,
and for Sundays, a doublet of Canvas, and a plain band of Holland.

An Account of Expenses issuing out yearly for Clothing, for the Christian
Servants, both Men and Women, with the Wages of the principal Overseer, which
shall be 50 l. sterling, or the value in such Goods as grow upon the Plantation.
To the five subordinate Overseers, for each man's clothing.
l. s. d. Six shirts, at 4 s. a piece 1 04 0 Six pair of Drawers, at 2 s. 0 12
0 Twelve pair of shoes, at 3 s. 1 16 0 Six pair of Linen or Irish stokings, at
20 d. 0 10 0 Three Monmouth Caps, at 4 s. 0 12 0 Two doublets of Canvas, and
six Holland bands 0 15 0 Sum total for each man 5 9 0 Sum total for the five
Overseers 27 5 0 To the fourteen common servants.
l. s. d. Six shirts to each man 1 04 0 Six pair of drawers to each man 0 12 0
Twelve pair of shoes, at 3 s. 1 16 0 Three Monmouth caps, at 4 s. 0 12 0 Sum
total to each man 4 04 0 Sum total, of the fourteen servants by the year 58
16 0

Now for the ten women servants, we will dispose of them, thus: Four to attend
in the house, and those to be allowed, as follows in the first Column, viz.
The four that attend in the house to each of them The other six that weed, and
do the common work abroad yearly. l. s. d. l. s. d. Six smocks, at 4 s. a piece
1 04 0 Four smocks, at 4 s. a piece 0 16 0 Three petticoats, at 6 s. 0 18 0
Three petticoats, at 5 s. a piece 0 15 0 Three wastcoats, at 3 s. 0 09 0 Four
coifs, at 12 d. a piece 0 04 0 Six coifes or caps, at 18 d. a piece 0 09 0
Twelve pair of shoes, at 3 s. 1 16 0 Twelve pair of shoes, at 3 s. 1 16 0 Sum
is 4 16 0 Sum is 3 11 0 Sum total of the four women that attend in the house
19 4 0 Sum total of the six common women servants 21 06 0 Thirty Rug Gowns
for these thirty servants, to cast about them when they come home hot and
wearied, from their work, and to sleep in a nights, in their Hamocks, at 25 s.
a Gown or mantle. 37 10 0 Now for the Negres, which we will account to be a
hundred of both Sexes, we will divide them equally; The fifty men shall be
allowed yearly but three pair of Canvas drawers a piece, which at 2 s. a pair,
is 6 s.

The women shall be allowed but two petticoats a piece yearly, at 4 s. a piece,
which is 8 s. yearly.

So the yearly charge of the fifty men Negres, is 15 00 0 And of the women 20
00 0 Sum is 35 00 0

Now to sum up all, and draw to a conclusion, we will account, that for the
repairing dilapidations, and decays in the houseing, and all Utensills
belonging thereunto, l. s. d. We will allow yearly to issue out of the Profits,
that arise upon the Plantation 500 00 00 As also for the moderate decays of
our Negres, Horses, and Cattle, notwithstanding all our Recruits by breeding
all those kinds 500 00 00 For foreign provisions of victuals for our servants
and some of our slaves, we will allow yearly 100 00 00 For wages to our
principal Overseer yearly 50 00 00 By the Abstract of the charge of Clothing
the five subordinate Overseers yearly. 27 05 00 By the Abstract of Clothing,
the remaining 14 menservants yearly 58 16 00 By the Abstract of Clothing four
women^servants that attend in the house 19 04 00 By the Abstract of the
remaining six women-servants, that do the common work abroad in the fields. 21
06 00 The charge of thirty Rug Gowns for these thirty servants 37 10 00 By the
abstract of the clothing of fifty men-Negres 15 00 00 By the abstract for the
clothing of fifty women-Negres 20 00 00 Sum total of the expenses is 1349 01
00 Sum total of the yearly profits of the Plantation 8866 00 00 So the clear
profit of this Plantation of 500 acres of land amounts to yearly 7516 19 00

A large Revenue for so small a sum as 14000 l. to purchase, where the Seller
does not receive two years value by 1000 l. and upwards; and yet gives days of
payment.



I have been believed in all, or the most part, of my former descriptions and
computations, concerning this Island, and the ways to attain the profits that
are there to be gathered; but when I come to this point, no man gives me
credit, the business seeming impossible, that any understanding man, that is
owner of a Plantation of this value, should sell it for so inconsiderable a
sum: and I do not at all blame the incredulity of these persons; for, if
experience had not taught me the contrary, I should undoubtedly be of their
persuasion. But lest I should, by an overweening opinion, hope, that my
experience (which is only to my self) should mislead any man besides his
reason, which every knowing man ought to be guided and governed by, I will
without strayning or forcing a reason, deliver a plain and naked truth, in as
plain language, as is fitting such a subject, which I doubt not but will
persuade much in the business.

It Is a known truth there, that no man has attained to such a fortune as this,
upon a small beginning, that has not met with many rubs and obstacles in his
way, and sometimes fallings back, let his pains and industry be what it will: I
call those fallings back, when either by fire, which often happens there; or
death of Cattle, which is as frequent as the other; or by losses at Sea, which
sometimes will happen, of which I can bring lively instances: If either of
these misfortunes fall, it stands in an equal balance, whether ever that man
recover, upon whom these misfortunes fall: But, if two of these happen
together, or one in the neck of another, there is great odds to be laid, that
he never shall be able to redeem himself, from an inevi^able ruin; For, if
fire happen, his stock is consumed, and sometimes his house; if his Cattle die,
the work stands still, and with either of these, his credit falls; so as if he
be not well friended, he never can entertain a hope to rise again.

These toyls of body and mind, and these misfortunes together, will depresse
and wear out the blessed spirits in the world, and will cause them to think, what
a happy thing it is, to spend the remainder of their lives in rest and quiet
in their own Countries. And I do believe, there are few of them, whose minds
are not over-ballanc'd with avarice and lucre, that would not be glad to sell
good penni-worths, to settle themselves quietly in England. Besides the
casualties which I have named, there is yet one of nearer Concern then all the
rest, and that is, their own healths, than which, nothing is more to be valued;
for, sicknesses are there more grievous, and mortality greater by far, than in
England, and these diseases many times contagious: And if a rich man, either by
his own ill diet or distemper, or by infection, fall into such a sickness, he
will find there a plentiful want of such remedies, as are to be found in
England. Other reasons, and strong ones, they have, that induce them to hanker
after their own Country, and those are, to enjoy the company of their old
friends, and to raise up families to themselves, with a Sum which they have
acquired by their toil and industry, and often hazards of their lives, whose
beginnings were slight and inconsiderable; and what can be a greater comfort,
both to themselves, and their friends, then such an enjoyment. But I speak not
this to discourage any man, that has a mind to improve his Estate, by
adventuring upon such a Purchase; for, though the Planter, by long and tedious
pain and industry, have worn ou^ his life, in the acquist of his fortune; yet,
the Buyer, by his purchase, is so well and happily seated, as he need endure no
such hardships, but may go on in the managing his business, with much ease,
and some pleasure; and in a dosen years, return back with a very plentiful
fortune, and may carry with him from England, better remedies for his health,
then they, who for a long time had neither means to provide, nor money to
purchase it; for, though some Simples grow there, that are more proper for the
bodies of the Natives, than any we can bring from foreign parts, and no doubt
would be so for our bodies too, if we knew the true use of them; yet wanting
that knowledge, we are feign to make use of our own.

But when able and skillful Physicians shall come, whose knowledge can make the
right experiment and use of the virtues of those simples that grow there, they
will no doubt find them more efficatious, and prevalent to their healths, then
those they bring from foreign parts. For certainly every Climate produces
Simples more proper to cure the diseases that are bred there, than those that
are transported from any other part of the world: such care the great Physician
to mankind takes for our convenience.

Somewhat I have said of the diseases that reign in General in this Island,
but have fallen on no particular, though I have felt the power and Tyranny of it
upon mine own body, as much as any man that has past through it to death,
though it pleased the merciful God to raise me up again: for I have it to
show under the hand of Colonel Thomas Modiford in whose house I lay sick, that
he saw me dead without any appearance of life, three several times, not as in
sounding but dying fits, and yet recovered at last.

To tell the tedious particulars of my sickness, and the several drenches our
Ignorant Quacksalvers there gave me, will prove but a troublesome relation, and
therefore I am willing to decline it: Only this much, that it began with a
Fever, and as it is the custom of that disease there to cause Bindings,
Costivenesse, and consequently Gripings, and Tortions in the Bowels, so it
fared with me, that for a fortnight together had not the least evacuation by
Seige, which put me to such Torment as in all that time I have not slept; and
want of that, wore me out to such a weakness, as I was not then in a condition
to take any remedy at all. This excessive heat within begat a new torment
within me, the Stone; which stopped my passage so as in foureteen days together
no drop of water came from me; But contrary to my expectation, God Almighty
sent me a Remedy for that, and such a one as all the whole world cannot afford
the like: for in ten hours after I took it, I found my self not only eased,
but perfectly cured of that Torment, at least for the present, for it not only
broke, but brought away all the Stones and gravel that stopped my passage, so
that my water came as freely from me as ever, and carried before it such
quantities of broken stones and gravel, as in my whole life I have not seen
the like. About three weeks or a month after this, I became in the same
distress and felt the like Torment, whereupon I took the same medicine; which
gave me the same help. Now if it did thus to a body so worn out as mine, where
Nature was so decayed as it could operate little to the cure; what will this
medicine do, when it meets with such Organs as can contribute mainly to assist
it? But I give the reader but a sooty relation of* my Maladies, and indeed very
unfit for his ears, yet when I shall prescribe the remedy, which may happen to
concern him, I may hope to make him amends: for truly my touching upon the
disease, was but to usher in the cure, which shall follow close after, and it is
briefly thus. Take the Pisle of a green Turtle, which lives in the Sea, dry it
with a moderate heat, pound it in a Mortar to powder, and take of this as much
as will lie upon a shilling, in Beer or the like, Ale or White wine, and in a
very short time it will do the cure. If this secret had bin known in Europe
but a dosen years since, no doubt we had bin well stored with it by this time,
for it is to be had both at the Charibby and Lucayicke Islands, where these
fishes abound.

Yet so slow was my recovery of the maine sickness and my relapses so
frequent, as I was ever and anon, looking out to meet my familiar Companion
Death; my Memory and Intellect suffering the same decays with my body, for I
could hardly give an account of ^ of the time I was sick; but as my health
increast, they returned. In three months more, I was able to ride down to the
Bridge, where finding a ship bound for England, I agreed for my passage and
diet by the way; and (as the manner of all Masters of ships is,) he made me
large promises, of plentiful provisions aboard, as Beef, Porke, Pease Fish,
Oil, Biscuit, Beer, and some Wine; This Ship had bin fifteen months out of
England, and had traded at Guinny and Binny for Gold and Elephants teeth, but
those commodities taking up but little room, the Captain made the Barbados in
his way home, intending to take in his full lading of Sugar, and such other
commodities as that Island afforded; and so being ready to set sail, my self
and diverse other Gentlemen embarkt, upon the fifthteenth of April 1650, at
twelve a clock at night; which time our Master made choice of, that he might
the better pass undescri'd by a well known Pirate, that had for many days
layne hovering about the Island, to take any ships that traded for London, by
virtue of a Commission as he pretended, from the Marquess of Ormond. This
Pirate was an Irish man, his name Plunquet, a man bold enough: but had the
character of being more merciless and cruel, then became a valiant man. To
confirm the first part of his character; he took a ship in one of the Habours
of the Island, out of which he furnished himself with such things as he wanted,
but left the carcass of the vessel, to floate at large. He had there a Frigot
of about 500 Tunns, and a small vessel to wait on her, but the night covered
us from being disdiscern'd by him, and so we came safely off the Island. About a
fortnight after we had bin at sea, our Master complained, that his men had
abused him, and (for some commodities useful to themselves) had truckt away
the greatest part of his Biscuit; So that instead of bread, we were served with
the sweepings and dust of the bread room, which caused a general complaint of
all the passengers but no remedy: our Pease must now supply that want, which
with some Physical persuasion of the Master, that it was as hearty and binding
as bread, we rested satisfied, with this Motto, Patience upon force. The next
thing wanting, was Fish, an excellent food at Sea; and the want of that
troubled us much, yet the same remedy must serve as for the other, Patience.
The next thing wanting was Porke; and the last Beer, which put as clean out of
all Patience; So that now our staple food of the Ship, was only Beef, a few
Pease, and for drink water that had bin fifteen months out of England; finding
how ill we were accommodated, we desired the Master to put in at Fiall, One of
the Islands of Azores, a little to refresh our selves, which Island was not much
out of our way, but the Master loath to be at the charge of re-victualling, and
loss of time; refused to hearken to us, and being a request much to his
disadvantage, slighted us and went on, till he was past recovery of those
Islands, and then a violent storm took us, and in that storm a sad accident,
which happened by means of a Portugal, who being a Seaman, and trusted at
the Helm and, who though he have a compass before him, yet is mainely guided
by the quarter Master that Conns the ship above, upon the quarter deck; whose
directions the Portugal mistook, being not well verst in the English tongue,
and so steered the Ship, so near the wind, that she came upon her stays,
which caused such a fluttering of the sails, against the Masts, (the wind
being extreme violent) as they tore all in pieces, Nor was there any other
sails in the ship, all being spent in the long voyage to Guinny; nor any
thread in the ship, to mend them, so that now the Master (though too late)
began to repent him of not taking our Counsel to go to Fiall.

But how to redeem us out of this certain ruin, neither the Master, nor his
Mates could tell; for though the winds blew never so fair, we lay still at
Hull; and to make use of the Tide, in the Maine, was altogether vain and
hopeless. Our victuals too, being at a very low Ebb, could not last us many
days. So that all that were in the ship, both Seamen and Passengers, were
gazeing one upon another, what to do when our small remainder of provision
came to an end. But the Seamen, who were the greater number, resolved, the
Passengers should be dressed and eaten, before any of them should go to the Pot;
And so the next thing to be thought on was, which of the Passengers should dye
first, for they were all designed to be eaten; So they resolved upon the
fattest and healthfullest first, as likely to be the best meat, and so the
next, and next, as they eat Cherries, the best first. In this Election I
thought my self secure, for my body being nothing but a bagg-full of
Hydroptique humors, they knew not which way to dress me, but I should
dissolve and come to nothing in the Cooking; At last the Cooper took me into
his consideration, and said that if they would hearken to him, there might be
yet some use made of me; and that was in his opinion the best; that seeing my
body was not of a consistence to satisfy their hunger, it might serve to
quench their thirst. So I saying a short Prayer against drought and thirst,
remained in expectation of my doom with the rest; So merry these kind of men
can make themselves, in the midst of dangers, who are so accustomed to them;
And certainly those men, whose lives are so frequently exposed to such
hazards, do not set that value upon them as others, who live in a quiet
security; yet, when they put themselves upon any noble action, they will sell
their lives at such a rate, as none shall out-bid them; and the custom of
these hazards, makes them more valiant then other men; and those amongst them,
that do found their courage upon honest grounds, are certainly valiant in a
high perfection.

At last, a little Virgin, who was a passenger in the Ship, stood up upon the
quarter deck, like a she-Worthy, and said, that if they would be ruled by her,
she would not only be the contriver, but the acter of our deliverance. At whose
speech, we all gave a strict attention, as ready to contribute our help to all
she commanded; which was, that the Ship-Carpenter should make her a Distaffe
and Spindle, and the Sailors comb out some of the Occome: with which
instruments and materials, she doubted not, but to make such a quantity of
thread, as to repair our then useless Sails; which accordingly she did, and
by her virtue (under God) we held our lives.

Though such an accident as this, and such a deliverance, deserve a grateful
commemoration; yet, this is not all the use we are to make of it, somewhat more
may be considered, that may prevent dangers for the future; and that is, the
great abuse of Captains and Masters of Ships, who promise to their Passengers,
such plenty of victuals, as may serve them the whole voyage: But, before they
be half way, either pinch them of a great part, or give them that which is
nastie and unwholesome. And therefore I could wish every man, that is to go a
long voyage, to carry a reserve of his own, of such viands, as will last, and
to put that up safe; for, if it be not under lock and key, they are never the
near; for, the Sailors will as certainly take it, as you trust it to their
honesties: Complain to the Master, and you find no remedy. One thing I have
observed, let a Sayler steal any part of the Ships provision, he shall be sure
to have severe punishment; but, if from a Passenger, though it concern him
never so nearly, his remedy is to be laughed at. These enormities are fit to be
complained on at the Trinity-house, that some redress may be had; for, the
abuses are grievous.

Out of this danger at Sea, it has pleased the God of all mercy to deliver me,
as also from a grievous and tedious sickness on land, in a strange Country;
For which, may his holy Name be eternally blessed and praised, for ever and
ever.

I am now cast in Prison, by the subtle practices of some, whom I have formerly
called Friends: But the eternal and merciful God has been pleased to visit
and comfort me, and to raise me up such friends, as have kept me from cold and
hunger, whose charities in an Age, where cruelties and tyrannies are exercised
in so high a measure, may be accounted a prodigy. But, I doubt not of my
release out of this restraint, by the power of him, who is able to do all in
all. For, as David said to Saul, that God, who had delivered him out of the paw
of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, would deliver him from that
uncircumcised Philistine, Goliath of Gath: So may I now say; that God, which has
delivered me from a sickness to death, on land, and from shipwreck and hazards
at Sea, will also deliver me from this uncircumcised Philistine, the Upper
Bench, than which, the burning fire of a Feavour, nor the raging waves of the
Sea, are more formidable: But, we have seen and suffered greater things. And
when the great Leveller of the world, Death, shall run his progress, all
Estates will be laid eeven.

Mors Sceptra Ligonibus aequat.

A TABLE, Of the several things mentioned in this HISTORY.
A View of Porto Sancto, Madera's, and Deserts. page 2. A view of Bonavista,
Isle of May and Palma. page 3. Hunting and Hawking at Sea. page 4. Shark and
Pilot fish, page 5. Carvil, a fish that sails. page 6. Observations upon the
Ship's way, as also the treachery of Bernardo, a Portugal. page 7. The first
sight of the Island of Saint Jago page 8. Description of the Bay there, which
they call the P^y. page 9. The Padre Vadago's house and entertainment. page 10.
Our landing on the Island, and what happened to us there. page 13. There are seven
Islands more, which are neighbors to this. page 18. The first sight of the
Barbados, page 21. The Island first discovered by a ship of Sir William
Curteen's page 23. The Situation of the Island. page 25. The extent and length
of days. page 26. Temperature of the air page 27. How watered. page 28. Meat
and drink for supportation of life. page 29. Bread and drink. page 31. Several
sorts of meat. page 33. The manner of killing a Turtle: page 36. Victuals
brought from foreign parts. page 37. A Feast of an inland Plantation. page 38.
The like of a Plantation near the Sea. page 39. Commodities exported and
imported. page 40. What materials grow on the Island, fit to build with. page
41. The number and nature of the Inhabitants. page 43. A combination among the
Servants, to kill their Masters. page 45. Reasons why the Negres can plot no
Massacres upon their Masters. page 46. Negres pastime upon Sundaies, and their
aptness to learn Arts. page 48. The Planters will not allow their Slaves to
be Christians. page 50. Observations upon the shapes of the Negres. page 51. A
plot of some Negres, to burn the Ingenio, and the plot discovered by some of
their own Countrymen, who were honest and noble. page 53. Observations upon
the Indians. page 54. Somewhat of the Planters themselves. page 55. Tame Beasts,
which are of great use to the planters, as, Camells, Horses, Bulls, Oxen,
Cowes, Assinigoes, Hoggs, Sheep, Goats. page 58. Birds of all sorts. page 60.
Animalls and Insects. page 61. Crabs that come and dwell upon the Land. page
65. Several Trees growing upon the Island, and first of the poisonous trees and
plants. page 66. Several kinds of Fruit Trees. page 69. Trees of mixed kinds.
page 72. Timber trees of several kinds. page 73. The Palmet Royal described.
page 75. Plants that bear fruit. page 79. The Pine described. page 82. Sugar
Canes, with the manner of planting, growth, time of ripeness, with the whole
process of Sugar-making, both Muscavadoes and Whites. page 84. The manner of
distilling the skimings of the Coppers, of which we make the strong drink,
which the planters call kill-devill. page 92. An estimate of the value of the
Sugar made upon this Island, in twenty months. page 95. The Withs described.
page 96. Caves, and the description of their largeness. page 98. The use of
Liam-hounds ibid. Alo^^ growing there ibid. The flower of the Moon. page 99.
English Herbs and Roots. ib. Strength of the Island by Nature to Sea-ward. page
100. As also within Land. ibid. How Governed, and how Divided. ibid. No Mines
in this Island. p. 101. The Tar River. ib. The ill contrivance of the Planters
houses, as we found them, when first we came there. page 102. Directions for
better buildings. p. 103. A survey of the pleasures and profits, commodities
and incommodities, sickness and healthfulnesse, of this Island, balanced with
those of England. p. 104. The beauties of the Heavens, and how much they
transcend those of farther distances from the Lane. p. 106. The voluptuous nor
lazy persons are not fit to inhabit on this Island. page 108. The value of a
Plantation Stock't, of five hundred acres of Land, whereof two hundred for
Canes, to be sold for 14000 l. ibid. How this purchase of 14000 l. by
providence and good husbandry, may be made with 3000 l. p. 109. The yearly
revenue of this Plantation, being once set in an orderly course, will amount
unto 8866 l. page 112. An Estimate of the expense, that will issue out yearly
to keep this Plantation in good order, as you first received it, which we will
presuppose to be completely furnished with all things. p. 113. The account
balanced, the yearly Revenue will amount unto 7516 l. 19 s. p. 116. An
Objection answered, how it comes to pass, that Plantations of so great a
yearly value, can be purchased with so little money. p. 116. Somewhat of the
Diseases of the Country, as also of the Physicians. p. 118. An incomparable
medicine for the stone. ibid. Plunquet, a great Pirate, took a ship in one of
the Bays. p. 119. I Embarked, and set sail for England, the fifteenth of
April, 1650. ibid. The abuses of the Captains and Masters of ships, that
promise large provision of Victual and Drink to their passengers; and when
they need it most, fail them grossly. ibid. A storm at Sea, out of which we
were delivered (under God) by a little Virgin, being a passenger in the Ship.
Errata.
PAge 1. line 9. for Risco from, read Ris^o as from. p. 3. l. 13. for one, r.
us. p. 4. l. 37. fot farkers, r. forkers. p. 5. l. 16. for he as is, r. as he
is. p. 8 l. 18. dele was. p. 9. l. 7 for it, r. they. p. 10. l. 4. for fell two
bows short in substance and language, r, fell the two bows short substance
and language, p. 11. l. 29. for Millions, r. Milons. p. 12. l. 18. for Frillos,
Gropps, or Piaro Torte's, r, Trillos, Groppos, or Piano Forte's. p. 20. l. 14.
for Painters, r. Poynters. p. 21. l. 3. for imperfect, r. in perfect. p. 23. l.
18. for Ternambock, r. Fernambock, p. 25. l. 35. for Morost, r. Morasse. p. 27.
l. 4. for there rise, r. there arises. p. 29. l. 50. for Put, r. Pat. p 32. l.
40. for Pognant, r. Poynant. p. 32. l. 47. for drunk sparingly, r. drunk but
sparingly. p. 3^. l. 10. for Westalia, r. Westfalia. p. 38. l. 31. for Pognant,
r. Poynant. p. 38. l. 48. for Millions, r. Milons. p. 42. l. 26. for handsome
in their houses, r. handsome their houses. p. 46. l. 38. for Gambra, r. Gambia.
p. 48. l. 46. for sinking r. singing. p. 50. l. 35. for weary, r. wary p. 54.
4. for to due, r. to do. p. 58. l. 13. for so are, r. soar. p. 57. l. 2. for
Gambra. r. Gambia. p. 57. l. 28. for entreating, r. in treating. p. 58. l. 26.
for Virginie, r. Virginia. p. 60. l. 23. for the nexi s, r. the next is p. 60.
l. 48. for Pitnies, r. Titmise. p. 62. l. ^1. for Pumises, r. Puneses. p. 71.
l. 9. for Gnaver, r. Guaver. p. 72. l. ^8. for found, r. formed. p. 75. l. 42
for greater, r. great. p. 77. l. 49. for ables, r. abler. p. 78. l. 19. for
Pedistan, r. Pedistall. p. 82. l. 5. for out of the fruit, r. out the fruit, p.
83. l. 49. for leave, r. bear. p. 83. l. 50. for Jet, r. Jetty. p. 85. l. 35.
for more, r. most. p. 90. l. 34. for Withs, r. Ashes. p. 90. l. 36. for
Ripeness, r. Ropeinesse. p. 105. l. 30. for Porch, r. Perch, p. 107. l. 45.
for Ingoti, r. Ingots, p. 108. l. 29. for Percullis, r. Portcullis. p. 101. l.
26: for Gages, r. Gouges. p. 112. l. 46. for 300. r. 3000. p. 113. l. 33. for
fruit, r. frait (or freight.) p. 120. 13. for trusted at the Helm, and r.
trusted at the Helm, who though.

FINIS.
map of Barbados A topographicall Description and Admeasurement of the YLAND of
BARBADOS in the West INDYAES with the Mrs. Names of the Several plantacons



