The Life and Death of Sir Hugh of the Grime.


AS it befell upon one time,
about Mid-summer of the year,
Every man was taxt of his crime,
for stealing the good Lord Bishops Mare.
The good Lord Screw he sadled a Horse,
and rid after this same scrime,
Before he did get over the Moss,
there was he aware of Sir Hugh of the Grime.
Turn, O turn, thou false Traitor,
turn and yield thy self unto me:
Thou have stolen the Lord Bishops Mare,
and now thou think away to flee.
No, soft Lord Screw that may not be,
here is a broad sword by my side,
And if that thou can conquer me,
the Uictory will soon be tried.
I never was afraid of a Traitor bold,
although thy name be Hugh in the Grime,
I Will make thee repent thy speeches foul,
if day and life but give me time.
Then do thy worst good Lord Screw,
and deal your blows as fast as you can:
It will be tried between me and you,
which of us two shall be the best man.
THus as they dealt their blows so free,
and both so bloody at that time,
Over the Moss ten Yeomen they see,
come for to take Sir Hugh in the Grime.
Sir Hugh set his back against a Tree,
and then the men encompast him round,
His mickle Sword from his hand did flee,
and then they brought sir Hugh to the ground.
Sir Hugh of the Grime now taken is,
and brought back to Garland Town,
The good Wives all in Garland Town,
sir Hugh in the grime thou'st never gang down
The good Lord Bishop is come to the town,
and on the Bench is set so high,
And every man was taxt to his crime,
at length he called sir Hugh in the Grime.
Here am I thou false Bishop,
thy humors all to fulfill,
I do not think my fa^t so great,
but thou may put it into thy own will.
The Quest of Iury-men was called,
the best that was in Garland Town,
Eleven of them spoke all in a breast,
Sir Hugh in the Grime thou'st never gang down.
Then other Questry-men was called,
the best that was in Rumary,
Twelve of them spoke all in a breast,
sir Hugh in the Grime thou'st now guilty.
Then came down my good Lord Boles,
falling down upon his knee,
Five hundred pieces of gold would I give,
to grant Sir Hugh in the Grime to me.
Peace, peace, my good Lord Boles,
and of your speeches set them by,
If there be eleven Grimes all of a name,
then by my own honor they all should dye.
Then came down my good Lady Ward,
falling low upon her knee,
Five hundred measures of gold I Will give,
to grant Sir Hugh of the Grime to me.
Peace, peace, my good Lady Ward,
none of your proffers shall him buy,
For if there be twelve Grimes all of a name,
by my own honor they all should dye.
Sir Hugh of the Grimes condemned to dye,
and of his friends he had no lack,
Fourteen foot he leapt in his ward,
his hands bound fast upon his back.
Then he looked over his left shoulder,
to see whom he could see or spy,
There was he aware of his Father dear,
came tearing his hair most pitifully.
Peace, peace, my Father dear,
and of your speeches set them by,
Though they have bereaved me of my life,
they cannot bereave me of heaven so high.
He looked over his right shoulder,
to see whom he could see or spy,
There was he aware of his Mother Dear,
came tearing her hair most pitifully.
Pray have me remembered to Peggy my wife,
as she and I walked over the Moor,
She was the causer of my life,
and with the old Bishop she played the whore.
Here Iohnny Armstrong take thou my Sword
that is made of the mettle so fine:
And when thou come to the Border side,
remember the death of Sir Hugh of the Grime.
FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, in West-smith-field, near the
Hospital-gate.


