A NEW Historical Relation OF THE KINGDOM OF SIAM.

BY Monsieur DE LA LOVBERE, Envoy Extraordinary from the FRENCH KING, to the
KING of SIAM, in the years 1687 and 1688.

Wherein a full and curious Account is given of the Chinese Way of Arithmetic,
and Mathematick Learning.

In Two TOMES. Illustrated with SCULPTURES.

Done out of French, by A. P. Genesis R. S.S.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Tho. Horn at the Royal Exchange, Francis
Saunders at the New Exchange, and Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCIII.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS. The Occasion and Design of this Work.
PART I. Of the Country of Siam.
CHAP. I. ITs Geographical Description. Page 3 CHAP. II. A Continuation of the
Geographical Description of the Kingdom of Siam, with an Account of its
Metropolis. Page 6 CHAP. III. Concerning the History and Origin of the
Siameses. Page 8 CHAP. IV. Of the Productions of Siam, and first of the Woods.
Page 11 CHAP. V. Concerning the Mines of Siam. Page 13 CHAP. VI. Of the
Cultivated Lands, and their Fertility. Page 15 CHAP. VII. Of the Grain of Siam.
Page 17 CHAP. VIII. Of the Husbandry, and the difference of the Seasons. Page
18 CHAP. IX. Of the Gardens of the Siameses, and occasionally of their Liquors.
Page 20
PART II. Of the Manners of the Siameses in general.
CHAP. I. OF the Habit and Mien of the Siameses. Page 25 CHAP. II. Of the
Houses of the Siameses, and of their Architecture in Public Buildings. Page 29
CHAP. III. Of the Furniture of the Siameses. Page 34 CHAP. IV. Concerning the
Table of the Siameses. Page 35 CHAP. V. Concerning the Carriages, and Equipage
of the Siameses in general. Page 39 CHAP. VI. Concerning the Shows, and other
Diversions of the Siameses. Page 44 CHAP. VII. Concerning the Marriage and
Divorce of the Siameses. Page 51 CHAP. VIII. Of the Education of the Siamese
Children, and first of Their Civility. Page 54 CHAP. IX. Of the studies of the
Siameses. Page 58 CHAP. X. What the Siameses do know in Medicine and Chemistry.
Page 62 CHAP. XI. What the Siameses do know of the Mathematics. Page 64 CHAP.
XII. Concerning Music, and the Exercises of the Body. Page 68 XIII. Of the
Arts exercised by the Siameses. Page 69 CHAP. XIV. Of the Traffic amongst the
Siameses. Page 71 CHAP. XV. A Character of the Siameses in general. Page 73
PART III. Of the Manners of the Siameses according to their several Conditions.
CHAP. I. OF the several Conditions among the Siameses. Page 77 CHAP. II. Of
the Siamese People. Page 78 CHAP. III. Of the Officers of the Kingdom of Siam
in general. Page 80 CHAP. IV. Concerning the Office of Judicatory. Page 82
CHAP. V. Of the Judiciary style or form of Pleading. Page 85 CHAP. VI. The
Functions of Governor and Judge in the Metropolis. Page 88 CHAP. VII. Of the
State Officers, and particularly of the Tchacry, Calla-hom, and of the General
of the Elephants. Page 89 CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Art of War amongst the
Siameses, and of their Forces by Sea and Land. Page 90 CHAP. IX. Of the
Barcalon and of the Revenues. Page 93 CHAP. X. Of the Royal Seal, and of the
Maha Oborat. Page 95 CHAP. XI. Of the Palace, and of the King of Siam's Guard.
Page 96 CHAP. XII. Of the Officers which nearest approach the King of Siam's
Person. Page 99 CHAP. XIII. Of the Women of the Palace, and of the Officers of
the Wardrobe. Page 100 CHAP. XIV. Of the Customs of the Court of Siam, and of
the Policy of its Kings. Page 102 CHAP. XV. Concerning the form of Embassies at
Siam. Page 108 CHAP. XVI. Of the Foreigners of different Nations, fled to and
settled at Siam. Page 112 CHAP. XVII. Of the Talapoins, and their Convents. Page
113 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Election of the Superior, and of the Reception of the
Talapoins and Talapoinesses. Page 118 CHAP. XIX. Concerning the Doctrine of the
Talapoins. Page 119 CHAP. XX. Of the Burials of the Chinese and Siameses. Page
122 CHAP. XXI. Of the Principles of the Indian Moral Law. Page 126 CHAP. XXII.
Of the supreme Felicity, and extreme Infelicity amongst the Siameses. Page 129
CHAP. XXIII. Concerning the Origin of the Talapoins, and of their Opinions.
Page 130 CHAP. XXIV. Of the fabulous Stories which the Talapoins and their
Brethren have framed on their Doctrine. Page 135 CHAP. XXV. Diverse
Observations to be made in Preaching the Gospel to the Orientals. Page 140
A NEW HISTORICAL RELATION OF THE KINGDOM OF SIAM. The Occasion and Design of
this Work.
AT my return from the Voyage I made to Siam, The Occasion of this work.
in quality of his Most Christian Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary, they whose
right it is to command, required me to render them an exact account of the
things, which I had seen or learnt in that Country; which will be the whole
matter of this work. Others have sufficiently informed the Public of the
Circumstances of this long Voyage: But as to what concerns the Description of a
Country, we cannot have too many Relations, if we would perfectly know it: the
last always illustrating the former. But that it may be known from what time I
write, I shall declare only that we set Sail from Breast on the First of March,
Anno 1687. That we cast Anchor in the Road of Siam the 27th of September, in
the same Year. That we departed thence for our return the 3d of January, 1688.
And that we landed at Breast the 27th of July following.

My Design is therefore to treat first of the Country of Siam, its Extent, The
Design of this work.
Fertility, and the qualities of its Soil and Climate: Secondly, I will explain
the manners of the Siameses in general, and then their particular Customs
according to their various Qualities. Their Government and Religion shall be
comprehended in the last part; and I flatter my self that the farther the
Reader shall advance in the perusal of this work, the more he will find it
worthy of Curiosity; by reason that the Nature and Genius of the Siameses,
which I have every where endeavored to penetrate into, will be discovered more
and more: In fine, not to stay on things, which would not please every one, or
which would interrupt my Narrative too much, I will at the end insert several
Memoirs which I brought from this Country, and which I cannot suppress without
injuring the Curiosity of the Public. But if notwithstanding this precaution, I
do yet enlarge on certain matters beyond the relish of some, I entreat them to
consider that general expressions do never afford just Idea's; and that this is
to proceed no farther than the superficial Knowledge of things. It Is out of
this desire of making the Siameses perfectly known, that I give several notices
of the other Kingdoms of the Indies and of China: For though rigorously taken,
all this may appear foreign to my Subject, yet to me it seems that the
Comparison of the things of Neighboring Countries with each other, does
greatly illustrate them. I hope also that a pardon will be granted me for the
Siamese names, which I relate and explain. These remarks will make other
relations intelligible as well as mine, which without these Illustrations might
sometimes cause a doubt concerning what I assert.

In a word, those with whom I am acquainted do know that I love the Truth; but
it is not sufficient to give a sincere relation to make it appear true: It Is
requisite to add clearness to sincerity, and to be thoroughly informed of that
wherein we undertake to instruct others. I have therefore considered,
interrogated, and penetrated, as far as it was possible; and to render my self
more capable of doing it, I carefully read over, before my arrival at Siam,
several Ancient and Modern Relations of diverse Countries of the East. So that
in my opinion this preparation has supplied the defect of a longer residence,
and has made me to remark and understand in the three Months I was at Siam,
what I could not perhaps have understood or remarked in three Years, without
the assistance and perusal of those Discourses.

A MAPP of the KINGDOM of SIAM


PART I. Of the Country of Siam.
CHAP. I. The Geographical Description.
NAvigation has sufficiently made known the Sea Coasts of the Kingdom of Siam,
and many Authors have described them; How much this Kingdom is unknown.
but they know almost nothing of the Inland Country, because the Siameses have
not made a Map of their Country, or at least know how to keep it secret. That
which I here present is the work of an European, who went up the Menam, the
principal River of the Country, to the Frontiers of the Kingdom; but was not
skilful enough to give all the Positions with an entire exactness. Besides he
has not seen all; and therefore I thought it necessary to give his Map to Mr.
Cassini, Director of the Observatory at Paris, to correct it by some Memorials
which were given me at Siam. Nevertheless I know it to be still defective; but
yet it fails not to give some notices of this Kingdom which were never heard
of, and of being more exact in those we already have:

Its Frontiers extend Northward to the 22d. Degree, or thereabouts; Its
Frontiers Northward.
and the Road which terminates the Gulf of Siam, being almost at the Latitude
of 13 degrees and a half, it follows, that this whole extent, of which we
hardly have any knowledge, runs about 170 Leagues in a direct Line, reckoning
20 Leagues to a degree of Latitude, after the manner of our Seamen.

The Siameses do say that the City of Chiamai is fifteen days journey more to
the North, than the Frontiers of their Kingdom, that is to say at most, The
City of Chiamai and its Lake.
between sixty and seventy Leagues; for they are Journeys by water, and against
the Stream. It Is about thirty years since their King, as they report, took this
City, and abandoned it, after having carried away all the People; and it has
been since repeopled by the King of Ava, to whom Pegu does at present render
Obedience. But the Siameses which were at that expedition, do not know that
famous Lake, from whence our Geographers make the River Menam arise, and to
which, according to them, this City gives its Names: which makes me to think
either that it is more distant than our Geographers have conceived, or that
there is no such Lake. It may also happen that this City adjoining to several
Kingdoms, and being more subject than another to be ruined by War, has not
always been rebuilt in the same place: And this is not difficult to imagine of
the Cities which are built only with wood, as all in these Countries are, and
which in their destruction leave not any Ruins nor Foundations. However it may
be doubted, whether the Menam springs from a Lake, by reason it is so small at
its entrance into the Kingdom of Siam, that for about fifty Leagues, it carries
only little Boats capable of holding no more than four or five Persons at most.

The Kingdom of Siam is bounded from the East to the North by high Mountains,
which separate it from the Kingdom of Laos, The Country of Siam is only a
Valley.
and on the North and West by others, which divide it from the Kingdoms of Pegu
and Ava. This double Chain of Mountains (inhabited by a few, savage, and poor,
but yet free People, whose Life is innocent) leaves between them a great
Valley, containing in some places between fourscore and an hundred Leagues in
breadth, and is watered from the City of Chiamai to the Sea, that is to say from
the North to the South, with an excellent River which the Siameses call Me-nam,
or Mother-water, to signify, a great water, which being increased by the
Brooks and Rivers it receives on every side, from the Mountains I have
mentioned, discharges it self at last into the Gulf of Siam by three months,
the most navigable of which is that toward the East.

Cities seated on the River.
On this River, and about seven Miles from the Sea, is seated the City of
Bancok: and I shall transiently declare, that the Siameses have very few
habitations on their Coasts, which are not far distant from thence; but are
almost all seated on Rivers navigable enough to afford them the Commerce of the
Sea. As to the names of most of these places, which for this reason may be
called Maritime, they are disguised by Foreigners. Thus the City of Bancok is
called Fon in Siamese, it not being known from whence the name of Bancok is
derived, although there be several Siamese Names, that begin with the word Ban,
which signifies a Village.

The Gardens of Bancok.
The Gardens which are in the Territory of Bancok, for the space of four
Leagues, in ascending toward the City of Siam to a place named Talacoan, do
supply this City with the Nourishment which the Natives of the Country love
best, I mean a great quantity of Fruit.

Other Cities on the Menam.
The other principal places which the Menam waters, are, Me-Tac the first City
of the Kingdom to the North North-West, and then successively Tian-Tong,
Campeng pet or Campeng simple, which some do pronounce Campingue, Laconcevan,
Tchainat, Siam, Talacoan, Talaqueou, and Bancok. Between the two Cities of
Tchainat and Siam, and at a distance, which the Maeanders of the River do
render almost equal from each other, the River leaves the City of Louvo a
little to the East, at the 14 d. 42 m. 32 S. of Latitude, according to the
observations which the Jesuits have published. The King of Siam does there
spend the greatest part of the year, the more commodiously to enjoy the
diversion of Hunting: but Louvo would not be habitable, were it not for a
channel cut from the River to water it. The City of Me-Tac renders obedience to
an Hereditary Lord, who, they say, is a Vassal to the King of Siam, whom some
call Paya-Tac, or Prince of Tac. Tian-Tong is ruined, doubtless by the Ancient
Wars of Pegu. Campeng is known by the Mines of excellent Steel.

Another River likewise called Menam.
At the City of Laconcevan the Menam receives another considerable River which
comes also from the North, and is likewise called Menam, a name common to all
great Rivers. Our Geographers make it to spring from the Lake of Chiamai: but
it is certain that it has its source in the Mountains, which lie not so much
to the North as this City. It runs first to Meuang-fang, then to Pitchiai,
Pitsanoulouc, and Pitchit, and at last to Laconcevan, where it mixes, as I have
said with the other River.

Pitsanoulouc, which the Portugueses do corruptly call Porselouc has formerly
had hereditary Lords, like the City of Me-Tac: and Justice is at present
executed in the Palace of the Ancient Princes. It Is a City of great commerce,
fortified with fourteen Bastions, and is at 19 degrees and some minutes
Latitude.

Laconcevan stands about the midway from Pitsanoulouc or Porselouc to Siam, a
distance computed to be Twenty five days Journey, for those that go up the
River in a Boat or Balon; but this voyage may be performed in twelve days when
they have a great many Rowers, and they ascend the River with speed.

Cities of Wood.
These Cities, like all the rest in the Kingdom of Siam, are only a great number
of Cabbins frequently environed with an enclosure of Wood, and sometimes with a
Brick, or Stone Wall, but very rarely of Stone. Nevertheless as the Eastern
people have ever had as much magnificence and pride in the figures of their
Language* as simplicity and poverty in whatever appertains to Life, the names
of these Cities do signify great things; Tian-Tong, for instance, signifies
True Gold; Campeng pet, Walls of Diamond; and it is said that its Walls are of
Stone: The superstition of the Siameses at Meuang-fang.
and Laconcevan signifies the Mountain of Heaven.

But as for what concerns Meuang fang, the word Fang being the name of a Tree
famous for dying, and which the Portugueses have called Sapan; some interpret A
MAPP of the Course of the River MENAM from SIAM to the SEA.
it the City of the Wood of Sapan. And because that there is kept a Tooth,
which is pretended to be a Relick of Sommona-Codom, to whose Memory the
Siameses do erect all their Temples; there are some who call not this City
Meuang-fang, but Meuang-fan, or the City of the Tooth. The superstition of
these people continually draws thither a great number of Pilgrims, not Siameses
only, but from Pegu, and Laos.

Such another Superstition prevails at a place named Prabat, Another
Superstition at Prabrat.
about five or six leagues to the East-North-East of the City of Louvo; the
superstition is this; In the Balie Language, which is the learned tongue of the
Siameses, or the Tongue of their Religion, Bat signifies a Foot, and the word
Pra, of which it is not possible exactly to render the signification, signifies
in the same tongue whatever may be conceived worthy of veneration and respect.
The Siameses do give this title to the Sun and Moon, but they do also give it
to Sommona-Codom, to their Kings, and some considerable Officers.

The Prabat is therefore the print of a man's foot, What it is.
cut by an ill Graver upon a Rock; but this impression containing about 13 or
14 inches in depth, is five or six times as long as a man's Foot, and
proportionably as broad. The Siameses adore it, and are persuaded that the
Elephants, especially the white ones, the Rhinoceros, and all the other Beasts
of their Woods, do likewise go to worship it when no person is there; And the
King of Siam himself goes to adore it once a year with a great deal of Pomp and
Ceremony. It is covered with a Plate of Gold, and enclosed in a Chapel which
is there built. They report that this Rock which is now very flat and like a
new mown Field, was formerly a very high Mountain, which shrunk and waxed level
on a sudden under the Foot of Sommona-Codom, in memory of whom they believe
that the Impression of the Foot does there remain. Nevertheless it is certain
by the Testimony of ancient men, that the Antiquity of this Tradition exceeds
not 90 years. A Talapoin, or Religious Siamese, of that time, having doubtless
made this Impression himself, or procured it to be made, and then feigned to
have miraculously discovered it; and without any other appearance of Truth,
gave Reputation and Credit to this Fable of the levelled Mountain.

Now in all this the Siameses are only gross Imitators. The Original of this
Superstition.
In the Histories of India it is related, with what respect a King of the
Island of Ceylon kept an Apes Tooth, which the Indians averred to be a Relic,
and with what Sums he endeavored to purchase and ransom it from Constantine of
Brigantium, then Viceroy of the Indies, who had found it amongst the Spoils
taken from the Indians: But Constantine chose rather to burn it, and afterward
throw the Ashes into a River. It Is known likewise that in the same Island of
Ceylon, which the Indians do call Lanca, and on a real Mountain which is not
levelled, there is a pretended print of a Man's foot, which has for a long time
been in great Veneration there. It doubtless represents the Left foot: For the
Siameses report that Sommona-Codom set his right foot on their Prabat, and his
left on Lanca; although the whole Gulf of Bengala runs between them.

The Portuguese have called the Print at Ceylon Adam's Foot, What the Adam's
foot of Ceylon is.
and believe that Ceylon was the Terrestrial Paradise, from the Faith of the
Indians at Ceylon, who declare that the Impression which they reverence, is the
Print of the first Man: Every one of these Heathenish Nations vigorously
asserting that the first Man inhabited their Country. Thus the Chinese do call
the first man Puoncuo, and believe that he inhabited China. I say nothing of
some other Impressions of this nature, which are revered in several places of
the Indies; nor of the pretended print of Hercules foot, mentioned by
Herodotus. Lib. 4. c. 82.
I return to my subject.

CHAP. II. A Continuation of the Geographical Description of the Kingdom of
Siam, with an Account of its Metropolis.
Other Cities of the Kingdom of Siam.
ON the Frontiers of Pegu is seated the City of Cambory, and on the borders of
Laos the Town of Corazema, which some do call Carissima, both very Famous. And
in the Lands which lie between the Rivers above the City of Laconcevan, and on
the Channels which have a Communication from one River to the other, there are
two other considerable Cities, Socotai, almost in the same Latitude with
Pitchit, and Sanquelouc more to the North.

A Country intersected with Channels. The City of Siam described.
The Country being so hot that it is inhabitable only near Rivers, the Siameses
have cut a great many Channels; and without having better Memoirs or Notes,
it is impossible to reckon up all the Cities seated thereon.

It Is by the means of these Channels, called by the Siameses Cloum, that the
City of Siam is not only become an Island, but is placed in the middle of
several Islands, which renders the situation thereof very singular. The Isle
wherein it is situated, is at present all enclosed within its walls, which
certainly was not in the time of Ferdinand Mendez Pinto; if notwithstanding the
continual mistakes of this Author, who seems to rely too much on his memory, we
may believe what he says, that the Elephants of the King of Pegu, who then
besieged the City of Siam, did so nearly approach the Walls, as with their
Trunks to beat down the Palisado's which the Siameses had there placed to cover
themselves.

Its Latitude, according to Father Thomas the Jesuit, is 14 d. 20 m. 40 S. and
its Longitude 120 d. 30 m. It has almost the figure of a Purse, the mouth of
which is to the East, and the bottom to the West. The River meets it at the
North by several Channels, which run into that which environs it; and leaves it
on the South, by separating itself again into several streams. The King's
Palace stands to the North on the Canal which embraces the City; and by turning
to the East, there is a Causey, by which alone, as by an Isthmus, People may go
out of the City without crossing the water.

The City is spacious, considering the Circuit of its Walls, which, as I have
said, incloses the whole Isle; but scarce the sixth part thereof is inhabited,
and that to the South-East only. The rest lies desert, where the Temples only
stand. It Is true that the Suburbs, which are possessed by strangers, do
considerably increase the number of the People. The streets thereof are large
and strait, and in some places planted with Trees, and paved with Bricks laid
edgewise. The Houses are low, and built with Wood; at least those belonging to
the Natives, who, for these Reasons, are exposed to all the Inconveniences of
the excessive heat. Most of the streets are watered with strait Canals, which
have made Siam to be compared to Venice, and on which are a great many small
Bridges of Hurdles, and some of Brick very high and ugly.

Its Names.
The Name of Siam is unknown to the Siamese. It Is one of those words which the
Portugues of the Indies do use, and of which it is very difficult to discover
the Original. They use it as the Name of the Nation, and not of the Kingdom:
And the Names of Pegu, Lao, Mogul, and most of the Names which we give to the
Indian Kingdoms, are likewise National Names; so that to speak rightly, we must
say, the King of the Peguins, Laos, Moguls, Siams, as our Ancestors said, the
King of the Franc's. In a word, those that understand Portuguese, do well know
that according to their Orthography, Siam and Siaom are the same thing; and
that by the Similitude of our Language to theirs, we ought to say the Sions,
and not the Siams: so when they write in Latin, they call them Siones. The true
Name of the Siameses signifies Francs.


The Siameses give to themselves the Name of Tai, or Free, as the word now
signifies in their Language: And thus they flatter themselves with bearing the
A Map of the City of SIAM
A. The City B. The Palace C. The Port D. ye Arsenall for ye Ships E. ye
Arsenall for ye Ballons and Galleys. F. The Street of ye Bazars G. The Seminary
H. The Portuguese Iacobins I. The Portuguese Jesuits K. The Dutch Factory L.
The Inclosur where the Elephants are taken M. A House begun for the French
Ambassadors 800 French Toises


The Bambou Tree
The Arvore de Raiz
A Map of Bancock
A Vessel of filigran
A Plaugh
The Arc Kier
Name of Francs, which our Ancestors assumed when they resolved to deliver the
Gauls from the Roman Power. And those that understand the Language of Pegu,
affirm that Siam in that Tongue signifies Free. It Is from thence perhaps that
the Portugues have derived this word, having probably known the Siameses by the
Peguins. Nevertheless Navarete in his Historical Treatises of the Kingdom of
China, chap. 1. art. 5. relates that the Name of Siam, which he writes Sian,
comes from these two words Sien lo, without adding their signification, or of
what Language they are; although it may be presumed he gives them for Chinese,
Meuang Tai is therefore the Siamese Name of the Kingdom of Siam (for Meuang
signifies Kingdom) and this word wrote simply Muantay, is found in Vincent le
Blanc, and in several Geographical Maps, as the Name of a Kingdom adjoining to
Pegu: But Vincent le Blanc apprehended not that this was the Kingdom of Siam,
not imagining perhaps that Siam and Tai were two different Names of the same
People.

As for the City of Siam, the Siameses do call it Si-yo-thi-ya, the o of the
Syllable yo being closer than our Dipthong an. Sometimes also they call it
Crung the-papra maha nacon: But most of these words are difficult to
understand, because they are taken from this Baly Language, which I have
already declared to be the learned Language of the Siameses, and which they
themselves do not always perfectly understand. I have already remarked what I
know concerning the word Pra, that of Maha signifies Great. Thus in speaking of
their King, they style him Pra Maha Crassat; and the word Crassat, according to
their report signifies living; and because the Portugues have thought that Pra
signifies God, they imagine that the Siameses called their King, The great
living God. From Si-yo-thi ya, the Siamese Name of the City of Siam, Foreigners
have made Judia, and Odiaa, by which it appears that Vincent le Blanc, and some
other Authors, do very ill distinguish Odiaa from Siam:

In a word, the Siameses, of whom I treat, do call themselves Tai Noe, Two
different People called Siameses.
little Siams. There are others, as I was informed, altogether savage, which
are called Tai yai, great Siams, and which do live in the Northern Mountains.
In several Relations of these Countries, I find a Kingdom of Siammon, or Siami:
but all do not agree that the People thereof are savage.

In fine, the Mountains which lie on the common Frontiers of Ava, Other
Mountains, and other Frontiers.
Pegu and Siam, gradually decreasing as they extend to the South, do form the
Peninsula of India extra Gangem, which terminating at the City of Sincapura,
separates the Gulphs of Siam and Bengala, and which with the Island of Sumatra
forms the famous Strait of Malaca, or Sincapura. Several Rivers do fall from
every part of these Mountains into the Gulphs of Siam and Bengala, and render
these Coasts habitable. The other Mountains which rise between the Kingdom of
Siam and Laos, and extend themselves also toward the South, do run gradually
decreasing, till they terminate at the Cape of Camboya, the most Eastern of all
those in the Continent of Asia toward the South. It Is about the Latitude of
this Cape, that the Gulf of Siam begins; and the Kingdom of this Name extends
a great way toward the South in form of an Horseshoe on either side of the
Gulf, viz. along the Eastern Coast to the River Chantebon, where the Kingdom
of Camboya begins; and opposite thereunto, viz. in the Peninsula extra Gangem,
which lies on the West of the Gulf of Siam, it extends to Queda and Patana,
the Territories of the Malayans, of which Malaca was formerly the Metropolis.

After this manner it runs about 200 Leagues on the side toward the Gulf of
Siam, and 180, or thereabouts, on the Gulf of Bengal, The Coasts of Siam.
an advantageous situation which opens unto the Natives of the Country the
Navigation on all these vast Eastern Seas. Add that as Nature has refused all
manner of Ports and Roads to the Coast of Coromandel, which forms the Gulf of
Bengal to the West, it has therewith enriched that of Siam which is opposite to
it, and which is on the East of the same Gulf.

A great number of Isles do cover it, Isles of Siam in the Gulf of Bengal.
and render it almost everywhere a safe Harbor for Ships; besides, that most of
these Isles have very excellent Ports, and abundance of fresh water and wood,
an invitation for new Colonies. The King of Siam affects to be called Lord
thereof, although his People, who are very thin in the firm Land, have never
inhabited them; and he has not strength enough at Sea to prohibit or hinder the
entrance thereof to strangers.

The City of Merguy.
The City of Merguy lies on the North-West Point of a great and populous Island,
which at the extremity of its course forms a very excellent River, which the
Europeans have called Tenasserim, from the Name of a City seated on its Banks
about 15 Leagues from the Sea. This River comes from the North, and after
having passed through the Kingdoms of Ava and Pegu, and entered into the Lands
under the King of Siam's Jurisdiction, it discharges itself by three Channels
into the Gulf of Bengal, and forms the Island I have mentioned. The Ports of
Merguy, which some report to be the best in all India, is between this Isle and
another that is inhabited, and lies opposite, and to the West of this, wherein
Merguy is situated.

CHAP. III. Concerning the History and Origin of the Siameses.
The Siameses little curious of their History.
THE Siamese History is full of Fables. The Books thereof are very scarce, by
reason the Siameses have not the use of Printing; for upon other Accounts I
doubt of the report, that they affect to conceal their History, seeing that the
Chinese, whom in many things they imitate, are not so jealous of theirs.
However that matter is, notwithstanding this pretended Jealousy of the
Siameses, they who have attained to read any thing of the History of Siam,
assert that it ascends not very high with any character of truth.

The Epoch of the Siameses.
Behold a very dry and insipid Chronological Abridgment which the Siameses have
given thereof: But before we proceed, it is necessary to tell you, that the
current year 1689, beginning it in the month of December 1688, is the 2233 of
their Era, from which they date the Epoch, or beginning (as they say) from
Sommona-Codom's death. But I am persuaded that this Epoch has quite another
foundation, which I shall afterward explain.

Their Kings.
Their first King was named Pra Poat honne sourittep-pennaratui sonanne bopitra.
The chief place where he kept his Court was called Tchai pappe Mahanacon, the
situation of which I ignore; and he began to reign An. 1300. computing after
their Epoch. Ten other Kings succeeded him, the last of which, named Ipoja
sanne Thora Thesma Teperat, removed his Royal Seat to the City of Tasco Nacora
Louang, which he had built, the situation of which is also unknown to me. The
twelfth King after him, whose Name was Pra Poa Noome Thele seri, obliged all
his People in 1731, to follow him to Locintai, a City seated on a River, which
descends from the Mountains of Laos, and runs into the Menam a little above
Porselouc, from which Locontai is between 40 and 50 Leagues distant. But this
Prince resided not always at Locontai; for he came and built, and inhabited the
City of Pipeli on a River, the mouth of which is about two Leagues to the West
of the most occidental mouth of Menam. Four other Kings succeeded him, of which
Rhamatilondi, the last of the four, began to build the City of Siam in 1894,
and there established his Court. By which it appears, that they allow to the
City of Siam the Antiquity of 338 years. The King Regent is the twenty fifth
from Rhamatilondi, and this year 1689, is the 56th or 57th year of his age.
Thus do they reckon 52 Kings in the space of 934 years, but not all of the same
Blood.

The Race of the present King.
Mr. Gervaise in his Natural and Political History of the Kingdom of Siam, gives
us the History of the now Regent King's Father; and Van Vliet gives it us much
more circumstanciated, in his Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam,
printed at the end of Sir Thomas Herbert's Travels into Persia. I refer the
Reader thither to see an Example of the Revolutions, which are common at Siam;
for this King who was not of the Royal Race, though Vliet asserts the contrary,
took away the Scepter and Life of his Natural Lords, and put to death all the
Princes of their Blood except two, which were alive when Vliet writ, but of
whom I could not learn any News. Without all doubt this Usurper put them to
death like the rest. And in truth, John Struys, in the First Tome of his
Voyages, asserts that this was the Fate of the last of these two Princes, who
was alive in the year 1650, and was then 20 years old; the Tyrant put him to
death that very year, with one of his Sisters, upon an Accusation notoriously
false: But a remarkable Circumstance of the History of his Usurpation, was,
that entering by force of Arms into the Palace, he forced the King to quit it,
and fly into a Temple for refuge; and having dragged this unfortunate Prince
out of this Temple, and carried him back a Prisoner to the Palace, he caused
him to be declared unworthy of the Crown and Government, for having deserted
the Palace. To this Usurper who died in 1657, after a Reign of 30 years,
succeeded his Brother; because his Son could not, or durst not then to dispute
the Crown with him. On the contrary, to secure his Life, he sought a Sanctuary
in a Cloister, and clothed himself with the inviolable Habit of a Talapoin.
But he afterward so politickly took his measures, that he dispossessed his
Uncle, who flying from the Palace on his Elephant, was slain by a Portuguese
with a Musket.

Ferdinand Mendez Pinto relates that the King of Siam, Another Example of the
Revolutions of Siam.
who reigned in 1547, and to whom he gives great Praises, was poisoned by the
Queen his Wife at his return from a military Expedition. This Princess
deliberated thus to prevent the vengeance of her Husband, by reason that during
his absence she had maintained an amorous Commerce, by which she proved with
Child. And this Author adds, that she soon after destroyed the King her own Son
in the same manner, and had the Credit to get the Crown set upon her Lover's
Head the 11th of November 1548. But in January 1549, they were both
assassinated in a Temple, and a Bastard Prince, the Brother and Uncle of the
two last Kings, was taken out of a Cloister to be advanced on the Throne. The
Crowns of Asia are always instable, and those of India, China and Japan, much
more than the others.

As for what concerns the Origin of the Siameses, it would be difficult to
judge whether they are only a single People, A Doubt as to the Origin of the
Siameses.
directly descended from the first Men that inhabited the Country of Siam, or
whether in process of time some other Nation has not also settled there,
notwithstanding the first Inhabitants.

The principal Reason of this Doubt proceeds from the Siameses understanding
two Languages, viz. the Vulgar, which is a simple Tongue, Two Languages at Siam.
consisting almost wholly of Monosyllables, without Conjugation or Declension;
and another Language which I have already spoken of, which to them is a dead
Tongue, known only by the Learned, which is called the Balie Tongue, and which
is enricht with the inflexions of words, like the Languages we have in Europe.
The terms of Religion and Justice, the names of Offices, and all the Ornaments
of the Vulgar Tongue are borrowed from the Balie. In this Language they compose
their best Songs; so that it seems at least that some Foreign Colony had
formerly inhabited the Country of Siam, and had carried thither a second
Language. But this is a Dispute that might be raised concerning all the
Countries of India; for, like Siam, they all have two Languages, one of which
is still remaining only in their Books.

The Siameses assert that their Laws are Foreign, What the Siameses report
concerning the Origin of their Laws and Religion.
and came to them from the Country of Laos, which has, perhaps, no other
Foundation than the Conformity of the Laws of Laos with those of Siam, even as
there is a Conformity between the Religions of these two Nations, and with that
of the Peguins. Now this does not strictly prove that any of these three
Kingdoms has given its Laws and its Religion to the rest, seeing that it may
happen that all the three may have derived their Religion and their Laws from
another common Source. However it be, as the Tradition is at Siam, that their
Laws and Kings came from Laos, the same Tradition runs at Laos, that their
Kings and most of their Laws came from Siam.

Of the Balie Language.
The Siameses speak not of any Country where the Balie Language, which is that
of their Laws and their Religion, is now in use. They suspect indeed, according
to the report of some amongst them, which have been at the Coast of Coromandel,
that the Balie Language has some similitude with some one of the Dialects of
that Country: but they agree at the same time that the Letters of the Balie
Language are known only amongst them. The secular Missionaries established at
Siam, are of opinion that this Language is not entirely extinct: by reason they
saw in their Hospital a man come from about the Cape of Comorin, who
interspersed several Balie words in his discourse, affirming that they were
used in his Country, and that he had never studied, and knew only his Mother
Tongue. They moreover averr for truth, that the Religion of the Siumeses came
from those Quarters, because that they have read in a Balie Book, that
Sommona-Codom whom the Siameses adore, was the Son of a King of the Island of
Ceylon.

The Siameses resemble their Neighbors.
But setting aside all these uncertainties, the vulgar Language of the Siameses,
like in its Simplicity to those of China, Tonquin, Cochinchina, and the other
States of the East, sufficiently evinces that those who speak it, are near of
the same Genius with their Neighbors. Add hereunto their Indian Figure, the
color of their Complexion mixed with red and brown, (which corresponds neither
to the North of Asia, Europe, nor Africa,) Add likewise their short Nose
rounded at the end, as their Neighbors generally have it; the upper Bone of
their Cheeks high and raised, their Eyes slit a little upwards, their Ears
larger than ours, in a word all the Lineaments of the Indian and Chinese
Physiognomy; their Countenance naturally squeezed and bent like that of Apes,
and a great many other things which they have in common with these Animals, as
well as a mavelous passion for Children. For nothing is equal to the
Tenderness which the great Apes expressed to their Cubs, except the Love which
the Siameses have for all Children, whether for their own, or those of another.

The King of Siam loves Children till 7 or 8 years old.
The King of Siam himself is encompassed with them, and delights to educate them
till seven or eight years old: after which, as they lose the childish Air, they
do also lose his Favor. One alone, say some, was there kept till between
twenty and thirty years of Age, and is still his favorite. Some do call him
his adopted Son, others suspect him to be his Bastard; He is at least Foster
Brother to his Lawful Daughter.

That the Siameses came not from far to Inhabit their Country.
But if you consider the extremely Low Lands of Siam, that they seem to escape
the Sea as it were by miracle, and that they lie annually under rain water for
several Months, the almost infinite number of very incommodious Insects which
they engender, and the excessive Heat of the Climate under which they are
seated; it is difficult to comprehend that others could resolve to inhabit
them, excepting such as came thither by little and little from places adjacent:
And it may be thought that they have been inhabited not many Ages, if a
Judgment may be made thereof by the few Woods that are stubbed as yet. Moreover
it would be necessary to travel more to the North of Siam, to find out the
warlike People which could yield those innumerable swarms of men, which
departed out of their own Country to go and possess others. And how is it
possible that they should not be stopped on the Road, among some of those soft
and effeminate People, which lie between the Country of the Scythians, and the
Woods and impassable Rivers of the Siameses? It Is not therefore probable that
the Lesser Siameses, which we have spoken of, are descended from the Greater,
and that the Greater withdrew into the Mountains which they inhabit, to free
themselves from the Tyranny of the neighboring Princes, under which they were
born.

Strangers that have come to Siam.
Nevertheless it is certain that the Siamese blood is very much mixed with
foreign. Not to reckon the Peguins, and the Inhabitants of Laos, which are at
Siam, and whom I consider almost as the same Nation with the Siameses; it is not
to be doubted that there formerly fled to Siam a great number of Strangers from
different Countries, upon the account of a free Liberty of Trade, and by reason
of the Wars of the true India, China, Japan, Tonquin, Cochinchina, and other
States in the South part of Asia. They report likewise that in the City of
Three Baly Alphabets
Kia ^ Keu ^ Keua ^ Koua ^ Koua ^ Ke ^ Ke ^ Ko ^ Kaou ^ Koum ^ Kam^ Karama^ Ko^
Kouai ^ Keua ^ reu ^ reu ^ leu ^ leu ^
Ca ^ Kha ^ Kha ^ go ^ nga^ Tcha ^ Tcha ^ Tcha ^ Tcha ^ ya ^ tha ^ tha ^ da^ na
^ Ta ^ tha ^ t^a ^ da ^ na ^ pa ^ ppa ^ da ^ me ^ Ca ^ ra ^ la ^ ua ^ ta ^ ha ^
la ^ ang ^
Ka ^ Kaa ^ Ki ^ Ku ^ Kou ^ Kou ^ Ke ^ Kai ^ Ko ^ Kaon ^ Kam ^ Ka ^ Ka-na^ Ka
na^ Kad-ni^ Kard ^ Kanou ^ Kanou ^ Ka-ne ^ Kanai ^ Ka na ^ Ka naon ^ Kanang ^
Ka-na ^


The Siamese Ciphers
1 ^ 2 ^ 3 ^ 4 ^ 5 ^ 6 ^ 7 ^ 8 ^ 9 ^ 10 ^


The Siamese numeral Names.
1 ^ 2 ^ 3 ^ 4 ^ 5 ^ 6 ^ 7 ^ 8 ^ 9 ^ 10 ^ 11 ^ 12 ^ 20 ^ 30 ^


depiction of a Hookah A Smoking Instrument which: the Mod^^ of Siam^do use.
AA. a Pipe of Bambou 8 or 9 footlong

The Chinese-Chese-Boord.
1 The King 2 The Guards 3 The Elephants 4 The Knights 5 The Wagons 6 The
Canons 7 The Pawns 8 The River


A Musical Instrument with. Bells
The Chinese Abacus or Arithmetical Instrument. or Counting

Siam, there are forty different Nations: but inasmuch as Vincent le Blanc
speaks in these very terms concerning the City of Martaban, this affected
Number of Forty Nations appears unto me an Indian Vanity. The entire
annihilation of the Commerce of Siam, having in these last years forced most of
the Foreigners, that fled thither, to seek out new Retreats, three or four
Canoniers which are of Bengal, do now compose a Nation; three Cochinchinese
Families do make another; the Moors alone which ought to be reckoned only for
one, do make more than ten, as well for that they came to Siam from different
Nations, as for their being of various conditions, as Merchants, Soldiers, and
Laborers. (I call Moors after the Spanish manner, not the Negro's, but those
Mahometans of Arabian Extraction, which our Ancestors have called Sarracens,
and whose race is spread almost through our whole Hemisphere.) And
notwithstanding all this, when the Ambassadors of the Foreigners, which at Siam
are called the Forty Nations, came to salute the King's Envoys, there were
reckoned no more than one and twenty Nations, computing as the Siameses would
have us.

They inhabit different quarters in the City or Suburbs of Siam; The people of
the Kingdom of Siam not very numerous.
and yet this City is very little inhabited in respect to its Bigness, and the
Country much less in Proportion. It must be imagined that they desire not a
greater People, for they count them every year; and do well know, what no
person ignores, that the only secret to increase them, would be to ease them in
the Taxes and Impositions. The Siameses do therefore keep an exact account of
the Men, Women, and Children; and in this vast extent of Land, according to
their own Confession, they reckoned up the last time but Nineteen Hundred
Thousand Souls. From which I question not that some retrenchment is to be made
for Vanity and Lies, Characters essential to the Eastern people; but on the
other hand, thereunto must be added the Fugitives, which do seek a Sanctuary in
the Woods against the Government.

CHAP. IV. Of the Productions of Siam, and first of the Woods or Trees.
THe Country of Siam lies almost wholly incultivated and covered with Woods.
One of their most eminent Trees is a kind of Reed, The Bambou.
called in Indian, Mambou, in Portuguese, Bambou, in Siamese, May pai. The
Indians apply it to an infinite number of uses. Aelian lib. 4. cap. 34.
mentions it as their most ancient nourishment. At present they use it little;
and that only in some of their dishes, when it is tender; and to preserve it,
they Pickle it up in Vinegar, as we do Cucumbers and Samphire. This Tree
resembles the Poplar, it is strait and tall, and the Leaves thereof few, pale,
and longish. It is hollow, and grows in shoots like our Reeds, and its shoots
are separated from one another by knots: but it has Branches and Thorns, which
our Reeds have not. It grows very close, and the same Roots do shoot forth
several stems, so that nothing is thicker or more difficult to pass than a
Forest of Bambou; and so much the more because the wood thereof is hard and
difficult to cut, although it be easy to cleave. The Siameses do set it on
fire by Friction, which is a token of its hardness. They have two pieces of
Bambou clest, which are like two pieces of Lath, in the edge of the one they do
make a notch, and do forcibly rub in this hole with the edge of the other, as
with a Saw; and some dry leaves, or other combustible matter, which is put in
the notch, fails not to catch fire without firing the Bambou. There is no Reed
but has naturally somewhat either more or less of a Sugary juice. That of the
Bambou is famous in some places of India, as an excellent Remedy for several
Maladies. It escaped my curiosity to ask whether the Sugar of the Bambou of
Siam is as much sought after upon this account, as that of the Bambou of
Malaca, which is not far distant.

The Arvore de Raiz.
The Siameses report that they likewise have that Tree, which the Portuguese
have called Arvore de Raiz, and they Co-pai, but that they have no plenty: and
they add that its wood has this property (doubtless by its smell) that when
any person has a little of it near him in his Bed, it drives away the Gnats.
It Is from the Branches of this Tree, so frequently described in the Relations
of India, that several Fibers do hang down to the ground, which there take
root, and become as so many new Trunks: so that by little and little this Tree
gains a considerable plot of ground, on which it forms a kind of Labyrinth by
its stems, which continually multiply, and which adhere to one another by the
branches, from which these stems are fallen. We have seen the Siameses seek out
other Remedies against the Gnats than that of this wood: and this persuades me
either that it is very rare, or that this virtue which is attributed thereunto,
is not well attested.

The Cotton Tree and Capoquier.
But the Siameses have other Trees more useful, and in great plenty. From the
one they do gather Cotton: another yields them Capoc, a kind of Cotton-wool
extremely fine, and so short that it is impossible to spin it, to them it serves
instead of Down.

Trees which produce Oils or Gums.
From certain Trees they extract several Oils which they mix in Ciments, to
render them more binding. A wall that is plastered therewith, is whiter, and
bears as good a Polish as Marble; and a Basin made of one of these Ciments
preserves water better then glazed Earth. They do likewise make better Mortar
than our's: by reason that in the water which they use, they do boil a certain
bark, the skins of Oxen, or Buffalo's, and Sugar. A kind of Trees very common
in their Woods yields that Gum, which composes the body of that excellent
Varnish, which we see on several works of Japan, and China. The Portuguez do
call this Gum Cheyram, a word perhaps derived from Cheyra, which signifies a
Perfume, although this Gum has not any Odor of it self. The Siameses do not
well know how to put it in use. At Siam I saw a Tunquinese of this Trade, but
he wrought nothing well for want perhaps of a certain Oil which was necessary
to mix with the Cheyram, and which he supplied, as he could, by a much worse. I
would have brought him to France, had he not been afraid to pass the Sea, as he
had promised me at first. In a word, some say that the best way to render the
Varnish more curious, is to lay on the more coverings, but this is to make it
much dearer. The Relations of China do also declare, that there are two
different Materials for the Varnish, and that the one is much better than the
other. The Cheyram is proved by a drop thereof poured into Water; and if this
drop sinks to the bottom without separating, the Cheyram is good.

Trees whose Bark serves to make Paper.
The Siameses make Paper of old Cotton rags, and likewise of the bark of a Tree
named Ton coi, which they pound as they do the old rags: but these Papers have
a great deal less Equality, Body and Whiteness than ours. The Siameses cease
not to write thereon with China Ink. Yet most frequently they black them, which
renders them smoother, and gives them a greater body; and then they write
thereon with a kind of Crayon, which is made only of a clayish Earth dried in
the Sun. Their Books are not bound, and consist only in a very long Leaf, which
they roll not up as our Ancestors did theirs, but which they fold in and out
like a Fan: and the way which the Lines are wrote, is according to the length
of the folds, and not according to their breadth. Besides this they write with
a Styletto and the Leaves of a Tree resembling the Palm: This Tree they call
Tan, and these Leaves Bailan; they cut them in a very long and narrow Square,
and on these Tables are writ the Tables and Prayers, which the Talapoins do
sing in their Temples.

The Siameses have also Timber proper for the building of Ships, and furnishing
them with Masts: But they having no Hemp, their Cordages are made of the Brou
Brou is a green Bark or skin which is on the Coco, like as on our Nuts: but
that of the Coco is three fingers thick, and its Fibers may be twisted into a
Cord.
of Coco, and their Sails are Mats of great Rushes: These Equipments do not
countervail ours by much; but their Sails have this advantage, that
spontaneously supporting themselves, they do better receive the Wind, when it
is near it; that is to say when it blows as much against us as possibly it can,
without being contrary to the Course.

In fine, the Siameses have Timber proper for building of Houses, Wood for
other uses.
for Wainscotting and Carving; they have both light and very heavy Wood, some
easy to cleave, and others which cleaves not, what Wedges soever it receives.
This last is called by the Europeans, Wood-Mary, and is better than any to make
the Ribs of Ships. That which is heavy and tough is called Iron-wood, very well
known in our Islands of America, and it is affirmed in process of time it eats
the Iron. They have a Wood which for its Lightness and Color some conceive to
be Fur, but it takes the Carver's Chisel in so many different ways without
splitting that I question whether we have any like it in Europe.

But above all, the Siameses have Trees so high and so strait, Trees for Balons.
that one alone is sufficient to make a Boat or Balon, as the Portugueses
speak, between 16 and 20 Fathom long. They hollow the Tree, and then by the
heat of the Fire enlarge the Capacity thereof; which done, they raise the sides
with an edge, that is to say with a Board of the same length: And in fine, at
both the ends they fasten a Prow and a Poop very high, and a little bending
out, frequently adorned with sculpture and gilding, and with some pieces of
Mother of Pearl.

Nevertheless amongst so many different sorts of Wood, They have none of our
Wood.
they have none of those which we know in Europe.

They have not been able to raise any Mulberry Trees, and for this reason they
have no Silkworms. No Flax also grows amongst them, nor in any other place of
India, or at least it is not in any esteem. The Cotton which they have in
abundance is, they say, more agreeable and more healthful to them; by reason
that Cotton-cloth grows not cold by being wet with sweat, and consequently
occasions not the catching cold, as Linen does.

They have the Cinnamon Tree, The Cinnamon and Fir Tree.
inferior indeed to that of the Island of Ceylon, but better than any other;
they have the Sapan, and other Woods proper for Dying.

They have also the Wood Aquila or Aloes, Wood Aquila.
not so good indeed as the Calamba of Cochinchina, but better than the Wood
Aquila of any other Country. This Wood is found only in pieces, by reason they
are only certain rotten places in Trees of a certain kind. And every Tree of
this same Species has it not, and those which have, have them not all in the
same place; so that it requires a tedious search in the Wood. 'Twas formerly
very dear at Paris, but is at present to be had at a reasonable rate.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Mines of Siam.
NO Country has a greater Reputation of being rich in Mines than the Country of
Siam, The Reputation of the Mines of Siam.
and the great quantity of Idols and other cast works which are there seen,
evinces that they have been better cultivated there in former times, than now
they are. It Is believed likewise that they thence extracted that great quantity
of Gold, wherewith their Superstition has adorned not only their almost
innumerable Idols, but the Wainscot and Roofs of their Temples. They do
likewise daily discover Pits anciently dug, and the remains of a great many
Furnaces, which are thought to have been abandoned during the ancient Wars of
Pegu.

Nevertheless the King that now reigns has not been able to find any Vein of
Gold or Silver, that is worth the pains that he has therein employed; The State
of the Mines at present.
although he has applied unto this work some Europeans, and amongst the rest a
Spaniard that came from Mexico, who found, if not a great fortune, at least his
Subsistence for twenty years, even to his Death, by flattering the Avarice of
this Prince, with the imaginary promises of infinite Treasures. After having
dug and min'd in several places, they light only on some very mean Copper
Mines, tho intermixed with a little Gold and Silver: Five hundred weight of Ore
scarce yielding an Ounce of Metal; neither understood they how to make the
separation of Metals.

Tambac.
But the King of Siam, to render his mixture more precious, caused some Gold to
be added thereunto: and this is what they call Tambac. It Is said that the Mines
of the Isle of Borneo do naturally produce it very Rich: and the scarceness
augments the price thereof, as it formerly increased that of the famous
Corinthian Brass; but certainly that which makes the true value thereof amongst
the Siameses, is the quantity of Gold wherewith it is thought to be mixed. When
their Avarice creates desires it is for the Gold, and not for the Tambac; and
we have seen that when the King of Siam has ordered Crucifixes to be made to
present to the Christians, the most noble and smallest part, which is the
Christ, has been of Gold, the Cross alone of Tambac. Vincent le Blanc relates,
that the Peguins have a mixture of Lead and Copper, which he calls sometimes
Ganze, and sometimes Ganza, and of which he reports that they make Statues, and
a small Money which is not stamped with the Kings Coin, but which every one has
a right to make.

Mr. Vincent the Physician retained by the King of Siam to work in his Mines.
From Siam we brought back Mr. Vincent the Physician. He departed from France,
to go into Persia, with the late Bishop of Babylon, and the report of the
arrival of the King's first Ships at Siam, made him to go thither as well out
of a desire to travel, as in hopes of procuring his return into France. He
understood Mathematics and Chemistry, and the King of Siam retained him some
time at the work in his Mines.

What he relates concerning the Mines of Siam.
He informed me that he rectified the labors of the Siamese in some things, so
that they obtain a little more profit than they did. He showed them a Mine of
very good Steel at the top of a Mountain, which had been already discovered,
and which they perceived not. He discovered to them one of Crystal, one of
Antimony, one of Emeril, and some others, with a Quarry of white Marble.
Besides this, he found out a Gold Mine, which to him appeared very rich, as far
as he was able to judge without trying it; but he has not showed it them.
Several Siameses, most Talapoins, came secretly to consult him about the Art of
purifying and separating Metals, and brought him diverse specimens of very rich
Ore. From some he extracted a very good quantity of fine Silver, and from
others, the mixture of several Metals.

Tin and Lead.
As for Tin and Lead, the Siameses have long since improved it from very
plentiful Mines, and though not very skilful, yet they cease not to get a
considerable revenue by it. This Tin, or Calin, as the Portuguese report, is
sold through all India; It Is soft and basely purified, and a specimen thereof
is seen in the common Tea Boxes or Cannisters, which come from this Country.
But to render it harder and whiter, like that of the finest Tea Boxes, they mix
it with Cadmia, a sort of Mineral easily reducible to powder, which being
melted with the Copper, makes it yellow: but it renders both these Metals more
brittle: And it is this white Tin which they call Tontinague. This is what Mr.
Vincent relates on the subject of the Mines of Siam.

Mines of Loadstone.
In the Neighborhood of the City of Louvo they have a Mountain of Loadstone.
They have another also near Jonsalam, a City seated in an Island of the Gulf
of Bengal, which is not above the distance of a Man's voice from the Coast of
Siam: but the Loadstone which is dug at Jonsalam loses its virtue in three or
four Months; I know not whether it is not the same in that of Louvo.

Precious Stones.
In their Mountains they find very curious Agate, and Mr. Vincent informed me
that he has seen, in the hands of the Talapoins, who secretly busy themselves
in these researches, some samples or pieces of Saphires and Diamonds that came
out of the Mine. He assured me also that some particular Persons having found
some Diamonds, and given them to the King's Officers, were retired to Pegu by
by reason they had not received any recompense,

Steel.
I have already said that the City of Campeng-pet is famous for Mines of
excellent Steel. The Inhabitants of the Country do forge Arms thereof after
their fashion, as Sabres, Poniards, and Knives. The Knife which they call Pen
is used by all, and is not looked upon as Arms, although it may serve upon
occasion: The blade thereof is three or four Fingers broad, and about a Foot
long. The King gives the Sabre and the Poniard. They wear the Poniard on the
left side, hanging a little before. The Portuguese do call it Christ, a word
corrupted from Crid, which the Siameses use. This word is borrowed from the
Malayan Language, which is famous throughout the East, and the Crids which are
made at Achim in the Isle of Sumatra, do pass for the best of all. As for the
Sabre, a Slave always carries it before his Master on his right shoulder, as we
carry the Musket on the left.

They have Iron Mines which they know how to melt, Iron.
and some have informed me that they have but little thereof; besides, they are
bad Forge-men. For their Galleys they have only wooden Anchors, and to the end
that these Anchors may sink to the bottom, they fasten stones unto them. They
have neither Pins, nor Needles, nor Nails, nor Chisels, nor Saws. They use not
a Nail in building their Houses, although they be all of Wood. Every one makes
Pins of Bambou, even as our Ancestors used Thorns for this purpose. To them
there comes Padlocks from Japan, some of Iron, which are good; and others of
Copper, which are very naught.

They do make very bad Gunpowder. The defect, they say, Saltpeter and Powder.
proceeds from the Saltpeter which they gather from their Rocks, where it is
made of the dung of Batts, Animals which are exceeding large and very plentiful
throughout India. But whether this Saltpeter be good or bad, the King of Siam
sells a great deal of it to Strangers.

Having described the natural Riches of the Mountains and Forests of Siam,
'twould be proper in this place to speak of the Elephants, Rhinoceros, Tigers,
and all other savage Beasts wherewith they are stored: yet seeing this matter
has been sufficiently explicated by a great many others, I shall omit it, to
pass on to the inhabited and cultivated Lands.

CHAP. VI. Of the cultivated Lands, and their Fertility.
THey are not Stony, it being very difficult to find a Flint; The Country of
Siam is Clayie.
and this makes me to believe of the Country of Siam, what some have reported
of Egypt, that it has been gradually formed of the clayish Earth which the
Rain-waters have carried down from the Mountains. Before the mouth of the
Menam, there is a Bank of Owse, which, in the Sea-phrase, is called the Bar,
and which prohibits entrance to great Ships. It Is probable that it will
increase itself by little and little, and will in time make a new Shore to the
firm Land.

It Is therefore this Mud descending from the Mountains, The annual Inundation
fattens the Lands of Siam.
that is the real cause of the Fertility of Siam, wherever the Inundation
extends itself. In other, and especially on the highest places, all is dried
and burnt with the Sun, in a little time after the Rains. Under the Torrid
Zone, and likewise in Spain, whose Climate is more temperate, if the Lands are
naturally fertile, (as for Example, between Murcia and Carthagena, where the
Seed yields sometimes an hundred fold) they are nevertheless so subject to
Drought, Insects, and other Inconveniences, that it frequently happens that
they are deprived of the whole Harvest several years together: And it is this
which betides all the Countries of India which are not subject to be
overflowed, and which besides the barrenness of the Soil, do suffer the ravages
of contagious and pestilential Distempers which succeed it. But the annual
Inundation gives to Siam the assurance and plenty of the Rice Harvest, and
renders this Kingdom the Nourisher of several others.

Besides the Inundations fatning the Land, it destroys the Insects; It destroys
the Insects.
although it always leaves a great many, which extremely incommode. Nature
instructs all the Animals of Siam to avoid the Inundation. The Birds which
perch not in our Countries, as Partridges and Pigeons, do all perch in that.
The Pismires doubly prudent, do here make their Nests and Magazines on Trees.

White Ants at Siam.
There are white Ants, which, amongst other ravages which they make, do pierce
Books through and through. The Missionaries are obliged to preserve theirs, by
varnishing them over the cover and edges with a little Cheyram, which hinders
them not from opening. After this precaution, the Ants have no more power to
bite, and the Books are more agreeable, by reason that this Gum being mixed with
nothing that colors it, has the same luster as the Glasses wherewith we cover
Pictures in Miniature. This would be no dear nor difficult Experiment, to try
whether the Cheyram would not defend the wood of our Beds against Buggs. It Is
this same Cheyram, which being spread upon Canvas, makes it appear like Horn.
Therewith they used to environ the great Cresset-lights, which some reported to
be of Horn, and all of a piece. Sometimes also those little Cups varnished with
red, which come to us from Japan, and whose lightness astonishes us, do consist
only of a double Cloth put into the form of a Cup, and covered over with this
Gum mixed with a color, which we call Lacca, or Chinese Varnish, as I have
already declared: these Cups last not long, when too hot Liquors are put
therein.

The Marin-gouins.
To return to the Insects, which we have begun occasionally to speak of, the
Marin-gouins are of the same Nature as our Gnats; but the heat of the Climat
gives them so much strength, that shamois Stockings defend not our Legs against
their Stings. Nevertheless it seems possible to know how to deal with them; for
the Natives of the Country, and the Europeans that have inhabited there for
several years, were not so marked with them as we were.

The Millepede.
The Millepede or Palmer is known at Siam, as in the Isles of America. This
little Reptile is so called, because it has a great number of feet along its
body, all very short in proportion to its length, which is about five or six
Inches. What it has most singular (besides the scales in form of rings, which
cover its body, and which insert themselves one into the other in its motions)
is, that it pinches equally with its head and tail, but its Stings, though
painful, are not mortal. A French Man of that Crew which went to Siam with us,
and whom we left there in perfect health, suffered himself to be stung in his
Bed above a quarter of an hour, without daring to lay hold on the Worm to
relieve himself. The Siameses report, that the Millepede has two heads at the
extremities of its body, and that it guides itself six months in the year with
the one, and six months with the other.

The Ignorance of the Siameses in things Natural.
But their History of Animals must not easily be credited, they understand not
Bodies better than Souls; and in all matters their inclination is to imagine
Wonders, and persuade themselves so much the more easily to believe them, as
they are more incredible. What they report of a sort of Lizard named Toc-quay,
proceeds from an Ignorance and Credulity very singular. They imagine that this
Animal feeling his Liver grow too big, makes the Cry which has imposed on him
the name of Toc-quay, to call another Insect to its succor; and that this other
Insect entering into his Body at his mouth, eats the overplus of the Liver, and
after this repast retires out of the Toc-quay's body, by the same way that he
entered therein.

Shining Flies.
The shining Flies, like Locusts, have four wings, which do all appear when the
Fly takes a flight; but the two thinnest of them are concealed under the
strongest when the Fly is at repose. We hardly saw these little Animals, by
reason that the rainy time was past when we landed. The North-winds, which
begin when the Rains cease, either kill them, or drive them all away. They have
some light in their Eyes, but their greatest splendour proceeds from under their
wings, and glitters only in the Air, when the wings are displayed. What some
report therefore is not true, that they might be used in the Night instead of
Candles; for though they had light enough, what method could be contrived to make
them always fly, and keep them at a due distance to illuminate? But thus much
may suffice to be spoken concerning the Insects of Siam; they would afford
matter for large Volumes to know them all.

I shall say only that there are not fewer in the River and Gulf, Insects in
the waters.
than on the Land; and that in the River there are some very dangerous, which
is the reason that the rich Men do bathe themselves only in houses of Bambou.

CHAP. VII. Of the Grain of Siam.
RICE is the principal Harvest of the Siameses, and their best Nourishment;
Rice.
it refreshes and fattens: And we found our Ship's Crew express some regret,
when after a three months allowance thereof, they were returned to Biscuit; and
yet the Biscuit was very good, and well kept.

The Siameses know by experience how to measure the water, The way of boiling
it in pure water;
fire and time necessary to the Rice, without bursting the Grain, and so it
serves them for Bread. Not that they mix it with all their other Food as we do
Bread; when they eat Flesh or Fish for example, they eat the one and the other
without Rice; and when they eat Rice, they eat it separately. They squeeze it a
little between the ends of their Fingers to reduce it into a Paste, and so they
put it into their mouth, as our Poor do eat Pottage. The Chinese do never
touch any meat but with two small Sticks squared at the end, which do serve
them instead of a Fork. They hold to their lower Lip a small Porcelane or China
Cup, wherein is their portion of Rice; and holding it steady with their left
hand, they strike the Rice into their mouth with the two Sticks which they hold
in their right hand.

The Levantines, or Eastern People, Or in milk.
do sometimes boil Rice with Flesh and Pepper, and then put some Saffron
thereunto, and this Dish they call Pilau. This is not the practice of the
Siameses: but generally they boil the Rice in clear water, as I have said; and
sometimes they boil it with milk, as we do on fasting days.

At Siam, in the Lands high enough to avoid the Inundation, Wheat.
there grows Wheat: they water them either with watering Pots like those in our
Gardens, or by overflowing it with the Rainwater, which they keep in Cisterns
much higher than these Lands. But either by reason of the Care or Expense, or
that the Rice suffices for common use, the King of Siam only has Wheat; and
perhaps more out of Curiosity, than a real Gusto. They call it Kaou Possali,
and the word Kaou simply signifies Rice. Now these terms being neither
Arabian, nor Turkish, nor Persian, I doubt of what was told me, that Wheat was
brought to Siam by the Moors. The French which are settled there, do import Meal
from Surrat; although near Siam there is a Windmil to grind Corn, and another
near Louvo.

In a word, the Bread which the King of Siam gave us, was so dry, Wheaten Bread
too dry at Siam.
that the Rice boiled in pure water, how insipid soever, was more agreeable to
me. I less wonder therefore at what the Relations of China report, that the
Sovereign of this great Kingdom, although he has Bread, does rather prefer Rice:
yet some Europeans assured me, that the wheaten Bread of Siam is good, and that
the dryness of ours must proceed from a little Rice-flower, which is doubtless
mixed with the Wheat, for fear perhaps lest the Bread should fail.

At Siam I have seen Pease different from ours. The Siameses, like us, Other
Grain.
do make more than one Crop, but they make only one in a year upon the same
Land: not that the Soil was not good enough, in my opinion, to yield two Crops
in a year, as some have related concerning some other Cantons of India, if the
Inundation did not last so long. They have Turky-Wheat only in their Gardens.
They do boil or parch the whole Ear thereof, without unhusking or breaking off
the Grains, and they eat the inside.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Husbandry, and the difference of the Seasons.
Oxen and Buffalo's employed in Husbandry.
THey equally employ Oxen and Buffalo's in Husbandry. They guide them with a
Rope put through a hole which they make in the Cartilage that separates the
Nostrils: And to the end that the Rope may not slip when they draw it, they do
tie a knot on each side. This same Cord runs also through a hole, which is at
the end of the draught Tree of their Plough.

The Siamese Plough.
The Plough of the Siameses is plain, and without Wheels. It consists in a long
Beam which is the Rudder, in another crooked piece which is the Handle, and in
another shorter and stronger piece, fastened almost at Right Angles underneath
at the end of the Handle; and it is this Third which bears the share. They
fasten not these four pieces with Nails, but with leather Thongs.

How they cleanse the Rice from the Chaff.
To unhusk the Rice, they employ large Beasts; when it is trodden out; they let
it fall by little and little from a very high place, to the end that the wind
may carry away the Chaff. And because the Rice has an hard Skin like Spelt, a
sort of Corn very common in Flanders, and other places, they bruise it in a
great wooden Mortar, with a Pestle of the same; or in a Hand-mill, all the
pieces of which are also of Wood. They knew not how to describe them to me.

Three Seasons only, and two sorts of years.
They know only three Seasons, the Winter, which they call Nanaou, the Beginning
of Cold; the Little Summer, which they call Naron, the Beginning of Heat; and
the Great Summer, which they call Naron-yai, the Beginning of Great Heat; and
which strips the Trees of their Leaves, as the Cold does ours. They have two
years together consisting of twelve months, and a third of thirteen.

The names of their days from the Planets.
They have no word to express Week; but, like us, they call the seven days by
the Planets, and their days correspond to ours. I mean, that when it is Monday
here, it is Monday there, and so of the rest; but the day begins about six
hours sooner there, than here. Amongst the Names they have given to the
Planets, that of Mercury is Pout, a Persian word, which signifies an Idol; from
whence comes Pout-Gheda, a Temple of false Gods; and Pagode comes from
Pout-Gheda.

From whence they begin their years.
They begin their year on the first day of the Moon in November or December,
according to certain Rules; and they do not always denote the years by their
number, but by the names they give them; for they make use of a Cycle of sixty
years, like the other Eastern Nations.

The Cycle of 60 years.
A Sexagenary Cycle is a Revolution of sixty years, as a week is a Revolution of
seven days; and they have names for the years of the Cycle, as we have for the
days of the week. It Is true, I have not been able to discover that they have
more than twelve different names, which they repeat five times in every Cycle
to arrive at the number of sixty, and in my opinion with some additions which
do make the differences thereof. They will date therefore, for instance, from
the year of the Pigg, or of the Great Serpent, which amongst them are the names
of the year; and they will not always denote what year of their Era this shall
be, as we sometimes date a Letter upon one of the days of the week to which we
set down the name, without noting what number it is in the month. At the end of
this Relation, I will give you the twelve names of the years in Siamese, with
those of the seven days of the week.

Their months.
Their months are vulgarly esteemed to consist of thirty days. I say vulgarly,
because that in Astronomical exactness there may be some month longer or
shorter; but the Siameses do observe it otherwise than we, in that we give
names to the months, and they do not. They call them by their order, the first
month, second month, etc.

The distinction of their Seasons.
The two first Months, which answer almost to our Months of December and
January, do make their whole Winter; the third, fourth, and fifth, do belong to
their little Summer, the seven others to their great Summer. Thus they have
Winter at the same time as we; by reason they lie to the North line like us.
But their greatest Winter is at least as hot as our greatest Summer. After the
time of the Inundation they cover the Plants in their Gardens from the heats of
the Sun, as we do sometimes cover ours from the cold of the Night or Winter:
But as to their Persons, the diminution of the heat appears unto them a very
incommodious cold. The little Summer is their Spring, and they utterly ignore
the Autumn. They only reckon a great Summer; although it seems that they might
reckon two after the manner of the Ancients, who have written of India, seeing
that they have the Sun perpendicularly over their heads twice a year; once when
it comes from the Line to the Tropic of Cancer, and another time when it
returns from the Tropic of Cancer toward the Line.

Their Winter is dry, and their Summer rainy. Of the Monsoons.
The Torrid Zone would doubtless be uninhabitable, as the Ancients have held,
were it not for that mavelous Providence which makes the Sun continually to
draw the Clouds and Rains after it, and the Wind incessantly to blow there from
one of the Poles, when the Sun is toward the other. Thus at Siam in Winter, the
Sun being in the middle of the Line, or toward the Antarctick Pole, the
North-winds do constantly prevail, and temper the Air very sensibly to refresh
it. In Summer, when the Sun is on the North of the Line, and perpendicularly
over the head of the Siameses, the South-winds which continually blow there, do
cause continual Rains, or at least do make the weather always inclined to Rain;
leaving most People in doubt whether this Season of Rains ought not to be
called the Winter of Siam. It Is this constant Rule of the Winds, which the
Portuguese have called Moncaos, and we after them Monsoons (Motiones aeris,
according to Ozorius and Maffeus.) And this is the reason that the Ships can
hardly arrive at the Bar of Siam during the six Months of the North-winds, and
that they can hardly depart thence during the six Months of the South-winds. At
the end of this work I will give the order of the Winds and Tides in the Gulf
of Siam, in favor of those that love to reason on Philosophical matters.

The Siameses do not give many forms to their Lands. The time of ploughing and
reaping.
They till them and sow them, when the Rains have sufficiently softened them;
and they gather their harvest when the waters are retired, and sometimes when
they are yet remaining on the ground, and they can go only by Boat. All the
land that is overflowed is good for Rice, and it is said that the Ear always
surmounts the waters; and that if they increase a foot in twenty four hours,
the Rice grows a foot also in twenty four hours: but though it be averred that
this happens sometimes, I cannot without much difficulty believe it in so vast
an Inundation: And I rather conceive that when the Inundation surmounts the
Rice at any time, it rots it.

They gather Rice also in diverse Cantons of the Kingdom which the Rains do not
overflow; and this is more substantial, better relisht, and keeps longer.
Another sort of Rice.
When it has grown long enough in the Land where it was sown, it is
transplanted into another, which is prepared after this manner. They overflow
it, as we do the Salt Marshes, until it be thoroughly soft; and for this purpose
it is necessary to have high Cisterns, or rather to keep the Rainwater in the
Field it self by little Banks made all round. Then they let the water go to
feed the Land, level it, and in fine, transplant the Rice-Roots one after the
other, by thrusting them in with the Thumb.

I am greatly inclined to believe, The original of Agriculture with the
Siameses.
that the Ancient Siameses lived only upon Fruits and Fish, as still do several
people of the Coasts of Africa; and that in process of time Husbandry has been
taught them by the Chinese. We read in the History of China that 'twas
anciently the King himself, that annually first set his hand to the Plough in
this great Kingdom, and that of the Crop which his Labor yielded him, he made
the Bread for the Sacrifices. The Lawful King of Tonquin and Cochinchina
together, who is called the Buado's, likewise observe this Custom of first
breaking up the Lands every year; and of all the Royal Functions, this is
almost the only one remaining to him. The most important are exercised by two
Hereditary Governors, the one of Tonquin, and the other of Cochinchina, who
wage war, and who are the true Sovereigns; although they profess to acknowledge
the Bua, which is at Tonquin, for their Sovereign.

The Ceremony of the Siameses touching Agriculture.
The King of Siam did formerly also set his hand to the Plough, on a certain day
of the year: For about an Age since, and upon some superstitious Observation of
a bad Omen, he labors no more; but leaves this Ceremony to an imaginary King,
which is purposely created every year: yet they will not permit him to bear the
Title of King, but that of Oc-ya-Kaou, or Oc-ya of the Rice. He is mounted upon
an Ox, and rides to the place where he must plough, attended with a great train
of Officers that are obedient to him. This Masquerade for one day gets him
wherewithal to live on the whole year. And by the same superstition has
deterred the Kings themselves. It is looked upon as ominous and unlucky to the
person. I suspect therefore that this custom of causing the lands to be
ploughed by the Prince, came from China, to Tonquin, and Siam, with the Art of
Husbandry.

It is Politic and Superstitious both together.
It may perhaps have been invented only to gain credit to Husbandry, by the
example of Kings themselves; but it is intermixed with a great many
superstitions, to supplicate the good and evil Spirits, whom they think able to
help or hurt the goods of the Earth. Amongst other things, the Oc-ya-Kaou
offers them a Sacrifice, in the open field, of an heap of Rice-sheaves,
whereunto he sets fire with his own hand.

CHAP. IX. Of the Gardens of the Siameses, and occasionally of their Liquors.
Their Pulse and Roots. The Potatoe.
THE Siameses are not less addicted to the manuring of Gardens, than to the
ploughing of Arable Lands. They have Pulse and Roots, but for the most part
different from ours. Amongst the Roots the Potatoe deserves a parcular mention.
It is of the form and size almost of a Parsenep, and the inside thereof is
sometimes white, sometimes red, sometimes purple; but I never saw any but the
first sort: Being roasted under the Ashes, it eats like the Chestnut. The Isles
of America made it known to us; it there frequently supplies, as some report,
the place of Bread. At Siam I have seen Chibbols, and no Onions, Garlic,
Turnips, Cucumbers, Citruls, Water-melons, Parsley, Bawm, Sorrel. They have no
true Melons, nor Strawberries, nor Raspberries, nor Artichoaks, but a great
deal of Asparagus, of which they do not eat. They have neither Sallory, nor
Beets, nor Coleworts, nor Coleflore, nor Turnips, nor Parseneps, nor Carrots,
nor Leeks, nor Lettuce, nor Chervil, nor most of the Herbs whereof we compose
our Sallads. Yet the Dutch have most of all these Plants at Batavia, which is a
sign that the Soil of Siam would be proper thereunto. It bears large Mushromes,
but few and ill tasted. It yields no Truffles, not so much as that insipid and
scentless kind, which the Spaniards do call Criadillas de tierra, and which
they put into their pot.

Cucumbers, Chibbols, Garlic, Radishes.
The Siameses do eat Cucumbers raw, as they do throughout the East, and also in
Spain; and it is not impossible but their Cucumbers may be more wholesome than
ours, seeing that Vinegar does not harden them: They look upon them, and call
them a kind of Water-Melons. Mr. Vincent informed me that a Persian will eat 36
pound weight of Melons, or Cucumbers, at the beginning of the season of these
Fruits to purge himself. The Chibbols, Garlic, and Radishes have a sweeter
taste at Siam, than in this Country. These sort of Plants do lose their
Rankness by the great Heat: And I easily believe what those who have
experienced it have assured me, that nothing is more pleasant than the Onions
of Egypt, which the Israelites so exceedingly regretted.

Flowers.
I have seen a great many Tuberoses in the Gardens of Siam, and no Roses, nor
Gillyflowers; but it is said there are plenty of Gillyflowers, and few Roses,
and that these Flowers have less scent here than in Europe; so that the Roses
have hardly any. The Jasmine is likewise so rare, that it is said, there are
none but at the King's House. We were presented with two or three Flowers as a
wonder. They have a great many Amaranthus, and Tricolors. Except these most of
the Flowers and Plants which adorn our Gardens, are unknown to them: But in
their stead they have others which are peculiar to them, and which are very
agreeable for their Beauty and Odor. I have remarked of some that they smell
only in the Night, by reason that the heat of the day dissipates all their
Spirits. Our Flowers have most scent about the Evening, and we have some, but
few, that smell only at Night.

Whatever has not naturally a great deal of taste and smell, Why there is no
Muscadine Grapes in Persia nor at Suratt.
cannot keep them in Countries extremely hot. Thus though there be Grapes in
Persia, and at Suratt, yet there can be no Muscadine Grapes, what care soever
is therein employed. The best Plants, which are transported thither from
Europe, do presently degenerate, and yield the second year ordinary Grapes only.

But at Siam, where the Climate is much hotter, there are no good Grapes. Nor
Grapes at Siam.
The few Vines which are planted at Louvo, in the King's Garden, produce only
some bad Grapes, which are small and of a bitter taste.

Pure Water is their ordinary Drink; they love only to drink it perfumed, Pure
water the ordinary drink of the Siameses.
whereas to our Palate Water which has no smell, is the best. As the Siameses
go not to draw it at the Springs, which are doubtless too remote, it is
wholesome only when it has been settled more or fewer days, according as the
Inundation is higher or lower, or wholly run out: For when the Waters retire,
and they are filled with Mud, and perhaps with the ill Juices which they take
from the Earth, or when the River is re-entred into its Channel sufficiently
muddy, they are more corrosive, do cause Disenteries and Lasks, and cannot be
drunk without danger, till they have let them stand in great Jars or Pitchers,
the space of three Weeks or a Month.

At Louvo the Waters are much more unwholesome than at Siam; The Waters of Louvo
and of Tlee Poussone.
by reason that the whole River flows not thither, but only an Arm, which has
been turned thither, which runs always decreasing after the Rains, and at last
leaves its Channel dry. The King of Siam drinks water from a great Cistern made
in the Fields, on which is kept a continual Watch. Besides that this Prince has
a little house called Tlee Poussone, or Rich Sea, about a League from Louvo. It
is seated on the brink of certain Low-lands, about two or three Leagues in
extent, which receive the Rain-waters and preserve them. This little Sea is of
an irregular figure, its Shores are neither handsome nor even; but its Waters
are wholesome, by reason they are deep and settled, and I have also heard that
the King of Siam drinks thereof.

For pleasure and conversation the Siameses do take Tea, Tea.
I mean the Siameses of the City of Siam. For the use of Tea is unknown in all
the other places of the Kingdom. But at Siam the Custom is thoroughly settled,
and it is amongst them a necessary Civility to present Tea to all that visit
them. They call it Tcha, as do the Chinese, and have not two Terms, the one
for what we call Tea, and the other for what we call Cha, or Flower of Tea.
It Is certain that it is not a Flower But to assert whether they are the budding
Leaves, and consequently the tenderest, or the highest, and consequently the
less nourished, or the point of the Leaves, which have been boiled at China, or
a kind of particular Tea; is what I cannot determine, by reason that various
Accounts have been given me thereof.

The Siameses do reckon three sorts of Tea, the Tchaboui or Boui Tea, Three
sorts of Tea.
which is reddish, which some say fattens and is astringent; it is looked upon
at Siam as a Remedy for the Flux. The Somloo Tea, which on the contrary purges
gently. And the third sort of Tea, which has no particular Name, that I know,
and which neither loosens nor binds.

The Chinese and all the Orientals, use Tea as a Remedy against the Headache:
Tea is a sudorifick.
But then they make it stronger, and after having drunk five or six Cups, they
lie down in their bed, cover themselves up, and sweat. It is not very
difficult, in such hot Climates, for Sudorificks to operate, and they are
looked upon there almost as general Remedies.

The manner of preparing Tea.
They prepare the Tea in this manner. They have Copper Pots tinned on the
inside, wherein they boil the Water; and it boils in an instant, by reason the
Copper thereof is very thin. This Copper comes from Japan, if my Memory fails
me not; and it is so easy to work, that I question whether we have any so
pliant in Europe. These Pots are called Boulis; and on the other hand they have
Boulis of red Earth, which is without taste, tho without Varnish. They first
rince the Earthen Bouli with boiling water to heat it, then they put in as much
Tea, as one can take up with the Finger and Thumb, and afterward fill it with
boiling water; and after having covered it, they still pour boiling water on
the outside, they stop not the Spout as we do. When the Tea is sufficiently
infused, that is to say when the Leaves are precipitated, they pour the Liquor
into China dishes; which at first they fill only half, to the end that if it
appear too strong or too deep, they may temper it, by pouring in pure water,
which they still keep boiling in the Copper Bouly. Nevertheless if they will
still drink, they do again fill the Earthen Bouly with this boiling water, and
so they may do several times without adding any more Tea, until they see that
the water receives no tincture. They put no Sugar into the Dishes, by reason
they have none refined which is not candy, and the candy melts too slowly. They
do therefore take a little in their mouth, which they champ as they drink their
Tea. When they would have no more Tea, they turn the Cup down on the Saucer;
because that it is the greatest incivility among them to refuse any thing, and
that if they leave the Cup standing, they fail not to serve them again with
Tea, which they are obliged to receive. But they forbear to fill the Dish,
unless they would testify to him unto whom they present it full, that it is, as
some say, for once, and that it is not expected that he ever come again to the
House.

Excellent water necessary for Tea.
The most experienced do say that the Water cannot be too clear for Tea, that
Cistern-water is the best as being the most pure, and that the finest Tea in
the world becomes bad in water, which is not excellent.

Whether it is necessary to drink the Tea hot.
In a word, if the Chinese drink Tea so hot, it is not perhaps that they have
found it either more wholesome or more pleasant after this manner; for they
drink all sorts of Liquor at the same degree of heat, unless the Tartars have
now taught them, as it is said, to drink Ice. It Is true that the infusion of
Tea is performed quicker in hot water than cold; but I have drunk with pleasure
what I had infused cold for above a day.

The Siameses adhere not to Tea: they freely drink Wine, when they have it;
although whatever inebriates is prohibited them by their Morality. The English and
Dutch do sometimes bring it them from Schiras in Persia, or from Europe. Our
Bourdcaux and Chors Wines came very sound to Siam, although they had twice passed
the Line; and at our return the remainder of these Wines, was perhaps much
stronger and better kept, than it would have been, had it continued always a
shore. I say nothing concerning the Wines of China and Japan, which are only
Beers exceedingly well mixed, but very pleasant. The China Wine, of which I have
brought a bottle, would not keep to France, although the Dutch Beer kept very well
to the Indies.

Other Liquors, Tari and Neri.
The Siameses do likewise drink two sorts of Liquors, which are called Tari and
Neri, and which they extract from two sorts of Trees called Palmites, from a
name general to every Tree which has great Leaves, like the Palm Tree. The
manner of collecting this drink is, in the Evening to make an Incision in the
bark of the Tree, near the top of its Trunk, and to apply thereunto a Bottle as
close as it is possible, luteing it with Clay, that the Air may not enter
therein. The next Morning the Bottle is full, and this Bottle is generally a
Pipe of great Bambou, to which the knot serves as a bottom. These two Liquors
may also be collected in the day time, but it is said that then they are eager,
and are used as Vinegar. The Tari is drawn from a sort of wild Cocotier, or
Coco-tree, and Neri from the Arequier, a sort of Tree which I shall presently
speak of.

Aqua vitae preferred before all, and of what they make it.
But as in hot Countries the continual dissipation of the Spirits, makes them
desire what increases them, they passionately esteem Aqua Vitae, and the
strongest more than the others. The Siameses do make it of Rice, and do
frequently rack it with Lime. Of Rice they do at first make Beer, which they
drink not; but they convert it into Aqua Vitae which they call Laou, and the
Portuguese Arak, an Arabian word, which properly signifies sweat, and
metaphorically essence, and by way of excellence Aqua Vitae. Of the Rice Beer
they likewise make Vinegar.

The English inhabiting at Siam do use a drink which they call Punch, Punch, an
English Drink.
and which the Indians do find very delicious. They put half a pint of Brandy
or Arak, to a pint of Limonade with Nutmeg and a little Sea Biscuit toasted and
broke, and beat it all together until the Liquors be well mixed. The French
call this drink Boule Ponche, and Bonne Ponche, from the two English words, a
Bowl of Punch.

In a word, the Moors of Siam drink Coffee, Coffee and Chocolat.
which comes to them from Arabia, and the Portuguese do drink Chocolate, when
it comes to them from Manille, the chief of the Phillipines, where it is
brought from the Spanish West Indies.

The Siameses do esteem fruit better than all things; Fruits.
they eat all the day long if they have it. But excepting Oranges, Citrons and
Pomegranates, there is not at Siam any of the fruits that we know. The Citrons
which they call Ma-crout, are small, full of Juice and very sour, and the skin
very smooth. They appeared to me of a singular quality, in that they are rotten
on the inside, when their peel is sound and entire. But they have moreover a
kind of sour, and no sweet Lemons, and on the contrary the Oranges and
Pomegranates are all sweet; unless for sour Oranges they would take the
Pampelmouses, which have the taste and shape thereof, but which are as big as
Melons, and have not much Juice. The Siameses do with reason range them among
the species of Oranges, and call them Soum-o, and Soum signifies an Orange.
Amongst the sweet Oranges the best have the Peel very green and rough; they
call them Soum-keou, or Crystal Oranges; not that they have any transparency,
but because they appear to them in their kind, of the repute of Crystal, which
they highly value. They give of these Soum-keou to their sick, and sell them,
as it is said, at five sous a piece when the season is past; a considerable
price in a Country where a man commonly lives for two Liards a day.

Now tho this sort of Oranges lasts not the whole year, Certain Fruits at every
Season.
yet there is always one sort or other. There is also of that Fruit which the
Europeans call Bananas, or Indian-Figs, and the Siameses Clouei, all the year.
All the other Fruits continue only a time. It Is at Achem only at the North
Point of the Isle of Sumatra, that Nature produces them all at every season.
Those excellent Canes of one single Shoot or Joint, between nine and ten foot
long, do grow only at Achem; but Rice, which is their principal nourishment,
frequently fails them: and they do then dearly purchase it with the Gold, which
they find so plentifully amongst them, that they contemn it. without Philosophy.

I designedly omit the Description of several Fruits, The difference of the
Fruits of Siam from ours.
and refer it to the end of this work. I will now only speak of the Areca, and
shall say of the Indian Fruits in general, that they have for the most part so
strong a taste and smell, that one loves them not, till accustomed thereunto;
and I think that then they do no hurt. By a contrary reason, our Fruits are at
first insipid and without flavor, to him that is accustomed to the Indian
Fruits.

The Areca, which the Siameses do call Plou, is a kind of great Acorn, The
Areca and Betel,
which yet wants that wooden Cup wherein our Acorn grows: When this Fruit is
yet tender, it has at the center or heart a greyish substance, which is as soft
as Pap. As it drys it waxes yellower and harder, and the soft substance it has
at the heart grows hard too: It is always very bitter and savory. After having
cut it into four parts with a Knife, they take a piece every time, and chew it
with a Leaf resembling Ivy called Betel by the Europeans which are at the
Indies, and Make by the Siameses. They wrap it up to put it the more easily into
the mouth, and do put on each a small quantity of Lime made of Cockle-shells,
and redded by I know not what art. For this reason the Indians do always carry
this sort of Lime in a very little China dish, for they put so little on every
Leaf, that they consume not much In a day, although they incessantly make use of
the Areca, and the Betel. The Areca whilst tender wholly consumes in the Mouth,
but the dry always leaves some remains.

Their effect.
The sensible effect of this Acorn and this Leaf is to excite much spitting, if
they care not to swallow the Juice; but it is good to spit out the two or three
first Mouthfuls at least, to avoid swallowing the Lime. The other less sensible
effects, but which are not doubted in the Indies, are to carry from the Gums,
perhaps by reason of the Lime, whatever may prejudice them, and to fortify the
Stomach, either by reason of the Juice that is swallowed at pleasure, and which
may have this quality, or by reason of the superfluous moistures which they
discharge by spitting. Thus have I never found any person at Siam with a
stinking breath, which may be an effect of their natural Sobriety.

Another effect of the Areca and Betel.
Now as the Areca and Betel do cause a red spittle independently on the red Lime
which is mixed therewith, so they leave a Vermilion Tincture on the Lips and
Teeth. It passes over the Lips, but by little and little it thickens on the
Teeth till they become black: So that persons that delight in neatness, do
blacken their Teeth, by reason that otherwise the spittle of the Areca and
Betel, mixed with the natural whiteness of the Teeth, causes an unpleasant
effect, which is remarked in the common People. I shall transiently declare,
that the Vermilion Lips, which the Siameses saw in the Pictures of our Ladies
which we had carried to this Country, made them to say that we must needs have
in France, better Betel than theirs.

How they blacken their Teeth, and how they redden the Nails of their little
fingers.
To blacken their Teeth, they do thereon put some pieces of very sour Lemon,
which they hold on their Jaws or Lips for an hour, or more. They report that
this softens the Teeth a little. They afterward rub them with a Juice, which
proceeds either from a certain Root, or from the Coco, when they are burnt, and
so the operation is performed. Yet it pleases them sometimes to relate that it
continues three days, during which it is necessary, they say, to lie on their
Belly and eat no solid Food: But some have assured me that this is not true,
and that it is sufficient to eat nothing hot for two or three days. I believe
rather that their Teeth are too much set on edge, to be able for some time to
eat any thing solid. It is necessary continually to renew this operation to
make the effect thereof continue; for this Blackness sticks not so strong to
the Teeth, but that it may be rubbed off with a burnt Crust of Bread reduced to
Powder. They love also to redden the Nails of their little Fingers, and for
this end they scrape them, and then apply a certain Juice, which they extract
from a little Rice bruised in Citron Juice with some Leaves of a ree, which in
every thing resembles the Pomegranate Tree, but bears no Fruit.

Of the Palmites in general.
In brief, the Arequier or Arectree, and all the Trees which are called
Palmites, have no Branches, but great, long and broad Leaves, like the
Palm Tree; and they have their Leaves only at the top of the stalk, which is
hollow. These sorts of Trees do annually produce a new Shoot of Leaves, which
spring out of the middle of the Leaves of the preceding year, which then fall
off, and leave a mark round the Trunk; so that by these marks which are so many
knots, and which are close together, they can easily compute the Years, or Age
of the Tree.

This is what I had to say concerning the Extent and Fertility of the Kingdom
of Siam, I will now discourse of the Manners of the Siameses in general; that
is to say of their Habit, Houses, Furniture, Table, Equipage, Diversions and
Affairs.

A Siamese Mandarin.
A Siamese Mandarin.
A Siamise woman with: her Child.
The Kings Apartment
I The Hall of Audience

A House of a Siamese.


PART II. Of the Manners of the Siameses in general.
CHAP. I. Of the Habit and Mien of the Siameses.
THey hardly cloth themselves. They wear few Clothes, not so much by reason of
the heat, as by the simplicity of their Manners.
Tacitus reports concerning the German Infantry in his time, that it was either
all naked, or covered with light Coats; and even at this present there are some
Savages in the Northern America, which go almost naked; which proves, in my
opinion, that the simplicity of Manners, as well as the Heat, is the cause of
the Nakedness of the Siameses, as it is of the Nudity of these Savages. It Is
not but that Clothes are almost insupportable to the French which arrive at
Siam, and who know not how to forbear acting and stirring; but it is
unhealthful for them to uncloath themselves, by reason that the Injuries of the
excessively hot Air are not less dreadful, than those of the extremely cold Air
to which one is not accustomed; yet with this difference, that in very hot
Climats it is sufficient for health, to cover the Stomach. The Spaniards do for
this reason cover it with a Buffalo's Skin four double; but the Siameses, whose
Manners are plain in every thing, have chosen to habituate themselves from
their Infancy, to an almost entire Nudity.

They go with their Feet naked, and their Head bare; The Pagne, the Habit of
the Siameses.
and for Decency only they begirt their Reins and Thighs down to their Knees
with a piece of painted Cloth about two Else and an half long, which the
Portuguese do call Pagne, from the Latin word Pannus; sometimes instead of a
painted Cloth, the Pagne is a silken Stuff, either plain, or embroidered with a
border of Gold and Silver.

The Mandarins, or Officers, do wear besides the Pagne, A Muslin Shirt serves
them for a Vest.
a Muslin Shirt which is as their Vest. They pluck it off, and wrap it about
their middle, when they approach a Mandarin much higher than them in Dignity,
to express unto him their readiness to go where he shall please to send them.
And yet the Officers whom we saw at the Audiences of the King of Siam, remained
clothed therewith as with their Habit of Ceremony; and by the same reason they
always had their Bonnets high, and pointed on the Head. These Shirts have no
Neck-band, and are open before, they taking no care to fasten them, to cover
their Stomach. The Sleeves hang down almost to their Wrists, being about two
Foot wide, but without being plaited above or below. Moreover, the Body thereof
is so strait, that not slipping nor falling down over the Pagne, it sets in
several wrinckles.

In Winter they do sometimes put over their shoulders a breadth of Stuff or
painted Linen, either like a Mantle or a Scarf, A Scarf against the Cold.
the ends of which they wind very neatly about their Arms.

But the King of Siam wears a Vest of some excellent Satin brocaded, How the
King wears Vests of Silk.
the Sleeves of which are very strait, and reach down to the Wrist; and as we
apparel our selves against the Cold under our Wastcoats, he puts this Vest
under the Shirt which I have described, and which he adorns with Lace, or
European Point. It Is not lawful for any Siamese to wear this sort of Vest,
unless the King gives it him, and he makes this Present only to the most
considerable of his Officers.

A sort of Military Vest.
He sometimes also gives them another Vest or Garment of Scarlet, which is to be
worn only in War, or at Hunting. This Garment reaches to the Knees, and has
eight or ten Buttons before. The Sleeves thereof are wide, but without
Ornament, and so short, that they touch not the Elbows.

The Red Color for War and Hunting.
It Is a general Custom at Siam, that the Prince, and all his Retinue, in the War
or Hunting, be clothed in Red. Upon this account the Shirts which are given to
the Soldiers, are of Muslin died Red; and on the days of Ceremony, as was that
of the Entry of the King's Ambassadors, these Red Shirts were given to the
Siameses, which they put under their Arms.

The high, and pointed Cap.
The white, high, and pointed Cap, which we saw on the Ambassadors of Siam, is a
Coif of Ceremony, whereof the King of Siam and his Officers do equally make
use; but the King of Siam's Cap is adorned with a Circle, or a Crown of
precious Stones, and those of his Officers are embellished with diverse Circles
of Gold, Silver, or Vermilion gilt, to distinguish their Dignities; or, have
not any Ornament. The Officers wear them only before the King, or in their
Tribunals, or in some Ceremony. They fasten them with a Stay under their Chin,
and never pull them off to salute any person.

Babouches.
The Moors have introduced amongst them the use of Babouches or Slippers, a kind
of pointed Shoes without quarter or heel. They leave them at the Gates of their
own and others Houses, to avoid dirtying the places where they enter. But,
wherever their King, or any other person is, to whom they owe Respect, (as is
for instance a Sancrat, or Superior of their Talapoins) they appear not with
Slippers.

The Neatness of the Palace of Siam.
Nothing is neater than the King of Siam's Palace, as well by reason of the few
persons admitted therein, as of the Precautions with which they enter.

Hats for Traveling.
They esteem of Hats for Traveling, and this Prince causes them to be made of
all Colors in almost the same shape with his Bonnet; but very few persons
amongst the People vouchsafe to cover their Head against the heat of the Sun:
and they do it but with a linen Clout, and only when on the River, where the
Reflection most incommodes.

The Habit of the Women.
The difference of the Women's Habit from the Men's, is, that the Women fastening
their Pagne length-wise round their Bodies, as likewise the Men do, they let it
fall down broad-ways, and imitate a close Coat, which reaches down halfway
their Leg; whereas the Men raise up their Pagne between their Thighs, by
pulling through one of the ends, which they leave longer than the other, and
which they tie to the Girdle behind, in which they do in some sort resemble our
Breeches. The other end of the Pagne hangs before, and as they have no Pockets,
they do frequently tie thereunto their Purse for the Betel, after the manner
that we tie any thing in the corner of our Handkercheif. They do sometimes also
wear two Pagnes one over the other, to the end that the uppermost may sit more
neat.

A Nakedness almost entire.
Excepting the Pagne, the Women go all naked, for they have no Muslin Shifts,
only the Rich do constantly wear a Scarf. They do sometimes wrap the ends
thereof about their Arms; but the best Air for them, is to put it singly over
their Bosom at the middle, to make smooth the wrinkles thereof, and to let the
two ends hang down behind over their Shoulders.

Modesty in this Nakedness.
Nevertheless so great a Nudity renders them not immodest. On the contrary, the
Men and Women of this Country are the most scrupulous in the world of showing
the parts of their Body, which Custom obliges them to conceal. The Women who
sat stooping in their Balons the day of the King's Ambassador's Entry, turned
for the most part their Backs to the Show, and the most Curious hardly looked
over their Shoulder. 'Twas necessary to give the French Soldiers some Pagnes to
wash in, to remove the Complaints which these People made, at seeing them go
all naked into the River.

The Infants go there without a Pagne to four or five years of age, but when
once of that age, they are never uncovered to chastise them; and in the East it
is an exceeding Infamy to be beaten naked on the parts of the Body, which are
generally concealed.

It Is from hence perhaps, Why they chastise with the Cudgel.
that the use of the Cudgel sprang up amongst them in chastising, by reason
that neither the Whip, nor the Rod, would be sufficiently felt through their
Clothes.

Moreover, they pluck not off their Clothes to lie down, Modesty in the Bed,
and also in the Bath.
or at least they only change the Pagne, as they do to bathe themselves in the
River. The Women bathe themselves like the Men, and do exercise themselves in
swimming; and in no part of the world do they swim better.

Their Modesty renders the Custom of Bathing almost insupportable unto them,
and few amongst them can resolve to do it. Other Proofs of their Modesty.
They have affixt Infamy to Nakedness: And they are no less careful about the
Modesty of the Ears, than of the Eyes; seeing that impure and baudy Songs are
prohibited by the Laws of Siam, as well as by those of China. Yet I cannot
affirm that they may not be used at all; for the Laws prohibit no other, than
the Excess already too much established: And from China there comes some
Porcelane Figures and Paintings so immodest, that they are no more permitted
than the Baudiest Songs.

Those Pagnes that are of an extraordinary beauty and gaudiness, What Pagnes
are permitted.
as those of Silk with Embroidery, or without Embroidery, and those of painted
Linen very fine, are permitted to those only to whom the Prince presents them.
The Women of Quality do greatly esteem the black Pagnes, and their Scarf is
frequently of plain white Muslin.

They wear Rings on the three last Fingers of each Hand, Rings, Bracelets,
Pendants.
and the Fashion permits them to put on as many as possibly can be kept on.
They freely give half a Crown for Rings with false Stones, which at Paris cost
not above two Sols. They have no Necklaces to adorn their Necks, nor their
Wives; but the Women and Children of both Sexes wear Pendants. They are
generally of Gold, Silver, or Vermilion gilt, in the shape of a Pear. The young
Boys and Girls of a good Family have Bracelets, but only to six or seven years
of Age; and they equally wear them on their Arms and Legs. They are Rings of
Gold, or Silver, or Vermilion gilt.

As these People have their Body of another Color than ours, Their Nakedness
surprizeth not.
it seems that our Eyes do not think them Naked, at least their Nakedness has
nothing which surprised me; whereas a Naked White Man, when I met one, always
appeared a new Object unto me.

The Siameses are rather Small, than Great; The Statute of the Siameses.
but their Bodies are well proportioned, which I principally attribute to their
not swaddling in their Infancy. The care that we take to form the shape of our
Children, is not always so successful, as the liberty which they leave to
Nature to proceed in forming theirs. It Is true, that the Breasts of the Siamese
Women uphold not themselves from their Childhood, and hang down rather to their
Navel; but otherwise, their Body is well proportioned, and their hanging
Breasts offend not the Eyes of their Husbands: so true it is that the
Fantasies, even they which seem to be most natural, do greatly consist in
Custom.

The shape of their Faces, as well of the Men as Women, Their Mien.
participate less of the Oval, than the Lozenge; it is broad and high at the
Cheek-bones, and on a sudden their Forehead contracts and terminates almost as
much in a Point, as their Chin. Moreover, their Eyes slit a little upwards are
small, and not overbrisk, and the white thereof is generally yellowish. Their
Jaws are hollow, by reason they are too high above; their Mouths are large,
their Lips thick and pale, and their Teeth blackened. Their Complexion is
gross, and of a brown mixed with red, unto which the continual Sun-burning
contributes as much as the Birth.

The Women use neither Paint nor Patches; but I have seen a great Lord, A blue
Color laid on the Body.
whose Legs were blu'd with a dull Blue, like that mark which the Gunpowder
leaves. They that showed me it, informed me that it was a thing affected by the
Great Men, that they had more or less blue according to their dignity; and that
the King of Siam was blu'd from the sole of his Feet, to the hollow of his
Stomach. Others assured me that it was not out of Grandeur, but Superstition;
and others would make me to doubt whether the King of Siam was blue. I know not
how it is.

The Nose and Ears of the Siameses.
The Siameses, as I have said, have their Nose short and round at the end, and
their Ears bigger than ours; and the larger they have them, the more they
esteem them: A Phantasy common to all the East, as it appears by all the
Statues of Porcelane and other matter, which come from thence. But in this
there is a difference amongst the Orientals; for some do stretch their Ears at
the tip to lengthen them, without boring them any more than is necessary to put
Pendants therein. Others, after having bored them, do by little and little
enlarge the hole, to thrust in bigger and bigger Sticks: And it happens,
especially in the Country of Laos, that they can almost thrust their Fist into
the hole, and that the tip of the Ear touches the Shoulders. The Siameses have
Ears somewhat bigger than ours, but naturally and without Artifice.

Their Hair.
Their Hair is black, thick and lank, and both Sexes wear it so short, that all
round the Head it reaches only to the top of the Ears. Underneath this they are
very closely shaved, and this Fashion pleases them. The Women raise it on
their Forehead, yet without fastening it again; and some, especially the
Peguins, do let it grow behind, to wreath it. The young unmarried wear it after
a particular manner. They cut with Scissars very close the Crown of the Head,
and then all round they pull off a small Circle of Hair about the thickness of
two Crown-pieces, and underneath they let the rest of their Hair grow down
almost to their Shoulders. The Spaniards, by reason of the heat, do thus
frequently shave the Crown of their Head, but they pluck off nothing.

The Fancy of the Siameses for white Women.
Now every one being in love with the things of his own Country, I doubted not
but the Pictures of some of the most beautiful persons of the Court, which I
had brought into this Country, would ravish the Siameses into admiration. The
painting thereof was better than that of those little Pictures which are daily
sent into Foreign Countries; yet it must be confessed that the Siameses hardly
considered them, and that after the Pictures of the Royal Family, before which
they respectively bowed themselves, not daring steadfastly to behold them, they
exceedingly esteemed that of the Duke of Montauzier, by reason of his high and
warlike Mien. We asked two young Mandarins what they thought of a great Puppet
or Baby, that we showed them. One of them replied, that a Woman like this would
be worth an hundred Catis, or fifteen thousand Livres, and his Companion was of
the same mind; but he added, that there was not any person at Siam that could
purchase it. Whether they put so high a value on a white Woman, either for the
singular delight which they take in them, or only by reason that whatever comes
from far, ought to be very dear, I leave to be determined. It Is certain, that
whether it be Fancy, or Grandeur, the King of Siam has some white Mingrelian,
or Georgian Women, which he purchases in Persia: And the Siameses that had been
in France acknowledged, that though they were not at first very much struck
either with the whiteness, or with the features of the French Women, yet they
presently apprehended that they alone were handsome, and that the Siameses were
not. As to the habit of the Puppet, the two Mandarins absolutely contemned it,
as too intricate and troublesome for the Husband that would pull it off from his
Wife: And I have since considered, that they imagined perhaps that our Wives
lay in their Clothes, like theirs, which would doubtless be very troublesome.

The Siameses are very neat.
As the Clothes imbibe whatever the Body transpires, it is certain that the less
one is clothed, the more easy it is to be neat, as the Siameses are. They
perfume themselves in several places of their Body. On their Lips they put a
sort of perfumed Pomatum, which makes them appear much paler than naturally
they are. They bathe themselves three or four times a day, or oftener, and it is
one of their Neatnesses not to make a Visit of Consequence without bathing; and
in this case they make a white spot on the top of their Breast with a piece of
Chalk, to show that they came from the Bath.

They bathe themselves two ways, Two ways of Bathing.
either by going into the water after our fashion, or by causing water to be
poured over their Body with Ladles; and they sometimes continue this sort of
Bathing for an hour. In a word, they need not to warm the water for their
Domestic Baths, no notwithstanding it has been kept several days, and in
Winter; it always continues naturally hot.

They take care of their Teeth, although they black them: The Neatness of their
Teeth and Hair.
they wash their Hair with Water and sweet Oils, as the Spaniards do, and they
use no more Powder than they; but they comb themselves, which most of the
Spaniards do not. They have Combs from China, which instead of being all of a
piece like ours, are only a great many Points or Teeth tied close together with
Wire. They pluck their Beard, and naturally have little; but they cut not their
Nails, they are satisfied to keep them neat.

We saw some Dancers by Profession, who, for Beauty, An Affectation for long
Nails.
had put on very long Copper Nails, which made them appear like Harpies. At
China, at least before the Conquest of the Tartars, the Custom was neither to
cut the Nails, nor the Hair, nor the Beard. The Men wore on their Heads a Net
of Hair or Silk, which they fastened behind; and which not covering the top of
the Head, left a space, through which they pulled out their Hair, and then
wreathed and fastened it with a Bodkin. And it is said that this Dress on which
they sometimes also wore Bonnets, or a kind of Hats, did cause Megrims, and
other very violent pains in their Head.

CHAP. II. Of the Houses of the Siameses, and of their Architecture in Public
Buildings.
IF the Siameses are plain in their Habits, they are not less in their Houses,
The Siameses keep the same Simplicity in every thing.
in their Furniture, and in their Food: Rich in a general Poverty, because they
know how to content themselves with a little. Their Houses are small, but
surrounded with pretty large Grounds. Hurdles of cleft Bambou, oftentimes not
close compacted, do make the Floors, Walls and Roofs thereof. The Piles, on
which they are erected to avoid the Inundation, are Bambou's as thick as one's
Leg, and about 13 Foot above the Ground, by reason that the Waters do sometimes
rise as much as that. There never is more than four or six, on which they do
lay other Bambou's across instead of Beams. The Stairs are a Ladder of Bambou,
which hangs on the outside like the Ladder of a Windmill. And by reason that
their Stables are also in the Air, they have Climbers made of Hurdles, by which
the Cattle enter therein.

If every House stands single, it is rather for the privacy of the Family,
Houses soon built.
which would be discovered through such thin Walls, than for fear of Fire: For
besides that, they make their little Fire in the Courts and not in the Houses,
it is impossible for them in any case to consume any great matter. Three
hundred Houses which were burnt at Siam in our time, were rebuilt in two days.
On a time when a Boom was shot to please the King of Siam, who beheld it at a
distance, and from one of the Windows of his Palace, it was necessary for this
purpose to remove three Houses, and the Proprietors had taken and carried them
away with their Furniture in less than an hour. Their Hearth or Chimney is a
Basket full of Earth, and supported with three Sticks like a Tripode. And thus
they place the Fires wherewith they enclose great spaces in the Forests for the
hunting of the Elephants.

There are no Inns at Siam.
It Is in Houses of this Nature, or rather in these sorts of Tents, but bigger,
that they lodged us along the River. They had built them purposely for us, by
reason there are not any wherein they could lodge us. There are no Inns at
Siam, nor in any State of Asia. But in Turkey, Persia, and Mogul there are
Caravansera's for Travelers, that is to say public Buildings without
Furniture, in which the Caravans may shelter themselves, and here every one
eats and lies according to the Provisions and Conveniences which he carries
thither. In the Road from Siam to Louvo, I saw a Hall for this use. It Is a
space about the bigness of an ordinary Hall, enclosed with a Wall about, as
high as one may easily lean over, and covered with a Roof, which is laid upon
wooden Pillars set at equal distances in the wall. The King of Siam does
sometimes dine there in his Travels, but as for particular persons, their Boats
serve them for their Inn.

Hospitality why unknown amongst the People of Asia.
Hospitality is a Virtue unknown in Asia, which in my opinion proceeds from the
care that every one takes to conceal his Wives. The Siameses practice it only
as to the Beasts, which they freely succor in their Distresses: But the
Talapoins having no Wives, they are more hospitable than the People. At Siam
was a French man who resolved to keep an Inn there; and some Europeans only did
sometimes go thither. And although amongst the Siameses, as well as amongst the
Chinese, it be an established practice to entertain one another, yet it is
rarely in this Country, and with much Ceremony: and especially no open Table is
there kept; so that it would be difficult to lay out much in keeping a Table,
if one would.

What Houses were purposely built for the King's Ambassadors.
There being no house proper for us on the banks of the River, they built some
after their Country fashion. Hurdles laid on Piles, and covered with Mats of
Bulrush, did not only make the Floors, but the Area of the Courts. The Hall and
Chambers were hung with painted Clothes, with Cielings of white Muslin, the
extremities of which hung sloping. The Floors were covered with Rushmats, finer
and more shining than those of the Courts; and in the Chambers where the King's
Ambassadors lay, Tapestry-carpets were laid over the Mats. Neatness appeared
every where, but no Magnificence. At Bancok, Siam, and Louvo, where the
Europeans, Chinese, and Moors have built Houses of Brick, they lodged us in
Houses of this sort, and not in Houses purposely built for us.

Brick-Houses for the Ambassadors of France and Portugal, which were not
Finished.
Yet we saw two Brick Houses which the King of Siam had built, one for the
Ambassadors of France, and the other for those of Portugal, but they are not
finished; by reason perhaps of the little probability there was, that they
would be frequently inhabited. Moreover it is certain that this Prince begins
several Brick buildings, and finishes few. The reason of which I know not.

The Houses of the great Officers of Siam.
The great Officers of this Court have Timber Houses, which are said to be great
Armories; but therein do lodge only the Master of the House, his Principal
Wife, and their Children. Every one of the other Wives with her Children, every
Slave with his Family, have all their little Apartments separate and alone, but
yet enclosed within the same Enclosure of Bambou with the Master's House; although
they be so many different Families.

Their Houses have but one Story.
One single story suffices them; and I am persuaded that this manner of
building is more commodious to them than ours; seeing that they are not
straightened for room (for there remains some in the City, and they take it where
they please) and seeing they build with those slight materials, which every one
takes at pleasure in the Woods, or which he buys at a low rate of him that has
been there to take them. Nevertheless it is reported that the reason why their
Houses have but one story, is that no Person may be higher in his own House
than the King of Siam, when he passes through the street mounted on his Elephant;
and that further to assure themselves that they are all lower than this Prince
when he goes either by Water or by Land, they must shut all their Windows, and
come into the Street, or into their Balons to prostrate themselves. Thus they
did on the day of the Entrance of the King's Ambassadors, less out of curiosity
for the Show, than out of respect to his Majesty's Letter: But it should seem
that this custom of coming down out of their Houses, is a sufficient respect to
their Prince. For it is not true, that the Houses erected, as they are on The
Timber work of the Temple which supports the Roof.
AA The Walls. BB Piles of Wood CCC Ground floor of the Temple DD. Stones
called Sema.


The Temple.

The King of Siam's Palace of Bambou in ye Woods the Rooms whereof have light
only at the Doors.
AA A Double Cloister of Bambou BB Courts of Hurdles set upon Piles C. The
Gate. D. The Shed. E. The Hall of Audience. F. A Scaffold of Bambou to get on
the Elephant of Guard. G. The Window w^ ye King shows HH The Chambers of ye K.
and his Ladies II The Chambrs. of ye Woman slaves lower K Beds of Hurdles
fa^^ed to ye Partitions like a Cabin about 2 foot high L. Stairs of Bambou M
Kitchins and Lodgings of ye Eunuch


The Platform of the Temple
Pagaueurs or Rowers
Piles, are lower than the King on his Elephant; and it is less true, that they
are not higher than the King in his Balon. But what they doubtless observe, is
that their Houses are less exalted than the Palaces of this Prince. Moreover
his Palaces consisting only of one story do sufficiently evince, that this is
the Fantasy of the Country in their Buildings; the true reason of which I
will give you in the sequel.

The Europeans, Chinese, and Moors, do there build with Brick, Brick-Houses
for Foreigners.
every one according to his Genius; for that they alone will be at the expense,
as I conceive, or that they alone have the Liberty thereof, as it is reported.
At the side of their Houses, to keep off the Sun and not hinder the Air, some
do add Pent-houses, which are sometimes supported by Pillars. Others do make
the bodies of the House double, which do reciprocally receive the light one
from the other, to the end that the Air may pass from one to the other. The
Chambers are large and full of Windows, to be the more fresh and airy. And
those of the first story have lights over the lower Hall, which ought to be so
called by reason of its height, and which sometimes is almost all enclosed
with Buildings, through which it receives the light. And it is this they call
Divan, an Arabian word which properly signifies a Council Chamger, or
Judgement-Hall.

There are other sorts of Divans, Halls called Divan.
which being built on three sides do want a fourth Wall, on that side which the
Sun shines least on, in the whole Course of the year, for between the Tropicks
it illuminates every where according to the several Seasons. On the side which
is open they do put a Pent-house, as high as the Roof: and the inside of the
Divan is frequently adorned from the top to the bottom with little Niches
contrived either in the Wall, or in the Wainscot, in which they put some China
Dishes. We had a Divan of this last sort in our House at Siam; and in the Front
under the Pent-house there played a little Fountain.

The Palaces of Siam and Louvo, Palaces and Temples of Brick, but low.
and several Pagodes or Temples are likewise of Brick, but the Palaces are low,
by reason they have no more than one story, as I have intimated; and the
Pagodes are not raised high enough in proportion to their bigness. They are
much darker than our Churches; perhaps because the Obscurity imprints more
respect, and seems naturally to have something religious. Moreover they are of
the shape of our Chapels, but without Vaults, or Cielings; only the
Timber-work which supports the Tiles, is varnished with red interspersed with
some streaks of Gold.

The King of China's Palace is still of Wood; Brick-Buildings modern at Siam.
and this persuades me that Brick Buildings are very modern at Siam, and that
the Europeans have there introduced the practice and use thereof. And because
that the first Europeans, which have built in this Country, were Factors, and
have called their Houses, Factories; the Siameses, from the word which in their
language signifies Factory, do likewise name their ancientest Brick-Pagod, as
if they should say Pagode-Factory, or Pagode of the Factory.

In a word, they know no exterior Ornament for Palaces, nor for Temples, They
know not the five Orders of Architecture.
save in the Roofs, which they cover with that ordinary Tin which they call
Calin, or with Tiles varnished with yellow, as it is in the King of China's
Palace. But tho there appears not any Gold in the Palace of Siam on the
outside, and there is but little gilding on the inside, yet they fail not to
call it Prassat-Tong, or the Golden Palace, because they give pompous names to
every thing which they honor. As for what concerns the five Orders of
Architecture, composed of Columns, Architraves, Frizes, and other Ornaments,
the Siameses have not any knowledge thereof; and it is not in Ornaments of
Architecture, that amongst them consists the real Dignity of the Royal Houses
and the Temples.

Their Stairs are so mean, that a pair of Stairs of ten or twelve steps, Stairs
and Gates.
by which we went up into the Hall of Audience at Siam, exceeded not two foot
in breadth. They were of Brick joining to the Wall on the right side, and
without any Rail on the left. But the Siamese Lords minded it not; they went up
crawling on their Hands and Knees; and so softly, that they might have said
that they would surprise the King their Master. The Gate of the Hall being
square, but low and strait, was agreeable to the Stairs, and placed on the left
Hand at the Extremity or Corner of the Wall of the Hall. I know not whether
they understand subtilty, and whether they do not believe that a very little
Door is too big, seeing it is thought that they ought to prostrate themselves
to enter therein. It Is true that the entrance into the Hall of Louvo is better,
according to our Fancy; but besides that, the Palace of Louvo is more modern,
the Prince does there lay aside his State, which resides principally in the
Metropolis, as I shall relate in the sequel.

Wherein the dignity of Palaces consist.
That which amongst them makes the real dignity of the Houses, is that although
there is no more than one story, yet they are not all level. As for example, in
the Palace, the King and Lady's Apartment is higher than the rest, and the
nearer an Apartment is to it, the higher it is in respect to another, which is
further distant: So that there is always some steps to ascend from one to the
other: For they all join to one another, and the whole is from end to end on a
line; and it is that which causes the inequality in the Roofs. The Roofs are
all highridged, but the one is lower than the other; as it covers a part lower
than another. And a lower Roof seems to come out from a higher Roof, and the
highest to bear on the lowest, like a Saddle, the fore-bow of which bears on
the hind part of another.

The same at China.
In the King of China's Palace it is the same: And this inequality of the Roofs,
which seems to proceed one from under another, after the manner that I have
explained it, denotes grandeur, in that it supposes an inequality of parts,
which is not found in these Countries, at least in considerable number, but at
the King's Houses; to the end that the further one is permitted to go into this
set of Buildings, the more indeed he ascends, and the greater distinction he
perceives. The great Officers will have three parts, one higher than another,
which are divided by three Roofs of different elevation: But at the Palace of
the City of Siam I have seen seven Roofs proceeding one from under another
before the Building: I know not whether there were not others behind. Some
square Towers, which are in the Palace, do seem also to have several Roofs, one
three, another five, another seven, as if they were square Goblets laid one
upon another; and in one of these Towers is a very great Drum headed with an
Elephants Skin, to beat the Tocsin or Alarm in case of need.

The same in the Temples or Pagodes.
As to the Pagodes, in those that I have seen, I observed only one single
Pent-house before, and another behind. The highest Roof is that under which the
Idol stands, the other two which are lower, are thought to be only for the
People; although the People forbear not to enter every where on the days when
the Temple is open.

Pyramids.
But the Principal Ornament of the Pagodes, is to be accompanied, as generally
they are, with several Pyramids of Lime and Brick, the Ornaments of which are
very grossly performed. The highest are as high as our ordinary Steeples, and
the lowest not exceeding two Fathom. They are all round, and do little diminish
in bigness as they rise; so that they terminate like a Dome: It is true that
when they are very low, there proceeds from this Dome-like extremity a Tin
Spire very small and sharp pointed, and high enough in relation to the rest of
the Pyramid. Some there are which diminish and grow thick again four or five
times in their height, so that the Profile of them goes waving: But these
Bellyings out are smaller as they are in a higher part of the Pyramid. They are
adorned in three or four places of their Contour, with several Furrows or
Flutings at Right Angles, as well as in that they have some hollow, as in that
they have some raised, which diminishing gradually in proportion to the
Diminution of the Pyramid, do run terminating in a point at the beginning of
the next bellying out, from whence do again arise new Flutings.

A Description of certain Halls of the Palace.
I cannot tell what the King of Siam's Apartments are; I have only seen the
first piece thereof, which is the Hall of Audience at Siam and Louvo. It Is said
that no person enters further, not the King's Domestics themselves, excepting
his Wives and Eunuch; in which, if it is true, this Prince maintains a greater
height than the King of China. I likewise saw the Council Chamger in the
Palace of Louvo; but it was also a first Room of another Pile of Building, I
mean that it was not preceeded by any Antichamber. At the Front and two sides
of this Hall lies a Terrass, which commands as well over the Garden which
environs it, as it is commanded by the Hall; and it is on this Terrass, and
under a Canopy, purposely erected on the North-side, that the King's
Ambassadors were at a private Audience, which the King of Siam gave them; and
this Prince was in a Chair of State at one of the Hall Windows. In the middle
of the Garden and in the Courts there are some single open Rooms, which are
called Halls; I mean those square places, that I have already described, which
enclosed with a Wall, no higher than one may lean over, and covered with a
Roof, which bears only upon Pillars placed at equal distances in the Wall.
These Halls are for the chief Mandarins, who do there sit cross-legg'd, either
for the Functions of their Offices, or to make their Court, or to expect the
Prince's Orders, viz. in the Morning very late, and in the Evening until the
approach of the Night, and they stir not thence without Order. The less
considerable Mandarins sit in the open Air, in the Courts or Gardens; and when
they know by certain signals that the King of Siam sees them, although he be
invisible, they do all prostrate themselves on their Hands and Knees.

When we dined in the Palace of Siam, The places of the Palace where we dined.
'twas in a very pleasant place under great Trees, and at the side of a
store-pond, wherein it was said that amongst several sorts of Fish there are
some which resemble a Man and Woman; but I saw none of any sort. In the Palace
of Louvo we dined in the Garden, in a single Hall, the Walls of which supported
the Roof. They are plaistered with a Ciment extremely white, smooth, and
shining, upon occasion of which it was told us there was much better made at
Suratt. The Hall has a Door at each end, and is encompast with a Ditch between
two or three Fathoms in breadth, and perhaps one in depth, in which there are
twenty little Jet-deaus, at equal distances. They play like a watering pot,
pierced with several very little holes, and they spurt no higher than the edge
of the Ditch, or thereabouts, because that instead of raising the Water, they
have dug away the Earth to make the Basins low.

The Garden is not very spacious: The Garden of Louvo.
the Compartments and Borders thereof are very little and formed by Bricks laid
edgeways. The Paths between the Borders cannot contain two a breast, nor the
Walks more: But the whole being planted with Flowers, and several sorts of
Palmites and other Trees, the Garden, Hall, and Fountains, had I know not what
Air of Simplicity and Coolness, which caused Delight. It Is a remarkable thing
that these Princes should never be inclined to use Magnificence in their
Gardens; although from all Antiquity the Orientals have admired them.

The King of Siam exercising the Chase sometimes for several days, Palaces of
Bambou in the Woods.
there are in the Woods some Palaces of Bambou, or if you please, some fixed
Tents, which only need furnishing to receive him. They are red on the outside,
like those of the great Mogul, when he goes into the Country, and like the
Walls which serve as an Enclosure for the King of China's Palace. I have given
the Model thereof, not only that the Simplicity of it may be seen, but
principally because some assured me that the King of Siam's Apartments, in his
Palaces of Siam and Louvo is according to the same Model. It Is only a little
Dormitory, where the King and his Wives have each a little Cell: Nevertheless
the truth of what few persons do see, is always hard to know. However some also
assured me concerning this Prince, what I have heard reported of Cromwell, which
is that for fear of being surprised by any Conspiracy, this Prince has several
Apartments wherein he locks himself at night, it being impossible to divine
exactly in which he lies. Strabo reports of the Indian Kings in his time, that
this very reason obliged them to change their Bed and Apartment several times
in the same Night. And this is almost all that can be spoken concerning the
manner of Building amongst the Siameses. Their Furniture is as follows.

CHAP. III. Of the Furniture of the Siameses.
Their gross Household Stuff.
THeir Bedstead is a wooden Frame very strait and matted, but without Head or
Posts. It has sometimes six Feet, which are not joined by cross pieces,
sometimes it has none at all; but the generality have no other Bed than a Matt
of Bulrush. Their Table is like a Drum-head with the Edges raised, and without
Feet. They have at Table neither Cloth nor Napkin, nor Spoon, nor Fork, nor
Knife, they are served with Morsels ready cut. No Seats, but Bulrush Matts,
finer or courser: No Carpets, when the Prince gives them not to them: And those
of fine Cloth are very honorable, by reason of the dearness thereof. The Rich
have Cushions to lean on, but they use them not to sit on, not the King
himself. That which amongst us is of Stuff or Wool, or Silk, is generally
amongst them of white or painted Cotton.

Their Vessels.
Their Vessels are either of Porcelane, or Potter's Clay, with some Vessels of
Copper. Wood plain, or varnished, Coco and Bambou afford them all the rest If
they have any Vessel of Gold or Silver, it is very little, and almost only by
the Liberality of the Prince, and as a Chattel belonging to their Offices.
Their Buckets to draw up Water are of Bambou, very neatly woven. In the Markets
the People are seen to boil their Rice in a Coco, and the Rice to be
sufficiently dressed, before the Coco begins to burn; but the Coco serves no more
than once.

Their Tools.
In short, every one builds his House, if he causes it not to be built by his
Slaves; and for this Reason the Saw and the Plane are every ones Tools. At the
end of this Volume the most Curious will find a List, which two Mandarins gave
me of the ordinary Movables in their Families. It Is not that every particular
person has so many, but perhaps none has more. They do there add the names of
the principal parts of a House, of their Habits, and of their Arms. There may
be seen the plain, but neat manner after which they built, and furnished
themselves with Movables; and several particulars of their Manners, which I
there relate upon the occasion of certain Movables.

The King's Furniture.
Their King's Furniture is almost the same, but richer and more precious than
those of particular persons. The Halls, which I saw at the Palaces of Siam and
Louvo, are all Wainscoted, and the Wainscot is varnished Red, with some streaks
and foliages of Gold. The Floors were covered with Carpets. The Hall of
Audience at Louvo was all over embellished with Looking-glasses, which the
King's Squadron had brought to Siam. The Council Chamger was furnished after
this manner. In the Room there was a Sopha made exactly like a great Bedstead
with its Posts, its Bottom and its Curtain-Rods all covered with a Plate of
Gold, and the bottom with a Carpet, but without Tester or Curtains, or any sort
of Garniture; instead of the Bolster there were Cushions pil'd, on which the
King leaned, but sat not thereon, as I have already remarked, he had only a
Carpet under him. In this Hall, at the Wall of the right side in relation to
the Sopha, there was an excellent Glass which the King had sent to the King of
Siam by M. de Chaumont. There was likewise a wooden Chair of State gilded, in
which this Prince showed himself to the King's Ambassadors at a private
Audience, which I have mentioned; and a Tiab or Cup to put Betel in, about two
Foot high, or thereabouts, and cased with Silver curiously wrought, and gilded
in some places.

The Table-Plate which we saw at the King's Palace.
In all the Entertainments which we received at the Palace, we saw great store
of Silver Plate, especially great Basins round and deep, with a Brim about a
Finger's breadth, in which were served up great round Boxes about a Foot and an
half in Diameter. They were covered, and had a Foot proportioned to their
bigness, and 'twas in these Boxes that the Rice was served up. For the Fruit
they gave us some gold Plates, which were reported to have been made purposely
for the Entertainments which the King of Siam made for M. de Chaumont; and it
is true that this Prince eats not in flat Plate. They esteem for his Dignity,
that the Messes which are served up to him are only in high Vessels, and
Porcelane is more common at his Table, than Gold or Silver: A general Custom in
all the Courts of Asia, and even in that of Constantinople.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Table of the Siameses.
THE Table of the Siameses is not sumptuous: That the Siameses eat little, and
what their Food is.
As we eat less in Summer than in Winter, they eat less than we, by reason of
the continual Summer in which they live; their common Food is Rice and Fish.
The Sea affords them very delicate small Oysters, very excellent small Turtles,
Lobsters of all sizes, and admirable Fish, the sorts of which are unknown to
us. Their River is also very plentiful of Fish, and principally very good and
curious Eels: But they make little esteem of fresh Fish.

Amongst the Fresh Water Fish, they have some little ones of two sorts, A
Wonder reported of two sorts of Fish.
which do here deserve to be mentioned. They call them Pla out, and Pla cadi,
that is to say the Fish out, and the Fish cadi. To free me from all doubts,
some have assured me, that after they have salted them together, as the
Siameses used to do, if they leave them in an earthen Pot in their Pickle,
where they soon corrupt, by reason they salt ill at Siam, then, that is to say
when they are corrupted, and as it were in a very liquid Paste, they do exactly
follow the flux and reflux of the Sea, growing higher and lower in the Pitcher
as the Sea ebbs or flows. Mr. Vincent gave me a Pot thereof at his arrival in
France, and assured me that this Experiment was true, and that he had seen it;
but I cannot add my Testimony thereunto, by reason I was too late advertised
thereof at Siam, to have an occasion of ascertaining it by my own Eyes; and
that the Pot which Mr. Vincent gave me, and which I brought to Paris, performed
this Effect no more: perhaps because the Fish were too much corrupted, or that
their virtue of imitating the flux and reflux of the Sea continues only a
certain time.

The Siameses find much difficulty to make good Salt, Bad Salt at Siam: The
desire of the Siameses for corrupt meats.
by reason that Meats do hardly take Salt in excessive hot Countries; but they
love Fish ill seasoned and dry better than fresh, even stinking Fish
displeases them not no more than rotten Eggs, Locusts, Rats, Lizards, and most
Insects: Nature doubtless framing their Appetite to things, the Digestion
whereof is more easy to them. And it may be that all these things have not
such an ill taste as we imagine. Whatever smells ill, is not always ill tasted.
Navarette in Page 45. Tom. I. of his Historical Discourses of China, relates
that he at first exceedingly detested the Brooded Eggs of a Bird which he calls
Tabon, but that when he eat thereof, he found them excellent. It Is certain that
at Siam new-laid Eggs are very unwholsom; we do here eat Vipers, we draw not
certain Birds to eat them; and sometimes Venison a little over-hunted is best
relisht.

A Siamese makes a very good Meal with a pound of Rice a day, What a Siamese
expends a day in Food.
which amounts not to more than a Farthing; and with a little dry or salt Fish,
which costs not more. The Arak or Rice Brandy is not worth above two Sols for
that quantity, which amounts to a Parisian Pint; after which it is no wonder if
the Siameses are not in any great care about their Subsistence, and if in the
Evening there is heard nothing but Singing in their Houses.

Their Sauces are plain, a little Water with some Spices, Garlic, Chibols,
Their Sauces.
or some sweet Herb, as Baulm. They do very much esteem a liquid Sauce, like
Mustard, which is only Cray-Fish corrupted, because they are ill salted; they
call it Capi. They gave Mr. Ceberet some Pots thereof, which had no bad Smell.

They yellow their Children.
That which serves them instead of Saffron is a root, which has the Taste and
Color thereof when it is dry and reduced to Powder: the Plant thereof is known
under the Name of Crocus Indicus. They account it very wholesome for their
Children, to yellow the Body and Face therewith. So that in the streets there
are only seen Children with a tawny Complexion.

What Oil they eat.
They have neither Nuts, nor Olives, nor any eating Oil, save that which they
extract from the Fruit of Coco; which, tho always a little bitter, yet is good,
when it is fresh drawn: but it presently becomes very strong, insomuch that it
is not eatable by such as are not accustomed to eat bad Oil. The Taste is
always made, and it happened at my return from a very long Voyage, where I met
with no extraordinary Oil, that I found the excellent Oil of Paris insipid and
tasteless.

How Relations must be understood with reference to him that writes them.
Wherefore I cannot forbear making a remark very necessary, truly to understand
the Relations of Foreign Countries. It Is that the words, good, excellent,
magnificent, great, bad, ugly, simple, and small; equivocal in themselves, must
always be understood with reference to the Fantasy of the Author of the
Relation, if otherwise he does not particularly explain what he writes. As for
example, if a Dutch Factor, or a Portuguese Monk do exaggerate the
Magnificence, and good Entertainment of the East; if the least House of the
King of China's Palace appears unto them worthy of an European King, it must be
supposed that this is true, in reference to the Court of Portugal. And yet some
may doubt hereof, seeing that in truth the Apartments of the Palace of China,
are no other than Wood varnished on the inside and outside, which is rather
agreeable and neat than magnificent. Thus (because it would not be just to
contemn every thing, that resembles not what we do now see in the Court of
France, and which was never seen before this great and glorious Reign) I have
endeavored to express nothing in ambiguous Terms, but to describe exactly what
I have seen, thereby to prevent the surprising any person by my particular
Fancy, and to the end that every one make as true a Judgment of what I write,
as if he had performed the Voyage that I have done.

Another Reflection on the same Subject.
Another defect in Relations is the Translation of the Foreign Words. As for
instance, amongst the King of China's Wives, there is only one that has the
Honors and Title of Queen: the rest are under her, although they be all
legitimate, that is to say permitted by the Laws of the Country. They are
called verbatim the Ladies of the Palace, and at Siam they have the same Name.
The Children of these Ladies honor not their natural Mothers, as the Chinese
are obliged theirs, but they render this Respect, and give the Name of Mother
to the Queen; as if the second Wives bore Children only for the principal Wife.
And this is also the Custom at China, in the Houses of private Persons, who
have several Wives; to the end that there may be an entire subordination, which
maintains Peace there as much as possible. And that the Children be not
permitted to dispute amongst them the merit of their Mothers. We read almost
the same thing of Sarah, who gave Hagar her Bond-maid unto Abraham, to have, as
she said, some Children by her Slave, being past Childbearing her self. Some
other Wives of the Patriarchs practiced the same, and it is evident that being
the principal Wives, every one was thought the Mother of all her Husband's
Children. But to return to what I have spoken concerning the danger of being
deceived by the Translations of the Foreign words in Relations, who sees not
the Equivocation of these words, the Ladies of the Palace, put into the mouth
of a Chinese, or Portuguese, or in the mouth of a Frenchman, who translates a
Portuguese Relation of China? The same Equivocations are found in the names of
Offices? Because that all Courts and all Governments do not resemble. All
Functions are not found every where, and the same are not every where
attributed to the same Offices, that is to say to Offices of the same name:
besides that such a Function will be great and considerable in one Country,
which may be inconsiderable in another. As for example, the Spaniards have
Marshals, which they at first designed in imitation of the Marshals of France,
and yet an Ambassador would find himself exceedingly mistaken, if being
accompanied to the Audience of the King of Spain, by a Marshal of Spain, he
should think himself as highly honored, as if he were accompanied to the
King's Audience by a Marshal of France. Now the more remote the Courts are, the
greater is the defect, when the same Words and the same Idea's are transferred
from the one to the other. At Siam it is a very honorable Employment to empty
the King's Close-stool, which is always emptied in a place appointed, and
carefully kept for this purpose; it may be out of some superstitious Fear of
the Sorceries which they imagine may be performed on the Excrements. At China
all the Splendour and Authority is in the Offices which we call the Long Robe:
And their Military Officers, at least before the Domination of the Tartars,
consisted only of unfortunate Wretches, who were not thought endowed with Merit
sufficient to raise themselves by Learning.

A third defect of Relations is to describe things only in one Particular,
Another Reflection on the same Subject.
if I may so say. The Reader conceives that in every thing else the Nation
whereof he is informed resembles his, and that in this only it is either
extravagant or admirable. Thus if it be simply said, that the King of Siam puts
his Shirt over his Vest, this would appear ridiculous to us; but when the whole
is understood, it is found, that, though all Nations act almost on different
Principles, the whole amounts almost to the same; and that there is not in any
place any thing mavelous or extravagant. But enough is spoken on this
Subject, I return to the good Cheer of the Siameses.

They have Milk from the Female Buffalo, which has more Cream, The Milk at Siam.
than the Milk of our Cows; but they make not any sort of Cheese, and scarce
any Butter. Butter does hardly take any Consistence there by reason of the
Heat; and that which is brought from Suratt and Bengale, through Climates so
extremely hot, is very bad, and almost melted in arriving there.

They disguise dry Fish after several manners, How the Siameses disguise their
Meats.
without varying the Preparation. For Example, they will cut it into thin
Slices, twisted like the Virmicelli of the Italians, or the oeufs filez of the
Spaniards. The Chinese are so addicted to this way of disguising their Meats,
that of a Drake, for Example, they will make a Soldier, of an Ananas a Dragon,
and this Dragon shall be painted in several Colors. Heretofore in Europe
several Sugar Figures were served up amongst the Fruit, but they eat them not;
and the Germans called them Schaw-essen, or Food to look upon.

Of more than thirty Dishes, A Chinese Repast.
wherewith we were served at Siam after the Fashion of the Chinese, it was not
possible for me to eat of one: Although it be naturally as easy to me as to any
other, to accommodate my self to strange Tastes. At the sight therefore of so
strange a Repast, I rested more satisfied with what some report of the
Chinese, that they taste, without loathing, the Excrements of Men and other
Animals, to choose out the most proper to manure and improve their Lands; and
that they commonly eat of all the Viands, which we abhor, as Cats, Dogs,
Horses, Asses, Mules, etc.

In which they are very opposite to the Siameses, The Siameses do love Flesh
little, and have no Butchers Meat.
who do rarely eat of any Flesh, though it be given them. But when they vouchsafe
so far as to eat thereof, they rather choose the Guts, and whatever is most
loathsome to us in the Intestines. In their Bazars or Markets they do sell
Insects broiled or roasted, and they have not any other Roast-meat. The King of
Siam gave us some Poultry, and other live Animals, for our Servants to kill and
dress for our Table. But in general all Food there is tough, Juiceless and
Crude; and by degrees the Europeans themselves, which inhabit at Siam, do
refrain eating thereof. The ancient Inhabitants of the Isle of Rhodes,
according to Aelian, esteemed not those who preferred Flesh before Fish. The
Spaniards and Italians do eat little, and do eat it dry roasted; and we find
that the English eat too much, and that they eat it too raw: It Is that as the
Countries are hotter, Sobriety is more natural.

The Siameses take no care of Poultry. They have two sorts of Hens, The Poultry.
some are like to ours, others have the Skin and Comb black, but the Flesh and
the Bones white; and when these black Hens are boiled, it is impossible to
distinguish them from the white ones either by the taste or color; although
there are some persons who generally esteem the black best. Ducks are very
plentiful and very good, but it is a Food, which, as it is said, does easily
cloy. The Indian Cocks are brought to us from the West Indies, and there are
none at Siam.

Game.
Peacocks and Pigeons are wild there; all Partridges are gray: Hares are very
scarce, and no Rabbets to be seen. It may be that the Race could not preserve
itself in the Woods, amongst all the carnivorous Animals, wherewith they are
stored. There is great plenty of Francolins, and excellent Snipes; here they do
eat Turtle-doves, whose Plumage is variegated, Parrots, and diverse small Birds,
which are good.

Wild-Fowl.
But Wild-Fowl is secure amongst the Siameses; they love neither to kill them,
nor hinder their liberty. They hate the Dogs that will take them; and moreover,
the height of their Herbage, and the thickness of the Woods do render the
Chase difficult; yet the Moors do exceedingly divert themselves in the flight
of Faulcons, and these Birds do come to them from Persia.

The Peculiarity of the Birds of Siam.
A thing which will appear singular, (although it be common at Brasil, and it may
be in other hot Countries) is, that almost all the Birds at Siam are beautiful
to behold, and are all very unpleasant to hear. There are several sorts, which
imitate the Voice; all have some Cry, but no warbling Note. And though in this
Country there are some of the Birds which we have here, they are, for Example,
neither Nightingales nor Canary-Birds, but Sparrows, Peacocks, Crows, and
Vultures. The Sparrows do enter boldly into the Chambers, there to pick up the
little Insects, wherewith they swarm. The Crows and Vultures are very
plentiful, and very familiar; because no person frights them, and the people
feed them out of Charity. They do generally give them the Children, which die
before three or four years old.

What we call Butcher's Meat, is worth nothing at Siam.
Goats and Sheep are here very scarce, small, and not over-good; they are to be
bought only of the Moors: the King of Siam caused a quantity of them to be
nourished for himself. They generally keep the Ox and Buffalo for Tillage, and
sell the Cows, and the whole is very bad to eat.

The goodness of the Pig.
The Pig is there very small, and so fat, that it is distasteful; yet the flesh
thereof is the wholsomest that can be eaten in most of the Countries of the
Torrid Zone, and is given to sick persons. The Pigs are excellent also on the
Sea, when they eat Biscuit; whereas the Sheep do frequently taste of the wool,
by reason they eat it one from another, as Poultry eats their feathers.

The price of Meats.
As to the price of Meats in the Kingdom of Siam, a Cow is not worth above ten
Sols in the Provinces; and a Crown, or thereabouts, in the Metropolis: A Sheep
four Crowns: A Goat two or three Crowns, (though the Moors do sell them very
unwillingly, because this is their principal Food:) A Pig is not worth above
seven Sols, by reason the Moors eat not thereof; Hens are worth about twenty
pence a dozen, and a dozen of Ducks is worth a Crown.

Volatiles do multiply exceedingly at Siam.
All Volatiles do multiply extremely at Siam; the heat of the Climate almost
hatches the Eggs. Venison also is not wanting, notwithstanding the spoil which
the wild Beasts make thereof, if the Siameses were greedy of Dainties: But when
they kill Bucks, and other Beasts, it is only to sell the Skins thereof to the
Dutch, who make a great Trade thereof to Japan.

The Distempers of the Siameses.
Yet to the discredit, in my opinion, of Sobriety, or because that in proportion
to the heat of their Stomach, the Siameses are not more sober than us, they
live not longer, and their Life is not less attacked with Diseases than ours.
Amongst the most dangerous, the most frequent are Fluxes and Dissenteries, from
which the Europeans that arrive at this Country, have more trouble to defend
themselves, than the Natives of the Country, by reason they cannot live sober
enough. The Siameses are sometimes attackt with burning Fevers, in which the
transport to the Brain is easily formed, with defluxions on the Stomach.
Moreover, Inflammations are rare, and the ordinary continual Fever kills none,
no more than in the other places of the Torrid Zone: Intermitting Fevers are
also rare, but violent, though the cold Fit be very short. The External does so
exceedingly weaken the Natural Heat, that here are not seen almost any of those
Distempers, which our Physicians do call Agues: and this is so throughout
India, and also in Persia, where, of an hundred sick persons, Mr. Vincent the
provincial Physician, whom I have already mentioned, declared that he scarce
found one which had the Fever, or any other hot distemper. Coughs, Coqueluches
or Quinancies, and all sorts of Defluxions and Rheumatisms are not less
frequent at Siam, than in these Countries; and I wonder not thereat, seeing
that the weather is inclined to Rain so great a part of the year: but the Gout,
Epilepsy, Apoplexy, Pthysick, and all sorts of Cholick, especially the Stone,
are very rare.

There are a great many Cankers, Abcesses, and Fistula's. Fresipeli are here so
frequent, that among twenty men, nineteen are infected therewith; and some have
two thirds of their body covered therewith. There is no Scurvy, nor Dropsy,
but a great many of those extraordinary distempers, which the people conceive
to be caused by Witchcraft. The ill consequences of a debauch are here very
frequent, but they know not whether they are ancient or modern in their Country.

In a word, there are some contagious diseases, What is the Plague at Siam.
but the real Plague of this Country is the Small Pox: It oftentimes makes
dreadful ravage, and then they interr the bodies without burning them: but
because their Piety always makes them desire to render them this last respect,
they do afterward dig them up again: and that which exceedingly surprises me,
is, that they dare not do it till three years after, or longer, by reason, as
they say, that they have experimented, that this Contagion breaks out afresh,
if they dig them up sooner.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Carriages and Equipage of the Siameses, in general.
BEsides the Ox and Buffalo, which they commonly ride, Their domestic Animals.
the Elephant is their sole Domestic Animal. The Hunting of Elephants is free
for all, but they pursue this Chase only to catch them, and never to kill them.
They never cut them, but for ordinary service they use only the Female
Elephants: the Males they design for the War. Their Country is not proper for
the breeding of Horses, or they know not how to breed them: but I believe also
that their Pastures are too course and moorish, to give Courage and Mettle to
their Horses; and this is the reason that they need not to cut them to render
them more tractable. They have neither Asses nor Mules; but the Moors which are
settled at Siam, have some Camels, which come to them from abroad.

The King of Siam only keeps about two thousand Horses: The King of Siam's
Horses.
He has a dozen of Persian, which are now nothing worth. The Persian Ambassador
presented them to him about four or five years since, from the King his Master.
Ordinarily he sends to buy some Horses at Batavia, where they are all small and
very brisk, but as resty as the Javan people are mutinous; either for that the
Country makes them so, or that the Hollanders know not to manage them.

I have more than once seen in the streets of Batavia the Burgesses of the City
on Horseback; but in an instant their Ranks were broken, The Cavalry and
Infantry of Batavia.
by reason that most of their Horses would stop on a sudden, and would refuse
to march: and mine Host hereupon informed me, that the common fault of the
Javan Horses was to prove very resty. The Dutch Company maintain Infantry at
Batavia, amongst which there is a good number of French. As for what concerns
the Cavalry, there is no other than the Burgesses, who notwithstanding the heat
of the Climate, do cloth themselves with good Buff, with rich trappings
embroidered with Gold and Silver. No Burgher serves in the Infantry: but if a
Soldier demonstrates that he has wherewith to settle and maintain himself at
Batavia, either by a Marriage or a Trade, they never refuse him neither his
liberty, nor his right of Burghership.

The King of Siam rides little or not at all on Horseback.
When we arrived there were two Siameses to buy two hundred Horses for the King
their Master, about an hundred and fifty of which they had already sent away
for Siam. It Is not that this Prince loves to ride on Horseback; this way seems
to him both too mean and of too little defense: for the Elephant appears to
them much more proper for Battle, though when all comes to all, it may
reasonably be doubted whether he be more proper for War, as I shall show in the
sequel. They report that this Animal knows how to defend his Master, and to set
him upon his back again with his Trunk, if he is fallen, and to throw his Enemy
on the ground. When the King of Siam seized on the Crown, the King his Uncle
fled from the Palace on an Elephant, and not on Horseback, although a Horse seems
much properer to fly.

A Guard Elephant in the Palace.
In the Palace there is always an Elephant on the Guard, that is to say
Harnessed and ready to mount, and no Guard-Horse. Yet some have assured me,
that the King of Siam disdains not absolutely to ride on Horseback, but that he
does it very rarely.

The King of Siam never seen on Foot.
In this place of the Palace where the Guard-Elephant stands, there is a little
Scaffold, to which the King walks from his Apartment, and from this Scaffold he
easily gets upon his Elephant. But if he would be carried in a Chair by men,
which he sometimes is, he comes to this sort of carriage, at the due height of
placing himself therein, either by a Window or a Terrace, and by this means
neither his Subjects nor Strangers do ever see him on Foot. This Honor is only
reserved for his Wives and Eunuchs, when he is locked up within his Palace.

Their Sedans.
Their Chairs or Sedans are not like ours, they are square and flat Seats, more
or less elevated, which they place and fix on Biers. Four or eight men (for the
Dignity herein consists in the Number) do carry them on their naked Shoulders,
one or two to each Staff, and other men relieve these. Sometimes these Seats
have a Back and Arms like our Chairs of State, and sometimes they are simply
compast, except before, with a small Ballister about half a Foot high; but the
Siameses do always place themselves cross-legged. Sometimes these Seats are
open, sometimes they have an Imperial; and these Imperials are of several
sorts, which I will describe in speaking of the Balons, in the middle of which
they do likewise place these Seats, as well as on the backs of Elephants.

The Imperial not very honorable at Siam, but the Parasol is.
As often as I have seen the King of Siam on an Elephant, his Seat was without
an Imperial, and all open before. At the sides and behind do rise up to the top
of his Shoulders three great Foliages, or Feathers gilt, and bent outward at
the Point: but when this Prince stops, a Footman, who stands ten or twelve
paces from him, shelters him from the Sun with a very high Umbrella like a
Pike, with the Head three or four Foot in Diameter: and this is not a small
fatigue, when the Wind blows thereon. This sort of Umbrella, which is only for
the King, is called Pat-boouk.

How they get upon an Elephant.
To return to the riding of the Elephant, those that would guide him themselves
do seat themselves on his Neck, as on a Horse, but without any kind of Saddle;
and with a punch of Iron or Silver they prick him on the head, sometimes on the
right side, sometimes on the left, or exactly in the middle of the Forehead,
telling him at the same time whether he must go, and when he must stop; and on
the Road in the descents of the ways they advise him to go descending, Pat,
Pat, that is to say, descend, descend. But if one will not take the pains to
guide him, he places himself on his back in a Chair, instead of a Saddle, or
without a Chair and on his Hair, if we may so speak of an Animal that has none:
And then a Servant, or commonly he that takes care of feeding the Elephant,
gets up on his Neck and guides him; and sometimes there is also another man
seated on the Crupper. The Siameses do call him that is placed on the Crupper
Houa-sip, or the Chief of Ten, because that they suppose out of Pride, that an
Elephant has a great number of men to serve him, and that there are ten under
the command of the Houa-sip. Him that sits upon the Elephants A Mandarins Balon.
The Body of a Balon with it is Benches for ye: Pagayeurs or Rowers and the
Alcove to fix the Mandarins seat.
A Pagaye or Oar

The Balon of the Kings Envoys
The Balon of the King of Siams Body wherein was the French King's Letter.
Neck they do call Nai-Tchang, or Captain of the Elephant, and he commands over
all those that are appointed for the service of the Elephant.

But because that in this Country they go more by Water than by Land, The
Carriage of the Balons.
the King of Siam has very fine Balons. I have already said that the Body of a
Balon is composed only of one single Tree, sometimes from sixteen to twenty
Fathom in length. Two men sitting cross-leg'd by the side one of another, on a
Plank laid across, are sufficient to take up the whole breadth thereof. The one
Pagayes at the right, and the other on the left side. Pagayer is to row with
the Pagaye, and the Pagaye is a short Oar, which one holds with both hands, by
the middle, and at the end. It seems that he can only sweep the water though
with force. It is not fixed to the edge of the Balon, and he that manages it,
looks where he goes; whereas he that rows, turns his back to his Road.

In a single Balon there are sometimes an hundred, An exact Description of a
Balon.
or an hundred and twenty Pagayeurs, thus ranged two and two with their Legs
crossed on Plancks: but the inferior Officers have Balons a great deal shorter,
where few Pagayes or Oars, as sixteen, or twenty do suffice. The Pagayeurs or
Rowers, do strike the Pagaye in Consort, do sing, or make some measured Noises;
and they plunge the Pagaye in a just cadence with a motion of the Arms and
Shoulders, which is vigorous, but easy, and graceful. The weight of this Bank
of Oars serves as Ballast to the Balon, and keeps it almost even with the
water, which is the reason that the Pagayes are very short. And the Impression
which the Balon receives from so many men which vigorously plunge the Pagaye at
the same time, makes it always totter with a motion which pleases the Eye, and
which is observed much more at the Poop and Prow; because they are higher, and
like to the Neck and Tail of some of Dragon, or some monstrous Fish, of which
the Pagayes on either side show like the Wings or the Fins. At the Prow one
single Pagayeur takes up the first Rank, without having any Comrade at his
side. He has not room enough to cross his left Leg with his right, and he is
forced to stretch it out over an end of a stick, which proceeds from the side
of the Prow. It Is this first Pagayeur that gives the motion to all the rest.
His Pagaye is somewhat longer, by reason that he is posted in that place where
the Prow begins to rise, and that he is so much the further from the Water. He
plunges the Pagaye once to every measure, and when it is necessary to go
swifter he plunges it twice; and lifting up the Pagaye continually, and only
for decency with a shout, he throws the water a great way, and the next stroke
all the Equipage imitates him. The Pilot stands always at the Poop, where it
rises exceedingly. The Rudder is a very long Pagaye, which is not fixed to the
Balon, and to which the Steersman seems to give no other Motion, than to keep
it truly perpendicular in the water, and against the edge of the Balon
sometimes on the right side, and sometimes on the left. The Women Slaves do row
the Ladies Balons.

In the Balons of ordinary service, wherein there are fewer Pagayeurs, Several
sorts of Balons.
there is in the middle a Cabin of Bambou, or other Wood, without Painting or
Varnish, in which a whole Family may be held, and sometimes this Cabin has a
lower Pent-house be fore, under which the Slaves are; and many of the Siameses
have no other Habitation. But in the Balons of Ceremony, or in those of the
King of Siam's body, which the Portuguese have called Balons of State, there is
in the middle but one Seat, which takes up almost the whole breadth of the
Balon, and wherein there is only one Person and his Arms, the Sabre and Lance.
If it is an ordinary Mandarin, he has only a single Umbrella like ours to
shelter himself; if it is a more considerable Mandarin, besides that his Seat
is higher, he is covered with what the Portugueses call Chirole, and the
Siameses Coup. It Is an Arbor all open before and behind, made of Bambous cleft
and interlac'd, and covered within and without with a black or red Varnish. The
red Varnish is for the Mandarins at the right hand, the black for those of the
left, a distinction which I shall explain in its due place. Besides this the
extremities of the Chirole are gilded on the outside the breadth of three or
four Inches, and some pretend that it is in the fashion of these gildings, which
are not plain, but like Embroidery, that the Marks of the Mandarins Dignity
are. There are also some Chiroles covered with Stuff, but they serve not for
many weather. He that commands the Equipage sometimes cudgels, but very rarely,
those which row softly and out of measure, places himself cross-leg'd before
the Mandarins Seat, on the extremity of the Table, on which the Seat is fixed.
But if the King chances to pass by, the Mandarin himself descends upon this
Table, and there prostrates himself; his whole Equipage does likewise follow
his example, and his Balon stirs not till the King's be out of sight.

The Balons of the Body which are called Balons of State.
The Imperials of the Balons of State are all over gilded, as well as the
Pagayes: They are supported by Columns, and loaded with several pieces of
Sculpture in Pyramids, and some have sheds against the Sun. In the Balon where
the King's Person is, there are four Captains or Officers to command the
Equipage, two before and two behind they sit cross-leg'd; and this is the
Ornament of the Balons.

The Swiftness of the Balons:
Now as these Vessels are very narrow, and very proper to cut the water, and the
Equipage thereof numerous, it cannot be imagined with what swiftness it carries
them, even against the Stream, and how pleasant a sight it is to behold a great
number of Balons to row together in good order.

The Entrance of the Kings Ambassadors into the River.
I confess that when the King's Ambassadors entered in the River, the Beauty of
the Show surpised me. The River is of an agreeable breadth, and
notwithstanding its Maeanders, there is always discovered a very great extent
of its Channel, the Banks whereof are two Hedge-rows continually green. This
would be the best Theater in the World for the most sumptuous and magnificent
Feasts: but no Magnificence appears like a great number of men devoted to serve
you. There were near three Thousand embarkt in seventy or eighty Balons, which
made the Train of the Ambassador. They rowed in two ranks, and left the Balon
with the King's Ambassadors in the middle. Every one was animated and in
motion: All eyes were taken up with the diversity and number of the Balons, and
with the pleasantness of the River's Channel; and yet the ears were diverted by
a barbarous, but agreeable noise of Songs, Acclamations and Instruments; in the
intervals of which the Imagination ceased not to have a sensible taste of the
natural silence of the River. In the night there was another sort of Beauty, by
reason that every Balon had its Lanthorn; and that a noise which pleases, is
much more pleasant in the night.

The ancient Magnificence of the Court of Siam.
It Is asserted at Siam that the Court was formerly very magnificent, that is to
say, there was a great number of Lords adorned with rich Stuffs, and a great
many precious Stones; and always attended with an hundred or two hundred
Slaves, and with a considerable number of Elephants: but this is gone ever
since the Father of the present King cut off almost all the most considerable,
and consequently the most formidable Siameses, as well those who had served him
in his Revolt, as those which had opposed him. At present three or four Lords
only have permission to use those Chairs or Sedans, which I have spoken of. The
Palankin (which is a kind of Bed, that hangs almost to the ground, from a great
Bar, which men carry on their Shoulders) is permitted to sick persons, and some
diseased old men, for it is a Carriage wherein they can only lie along. But
though the Siameses may not freely use these sorts of Conveniences, the
Europeans which are at Siam, have more permission herein.

Vmbrella's.
The use of Vmbrella's, in Siamese Roum, is also a Favor which the King of Siam
grants not to all his Subjects, although the Umbrella be permitted to all the
Europeans. Those which are like to ours, that is to say, which have but one
round, is the least honorable, and most of the Mandarins have thereof. Those
that have more rounds about the same handle, as if they were several Vmbrella's
fixed one upon another, are for the King alone. Those which the Siameses do
call Clot, which only have one round, but from which do hang two or three
painted Clothes like so many Hangings, one lower than the other, are those
which the King of Siam gives to the Sancrats or Superiors of the Talapoins.
Those which he gave to the King's Ambassadors were of this last sort, and with
three Clothes. You may see the figure thereof in that of the Balons of the
King's Ambassadors.

The Umbrella of the Talapoins, and the Origin of the word Talapoin.
The Talapoins have Vmbrella's in the form of a Screen, which they carry in
their hand. They are of a kind of Palmito leaf cut round and folded, and the
folds thereof are tied with a thread near the stem, and the stem which they
make crooked like an S is the handle thereof. In Siamese they call them
Talapat, and it is probable that from hence comes the name of Talapoi or
Talapoin, which is in use amongst Foreigners only, and which is unknown to the
Talapoins themselves, whose Siamese name is Tchaou-cou.

The Elephant is the carriage of every one that can take one by hunting, The
Elephant and Boat permitted to all.
or purchase one; but the Boat is the more universal carriage: no person can
travel without one, by reason of the annual Inundation of the Country.

Whilst the King of Siam is in his Metropolis, When and how the King of Siam
shows himself.
the ancient custom of his Court requires that he show himself to the people
five or six days of the year only, and that he does it with Pomp. Heretofore
the Kings his Predecessors did first break up the ground every year, till they
left this Function to the Oc-ya-kaou; and it was attended with great Splendour.
They also went out another day to perform on the water another Ceremony, which
was not less superstitious, nor less splendid. 'Twas to conjure the River to
return into its Channel, when the Agriculture required it, and when the Wind
inclining to the North assured the return of fair weather. The present King was
the first that dispensed with this troublesome work, and it is several years
since it seemed abolished; because, say they, that the last time he performed
it, he had the disgrace of being surpised with rain, although his Astrologers had
promised him a fair day.

Ferdinand Mendez Pinto, relates that in his time the King of Siam used to show
himself one day in a year upon his white Elephant, to ride through nine streets
of the City, and to extend great Liberalities to the People. This Ceremony, if
it has been in use, is now abolished. The King of Siam never mounts the white
Elephant, and the reason which they give is, that the white Elephant is as
great a Lord as himself, because he has a King's soul like him. Thus this
Prince shows himself in his Metropolis no more than twice a year, at the
beginning of the sixth and twelfth month, to go and present Alms of Silver,
yellow Pagnes --, and fruits to the Talapoins of the Principal Pagods. On these
days, which the Siameses do call Van pra, a holy, or excellent day, he goes
upon an Elephant to the Pagodes which are in the same City, and by water to
another, which is about two leagues from the City down the River. On the days
following he sends the like Alms to the less considerable Pagods: but this
extends not above two leagues from the Metropolis, or thereabouts. And in the
last month of the year 1687, this Prince went no where in person; he contented
himself with sending every where.

If therefore the King of Siam shows himself in his Metropolis, it is upon some
Ceremonies of Religion, At Louvo, The King of Siam lives with less pomp at
Louvo than at Sam
where it is permitted him to lay aside his Kingship, he frequently goes
abroad, either for the hunting of the Tiger and Elephant, or to stir himself;
he goes with so little Pomp, that when he marches from Louvo to his little
house of Thlee-poussone with his Ladies, he gives not any carriage to the women
which are of the Company: which is doubtless a respect from these women Slaves
to their Mistresses.

Nevertheless he has always in his retinue two or three hundred men as well on
foot as on horseback; The King of Siam's Retinue.
but what is this in comparison of those Trains of fifteen and twenty thousand
men which the Relations do give him on days of Ceremony? Before him do march
some Footmen with Staves, or with long Truncks to shoot Peace with, to drive all
the People out of his way, and especially when the Ladies follow him; and
likewise before he goes out the Europeans are therewith acquainted, if there
are any lately arrived, to avoid meeting him: As for all the Asiaticks, they
very well know this custom, which is the same in all the Courts of Asia. Barros
reports, that in the true India, when a Nobleman walks in the Streets he is
always preceded by one of his Domestics, who cries po, po, that is to say,
close, close, to the end that all the Ploughmen may disperse themselves.
Osorius reports, that it is the Ploughman that is obliged to cry out, and he
subjoyns, that it is for fear lest any Nobleman should touch him unawares, and
revenge this Affront by killing him. The Neiras I call Nobles, who alone make
profession of Arms, and who think themselves defiled, when they touch a
Ploughman. At Siam and China the principal Magistrates have Officers that go
before them, who make the People to stand in Ranks, and who would cudgel those
that would not retire, or which would not render to their Master all the other
respects which are due unto him, and which in these Countries we found very
insupportable. It Is no wonder therefore if the King of China, the Great Mogul,
the King of Persia, and the other Asiatick Potentates have thought it
consistent with their Dignity, thus to advertize the People of their March.
Those that do for this purpose precede the King of Siam, are called Conlaban
and Coeng. The Conlaban's do keep the right hand, and the Coeng's the left: and
we shall see in the List of certain Officers, that Coeng is the Title of the
Provost. It Is upon the same account, that is to say, to disperse the People
from the person of the King of Siam, when he travels, that two Officers of his
Horse Guard, of Men and Laos, do march on both sides, but about 50 or 60 paces
from him. His Courtizans appear first at the Rendevouz, or they do sometimes
follow on Foot with their hands joined on their Breast. Sometimes they follow
on Horseback, sometimes on Elephants, but in this case their Elephants have no
Chairs. The Foot and Horse-Guards do likewise follow, but confusedly and
without any order; and if this Prince stops, all that follow him on Foot,
prostrate themselves on their Knees and Elbows; and those that follow on
Horseback, or on Elephants, do entirely bow down themselves on these Animals.
Those which are named Schaou-mou, do also follow a Foot: They are the King's
Domestics, which are not Slaves. Some do carry his Arms, and others his Boxes
with Betel and Arek.

The singular Respect of the Siameses for their King.
When this Prince gave to the King's Ambassadors the diversion of taking an
Elephant, twelve Lords clothed in Scarlet, and with their red Caps, arrived
before the King at the place of the Show, and seated themselves cross-leg'd on
the ground before the place, where the King their Master was to stand. They
were turned toward the place of the Show; but so soon as they heard the Noise
of this Prince's March, they prostrated themselves on their Knees and Elbows
toward the place from whence the sound came, and as the Noise approached they
turned themselves by little and little toward the Noise, and still remained
prostrate: So that when the King their Master was come they were prostrate
before him, and their back was turned to the Show; and whilst the Show
continued they made not any motion, and expressed not any sign of Curiosity. But
my Discourse insensibly leads me to speak of the Shows and other Diversions of
the Siameses,

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Shows, and other Diversions of the Siameses.
The way of catching a wild Elephant.
THE place, where the Elephant is that they would take, is as it were a very
broad and very long Trench: I say, as it were a Trench, because it is not made
by digging, but by raising the Earth almost perpendicular on each side, and it
is upon these Terrasses that the Spectators stand. In the bottom, which is
between these Terrasses, is a double row of Trunks of Trees above ten Foot
high, planted in the Earth, big enough to resist the Attacks of the Elephant,
and far enough from one another to let a Man pass between, but too close to let
an Elephant pass through. It Is between these two rows of Trunks, that the tame
Female Elephants, which they had led into the Woods, had enticed a wild Male
Elephant. Those which guide them thither, do cover themselves with Leaves, to
avoid frighting the Elephants of the Woods, and the Female Elephants have
understanding enough, to make the Cries proper to call the Males. He was
already intrap'd in the double row of Trunks, by following the Females, and
could no more return into the Woods; but the design was to take him and tie
him, to shut him up and tame him. The Egress from the space wherein he was, is
a strait Cortina, composed also of great Trunks of Trees. So soon as the
Elephant is entered into this Cortine, the Gate through which he enters, and
which he opens by thrusting it before him with his Proboscis, shuts again with
its own weight: the other Gate through which he must pass is shut; and besides
the space is so narrow, that he cannot turn himself therein. The difficulty was
to engage the wild Elephant in this Cortine, and to engage him single; for the
Females were still with him in the Trench, and he did not separate from them.
Several Siameses who stood behind the Pallisado's of the Trunks, and the Foot
of the Terrasses, where the Elephant could not come at them, entered every
where between the Trunks into the space, where the Elephant was, to vex him;
and when the Elephant pursued one of them, he fled very swiftly behind the
Pallisado's, between which the enraged Elephant vainly thrust his Proboscis,
and against which he broke the end of one of his Teeth. Whilst he thus pursued
after those which provoked him, others laid long Nooses for him. One of the
ends of which they kept; and they threw them at him with so much dexterity,
that the Elephant in running never failed to put one of his hind-feet therein:
so that by diligently putting the end of the Noose, they closed and fastened it
a little above the Elephant's foot, These Nooses were of great Ropes, one of
the ends of which was put into the other like a Slip-knot, and the Elephant
dragged three or four of them at each hind-foot. For as soon as the Noose is
once knit, he lets go the end thereof, to avoid being dragged himself by the
Elephant. The more he is exasperated, the less he associates with the Females;
and yet to make them quit this space, a Man mounted on another Female entered
therein, and went back again several times through the Cortine, and this Female
which he mounted, called the others, by a dry blow, which she struck against
the ground with her Proboscis. She darted it perpendicularly downwards, yet
avoiding to strike altogether with the end, which she kept bended upwards. And
when she had repeated this Call twice or thrice, he that rid her, made her to
return back again through the Cortine. In fine, after he had performed this
Trick five or six times with this Female, the other Female followed her, and
soon after the Elephant returned to himself, because they forbore to vex him,
resolved to go after them. He pushed open the first door of the Cortine with
his Proboscis, and so soon as he was entered, they threw several Buckets of
water on his Body to refresh him, and with an incredible swiftness and
dexterity they tied him to the Trunks of the Cortine with the Nooses, which
were already at his feet. Then they made a tame Elephant to enter backwards
into the Cortine, to whose Neck they also tied the savage Elephant by the Neck,
and at the same time unloos'd him from the Trunks; and two other tame Elephants
being likewise led to the Succor, all the three, the one on one side, the other
on the other, and the third behind, do conduct the wild Elephant under a
Pent-house near adjoining, where they fasten and tie him close by the Neck to a
Pivot planted upright, which he made to turn as he turned round. They said that
he need remain at this Pivot but 24 hours, and that in this space of time they
would lead some tame Elephants to him to keep him company, and comfort him:
that after 24 hours they would carry him into the Stable appointed for him; and
that in eight days he would bethink himself, and submit to Slavery.

They speak of an Elephant as of a Man; What the Siameses do think of the
Elephants.
they believe him perfectly rational, and they relate such rational things of
him, that he only wants Speech. This is one, for Example, to which you may give
what Credit you please. Some have related to us for a known Truth, that a Man
having cracked a Coco on the head of an Elephant which he rode, and using for
this purpose the back of that kind of Punch, with which I have said that they
guide the Elephants, this Elephant took up a resolution of revenging himself as
soon as he could. He gathered up with his Proboscis, as they say, one of the
Shells of the Coco, and kept it several days, never letting it go but to eat,
during which he kept it carefully between his two fore-feet. In fine, he that
had affronted him, approaching him to give him food, the Elephant seized him,
trampled him under his feet, and slew him, and for his Justification laid the
Coco-Shell on the dead Body. It Is in these terms that the Relation was made to
us: for the Siameses do think that Elephants are capable of Justice, and of
profiting by the punishments one of another; and they allege that in War, for
Instance, when these Animals mutiny, it is needful only to kill one on the
spot, to render all the others wise. But these Relations, and several others,
which I have forgot, do seem very fabulous; and not to digress from the
Example, which I have mentioned, it is, in my opinion, very evident, that if
the offended Elephant had consulted reason, he would not have waited another
opportunity of revenge, but would have wreak'd his vengeance on the spot;
seeing that every Elephant can with his Proboscis throw off the Rider, and
having thrown him on the ground, trample him under foot, and kill him.

How the Siameses took leave of the three Elephants, which the King of Siam
sent into France.
As for my self, during the time I was at Siam, I saw no mavelous Act
performed by any of these Animals, though I am persuaded that they are more
docible than others. They embarked three young ones, which the King of Siam
sent to the three Princes the Grandsons of France. The Siameses which brought
them on Board our Ships to embark them, took leave of them, as they would have
done of three of their Companions, and whispered them in their Ears, saying,
Go; depart cheerfully, you will be Slaves indeed, but you will be so to three
the greatest Princes of the World, whose Service is as moderate at it is
glorious. They afterward hoisted them into the Ships, and because they bowed
down themselves to go under the Decks, they cried out with admiration, as if
all Animals did not as much to pass under low places.

The Elephant is very dangerous when he is enraged.
One day at Louvo an Elephant tore in pieces in the Street the Brother of a
young Mandarin, who was with the King's Ambassadors, as Mr. Torph had been with
the Ambassadors of Siam. They said indeed that the Elephant was enraged, but
this Rage was not of a Beast more reasonable, but only more cruel than the
rest. Thus to render the Elephants of War more tame, they are accompanied with
Females, when they are led out to water and wash themselves, and I know not
whether without this Train it could ever be accomplished. The Siameses report,
that the Elephants are sensible of Grandeur; that they love to have a great
House, that is to say, several Grooms for their service, and some Females for
their Mistresses, (with whom nevertheless it is said that the Elephants desire
familiarity only in the Woods, so long as they are savage, and at full
liberty:) that without this state, they afflict themselves at the little regard
had for them; and that when they commit any great Fault, the severest
punishment that can be inflicted on them, is to retrench their House, to take
away their Females, to remove them from the Palace, and to send them into
Stables abroad. They say that an Elephant having been punished after this
manner, and being set at liberty, returns to his Lodge at the Palace, and kills
the Elephant which was put in his place; which seems neither incredible nor
strange, provided the way be free and open: for every Animal loves his usual
Lodging, and according as he is more or less Courageous, he will use more or
less Violence to drive out another Animal.

A Fight of Elephants.
To return to the Diversions of the Court of Siam, we saw a Fight of two
Elephants of War. They were retained by the hind-feet with Cables, which
several Siameses held, and which besides this were fastened to Capstains. The
Elephants could hardly cross their Trunks in the Fight, two Men were mounted on
each of them to animate them; but after five or six Attacks the Combat ended,
and they brought in the Females, who parted them. At the great Mogul's Palace,
the Elephants are permitted to approach nearer, and these Animals endeavor to
beat off each other's Rider, and frequently they knock him down and kill him.
At Siam they neither expose the Life of Men nor Beasts, by way of Sport or
Exercise.

Cock-fighting.
They love Cock-Fighting. The most Courageous are not always the biggest, but
those which are naturally the best armed, that is to say, those which have the
best Spurs. If a Cock falls, they give him drink; by reason that they
experimentally know that it is oftentimes only an effect of Thirst, and indeed
he generally renews the Fight after quenching his Thirst. But as it almost
always cost the life of one of the Cocks, the King of Siam prohibited these
sort of Duels; because the Talapoins cried, and said, That the Owners of the
Cocks would for their punishment be bastinado'd in the other World with Bars of
Iron. I forbore going to a Fight of an Elephant and a Tiger, because the King
of Siam would not be there, and that I knew they would not permit to these
Animals the liberty of using all their Courage. Some informed me that the Tiger
had been very Cowardly, and that the Show had succeeded ill. The hunting of
Elephants performed by an enclosure of Fires in the Woods, has been described
by others: the King of Siam went not to that which was performed whilst the
King's Ambassadors were at his Court, neither were they invited; but the other
Diversions which were exhibited to them all at once, and in a vast Court, were
these.

The one was a Chinese Comedy, A Chinese Comedy.
which I would willingly have seen to the end, but it was adjourned, after some
Scenes, to go to Dinner. The Chinese Comedians, whom the Siameses do love
without understanding them, do speak in the Throat. All their words are
Monosyllables, and I heard them not pronounce one single one, but with a new
breath: some would say that it throttles them. Their Habit was such as the
Relations of China describe it, almost like that of the Carthusians, being
clasped on the side by three or four Buckles, which reach from the Arm-pit to
the Hip, with great square Placards before and behind, whereon were painted
Dragons, and with a Girdle three Fingers broad; on which, at equal distances,
were little squares, and small rounds either of Tortoise-Shell or Horn, or of
some sort of Wood: And these Girdles being loose, they were run into a Buckle
on each side to sustain them. One of the Actors who represented a Magistrate,
walked so gravely, that he first trod upon his Heel, and then successively and
slowly upon the Sole and Toes; and as he rested on the Sole, he raised the
Heel; and when he rested on his Toes, the Sole touched the ground no more. On
the contrary, another Actor, walking like a Madman, threw his Feet and Arms in
several extravagant Postures, and after a threatening manner, but much more
excessive, than the whole Action of our Captains or Matamores. He was the
General of an Army; and if the Relations of China are true, this Actor
naturally represented the Affectations common to the Soldiers of his Country.
The Theater had a Cloth on the bottom, and nothing on the sides, like the
Stages of our Rope-dancers and Jack-puddings.

The Puppets are mute at Siam, Puppets.
and those which come from the Country of Laos are much more esteemed than the
Siamese. Neither the one nor the other have any thing, which is not very common
in this Country.

But the Siamese Tumblers are excellent, Rope-dancers, and other sorts of
excellent Tumblers.
and the Court of Siam gives the diversion thereof to the King, when he arrives
at Louvo. Aelian reports, that Alexander had some Indian Rope-dancers at his
Wedding, and that they were esteemed more nimble than those of other Nations.
These are their Actions, which it is necessary to confess I did not closely and
carefully consider, because I was more attentive to the Chinese Comedy, than to
all the other Shows, which were at the same time exhibited to us. They plant a
Bambou in the ground, and to the end of this they join another, and to the end
of this second a third, and to the end of the third a Hoop: so that this makes
as it were the wood of a round Racket, the Handle of which would be very long.
A Man holding the two sides of the Hoop with his two Hands, puts his Head upon
the inferior and inward part of the Hoop, raises his Body and his Feet on high,
and continues in this posture an hour, and sometimes an hour and half: then he
will put a Foot where he had placed his Head, and without standing otherwise,
and without fixing the other Foot, he will dance after their manner, that is to
say, without raising himself, but only by making Contorsions: And what renders
all this more perilous and difficult, is the continual wavering of the Bambou.
A Bambou dancer of this sort, they call Lot Bouang; Lot signifies to pass, and
Bouang a Hoop.

There dyed one, some Years since, who leaped from the Hoop, A Tumbler
exceedingly honored by the King of Siam.
supporting himself only by two Vmbrella's, the hands of which were firmly
fixed to his Girdle: the Wind carried him accidentally sometimes to the Ground,
sometimes on Trees or Houses, and sometimes into the River. He so exceedingly
diverted the King of Siam, that this Prince had made him a great Lord: he had
lodged him in the Palace, and had given him a great Title; or, as they say, a
great Name. Others do walk and dance, after the mode of the Country, without
raising themselves; but with Contorsions on a Copper-wire as big as the little
Finger, and stretched after the same manner as our Rope-dancers do stretch
their Rope: And they say, that the more the Wire is stretched, the more
difficult it is to stand, by reason it gives a greater spring, and is so much
the more uncertain. But what they account most difficult, is to get upon this
Wire by the part of that same Wire which is fastened to the ground, and to
descend thence by one of the Bambou's, which are placed like a St. Andrew's
Cross to support it: as also to sit on the Wire cross-leg'd, to hold there one
of those Bands, which serves them as a Table to eat on it, and to raise
themselves on their Feet. They cease not likewise to ascend and dance upon an
extended Rope, but without a Counterpoise, and with Babouches or Slippers on
their Feet, and with Sabres, and Buckets of water fastened to their Legs. There
are such who plant a very high Ladder in the ground, the two sides of which are
of Bambou's, and the steps of Sabres, the edges of which are turned upwards. He
goes to the top of this Ladder, and stands, and dances without any support on
the edge of the Sabre, which makes the last step thereof; whilst the Ladder has
more motion than a Tree shaken by the wind: then he descends Head foremost, and
passes nimbly, winding between all the Sabres. I saw him descend, but observed
not when he was on the highest Sabre; and I went not to examine whether the
Steps were Sabres: not reckoning that the Sabres could be keen, except perhaps
the lowest, because they are most exposed to view. I omit the rest of this
matter, as little important, and because I have not sufficiently observed it to
support it with my Testimony.

Tame Serpents.
The Emperor Galba being in his Praetorship, exhibited to the Roman People the
sight of some Elephants dancing upon Ropes. The Elephants of Siam are not so
experienced, and the only Animals that I know the Siameses instruct, are great
Serpents, which, they say, are very dangerous. These Animals do move themselves
at the sound of the Instruments, as if they would dance. But this passes for
Magic, because that always in that Country, as oftentimes in this, those who
have some extraordinary Artifice, do pretend that it consists in some
mysterious words.

Religious Shows: An Illumination on the Waters, and another on the Land, and
in the Palace.
The Siameses have also some Religious Shows. When the Waters begin to retreat,
the People returns them Thanks for several Nights together with a great
Illumination; not only for that they are retired, but for the Fertility which
they render to the Lands. The whole River is then seen covered with floating
Lanthorns, which pass with it. There are of different Sizes, according to the
Devotion of every particular Person; the variously painted Paper, whereof they
are made, augments the agreeable effect of so many Lights. Moreover, to thank
the Earth for the Harvest, they do on the first days of their Year make another
magnificent Illumination. The first time we arrived at Louvo was in the Night,
and at the time of this Illumination; and we saw the Walls of the City adorned
with lighted Lanthorns at equal distances; but the inside of the Palace was
much more pleasant to behold. In the Walls which do make the Enclosures of the
Courts, there were contrived three rows of small Niches all round, in every of
which burnt a Lamp. The Windows and Doors were likewise all adorned with
several Fires, and several great and small Lanthorns, of different Figures,
garnished with Paper, or Canvas, and differently painted, were hung up with an
agreeable Symmetry on the Branches of Trees, or on Posts.

Excellent Artificial Fireworks.
I saw no Fireworks, in which nevertheless the Chinese of Siam do excel, and
they made some very curious during our residence at Siam and Louvo. At China
there is also made a solemn Illumination at the beginning of their Year, and at
another time another great Festival on the Water without any Illumination. The
Chinese agree not in the Reasons they give thereof, but they give none upon
the account of Religion, and those which they give are puerile and fabulous.

We must not omit the Paper-Kite, in Siamese Vao, A Paper-Kite.
the Amusement of all the Courts of the Indies in Winter. I know not whether it
be a piece of Religion, or not; but the great Mogul, who is a Mohammedan, and
not an Idolater, delights himself also therein. Sometimes they fasten Fire
thereunto, which in the Air appears like a Planet. And sometimes they do there
put a piece of Gold, which is for him that finds the Kite, in case the String
breaks, or that the Kite falls so far distant, that it cannot be drawn back
again. That of the King of Siam is in the Air every Night for the two
Winter-months, and some Mandarins are nominated to ease one another in holding
the String.

The Siameses have three sorts of Stage Plays. Three sorts of Stage Plays
amongst the Siameses.
That which they call Cone is a Figure-dance, to the Sound of the Violin, and
some other Instruments. The Dancers are masqued and armed, and represent rather
a Combat than a Dance: And though every one runs into high Motions, and
extravagant Postures, they cease not continually to intermix some word. Most
of their Masks are hideous, and represent either monstrous Beasts, or kinds of
Devils. The Show which they call Lacone, is a Poem intermixed with Epic and
Dramatic, which lasts three days, from eight in the Morning till seven at
Night. They are Histories in Verse, serious, and sung by several Actors always
present, and which do only sing reciprocally. One of them sings the Historian's
part, and the rest those of the Personages which the History makes to speak;
but they are all Men that sing, and no Women. The Rabam is a double Dance of
Men and Women, which is not Martial, but Gallant; and they presented unto us
the Diversion thereof with the others, which I have before mentioned. These
Dancers, both Men and Women, have all false Nails, and very long ones, of
Copper: They sing some words in their dancing, and they can perform it without
much tyring themselves, because their way of dancing is a simple march round,
very slow, and without any high motion; but with a great many slow Contorsions
of the Body and Arms, so they hold not one another. Mean while two Men
entertain the Spectators with several Fooleries, which the one utters in the
name of all the Men-dancers, and the other in the name of all the
Women-dancers. All these Actors have nothing singular in their Habits: only
those that dance in the Rabam, and Cone, have gilded Paper-Bonnets, high and
pointed, like the Mandarins Caps of Ceremony, but which hang down at the sides
below their Ears, and which are adorned with counterfeit Stones, and with two
Pendants of gilded wood. The Cone and the Rabam are always called at Funerals,
and sometimes on other occasions; and it is probable that these Shows contain
nothing Religious, since the Talapoins are prohibited to be present thereat.
The Lacone serves principally to solemnize the Feast of the Dedication of a new
Temple, when a new Statue of their Sommona-Codam is placed therein.

This Festival is likewise accompanied with races of Oxen, Wrestling and Boxing.
and several other Diversions, as of Wrestlers, and Men that fight with their
Elbow and Fist. In Boxing, they guard their Hand with three or four rounds of
Cord instead of the Copper Rings, which those of Laos do use in such Combats.

The Running of Oxen is performed in this manner. A Race of Oxen.
They mark out a Plat of 500 Fathom in length, and two in breadth, with four
Trunks, which are planted at the four Corners, to serve as Boundaries; and it
is round these Limits that the Coutse is run. In the middle of this place they
erect a Scaffold for the Judges: and the more precisely to mark out the middle,
which is the place from whence the Oxen were to start, they do plant a very
high Post against the Scaffold. Sometimes it is only a single Ox which runs
against another, the one and the other being guided by two Men running a foot,
which do hold the Reins, or rather the String put into their Noses, the one on
the one side, and the other on the other side; and other Men are posted at
certain distances, to ease those which run. But most frequently it is a Yoke of
Oxen fastened to a Plough, which runs against another Yoke of Oxen joined to
another Plough; some Men guide them on the right side and on the left, as when
it is only a single Ox which runs against another: But besides this, it is
necessary that each Plough be so well sustained in the Air by a Man running,
that it never touch the ground, for fear it retard the Animals that draw it;
and these Men which thus support the Ploughs, are more frequently relieved than
the others. Now though the Ploughs run both after the same manner, turning always
to the right round the space which I have described, they set not out from the
same place. The one starts at one side of the Scaffold, and the other at the
other, to run reciprocally one after the other. Thus at the beginning of their
Course they look from opposite places, and they are distant one from the other
half a Circle, or half the space over which they were to run. Yet they run
after the same manner, as I have said, turning several times round the four
Boundaries, which I have mentioned, till the one overtakes the other. The
Spectators are nevertheless all round, yet is it not necessary to have Bars to
hinder from approaching too near. These Courses are sometimes the subjects of
Bettings, and the Lords do breed and train up small, but well-proportion'd Oxen
for this Exercise; and instead of Oxen, they do likewise make use of Buffalo's.

A Race of Balons.
I know not whether I ought to rank amongst the Shows, the Diversion which was
given us of a Race of Balons; for in respect of the Siameses it is rather a
Sport, than a Show. They choose two Balons the most equal in all things as is
possible, and they divide themselves into two Parties to bett. Then the
Captains do beat a precipitate measure, not only by knocking with the end of a
long Bambou which they have in their hands, but by their Cries, and the
Agitation of their whole Body. The Crew of Rowers excites itself also by
several redoubled Acclamations, and the Spectator which betts, hollows also,
and is in no less motion than if he really rowed. Oftentimes they commit not to
the Captains the care of animating the Rowers, but two of the Bettors do
execute this Office themselves.

The excessive love of Gaming.
The Siameses love Gaming to such an Excess as to ruin themselves, and lose
their Liberty, or that of their Children: for in this Country, whoever has not
wherewith to satisfy his Creditor, sells his Children to discharge the Debt;
and if this satisfies not, he himself becomes a Slave. The Play which they love
best, is Tick-Tack, which they call Saca, and which they have learnt perhaps
from the Portuguese; for they play it like them and us. They play not at Cards,
and their other hazardous Sports I know not; but they play at Chesse after our
and the Chinese way. At the end of this Work I will insert the Game of Chesse
of the Chinese.

The Siameses love to smoke Tobacco.
Tobacco-Smoke (for they take none in Snush) is also one of their greatest
pleasures, and the Women, even the most considerable, are entirely addicted
thereunto. They have Tobacco from Manille, China, and Siam; and though these
sorts of Tobacco are very strong, the Siameses do smoke it without any weakening
it; but the Chinese and Moors do draw the Smoke through water, to diminish the
strength thereof. The method of the Chinese is, to take a little water into
their mouth, and then proceed to fill their mouth with Tobacco-Smoke, and
afterward they spit out the water and the Smoke at the same time. The Moors
make use of a singular Instrument, the Description and Figure of which you will
find at the end of this Work.

The common life of a Siamese.
Such are the Diversions of the Siameses, to which may be added the Domestic.
They love their Wives and Children exceedingly, and it appears that they are
greatly beloved by them. Whilst the Men acquit themselves of the six months
work, which they every one yearly owe to the Prince, it belongs to their Wife,
their Mother, or their Children to maintain them. And when they have satisfied
the Service of their King, and they are returned home, the generality know not
unto what business to apply themselves, being little accustomed to any
particular Profession; by reason the Prince employs them indifferently to all,
as it pleases him. Hence it may be judged how lazy the ordinary life of a
Siamese is. He works not at all, when he works not for his King: he walks not
abroad; he hunts not: he does nothing almost but continue sitting or lying,
eating, playing, smoking and sleeping. His Wife will wake him at 7 a clock in
the morning, and will serve him with Rice and Fish: He will fall asleep again
hereupon; and at Noon he will eat again, and will sup at the end of the day.
Between these two last Meals will be his day; Conversation or Play will spend
all the rest. The Women plough the Land, they sell and buy in the Cities. But
it is time to speak of the Affairs and serious Occupations of the Siameses,
that is to say of their Marriages, of the Education they give to their
Children, of the Studies and Professions to which they apply themselves.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Marriage and Divorce of the Siameses.
It Is not the Custom in this Country to permit unto Maids the Conversation of
young men. The Mothers chastise them, when they surprise them so: The care they
have of keeping their Daughters.
but the Girls forbear not to get out, when they can; and this is not
impossible toward the Evening.

They are capable of having children at twelve years of Age, At what Age they
marry them.
and sometimes sooner; and the greatest part have none past forty. The Custom
is therefore to marry them very young, and the Boys in proportion. Yet there is
found some Siameses. who disdain Marriage all their life, but there is not any
that can turn Talapoinesse, that is to say, consecrate her self to a Religious
life, who is not advanced in years.

When a Marriage is designed, How a Siamese seeks a Maid in Marriage, and how
their Marriage is concluded.
the Parents of the young man demand the Maid of her Parents, by women advanced
in years and of good Reputation. If the Parents of the Maid have any
inclination thereunto, they return a favorable Answer. Nevertheless they
reserve unto themselves the liberty of consulting first the mind of their
Daughter; and at the same time they take the hour of the young man's Nativity,
and give that of the Birth of the Maid: and both sides go to the Southsayers to
know principally whether the Party proposed is rich, and whether the Marriage
will continue till death without a divorce. As every one carefully conceals his
riches, to secure them from the oppression of the Magistrate, and the
Covetuousness of the Prince, it is necessaty that they go to the Southsayer, to
know whether a Family is rich, and it is upon the advice of the Southsayers
that they take their Resolution. If the Marriage must be concluded, the young
man goes to visit the Lady three times, and carries her some presents of Betel
and Fruit, and nothing more precious. At the third Visit the Relations on both
sides appear there likewise, and they count the Portion of the Bride, and what
is given to the Bridegroom to whom the whole is delivered upon the spot, and in
presence of the Relations, but without any writing. The new married couple do
also commonly receive on this occasion some presents from their Uncles: and
from that time, and without any Religious Ceremony, the Bridegroom has a right
to consummate the Marriage. The Talapoins are prohibited to be present thereat.
Only some days after they go to the house of the New Married folks to sprinkle
some Holy Water, and to repeat some Prayers in the Baly-Tongue.

The Wedding as in all other places, is attended with Feasts and shows. The
Nuptial Feast.
They do hire and invite professed Dancers thereunto; but neither the Bridegroom,
nor the Bride, nor any of the Guests do dance. The Feast is made at the house
of the Brides Relations, where the Bridegroom takes care to build an Hall on
purpose, which stands alone: And from thence the new married persons are
conducted into another single Building, built also on purpose, at the expense
and care of the Bridegroom, in the Enclosure of Bambou, which makes the
Enclosure of the House of the Brides Relations. The new married persons
continue there some Months, and then go to settle where it pleases them best to
build an House for themselves. A singular Ornament for the Daughters of the
Mandarins which are married, is to put on their head that Circle of Gold, which
the Mandarins put on their Bonnet of Ceremony. Next to this the decking
consists in having finer Pagnes then ordinary, more excellent Pendants, and
more curious Rings on their Fingers, and in greater quantity. Some there are
who report that the pretended father-in-Law, before the conclusion of the
Marriage of his Daughter with his Son-in-Law, keeps him six Months in his
house, to know him better. Some absolutely deny that this is true. And all
that, in my opinion, may have given occasion to the report, is that it belongs
to the Bridegroom to build the Wedding Room, and House, which he is to have at
his Father-in-Law's, during which, that is to say for two or three days at
most, his future Spouse brings him Food, without dreading the Consequences
thereof, because the Marriage is already concluded, although the Feast be
deferred.

The Riches of the Marriages at Siam.
The greatest Portion at Siam is an hundred Catis, which do make 15000 Livres;
and because it is common that the Bridegroom's Estate equals the Portion of the
Bride, it follows that at Siam the greatest Fortune of two new married Persons
exceeds not 10000 Crowns.

Of Plurality of Wives.
The Siameses may have several Wives, though they think it would be best to have
but one; and it is only the Rich that affect to have more, and that more out of
Pomp and Grandeur, than out of Debauchery.

A considerable distinction between them.
When they have several Wives, there is always one that is the chief: they call
her the great Wife. The others, which they call the lesser Wives, are indeed
legitimate, I mean permitted by the Laws, but they are subject to the
Principal. They are only purchased Wives, and consequently Slaves; so that the
Children of the little Wives do call their Father Po Tchaou, that is to say
Father Lord, whereas the Children of the principal Wife do call him simply Po,
or Father.

The degrees of Alliance prohibited, and how the Kings of Siam dispense with
this Article.
Marriage in the first degrees of Kindred is prohibited them, yet they may marry
their Cousin-German. And as to the degrees of Alliance, a Man may marry two
Sisters one after the other, and not at the same time. Nevertheless the Kings
of Siam do dispense with these Rules, and do think it hardly possible to find a
Wife worthy of them, but in persons that are nearly related to them. The
present King married his Sister, and by this Marriage was born the Princess his
only Daughter, whom it is said he has married. I could not find out the truth,
but this is the common Report: And I think it probable, in that her House is
erected as unto a Queen; and the Europeans who have called her the
Princess-Queen, have made the same judgment thereof with me. The Relations
inform us, that in other places as well as at Siam, there are some Examples of
these Marriages of the Brother with the Sister; and it is certain that they
have been anciently frequent amongst a great many Pagan Nations, at least in
the Royal Families: either to the end that the Daughter might succeed to the
Crown with the Son, or out of the fear I have mentioned, that these Kings have
had of misplacing their Alliances, Thus Jupiter had married his Sister.
if they married not their own Sisters. For as to what others add, that it is
to the end that the People may not doubt of having a Sovereign of the Royal
Blood, at least by his Mother, I find no probability therein as to the East,
where the People are so little wedded to the Blood of their Kings, and where
the Kings do think to assure themselves of the Fidelity of their Wives, by
keeping them very closely.

The Laws of Succession for Widows and Children.
The Succession in particular Families is all for the great Wife, and then for
her Children, who inherit from their Parents by equal Portions. The little
Wives and their Children may be sold by the Heir; and they have only what the
Heir gives them, or what the Father before his death has given them from hand
to hand, for the Siameses know not the use of Wills. The Daughters born of the
little Wives, are sold to be themselves little Wives; and the most powerful
purchasing the handsomest, without having any regard to the Parents from whom
they descend, do after this manner make very unequal Alliances: and those with
whom they make them, do not thereby acquire any more Honor or Protection.

Wherein consists the Fortune of a Siamese.
The Estate of the Siameses consist chiefly in Movables. If they have Lands,
they have not much, by reason they cannot obtain the full Property thereof: It
belongs always to their King, who at his pleasure takes away the Lands which he
has sold to particular persons, and who frequently takes them again without
returning the value. Nevertheless the Law of the Country is, that Lands should
be hereditary in Families, and that particular persons may sell them one to
another: But this Prince has regard only to this Law, as far as it suits him,
because it cannot prejudice his Demesnes, which generally extend over all that
his Subjects possess. This is the Reason that they get as few Immoveables as
they can, and that they always endeavor to conceal their Movables from the
knowledge of their Kings: and because that Diamonds are Movables the most
easy to hide and transport, they are mightily sought after at Siam, and in all
India, and they sell them very dear. Sometimes the Indian Lords do at their
death give part of their Estate to the King their Master, to secure the rest to
their Family, and this generally succeeds.

The Families are almost all happy at Siam, A Divorce.
as may be judged by the Fidelity of the Wives in nourishing their Husband,
whilst he serves the King: A Service which by a kind of Oppression lasts not
only six Months in a Year, but sometimes one, two, and three Years together.
But when the Husband and Wife cannot support one another, they have the remedy
of Divorce. It Is true that it is in practice only amongst the Populace; the
Rich who have several Wives, do equally keep those they love not, and those
they love.

The Husband is naturally the Master of the Divorce, What are the Laws thereof.
but he never refuses it to his Wife, when she absolutely desires it. He
restores her Portion to her, and their Children are divided amongst them in
this manner. The Mother has the first, the third, the fifth, and so all the odd
ones. The Father has the second, fourth, sixth, and all the even ones. Hence it
happens, that if there is no more than one Child, it is for the Mother; and
that if the number of Children is unequal, the Mother has one more: whether
that they judge the Mother would take more care thereof, than the Father; or
that having born them in her womb, or nourished them with her milk, she seems
to have a greater Right therein, than the Father; or that being weaker, she has
more need of the succor of her Children than he.

After the Divorce, And the Consequences.
it is lawful for the Husband and Wife to marry again with whom they please;
and it is free for the Woman to do it in the very day of the Divorce, they not
troubling themselves with the Doubt that may thence arise touching the Father
of the first Child, that may be born after the second Marriage. They rely on
what the Wife says thereof; a great sign of the little Jealousy of this
People. But though the Divorce be permitted them, yet they consider it as a very
great Evil, and as the almost certain Ruin of the Children, which are
ordinarily very ill treated in the second Marriages of their Parents. So that
this is one of the Causes assigned why the Country is not populous; although the
Siameses are fruitful, and do very frequently bring Twins.

The power of the Husband is despotical in his Family, Of the Paternal Power.
even to the selling his Children and Wives, his principal Wife excepted, whom
he can only repudiate. The Widows inherit the power of their Husbands, with
this restriction, that they cannot sell the Children which they have of the
even number, if the Father's Relations oppose it; for the Children dare not.
After the Divorce, the Father and Mother may each sell the Children which fell
to them by lot, according to the Division I have mentioned. But the Parents
cannot kill their Children, nor the Husband his Wives, by reason that in
general all Murder is prohibited at Siam.

The Love of free persons is not ignominious, at least amongst the Populace:
Amorous Conversations.
It is there looked upon as a Marriage, and Incontinency as a Divorce.
Nevertheless the Parents do carefully watch their Daughters, as I have said;
and Children are no where permitted to dispose of themselves to the prejudice
of the paternal Power, which is the most natural of all Laws. Moreover, the
Siameses are naturally too proud easily to give themselves to Foreigners, or at
least to invite them. The Peguins which are at Siam, as being Strangers
themselves, do more highly esteem of Foreigners; and do pass for debauched
persons in the minds of those who understand not that they seek a Husband. Thus
they continue faithful until they are abandoned; and if they prove big with
Child, they are not less esteemed amongst those of their Nation, and they do
even glory in having had a white Man for a Husband. It may be also that they
are of a more amorous Complexion than the Siameses; they have at least more
spirit and briskness. It Is an established opinion in the Indies, that the
people have more or less vigor and spirit, according as they are nearer, or
remoter from Pegu.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Education of the Siamese Children, and first of their
Civility.
The love of the Siamese Children for their Parents.
THE Siamese Children have docility and sweetness, provided they be not
discountenanced. Their Parents know how to make themselves extremely beloved
and respected, and to inspire an extreme Civility in them. Their Instructions
are marvellously assisted by the Despotic Power, which I have said they have in
their Family; but the Parents do also answer unto the Prince for the Faults of
their Children. They share in their Chastisements, and more especially are
obliged to deliver them up when they have offended. And though the Son be fled,
he never fails to return and surrender himself, when the Prince apprehends his
Father, or his Mother, or his other collateral Relations, but older than
himself, and to whom he owes Respect: And this is a great proof of the love of
the Siamese Children to their Parents.

Civility necessary to the Siameses.
As to Civility, it is so great throughout the East, even amongst Strangers,
that an European who has lived there a long time, finds much difficulty to
re-accustom himself to the Familiarities of these Countries. The Indian Princes
being very much given to Traffic, they love to invite Strangers amongst them,
and they protect them even against their own Subjects. And hence it is that the
Siameses do for Example appear savage, and that they eschew the Conversation of
Strangers. They know that they are thought always to be in the wrong, and that
they are always punished in the Quarrels they have with them. The Siameses do
therefore educate their Children in an extreme Modesty, by reason that it is
necessary in Trade, and much more in the Service, which for six Months in the
Year they render unto the King, or to the Mandarins by order of their King.

Their Inclination to Silence.
Silence is not greater amongst the Carthusians, than it is in the Palace of
this Prince; the Lords dispense not therewith more than others. The sole desire
of speaking, never excites the Siameses to say any thing that may displease.
It Is necessary that they be thoroughly convinced that you would know the truth
of any thing, to embolden them to declare it against your opinion. They do in
nothing affect to appear better instructed than you, not in the things of their
own Country, although you be a Stranger.

The Raillery amongst them.
They appeared to me very far from all sort of Raillery, by reason they
understand not any, perhaps through the fault of the Interpreters. It Is
principally in matter of Raillery, that this ancient Proverb of the Indians is
verified, That things best weighed, when delivered by an Interpreter, are as a
pure Spring which runs through mud. Most safe it is to droll little with
Strangers, even with those that understand our Language; because that
Railleries are the last thing that they understand, and that it is easy to
offend them with a Raillery which they understand not. I doubt not therefore
that the Siameses know how to jest wittily one with another. Some have assured
me, that they do it frequently amongst Equals, and even in Verse; and that as
well the Women as the Men are all very readily verst therein; the most ordinary
method of which is amongst them a continued Raillery, wherein emulously appears
the briskness of the Answers and Repartees. I have observed the same thing
amongst the people of Spain.

The Politeness of the Siamese Language.
But when they enter into earnest, their Language is much more capable than
our's, of whatever denotes Respect and Distinction. They give, for instance,
certain Titles to certain Officers, as amongst us are the Titles of Excellence
and Greatness. Moreover, these words I and Me, indifferent in our Language, do
express themselves by several terms in the Siamese Tongue; the one of which is
from the Master to the Slave, and the other from the Slave to the Master.
Another is from the Man of the people to a Lord; and a fourth is used amongst
Equals; and some there are which are only in the mouth of Talapoins. The word
You and He are not expressed in fewer manners. And when they speak of Women,
(because that in their Tongue there is no distinction of Genders into Masculine
and Feminine) they add to the Masculine the word Nang, which in the Balie
Language signifies Young, to imply the Feminine, as if we should say for
Example, Young Prince, instead of Princess. It seems that their Civility
hinders them from thinking that Women can ever grow old.

By the same Complaisance they call them by the most precious or most agreeable
things of Nature, as young Diamond, young Gold, young Crystal, young Flower.
The Names of the Siameses.
The Princess, the King's Daughter, is called Nang fa, young Heaven; if he had
a Son, he would be called, as some report, Tchaou fa, Lord of Heaven. It Is
certain that the white Elephant which Mr. de Chaumont saw at Siam, and which
was dead when we arrived there, had attained to an extreme old Age; yet because
it was a Female, and that they believe moreover that in the Body of white
Elephants there is always a Royal Soul, they called her verbatim, Nang Paya
Tchang peuac, young Prince white Elephant.

The words which the Siameses use by way of Salute, are cavai Tchaou, The words
which the Siameses use in saluting.
I salute Lord. And, if it is really a Lord that salutes an Inferior, he will
bluntly answer, Raou vai, I salute, or ca vai, which signifies the same thing;
although the word ca, which signifies me, ought to be naturally only in the mouth
of a Slave speaking to his Master; and that the word Raou, which also signifies
me, denotes some dignity in him that speaks. To ask, How do you? they say,
Tgiou de? Kindi? That is to say, Do you continue well? Do you eat well?

But it is a singular Observation, How they are permitted to ask News of their
King's health.
that it is not permitted a Siamese to ask his Inferior any News concerning
their King's health; as if it was a Crime in him, that approaches near the
person of the Prince, to be less informed thereof, than another that is obliged
to keep at a greater distance.

Their civil posture of Sitting is as the Spaniards sit, crossing their Legs;
How they sit.
and they are so well accustomed thereunto, that, even on a Seat when given
them, they place themselves no otherwise.

When they bow, they do not stand; but if they sit not cross-leg'd, Their
Postures
they bow themselves out of respect to one another. The Slaves and the Servants
before their Masters, and the common People before the Lords keep on their
knees, with their Body seated on their heels, their head a little inclined, and
their hands joined at the top of their forehead. A Siamese which passes by
another, to whom he would render Respect, will pass by stooping with joined
hands more or less elevated, and will salute him no otherwise.

In their Visits, if it is a very inferior person that makes it, Their
Ceremonies in Visits.
he enters stooping into the Chamber, he prostrates himself, and remains upon
his knees, and sitting upon his heels after the manner that I have described;
but he dares not to speak first. He must wait till he to whom he pays the
Visit, speaks to him: and thus the Mandarins that came to visit us on the
behalf of the King of Siam, waited always till I spoke to them first. If it is
a Visit amongst Equals, or if the Superior goes to see the Inferior, the Master
of the House receives him at the Hall-door, and at the end of the Visit he
accompanies him thither, and never any further. Moreover, he walks either
upright, or stooping, according to the degree of Respect which he owes to the
Visitor. He likewise observes to speak first, or last, according as he can, or
as he ought; but he always offers his place to him whom he receives at his
House, and invites him to accept it. He afterward serves him with Fruit and
Preserves, and sometimes with Rice and Fish; and more especially he with his
own hand presents him with Arek and Betel, and Tea. The common People forget
not Arek, and Persons of Quality do sometimes accommodate themselves therewith.
At the end of the Visit, the Stranger first testifies that he will go; as
amongst us, and the Master of the House consents thereto with very obliging
Expressions, To what degree the highest place is the most honorable.
and he must be greatly superior to him that renders him the Visit, to bid him
depart.

The highest place is so far the most honorable according to them, that they
dared not to go into the first Story, even for the service of the House, when
the Kings Ambassadors were in the lower Hall. In the Houses, which strangers do
build of Brick above one story, they observe that the undermost part of the
Stairs never serves for a passage, for fear lest any one should go under the
feet of another that ascends: but the Siameses build no more than one story, by
reason that the bottom would be useless to them, no person amongst them being
willing either to go or lodge under the feet of another. For this reason,
though the Siamese Houses be erected on Piles, they never make use of the under
part, not so much as in the Kings House, whose Palace being uneven, has some
pieces higher than others, the under part of which might be inhabited. I
remember that when the Ambassadors of Siam came to an Inn near Vincennes, the
first Ambassador being lodged in the first story, and the others in the second,
the second Ambassador perceiving that he was above the King his Masters Letter,
which the first Ambassador had with him, ran hastily out of his Chamber
bewailing his offense, and tearing his hair in despair.

The right hand more honorable then the left at Siam.
At Siam the right hand is more honorable than the left: the floor of the
Chamber opposite to the door is more honorable than the sides; and the sides
more than the wall where the door is, and the wall which is on the right hand
of him that sits on the floor, is more honorable than that which is on his
left hand. Thus in the Tribunals, no person sits on the Bench fixed to the wall
which is directly opposite to the door, save the President, who alone has a
determinative Vote. The Counselors, who only have a Consultative Vote, are
seated on other lower Benches along the side-walls, and the other Officers
along the wall of the door. After the same manner, if any one receives an
important visit, he places the Visitor alone on the floor of the Chamber, and
seats himself with his back toward the door, or toward one of the sides of
the Chamber.

Why the Cities at China are all after one Model.
These Ceremonies and a great many others are so precise at China, that it is
necessary that the Entries of the Houses, and the Rooms where particular
persons receive their Visits, and those where they entertain their Friends, be
all after one model, to be able to observe the same Civilities. But this
Uniformity of building, and of turning the buildings to the South, so that they
front the North in their entering in, has been much more indispensible in the
Tribunals, and in all the other public houses; insomuch that whoever sees one
City in this great Kingdom sees them all.

The exactness of the Siameses in their Ceremonies.
Now Ceremonies are as essential, and almost as numerous at Siam as at China. A
Mandarin carries himself one way before his Inferiors, and another way before
his Superiors. If there are several Siameses together, and there unexpectedly
comes in another, it frequently happens that the posture of all changes. They
know before whom, and to what degree, they must keep themselves inclined or
strait, or sitting: whether they must join their hands or not, and keep them
high, or low: whether being seated they may advance one Foot, or both, or
whether they must keep them both concealed by sitting on their heels. And the
miscarriages in these sorts of duties may be punished with the cudgel by him to
whom they are committed, or by his orders, and on the spot. So that there is
not introduced amongst them those Airs of familiarity, which in diversions do
attract rudeness, injuries, blows and quarrels, and sometimes intemperance and
impudence: they are always restrained by reciprocal respects. What some report
concerning the Chinese Hat, is a thing very pleasant. It has no brim before nor
behind, but only at the sides: and this brim, which terminates in an oval, is
so little fastened to the body of the Hat, that it flaps, and renders a man
ridiculous, at the least irregular motion which he makes of his head. Thus
these people have imagined, that the less men are at ease, the fewer faults
they commit.

They are accustomed thereunto from their infancy.
But all these forms, which seem to us very troublesome, appear not so to them,
by reason they are early accustomed thereunto. Custom renders the distinctions
less severe to them, than they would be to us: and much more the thoughts that
they may enjoy it in their turn: He that is Superior or Inferior to day,
changing his condition to morrow, according to the Prudence, or the Capricious
Humor of the Prince. The hereditary distinctions which the Birth does here give
to so many persons who are sometimes without merit, will not appear less hard
to undergo, to him who should not be thereto accustomed, or who should not
comprehend that the most precious recompense of Virtue is that, which one hopes
to transmit to his posterity.

The Custom is therefore at Siam and China, How the great men dispense with
these in their Inferiors
that when the Superior would discreetly manage the Inferior, and testify a
great deal of consideration for him (as it sometimes happens in the intrigues
of Court) the Superior affects publicly to avoid the meeting the Inferior; to
spare him the public submissions, with which he could not dispense if they
should meet him. Moreover, affability toward Inferiors, Easiness of access, or
going before them, do pass for weakness in the Indies.

The Siameses constrain not themselves to belching in conversation, Certain
things incident amongst us are not so amongst them, and on the contrary.
neither turn they aside their face, or put any thing before their mouth, no
more than the Spaniards. It Is no incivility amongst them to wipe off the Sweat
of their forehead with their Fingers, and then to shake them against the
ground. For this purpose we use a Handkercheif, and few of the Siameses have
any: which is the reason why they very slovenly perform every thing whereunto
the Handkercheif is necessary. They dare to spit neither on the Mats, nor the
Carpets; and because they are in all houses a little furnished, they make use
of spitting-pots which they carry in their hand. In the Kings Palace they
neither cough, nor spit, nor wipe their Nose. The Betel which they continually
chew, and the juice of which they swallow at pleasure, hinders them:
Nevertheless they cannot take Betel in the Prince's presence, but only continue
to chew that which they have already in their Mouth. They refuse nothing that
is offered them, and dare not to say, I have enough.

As the most eminent place is always amongst them the most honorable, What is
the greatest Affront among the Siameses.
the head, as the highest part of the body, is also the most respected. To
touch any person on the head or the hair, or to stroke ones hand over the head,
is to offer him the greatest of all affronts. To touch his Bonnet, if he leaves
it any where, is a great incivility. The mode of this Country amongst the
Europeans which dwell there, is never to leave their Hat in a low place, but to
give it to a Servant, who carries it higher than his Head, at the end of a
Stick, and without touching it; and this Stick has a foot, to the end that it
may stand up, if he that carries it, be obliged to leave it.

The most respectful, or to say better, the most humble posture, What postures
are more or less respectful.
is that in which they do all keep themselves continually before their King: in
which they express to him more respect than the Chinese do to theirs. They
keep themselves prostrate on their knees and elbows, with their hands joined at
the top of their forehead, and their body seated on their heels; to the end
that they may lean less on their elbows, and that it may be possible (without
assisting themselves with their hands, but keeping them still joined to the top
of their forehead) to raise themselves on their knees, and fall again upon
their elbows, as they do thrice together, as often as they would speak to their
King: I have remarked, that when they are thus prostrate, they lean their
back-part on one side or other, as much as possibly they can, without
displacing their knees, as it were to lessen and undervalue themselves the more.

By the same principle, it is not only more honorable, according to them, to
be seated on a high seat, than on a low seat; but it is much more honorable to
be standing than sitting. When Mr. de Chaumont had his first audience, it was
necessary that the French Gentlemen which accompanied him, should enter first
into the Hall, and seat themselves on their heels, before the King of Siam
appeared; to the end that this Prince might not see them a moment standing.
They were prohibited to rise up to salute him, when he appeared. This Prince
never suffered the Bishops nor the Jesuits to appear standing before him in the
Audiences. It is not permitted to stand in any place of the Palace, unless
while walking: and if in this last Voyage of 1687, at the first audience of the
Kings Ambassadors, the French Gentlemen had the honor of entering, when the
King of Siam was already visible, it was only because the Mandarins, which had
accompanied the Ambassadors of Siam into France, were admitted into the Gallery
of Versailles, when the King was seated on the Throne which he had erected
there.

How the King of Siam accomodates the Ceremonies of his Court, to those of the
Court of France.
The King of Siam had that respect for the King of France, as to acquaint him by
Mr. de Chaumont, that if there was any Custom in his Court which was not in the
Court of France, he would alter it; and when the King's Ambassadors arrived in
this Country, the King of Siam affected indeed to make them a Reception
different in several things from that which he had made to Mr. de Chaumont, to
conform it the more to that which he understood the King had made to his
Ambassadors. He did one thing, when Mr. des Farges saluted him, which never had
any Precedent at Siam: for he commanded that all the Officers of his Court
should stand in his presence, as did Mr. des Farges, and the other French
Officers which accompanied him.

Why I chose to speak to the King of Siam rather standing, than sitting.
Remembering therefore that Mr. de Chaumont had demanded to compliment him
sitting, and knowing that his Ambassadors had spoken standing to the King, (an
Honor which he highly esteemed) he informed me, that he would grant me the
liberty to speak to him sitting or standing; and I chose to deliver all my
Compliments standing: And if I could have raised my self higher, I should have
received more Honor. 'Twas in the King of Siam, as they informed me, a mark of
respect for the King's Letters, not to receive them standing, but sitting.

Another Siamese Civility.
To lay a thing upon one's head, which is given, or received, is at Siam, and in
a great many other Countries, a very great mark of respect. The Spaniards, for
Example, are obliged by an express Law to render this respect to the Cedules,
or written Orders, which they receive from their King. The King of Siam was
pleased to see me put the King's Letter on my head, in delivering it to him: he
cried out, and demanded, Where I had learnt that Civility used in his Country?
He had lifted up to his Forehead the King's Letter, which Mr. de Chaumont
delivered him; but understanding, by the report of his Ambassadors, that this
Civility was not known in the Court of France, he omitted it, in regard of the
King's Letter, which I had the Honor to deliver him.

The manner of saluting among the Siameses.
When a Siamese salutes, he lifts up either both his hands joined, or at least
his right hand to the top of his forehead, as it were to put him whom he
salutes on his head. As often as they take the liberty to answer to their King,
they always begin again with these words, Pra pouti Tchaou-ca, co rap pra
ouncan sai claou sai cramom: That is to say, High and Mighty Lord of me thy
Slave, I desire to take thy Royal Word, and put it on my Brain, and on the top
of my Head. And it is from these words Tchaou-ca, which signify Lord of me thy
Slave, that amongst the French is sprung up this way of speaking fair choca,
to signify Ta vai bang com, or to prostrate himself after the Siamese manner.
Fair la Zombaye to the King of Siam, signifies to present him a Petition,
which cannot be done without performing the cocha. I know not from whence the
Portugueses have borrowed this way of speaking. If you stretch out your hand to
a Siamese to take hold on his, he puts both his hands underneath yours, as to
put himself entirely into your power. It Is an Incivility, in their opinion, to
give only one hand, as also not to hold what they present you, with both their
hands, and not to take with both hands what they receive from you. But let this
suffice as concerning the Civility with which the Siameses inspire their
Children, although I have not exhausted this Subject.

CHAP. IX. Of the Studies of the Siameses.
They put their Children to the Talapoins.
WHen they have educated their Children to seven or eight years old, they put
them into a Convent of Talapoins, and make them assume the habit of a Talapoin:
for it is a Profession which obliges not, and which is quitted at pleasure
without disgrace. These little Talapoins are called Nen: they are not
Pensioners, but their Friends do daily send them Food. Some of these Nens are
of a good Family, and have one or more Slaves to wait upon them.

They are taught principally to Read, to Write, and to cast Account; What they
learn.
by reason that nothing is more necessary to Merchants, and that all the
Siameses do exercise Traffic. They are taught the Principles of their Morality,
and the Fables of their Sommona-Codom, but no History, nor Law, nor any
Science. They likewise teach them the Balie Tongue, which, as I have more than
once declared, is the language of their Religion, and their Laws; and few
amongst them do make any progress therein, if they do not a long time adhere to
the profession of the Talapoin, or if they enter not into some offices: for it
is in these two Cases only that this language is useful to them.

They write the Siamese and Balie from the left hand to the right, The Balie
and Siamese Languages compared with the Chinese.
after the same manner as we write our Languages of Europe: in which they
differ from most of the other Asiatics, who have ever wrote from the right to
the left; and from the Chinese also, who draw the line from the top to the
bottom; and who in the ranging of the lines in one Page, do put the first on
the right hand, and the others successively toward the left. They are
different also from the Chinese, in that they have not like them a Character
for every word, or even for every signification of a single word; to the end
that the writing may have no Equivocations like the Language. The Siamese and
Balie Tongues have, like ours, an Alphabet of few letters, of which are
composed syllables and words. Moreover, the Siamese Language participates
greatly of the Chinese, in that it has a great deal of Accent, (for their Voice
frequently rises above one fourth) and in that it consists almost all of
Monosyllables: so that it may be presumed, that if one perfectly understood it,
one should find that the few words which it has of several syllables, are
either foreign, or composed of Monosyllables, some of which are used only in
these Compositions.

But the most remarkable Similitude that is between these two Languages, The
Siamese and Chinese Languages have no Declensions of words, the Balie has.
and which is not found in the Balie, is that neither the one nor the other
have any Declension or Conjugation, nor perhaps Derivations, which the Balie
has. As for Example, the word which signifies Content, may likewise signify
Contentment; and that which signifies Good, will signify Well, and Bounty,
according to the various ways of using them. The placing alone denotes the
Cases in Nouns, and herein their disposition is hardly different from ours. And
as to the Conjugations, the Siameses have only four or five small Particles,
which they put sometimes before the Verb, and sometimes after, to signify the
Numbers, Tenses, and Moods thereof. I will insert them at the end of this
Volume, with the Siamese and Balie Alphabets; and it is in this that their
whole Grammar almost consists.

Their Dictionary is not less simple: I mean, The Siamese Language not copious,
but very figurative.
that their Language is not copious; but the turn of their Phrase is only more
various, and more difficult. In cold Countries, where the Imagination is cold,
every thing is called by its Name; and they do there abound as much or more in
words, than in things: And when one has fixed all these words in his memory, he
may promise himself to speak well. It is not the same in hot Countries, few
words do there suffice to express much, by reason that the briskness of the
Imagination employs them in an hundred different ways, all figurative. Take two
or three Examples of the methods of speaking Siamese. Good Heart signifies
Content, thus to say, If I was at Siam, I should be content; they said, If I
were City Siam, me heart good much. Sii signifies Light, and by a Metaphor
Beauty; and by a second Metaphor, this word Sii being joined with Pak, which
signifies Mouth; Sii-pak, signifies the Lips; as if one should say, The Light,
or Beauty of the Mouth. Thus, The Glory of the Wood, signifies a Flower; the
Son of the Water implies in general, whatever is ingender'd in the Water
without it be Fish; as Crocodiles, and all sorts of aquatic Insects. And on
other occasions, the word Son will only denote Smalness, as the Sons of the
Weights, to signify small Weights, contrary to the word Mother, which in
certain things they make use of to signify Greatness. In short, I have not
seen any words in this Language that have resemblance to ours, excepting those
of po and me, which signify Father and Mother, in Chinese fu, mu.

Arithmetic.
I proceed to Arithmetic, which after Reading and Writing, is the principal
Study of the Siameses. Their Arithmetic, like ours, has ten Characters, with
which they figure the Naught like us, and to which they give the same Powers as
we, in the same disposition, placing, like us, from the Right to the Left,
Unites, Tens, Hundreds, Thousands, and all the other Powers of the Number Ten.
The Indian Merchants are so well versed in casting Account, and their
Imagination is so clear thereupon, that it is said they can presently resolve
very difficult Questions of Arithmetic; but I suppose likewise that they do
never resolve what they cannot resolve immediately. They love not to trouble
their heads, and they have no use of Algebra.

An Instrument which serves the Chinese for an Abacus, or Compting Table.
The Siameses do always calculate with a Pen; but the Chinese make use of an
Instrument which resembles the Abacus, and which F. Martinius, in his History
of China, intimates, that they invented about 2600 or 2700 years before Jesus
Christ. However it be, Pignorius, in his Book de Servis, informs us, that this
Instrument was familiar to the ancient Roman Slaves that were appointed to cast
Account. I give the Description and Figure thereof at the end of this Work.

The Siameses not proper for Studies of Application.
The Studies to which we apply our selves in our Colleges, are almost
absolutely unknown to the Siameses; and it may be doubted whether they are fit
for such. The essential Character of the People of Countries extremely hot, or
extremely cold, is sluggishness of Mind and Body; with this difference, that it
degenerates into Stupidity in Countries too cold, and that in Countries too
hot, there is always Spirit and Imagination; but of that sort of Imagination
and Spirit, which soon flaggs with the least Application.

They have Imagination and Laziness.
The Siameses do conceive easily and clearly, their Repartees are witty and
quick, their Objections are rational. They imitate immediately, and from the
first day they are tolerable good Workmen: so that one would think a little
Study would render them very accomplished, either in the highest Sciences, or in
the most difficult Arts; but their invincible Laziness suddenly destroys these
hopes. It is no wonder therefore if they invent nothing in the Sciences which
they love best, as Chemistry and Astronomy.

They are naturally Poets, and their Poetry is Rhyme.
I have already said that they are naturally Poets. Their Poetry, like ours; and
that which is now used throughout the known World, consists in the number of
Syllables, and in Rhyme. Some do attribute the Invention thereof to the
Arabians, by reason it seems to have been they that have carried it every
where. The Relations of China report, that the Chinese Poetry at present is in
Rhyme; but though they speak of their ancient Poetry, of which they still have
several Works, they declare not of what nature it was, because, in my opinion,
They read the ancient Characters in the present Language.
it is difficult to judge thereof: for though the Chinese have preserved the
sense of their ancient Writing, they have not preserved their ancient Language.
However, I can hardly comprehend from a Language wholly consisting of
Monosyllables, and full of accented Vowels, and compounded Dipthongs, that if
the Poetry consists not in Rhyme, it can consist in Quantity, as did the Greek
and Latin Poems.

Their Genius in Poetry.
I could not get a Siamese Song well translated, so different is their way of
thinking from ours; yet I have seen some Pictures, as for Example, of a
pleasant Garden, where a Lover invites his Mistress to come. I have also seen
some Expressions, which to me appeared full of Smootiness, and gross Immodesty;
although this had not the same Effect in their Language. But besides Love-Songs,
they have likewise some Historical and Moral Songs altogether: I have heard the
Pagayeurs sing some, of which they made me to understand the sense. The Lacone
which I have mentioned, is no other than a Moral and Historical Song; and some
have told me, that one of the Brothers of the King of Siam composed some Moral
Poems very highly esteemed, to which he himself set the Tune.

They are no Orators.
But if the Siameses are born Poets, they neither are born, nor do become
Orators. Their Books are either Narrations of a plain Style, or some Sentences
of a broken Style full of Idea's. They have no Advocates: the Parties do each
declare their Cause to the Register, who, without any Rhetoric, writes down the
Facts and Reasons which are told him. When they preach, they read the Balie
Text of their Books, and they translate and expound it plainly in Siamese,
without any Action, like our Professors, and not our Preachers.

They know how to speak to a Business, Their Compliments always the same.
and do therein manage themselves with a great deal of Insinuation; but as for
their Compliments, they are all after one Model, which is indeed very good; but
which is the reason that in the same Ceremonies they do always speak almost the
same things. The King of Siam himself has his words almost counted in his
Audiences of Ceremony; and he spoke to the King's Ambassadors almost the same
that he had delivered to Mr. de Chaumont, and before him to the late Bishop of
Heliopolis.

I have not forgot that excellent Speech which the Ambassador of Siam made to
the King at his Audience of Leave, The last Speech which the Ambassador of Siam
made in France.
and which alone might cause a Belief that the Siameses are great Orators; if
we could judge of the merit of the Original, by that of the Translation: But
this is difficult, especially in two Languages, which have so little similitude
one to the other. All that we ought to think thereof, is, that the main of the
Design and Thought is the Siamese Ambassador's; and I wonder not that he has
admired the excellent Mien, the Majestic Air, the Power, the Affability, and
all the extraordinary qualities of the King. They ought to amaze him more than
another, because that these Virtues are absolutely unknown in the East; and if
he had dared to declare the Truth, he would have confessed that the Flattery
natural to those of his Country, had made him all his life to extol those very
things where they were not, and that he saw the first Example thereof in the
King. When the Mandarins came on Board our Ship to carry the first Compliment
of the King of Siam to the King's Ambassadors, they took Leave of them, by
testifying unto them that they demanded it unwillingly, and out of an
indispensible necessity of going to satisfy the Impatience of the King their
Master, about the things which they had to relate unto him: A Thought natural
and good, on which runs the whole beginning of the Ambassador's Speech of
Leave. And as to that excellent place where he ends, that their Relation of him
and his Colleagues would be put into the Archives of the Kingdom of Siam; and
that the King their Master would do him an Honor to send him to the Princes
his Allies, he was in this a less Orator, than Historian. He rendered an
account of a Practice of his Country, which is not omitted in great occasions,
and which is in use in other Kingdoms. One Example there is in Osorius, in the
8th Book of his History of Emanuel King of Portugal, where he relates how
Alphonsus, the 2d Christian King of Congo, inserted into his Argives the
History of his Conversion, and that of another famous Embassy which he had
received from Emanuel, and how he imparted it to all the Princes his Vassals.
We may therefore be assured, that the Siameses are not Orators, and that they
never have need to be such. Their Custom is not to make either Speech or
Compliment to the Princes to whom they send them, but to answer the things
about which these Princes interrogate them. They made a Speech at this Court,
to accommodate themselves to our Customs, and to enjoy an Honor they highly
valued; which was, to speak to the King, before his Majesty spoke to them. This
is all we can say of their Poetry, and their Rhetoric.

They absolutely ignore all the parts of Philosophy, They have a Moral
Philosophy, and no Theology.
except some Principles of Morality, where, as we shall see in discoursing of
the Talapoins, they have intermixed Truth with Falsehood. I will at the same time
also demonstrate, that they have not any sort of Theology, and that we might
perhaps justify them about the worshipping of the false Deities whereof they
are accused, by an Impiety more culpable, which is not to acknowledge any
Divinity neither true nor false.

They study not the Civil Law: How they study their Laws.
They learn the Laws of their Country only in Employments. They are not Public,
as I have said, for want of Printing; but when they enter into any Office, they
put into their hands a Copy of the Laws which concern it: And the same thing is
practiced in Spain, though the Laws be there in the hands of all persons, and
that there are public Schools, to teach them. As for example, in the
Provisions of a Corregidor they will insert the whole Title of the Corregidors,
which is in the compiling of their Ordinances and Decrees. I have likewise seen
some example of this in France.

CHAP. X. What the Siameses do know in Medicine and Chemistry.
The King of Siam has his Physicians from diverse Countries.
MEdicine cannot merit the name of a Science amongst the Siameses. The King of
Siam's principal Physicians are Chinese; and he has also some Siameses and
Peguins: and within two or three years he has admitted into this quality Mr.
Paumart, one of the French Secular Missionaries, on whom he relies more than on
all his other Physicians. The others are obliged to report daily unto him the
state of this Prince's health, and to receive from his hand the Remedies which
he prepares for him.

They understand not Chyrurgery nor Anatomy.
Their chief Ignorance is to know nothing in Chyrurgery, and to stand in need of
the Europeans, not only for Trapans, and for all the other difficult Operations
of Chyrurgery, but for simple Blood-lettings. They are utterly ignorant of
Anatomy: and so far from having excited their Curiosity, to discover either the
Circulation of the Blood, or all the new things, that we know touching the
structure of the body of Animals, that they open not the dead bodies, till
after having roasted them in their Funeral solemnities, under pretense of
burning them; and they open them only to seek wherewith to abuse the
superstitious credulity of the people. For example, they allege that they
sometimes find in the Stomach of the dead, great pieces of fresh Pig's flesh,
or of some other Animal, about eight or ten pound in weight: and they suppose
that it has been put therein by some Divination, and that it is good to perform
others.

They have not any principle, but Receipts.
They trouble not themselves to have any principle of Medicine, but only a
number of Receipts, which they have learnt from their Ancestors, and in which
they never alter any thing. They have no regard to the particular symptoms of
diseases: and yet they fail not to cure a great many; because that the natural
Temperance of the Siameses preserves them from a great many evils difficult to
cure. But when at last it happens that the Distemper is stronger than the
Remedies, they fail not to attribute the cause thereof to Enchantment.

The Chinese Physicians are great Mountebanks.
The King of Siam understanding one day that I was somewhat indisposed, tho it
was so little, that I kept not my Chamber, he had the goodness to send all his
Physicians to me. The Chinese offered some Civility to the Siameses and
Peguins: and then they made me sit, and sat down themselves: and after having
demanded silence, for the company was numerous, they felt my pulse one after
the other a long time, to make me suspect that it was not only a grimace. I had
read that at China there is no School for Physicians, and that one is there
admitted to exercise the profession thereof, at most by a flight examination
made by a Magistrate of Justice, and not by Doctors in Physic. And I knew
moreover, that the Indians are great Cheats, and the Chinese much greater: so
that I had thoroughly resolved to get rid of these Doctors without making any
experience of their Remedies. After having felt my pulse, they said that I was
a little feverish, but discerned it not at all: they added that my Stomach was
out of order, and I perceived it not, save that my voice was a little weak. The
next morning the Chinese returned alone to present me a small Potion warm, in
a China Cup covered and very neat. The smell of the remedy pleased me, and made
me to drink it, and I found my self neither better nor worse.

The difference of the Chinese Mountebanks from ours*
It Is well known that there are Mountebanks every where, and that every Man who
will boldly promise Health, Pleasures, Riches, Honors, and the knowledge of
Futurities, will always find Fools. But the difference that there is between
the Mountebanks of China and the Quacks of Europe on the account of Medicine,
is that the Chinese do abuse the sick by pleasant and enticing Remedies, and
that the Europeans do give us Drugs, which the humane Body seeks to get rid off
by all manner of means: so that we are inclined to believe that they would not
thus torment a sick person, if it was not certainly very necessary.

When any person is sick at Siam, What Remedies are used at Siam*
he begins with causing his whole body to be molded by one that is skilful
herein, who gets upon the Body of the sick person, and tramples him under his
feet. It Is likewise reported that great bellied women do thus cause themselves
to be trodden under foot by a Child, to procure themselves to be delivered with
less pain: for in hot Countries, though their Deliveries seem to be more easy
by the natural Conformation of the women, yet they are very painful, by reason
perhaps that they are preceded with less Evacuation.

Anciently the Indians applied no other Remedy to plenitude, than an Excessive
diet; and this is still the principal subtilty of the Chinese in Medicine. The
Chinese do now make use of Blood-letting, provided they may have an European
Chyrurgion: and sometimes instead of Blood-letting they do use Cupping-glasses,
Scarifications and Leeches.

They have some Purgatives which we make use of, and others which are peculiar
to them; but they know not the Hellebore, so familiar to the Ancient Greek
Physicians. Moreover they observe not any time in purging, and know not what
the Crisis is: though they understand the benefit of Sweats in distempers, and
do highly applaud the use of Sudorificks.

In their Remedies they do use Minerals and Simples, and the Europeans have
made known the Quinquina unto them. In general all their Remedies are very hot;
and they use not any inward Refreshment: but they bath themselves in Fevers,
and in all sorts of diseases. It seems that whatever concenters or augments the
natural heat, is beneficial to them.

Their sick do nourish themselves only with boiled Rice, The Diet of the sick
Siameses.
which they do make extremely liquid: the Portuguese of the Indies do call it
cange. Meat-Broths are mortal at Siam, because they too much relax the Stomach:
and when their Patients are in a condition to eat any thing solid, they give
them Pigs flesh preferable to any other.

They do not understand Chemistry, although they passionately affect it; Their
Ignorance in Chemistry, and their Fables about this matter.
and that several amongst them do boast of possessing the most profound secrets
thereof. Siam, like all the rest of the East, is full of two sorts of persons
upon this account, Impostors and Fools. The late King of Siam, the Father of
the present Prince, spent two Millions, a great sum for his Country, in the
vain research of the Philosophers Stone: and the Chinese, reputed so wise,
have for three or four thousand years had the folly of seeking out an Universal
Remedy, by which they hope to exempt themselves from the necessity of dying.
And as amongst us there are some foolish Traditions concerning some rare
persons that are reported to have made Gold, or to have lived some Ages; there
are some very strongly established amongst the Chinese, the Siameses, and the
other Orientals, concerning those that know how to render themselves immortal,
either absolutely, or in such a manner, that they can die no otherwise than of
a violent death. Wherefore it is supposed, that some have withdrawn themselves
from the sight of men, either to enjoy a free and peaceable Immortality, or to
secure themselves from all foreign force, which might deprive them of their
life, which no distemper could do. They relate wonders concerning the knowledge
of these pretended Immortals, and it is no matter of astonishment that they
think themselves capable of forcing Nature in several things, since they
imagine that they have had the Art of freeing themselves from Death.

CHAP. XI. What the Siameses do know of the Mathematics.
The great Heat of Siam, repugnant to all application of Mind.
THE quick and clear Imagination of the Siameses should seem more proper for the
Mathematics, than the other Studies, if it did not soon weary them; but they
cannot follow a long thread of Ratiocinations, of which they do foresee neither
the end nor the profit. And it must be confessed for their Excuse, that all
application of Mind is so laborious in a Climate so hot as theirs, that the
very Europeans could hardly study there, what desire soever they might have
thereunto.

The Ignorance of the Siameses touching the principal parts of Mathematics.
The Siameses do therefore know nothing in Geometry or Mechanics, because they
can be absolutely without them: And Astronomy concerns them only as far as they
conceive it may be assistant to Divination. They know only some Practical part
thereof, the Reasons of which they disdain to penetrate; but of which they make
use in the Horoscopes of particular Persons, and in the Composition of their
Almanac, which, as it were, is a general Horoscope.

Of the Siamese Calendar, and why they have two Epocha's.
It appears that they have twice caused their Calendar to be reformed by able
Astronomers, who, to supply the Astronomical Tables, have taken two arbitrary
Epocha's, but yet remarkable for some rare Conjunction of the Planets. Having
once established certain Numbers upon these Observations, they by the means of
several Additions, Substractions, Multiplications and Divisions, have given for
the following Years the secret of finding the place of the Planets, almost as
we find the Epact of every Year, by adding eleven to the Epact of the Year
foregoing.

The most Modern is evidently Arbitrary.
The most Modern of the two Siamese Epocha's, is referred to the Year of Grace
638. I gave to Mr. Cassini, Director of the Observatory at Paris, the Siamese
Method of finding the place of the Sun and Moon by a Calculation, the ground of
which is taken from this Epoch. And the singular Merit which Mr. Cassini has
had of unfolding a thing so difficult, and penetrating the Reasons thereof,
will doubtless be admired by all the Learned. Now as this Epoch is visibly the
ground only of an Astronomical Calculation, and has been chosen rather than
another, only because it appeared more commodious to Calculation than another,
it is evident that we must thence conclude nothing which respects the Siamese
History; nor imagine that the Year 638, has been more Famous amongst them than
another for any Event, from which they have thought fit to begin to compute
their Years, as we compute ours, from the Birth of the Savior of the World.

The most Ancient also appears Arbitrary.
By the same Reason I am persuaded, that their most Ancient Epoch, from which
in this Year 1689, they compute 2233 Years, has not been remarkable at Siam for
any thing worthy of Memory, and that it proves not that the Kingdom of Siam is
of that Antiquity. It is purely Astronomical, and serves as a Foundation to
another way of calculating the places of the Planets, which they have
relinquished for that new Method which I have given to Mr. Cassini. Some person
may discover to them the Mistakes, where in process of time this ancient Method
must fall; as in time we have found out the Errors of the Reformation of the
Calendar made by the Order of Julius Caesar.

And is not taken from the death of Sommona-Codom.
The Historical Memoirs of the Siameses re-ascending, as I have remarked in the
beginning, to 900 Years, or thereabouts, it is not necessary to seek the
Foundation of their Kingdom in the 545th Year before the Birth of Jesus Christ;
nor to suppose that from this time they have enjoyed a Succession of Kings,
which they themselves are absolutely ignorant of. And though the Siameses do
vulgarly report, that this first Epoch, from which they compute, as I have
said, 2233 Years, is that of the death of their Sommona-Codom; and although it
refers almost to the time in which Pythagoras lived, who has sowed in the West
the Doctrine of the Metempsychosis, which he had learnt from the Egyptians, yet
it is certain that the Siameses have not any Memoirs of the time in which their
Sommona-Codom might have lived: And I cannot persuade my self that their
Sommona-Codom could be Pythagoras, who was not in the East, nor that their
ancient Epoch is other than Astronomical and Arbitrary, no more than their
Modern Epoch.

But if the Siameses do still make use thereof in their Dates, The Variety of
Style in their Dates.
after having relinquished it in their Astronomical Calculations, it is because
that in things of Style they do not easily alter the Usages unto which they are
accustomed; and yet they cease not to date sometimes with respect to that
modern Epoch which they have taken, as I have said, from the Year of our Lord
638. But their first Month is always the Moon of November or December, in which
they depart not from the ancient Style, even then when they date the Year
according to their new Style; though the first Month of the Year, according to
this new Style, be the fifth or sixth of the old Style.

This, in few words, is the whole Skill of the Siameses in Astronomy. What the
Siameses do think of the System of the World.
Moreover, they understand nothing of the true System of the World, because
they know nothing by Reason. They believe therefore, like all the East, that
the Eclipses are caused by some Dragon, which devours the Sun and Moon (perhaps
by reason of the Astronomer's metaphorical way of speaking, that the Eclipses
are made in the Head and Tail of the Dragon:) And they make a great noise, with
Fire-shovels and Kettles, to scare and drive away this pernicious Animal, and
to deliver those beauteous Planets. They believe the Earth Apiece, and of
vast Extent, on which the Arch of Heaven rests at its extremities, as if it was
one of our Glass-Bells with which we cover some of our Plants in our Gardens.
They assert, that the Earth is divided into four habitable parts of the World,
so separated one from the other by Seas, that they are, as it were, four
different Worlds. In the middle of these four Worlds, they suppose an exceeding
high Pyramidal Mountain with four equal sides, called, Caou pra Soumene (Caou
signifies, a Mountain, and to Mount;) and from the Surface of the Earth, or the
Sea, to the top of this Mountain, which, as they say, touches the Stars, they
compute 84000 Iods, and every Iod contains about 8000 Fathoms. They reckon as
many Iods from the Surface of the Sea to the Foundations of the Mountain; and
they likewise reckon 84000 Iods extent of Sea from each of the four sides of
this Mountain to every of the four Worlds which I have mentioned. Now our
World, which they call Tchiampion, lies, as they report, to the South of this
Mountain, and the Sun, Moon and Stars do incessantly turn round it; and it is
that, which according to them, makes the Day and Night. At the top of this
Mountain is a Heaven, which they call Intratiracha, which is surmounted by the
Heaven of Angels. This Sample, which is all I know thereof, will suffice to
demonstrate their Grossness; and if it does not exactly accord to what others
have writ before me concerning this matter, we must not more admire the variety
of the Siamese Opinions in a thing they understand not, than the contrariety of
our Systems in Astronomy, which we pretend to understand.

The extreme Superstition of the Indians is therefore a very natural
Consequence of their profound Ignorance; but for their Excuse, some People, The
Indians are Superstitious proportionably to their extreme Ignorance.
more illuminated than them, have not been less Superstitious. Have not the
Greeks, and after them the Romans, believed in Judiciary Astrology, Augurs,
Presages, and all sorts of Arts invented under pretense of Divining and
Predicting? They thought that it was the goodness of the Gods, to bestow on Men
some Succors to penetrate Futurities; and the words Divination and Divine are
the same word in their Origin, because that according to the ancient Pagans,
the Art of Divining was only an Art to consult the Deities. The Siameses are
also of opinion, that there is an Art of Prophesying, as there is one of
restoring Health to the Sick: And when the King of Siam's Soothsayers are
mistaken, he causes them to be bastinado'd, not as Impostors, but as negligent
persons; as he commands his Physicians to be cudgelled, when the Remedies they
give him, perform not the Effect which is thereby promised.

The Authority of Soothsayers over the Siameses.
This Prince, no more than his Subjects, undertakes no Affair, nor Expedition,
till his Diviners, which are all Brames or Peguins, have fixed him an hour
prosperously to set upon it. He stirs not out of his House, or if he be gone,
he enters not again, so long as his Diviners prohibit him. Sunday seems to him
more lucky than the other days, because that in his Tongue he has preserved the
name of the Sun's-day. He believes the Increase of the Moon more lucky than the
Decrease; and besides this, the Almanac which he causes Annually to be made by
a Brame Astrologer, denotes to him and his Subjects, the lucky or unlucky days
for most of the things they used to do: A Folly which is perhaps too much
tolerated amongst the Christians, witness the Almanac of Milan, to which so
many persons do now give such a blind Belief.

And Presages.
The Siameses do take the Howlings of wild Beasts, and the Cries of Stags and
Apes, for an ill Omen; as several persons amongst us are frightened with the
Barking of the Dogs in the Night. A Serpent which crosses the way, the
Thunderbolt which falls on a House, any thing that falls as it were of itself,
and without any apparent Cause, are Subjects of dread to the Siameses, and the
reasons of laying aside or setting upon an Affair, how important and pressing
soever it be. One of the ways they make use of to foretell things to come, and
which is common to all the Orientals, is to perform some superstitious
Ceremonies, then to go into the City, and to take for an Oracle about what they
desire to know, the first words which they hear accidentally spoken in the
Streets, or in the Houses. I could learn no more thereof, by reason that the
Christian Interpreters, which I made use of, looked upon these things with
Horror, as Witchcraft and Compacts with the Demon, although it be very possible
that they are only Fooleries full of Credulity and Ignorance. The ancient
Francs, by a like Superstition, consulted in their Wars the first words which
they heard sung in the Church, at their entering thereinto. At this very day
several persons have a Superstitious Belief in certain Herbs which they gather
the Evening of St. John, from whence is risen this Proverb, To use or employ
all the Herbs of St. John, that is, the utmost skill in an Affair: And amongst
the Italians, there are some, who, after having washed their Feet in Wine on
St. John's Eve, do throw the Wine out at Window, and so stand afterward to
hear those that pass along the Street, taking for a certain Augury on what they
desire to know, the first word they hear spoken.

The Indians accused of Sorcery, and why.
But that which has raised the Reputation of great Sorcerers amongst the
Indians, is principally the continual Conjurations which they use to drive away
the evil Spirits with, and attract the good. They pretend to have some
Talismans, or Characters which they call Cata, to accomplish whatever they
please; as to kill, or to render invulnerable; and to impose Silence on Persons
and Dogs, when they would commit a wicked Action, and not be discovered. If
they prepare a Medicine, they will fasten to the brim of the Vessel several
Papers, wherein they will write some mysterious words, to hinder the
Petpayatons from carrying away the virtue of the Remedy with the steem. These
Petpayatons are in their Opinion some Spirits diffused in the Air, of whom they
believe, amongst other things, that they do first enjoy all the Maidens; and
that they do them that pretended hurt, which is renewed every Month. In a Storm
at Sea, they will fasten to all the Tackle such like written Papers, which they
believe proper to assuage the Winds.

Superstitions for Women in Childbed.
The superstitions which they use toward Women in Childbed, appear not less
ridiculous, although they be founded perhaps on some benefit for health. They
believe that Women in Childbed have need of being purified: whether that the
Jews, spread throughout the Earth, have sowed this Tradition amongst several
Nations, or that the people of hot Countries are more easily prejudiced than
those of cold Countries with the natural impurities of Women. The Siameses keep
the Women in Childbed before a continual and great fire for a month, where
they turn them sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other. The smoke does
greatly incommode them, and passes slowly through an Aperture, which they make
in the roof of their houses. The Peguins do put their Wives on a kind of
Bambou-grate, very nigh, with fire underneath; but they keep them thus no more
than four or five days. At the up-rising, the one and the other return thanks
to the Fire for having purified their Wives; and in the Entertainment which
they give on this occasion to their Friends, they eat nothing which they have
not first offered to the Fire, leaving it some time near it. During the whole
time of lying in Childbed, the Women neither eat nor drink any thing that is
not hot: and I understand that our Midwives. forbid their Women also to drink
any thing cold.

But the most speedy and most sensible effects of the pretended Divinations of
the Indians are in the use of certain Philtres, which are only natural drinks.
Philtres looked upon as the effect of Magic.
The Indies do produce some Simples, the kinds, force, or use of which we
understand not. The Amorous Philtres, or Love-potions, are those which
debilitate the Imagination, and make a Man to become a Child; so that after
this it is easy to govern him. My domestics assured me that they had seen a
man at Batavia, of whom it was reported that his wife had rendered him
senseless after this manner. Other drinks do cause other effects. The Relations
are full of those which the women of Goa frequently give their Husbands; and
which render them so stupid for 24 hours, that they can then be unfaithful to
them in their presence. Opium, or the quintessence of Poppies, causes such
different effects, that it procures sleep, or watchfulness, as it is variously
prepared. The Indians going to Battle, do take thereof to inspire them with
courage, or rather with fury. They then run headlong upon the Enemy like wild
Boars: It is dangerous to attend them, but one may avoid them by turning out of
the way, for they go forwards. Moreover, the effect of Opium lasts only some
hours, after which they relapse not only into their natural cowardice, but into
a faintness, which leaves them but little action for their defense. And such
were those Macassers, which had conspired against the King of Siam, some months
before the Kings Ambassadors arrived there.

The Siameses have likewise some Distempers, Distempers considered as the
Effects of Magic.
the symptoms of which are sometimes so strange, that they think the cause
thereof can be attributed only to Witchcraft. But besides these extraordinary
cases, their Physicians do almost continually accuse the greater Energy of the
Spirits, with the inefficaciousness of their Remedies; and they do herein play
such subtle juggling tricks, or rather they deal with persons so credulous,
that whilst we were at Siam, they made a sick man believe, that he had voided a
Deers skin with a Medicine, and that he must have swallowed this Deers skin by
a Magical effect, and without perceiving it. This is what I judged necessary to
relate concerning the Siameses Superstitions, of which every one may judge as
he pleases: for if on the one hand I have seen nothing which obliges me to
accuse them of Sorcery, on the other hand I am not concerned to justify them
entirely.

But before we quit this subject I will here add one thing, Superstition or
Vanity touching the walls of Cities.
which may be attributed at your pleasure, to Superstition or Vanity: One day
when the King's Ambassadors were saluted by the real or supposed Ambassadors,
from Patana, Camboya, and some other neighboring Courts, the Ambassadors of
some of the several Nations which are at Siam, were also at this Visit: and
among the rest there were two, who said that the City of their Origin, the
name of which I have forgot, remained no more: but that it had been so
considerable, that it was impossible to go round it in three Months. I smiled
thereat as at a groundless folly: and in a few days after Mr. de la Mare the
Ingineer, whom Mr. de Chaumont had left at Siam, informed me, that when by the
King of Siam's order he had been at Ligor to take the draught thereof, the
Governor would not permit him to go round it under two days, though he could
have done it in less than an hour. Let us proceed to the study of the last part
of the Mathematics.

CHAP. XII. Concerning Music, and the Exercises of the Body.
The Siameses have no Art in Singing.
Music is not better understood at Siam, than Geometry and Astronomy. They make
Airs by Fancy, and know not how to prick them by Notes. They have neither
Cadence, nor quaver no more than the Castilians: but they sometimes sing like
us without words, which the Castilians think very strange; and in the stead of
words, they only say noi, noi, as we do say lan-la-lari. I have not remarked
one single Air, whose measure was triple, whereas those are without comparison
the most familiar to the Spaniards. The King of Siam, without showing himself,
heard several Airs of our Opera on the Violin, and it was told us that he did
not think them of a movement grave enough: Nevertheless the Siameses have
nothing very grave in their Songs; and whatever they play on their Instruments,
even in their Kings march, is very brisk.

They have not several parts in their Consorts.
They understand not more than the Chinese the diversity of Parts in
composition; they understand not the Variety of the Parts; they do all sing
Unisons. Their Instruments are not well chose, and it must be thought that
those, wherein there appears any knowledge of Music, have them brought from
other parts.

Their Instruments: the Rebeck, Hoboy, Basins.
They have very ugly little Rebecks or Violins with three strings, which they
call Tro, and some very shrill Hoboys which they call Pi, and the Spaniards
Chirimias. They play not ill, and accompany them with the noise of certain
copper Basins, on each of which a man strikes a blow with a short stick, at
certain times The Ear guides them, no person beating the Time.
in each measure. These Basins are hung up by a string, each has a Pole laid
across upon two upright Forks: the one is called Schoungschang, and it is
thinner, broader, and of a graver sound than the other, which they call Cong.

The Tlounpounpan.
To this they add two sorts of Drum, the Tlounpounpan, and the Tapon. The wood
of the Tlounpounpan is about the size of our Timbrels, but it is covered with
skin on both sides like a true Drum, and on each side of the wood hangs a
leaden ball to a string. Besides this the wood of the Tlounpounpan is run
through with a stick which serves as a handle, by which it is held. They roll
it between their hands like a Chocolate-stick, only that the Chocolate stick is
held inverted, and the Tlounpounpan strait: and by this motion which I have
described, the Leaden Balls which hang down from each side of the Tlounpounpan,
do strike on each side upon the two Skins.

The Tapon.
The Tapon resembles a Barrel; they carry it before them, hung to the Neck by a
Rope; and they beat it on the two Skins with each fist.

They have another Instrument composed of......., which they call Pat-cong.
The...... are all placed successively every one on a short stick, and planted
perpendicular on a demi-circumference of Wood, like to the felleys of a little
Wheel of a Coach. He that plays on this Instrument is seated at the center
cross-legg'd; and he strikes the....... with two sticks, one of which he holds
in his right hand, and the other in his left. To me it seems that this
Instrument had only a fifth redoubled in extent, but certainly there was not
any half notes, nor any thing to stop the sound of one......., when another was
struck.

The Consort which follows the King in his Marches.
The March which they sounded at the entrance of the Kings Ambassadors, was a
confused noise with all these Instruments together: The like is sounded in
attending on the King of Siam; and this noise, as fantastical and odd as it is,
has nothing unpleasant, especially on the River.

Instruments accompanying the Voice.
They sometimes accompany the Voice with two short sticks, which they call Crab,
and which they strike one against the other; and he that sings thus, is styled
Tchang cap. They hire him at Weddings with several of those Instruments I have
mentioned. The people do also accompany the Voice in the Evening into the
Courts of the Houses, with a kind of Drum called Tongue. They hold it with the
Left hand, and strike it continually with the Right hand. It Is an earthen
Bottle without a bottom, and which instead thereof is covered with a Skin tied
to the Neck with Ropes.

The Siameses do extremely love our Trumpets, theirs are small and harsh,
Trumpets and Drums.
they call them Tree; and besides this they have true Drums, which they call
Clong. But though their Drums be lesser than ours, they carry them not hanging
upon their Shoulder: They set them upon one of the Skins, and they beat them on
the other, themselves sitting cross-leg'd before their Drums. They do also make
use of this sort of Drum to accompany the Voice, but they seldom sing with
these Drums but to dance.

On the day of the first Audience of the King's Ambassadors, They have false
ones to make a show.
there were in the innermost Court of the Palace an hundred Men lying
prostrate, some holding for show those ugly little Trumpets which they sounded
not, and which I suspect to be of wood, and the others having before them every
one a little Drum without beating it.

By all that I have said, The Exercises of the Body.
it appears that in some cases the Mathematics are as much neglected at Siam,
as the other Sciences. They have Exercises of the Body in no more Esteem than
those of the Mind. They know not what the Art of Riding the Great Horse is:
Arms they have none, except the King gives them some; and they cannot purchase
any, till he has given them some. They exercise them only by the Order of this
Prince. They never fire the Musket standing, no not in War: To discharge it,
they place one Knee on the ground, and frequently proceed to sit on their Heel,
stretching forward the other Leg, which they have not bent. They hardly know to
march, or keep themselves on their Feet with a good grace. They never stretch
out their Hams well, because they are accustomed to keep them bended. The
French taught them how to stand to their Arms, and till the arrival of the
King's Ships at Siam, their Sentinels themselves sat upon the ground. So far
are they from running Races, purely for Recreation sake, that they never walk
abroad. The heat of the Climate causes a great Consumption in them. Wrestling,
and Fisty-cuffs, are the Jugler's Trade. The running of Balons is therefore
their sole Exercise. The Oar and Pagaye are in this Country the Trade of all
the People from four or five years old. They can Row three days and three
nights almost without resting, although they cannot undergo any other Work.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Arts exercised by the Siameses.
THey have no Companies of Trades, They are bad Artificers, and why.
and the Arts flourish not amongst them, not only by reason of their natural
sluggishness, but much more by reason of the Government under which they live.
There being no security for the wealth of particular persons, but to conceal it
well every one there continues in so great a simplicity, that most of the Arts
are not necessary to them, and that the Workmen cannot meet with the just value
of the Works on which they would bestow a great deal of Expense and Labor.
Moreover, as every particular Person does Annually owe six Months service to
the King, and that frequently he is not discharged for six Months, there is no
Person in this Country that dares to distinguish himself in any Art, for fear
of being forced to work gratis all his life for the service of this Prince. And
because that they are indifferently employed in these Works, every one applies
himself to know how to do a little of all, to avoid the Bastinados; but none
would do too well, because that Servitude is the reward of Ingenuity. They
neither know, nor desire to know how to do otherwise, than what they have
always done. It Is no matter to them to have 500 Workmen, for several Months,
upon what a few Europeans, well paid, would finish in a few days. If any
Stranger gives them any direction, or any Machine, they forget it so soon as
their Prince forgets it. Wherefore no European offers his service to an Indian
Prince, who is not received, as I may say, with open Arms. How little Merit
soever he may have, he always has more than the natural Indians; and not only
for the Mechanic Arts, but for the Sea, and for Commerce, to which they are
much more affected. The Inconvenience is, that the Indian Kings do well know
the Secret, either of enriching a Stranger only with hopes, or of detaining him
amongst them if they have really enriched him. Nothing is so magnificent as the
Grants which the great Mogul gives: But is there found one European that has
carried away much wealth out of his Service?

What Arts they exercise.
To return to the Industry of the Siameses, the Arts which they understand are
these. They are reasonable good Joyners, and because they have no Nails, they
very well understand how to fasten pieces together. They pretend to Sculpture,
but grossly perform it. The Statues of their Temples are very ill made. They
know how to burn Brick, and make excellent Ciments, and are not unskilled in
Masonry. Nevertheless their Brick Buildings do not last, for want of
Foundations: they do not make any, even in their Fortifications. They have no
melted Crystal, nor Glass; and it is one of the things they most esteem. The
King of Siam was extremely pleased with those Fosset-cut Glasses, which
multiply an Object; and he demanded entire Windows with the same property.

The Windows of the Chinese.
The Windows of the Chinese are composed with Threads of Glass as big as Straws,
laid one by another, and glued at the ends to Paper, as we solder the Quarries
of Glass into our Window-frames. They do frequently put some Paintings on these
sorts of Glasses, and with these Glasses thus painted, they sometimes make
Pannels of Screens, behind which they love to set some lights, because they
extremely admire the Fancy of Illuminations.

How the Siameses do use Metals.
The Siameses do know to melt Metals, and cast some Works in Molds. They do
cover their Idols, which are sometimes enormous masses of Brick and Lime, with
a very thin Plate either of Gold or Silver, or Copper. I have in my possession
a little Sommona-Codom, which is thus covered over with a Copper Plate gilded,
and which is yet full of the Ciment, which served as the Model. With such a
Plate of Gold or Silver they cover certain of their King's Movables, and the
Iron hilt of the Sabres and Daggers, which he presents to some of his Officers,
and sometimes to Strangers. They are not wholly ignorant of the Goldsmith's
Trade; but they neither know how to polish, nor to set precious Stones.

How they write on a Leaf of Gold.
They are excellent Gilders, and know very well how to beat the Gold. As often
as the King of Siam writes to another King, he does it upon a Leaf of that
Metal as thin as a Leaf of Paper. The Letters are imprinted thereon with a
blunt Poinson or Bodkin, like those with which we write in our Table-Books.

They are bad Smiths, and no Tanners.
They make use of Iron only as it is Cast, by reason they are bad Forge-men;
their Horses are not shod, and have commonly Stirrups of Rope, and very paltry
Snaffles. They have no better Saddles, the Art of Tanning and preparing Skins,
being absolutely unknown at Siam.

They make little Linen, and no Stuffs.
They make little Cotton-Cloth, and that very course, with a very nasty
Painting, and only in the Metropolis. They make no Stuffs, neither of Silk, nor
Wool, nor any Tapestry-work: Wool is here very scarce. They understand
Embroidery, and their Designs please.

The painting of the Siameses and Chinese.
In one of their Temples I saw a very pleasant Picture in Fresco, the Colors of
which were lively. There was no Ordonance, and it made us to remember our
ancient Tapestries: 'Twas not certainly the work of a Siamese hand.

The Siameses and Chinese know not how to paint in Oil; and, moreover, they
are bad Painters. Their Fancy is to slight and disesteem whatever is after
Nature only. To them it seems that an exact Imitation is too easy, wherefore
they overdo every thing. They will therefore have Extravagancies in Painting,
as we will have Wonders in Poetry. They represent Trees, Flowers, Birds, and
other Animals, which never were. They sometimes give unto Men impossible
Proportions, and the Secret is, to give to all these things a Facility, which
may make them to appear Natural. This is what concerns the Arts.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Traffic amongst the Siameses.
THE most general Professions at Siam are Fishing for the common People,
Fishing and Commerce are the two Professions which do almost employ all the
Siameses.
and Merchandise for all those that have wherewith to follow it. I say all, not
excepting their King himself. But the Foreign Trade being reserved almost
entire to the King, the Home Trade is so inconsiderable, that it is impossible
to raise any competent Fortune thereby. That simplicity of Manners, which makes
the Siameses to let go most of the Arts, makes them also to slight most of the
Commodities which are necessary to the Europeans; yet see how the Siameses
carry on their Commerce.

In their Loans, a third person, whosoever he be, writes down the Promise; What
their private Writings are.
and this suffices them in Justice, because it is determined against the word
of the Debtor who denies, upon the double Testimony of him that produces the
Promise, and of him that writ. It is necessary only that it appear by the
viewing of the Writing, that it is not the Creditor that writ the Promise.

Moreover, they sign no Writings, What their Signature is.
neither do they apply any Seal to private Writings. It Is only the Magistrates
that have a Seal, that is properly a Seal which the King gives them as an
Instrument of their Offices. Particular Persons, instead of a Signature, do put
a single Cross; and though this kind of Signature be practiced by all, yet every
one knows the Cross which is under his own hand; and it is very rare, they say,
that any one is of a Reputation so bad as to disown it in Justice. In a word, I
shall transiently declare, that we must not search out any Mystery in that they
sign with a Cross: It Is amongst them only a kind of Flourish which they have
preferred before any other, probably because it is more plain.

I have said, that they endow the Virgins at their marrying; They have no
public Writing nor Notaries.
and that the Portion is paid to the Husband in presence of the Parents, but
without any Writing. I have said also, that they make no Will, and that before
their death they dispose of their Estate with their own hand, and to whom they
please, and that after this manner Custom disposes of their Inheritance. They
Trade little with Immoveables, no person amongst them thinking it safe to
purchase Land of another; the Prince gives, or sells thereof, to whoever would
have it. But the real Property remaining always in him, is the reason that none
in this Country does care to purchase much Land, nor to meliorate it, for fear
of exciting a desire of it in one more powerful than himself. And thus needing
no Writings of long continuance, they have not thought fit to have any Notaries.

As to the small Trades, they are almost all of so little Consequence, The
small Trades.
and Fidelity is there so great, that in the Bazars or Markets the Seller
counts not the Money which he receives, nor the Buyer the Commodity, which he
purchases by Tale. They were scandalized to see the French buy the least things
with more Caution.

The Hour of the Market is from Five in the Evening to Eight or Nine. They use
no Ell.
They use no Ell, by reason they buy Muslins, and other Linnens, all in whole
Pieces. They are very poor and miserable in this Country, when they buy Cloth
by Ken, a term which signifies the Elbow and Cubit both, and for these they
measure with their Arm, and not with any sort of Ell.

They have the Fathom, which they use in several things, and especially in
measuring the Roads.
Nevertheless they have their Fathom, which equals the French Toise within an
Inch. They use it in Buildings, in surveying of Land, and perhaps in other
things; and especially in measuring the Roads, or Channels, through which the
King generally passes. Thus from Siam to Louvo, every Mile is marked with a
Post, on which they have writ the number of the Mile. The same thing is
observed in the Country of the great Mogul, where Bernier reports, that they
mark the Kosses, or Half-miles, with Tourrettes, or little Pyramids, and every
one knows that the Romans denoted their Miles with Stones.

The Coco serves the Siameses as Measure for Grains and Liquors.
The Coco serves as a Measure for Grain and Liquors in this manner. As all the
Coco's are naturally unequal, they measure the Capacity thereof by those little
Shells called Coris, which serve for small Money at Siam, and which are not
sensibly greater one than the other. There is therefore such a Coco which
contains a thousand Coris, as some have informed me, such an one which contains
five hundred, and such another more or less. To measure Corn they have a kind
of Bushel, called Sat in the Siamese, which is made only with interlac'd
Bambou; and to measure Liquors, they have a Pitcher called Canan in Siamese,
Choup in Portuguese; and it is according to these sorts of Measures, that they
make their Markets. But for want of Policy, and a Standard, according to which
the Measures should legally be regulated, the Buyer accepts them only after
having measured them with his Coco, the Capacity of which he knows by the
Coris; and he uses either Water, or Rice, according as he would measure either
the Canan or the Sat with his Coco. In a word, the quarter of the Canan is
called Leeng, and forty Sats do make the Seste, and forty Seste's the Cohi. It
is impossible to declare the resemblance which Measures so little exact have
with ours. I have said moreover, that a Pound of Rice a day suffices a Man,
and that it is worth no more than a Farthing. Mr. Gervaise says, that the Seste
of Rice is reckoned to weigh an hundred Catis, that is to say, two hundred
twenty and five of our Pounds.

Money serves them for Weights.
They are not more exact as to their Weights, in general they call them Ding;
and the pieces of their Money are more nice and true, and almost the only ones
which they use, although their Money be frequently false or light. Some informed
me, as a thing very remarkable, that the Siameses sold course Silver by weight,
because they had seen in the Market that Commodity in one of the Scales, and
the silver Money which served as a Weight in the other. The same Names do
therefore signify the Weights and Money both.

Their Moneys.
Their silver Coins are all of the same Figure, and struck with the same Stamps,
only some are smaller than others. They are of the Figure of a little Cylinder
or Roll very short, and bowed quite at the middle, so that both ends of the
Cylinder touched one another. Their Stamps (for they have two on each piece,
struck one at the side of the other in the middle of the Cylinder, and not at
the ends) do represent nothing that we knew, and they have not explained them
to me. The proportion of their Money to ours is, that their Tical, which weighs
no more than half a Crown, is yet worth three shillings and three halfpence. I
give the Figure and Size thereof, and at the end of this Work you will find
their Measures for the Lengths, as well as their Coins and their Weights. They
have no Gold, nor Copper-Money. Gold is a Merchandise amongst them, and is
twelve times the value of Silver, the purity being supposed equal in both the
Metals.

The Chinese Money.
Neither Gold nor Silver are Moneys at China: They cut these Metals into ill
shaped pieces, with which they pay for other Commodities; and for this purpose
it is necessary, that they always have a pair of Gold Scales, and a Touchstone
in their hand. Their pair of Gold Scales is a little Roman Balance; but amongst
them there is such cheap living, that for ordinary Provisions their own Money,
which is only Copper, suffices them. They thread it in a certain number on a
Cord, for it is perforated in the middle, and they count by strings, and not by
pieces.

A Tical in its natural size viewed several ways.
The Stamps of the Tical engraved at large

Cori a shell serueing for Money seen several ways in its natural size.
The Size and Figure of ye Coupan a Gold Coin in Iapan seen on both sides
These strokes are not shadows but are made in the Money to Justify the weight
thereof.

A Prospect of the Hall of Audience in the Palace of Siam.


The Japaneses have a flat Gold Coin somewhat longer than broad, The Coupan the
Gold Money of Japan.
and rounded like an oval. I give exactly the size and figure thereof. It is
struck at several stamps with hatchings. Its weight is four Drams and a half,
and twelve grains, and is at least Twenty three Carrats, as far as we can judge
thereof without melting it. It is called Coupan, and its value is vulgarly
esteemed Ten Crowns a piece.

The base Coin at Siam is no other than those little Shells I have already
mentioned, and of which I have likewise given the size and figure. Shells, the
base Money of Siam.
The Europeans which are at Siam do call them Coris, and the Siameses Bia. They
fish them up abundantly at the Maldives Islands, and sometimes at the
Phillipine Isles, but in very little quantity, as some have informed me.
Nevertheless Navarrette in his Discourse of China, page 62. speaks thus
concerning the Coris, which he calls Seguejes. It Is imported, says he, from
the coast of India and Manille: They are innumerable at the Isle of Luban,
which is one of the Phillipines. And a little after he subjoyns, the Seguejes
are brought from the Isles of Baldivia, which are the Maldiviae.

It Is not easy to say how far the use of this Money extends it self. How much
the use of this Money is extended.
It is current throughout India, and almost over all the coasts of Africa; and
some have informed me that it is received in some places of Hungary: but I can
hardly believe it, by reason I see it not worth the trouble to carry it
thither. It breaks much in the use; and as there is less of it, it is more
worth in respect to the Silver Money; as likewise it lowers its price when
there arrives any considerable cargo by any Ship: for it is a kind of
Merchandise. The ordinary price at Siam is that a Fouan, or the eighth part of
a Fical, is worth eight hundred Coris, or that 7 or 800 Coris are hardly worth
a Penny: The lowness of Money being a certain sign of a good Market, or rather
of the cheapness of Commodities.

CHAP. XV. A Character of the Siameses in general.
AS easiness of living consists in the reasonable price of things necessary for
life, The Siameses are good People.
and as good manners are more easily preserved in a moderate easiness, than in
a Poverty attended with too much labor, or in an over-abundant Idleness, it
may be affirmed that the Siameses are good men. Vices are detestable amongst
them, and they excuse them not as witty conceits, nor as sublimity of mind. A
Siamese never so little above the refuse of the people, is so far from making
himself drunk, that he accounts it a shame to drink Arak.

Adultery is rare at Siam, Adultery is rare at Siam.
not so much because the Husband has the power of doing himself Justice over
his Wife, (that is to say, to kill her if he finds her in a palpable offense,
or to sell her, if he can convict her of Infidelity) as because the Women are
not corrupted by Idleness (for it is they that maintain the men by their
Labor) nor by the Luxury of the Table or of Clothes, nor by Gameing, nor by
Shows. The Siamese Women do not play: they receive no Visits from men; and
Plays are very rare at Siam, and have no appointed days, nor certain price, nor
public Theater. It must not however be thought that all Marriages are chaste,
but at least any other Love more immoderate, than that of the Wives is, they
say, without example.

Jealousy is amongst them only a mere opinion of Glory, The Jealousy of the
Siameses to their Wives.
which is greater in those, that are most highly advanced in Dignity. The Wives
of the People managing all the Trade do enjoy a perfect Liberty. Those of the
Nobles are very reserved, and stir not abroad but seldom, either upon some
Family visit, or to go to the Pagodes. But when they go out, they go with their
face uncovered, even when they go on foot; and sometimes it is hard to
distinguish them from the Women-slaves which accompany them. In a word, they
not only find nothing austere in the constraint under which they live, but they
place their glory therein. They look upon a greater liberty as a shame: and
would think themselves slighted and contemned by a Husband that would permit it
them: They are jealous for them as much as they are themselves.

The Glory of the Asiatick Women.
There is not a virtuous Woman in Asia, who in time of War chooses not rather
that her Husband should kill her, than that he should suffer her to fall under
the power of the Enemies. Tacitus in the Twelfth Book of his Annals, gives an
example thereof in Zenobia, the wife of Rhadamistus. The Husbands themselves do
think it the most shameful thing in the world to them, that their Wives should
fall into the Enemies hands; and when this happens, the greatest affront that
can be done them, is not to restore them their Wives. But tho the Women of Asia
be capable of sacrificing their life to their glory, there ceases not to be
some amongst them, who take secret pleasures when they can, and who hazard
their glory and their life upon this account. It Is reported that there have
been some examples hereof amongst the King of Siam's Wives: How closely soever
they be shut up, they do sometimes find out a way to have Lovers. Some have
assured me, that the ordinary method by which this Prince punishes them, is
first to submit them to a Horse, accustomed I know not how, to the love of
Women, and then to put them to death. It Is some years since he gave one to the
Tigers, and because these Animals spared her at the first, he offered her a
Pardon: but this Woman was so unworthy as to refuse it, and with so many
affronts, that the King looking upon her as distracted, ordered again that she
should dye. They irritated the Tigers, and they tore her in pieces in his
presence. It is not so certain that he puts the Lovers to death, but at the
least he causes them to be severely chastized. The common opinion at Siam is,
that 'twas a fault of this nature, which caused the last disgrace of the late
Barcalon, elder Brother to the King of Siam's first Ambassador to the King.
The King his Master caused him to be very severely bastinado'd, and forbore to
see him, yet without taking away his Offices. On the contrary, he continued to
make use of him during the six months, that he survived the blows which he had
received; and he with his own hand prepared all the Remedies which the Barcalon
took in his last sickness, because no person dared to give him any, for fear of
being accused of the death of a man, who appeared so dear to his Master.
Bernier relates some examples, by which it appears that the Great Mogul does
not always punish the Women of his Seraglio that offended in their duty, nor
the Men that are their Accomplices, with death. These Princes consider these
sorts of Crimes, like the others, which may be committed against their Majesty,
unless any sentiment of Love renders them more sensible of Jealousy.

The Jealousy of the Siameses toward their Daughters.
The Siamese Lords are not less jealous of their Daughters than of their Wives:
and if any one commits a fault, they sell her to a certain man, who has a
privilege of prostituting them for Money, in consideration of a Tribute which
he pays the King: It Is said that he has six hundred, all Daughters of Officers
in esteem. He likewise purchases Wives, when the Husbands sell them, being
convicted of Infidelity.

Their respect toward Old Men.
Disrespect toward Old Men is not less rare at Siam than at China. Of the two
Mandarins which came on board the Kings Ambassadors Ship, to bring them the
first Compliment from the King of Siam; the younger, tho the highest in
dignity, yielded the first place and speech to the elder, who was not above
three or four years older.

The Siameses great Liars.
Lying toward Superiors is punished by the Superior himself; and the King of
Siam punishes it more severely than any other: and notwithstanding all this,
they lie as much or more at Siam, than in Europe.

Great Union in their Families.
The Union of Families there is such, that a Son who would plead against his
Parents, would pass for a Monster: Wherefore no person in this Country dreads
Marriage, nor a number of Children: Interest divides not Families: Poverty
renders not Marriage burdensome.

Begging is rare and Shameful at Siam.
Our Domestics observed only three sorts of Beggars, Aged, Impotent and
Friendless persons. Relations permit not their Kindred to beg Alms: They
charitably maintain those that cannot maintain themselves out of their Estate
or Labor. Begging is shameful there, not only to the Beggar, but to all his
Family.

But Robbing is much more ignominious than Begging, The Siameses are Robbers.
I say not to the Robber himself, but to his Relations. The nearest Friend dare
not concern themselves about a Man accused of Theft; and it is not strange that
Thievery should be reputed so infamous, where they may live so cheap: Thus are
their Houses much less secure, then our worst Chests. Nevertheless as it is not
possible to have true Virtue, but in the eternal prospects of Christianity, the
Siameses do seldom as I may say refuse to steal whatever they meet with. It Is
properly amongst them that opportunity makes the Thief. They place the Idea of
perfect Justice in not gathering up lost things, that is to say in not laying
hold on so easy an occasion of getting. After the same manner the Chinese to
exaggerate the good Government of some of their Princes, do say that under
their Reign Justice was in so high an esteem among the People, that no person
meddled with what he found scattered in the high Road; and this Idea has not
been unknown to the Greeks. Anciently in Greece the Stagyritae made a Law in
these words: What you have not laid down take not up; and it is perhaps from
them that Plato learned it, when he inserted it amongst his Laws. But the
Siameses are very remote from so exquisite a probity.

Father d' Espagnac, Some examples of Theft committed by the Siameses.
one of those pious and learned Jesuits which we carried to Siam, being one day
alone in the Divan of their House, a Siamese came boldly to take away an
excellent Persian Carpet from off a Table that was before him: and Father d'
Espagnac let him do it, because he imagined not that he was a Robber. In the
Journey which the King caused the Ambassadors from Siam to make into Flanders,
one of the Mandarins which accompanied them, took twenty Scions in a house,
where the Ambassadors were invited to dine, as they sojourned in one of the
principal Cities of Picardy. The next day this Mandarin conceiving that these
Scions were Money; gave one to a Footman to drink; and his Theft was hereby
discovered, but no Notice taken thereof.

Behold likewise an ingenious prank, which proves that the opportunity of
stealing has so much power over them, that it sometimes sways them, even when
it is perilous. One of the Officers of the King of Siam's Magazines having
stolen some Silver, this Prince ordered him to be put to death, by forcing him
to swallow three or four Ounces of melted Silver, and it happened, that he who
had order to take those three or four Ounces of Silver out of that Wretch's
throat, could not forbear filching part of it. The King therefore caused him to
die of the same punishment, and a third exposed himself to the same hazard by
committing the like Offense: I mean by stealing part of the Silver, which he
took out of the last dead Man's throat. So that the King of Siam, pardoning him
his Life, said, there is enough punished, I should destroy all my Subjects, if I
should not resolve to pardon them at last.

It must not be doubted after this, Robbers in the Woods of Siam and China,
which do very rarely kill.
of what is reported of the Siameses who live in the Woods, to withdraw
themselves from the Government, that they frequently rob the Passengers, yet
without killing any. The Woods of China have been continually pestered with
such Robbers: and there are some who after having enticed a great many
Companions with them, have formed whole Armies, and at last rendered themselves
Masters of that great Kingdom.

On the other hand, Fidelity is exceeding great at Siam, in all sorts of
Traffic, The fidelity of the Siameses in Commerce, their boundless Usury, and
their Avarice.
as I have elsewhere remarked: but Usury is there practiced without bounds.
Their Laws have not provided against it, though their Morality prohibits it.
Avarice is their essential Vice; and what is more wonderful herein, is that
they heap not up riches to use them, but to bury them.

As they traffic not almost with immoveables, make no Wills, They are very
revengful, and how.
nor public Contracts, and as in a word they have no Notaries, it seems that
they cannot almost have any Suits, and they have indeed few Civil, but a great
many Criminal causes. It Is principally out of spite that they exercise their
secret Hatreds and Revenges; and they find facility therein with the Judges,
who in this Country, as in Europe, do live on their profession. The Siameses
have naturally an aversion to blood: but when they hate, even unto death, which
is very rare, they assassinate, or they poison, and understand not the
uncertain Revenge of Duels, yet most of their quarrels do terminate only in
blows, or reciprocal defamations.

Other qualities of the Siameses.
The Ancients have remarked that it is the Humidity of the Elements, which
defends the Indians against that action of the Sun, which burns the Complexion
of the Negro's, and makes their Hair to grow like Cotton. The Nourishment of
the Siameses is likewise more aqueous, than that of any other People of the
Indies; and unto them may be safely attributed all the good, and all the bad
qualities, which proceed from Phlegm and Spittle; because that Phlegm and
Spittle are the necessary effects of their Nourishment. They are courteous,
polite, fearful, and careless. They contain themselves a long time, but when
once their Rage is kindled, they have perhaps less discretion than we have.
Their Timidity, their Avarice, their Dissimulation, their Silences, their
Inclination to lying do increase with them. They are stiff in their Customs, as
much out of Idleness, as out of respect to their Ancestors, who have
transmitted them to them. They have no curiosity, and do admire nothing. They
are proud with those that deal gently with them, and humble to those that treat
them with rigor. They are subtle and variable, like all those that perceive
their own weakness.

Their Friendship is perfidious.
Their manner of promising themselves an eternal amity, is by drinking of the
same Aqua Vitae in the same Cup, and when they would swear themselves more
solemnly, they taste the blood one of another; which Lucian gives us for a
Custom of the ancient Scythians, and which is practiced also by the Chinese,
and by other Nations: but the Siameses cease not sometimes to betray after all
these Ceremonies.

They are naturally more moderate than we are, because they are more dull.
In general they have more Moderation than us: their Humors are as calm as their
Heaven, which changes only twice a year and insensibly, when it turns by little
and little from Rain to Fair-weather, and from Fair-weather to Rain. They act
only by necessity, and do not like us place merit in Action. It seems not
rational to them that Labor and Pains should be the Fruit and Reward of
Virtue. They have the good Fortune to be born Philosophers, and it may be that
if they were not born such, they would not become so more than we. I therefore
willingly believe what the Ancients have reported, that Philosophy came from
the Indies into Europe, and that we have been more concerned at the
insensibility of the Indians, than the Indians have been at the wonders, which
our inquietude has produced in the discovery of so many different Arts, whereof
we flatter our selves, perhaps to no purpose, that necessity was the Mother.
But enough is spoken of the Siameses in general, let us enter into the
particulars of their manners, according to their various conditions.

PART III. Of the Manners of the Siameses, according to their several
Conditions.
CHAP. I. Of the several Conditions among the Siameses.
AT Siam all Persons are either Freemen or Slaves. Of the Slavery according to
the Manners of Siam.
The Master has all power over the Slave, except that of killing him: And though
some may report, that Slaves are severely beaten there, (which is very probable
in a Country where free persons are so rigidly bastinado'd) yet the Slavery
there is so gentile, or, if you will, the Liberty is so abject, that it is
become a Proverb, that the Siameses sell it to eat of a Fruit, which they call
Durions. I have already said, that they choose rather to enjoy it, than to enjoy
none at all: It Is certain also, that they dread Beggary more than Slavery; and
this makes me to think, that Beggary is there as painful as ignominious, and
that the Siameses, who express a great deal of Charity for Beasts, even to the
relieving them, if they find any sick in the Fields, have very little for the
Men.

They employ their Slaves in cultivating their Lands and Gardens, In what the
Slaves are employed.
and in some domestic Services; or rather, they permit them to work to gain
their livelihood, under a Tribute which they receive, from four to eight Ticals
a Year, that is to say, from seven Livres ten Sols, to fifteen Livres.

One may be born, or become a Slave. One becomes so either for Debt, A Siamese
may be born, or become a Slave.
as I have said, or for having been taken Captive in War, or for having been
confiscated by Justice. When one is made a Slave for Debt, his Liberty returns
again by making satisfaction; but the Children born during this Slavery, though
it be but for a time, continue Slaves.

One is born a Slave, when born of a Mother-slave; and in the Slavery, How he
is born a Slave, and to whom he belongs.
the Children are divided as in the Divorce. The first, third, fifth, and all
the rest in the odd number belong to the Master of the Mother: the second,
fourth, and all the others in the even rank belong to the Father, if he is
free; or to his Master, if he is a Slave. It Is true, that it is necessary upon
this account, that the Father and Mother should have had Commerce together,
with the consent of the Master of the Mother: for otherwise all the Children
would belong to the Master of the Mother.

The difference of the King of Siam's Slaves from his Subjects of free
condition, is, that he continually employs his Slaves in personal labors, The
difference between the King of Siam's Slaves, and his other Subjects. The
Slaves of private men owe not any service to the King.

Of the Siamese Nobility.


and maintains them; whereas his free Subjects only owe him six months service
every Year, but at their own expense.

In a word, the Slaves of particular men owe not any service to that Prince;
and though for this Reason he loses a Freeman, when this man falls into slavery,
either for Debt, or to avoid Beggary, yet this Prince opposes it not, neither
pretends any Indemnity upon this account.

Properly speaking, there is not two sorts of Conditions among free persons.
Nobility is no other thing than the actual possession of Offices, the Families
which do long maintain themselves therein, do become doubtless more illustrious
and more powerful; but they are rare: and so soon as they have lost their
Offices, they have nothing, which distinguishes them from the common People.
There is frequently seen at the Pagaye, the Grandson of a Man who died a great
Lord, and sometimes his own Son.

Of the Priests or Talapoins.
The distinction between the People and the Priests is only an uncertain
distinction, seeing that one may continually pass from one of these States to
the other. The Priests are the Talapoins, of whom we shall speak in the sequel.
Under the Name of People I comprehend whatever is not a Priest, viz. the King,
Officers, and People, of whom we now proceed to speak.

CHAP. II. Of the Siamese People.
The Siamese people is a Militia.
THE Siamese People is a Militia, where every particular person is registered:
They are all Soldiers, in Siamese Taban, and do all owe six Months service
annually to their Prince. It belongs to the Prince to arm them, and give them
Elephants or Horses, if he would have them serve either on Elephants, or on
Horseback: but it belongs to them to cloth, and to maintain themselves. And as
the Prince never employs all his Subjects in his Armies, and that oftentimes he
sends no Army into the Field, though he be at War with some of his Neighbors,
yet for six months in the year he employs in such a work, or in such a service
as pleases him, those Subjects which he employs not in the War.

Is counted and divided into men on the right hand, and on the left.
Wherefore, to the end that no person may escape the personal service of the
Prince, there is kept an exact account of the People. It Is divided into men on
the right hand, and men on the left, to the end that every one may know on what
side he ought to range himself in his Functions.

And by Bands.
And besides this it is divided into Bands, each of which has its Chief, which
they call Nai: so that this word Nai is become a term of Civility, which the
Siameses do reciprocally give one to the other, as the Chinese do interchange
the Title of Master or Governor.

What difference there is between a Band and a Company.
I have said that the Siamese People is divided by Bands, rather than by
Companies; because that the number of Soldiers of the same Band is not fixed,
and because that all those of the same Band, are not of the same Company in the
Army: and I have said, that Nai signifies Chief, though some translate it by
the word Captain; because that the Nai does not always lead his Band to the
War, no more than to the six months Service: His care is to furnish as many men
out of his Band, as are required, either for the War, or for the six months
Service.

The Children are of the same Band with their Parents.
The Children are of the same Band with their Parents; and if the Parents are of
different Bands, the Children in the odd rank are of the Mother's Band, and the
Children in the even rank of the Father's; provided nevertheless that the
Mother's Nai has been acquainted with the Marriage, and that he has given his
consent thereunto: otherwise the Children would be all of the Mother's Band.

The Talapoins and Women are exempt from service, and yet are registered, and
why.
Thus, though the Talapoins and Women do enjoy all exemption from Service, as
not being esteemed Soldiers, yet they cease not to be set down in the Rolls of
the People: the Talapoins, because they may return when they please to a
secular condition, and that then they fall again under the power of their
natural Nai: the Women because their Children are of their Band, or all, or the
greatest part, as I have said.

The Advantages of the Nai.
It Is one of the Nai's Privileges to be able to lend to his Soldier sooner than
any other, and to be able to satisfy his Soldiers Creditor; thereby to make
his Soldier his Slave, when he is insolvable. As the King gives a Balon to each
Officer with a certain number of Pagayeurs, and as these are the Officers,
which are also the Nai, every Officer has his Pagayeurs in his Band. They brand
them on the outside of the Wrist with an hot Iron and an Anchor over it; and
these sort of Domestics are called Bao. But none of the Bao's or Pagayeurs
owes to his Nai only this service, and that only six months in the year,
wherefore they are released from six months to six months, or by month, as it
pleases the Nai: the Nai has also some Offices in the Law as we shall see.

Now the more numerous his Band is, the more powerful he is esteemed: What at
Siam are the dignities of Pa-ya, Oc-ya and the rest.
The Offices and Employments of Siam being important only in this. The
Dignities of Pa-ya, Oc-ya, Oc-Pra, Oc-Louang, Oc-Counne, Oc-Meuing, and Oc-Pan,
are seven degrees of these Nai. It Is true that the Title of Oc-Pan is now
disused. Pan signifies a Thousand, and it was thought that an Oc-Pan was Chief
of a Thousand Men. Meuing signifies Ten Thousand, and it is thought that an
Oc-Meuing is the Chief of Ten Thousand Men: not that in truth it was so, but
that in the Indies they magnify the Titles, No person could give me the true
signification of these words, Pa-ga, Oc-ya, Oc-Pra, Oc-Louang, Oc-Counne, nor
how many men are assigned to each of the five Dignities; but it is probable
that as the words Pan and Meuing are Terms of Number, the rest are so too.

The word Oc seems to signify Chief; Of the word Oc.
for they have another Title without Function, viz. Oc-Meuang, which seems to
signify Chief of a City, in that Meuaug signifies a City, and in that it is
necessary to have been made Oc-Meuang before he be effectually made Governor,
whom they call Tchaou-Meuang, Lord of a City.

But this word Oc is not Siamese; Chief in Siamese is called Houa, This word is
not Siamese, and how they use it.
and this word Houa properly signifies the Head. From hence comes Houa Sip,
Chief of Ten, which is, as I have elsewhere said, the Title of him that mounts
the Elephant at the Crupper. After the same manner they call him, that bears
the Royal Standard in the Balon where the King is, Houapan, or Chief of a
Thousand. To return to the word Oc, a Superior never uses it to an Inferior.
Thus the King of Siam speaking to Oc-Pra Pipitcharatcha, will not, for example,
say Oc-Pra Pipitcharatcha, but only Pra-Pipitcharatcha; A man relating his own
Titles himself, will also modestly suppress this term Oc; and in fine, the
inferior People in speaking of the highest Officers will omit the word Oc, and
will say for example, ya-yumrat, for Ocya yumrat; Meuing Vai, for Oc Meuing Vai.

The Portuguese have translated the word Pa-ya, by that of Prince; Of the word
Pa-ya.
not in my opinion, from their right understanding it, but because they have
seen this Title given to Princes, and that the King of Siam gives it himself;
but he sometimes gives it also to the Officers of his Court, which are not
Princes* and he gives it not always to the Princes of the Blood. The Lords of
the Great Moguls Court are called, according to Bernier, Hazary, Dou-hazary,
Penge, hecht, and Deh-hazary, that is to say, One Thousand, Two Thousand, Five,
Eight, and Ten Thousand, as if one should say, Lords over so many Thousands of
Horse: though in reality they could neither maintain, nor command so great a
number. The great Moguls eldest Son, he says, is called Twelve Thousand, as if
he had the effective command of Twelve Thousand Horse. It Is no strange thing
therefore that the King of Siam's Subjects being esteemed Soldiers, as those of
the Great Mogul are esteemed Horsemen, have equally assumed in both Courts the
term of number, to express the highest Dignities, and to name the Princes
themselves; yet I cannot affirm this is so at Siam, by reason that I know only
that the words Pang and Meuing are Siamese and numeral Terms: but as to the
other names of Dignity, which I have mentioned, some have informed me that they
are Balie, and that they understood them not. I know that in the Country of
Laos the Dignities of Pa-ya and Meuang, and the honorable Epithets of Pra are
in use; it may be also that the other Terms of Dignity are common to both
Nations, as well as the Laws.

In reference to the six Dignities (for that of Oc-pan is obsolete, Six orders
of Cities of Siam.
as I have said) there are now at Siam six Orders of Cities, which have been
anciently determined according to the Rolls of the Inhabitants. So that such a
City, which was then found very populous had a Pa ya for Governor, and such
which was less populous had an Oc-ya, and the rest had also other Dignities in
proportion to the Inhabitants which they contained. But it is not necessary to
believe that these Cities have ever been so populous as the Titles of their
Governors import; by reason, as I have often alleged, that these People are
very proud in Titles. Only the greatest Titles were given to the Governors of
the biggest Cities, and the least Titles to the Governors of the Cities less
inhabited. Thus the City of Me-Tac, of which I have spoken at the beginning,
had a Governor called Pa-ya-Tac, and the word Me which signifies Mother, and
which is joined to Tac, seems to intimate that the City of Me-Tac was very
great. The City of Porselouc had also a Pa-ya; Tenasserim, Ligor, Corazema and
other, have still some Oc-ya. Lesser Cities, as Pipeli and Bancock, have the
Oc-pra, others have the Oc-Louang, or the Oc-Counnes, and the least of all have
the Oc-Meuing. The Portuguese have translated these Titles according to their
fancy by those of King, Viceroy, Duke, Marquis, Earl, etc. They have given the
Title of Kingdom to Metac, Tenassarim, Porselouc, Ligor, and Pipeli; either by
reason of their hereditary Governors, or for having been like Pipeli the
residence of the Kings of Siam; and to the Kings of Siam they have given the
Title of Emperor, because the Spaniards have ever thought the Title of Emperor
ought to be given to Kings, that have other Kings for Feudataries: So that upon
this single reason some Kings of Castille have born the Title of Emperor,
giving to their Children the Title of Kings of the several Kingdoms which were
united to their Crown.

The dignities of the Siameses are not annexed to the single Governments of City
or Province.
To return to the Titles of the Siameses, they are given not only to the
Governors, but to all the Officers of the Kingdom; because that they are all
Nai: and the same Title is not always joined to the same Office. The Barcalon,
for example, has sometimes had that of Pa-ya, as some have informed me, and now
he has only that of Oc-ya. But if a Man has two Offices, he may have two
different Titles in respect to his two Offices: and it is not rare that one Man
has two Offices, one in the City and the other in the Province, or rather one
in Title and the other by Commission. Thus Oc-ya Pra-Sedet who is Governor of
the City of Siam in Title, is now Oc-ya Barcalon by Commission: the King of
Siam finding it his interest, because that upon this account he gives not to
one Officer a double Sallery.

The Equivocations which this causes in Relations.
But this Multiplication of Offices on the same Head causes a great deal of
Obscurity and Equivocation in the ancient Relations of Siam; because that when
a man has two Offices, he has two Titles, and two Names, and when the Relation
imports that such an Oc-ya for example, is concerned in such a thing, one is
inclined to believe that the Relation has styled this Oc-ya by the title of the
function which it attributes to him, and frequently it has named him by the
title of another Office. Thus if a Relation of the Kingdom of France made by a
Siamese should intimate, that the Duke of Main is General of the Suisses, the
Siameses might groundlesly persuade themselves, that every General of the
Suisses bears the Title of Duke of Main. And this is what I had to say
touching the People of Siam.

CHAP. III. Of the Officers of the Kingdom of Siam in general.
The proper signification of the word Mandarin.
THE Portugueses have generally called all the Officers throughout the whole
extent of the East Mandarins; and it is probable that they have formed this
word from that of Mandar, which in their Language signifies to command.
Navarette, whom I have already cited, is of this opinion; and we may confirm
it, because that the Arabian word Emir, which is used at the Court of the Great
Mogul, and in several other Mohammedan Courts of the Indies, to signify the
Officers, is derived from the Arabian Verb amara, which signifies to command.
The word Mandarin extends also to the Children of the Principal Officers, which
are considered as Children of Quality, called Mon in Siamese. But I shall make
use of the word Mandarin, only to signify the Officers.

The King of Siam therefore makes no considerable Mandarin, The King of Siam
gives Names to the considerable Mandarins.
but he gives him a new Name; a Custom established also at China, and in other
States of the East. This Name is always an Elogium; sometimes it is purposely
invented, like that which he gave to the Bishop of Metelpolis, and like those
which he gives to the Foreigners that are at his Court; but oftentimes these
Names are ancient, and known for having been formerly given to others; and
those are the most honorable, which have been heretofore born by persons very
highly advanced in Dignity, or by the Princes of the Royal Blood. And although
such Names be not always accompanied with Offices and Authority, they cease not
to be a great Mark of Favor. It likewise happens that the same Name is given
to several persons of different Dignities; so that at the same time the one,
for example, will call himself, Oc-Pra Pipitcharatcha, and the other Oc-Counne
Pipitcharatcha. These Names, of which the first words are only spoken, and
which do every one make a Period, are taken almost all entire out of the Baly
Tongue, and are not always well understood: But this, and the Style of the
Laws, which participate very much of the Baly, and the Books of Religion, which
are Baly, are the cause why the Kings of Siam ought not to ignore this Tongue.
Forasmuch as, I have elsewhere said, it lends all its Ornaments to the Siamese,
and that oftentimes they do elegantly intermix them, either in speaking or in
writing.

The Law of the State is, that all Offices should be hereditary; All Offices
are hereditary.
and the same Law is in the Kingdom of Laos, and was anciently at China. But
the selling of Offices is not there permitted: and moreover the least fault of
the Patent, or the capricious Humor of the Prince, or the Dotage of the
Inheritor may take away the Offices from the Families, and when this happens it
is always without Recompense. Very few Families do long maintain themselves
therein, especially in the Offices of the Court, which are more than the rest
under the Master's power.

Moreover, no Officer at Siam has any Sallary. The Prince lodges them, The
Profits of the Offices.
which is no great matter; and gives them some movables, as Boxes of Glod or
Silver for Betel; some Arms, and a Balon; some Beasts, as Elephants, Horses,
and Buffalo's; some Services, Slaves, and in fine some Arable Lands. All which
return to the King with the Office, and which do principally make the King to
be the Heir of his Officers. But the principal gain of the Offices consists in
Extorsions, because that in this there is no Justice for the weak. All the
Officers do hold a correspondence in pillaging; and the Corruption is greatest
in those from whence the Remedy ought to come. The Trade of Presents is
public; the least Officers do give unto the greatest, under a Title of
Respect; and a Judge is not there punished for having received Presents, if
otherwise he be not convicted of Injustice, which is not very easy to do.

The Form of the Oath of Fidelity consists in swallowing the water, The Oath of
Fidelity.
over which the Talapoins do pronounce some Imprecations against him, who is to
drink it, in case he fails in the Fidelity which he owes to his King. This
Prince dispenses not with this Oath to any persons that engage themselves in
his Service, of what Religion or Nation soever.

The Public Law of Siam is written in three Volumes. The Public Law of Siam
is written.
The first is called Pra Tam Ra, and contains the Names, Functions, and
Prerogatives of all the Offices. The second is entitled, Pra Tam Non, and is a
Collection of the Constitutions of the Ancient Kings; and the third is the Pra
Rayja Cammanot, wherein are the Constitutions of the now Regent King's Father.

Nothing would have been more necessary than a faithful extract of these three
Volumes, The difficulty of procuring the Books thereof.
rightly to make known the Constitution of the Kingdom of Siam: but so far was
I from being able to get a Translation, that I could not procure a Copy thereof
in Siamese. It would have been necessary upon this account to continue longer
at Siam, and with less business. This is therefore what I could learn certainly
about this matter, without the assistance of those Books, and in a Country
where every one is afraid to speak. The greatest token of Servitude of the
Siameses is, that they dare not to open their mouth about any thing that
relates to their Country.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Offices of Judicatory.
The Division of the Kingdom of Siam by Provinces.
THE Kingdom of Siam is divided into the upper and lower. The upper lies toward
the North, (seeing that the River descends from thence) and contains seven
Provinces, which are named by their Chief Cities, Porselouc, Sanquelouc,
Lacontai, Campeng-pet, Coconrepina, Pechebonne, and Pitchai. At Porselouc do
immediately arise ten Jurisdictions, at Sanquelouc eight, at Lacontai seven, at
Campeng-pet ten, at Coconrepina five, at Pechebonne two, and at Pitchai seven.
And besides this there are in the upper Siam one and twenty other
Jurisdictions, to which no other Jurisdiction resorts; but which do resort to
the Court, and are as so many little Provinces.

In the lower Siam, that is to say in the South part of the Kingdom, they
reckon the Provinces of Jor, Patana, Ligor, Tenasserim, Chantebonne, Petelong
or Bordelong, and Tchiai. On Jor do immediately depend seven Jurisdictions, on
Patana eight, on Ligor twenty, on Tenasserim twelve, on Chantebonne seven, on
Petelong eight, and on Tchiai two. And besides this, there are likewise in the
lower Siam thirteen small Jurisdictions, which are as so many particular
Provinces, which resort only to the Court, and to which no other Jurisdiction
resorts. The City of Siam has its Province apart, in the heart of the State,
between the upper and lower Siam.

The Governor is the Judge.
The whole Tribunal of Judicature consists properly only in a single Officer,
seeing that it is the Chief or President only that has the deliberate voice,
and that all the other Officers have only a consultative voice, according to
the Custom received also at China, and in the other Neighboring States. But
the most important prerogative of the President is to be the Governor of his
whole Jurisdiction, and to command even the Garrisons, if there be any; unless
the Prince has otherwise disposed thereof by an express order. So that as in
other places these Offices are hereditary, it is no difficult matter for some
of these Governors, and especially the most powerful, and for the most remote
from Court, to withdraw themselves wholly or in part from the Royal Authority.

Jor belongs no more to the Kingdom of of Siam.
Thus the Governor of Jor renders Obedience no longer, and the Portugueses give
him the Title of King. And it may be he never intends to obey, unless the
Kingdom of Siam should extend it self, as Relations declare, to the whole
Peninsula extra Gangem. Jor is the most Southern City thereof, seated on a
River, which has its Mouth at the Cape of Sincapura, and which forms a very
excellent Port.

Nor Patana.
The People of Patana live, like those of Achem in the Isle of Sumatra, under
the Domination of a Woman, whom they always elect in the same Family, and
always old, to the end that she may have no occasion to marry, and in the name
of whom the most trusty persons do rule. The Portuguese have likewise given her
the Title of Queen, and for Tribute she sends to the King of Siam every three
Years two small Trees, the one of Gold, the other of Silver, and both loaded
with Flowers and Fruits; but she owes not any assistance to this Prince in his
Wars. Whether these Gold and Silver Trees are a real Homage, or only a Respect
to maintain the liberty of Commerce, as the King of Siam sends Presents every
three Years to the King of China, in consideration of Trade only, is what I
cannot allege; but as the King of China honors himself with these sorts of
Presents, and takes them for a kind of Homage, it may well be, that the King of
Siam does not less value himself on the Presents he receives from the Queen of
Patana, although she be not perhaps his Vassal.

The Siameses do call an Hereditary Governor Tchaou-Meuang; The Governor is
Lord.
Tchaou signifies Lord, and Meuang a City or Province, and sometimes a Kingdom.
The Kings of Siam have ruined and destroyed the most potent Tchaou-Meuang, as
much as they could, and have substituted in their place some Triennial
Governors by Commission. These Commission-Governors are called Pouran, and Pou
signifies a Person.

Besides the Presents which the Tchaou-Meuang may receive, as I have declared,
The Profits or Rights of the Tchaou-Meuang.
his other legal Rights are,

First, Equally to share with the King the Rents that the arable Lands do
yield, which they call Naa, that is to say Fields; and according to the ancient
Law, these Rents are a Mayon, or quarter part of a Tical for forty Fathom, or
two hundred Foot square.

2dly, The Tchaou-Meuang has the profit of all Confiscations, of all the
Penalties to the Exchequer, and ten per Cent. of all the Fines to the Party.
The Confiscations are fixed by Law according to the Cases, and are not always
the whole Estate, not even in case of sentence of Death; but sometimes also
they extend to the Body, not only of the Person condemned, but of his Children
too.

3dly, The King of Siam gives the Tchaou-Meuang some men to execute his Orders;
they accompany him everywhere, and they row in his Balon. The Siameses do call
them Kenlai, or Painted Arms; by reason that they pink and mangle their Arms,
and lay Gunpowder on the wounds, which paints their Arms with a faded Blue. The
Portuguese do call them Painted Arms, and Officers; and these Painted Arms, are
still used in the Country of Laos.

4thly, In the Maritime Governments, the Tchaou-Meuang sometimes takes Customs
of the Merchant Ships, but it is generally inconsiderable. At Tenasserim it is
eight per Cent. in the kind, according to the Relation of the Foreign Missions.

Some have assured me, The Humanity of the Siameses toward those that have
suffered Shipwreck.
that the Siameses have the Humanity not to appropriate any thing to themselves
of what the Tempest casts on their Coasts by Shipwreck; yet Ferdinand Mendez
Pinto relates, that Lewis de Monteroyo, a Portuguese, having suffered Shipwreck
on the Coast of Siam near Patana, the Chabaudar, or Custom-house Officer, which
he names Chatir, confiscated not only the Ship and its Cargo, but Monteroyo
himself, and some Children; alleging, that by the ancient Custom of the
Kingdom, whatever the Sea cast upon the Coasts, was the profit of his Office.
It Is true, that this Author adds, with great Praises on the King of Siam who
then reigned, that this Prince, at the Request of the Portugueses which were at
his Court, set Monteroyo at liberty, and restored him all the Prize, and the
Children; but he subjoins also that it was out of Charity, and on the day that
this Prince went through the City mounted on a white Elephant, to distribute
Alms to the People.

5thly, A continuance of the Rights or Profits of the Tchaou-Meuang.
The Tchaou-Meuang arrogating to themselves all the Rights of Sovereignty over
the Frontiers, do levy, when they can, extraordinary Taxes on the People.

6thly, The Tchaou-Meuang do exercise Commerce every where, but under the name
of their Secretary, or some other of their Domestics. And this last
Circumstance demonstrates that they have some shame, and that the Law perhaps
prohibits them; but that in this they are not more scrupulous than their King.

7thly, In some places where there are Fish Ponds, the Tchaou-Meuang take the
best of the Fish when the Pond is emptied; but he takes for his own use only,
and not to sell, and the rest he leaves to the People.

8thly, Venison and Salt are free throughout the Kingdom, and the King himself
has laid no Prohibition nor Impost thereon. Salt is there of little value. I
have heard that they have Rock-salt, and they make it of Seawater; some have
told me with the Sun, others with Fire; and, perhaps, both is true. At the
places where the Shoars are too high to receive the Sea, and in those, where
Wood is not near at hand, the Salt may fail, or cost too much to make, as in
the Island of Jonsalam, the Inhabitants whereof do rather choose to import their
Salt from Tenasserim.

The Rights or Profits of the Pou-ran.
The Pou-ran, or Governor by Commission, has the same Honors, and the same
Authority as the Tchaou-Meuang, but not the same Profits. The King of Siam
names the Pou-ran upon two Accounts, either when he would have no
Tchaou-Meuang, or when the Tchaou-Meuang is obliged to absent himself from his
Government; for the Tchaou-Meuang has no ordinary Lieutenant who can supply his
place in his absence, as in France the Chancellor has none. In the first Case
the Pou-ran has only the Profits which the King assigns him at naming him; in
the second Case he takes the Moiety of the Profits from the Tchaou-Meuang, and
leaves him the other Moiety.

The Names and Functions of the Officers which compose a Tribunal.
Now follows the ordinary Officers of a Tribunal of Judicature, not that there
are so many in every one, but that in any one perhaps there is not more.

Oc-ya Tchaou-Meuang. The Tchaou-Meuang is not always Oc-ya, he has sometimes
another Title, and the other Officers of his Tribunal have always some Titles
proportioned to his.

Oc-Pra Belat. His Name signifies Second, but he presides not in the absence of
the Tchaou Meuang, because he has no determinative Voice.

Oc-Pra Jockebatest, a kind of Attorney General, and his Office is to be a
strict Spy upon the Governor. His Office is not Hereditary, the King nominates
some person of Trust; but Experience evinces, that there is no Fidelity in
these Men, and that all the Officers hold a private Correspondence to pillage
the People.

Oc Pra Peun commands the Garrison, if there is any, but under the Orders of
the Tchaou-Meuang; and he has no Authority over his Soldiers, but when they are
in the Field.

Oc-Pra Maha-Tai, is, as it were, the Chief of the People. His Name seems to
signify the Great Siamese; for Maha signifies Great, and Tai signifies
Siamese. It Is he that levies the Soldiers, or rather that demands them of the
Nai: who sends Provisions to the Army, who watches that the Rolls of the People
be well made; and who, in general, executes all the Governor's Orders which
concern the People.

Oc-Pra Sassedi makes and keeps the Rolls of the People. It Is an Office very
subject to Corruption, by reason that every particular person endeavors to get
himself omitted out of the Rolls for money. The Nai do likewise seek to favor
those of their Band, who make Presents to them, and to oppress those with
labor who have nothing to give them. The Maha Tai, and the Sassedi, would
prevent this disorder, if they were not the first corrupted. The Sassedi begins
to enter down Children upon the Rolls, when they are three or four Years old.

Oc-Louang-Meuang is, as it were, the Mayor of the City; for, as I have already
said, Meuang signifies City; but as for what concerns the Title of Oc-Louang,
it does not signify Mayor, and is no more applied to that Office than another
Title. This Mayor takes care of the Polity and Watch. They kept a Watch every
Night round the Ambassador's Lodgings, as round the King of Siam's Palace, and
this was a very great Token of Honor.

Oc-Louang Vang is the Master of the Governor's Palace, for Vang signifies
Palace. He causes it to be repaired, he commands the Governor's Guards, and
even their Captain; and, in a word, he orders in the Governor's Palace,
whatever has relation to the Governor's charge.

Oc-Louang-Peng keeps the Book of the Law and the Custom, according to which
they judge; and when Judgment is passed, he reads the Article thereof, which
serves for the Judgment of the Process: and, in a word, it is he that
pronounces the Sentence.

Oc-Louang Clang has the Charge of the King's Magazine, Clang signifies
Magazine. He receives certain of the King's Revenues, and sells to the People
the King's Commodities, that is to say those, the Trade of which the King
appropriates to himself, as in Europe the Princes do generally appropriate the
Trade of Salt to themselves.

Oc-Louang Couca has the Inspection over Foreigners; he protects them, or
accuses them to the Governor.

Moreover there are some Officers in every superior Tribunal to send to the
inferior Justices, when the Tchaou-Meuang or Pouran are dead, whilst that the
King fills the place: and the number of these Officers are as great as that of
the inferior Justices.

Oc-Louang or Oc-Counne Coeng is the Provost: he is always armed with a Sabre,
and has Painted Arms like Archers.

Oc-Counne Pa-ya Bat is the Keeper of the Goal or Prisons: and the word Pa-ya;
which the Portugueses have translated by that of Prince, seems exceedingly
vilified in the Title of this Office. Nai-Goug is the true Jailer, Couc
signifies a Prison, and nothing is more cruel than the Prisons of Siam. They
are Cages of Bambou exposed to all the injuries of the Air.

Oc-Counne Narin commands those that have the care of the Elephants, which the
King has in the Province: for there are some in several places, because it
would be difficult to lodge and feed a very great number of Elephants together.

Oc-Counne Nai-rang is the Purveyor of the Elephants. In a word, there is an
Officer in every Tribunal to read the Tara or Orders from the King to the
Governor, and an House in an eminent place for to keep them: As within the
enclosure of the King of Siam's Palace there is a single House, on an eminent
place, to keep all the Letters which the King of Siam receives from other Kings.

These are the Officers which are called from within. Besides these, An
important distinction into Officers within and Officers without.
there are others which are called from without, for the Service of the
Province. All have an entire dependence upon the Governor; and although those
without have the like Titles, yet they are very inferior to the Officers
within. Thus an Oc-Meuang within the Palace, is superior to an Oc-ya without;
and in a word it is not necessary to believe that all those who bear great
Titles, must always be great Lords: That infamous fellow who buys Women and
Maids to prostitute them bears the Title of Oc-ya; he is called Oc-ya Mien, and
is a very contemptible person. There are none but debauched persons that have
any Correspondence with him. Every one of the Officers within has his
Lieutenant, in Siamese Balat, and his Register in Siamese Semien, and in his
House, which the King gives him, he has generally an Hall to give his Audiences.

CHAP. V. Of the Judiciary Style and Form of Pleading.
THey have only one Style for all matters in Law, They have not a double Style.
and they have not thought fit to divide them into Civil and Criminal: either
because there is always some punishment due to him that is cast, even in a
matter purely Civil, or because that suits in matters purely Civil are very
rare there.

It Is a general Rule amongst them, that all Process should be in writing, They
plead only in writing and by giving Bail. The Function of the Nai in Law Suits.
and that they plead not without giving Caution.

But as the whole People of the Jurisdiction is divided by Bands, and that
their principal Nai are the Officers of the Tribunal, whom I shall call by the
general name of Counselors; in case of process the Plaintiff goes first to the
Councellor who is his Nai, or to his Country Nai, who goes to the Councellor
Nai. He presents him his Petition, and the Councellor presents it to the
Governor. The Duty of the Governor is nicely to examine it; and to admit or
reject it, according as to him it seems just or unjust; and in this last case
to Chastise the Party, who presented it, to the end that no person might begin
any process rashly, and this is likewise the Style or form of China, but it is
little observed at Siam.

How a Process is prepared at Siam.
The Governor then admits the Petition, and refers it to one of the Counselors;
and ordinarily he returns it to him that presented it, if he is the common Nai
of both parties: but then he puts his Seal thereunto, and he counts the lines
and the cancelling thereof, to the end that no alteration may be made. The
Councellor gives it to his Deputy and to his Clerk, who make their report to
him at his House in his Hall of Audience: And this report, and all those which
I shall treat of in the sequel, are only a Lecture. After this the Councellor's
Clerk presented by his Master, reports or reads this very Petition, in the
Governor's Hall, at an Assembly of all the Counselors; but in the absence of
the Governor, who vouchsafes not to appear at whatever serves only to prepare
the Cause. The Parties are there called in under pretense of endeavoring to
reconcile them: and they are summoned three times, more for fashions sake, than
with a sincere intention of procuring the accommodation. This Reconciliation
not succeeding, the Court orders, if there are witnesses, that they should be
heard before the same Clerk, unless he be declared suspected. And in such
another Session, that is to say, where the Governor is not present, the Clerk
reads the Process and the depositions of the Witnesses, and they proceed to the
Opinions, which are only consultative, and which are all writ down, beginning
with the Opinion of the last Officer.

The Form of the Judgments.
The Process being thus prepared, and the Council standing in presence of the
Governor, his Clerk reads unto him the Process and the Opinions; and the
Governor, after having resumed them all, interrogates those whose Opinions seem
to him not just, to know of them upon what reasons they grounded them. After
this Examination he pronounces in general terms, that such of the Parties shall
be condemned according to the Law.

The Law or Custom is read.
Then it belongs to Oc-Louang-Peng to read with a loud voice the Article of the
Law, which respects the suit: but in that Country, as in this, they dispute the
sense of the Laws. They do there seek out some accommodations under the title
of Equity; and under pretense that all the circumstances of the fact are never
in the Law, they never follow the Law. The Governor alone decides these
disputes, and the Sentence is pronounced upon the parties, and set down in
Writing. But if it be contrary to all appearance of Justice, it belongs to the
Jockebat, or the Kings Attorney General, to advertise the Court thereof, but
not to oppose it.

Suits are a long time depending. They have no Advocate nor Attorney.
Every suit ought to end in three days, and some there are which last three
years.

The parties do speak before the Clerk, who writes down what they tell him; and
they speak either by themselves, or by another: but it is necessary that this
other, who herein performs the office of an Attorney or Advocate, should be at
least Cousin German to him for whom he speaks; otherwise he would be punished,
and not heard.

Before whom they produce.
The Clerk receives likewise all the Titles and Deeds, but in presence of the
Court, who counts all the lines thereof.

Proofs subsidiary to the Torture.
When ordinary proofs do not suffice, they have recourse to Torture in
Accusations, which are very grievous upon this account; and they apply it
rigorously, and in several ways: or rather they use the proofs of Water and of
Fire, or of some others as superstitious, but not of Duelling.

The Proof of the Fire.
In the Proof of Fire they erect a Pile of Faggots in a Ditch, in such a manner
that the surface of the Pile be level with the edge of the Ditch. This Pile is
five fathomslong, and one broad. Both the parties do walk with their naked Feet
from one end to the other, and he that has not the sole of his Feet hurt gains
his Suit. But as they are accustomed to go with naked Feet, and that they have
the sole of the Foot hard like Horn, they say that it is very common that the
Fire spares them, provided they rest the Foot upon the Coals: for the way to
burn themselves is to go quick and lightly. Two men do generally walk by the
side of him that passes over the Fire, and they lean with force upon his
Shoulders, to hinder him from getting too quick over this proof: and it is said
that this weight is so far from exposing him more to be burnt, that on the
contrary he stifles the Action of the Fire under his Feet.

Sometimes the proof of the Fire is performed with Oil, Another sort of Proof
by Fire.
or other boiling matter, into which the parties do thrust their hand. A
Frenchman, from whom a Siamese had stole some Tin, was persuaded, for want of
proof, to put his hand into the melted Tin; and he drew it out almost consumed.
The Siamese being more cunning extricated himself, I know not how, without
burning; and was sent away absolved; and yet six Months after, in another Suit,
wherein he was engaged, he was convicted of the Robbery, wherewith the
Frenchman had accused him. But a Thousand such like events persuade not the
Siameses to change their form.

The Proof of the Water is performed after this manner. The Proof of the Water.
The two parties do plunge themselves into the Water at the same time, each
holding by a Pole, along which they descend; and he that remains longest under
Water is thought to have a good Cause. Every one therefore practices from their
Youth, in this Country, to familiarize himself with Fire, and to continue a
long time under Water.

They have another sort of Proof, A Proof by Vomits.
which is performed by certain Pills prepared by the Talapoins, and accompanied
with Imprecations: Both the parties do swallow them, and the token of the right
Cause is to be able to keep them in the Stomach without casting them up, for
they are vomitive.

All these Proofs are not only before the Judges, but before the People, The
various successes of these Proofs.
and if the two parties do escape equally well, or equally ill with one, they
have recourse to another Trial. The King of Siam uses them also in his
Judgments, but besides this he sometimes delivers up the parties to Tigers, and
he whom the Tigers spare for a certain time is adjudged innocent. But if the
Tigers devour them both, they are both esteemed guilty. If on the contrary the
Tigers do meddle neither with the one nor the other, they have recourse to some
other Proof, or rather they wait till the Tigers determine to devour one or
both of the Parties. The Constancy with which it is reported that the Siameses
do undergo this kind of death, is incredible in persons, who express so little
Courage in War.

There are sometimes several Provinces which appeal one to the other; The
Degrees of Appeal.
which multiplies the degrees of Appeal to three or four. An Appeal is
permitted in all cases, but the charges thereof are always greater, as it is
necessary to travel further to plead, and in a Tribunal superior,

But when there ought to pass the sentence of Death, Judgments of Death
reserved to the Prince, or to some extraordinary Commissioners.
the decision thereof is reserved to the King alone. No other Judge than
himself can order a capital punishment, if this Prince does not expressly grant
him the power thereof; and there is hardly any precedent, that he grants it
otherwise than to some extraordinary Judges, whom this Prince sends sometimes
into the Provinces, either upon a particular case, or to execute Justice at the
places of all the crimes worthy of death. All the Criminals are kept in the
Prisons till the arrival of the Commissioners: and they have sometimes, as at
China, the power of deposing and punishing the ordinary Officers with death, if
they deserve it. But if the King of Siam grants other Commissions for his
Service, or for the Service of the State, it is rare that he exempts the
Commissioner from taking the assistance of the Governor of the places where he
sends him.

The usual Punishment of Robbery is the Condemnation to the double, The
Punishment of Robbery extended to Estates.
and sometimes to the triple; by equal portions to the Judge and Party: But it
is most singular in this, that the Siameses extend the Punishment of Robbery to
every unjust Possessor in a Real Estate: So that whoever it evicted out of an
Inheritance by Law, not only restores the Inheritance to the Party, but
likewise pays the value thereof, half to the Party, and half to the Judge. But
if by the King's special permission the Judge can put the Robber to death, then
he can at his own discretion order either Death, or the pecuniary Mulct, but
not Death and the pecuniary Mulct together.

But to show how dear Justice is in a Country, where Provisions are so cheap, I
will add at the end of this work, a Note that was given me of the charges of
Justice, where you will likewise see a particular of the form: but the charges
are not the same in all the Tribunals, as I have already declared. He for whom
this Roll is, has four inferior Jurisdictions, and he appeals to another, which
appeals to the Court.

CHAP. VI. The Functions of the Governor and Judge in the Metropolis.
The King is the Tchaou-Meuang of the Metropolis.
IN the Metropolis, where there is no other Tchaou-Meuang than the King, the
Functions of Governor and Judge are divided into two Offices: and the other
Functions of the lesser Offices, which compose a Tribunal of Tchaou-Meuang, are
distributed to the principal Officers of the State; but with greater Extent and
Authority, and with higher and more pompous Titles.

The Office of Yummarat, which they pronounce Yumrat.
The President of the Tribunal of the City of Siam, to whom all the Appeals of
the Kingdom do go, they call Yumrat. He generally bears the Title of Oc-ya, and
his Tribunal is in the King's Palace; but he follows not the King, when that
Prince removes from his Metropolis; and then he renders Justice in a Tower,
which is in the City of Siam, and without the enclosure of the Palace. To him
alone belongs the determinative Voice; and from him there also lies an Appeal
to the King, if any one will bear the expense.

The Judiciary form before the King.
In this case the Process is referred and examined by the King's Council; but in
his absence to a Sentence inclusively consultative, as is practiced in the
Council of the Tchaou-Meuang. The King is present only when it is necessary
that he pronounce a definitive Judgment: and according to the general form of
the Kingdom, this Prince, before passing the Sentence, resumes all the opinions
and debates with his Counselors, those which to him seem unjust; and some have
assured me, that the present King acquits himself herein with a great deal of
Ingenuity and Judgment.

The Office of Pra-sadet, which is pronounced Pra-sedet.
The Governor of the City of Siam is called Pra-sedet, and generally also bears
the Title of Oc ya. His Name, which is Baly, is composed of the word Pra, which
I have several times explained, and of the word Sedet which signifies, say
some, the King is gone; and indeed they speak not otherwise, to say that the
King is gone. But this does not sufficiently explain what the Office of
Pra-sedet is: and in several things it appears, that they have very much lost
the exact understanding of the Baly. Mr. Gervaise calls this Office Pesedet; I
always heard it called Pra-sedet, and by able men, although they write it
Pra-sadet.

The Reception which the Governors gave to the King's Ambassadors, every one in
his Government.
The course of the River from its Mouth to the Metropolis, is divided into
several small Governments. The first is Pipeli, the second Prepadem, the third
Bancock, the fourth Talaccan, and the fifth Siam. The Officers of every one of
these Governments received the King's Ambassadors at the entrance into their
Jurisdiction, and they left them not till the Officers of the next Jurisdiction
had joined and saluted them: and they were the particular Officers of each
Government that made the Head of the Train. Besides this there were some
Officers more considerable, that came to offer the King their Master's Balons
to the Ambassadors, at the Mouth of the River: and every day there joined new
Officers, that came to bring new Compliments to the Ambassadors: and who
quitted not the Ambassadors after they had joined them.

The place where the King's Ambassadors expected the day of their entrance.
The King's Ambassadors arrived thus within two Leagues of Siam, at a place
which the French called the Tabanque; and they waited there eight or ten days
for the time of their entrance into the Metropolis. Tabanque in Siamese
signifies the Custom House: and because the Officer's House, which stands at
the Mouth of the River, is of Bamhou like all the rest, the French gave the
name of Tabanque to all the Bambou-houses where they lodged, from the name of
the Officers House, which they had seen first of all.

The day therefore that the King's Ambassadors made their entrance, The
Governor of Siam came to fetch them.
Oc-ya Prasedet as Governor of the Metrpolis came to visit, and compliment
them at this pretended Tabanque.

CHAP. VII. Of the State Officers, and particularly of the Tchacry, Calla-hom,
and of the General of the Elephants.
AMongst the Court Officers are principally those, Of the chief Officers in
general.
to whom are annexed the Functions of our Secretaries of State: but before an
entrance be made into this matter, I must declare that all the chief Officers
in any kind of Affairs whatever, have under them as many of those Subaltern
Officers which compose the Tribunal of the Tchaou-Meuang.

The Tchacry has the distribution of all the Interior polity of the Kingdom: Of
the Tchacry.
to him revert all the Affairs of the Provinces: All the Governors do
immediately render him an Account, and do immediately receive Orders from him:
he is President of the Council of State.

The Calla-hom has the appointment of the War: Of the Calla-hom.
he has the care of the Fortifications, Arms, and Ammunitions: He issues out
all the Orders, that concern the Armies; and he is naturally the General
thereof, although the King may name whom he pleases for General. By Van Vliet's
Relation it appears that the Command of the Elephants belonged also to the
Calla-hom, even without the Army. But now this is a separate Employment, as
some have assured me: either for that the present King's Father, after having
made use of the Office of the Calla-hom to gain the Throne; resolved to divide
the Power thereof, or that naturally they are two distinct Offices, which may
be given to a single Person.

However it be, it is Oc-Pra Pipitcharatcha corruptly called Petratcha, Of the
General of the Elephants.
who commands all the Elephants, and all the Horses: and it is one of the
greatest Employments of the Kingdom, because that the Elephants are esteemed
the King of Siam's Principal Forces. Some there are who report that this Prince
maintains Ten Thousand, but is impossible to be known, by reason that Vanity
always inclines these People to Lying: and they are more vain in the matter of
Elephants, than in any thing else. The Metropolis of the Kingdom of Laos is
called Lan-Tchang, and its name in the Language of the Country, which is almost
the same as the Siameses, signifies Ten Millions of Elephants. The King of Siam
keeps therefore a very great number: and it is said that three men at least are
required for the service of every Elephant: and these men, with all the Offiers
that command them, are under the orders of Oc-Pra Pipitcharatcha: who though he
has only the Title of Oc-Pra, is yet a very great Lord. The people love him
because he appears moderate; and think him invulnerable, because he expressed a
great deal of Courage in some Fight against the Peguins: his Courage has
likewise procured him the Favor of the King his Master. His Family has
continued a long time in the highest Offices: is frequently allied to the
Crown; and it is publicly reported that he or his Son Oc-Louang Souracac may
pretend to it, if either of them survive the King that now Reigns. The Mother
of Oc-Pra Pip ^haratcha was the King's Nurse, and the Mother of the first
Ambassador whom we saw here: and when the King commanded the great Barcalon,
the Brother of this Ambassador, to be bastinado'd the last time, 'twas
Oc-Louang Souracac the Son of Oc-Pra Pipitcharatcha that bastinado'd him by the
King's order, and in his presence; the Prince's Nurse, the Mother of the
Barcalon, lying prostrate at his Feet, to obtain pardon for her Son.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Art of War amongst the Siameses, and of their
Forces by Sea and Land.
The Siameses not proper for War.
THe Art of War is exceedingly ignor'd at Siam: the Siameses are little inclined
to this Trade. The over-quick imagination of the excessive hot Countries, is
not more proper for Courage, than the slow imagination of Countries extremely
cold. The sight of a naked Sword is sufficient to put an hundred Siameses to
flight; there needs only the assured Tone of an European, that wears a Sword at
his side, or a Cane in his hand, to make them forget the most express Orders of
their Superiors.

How contemptible the men in the Indies are as to their Courage.
I say moreover, that every one born in the Indies is without Courage; although
he be born of European Parents. And the Portugueses born in the Indies have
been a real proof thereof. A society of Dutch Merchants found in them only the
Name and the Language, and not the Bravery of the Portuguese: and if other
Europeans went to seek out the Dutch, they would not be found more Valorous.
The best constituted men are those of the Temperate Zones: and amongst these
the difference of their common aliments, and of the places which they inhabit,
more or less hot, dry or moist, exposed to the Winds or to the Seas, Plains or
Mountains. Woods or Champains, and much more the several Governments do cause
very great differences. For who doubts, for example, that the Ancient Greeks,
brought up in liberty, where incomparably more Valorous then the present
Greeks, depressed by so long a Servitude? All these reasons do concur to
effeminate the Courage of the Siameses, I mean the heat of the Climate, the
phlegmatic Aliments, and the Despotick Government.

The Siameses abhor blood.
The Opinion of the Metempsychosis inspiring them with an horror of blood,
deprives them likewise of the Spirit of War. They busy themselves only in
making Slaves. If the Peguins, for example, do on one side invade the lands of
Siam, the Siameses will at another place enter on the Lands of Pegu, and both
Parties will carry away whole Villages into Captivity.

How in fighting they disguise the design of killing their Enemies.
But if the Armies meet, they will not shoot directly one against the other, but
higher: and yet as they endeavor to make these random Shots to fall back upon
the Enemies, to the end that they may be overtaken therewith, if they do not
retreat, one of the two Parties does not long defer from taking flight, upon
perceiving it never so little to rain Darts or Bullets. But if the design be to
stop the Troops that come upon them, they will shoot lower than it is
necessary; to the end that if the Enemies approach, the fault may be their own
in coming within the reach of being wounded or slain. Kill not is the order,
which the King of Siam gives his Troops, when he sends them into the Field:
which cannot signify that they should not kill absolutely, but that they shoot
not directly upon the Enemy.

How the King of Singor was taken by a Frenchman.
Some have upon this account informed me a thing, which in my opinion, will
appear most incredible. It Is of a provincial named Cyprian, who is still at
Surat in the French Company's Service, if he has not quitted it, or if he is
not lately dead: the name of his Family I know not. Before his entrance into
the Companies service, he had served some time in the King of Siam's Army in
quality of Canoneer; and because he was prohibited from shooting strait, he
doubted not that the Siamese General would betray the King his Master. This
Prince sending afterward some Troops against the Tchaou-Meuang, or if you
will, against the King of Singor, on the western Coast of the Gulf of Siam,
Cyprian wearied with seeing the Armies in view, which attempted no persons
life, determined one night to go alone to the Camp of the Rebels, and to fetch
the King of Singor into his Tent. He took him indeed, and brought him to the
Siamese General, and so terminated a War of above twenty years. The King of
Siam intended to recompense this service of Cyprian with a quantity of
Sapan-wood; but by some intrigue of Court he got nothing, and retired to Surat.

Now though the Siameses appear to us so little proper for War, The Siameses
have little to fear from their Neighbors. The King of Siam has no other Troops
maintained than his foreign Guard.
yet they cease not to make it frequently and advantageously, by reason that
their Neighbors are neither more potent nor more valiant than them.

The King of Siam has no other Troops maintained than his foreign Guard, of
which I will speak in the sequel. It Is true that the Chevalier de Fourbin had
showed the Exercise of Arms to four hundred Siameses, which we found at
Bancock: and that after he had quitted this Kingdom, an Englishman, who had
been a Sergeant in the Garrison of Madraspatan, on the Coast of Coromandel,
showed this same exercise, which he had learnt under the Chevalier de Fourbin,
to about eight hundred other Siameses, to show the King of Siam that the
Chevalier de Fourbin was not necessary to him. But all these Soldiers have no
other pay, than the Exemption from the six Months Service for some of their
Family. And as they cannot easily maintain themselves from their own Houses, by
reason they receive no money, they remain at their own Habitations; the four
hundred about Bancock, and the other eight hundred at Louvo, or thereabouts.
Only for the security of Bancock some Detachments went thither by turns to keep
a continual Guard, and the rest being thereabouts might render themselves in
case of an Alarm. But according to the common practice of the Kingdom of Siam,
the Garrisons which it may have, are composed of persons, who serve in this by
six Months, as they should serve in another thing; and who are relieved by
others when they have served their full time.

The Kingdom of Siam being very strong by its impenetaable Woods, The Country
of Siam is very strong without Forts.
and by the great number of Channels, wherewith it is interspersed, and in fine
by the annual Innundation of six Months, the Siameses would not hitherto have
places well fortified for fear of losing them, and not being able to retake
them; and this is the reason they gave me thereof. The Castles they have would
hardly sustain the first shock of our Soldiers; and though they be small and
ugly, because they would have them such, yet is it necessary to employ the
skill of the Europeans to delineate them.

It Is some years since the King of Siam designing to make a wooden Fort on the
Frontier of Pegu, The Siameses know not how to make a wooden Fort.
had no abler a person to whom he could entrust the care thereof, than to one
named Brother Rene Charbonneau, who after having been a Servant of the Mission
of St. Lazarus at Paris, had passed to the Service of the Foreign Missions, and
was gone to Siam. Brother Rene, who by his Industry knew how to let blood, and
give a Remedy to a sick Person (for it is by such like charitable Employments,
and by some presents, that the Missionaries are permitted and loved in this
Country) defended himself as much as he could from making this Fort, protesting
that he was not capable: but in short he could not prevent rendering obedience,
when it was signified to him that the King of Siam absolutely required it. He
was afterward three or four years Governor of Jonsalam by Commission, and with
great approbation: and because he desired to return to the City of Siam to his
Wife's Relations, which are Portugueses, Mr. Billi, the Master of Mr. de
Chaumont's Palace, succeeded him in the Employment of Jonsalam.

The Siameses have not much Artillery. A Portuguese of Macao, Of their
Artillery.
who died in their service, cast them some pieces of Cannon; but as for them, I
question whether they know how to make any moderately good: though some have
informed me that they have hammered some out of cold Iron.

As they have no Horses (for what is two thousand Horse at most, In what their
Armies consist.
which it is reported that the King of Siam keeps?) their Armies consist only in
Elephants, and in Infantry, naked and ill armed, after the mode of the Country.
Their order of Battle and Encampment is thus.

They range themselves in three lines, What is their order of battle and of
their Encampments.
each of which is composed of three great square Battalions; and the King, or
the General whom he names in his absence, stands in the middle Battalion, which
he composes of the best Troops, for the security of his Person. Every
particular Captain of a Battalion keeps himself also in the midst of the
Battalion which he commands: and if the nine Battalions are too big, they are
each divided into nine less, with the same symmetry as the whole body of the
Army.

Elephants of War.
The Army being thus ranged, every one of the nine Battalions has sixteen male
Elephants in the rear. They call them Elephants of War: and each of these
Elephants carries his particular standard, and is accompanied with two female
Elephants; but as well females as males are mounted each with three armed Men;
and besides this the Army has some Elephants with Baggage. The Siameses report
that the female Elephants are only for the dignity of the males; but as I have
already declared in the other part, it would be very difficult always to govern
the males without the Company of the females.

The Artillery begins the Fight.
The Artillery, at the places where the River grows shallow, is carried on
Wagons drawn by Buffalo's, or Oxen, for it has no carriage. It begins the
Fight, and if it ends it not, then they place themselves within reach to make
use of the small shot, and Arrows, after the manner as I have explained, but
they never fall on with vigor enough, nor defend themselves with constancy
enough, to come to a close Fight.

The Siameses easy to break, and to rally.
They break themselves and fly into Woods, but ordinarily they rally with the
same facility. as they are broken; and if on some occasion, as in the last
Conspiracy of the Macassars, it is absolutely necessary to stand firm, they can
promise themselves to retain the Soldiers, only by placing some Officers
behind, to kill those that shall fly. I have elsewhere related how these
Macassars made use of Opium to endow themselves with Courage: it is a custom
practiced principally by the Ragipouts, and the Melays, but not by the
Siameses: the Siameses would be afraid to become too Courageous.

Elephants not proper for War.
They very much rely upon the Elephants in Combats, though this Animal for want
of Bitt or Bridle, cannot be securely governed, and he frequently returns upon
his own Masters when he is wounded. Moreover he so exceedingly dreads the fire,
that he is never almost accustomed thereunto. Yet they exercise them to carry,
and to see fired from their back little pieces about three foot long, and about
a pound of Ball; and Bernier reports that this very practice is observed in the
Mogul's Country.

The Siameses incapable of Sieges.
As for Sieges they are wholly incapable thereof, for men that dare not set upon
the Enemies when in view, will not vigorously attack a place never so little
Fortified, but only by Treachery, in which they are very cunning, or by Famine,
if the Besieged cannot have provision.

Their weakness by Sea.
They are yet more seeble by Sea than by Land. Not without much ado the King of
Siam has five or six very small Ships, which he principally makes use of for
Merchandise; and sometimes he arms them as Privateers against those of his
Neighbors, with whom he is at War. But the Officers and Seamen, on whom he
confides, are Foreigners; and till these latter times he had chosen English and
Portuguese: but within these few years he has employed some French. The King
of Siam's Intention is, that his Corsairs should kill no person, no more than
his Land Forces, but that they use all the Tricks imaginable to take some
Prizes. In his War at Sea, he proposes to himself only some Reprizals from some
of his Neighbors, from whom he believes himself to have received some injury
in Trade. And the contrivances succeed whilst his Enemies are not in any
distrust. Besides this he has fifty or sixty Galleys, whose Anchors, I have
said are of Wood. They are only moderate Boats for a Bridge, which do every one
carry fifty or sixty men to Row and to Fight. These men do fight by turns, as
in every thing else: There is only one to each Oar; and he is obliged to Row
standing, because the Oar is so short, for lightness sake, that it would not
touch the water, if not held almost perpendicular. These Galleys only coast it
along the Gulf of Siam.

CHAP. IX. Of the Barcalon, and of the Revenues.
THe Pra-Clang, or by a corruption of the Portugueses, the Barcalon, Of the
Barcalon.
is the Officer which has the appointment of the Commerce, as well within as
without the Kingdom. He is the Superintendent of the King of Siam's Magazines,
or if you will, his chief Factor. His name is composed of the Balie word Pra,
which I have so often discoursed of, and of the word Clang, which signifies
Magazine. He is the Minister of the foreign affairs, because they almost all
relate to Commerce; and it is to him that the fugitive Nations at Siam address
themselves in their affairs, because it is only the liberty of Trade that
formerly invited them thither. In a word, it is the Barcalon that receives the
Revenues of the Cities.

The King of Siam's Revenues are of two sorts, Revenues of the Cities, The King
of Siam's Revenues arise from two Sources.
and Revenues of the Country. The Country Revenues are received by Oc ya
Pollatep, according to some, or Vorethep, according to Mr. Gervase.

They are all reduced to the Heads following.

1. On Forty Fathom Square of cultivated Lands, His Duties on cultivated Lands.
a Mayon or quarter of a Tical by year: but this Rent is divided with the
Tchaou-Meuang where there is one; and it is never well paid to the King on the
Frontiers. Besides this, the Law of the Kingdom is, that whoever ploughs not
his ground pays nothing, though it be by his own negligence that he reaps
nothing. But the present King of Siam, to force his Subjects to work, has
exacted this duty from those that have possessed Lands for a certain time,
although they omit to cultivate them. Yet this is executed only in the places
where his Authority is absolute. He loved nothing so much, as to see Strangers
come to settle in his States, there to manure those great uncultivated Spaces,
which without comparison do make the most considerable part thereof: in this
case he would be liberal of untilled grounds, and of Beasts to cultivate them,
though they had been cleared and prepared for Tillage.

2. On Boats or Balons, On Boats.
the Natives of the Country pay a Tical for every Fathom in length. Under this
Reign they have added that every Balon or Boat above six Cubits broad should
pay six Ticals, and that Foreigners should be obliged to this duty, as well as
the Natives of the Country. This duty is levied like a kind of Custom at
certain places of the River, and amongst others at Tchainat, four Leagues above
Siam, where all the Streams unite.

3. Customs on whatever is imported or exported by Sea. Besides which, Customs.
the body of the Ship pays something in proportion to its Capacities, like the
Balons.

4. On Arak or Rice-Brandy, or rather on every Furnace where it is made, On
Arak.
which they call Taou-laou, the People of the Country do pay a Tical per Annum.
This Duty has been doubled under this Reign, and is exacted on the Natives of
the Country, and on Strangers alike. It Is likewise added, that every Seller of
Arak by re-tail, should pay a Tical a year, and every Seller by wholesale, a
Tical per Annum for every great Pot, the size of which, I find no otherwise
described in the Note which was given me.

5. On the Fruit called Durion, for every Tree already bearing, On Durions.
or not bearing Fruit, two Mayons or half a Tical per annum.

6. On every Tree of Betel, a Tical per annum. On Betel.


7. On every Arekier they formerly paid three Nuts of Arek in kind: On the Arek.
under this Reign, they pay six.

8. Revenues entirely new, or established under this Reign, New Imposts.
are in the first place, a certain Duty on a School of Recreation permitted at
Siam. The Tribute which the Oc-ya Mien pays, is almost of the same Nature, but
I know not whether it is not ancienter than the former. In the second place, on
every Coco-Tree, half a Tical per Annum; and in the third place on
Orange Trees, Mango-Trees, Mangoustaniers and Pimentiers, for each, a Tical per
Annum. There is no duty on Pepper, by reason that the King would have his
Subjects addict themselves more to plant it.

A Demesne reserved to the King.
9. This Prince has in several places of his States some Gardens and Lands,
which he causes to be cultivated, as his particular demesne, as well by his
Slaves, as by the six Months Service. He causes the Fruits to be gathered and
kept on the places, for the maintenance of his House, and for the nourishment
of his Slaves, his Elephants, his Horses, and other Cattle; and the rest he
sells.

10. A Casual Revenue is the Presents which this Prince receives, as well as
all the Officers of his Kingdom, the Legacies which the Officers bequeath him
at their death, or which he takes from their Succession; and in fine, the
extraordinary Duties, which he takes from his Subjects on several occasions: as
for the Maintenance of Foreign Ambassadors, to which the Governors, into whose
Jurisdiction the Ambassadors do pass, or sojourn, are obliged to contribute;
and for the building of Forts, and other public works, an expense which he
levies on the People, amongst whom these works are made.

Confiscations and Fines. Six Months Service.
11. The Revenues of Justice do donsist in Confiscations and Fines.

12. Six Months service of every one of his Subjects per Annum: a Service which
he or his Officers frequently extend much further, who alone discharges it from
every thing, and from which there remains to him a good Increase. For in
certain places this Service is converted into a payment made in Rice, or in
Sapan-wood, or Lignum-aloes, or Saltpetre, or in Elephants, or in Beasts Skins,
or in Ivory, or in other Commodities: and in fine, this Service is sometimes
esteemed and paid in ready Money; and it is for the ready Money that the Rich
are exempted. Anciently this Service was esteemed at a Tical a Month, because
that one Tical is sufficient to maintain one Man: and this computation serves
likewise as an assessment on the days Labor of the Workmen, which a particular
Person employs. They amount to two Ticals a Month at least, by reason that it
is reckoned that a Workman must in 6 Months gain his Maintenance for the whole
year; seeing that he can get nothing the other six Months that he serves the
Prince. The Prince now extorts two Ticals a Month for the exemption from the
six Months Service.

Commerce, a Revenue extraordinary or casual.
13. His other Revenues do arise from the Commerce, which he exercises with his
Subjects and Foreigners. He has carried it to such a degree, that Merchandise
is now no more the Trade of particular persons at Siam. He is not contented
with selling by Wholesale, he has some Shops in the Bazars or Markets, to sell
by Re-tail

Cotton-cloath.
The principal thing that he sells to his Subjects is Cotton-cloath: he sends
them into his Magazines of the Provinces. Heretofore his Predecessors and he
sent them thither only every Ten Years, and a moderate quantity, which being
sold, particular persons had liberty to make Commerce thereof: now he
continually furnishes them, he has in his Magazines more than he can possibly
sell; and it sometimes happens that to vend more, that he has forced his
Subjects to cloth their Children before the accustomed Age. Before the
Hollanders came into the Kingdom of Laos, and into others adjacent, the King of
Siam did there make the whole Commerce of Linen with a considerable profit.

The Calin or Tin.
All the Calin is his, and he sells it as well to Strangers as to his own
Subjects, excepting that which is dug out of the Mines of Jonsalam on the Gulf
of Bengal: for this being a remote Frontier, he leaves the Inhabitants in their
ancient Rights, so that they enjoy the Mines which they dig, paying a small
profit to this Prince.

Ivory, Saltpetre, Lead, Sapan.
All the Ivory comes to the King, his Subjects are obliged to vend him all that
they sell, and Strangers can buy only at his Magazine. The Trade of Saltpetre,
Lead and Sapan, belongs also to the King: they can buy and sell them only at
his Magazine, whether one be a Siamese or Stranger.

Arek.
Arek, a great deal of which is exported out of the Kingdom, can be sold to
Foreigners only by the King: and for this end he buys some of his Subjects,
besides that which he has from his particular Revenues.

Prohibited Goods, as Powder, Sulphur and Arms, Prohibited Goods. Skins of
Beasts.
can be bought or sold at Siam, only at the King's Magazine.

As to the Skins of Beasts, this Prince is obliged, by a Treaty made with the
Hollanders, to sell them all to them; and for this purpose he buys them of his
Subjects: but his Subjects do convey away a great many, which the Hollanders
buy of them in secret.

The rest of the Commerce at Siam is permitted to all, as that of Rice, Fish,
The Commerce free to all persons.
Salt, Brown Sugar, Sugar Candy, Ambergreese, Wax, the Gum with which Varnish
is made, Mother of Pearl, those edable Birds-Nests which come from Tonquin and
Cochinchina, which Navaratte reports to be made of the Sea-froth in some Rocks,
by a kind of small Sea-Birds, which resemble Swallows, Gum Gutte, Incense,
Oil, Coco, Cotton, Cinnamon, Nenuphar, which is not exactly like ours; Cassia,
Dates, and several other things, as well the growth of the Kingdom, as brought
from abroad.

Every one may make and sell Salt; fish and hunt, as I have declared, Salt,
Fishing, Hunting.
and without paying any thing to the King. It is true, that the necessary
Policy is used in Fishing; and Oc-Pra Tainam, who receives the particular
Revenues of the River, hinders those ways of Fishing, which destroy too much
Fish at once. To what Sum the King of Siam's Revenues amount.


The King of Siam has never been well paid his Revenues in lands remote from
his Court. It Is said that the ready Money that he formerly received, amounted
to Twelve hundred thousand Livres, and that what he now gets amounts to Six
hundred thousand Crowns, or to Two Millions. It Is a difficult thing to know
exactly: all that I can assert is, that in this Country it is reported (as a
thing very considerable, and which seems Hyperbolical) that the present King of
Siam has augmented his Revenues a Million.

CHAP. X. Of the Royal Seal, and of the Maha Obarat.
THere is no Chancellor at Siam. There is no Chancellor at Siam. The King gives
not his Seal to any person.
Every Officer that has the Power of giving the Sentences, or Orders in
Writing, which they call Tara in general, has a Seal which the King gives him:
and the King himself has his Royal Seal, which he commits to no person
whatever, and of which he makes use for the Letters he writes, and for whatever
proceeds immediately from him. The Figure which is in the Seals, is not hollow,
but in Relievo. The Seal is rubbed over with a kind of Red Ink, and is printed
on the Paper with the Hand. An inferior Officer takes this Pains; but it is the
duty of the Officer to whom the Seal belongs, to pluck it with his own Hand
from the Print.

After several remarks, which I have made, it seems to me, Of the Maha-Oharat.
that whatever is done in the King of Siam's Name has no Power, if it is not
done at the place where this King actually resides. Certain reasons have
hindered, why they have not certainly informed me thereof. However, it is
certain, that for the reason which I have alleged, or for some other, there is
at Siam as it were a Viceroy, who represents the King, and performs the Regal
Functions in the King's Absence; as when this Prince is at War. This Officer is
called Maha-Oharat, as it was given me in writing, or Ommarat, according to the
Abbot de Choisy, and Mr. Gervaise. And the Abbot de Choisy adds, that the Maha
Omarat has a right of sitting down in the King's Presence, a Circumstance which
some have informed me to be peculiar to another Officer, of whom I shall speak
in the sequel. At present they give him the Title of Pa-ya, and they do
thereunto add the word Tchaou, which signifies Lord; Tchaou Pa-ya Maha Omrat:
Sometimes he has only the Title of Oc-ya, as in Vliet's Relation, where he is
called Oc-ya Ombrat. He is thereunto qualified as Chief of the Nobility, which
signifies nothing, but the first Officer of the Kingdom.

CHAP. XI. Of the Palace, and of the King of Siam's Guards.
Officers within and without.
IT now remains for me to speak of the King, and of his House. This Prince's
Palace has its Officers within, and its Officers without; but so different in
dignity, that an Oc-Meuing within commands all the Oc-ya without. They call
Officers within, not only those which lodge always in the Palace, but those
whose functions are exercised in the Palace: And they call Officers without the
Palace, not all the Officers of the Kingdom, which have no Function in the
Palace, but those which having no Function in the Palace; yet have not any
without which respects not the Service of the Palace. Thus the Spaniards have
Servants, which they call de Escalera arriba, and others which they call de
Escalera abaxo, that is to say Servants at the top of the Stairs, or which may
go up the Stairs to their Master, and to those to whom their Master sends them,
and others who wait always at the bottom of the Stairs.

Three Enclosures in the King of Siam's Palace.
The King of Siam's Palaces have three Enclosures: and that of the City of Siam
has them so distant one from the other, that the space thereof appears like
vast Courts. All that the inward Close includes, viz. the King's Apartment,
some Court, and some Garden, is called Vang in Siamese. The whole Palace with
all its Enclosures is called Prassat, though Vliet in the Title of his Relation
translates the word Prassat by that of Throne. The Siameses neither enter into
the Vang, nor depart thence without prostrating themselves, and they pass not
before the Prassat. And if sometimes the stream of the Water carries them, and
forces them to pass thereby, they are pelted with showers of Pease, which the
King's Servants shoot over them with Trunks. Mr. de Chaumont and the King's
Ambassadors landed, and left their Umbrella's at the first entrance of the
Prassat.

Of the Oc-ya Vang.
The Oc-ya Vang commands in the Vang; and in him reunites all the Functions
which respect the Reparations of the Palace, the Order which must be observed
in the Palace, and the Expense which is made for the Maintenance of the King,
of his Wives and of his Eunuchs, and of all those whom this Prince maintains in
the Vang. 'Twas the Oc-ya Vang, who, after the Example of all the other
Governors, which had received the King's Ambassadors at the entrance of their
Government, came to receive them at the Gate of the Vang; and who introduced
them to the Audience of the King his Master.

The Gates of the Palace, and of the precautions with which persons are
admitted.
The Gates of the Palace are always shut; and behind each stands a Porter, who
has some Arms, but who instead of bearing them, keeps them in his Lodge near
the Gate. If any one knocks, the Porter advertises the Officer, who commands in
the first Enclosure, and without whose permission no person enters in, nor goes
out: but no person enters armed, nor after having drunk Arak, to assure himself
that no drunken man enters therein. Wherefore the Officer views, and smells the
breath of all those that must enter therein.

The Meuing Tchion.
This Office is double, and those that are in it do serve alternately and by
day. The days of Service they continue twenty four whole hours in the Palace,
and the other days they may be at home. Their Title is Oc-Meuing Tchion, of
rather Pra Meuing Tchion: for at the Palace before the word Meuing there are
some who put the word Pra instead of Oc, though some have told me that it is
Oc-Meuing, and not Pra-Meuing that he must be always called. 'Twas one of these
Meuing Tchions who brought the first Compliment from the King of Siam to the
Ambassadors, when they were in the Road; and who stayed constantly with them
after they were landed, as Mr. Torpff, continued always with the Ambassador of
Siam.

Painted Arms.
Between the two first Enclosures, and under a Pent-house, is a small number of
Soldiers unarmed and stooping. They are those Kenhai or Painted Arms, of whom I
have spoken. The Officer who commands them immediately, and who is a
Painted-Arm himself, is called Oncarac, and he and they are the Prince his
Executioners; as the Officers and Soldiers of the Pretorian Cohorts, were the
Executioners of the Roman Emperors. But at the same time they omit not to watch
the Prince's person; for in the Palace there is wherewith to arm them in case
of need. They row the Balon of State, and the King of Siam has no other
Foot-guard. Their Employment is hereditary, like all the rest of the Kingdom;
and the ancient Law imports that they ought not to exceed six hundred: But this
must doubtless be understood that there ought to be no more than six hundred
for the Palace: for there must needs be many more in the whole extent of the
State; because that the King, as I have said elsewhere, gives thereof to a very
great number of Officers. A Guard of Slaves for a Show.


But this Prince is not contented with this Guard on days of Ceremony, as was
that of the first Audience of the King's Ambassadors. On such occasions he
causes his Slaves to be armed; and if their number is not sufficient, the
Slaves of the principal Officers are armed. He gives to them all some Muslin
Shirts dyed red, Muskets, or Bows, or Lances, and Pots of gilded wood on their
Heads, which for this purpose are taken out of the Magazine: and the quantity
of which, in my opinion, determines the number of these Soldiers of show. They
formed a double Rank at the reception of Mr. de Chaumont; and so soon as he was
past, those which he had left behind, made haste to get before by the by-ways,
to go to fill up the vacant places which were left for them. In our time they
marched by the sides of the Ambassadors, till they stopped up the space through
which they were to pass. We also found part of these Slaves prostrate before
the little Stairs, which goes up to the Hall of Audience. Some held those
little useless Trumpets, which I have spoken of; and others had before them
those little Drums, which they never beat. The Meuing Tchion are the Nai of all
these Slaves; and these Slaves row the Balons of the King's retinue, and are
moreover employed on several works.

Anciently the Kings of Siam had a Japponese Guard, The King of Siam has no
standing Japponese Guard.
composed of six hundred men: but because these six hundred men alone, could
make the whole Kingdom to tremble when they pleased, the present King's Father,
after having made use of them to invade the Throne, found out a way to rid
himself of them, more by policy than force.

The King of Siam's Horse-guard is composed of Men from Laos, The Horse-Guard
from Mien, and Laos.
and another neighboring Country, the chief City whereof is called Mien: and
as the Meens and Laos do serve him by six Months, he makes this Guard as
numerous as he pleases, and as many Horse as he would employ therein.

Oc-Coune Ran Patchi commands this Guard on the right hand: His Son is in
France, and has for some years learnt the Trade of a Fountain-maker at
Triannon. Oc-Coune Pipitcharatcha, or as the People say, Oc-Coune Petratcha,
commands the half of this Guard, which serves on the left hand: but over these
two Officers Oc-ya Lao commands the Guard of the Laos, and Oc-ya Mien the Guard
of the Mien: and this Oc-ya Mien is a different person from him that
prostitutes lewd Women.

Besides this the King of Siam has a foreign standing Horse-guard, A Foreign
Horse-Guard.
which consists in an Hundred and Thirty Gentlemen: but neither they, nor the
Mien, nor the Laos, do ever keep Guard in the Palace. Notice is given them to
accompany the King when he goes out, and thus all this is esteemed the exterior
Service, and not the interior Service of the Palace.

This foreign Guard consists, first in two Companies of thirty Moors each, Of
what it is composed.
Natives, or originally descended from the States of the Mogul, of an excellent
Mien, but accounted Cowards. Secondly, in a Company of twenty Chinese Tartars
armed with Bows and Arrows, and formidable for their Courage; and lastly in two
Companies of Twenty five Men each, Pagans of the true India, habited like the
Moors, which are called Rasbouts, or Raggibouts, who boast themselves to be of
the Royal blood, and whose Courage is very famous, though it be only the effect
of Opium, as I have before remarked.

The King of Siam supplies this whole Guard with Arms, and with Horses: What it
costs.
and besides this every Moor costs him three Catis and twelve Teils a year,
that is to say 540 Livres, or thereabouts, and a red Stuff Vest; and every of
the two Moorish Captains five Catis and twelve Teils, or 840 Livres, and a
Scarlet Vest. The Raggibouts are maintained according to the same rate; but
every Chinese Tartar costs him only six Teils, or 45 Livres a year, and their
Captain fifteen Teils, or 112 Livres, ten Sols.

The Elephants and Horses of the Palace.
In the first Enclosures are likewise the Stables of the Elephants and Horses,
which the King of Siam esteems the best, and which are called Elephants and
Horses by Name: because that this King gives them a Name, as he gives to all
the Officers within his Palace, and to the important Officers of the State,
which in this are very much distinguished from the Officers on whom he imposes
none. He that has the care of the Horses, either for their maintenance, or to
train them up, and who is as it were the chief Querry, is called Oc Louang
Tchoumpon; his Belat, or Lieutenant is Oc-Meuing Si Sing Toup Pa-tchat; but he
alone has the Privilege of speaking to the King: Neither his Belat nor his
other inferior Officers do speak unto him.

The Elephants of Name.
The Elephants of Name are treated with more or less Dignity, according to the
more or less honorable Name they bear; but every one of them has several Men
at his Service. They stir not out, as I have elsewhere declared, without
trappings; and because that all the Elephants of Name cannot be kept within the
Compass of the Palace, there are some which have their Stables close by.

Of the White Elephant.
These People have naturally so great an esteem of Elephants, that they are
persuaded that an Animal so noble, so strong, and so docile, can be animated
only with an illustrious Soul, which has formerly been in the body of some
Prince, or of some great Person: but they have yet a much higher Idea of the
White Elephants. These Animals are rare, and are found, say they, only in the
Woods of Siam. They are not altogether White, but of a flesh color, and for
this reason it is that Vliet in the Title of his Relation has said, the White
and Red Elephant. The Siameses do call this color Peuak, and I doubt not that
it is this color inclining to White and moreover so rare in this Animal, which
has procured it the Veneration of those People to such a degree, as to persuade
them what they report thereof, that a Soul of some Prince is always lodged in
the body of a White Elephant, whether Male or Female it matters not.

The Esteem which the Siameses do make of the White color in Animals.
By the same reason of the color, White Horses are those which the Siameses
most esteem. I proceed to give a proof thereof. The King of Siam having one of
his Horses sick, entreated Mr. Vincent, that Physician which I have frequently
mentioned, to prescribe him some Remedy. And to persuade him to it (for he well
knew that the European Physicians debased not themselves to meddle with Beasts)
he acquainted him that the Horse was Mogol (that is to say White) of four races
by Sire and Dam, without any mixture of Indian blood; and that had it not been
for this consideration he would not have made him this request. The Indians
call the White, Mogols, which they distinguish into Mogols of Asia, and Mogols
of Europe. Therefore whence soever this respect is for the White color, as
well in Men as in Beasts, I could discover no other reason at Siam, than that
of the veneration which the Siameses have for the White Elephants. Next to the
White they most esteem those which are quite Black, because they are likewise
very rare; and they Dye some of this color, when they are not naturally Black
enough. The King of Siam always keeps a White Elephant in his Palace, which is
treated like the King of all those Elephants, which this Prince maintains. That
which Mr. de Chaumont saw in this Country, was dead, as I have said, when we
arrived there. There was born another as they reported on the 9th of December
1687. a few days before our departure: but this Elephant was still in the
Woods, and received no Visit, and so we saw no White Elephant. Other Relations
have informed us how this Animal is served with Vessels of Gold.

The King of Siam's Balons.
The Care of the King's Balons, and of his Galleys, belongs to the Calla-hom.
Their Arsenal is over against the Palace, the River running between. There
every one of these Barges is locked up in a Trench, whereinto runs the Water of
the River; and each Trench is shut up in an Enclosure made of Wood, and
covered. These Enclosures are locked up, and besides this a person watches
there at Night. The Balons of ordinary Service are not so adorned as those for
Ceremony; and amongst those for Ceremony there are some which the King gives to
his Officers for these occasions only: for those which he allows them for
ordinary Ceremonies, are less curious and fine.

CHAP. XII. Of the Officers which nearest approach the King of Siam's Person.
IN the Vang are some of those single Halls which I have described; In what
place of the Palace the Courtiers wait.

How the King of Siam shows himself to them.


in which the Officers do meet, either for their Functions, or to make their
Court, or to wait the Orders of the Prince.

The usual place were he shows himself unto them, is the Hall, where he gave
Audience to the King's Ambassadors; and he shows himself only through a Window,
as did anciently the King of China. This Window is from a higher Chamber, which
has this prospect over the Hall, and which may be said to be of the first
Story. It is nine Foot high or thereabouts; and it was necessary to place three
steps underneath, to raise me high enough to present the King's Letter to the
King of Siam. This Prince chose rather to cause these three steps to be put,
than to see himself again obliged to stoop, to take the King's Letter from my
hand, as he had been obliged to do, to take that which Mr. de Chaumont
delivered him. It Is evident by the Relation of Mr. de Chaumont, that he had in
his hands a kind of Gold Cup, which had a very long handle of the same matter;
to the end that he might use it to give the King's Letter to the King of Siam.
He did it, but he would not take this Cup by the handle to raise the Letter; so
that it was necessary that the King of Siam should stoop out of the Window to
receive it. It Is with the same Cup, that the Officers of this Prince deliver
him every thing that he receives from their hands. At the two Corners of the
Hall which are at the sides of this Window, are two doors about the height of
the Windows, and two pair of very narrow Stairs to ascend. For the Furniture
there is only three Vmbrella's, one before the Window with nine rounds, and two
with seven rounds on both sides of the Window. The Vmbrella is in this Country
as the Daiz or Canopy is in France.

It Is in this Hall that the King of Siam's Officers, which if you please, The
King of Siam's Pages.
may be named from his Chamber, or rather his Antichamber, do expect his
Orders. He has Forty four young men, the oldest of which hardly exceeds twenty
five years of Age: the Siameses do call them Mahatlek, the Europeans have
called them Pages. These Forty four Pages therefore are divided into four
Bands, each consisting of eleven: the two first are on the right hand, and do
prostrare themselves in the Hall at the King's right hand; the two others are
on the left hand, and do prostrate themselves on the left hand. This Prince
gives them every one a Name and a Sabre; and they carry his Orders to the Pages
without, which are numerous, and which have no Name, that is imposed on them by
the King. The Siameses do call them Caloang, and it is these Caloangs that the
King ordinarily sends into the Provinces upon Commissions, whether ordinary, or
extraordinary.

Besides this the Forty four Pages within have their Functions regulated: Some,
Their Functions.
for example, do serve Betel to the King, others take care of his Arms, others
do keep his Books, and when he pleases they read in his presence.

This Prince is curious to the highest degree. How the King of Siam loves
Reading.
He caused Q. Curtius to be translated into Siamese, whilst we were there, and
has since ordered several of our Histories to be translated. He understands the
States of Europe; and I doubt not thereof, because that once, as he gave me
occasion to inform him that the Empire of Germany is Elective, he asked me
whether besides the Empire and Poland, there was any other Elective State in
Europe? And I heard him pronounce the word Polonia, of which I had not spoken
to him. Some have assured me that he has frequently asserted, that the Art of
Ruling is not inspired, and that with great Experience and Reading he perceived
that he was not yet perfect in understanding it. But he designed principally to
study it from the History of the King: he is desirous of all the News from
France; and so soon as his Ambassadors were arrived, he retained the third with
him, until he had read their Relation to him from one end to the other.

The Officers which command the Pages within.
To return to the Forty-four Pages, Four Officers command them; who, because
they so nearly approach the Prince, are in great esteem, but yet not in an
equal degree: for there is a great difference from the first to the second,
from the second to the third, and from the third to the fourth. They bear only
the Title of Oc-Meuing, or of Pra-Meuing: Meuing Vai, Meuing Sarapet, Meuing
Semeungtchai, Meuingsii. The Sabres and Poniards which the King gives them are
adorned with some precious Stones. All four are very considerable Nai, having a
great many subaltern Officers under them; and though they have only the Title
of Meuing, they cease not to be Officers in chief. The Pa-ya, the Oc-ya, the
Oc-pra, and the other Titles are not always subordinate to them, only the one
must command more persons than the other. In a word, 'twas Meuingsii which
accompanied Meuing Tchion on Board our Ships, to bring to the King's
Ambassadors the first Compliment from the King of Siam, and it was to him that
Meuing Tchion, though higher in dignity, gave the precedence and the word;
because that Meuingsii was three or four years older, but the eldest of both
was not thirty.

Of the single Officer which prostrates not himself before the King of Siam.
Whilst the Ambassadors were at Audience, there was in one place an Officer,
whom we perceived not, who alone, as they informed me, has the Privilege of
not prostrating himself before the King his Master; and this renders his Office
very honorable. I forgot to write down his Title in my Memoirs. He always has
his Eyes fixed upon this Prince, to receive his Orders, which he understands by
certain Signs, and which he signifies by Signs to the other Officers which are
without the Hall. Thus when the Audience was ended, I would say when the King
had done speaking to us, this Prince, in that silence which is profound, gave
some Signal, to which we gave no heed; and immediately at the bottom of the
Hall, and in an high place, which is not visible, was heard a tinkling Noise,
like that of a Timbrel. This Noise was accompanied with a Blow, which was ever
and anon struck on a Drum, which is hung up under a Penthouse without the Hall,
and which for being very great, renders its sound grave and Majesty; it is
covered with an Elephant's Skin: yet no person made any motion, till that the
King, whose Chair an invisible hand did by little and little draw back, removed
himself from the window, and closed the Shutters thereof; and then the Noise of
the tinkling and of the great Drum ceased.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Women of the Palace, and of the Officers of the Wardrobe.
The King of Siam's Chamber.
AS to the King of Siam's Chamber, the true Officers thereof are Women, it is
they only that have a Privilege of entering therein. They make his Bed, and
dress his Meat; they cloth him, and wait on him at Table: but none but himself
touches his Head when he is attired, nor puts any thing over his Head. The
Pourveyors carry the Provisions to the Eunuchs, and they give them to the
Women; and she which plays the Cook, uses Salt and Spices only by weight,
thereby never to put in more nor less: A practice, which, in my opinion, is
only a Rule of the Physicians, by reason of the King's unhealthy disposition,
and not an ancient custom of the Palace.

The Women do never stir out but with the King, Of the late Queen his Wife and
his Sister.
nor the Eunuchs without express Order. It Is reported that he has eight or ten
Eunuchs only, as well white as black. The late Queen, who was both his Wife and
his Sister, was called Nang Achamahisii. It is not easy to know the King's
Name, they carefully and superstitiously conceal it, for fear lest any
Enchantment should be made on his Name. And others report, that their Kings
have no Name till after their death, and that it is their Successor which names
them, and this would be more certain against the pretended Sorceries.

Of Queen Achamahisii is born, as I have related in the other Part, the
Princess, Of the Princess his only Daughter.
the King of Siam's only Daughter, who now has the Rank and House of a Queen.
The King's other Wives (which in general are called Tchaou Vang, because that
the word Tchaou, which signifies Lord, signifies likewise Lady and Mistress) do
render Obedience to her, and respect her as their Sovereign. They are subject
to her Justice, as well as the Women and Eunuchs which serve them; because that
not being able to stir out, to go plead elsewhere, it necessarily follows that
the Queen should judge them, and cause them to be chastised, to keep them in
peace. This is thus practiced in all the Courts of Asia; but it is not true
neither at Siam, nor perhaps in any part of the East, that the Queen has any
Province to govern. It Is easy also to comprehend, that if the King loves any
of his Ladies more than the rest, he causes her to remove from the Jealousy
and harsh Usage of the Queen.

At Siam they continually take Ladies for the service of the Vang, The King of
Siam takes the Daughters of his Subjects for his Palace, when he pleases.
or to be Concubines to the King, if this Prince makes use thereof. But the
Siameses deliver up their Daughters only by force, because it is never to see
them again; and they redeem them so long as they can for Money. So that this
becomes a kind of Extortion, for they designedly take a great many Virgins
merely to restore them to their Parents, who redeem them.

The King of Siam has few Mistresses, that is to say eight or ten in all, He
has few Ministresses.
not out of Continency, but Parsimony. I have already declared, that to have a
great many Wives, is in this Country rather Magnificence, than Debauchery.
Wherefore they are very much surprised to hear that so great a King as ours has
no more than one Wife, that he had no Elephants, and that his Lands bear no
Rice; as we might be, when it was told us that the King of Siam has no Horses,
nor standing Forces, and that his Country bears no Corn nor Grapes, although all
the Relations do so highly extol the Riches and Power of the Kingdom of Siam.

The Queen has her Elephants and her Balons, The Queen's House.
and some Officers to take care of her, and accompany her when she goes abroad;
but none but her Women and Eunuchs do see her. She is concealed from all the
rest of the People; and when she goes out either on an Elephant, or in a Balon,
it is in a Chair made up with Curtains, which permit her to see what she
pleases, and do prevent her being seen: And Respect commands, that if they
cannot avoid her, they should turn their back to her, by prostrating themselves
when she passes along.

Besides this she has her Magazine, her Ships, and her Treasures. Her Magazine
and her Ships.
She exercises Commerce; and when we arrived in this Country, the Princess,
whom I have reported to be treated like a Queen, was exceedingly embroiled with
the King her Father, because that he reserved to himself alone almost all the
Foreign Trade, and that thereby she found herself deprived thereof, contrary to
the ancient Custom of the Kingdom.

Daughters succeed not to the Crown, they are hardly looked upon as free. Of
the Succession to the Crown, and the Causes which render it uncertain.
It Is the eldest Son of the Queen that ought always to succeed by the Law.
Nevertheless because that the Siameses can hardly conceive that amongst Princes
of near the same Rank, the most aged should prostrate himself before the
younger; it frequently happens that amongst Brethren, though they be not all Sons
of the Queen, and that amongst Uncles and Nephews, the most advanced in Age is
preferred, or rather it is Force which always decides it. The Kings themselves
contribute to render the Royal Succession uncertain, because that instead of
choosing for their Successor the eldest Son of the Queen, they most frequently
follow the Inclination which they have for the Son of some one of their
Concubines with whom they were enamored.

The occasion which tendered the Hollanders Masters of Bantam.
It Is upon this account that the King of Bantam, for example, has lost his Crown
and his Liberty. He endeavored to get one of his Sons, whom he had by one of
his Concubines, to be acknowledged for his Successor before his Death: and the
eldest Son which he had by the Queen put himself into the hands of the
Hollanders. They set him upon the Throne after having vanquished his Father,
whom they still keep in Prison, if he is not dead: but for the reward of this
Service they remain Masters of the Port, and of the whole Commerce of Bantam.

Of the Succession to the Kingdom of China.
The Succession is not better regulated at China, though there be an express and
very ancient Law in favor of the eldest Son of the Queen. But what Rule can
there be in a thing, how important soever it be, when the Passions of the Kings
do always seek to imbroil it? All the Orientals, in the choice of a Governor,
adhere most to the Royal Family, and not to a certain Prince of the Royal
Family: uncertain in the sole thing wherein all the Europeans are not. In all
the rest we vary every day, and they never do. Always the same Manners amongst
them, always the same Laws, the same Religion, the same Worship; as may be
judged by comparing what the Ancients have writ concerning the Indians, with
what we do now see.

Of the King of Siams Wardrobe.
I have said that it is the Women of the Palace which dress the King of Siam; but
they have no charge of his Wardrobe; he has Officers on purpose. The most
considerable of all is he that touches his Bonnet, although he be not permitted to
put it upon the Head of the King his Master. It Is a Prince of the Royal blood
of Camboya; by reason that the King of Siam boasts in being thence descended,
not being able to vaunt in being of the race of the Kings his Predecessors. The
Title of this Master of the Wardrobe is Oc-ya Out haya tanne, which
sufficiently evinces that the Title of Pa-ya does not signify Prince, seeing
that this Prince wears it not. Under him Oc-Pra Rayja Vounsa has the charge of
the clothes. Rayja or Raja or Ragi or Ratcha, are only an Indian term variously
pronounced, which signifies King, or Royal, and which enters into the
composition of several Names amongst the Indians.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Customs of the Court of Siam, and of the Policy of its Kings.
The Hours of Council.
THe common usage of the Court of Siam is to hold a Council twice a day; about
Ten a clock in the Morning, and about Ten in the Evening, reckoning the hours
after our fashion.

The division of the day and night according to the Siameses.
As for them, they divide the day into Twelve hours, from the Morning to the
Night: The Hours they call Mong: they reckon them like us, and give them not a
particular name to each, as the Chinese do. As for the Night, they divide it
into four Watches, which they call Tgiam, and it is always broad Day at the end
of the Fourth. The Latins, Greeks, Jews, and other people have divided the Day
and Night, after the same manner.

Their Clock.
The People of Siam have no Clock; but as the Days are almost equal there all
the Year, it is easy for them to know what Hour it is, by the sight of the
Sun. In the King's Palace they use a kind of Water-Clock: It Is a thin Copper
Cup, at the bottom of which they do make an almost imperceptible hole. They put
it quite empty upon the water: which by little and little enters therein
through the hole; and when the Cup is full enough to sink down, this is one of
the hours, or a twelfth part of the day. They measure the Watches of the Night
by such a like method, and they make a Noise on Copper Basins when the Watch is
ended.

I have related how Causes are determined in the King of Siam's Council: How
the King of Siam examines Affairs in his Council, and how he terminates them.
Affairs of State are there examined, and decided almost after the same manner.
That Councellor to whom this Prince has committed a business, makes the report
thereof, which consists in reading it, and then proceeds to the consultative
Opinions; and hitherto the King's Presence is not necessary. When he is come he
hears the report, which is read to him concerning the former Consult, he
resumes all the advices, confutes those which he approves not, and then
decides. But if the Affair seems to him to merit a more mature deliberation, he
makes no decision: but after having proposed his difficulties, he commits the
examination thereof to some of his Council, whom he purposely appoints; and
principally to those who were of a different Opinion from his. They, after
having again consulted together, do cause the report of their new Consultation
to be made by one of them, in a full Council, and before the King; and hereupon
this Prince consummates his Determination. Yet sometimes, but very rarely, and
in affairs of a cerrain Nature, he will consult the principal Sancras, which
are the Superiors of the Talapoins; whose credit in other matters he depresses
as much as he can, though in appearance he honors them exceedingly. In a word,
there is such a sort of affairs, wherein he will call the Officers of the
Provinces: but on all occasions, and in all affairs, he decides when he
pleases; and he is never constrained to either ask advice of any person, or to
follow any other advice than his own.

He oftentimes punishes ill Advice, or recompenses good. He punishes bad
Counsels, and recompenses good.
I say good or bad according to his sense, for he alone is the Judge thereof.
Thus his Ministers do much more apply themselves to divine his sentiments, than
to declare him theirs, and they misunderstand him, by reason he also endeavors
to conceal his Opinion from them.

In a word, the affair on which he consults them, Sometimes he consults about
Affairs invented by way of Exercise.

He examines his Officers about their Obligations.

A Law against the Ambition of the Great Men.


is not always a real concern; it is sometimes a question, which he propounds to
them by way of exercise.

He likewise has a custom of examining his Officers about the Pra-Tam-Ra, which
is that Book, which I have said contains all their Duties; and causes such to
be chastized with the Bastinado, who answer not very exactly; even as a Father
chastizes his Children in instructing them.

It Is an ancient Law of the State established for the security of the King,
whose Authority is naturally almost unarmed, that the Courtiers should not
render him any visit without his express leave, and only at Weddings and
Funerals, and that when they meet, they should speak with a loud voice, and in
the presence of a third person: but if the Kings of Siam be unactive, or
negligent, not any Law secures them. At present the Courtiers may appear again
at the Academy of Sports, where the great number seems to take away all
opportunity of Caballings.

The Trade of an Informer, so detested in all places where men are born free,
The Trade of an Informer commanded at Siam by the Law.
is commanded to every person at Siam, under pain of death for the least
things; and so whatever is known by two Witnesses, is almost infallibly related
to the King: because that every one hastens to give information thereof, for
fear of being herein prevented by his Companion, and remain guilty of Silence.
The King of Siams Precautions to prevent being deceived.


The present King of Siam relies not in an important affair upon the single
report of him to whom he has committed it; but neither does he rely also on the
report of a single Informer. He has a number of secret Spies, whom he
separately interrogates; and he sometimes sends more than one to interrogate
those who have acted in the affair, whereof he would be informed.

And yet it is easy for him to be deceived; Why they are frequently
ineffectual.
for throughout the Country every Informer is a dishonest man, and every
dishonest man is an Infidel. Moreover Flattery is so great in India, that it
has persuaded the Indian Kings, that if it is their interest to be informed, it
is their dignity to hear nothing that may displease them. As for example, they
will not tell the King of Siam, that he wants Slaves or Vassals, for any
enterprise he would go about. They will not tell him that they cannot perform
his Commands: but they execute them ill, and when the mischief appears, they
will excuse it by some defect. They will tell him ill news quite otherwise than
it is; to the end that the truth reaching his Ears only by degrees, may vex him
less, and that it might be easier to pacify him at several times. They will
not counsel him a bad thing; but will so insinuate it, that he may think
himself the Author, and only take to himself the bad success. And then they
will not tell him that he must alter a thing that he has done amiss; but they
will persuade him to do it better some other way, which will only be a
pretense: and in the new project they will suppress, without acquainting him,
what they designed to reform, and will put in the place what they designed to
establish. I my self have seen part of what I relate, and and they have assured
me the rest.

The King of Siams rigorous Justice.
Now such like Artifices are always very perilous; they offend the present King
in nothing without being punished. Being severe to extreme rigor, he puts to
death whom he pleases without any formality of Justice, and by the hand of whom
he pleases, and in his own Presence. And sometimes the Accuser with the
Criminal, the Innocent with the Calumniator: for when the proofs remain
doubtful, he, as I have said, exposes both parties to the Tigers.

How he insults over the dead body.
After the Execution he insults over the dead body with some words, which are a
lesson to the living; as for example, after having made him who had robbed his
Magazine, to swallow some melted Silver, he says to the dead body, Miserable
wretch, thou have robbed me of Ten Pieces of Silver, and Three Ounces only are
sufficient to take away thy life. Then he complains that they withheld him not
in his Anger; either that he indeed repents sometimes of his precipitate
Cruelties, or that he would make believe that he is cruel only in the first
Transport.

The Various Punishments of the Court of Siam.
Sometimes he exposes a Criminal to an enraged Bull, and the Criminal is armed
with a hollow stick, consequently proper to cause fear, but not to wound, with
which he defends himself some time. At other times he will give the Criminal to
Elephants, sometimes to be trampled under foot and slain, sometimes to be
tossed without killing: for they affirm that the Elephants are docible to that
degree, and that if a Man is only to be tossed, they throw him one to the
other, and receive him on their Trunck, and on their Teeth, without letting him
fall on the ground. I have not seen it, but I cannot doubt of the manner which
they have assured me.

The Punishments have respect to the Crimes.
But the Ordinary Chastisements are those, which have some relation to the
Nature of the Crimes. As for example, Extortion excercised on the People, and a
Robbery committed on the Prince's Money, will be punished by the swallowing of
Gold or Silver melted: Lying, or a Secret revealed, will be punished by Sowing
up the Mouth. They will slit it to punish Silence, where it is not to be kept.
Any Fault in the execution of Orders, will be Chastised by pricking the Head,
as to punish the Memory. To prick the Head, is to cut it with the edge of a
Sabre: but to manage it securely, and not to make too great wounds, they hold
it with one hand by the Back, and not by the Handle.

The punishment of the Sword and the Cudgel.
The punishment of the Glave or Sword is not executed only by cutting the Head
off, but by cutting a man through the middle of the Body: And the Cudgel is
sometimes also a punishment of death. But when the Chastisement of the Cudgel
ought not to extend to death, it ceases not to be very rigorous, and frequently
to cause the loss of all knowledge.

The Punishment with which Princes are punished.
If the matter is to put a Prince to death in form, as it may happen, or when a
King would rid himself of some of his Relations, or when an Usurper would
extinquish the race, from which he has ravished the Crown, they make it a piece
of Religion not to shed the Royal blood: but they will make him to die with
hunger, and sometimes with a lingering hunger, by daily substracting from him
something of his food; or they will stifle him with Rich Stuffs; or rather they
will stretch him on Scarlet, which they mightily esteem, because the Wool is
rare, and dear; and there they will thrust into his Stomach a billet of
Saunders Wood. This Wood is odoriferous, and highly esteemed. There are three
sorts; the white is better than the yellow, and both do grow only in the Isles
of Solor and Timor, to the East of Java. The red is esteemed the least of all,
and it grows in several places.

The Kings of Asia do place their whole security in rendering themselves
formidable, and from time out of mind they have had no other Policy: The
extreme distrust of the Kings of Siam.
whether that a long Experience has evinced that these People are incapable of
Love for their Sovereign; or that these Kings would not be advised that the
more they are feared, the more they have to fear. However it be, the extreme
distrust in which the Kings of Siam do always live, appears sufficiently in the
cares which they take to prevent all secret Correspondence amongst the great
Men, to keep the Gates of their Palace shut, and to permit no armed person to
enter, and to disarm their own Guards. A Gun fired, by accident or otherwise,
so near the Palace that the King hears it, is a capital Crime; and the noise of
a Pistol being heard in the Palace, a little after the Conspiracy of the
Macassars, 'twas doubted whether the King had not with this shot killed one of
his Brothers; because that the King alone has power to shoot, and that moreover
one of his Brethren had been suspected of having meddled in this Conspiracy: and
this doubt was not cleared when we left Siam.

Besides these Punishments which I have mentioned, Infamous Punishments.
they have some less dolorous, but more infamous, as to expose a Man in a
public place loaded with Irons, or with his Neck put into a kind of Ladder or
Pillory, which is called Cangue, in Siamese Ka. The two sides of this Ladder
are about six foot long, and are fastened to a Wall, or to Posts, each at one
end, with a Cord; insomuch that the Ladder may be raised up, and let down, as
if it was fastened to Pullies. In the middle of the Ladder are two Steps or
Rounds, between which is the Neck of the Offender, and there are no more Rounds
than these two. The Offender may sit on the ground, or stand, when the weight
of the Ladder, which bears upon his Shoulders, is not too big, as it is
sometimes; or when the Ladder is not fastened at the four ends: for in this last
Case it is planted in the Air, bearing at the ends upon Props, and then the
Criminal is as it were hung by the Neck; he hardly touches the ground with the
Tips of his Toes. Besides this, they have the use of Stocks and Manacles.

The Criminal is sometimes in a Ditch to be lower than the ground; and this
Ditch is not always broad, but oftentimes it is extremely narrow, and the
Criminal, properly speaking, is buried up to the Shoulders. There, for the
greater Ignominy, they give him Cuffs or Blows on the Head; or they only stroke
the hand over his Head, Affronts esteemed very great, especially if received
from the hand of a Woman.

But what is herein very particular, is, The shame of the Punishments lasts no
longer than the Punishments.

It is attended with Honor


that the most infamous Punishment is reproachful only as long as it lasts. He
that suffers it to day, will re-enter tomorrow, if the Prince thinks fit, into
the most important Offices.

Moreover, they boast of the Punishments which they receive by Order of their
King, as of his paternal care for him whom he has the goodness to chastise. He
receives Compliments and Presents after the Bastinado, and it is principally in
the East that Chastisements do pass for testimonies of Affection. We saw a
young Mandarin shut up to be punished, and a Frenchman offering him to go and
ask his Pardon of his Superior: No, replied the Mandarin in Portuguese, I would
see how far his Love would reach; or as an European would have said, I would
see how far he will extend his Rigor. To be reduced from an eminent place to a
lower is no Reproach, and this befell the second Ambassador whom we saw here.
Yet it happens also, that in this Country they hang themselves in despair, when
they see themselves reduced from an high Employment to an extreme Poverty, and
to the six Months Service due to the Prince, though this Fall be not shameful.

I have said in another place, Others are included in the Punishments with the
Criminals.
that a Father shares sometimes in the punishment of the Son, as being bound to
answer for the Education which he has given him. At China an Officer answers
for the Faults of all the persons of his Family, because they pretend, that he
who knows not how to govern his own Family, is not capable of any public
Function. The Fear therefore, which particular persons have of seeing their
Families turned out of the Employments, which do make the Splendour and Support
thereof, renders them all wise, as if they were all Magistrates. In like manner
at Siam, and at China, an Officer is punished for the Offenses of another
Officer that is subject to his Orders, by reason that he is to watch over him
that depends on him; and that having power to correct him, he ought to answer
for his conduct. Thus about three years since we saw at Siam for three days,
Oc-Pra-Simo-ho-sot, by Nation a Brame, who is now in the King of Siam's Council
of State, exposed to the Cangue with the head of a Malefactor, which they had
put to Death, hung about his Neck; without being accused of having had any
other hand in the crime of him, whose head was hung to his Neck, than too great
Negligence in watching over a Man that was subject to him. After this it is no
wonder in my opinion, that the Bastinado should be so frequent at Siam.
Sometimes there may be seen several Officers at the Cangue, disposed in a
Circle; and in the midst of them will be the head of a man, which they have put
to death; and this head will hang by several strings from the Neck of every one
of these Officers.

The least pretense for a Crime is punished.
The worst is, that the least appearance of guilt renders an action criminal: To
be accused is almost sufficient to be culpable. An action in it self innocent
becomes bad, so soon as any one thinks to make a Crime thereof. And from thence
proceed the so frequent disgraces of the principal Officers. They know not how,
for instance, to reckon up all the Barcalons that the King of Siam has had
since he reigned.

The Policy of the Kings of Siam, cruel against all, and against their own
Brethren.
The Greatness of the Kings, whose Authority is despotical, is to exercise Power
over all, and over their own Brethren. The Kings of Siam do maim them, in
several ways, when they can: they take away or debilitate their sight by fire;
they render them impotent by dislocation of Members, or sottish by Drinks,
securing themselves and their Children against the Enterprises of their
Brethren, only by rendering them incapable of reigning: he that now reigns has
not treated his better. This Prince will not therefore envy our King, the
sweetness of being beloved by his Subjects, and the Glory of being dreaded by
his Enemies. The Idea of a great King is not at Siam, that he should render
himself terrible to his Neighbors, provided he be so to his Subjects.

The Government of Siam more burdensome to the Nobles than to the Populace.
Yet there is this Reflection to be made on this sort of Government, that the
Yoke thereof is less heavy, if I may so say, on the Populace than on the
Nobles. Ambition in this Country leads to Slavery: Liberty, and the other
Enjoyments of Life are for the vulgar Conditions. The more one is unknown to
the Prince, and the further from him, the greater Ease he enjoys; and for this
reason the Employments of the Provinces are there considered, as a Recompense
of the Services done in the Palace.

How tempestuous the Ministry is at Siam.
The Ministry there is tempestuous: not only through the natural Inconstancy, which
may appear in the Prince's Mind; but because that the ways are open for all
persons to carry complaints to the Prince against his Ministers. And though the
Ministers and all the other Officers, do employ all their artifices to render
these ways of complaints ineffectual, whereby one may attack them all, yet all
complaints are dangerous, and sometimes it is the slightest which hurts, and
which subverts the best established favor. These examples, which very
frequently happen, do edify the People; and if the present King had not too
far extended his exactions without any real necessity, his Government would as
much please the Populace, as it is terrible to the Nobles.

The King of Siam's regards for his people.
Nevertheless he has had that regard for his People, as not to augment his
Duties on cultivated Lands, and to lay no imposition on Corn and Fish; to the
end that what is necessary to Life might not be dear: A moderation so much the
more admirable, as it seems that they ought not to expect any from a Prince
educated in this Maxim, that his Glory consists in not setting limits to his
power, and always in augmenting his Treasure.

The Inconveniences of this Government. It renders the Prince wavering on his
Throne.
But these Kings which are so absolutely the Masters of the Fortune and Life of
their Subjects, are so much the more wavering in the Throne. They find not in
any person, or at most in a small number of Domestics, that Fidelity or Love
which we have for our Kings. The People which possess nothing in property, and
which do reckon only upon what they have buried in the ground, as they have no
solid establishment in their Country, so they have no obligation thereto. Being
resolved to bear the same Yoke under any Prince whatever, and having the
assurance of not being able to bear a heavier, they concern not themselves in
the Fortune of their Prince: and experience evinces that upon the least trouble
they let the Crown go, to whom Force or Policy will give it. A Siamese, a
Chinese, an Indian, will easily die to exert a particular Hatred, or to avoid a
miserable Life, or a too cruel Death: but to die for their Prince and their
Country, is not a Virtue in their practice. Amongst them are not found the
powerful motives, by which our People animate themselves to a vigorous Defense.
They have no Inheritance to lose, and Liberty is oftentimes more burdensome to
them than Servitude. The Siameses which the King of Pegu has taken in war, will
live peaceable in Pegu, at Twenty miles distant from the Frontiers of Siam, and
they will there cultivate the Lands which the King of Pegu has given them, no
remembrance of their Country making them to hate their new Servitude. And it is
the same of the Peguins, which are in the Kingdom of Siam.

The Eastern Kings are looked upon as the adoptive Sons of Heaven. How
uncertain the extreme Respect of the Orientals is for their Kings.
It Is believed that they have Souls celestial, and as high above other Souls by
their Merit; as the Royal Condition appears more happy than that of other men.
Nevertheless, if any one of their Subjects revolts, the People doubt presently
which of the two Soul^ is most valuable, whether that of the Lawful Prince, or
that of the Rebellious Subject^; and whether the Adoption of Heaven has not
passed from the King to the Subject. Their Histories are all full of these
examples: and that of China, which Father Martinius has given us, is curious in
the ratiociniations, by which the Chinese, I mean the Chinese Philosophers,
are often persuaded that they followed the Inclination of Heaven in changing
their Sovereign, and sometimes in preferring a High-way-man before their Lawful
Prince.

But besides that the despotick Authority is almost destitute of defense, These
Princes do oftentimes lose their Authority by being too jealous.
it is moreover rather usurped by him that possesses it, in that the exercise
thereof is less communicated. Whoever takes upon him the Spirit or Person of a
Prince, has almost nothing more to do to dispossess the Prince; because that
the exercise of the Authority being too much reunited in the Prince, there is
none besides him that prohibits it in case of need. Thus is it not lawful for a
King to be a Minor, or too easy to let himself be governed. The Scepter of
this Country soon falls from hands that need a support to sustain it. On the
contrary, in Kingdoms where several permanent bodies of Magistracy divide the
Splendour and the Exercise of the Royal Authority, these same bodies do preserve
it entire for the King, who imparts it to them; because they deliver not to the
Usurper that part which is in their hands, and which alone suffices to save
that which the King himself knows not how to keep.

In the ancient Rebellions of China it appears, The peril in re-uniting all the
Royal Authority in the Seal.
that he who seized on the Royal Seal, presently rendered himself Master of
all; because that the people obeyed the Orders where the Seal appeared, without
informing themselves in whose hands the Seal was. And the Jealousy which the
King of Siam has of his, that I have said he intrusts with no person, persuades
me that it is the same in his Country. The danger therefore to these Princes is
in that wherein they place their security. Their Policy requires that their
whole Authority should be in their Seal, to exercise it more entire themselves
alone: And this Policy as much exposes their Authority, as their Seal is easy
to lose.

The same danger is found in a great Treasure, A public Treasure necessary to
despotick Governments, and what are the Inconveniences thereof.

The Conclusion of this Chapter.


the only spring of all the Despotick Governments, where the ruined people
cannot supply extraordinary Subsidies in public necessities. In a great
Treasure all the Forces of the State reunite themselves, and he that seizes on
the Treasure, seizes on the State. So that besides a Treasures ruining the
People, on whom it is levied, it frequently serves against those that
accumulate it; and this likewise draws the dissipation thereof.

The Indian Government has therefore all the defects of the Despotick
Government. It renders the Prince and his Subjects equally uncertain: It
betrays the Royal Authority, and delivers it up entire, under pretense of
putting the more entire Management thereof into the hands of a single person;
and moreover it deprives it of its natural defense, by separating the whole
Interest of the Subjects from that of the Prince and State. Having therefore
related how the Kings of Siam do treat their Subjects, it remains to show how
they treat, as well with foreign Princes by Embassies, as with the foreign
Nations which are fled to Siam.

CHAP. XV. Concerning the Form of Embassies at Siam.
The Eastern Ambassadors represent not their Masters, and are less honored than
in Europe.
AN Ambassador throughout the East is no other than a Kings Messenger: he
represents not his Master. They honor him little, in comparison of the
respects which are rendered to the Letters of Credence whereof he is Bearer.
Mr. de Chaumont, tho an Ambassador extraordinary, never had a Balon of the
Body, not on the very day of his entrance; and it was in a Balon of the Body
that the Kings Letter was put, which he had to deliver to the King of Siam.
This Balon had four Vmbrella's, one at each corner of the Seat; and it was
attended with four other Balons of the Body, adorned with their Vmbrella's, but
empty; as the King of Spain, when he goes abroad in his Coach, and that he
would be seen and known, has always one which follows him empty, which is
called de respeto, a word and custom come from Italy. The Kings Presents were
likewise carried in Balons of the Body; and the same things were observed at
the entrance of the King's Envoys. Thus the Orientals make no difference
between an Ambassador and an Envoy: And they understand not Ambassadors, nor
ordinary Envoys, nor Residents; because they send no person to reside at a
foreign Court, but there to dispatch a business, and return.

The Siamese Embassies consists in three persons.
The Siameses do never send more nor less than three Ambassadors together. The
first is called Rayja Tout, that is to say, Royal Messenger, the second Oubba
Tout, and the third Tri Tout (terms which I understand not) but the two last
Ambassadors are obliged in every thing to follow the Advice of the first.

They are looked upon as Messengers which carry a Letter.
Every one therefore who is the carrier of a Letter from the King, is reputed an
Ambassador throughout the East. Wherefore, after the Ambassador of Persia,
which Mr. de Chaumont left in the Country of Siam, was dead at Tenasserim, his
Domestics having elected one amongst them, to deliver the King of Persia's
Letter to the King of Siam, he that was elected was received without any other
Character, as the real Ambassador would have been, and with the same honors
which the King of Persia had formerly granted to the Ambassador of Siam.

He returns them no Answer, but a Recepisse.
But that wherein they treat an Ambassador like a mere Messenger, is, that the
King of Siam, in the Audience of Leave, gives him a Recepisse of the Letter he
has received from him; and if this Prince returns an Answer, he gives it not to
him, but he sends his own Ambassadors with him to carry it.

How the King of Siam is advertised of the Arrival of an Ambassador.
A foreign Ambassador which arrives at Siam, is stopped at the Entrance of the
Kingdom, until the King of Siam has received intelligence thereof; and if he is
accompanied with Siamese Ambassadors, as we were, it belongs to the Siamese
Ambassadors to go before, to carry unto the King their Master, the news of
their Arrival, and of the Arrival of the foreign Ambassador, whom they brought
with them.

An Ambassador has his Charges born at Siam. He must Commun^cate his
Instructions.
Every foreign Ambassador is lodged and maintained by the King of Siam, and
during the time of his Embassy he may exercise Merchandise; but he cannot treat
of any affair till he has delivered his Letter of Credence, and communicated
his Original Instructions. They dispensed with this last Article to Mr. de
Chaumont, and the King's Envoys; but the Ambassadors of Siam dispensed not
therewith in France: They communicated their Instructions.

The Ambassador cannot enter into the Metropolis, He enters not into his
Metropolis till he goes to Audience, and departs thence in going from the
Audience of Leave. The Solemn Audiences.
till he goes directly to Audience, nor continue therein till after the
Audience of Leave: in going from the Audience of Leave he departs out of the
City, and negotiates nothing more. Wherefore on the Evening before the Audience
of Leave, the King of Siam demands of him, Whether he has any thing to propose?
And in the Audience of Leave, he asks him, If he is contented?

The Majesty of the Prince resides principally in the Metropolis, it is there
that the Solemn Audiences are given; out of this City every Audience is
accounted private, and without Ceremony. The whole Guard, as well the Ordinary,
as that of Ostentation, was put in Arms for the Audience at Siam: the Elephants
and the Horses appeared with their best Harness, and in great number, on the
Entry of the King's Envoys, and there was almost nothing of all this for the
Audiences at Louvo. At Siam the Vmbrella, which was before the King's window,
had nine Rounds, and the two which were at the side had seven each. At Louvo
the King had no Vmbrella before him, but two on each side, which had each four
Rounds apiece, and which mounted up much lower than those of Siam. The King was
not at Louvo at a single window, as at Siam; he was in a wooden Tower joined to
the Floor of the Hall, into which he entered behind, and immediately, by a Step
higher than the Hall. So that though this Prince was as high at Louvo as at Siam,
yet he was at Louvo in the Hall of Audience; whereas at Siam he was in another
Room, which had a Prospect into the Hall. Moreover, the Gate of the Hall at
Louvo was large, and in the middle of the Tower, that is to say opposite to the
King; whereas at Siam the door was low and strait, and almost at the corner of
the Hall: differences, which have all their reasons in this Country, where the
least things are measured and performed with diligence. At the Audience at Siam
there were 50 Mandarins prostrate in the Hall, 25 on each side, in five Ranks,
each consisting of five. At the Audiences at Louvo there were no more than 32,
16 on each side, in four Ranks, of four in a Rank. The Audience of Reception,
where the Letter of Credence is delivered, is always given in the chief City,
and with all the magnificence imaginable, in respect to the Letter of Credence:
the other Audiences are given without the City, and with less Pomp, because
there appears no Letter from the King.

The Custom in all Audiences is, that the King speaks first, What is observed
in Audiences.
and not the Ambassador. What he speaks in Audiences of Ceremony, is reduced to
some Questions almost always the same; after which, he orders the Ambassador to
address himself to the Barcalon upon all the Propositions which he has to make.
Harrangues please him not at all; though he had the goodness to acquaint me, upon
the Compliments I had the Honor to make to him, that I was a great Contriver
of Words. We were fain to embellish them with Figures, and therein to use the
Sun, Moon and Stars; Ornaments of Discourse, which may please them in other
things: This Prince thinks that the longer an Ambassador speaks the first time,
the less he honors him. And indeed when the Ambassador is only a Messenger,
which delivers a Letter, it is natural that he has nothing to say which is not
asked him. After the King has spoken to the Ambassador, he gives him Arek and
Betel, and a Vest, with which the Ambassador clothes himself immediately, and
sometimes a Sabre, and a Chain of Gold.

This Prince gave Sabres, Chains of Gold and Vests, To Foreigners which are not
Ambassadors, he gives Audience only by accident. The Indians are cunning and
deceitful in their Negotiations.
or sometimes only Vests to the principal French Officers, but gave them
Audience only as it were by accident in his Gardens, or out of his Palace at
some Show.

In all sorts of Business, the Indians are slow in concluding, by reason of the
length of their Councils, for they never depart from their Customs. They are
very phlegmatic and hypocritical. They are insinuating in their Speeches,
captious in their Writings, deceitful, to such a degree as to Cheat. The praise
which the King of Siam's Wives and Concubines give him, when they would flatter
him to the highest degree, was to tell him, not that he was an Hero, or the
greatest General in the World, but that he had always been more politic and
witty, than all the Princes with whom he had to do. They engage themselves in
writing as little as they can. They will rather receive you into a Port, or
into a Castle, than they will agree with you to surrender them up to you by a
Treaty in ample Form, and sealed by their Barcalon.

That the Europeans have ever found it necessary to treat the Indians with
arrogance.
The Portugueses being naturally bold and distrustful, have always treated the
Indians with a great deal of Loftiness, and with very little Confidence: And
the Dutch have thought they could not do better, than herein to imitate the
Portugueses; because that indeed the Indians being educated in a Spirit of
Servitude, are crafty, and, as I have said in another place, subservient to
those who treat them haughtily, and insolent to those that use them gently. The
King of Siam says of his Subjects, that they are of the temper of Apes, who
tremble so long as one holds the end of their Band, and who disown their
Master, when the Band is loosed. Examples are not rare in India of simple
European Factors, who have bastinado'd the Officers of the Indian Kings without
being punished. And it is evident, that the certain vigorous Repartees which
are sometimes made in our Countries, appear to us more daring, than the
Bastinado is in theirs; provided it be given them in cold Blood, and not in
Anger: A Man that suffers himself to be transported with Passion, is what the
Indians most contemn.

Presents are essential to Embassies in the East.
But as Trade is their most sensible Interest, Presents are essential for them
in Embassies. It Is a trafficking under an honorable Title, and from King to
King. Their Politeness excites them to testify by several Demonstrations, how
they esteem the Presents which they have received. If it is any thing of use,
though it be not for their use, they publicly prepare whatever shall be
necessary to use it, as if they had a real desire thereof. If it is any thing
to wear, they will adorn themselves therewith in your presence. If they are
Horses, they will build a Stable on purpose to lodge them. Was it only a
Telescope, they would build a Tower to see with this Glass. And so they will
seem to make an high account of all sorts of Presents, to honor the Prince
which sends them, unless he has received Presents from their part with less
demonstrations of Esteem. Nevertheless they are really concerned only for the
Profit. Before that the King's Presents went out of our hands, some of the King
of Siam's Officers came to take an exact description thereof in writing, even
to the counting all the Stones of every sort which were interspersed in the
Embroideries; and to the end that it might not seem that the King their Master
took this care to prevent being robbed by his Officers, through whose hands the
Presents were to pass, they pretended that this Prince was curious and
impatient, and that it was necessary to go render him an account of what this
was, and to be ready to answer him exactly upon the least things.

The Orientals do esteem it a great Honor to receive Embassies.
All the Oriental Princes do esteem it a great Honor to receive Embassies, and
to send the fewest they can: Because that, in their Opinion, it is a Badge
which cannot be alien'd from them and their Riches, and that they can content
themselves without the Riches of Foreigners. They look upon Embassies as a kind
of Homage; and in their Courts they retain the Foreign Ministers as long as it
is possible, to prolong, as much as in them lies, the Honor which they
receive. Thus the great Mogul, and the Kings of China and Japan, do never send
Ambassadors. The King of Persia likewise sends only to Siam, because that the
King of Siam's Ambassador had demanded it, as I proceed to relate.

The Siamese Ambassadors are accountable.
The Siamese Ambassadors are accountable, because that they are loaded with
Goods; and it rarely happens, that they render an Account good enough entirely
to avoid the Bastinado. Thus Agi Selim ('it is the name of a Moor, whom the King
of Siam sent eight or nine years since into Persia, as his Ambassador) was
severely chastised at his return, though in appearance he had served very
faithfully. He had established Commerce with Persia, and had brought with him
that Persian Ambassador, who, as I have several times related, dyed at
Tenasserim. He was a Moula, or Doctor of the Law of Mahomet, whom Agi Selim had
demanded of the King of Persia, to instruct, as he pretended, the King of Siam
in Mahumetanism. Bernier Tome II. page 54. reports that during his abode in the
Indies, some Ambassadors from Prester John, who, as every one knows, professes
to be a Christian, demanded of the great Mogul an Alcoran, and eight of the
most renowned Books that were in the Mahumetan Religion; a base Flattery, which
exceedingly scandalized Bernier. But generally speaking, these trading Kings do
exceedingly make use of the pretense of Religion, for the increase of their
Commerce.

Explication of the Platform of the Hall of Audience of Siam.
A Three Steps which are placed under the Window, where the King of Siam was,
to raise me high enough to deliver him the King's Letter from hand to hand. B
Three Parasols or Vmbrella's. C Two pair of Stairs to go up into the place
where the King of Siam was. D Two Tables covered with Tapestry, on which were
laid the King's Present, which could be held there. E The Son of Mr. Ceberet
standing, holding the King's Letter in a Gold Basin of Filigreen with a triple
Story, the Figure of which is seen at Page F Two little square and low Stools,
each covered with a little Carpet, for the King's Envoys to sit on. Monsieur de
Chaumont had such another. G The Bishop of Metellopolis, Apostolic Vicar,
sitting cross-legg'd. H Monsieur Constance prostrate at my right hand, and
behind me to serve as my Interpreter. I Father Tachart sitting cross-legg'd. K
Fifty Mandarins prostrate. L The French Gentlemen sitting with their Legs
across. M A little pair of Brick Stairs to go up to the Hall of Audience. N The
Wall whereunto this pair of Stairs is fixed.
The Explication of the Platform of the Temple, which should have been inserted
in Chap. 2. Part 2.
A The Steps before the Gates of the Temple. B The principal Gate. C The two
Gates behind. D The Piles of Wood which bear the Roof. E The Piles of Wood
which bear before and behind the Temple. FF The Altar. G The Figure of
Sommona-Codam taking up the all the forepart of the Altar. HH The Statues of
Pra Mogla, and of Pra Sarabout, less and lower than the first. III Other
Stautes lesser than the former. K. Steps to ascend on the Altar, which is a
Mass built with Bricks about 4 Foot high.
CHAP. XVI. Of the Foreigners of different Nations fled to, and settled at Siam.
The Policy observed in respect of the Strangers fled to Siam.
'TWas, as I have said, the Liberty of Commerce, which had formerly invited to
Siam a great multitude of Strangers of different Nations; who settled there
with the Liberty of living according to their Customs, and of publicly
exercising their several ways of Worship. Every Nation possesses a different
Quarter. The Quarters which are without the City, and which do compose the
Suburbs thereof, the Portugueses do call Camp, and the Siameses Ban. Moreover
every Nation chooses its Chief, or its Nai, as the Siameses do speak, and this
Chief manages the Affairs of his Nation with the Mandarin, whom the King of
Siam nominates for this purpose, and whom they call the Mandarin of this
Nation. But Affairs of the least importance are not determined by this
Mandarin, they are carried to the Barcalon.

The Fortune of the Moors very different at Siam, at several times.
Amongst the several Nations, that of the Moors has been the best established
under this Reign. It once happened that the Barcalon was a Moor, probably because
the King of Siam thought by this means better to establish his Commerce,
amongst the most powerful of his Neighboring Princes, who do all make
profession of Mahumetanism: The principal Offices of the Court, and of the
Provinces were then in the hands of the Moors: The King of Siam caused several
Mosques to be erected for them at his expense, and he still bears the charges
of their principal Festival, which they celebrate for several days together, in
memory of the Death of Haly, or of his Children. The Siameses, which embraced
the Religion of the Moors, had the Privilege of being exempted from the
personal Service: But the Barcalon Moor soon experienced the Inconstancy of the
Fortunes of Siam, he fell into Disgrace, and the Credit of those of his Nation
fell afterward into Decay. The considerable Offices and Employments were taken
away from them, and the Siameses which were turned Mahumetans, were forced to
pay in ready Money for the six Months Service, from which they had been
exempted. Nevertheless their Mosques are remaining to them, as well as the
public Protection which the King of Siam gives to their Religion, as to all
foreign Religions. There are therefore three or four Thousand Moors at Siam, as
many Portugueses born in India, and as many Chinese, and perhaps as many
Malays, besides what there is of other Nations.

The Foreign Commerce ceased at Siam has caused the Richest Strangers, and
especially the Moors to depart thence.
But the richest Foreigners, and especially the Moors, are retired elsewhere,
since the King of Siam has reserved to himself alone almost all the foreign
Commerce. The King his Father had heretofore done the same thing, and perhaps
it is the Policy of Siam to do it thus from time to time; otherwise it is
certain that they have almost always left the Trade free, and that it has
frequently flourished at Siam. Ferdinand Mendez Pinto reports, that in his time
there were annually above a thousand foreign Ships; whereas at present there
goes no more than two or three Dutch Barks.

Why the Foreign Trade ceased at Siam.
Commerce requires a certain liberty: no person can resolve to go to Siam,
necessarily to sell unto the King what is carried thither, and to buy of him
alone what one would carry thence, when this was not the product of the
Kingdom. For though there were several foreign Ships together at Siam, the
Trade was not permitted from one Ship to the other, nor with the Inhabitants of
the Country, Natives or Foreigners, till that the King, under the pretense of a
preference due to his Royal dignity, had purchased what was best in the Ships,
and at his own rate, to sell it afterward as he pleased: because that when the
season for the departure of the Ships presses on, the Merchants choose rather
to sell to great loss, and dearly to buy a new Cargo, than to wait at Siam a
new season to depart, without hopes of making a better Trade.

A Siamese Song.
^ Say Samon euy leupacam Son Seua conep neua Tchaon

^ Keun diaou nayey pleng nij co tchaoua pleng day, pleng labam le tchaouey
tchautay

^ pleng nij cochaoua pleng So nayey, peuy Vongle chaouey Tchiong

^ quouang nang Tchang Tchayleu Tcha deun ey.

Musical Instruments
Statues of Somona Codom
A Brass Statue

A Brick statue in Demi relief gild^^

A Brass statue gilded.

A Platform of the Hall of Audience of Siam
A CONVENT of Talapoins
A Talapat leaf or ye Umbrelle of ye Talapoins


In a word, it is neither the natural Riches, The Natural Siameses cannot afford
a great Trade.
nor the Manufactures of the Kingdom of Siam, that should tempt one to go
thither. The natural Siameses, ruined as they are by impositions and services,
cannot carry on a great Trade, though they should have all the liberty
imaginable* The Trade is managed only with the superfluous Money, and in the
places where the Impositions are very great, there is scarcely found Money
necessary for life. The vast sum levied on the people returns slowly to the
people, and especially in the remote Provinces; and the whole does not return,
because that a great part thereof remains in the hands of those, that tend upon
the receipts and expenses of the Prince. And as to that part which returns to
the people, it remains not in their hands for their uses; it soon goes thence
to return to the Princes Coffers: so that it must needs be, that all the small
Trades do cease for want of Money; which cannot be, but the general Commerce of
a State does greatly suffer. But this is yet much truer at Siam, where the
Prince annually accumulates his Revenues, instead of expending them. Having
thus explained what respects the King, the Officers, and the People of Siam, it
remains to speak of their Talapoins, or Priests.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Talapoins, and their Convents.
THey live in Convents, which the Siameses do call Vat; The origin of the word
Pagod.
and they make use of the Temples, which the Siameses do call Pihan, and the
Portugueses Pagode, from the Persian word Poutgheda, which signifies a Temple
of Idols; but the Portugueses do use the word Pagode, to signify equally the
Idol and the Temple.

The Temple and the Convent do take up a very great square piece of ground, A
Description of the Convents of the Talapoins.
encompast with an Enclosure of Bambou. In the middle of the ground stands the
Temple, as in the place esteemed the most honorable in their Encampments; and
at the corners of this ground, and along the Bambou Enclosure, are ranged the
Cells of the Talapoins, like the Tents of an Army; and sometimes the Rows
thereof are double, or triple: These Cells are little single Houses, erected on
Piles, and that of the Superior is after the same manner, but a little larger
and higher than the rest. The Pyramids stand near and quite round the Temple:
and the ground which the Temple and the Pyramids take up, besides its being
higher, is enclosed between four Walls: but from these Walls to the Cells there
likewise remains a great void piece of Ground, which is as it were the Court of
the Convent. Sometimes these Walls are all bare, and serve only as an Enclosure
to the ground, which the Temple and the Pyramids take up: Sometimes along these
Walls there are covered Galleries of the Figure of those, which in our
Religious Houses we call the Cloister; and on a counterwall breast high, which
runs along these Galleries, they place in a Train, and close together, a great
number of Idols sometimes gilded.

Though at Siam there are some Talapoinesses, or Women, They have Cells for the
Talapoinesses.
who in most things do observe the Rule of the Talapoins, yet they have no
other Convents than those of the Talapoins themselves: The Siameses do think
that the advanced Age of all these Women, for there are none young, is a
sufficient caution of their Chastity. There are not Talapoinesses in all the
Convents: but in those where any are, their Cells run along one of the sides of
the Bambou Enclosure, which I have mentioned, without being otherwise separated
from those of the Talapoins.

The Neus, or Talapoin Children, are dispersed one, two, How the Talapoin
Children are lodged.
or three into every Talapoins Cell, and they serve the Talapoin with whom they
lodge, that is to say with whom they have been placed by their Parents: So that
when a Talapoin has two or three Nens, he receives no more. In a word, these
Nens are not all young; some there are which do grow old in this Condition,
which is not thought entirely religious, and the eldest of all they call Taten.
It belongs to him to pluck up the Weeds which grow in the ground of the
Convent, which the Talapoins themselves cannot do, in their opinion, without
sin.

The Halls of the Convent.
The School of the Nens is a Hall of Bambou standing alone; and besides this
Hall, there is always such another, where the People carry their Alms on the
days when the Temple is shut, and where the Talapoins assemble for their
ordinary Conferences.

The Steeple.
The Steeple is a Wooden Tower standing also alone, they call it Horacang, or
the Belfry; but the Bell has no Clapper. They strike it with a Mallet or Wooden
Hammer to sound it: and it is only in War, or for things of War, that they
strike their Basins, and other Instruments of Brass or Copper, with Iron
Hammers.

Of the Superiors.
Every Convent is under the Conduct of a Superior called Tchaou-Vat, that is to
say, Lord or Master of the Convent; but all the Superiors are not of equal
dignity: The most honorable are those which they call Sancrat, and the Sancrat
of the Convent of the Palace is the most reverend of all. Yet no Superior, nor
no Sancrat, has Authority or Jurisdiction over another. This body would be too
formidable if it had but one head, and if it acted always unanimously, and
according to the same Maxims.

Of the Sancrats.
The Missionaries have compared the Sancrats to our Bishops, and the simple
Superiors to our Curates; and they have some inclination to believe that this
Country has formerly had some Christian Bishops, to whom the Sancrats have
succeeded. None but the Sancrats indeed can make Talapoins, as none but Bishops
can make Priests. But otherwise the Sancrats have not any Jurisdiction nor any
Authority, neither over the People, nor over the Talapoins, which are not of
their Convent; and they could not inform me whether they have any particular
Character which makes them Sancrats, save that they are Superiors of certain
Convents designed for Sancrats. Every Convent therefore designed for a Sancrat
is distinguished from the other Convents, wherein there are only simple
Superiors, by some Stones planted round the Temple, and near its Walls, each of
which is double, and bears some resemblance, but at a very great distance, with
a Mitre set upon a Pedestal. I have inserted the Figure thereof in the Print of
a Temple. Their Name in Siamese is Sema. Now it is this resemblance of these
Stones with the Mitres, that is the principal Foundation of the Suspicion,
which the Missionaries have, that the Sancrats have succeeded some Bishops. The
more of these Stones there is round a Temple, the more the Sancrat is thought
advanced in Dignity; but there never is fewer than two, nor more than eight.
The Ignorance under which the Siameses are, as to what these Stones do
signify, has put the Missionaries upon seeking the Origin thereof in
Christianity.

The honors of the Sancrats.
The King of Siam gives to the principal Sancrats a Name, an Umbrella, a Sedan,
and some men to carry it; but the Sancrats do make use of this Equipage only to
wait upon the King, and they never are Talapoins that carry the Sedan. The
Sancrat of the Palace is now called Pra Viriat.

The Spirit of this Institution.
The Spirit of the Institution of the Talapoins, is, to keep themselves from the
Sins of the People, to lead a penitent Life for the Sins of those that bestow
Alms upon them, and to live on Alms. They eat not in common, and tho they be
very hospitable to the Seculars, which have recourse to them, and even to
Christians, yet it is prohibited them to share the Alms which they receive, or
at least to do it presently; because that every one of them being thought to
repent sufficiently, has no need to redeem his Sins by bestowing Alms on his
Companion, and perhaps they would also oblige them all to the fatigue of
begging: Nevertheless a Talapoin is not prohibited from ever giving any thing
to his Brother, or from assisting him in a real Necessity. They have two
Lodgings, one on each side of their door to receive the Passengers, who desire
a bed amongst them.

There are two sorts of Talapoins.
There are two sorts of Talapoins at Siam, as in all the rest of the Indies.
Some do live in the Woods, and others in the Cities. And those of the Woods do
lead, as they say, a Life which would appear intolerable, and which would
doubtless be so in Countries less hot than Siam, or than the Thebais of Egypt.

All, that is to say those of the Cities, and those of the Woods, They are
obliged to Celibacy under the penalty of the Fire.
are obliged under pain of Fire strictly to keep Celibacy, so long as they
continue in their Profession; and the King of Siam, from whose Jurisdiction
they cannot withdraw themselves, pardons them not in this point: for as they
have great Privileges, and amongst other things are exempted from the six
Months Service, it imports him that the Profession of Talapoin become not
altogether convenient, for fear lest all his Subjects embrace it.

To diminish the number of these privileged Persons, And to a certain degree
of Literature under pain of being expelled out of the Convent.
he causes them to be from time to time examined as to their Knowledge, which
respects the Balie Language and its Books: and when we arrived in this Country,
he had just reduced several Thousands to the Secular condition, because they
had not been found learned enough. Their Examiner was Oc-Louang Souracac, a
young man of about Twenty eight or Thirty years old, the Son of that Oc-Pra
Pipitcharatcha, who, as I have said, commands the Elephants; but the Talapoins
of the Woods had refused to submit to the Examination of a Secular, and
consented to be examined only by one of their Superiors.

They educate the Youth, as I have related; They Educate the Youth and instruct
the People.
and they explain their Doctrine to the People, according as it is written in
their Balie Books. They preach the next day after every new and every full
Moon, and the People are ever very constant in the Temples. When the Channel of
the River is full of Rainwater, until the Inundation begins to sink, they
preach every day, from six in the Morning till Dinnertime, and from one in the
Afternoon till five in the Evening. The Preacher is seated cross-leg'd in a
high Chair of State, and several Talapoins release one another in this Office.

The People approves the Doctrine which is preached to them in these Balie
words, sa tou sa, which signifies, it is so Sir, This Trade is gainful.
or in other Siamese words which amount to the same sense; and then they give
Alms to the Preacher: and those that do preach frequently, not only at this
time, but during the whole course of the year, do easily become rich.

Now it is this time which the Europeans have called the Lent of the Talapoins.
Of the Lent of the Talapoins and of their facility in fasting.
Their Fasting is to eat nothing from Noon, unless they may chew Betel: but
when they do not fast, they only eat Fruit in the Afternoon. The Indians are
naturally so sober, that a Fast of Forty, nay of an Hundred days, appears not
incredible to them. Twist, a Dutch Author, in his Description of the Indies
reports, that Experience has certainly evinced that there are some Indians that
can fast Twenty, Thirty, and Forty days, without taking any thing but a little
Liquor mixed with some bitter Wood reduced to Powder. The Siameses have cited
the example of a Talapoin, whom they pretend to have fasted an hundred and
seven days, without eating any thing But when I sounded their opinion thereon,
I found that they attributed this Fast to Magic; and to prove it to me, they
added, that it was easy to live on the Grass of the Fields; provided they
breathed thereon, and uttered certain words, which they understood not, or
which they would not inform me, or which they said that others understood.

After the Rice-Harvest the Talapoins do go for three Weeks to watch in the
Nights in the middle of the Fields, The Watch of the Siameses in the Fields;
and the Esteem which the People makes thereof.
under small Huts of branches of Leaves ranged square; and in the day they
return to visit the Temple, and to sleep in their Cells. The Hut of the
Superior stands in the middle of the others, and higher. They make no Fire in
the Night to scare away the wild Beasts, as all those that travel in the Woods
of this Country used to do, and as was done round the Tabanques wherein we
lodged: So that the People look upon it as a Miracle, that the Talapoins are
not devoured; and I know not what precaution they use, except that of enclosing
themselves in a Park of Bambou. But doubtless they chose places little exposed,
remote from the Woods, and where the savage Beasts cannot come with Hunger, but
after having found a great deal of Food, for it is the season wherein there is
plenty of Forage on the ground. The People admire also the security, in which
the Talapoins of the Woods do live: For they have neither Convent nor Temple to
retire into. They think that the Tigers, Elephants, and Rhinoceros do respect
them, and lick their hands and feet, when they find any one asleep: but these
may make a Fire of Bambou, to defend themselves from these Animals, they may
lie in the closest Thickets; and moreover, though the people should find the
remains of some man devoured, it would never be presumed he was a Talapoin; and
when they could not doubt thereof, they would presume that this Talapoin had
been wicked, and would not cease to believe that the Beasts respect the good.
And it must needs be that the Woods are not so dangerous as they report, seeing
that so many Families do seek Sanctuary there against the Government.

The Talapoins have a Chaplet.
I know not what the Talapoins do pretend, either by this Watch, or by their
Lent; I ignore also what the Chaplets of one Hundred and eight Grains, on which
they recite certain Balie words, do mean.

Their Habit.
They go with naked feet and bare-headed, like the rest of the People: round
their Reins and Thighs they wear the Pagne of the Seculars, but of yellow
Linen, which is the color of their Kings, and of the Kings of China: and they
have no Muslin Shirt, nor any Vest. Their Habit consists of four pieces. The
first which they call Angsa, is a kind of Shoulder Belt of yellow Linen, five
or six Inches broad; they wear it on their left Shoulder, and button it with a
single button on the right Hip; and it descends not lower than the Hip. Over
this Belt they put another great yellow cloth, which is called the Pagne of
the Talapoin, and which they call Pa Schivon, or the Cloth of several pieces,
because it ought to be patched in several places. It Is a kind of Scapulary,
which reaches down to the ground behind and before; and which covering only the
left Shoulder returns to the right Hip, and leaves the two Arms and all the
right Shoulder free. Over the Pa Schivon is the Pa Pat. It Is another cloth four
or five Inches broad which they do likewise put over the left Shoulder, but
like a Hood; it descends to the Navel before, and as much behind as before. Its
color is sometimes red: the Sancrats and the most ancient Talapoins do wear it
thus, but the Angsa and the Pa Schivon can never be other than yellow. To keep
the Pa Pat and the Pa Schivon in a posture, they girt the middle of their body
with a Scarf of yellow Cloth which they call Rappacod, and which is the fourth
and last piece of their Habit.

They have a little Iron-Bason for begging.

They shave all the Head, and have a Screen in their hand.


When they go a begging they carry an Iron Basin, to receive what is given them;
and they carry it in a Linen Bag, which hangs on the left side, by two ends of
a Rope hung like a Belt over the right Shoulder.

They shave all their Beard, Head, and Eyebrows; and to defend themselves from
the Sun they have the Talapat, which is their little Vmbrella, in form of a
Screen, as I have already said in the other part. The Superior is forced to
shave himself, because no person can touch his head, without showing him
disrespect. By the same reason a young Talapoin dares not to shave an old one:
but it is lawful for the old to shave the young, I mean those Children whose
Education is committed to them, and who know not how to shave themselves.
Nevertheless when the Superior is very old, it is necessary that he permit
another to shave him; and this other does it after having desired an express
Permission. In a word, the Razors of Siam are of Copper.

The days on which they shave themselves, are days of Devotion to the People.
The days on which they shave themselves, are those of the new and full Moon;
and on these days the Talapoins and the People do fast, that is to say, they
eat nothing from Noon. The People abstain also on these days from going a
Fishing, not that Fishing is a work, for they abstain not from any other Labor,
but because that, in my opinion, they esteem not Fishing wholly innocent, as we
shall see in the sequel. And in fine, the People on these days do carry unto
the Convents some Alms, which consist in Money, Fruits, Pagnes, or Cattle. If
the Cattle are dead, the Talapoins do eat them: if they are alive, they let
them live and die about the Temple; and they eat them only when they die of
themselves. Near certain Temples there is also a Pond for the living Fish,
which is offered to the Temple: and besides these Festival days, common to all
the Temples, The People love to adorn themselves to go to the Temples: and
their Charity to Animals.
every Temple has a particular one appointed to receive the Alms, as if it was
the Feast of its Dedication: for I could not learn what it is.

The People voluntarily assist at these Festivals, and make a show with their
new Clothes. One of their greatest Charities is to give Liberty to some
Animals, which they buy of those that have taken them in the Fields. What they
give to the Idol, they offer not immediately to the Idol, but to the Talapoins;
and they present it to the Idol, either by holding it in their hand before the
Idol, or by laying it upon the Altar; and in a little time after they take it
away, and convert it to their own uses. Sometimes the People offer up lighted
Tapers, which the Talapoins do fasten to the knees of the Statue, and this is
the reason why one of the knees of a great many Idols is ungilt. As for bloody
Sacrifices, they never offer up any, on the contrary they are prohibited from
killing any thing.

At the Full Moon of the fifth Month, The Siameses do wash their Idols, their
Talapoins, and their Parents.
the Talapoins do wash the Idol with perfumed waters, but respect permits them
not to wash its head. They afterward wash the Sancrat. And the People go also
to wash the Sancrats, and the other Talapoins: And then in particular Families
the Children do wash their Parents, without having regard to the Sex; for the
Son and the Daughter do equally wash the Father and the Mother, the Grandfather
and the Grandmother. This Custom is observed also in the Country of Laos, with
this Singularity, that the King himself is washed in the River.

The Talapoins have no Clock; The hour on which the Talapoins do wash
themselves.
and they wash themselves only when it is light enough to be able to discern
the veins of their hands, for fear lest if they should wash themselves earlier
in the morning, they should in walking kill any Insect without perceiving it.
This is the reason why they wash later in the shortest days, though their Bell
fails not to wake them before day.

Being raised, they go with their Superior to the Temple for two hours. They go
to the Temples in the morning.
There they sing or repeat out of the Balie, and what they sing is written on
the Leass of a Tree somewhat longish, and fastened at one of the ends, as I
have said in discoursing of the Tree which bears them. The People have not any
Prayer Book. The posture of the Talapoins, whilst they sing, is to sit
cross-leg'd, and continually to toss their Talipat or Fan, as if they would
continually fan themselves: so that their Fan goes or comes at each Syllable
which they pronounce, and they pronounce them all at equal times, and after the
same tone. In entering in and going out of the Temple, they prostrate
themselves three times before the Statue, and the Seculars do observe the same;
but the one and the other do remain in the Temple sitting cross-leg'd, and not
always prostrate.

In going from Prayer, the Talapoins go into the City to beg Alms for an hour;
Then to begging, on which alone they do not always live.
but they never go out of the Convent, and never re-enter, without going to
salute their Superior, before whom they prostrated themselves to touch the
ground with their Forehead; and because that the Superior sits generally
cross-leg'd, they take one of his Feet with both their hands, and put it on
their head. To crave Alms they stand at the Gates, without saying any thing;
and they pass on after a little time, if nothing is given them. It is rare that
the People sends them away without giving them, and besides this their Parents
never fail them. The Convents have likewise some Gardens, and cultivated Lands,
and Slaves to plough them. All their Lands are free from Taxes, and the Prince
touches them not; although he has the real property thereof, if he divests not
himself by writing, which he almost never does.

At their return from begging, the Talapoins do breakfast if they will, How
they fill up the day.
and are not always regular in presenting to the Idol what they eat, though they
do it sometimes after the manner that I have related. Till Dinnertime they
study, or employ themselves as to them seems meet, and at Noon they dine. After
Dinner they read a Lecture to the little Talapoins, and sleep; and at the
declining of the day they sweep the Temple, and do there sing as in the morning
for two hours, after which they lie down. If they eat in the evening, it is
only Fruit; and though their day's work seems full by what I have said, they
cease not to walk in the City after Dinner for their pleasure.

Besides the Slaves which the Convents may have, The secular Servants of the
Talapoins.
they have each one or two Servants which they call Tapacaou, and which are
really Seculars, though they be habited like the Talapoins, excepting that their
Habit is white, and not yellow. They receive the money which is given to the
Talapoins, because the Talapoins cannot touch it without sinning: they have the
care of the Gardens and Lands, which the Convent may have, and in a word they
act in the Convents for the Talapoins, whatever the Talapoins conceive cannot
be done by themselves, as we shall see in the Sequel.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Election of the Superior, and of the Reception of the
Talapoins and Talapoinesses.
The Election of the Superior.
WHen the Superior is dead, be he Sancrat or not, the Convent elects another,
and ordinarily it chooses the oldest Talapoin of the House, or at least the most
learned.

How a Secular does, who builds a Temple, and begins a Convent. How a Talapoin
is admitted.
If a particular person builds a Temple, he agrees with some old Talapoin at his
own choice to be the Superior of the Convent, which is built round this Temple,
as other Talapoins come thither to inhabit; for he builds no Talapoins Lodging
beforehand.

If any one would make himself a Talapoin, he begins with agreeing with some
Superior that would receive him into his Convent; and because there is none but
a Sancrat, as I have said, can give him the Habit, he goes to demand it of some
Sancrat, if the Superior with whom he would remain, is not himself a Sancrat;
and the Sancrat appoints him an hour some few days after, and for the
Afternoon. Whoever should oppose him would sin; and as this Profession is
gainful, and it lasts not necessarily the whole life, the Parents are always
very glad to see their Children embrace it. I have not heard what Mr. Gervaise
reports, that it is needful to have a permission in writing from Oc-ya Pra
Sedet, to be received a Talapoin. I see not likewise how this could be
practicable in the whole extent of the Kingdom; and they have always assured
me, that it is free for every one to make himself a Talapoin, and that if any
one did oppose the reception of another into this Profession, he would sin.
When any one therefore is to be admitted, his Parents and his Friends accompany
him to this Ceremony with Instruments and Dancers, and they stop frequently by
the way to see dancing. During the Ceremony, the Demandant, and the Men that
are of his Retinue, do enter into the Temple where the Sancrat is; but the
Women, the Instruments, and the Dancers enter not therein. I know not who
shaves the Head, the Eyebrows and the Beard of the Demandant, or whether he
shaves it not himself. The Sancrat gives the Habit with his own hand, and he
clothes himself therewith, letting the secular Habit fall underneath when he
has put on the other. Mean while the Sancrat pronounces several Balie words;
and when the Ceremony is ended, the new Talapoin goes to the Convent, where he
must remain, and his Parents and Friends accompany him thither: But from this
time he must no more hear any Instrument, nor behold any Dance. Some days after
the Parents do give an Entertainment to the Convent, and they exhibit a great
many Shows before the Temple, which the Talapoins are prohibited to see.

Whether there are several degrees of Talapoins.
Mr. Gervaise distinguishes the Talapoins into Balouang, Tchaou-cou and Pecou.
As for me, I have always heard say that Balouang, which the Siameses do write
Pat-louang, is only a Title of Respect. The Siameses gave it to the Jesuits, as
we do give them the Title of Reverence. In this Country I never heard speak of
the word Picou, but only of Tchaou-cou, which I shall explain in the Sequel,
and which some have informed me to be the Siamese word which signifies
Talapoin. So that they say, He is a Tchaou-cou, and I would be Tchaou-cou, to
signify he is a Talapoin, and I would be a Talapoin. Nevertheless as there may
be some difference between the Sancrats and Talapoins, which the persons whom I
consulted, knew not, though otherwise expert, it may well be that there is some
likewise between the Talapoins themselves, some of which might be Pat-louang,
and others Picou, and that the general name of all might be Tchaou-cou; I refer
my self to Mr. Gervaise.

The Talapoinesses do call themselves Nang Tchii: They are clad in white, Of
the Talapoinesses.
like the Tapacaou, and are not esteemed altogether Religious. A simple
Superior suffices to give them the Habit, as well as to the Nens: And although
they cannot have any carnal Commerce with Men, yet are they not burnt upon this
account, as the Talapoins are, which are surprised in a Fault with the Women.
They deliver them up to their Parents to bastinado them, because that neither
the Talapoins nor the Talapoinesses can strike any person.

CHAP. XIX. Concerning the Doctrine of the Talapoins.
ALL the Indies are full of Talapoins, Diverse kinds of Talapoins in the Indies.
though they have not everywhere this Name, and live not everywhere after the
same manner. Some marry, and others strictly observe Celibacy. Some eat Meat,
provided it is given them slain, others never eat any. Some do kill Animals,
others kill none at all; and others do kill very rarely, and for some
Sacrifice. Their Doctrine appears not more exactly the same in all places, though
the Foundation thereof be always the opinion of the Metempsychosis; and their
Worship is also various, though it always refers to the dead.

It seems that they believe all Nature animated, not only Men, How they believe
the whole animated Nature, and what Idea they have of the Animation
Beasts and Plants, but the Heaven, the Planets, the Earth, and the other
Elements, the Rivers, the Mountains, the Cities, the Houses themselves. And
moreover, as all Souls appear to them of the same Nature, and indifferent to
enter into all Bodies, of what kind soever they be, it seems that they have not
the Idea of the Animation as we have. They believe that the Soul is in the
Body, and that it rules the Body, but it appears not that they believe like us,
that the Soul is physically united to the Body, to make one with it. So far are
they from thinking that the natural Inclinations of Souls is to be in Bodies,
that they believe it is a Penance for them, to extirpate their Sins by their
Sufferings, because that indeed there is no kind of Life which has not its
Troubles. The supreme Felicity of the Soul, in their opinion, is not to be
obliged to animate any Body, but to remain eternally in repose. And the true
Hell of the Soul is on the contrary, according to them, the perpetual necessity
of animating Bodies, and of passing from one to another by continual
Transmigrations. It Is said, that amongst the Talapoins, there are some which
boldly assert, that they remember their past Transmigrations; and these
Testimonies do doubtless suffice to confirm the People in the Opinion of the
Metempsychosis. The Europeans have sometimes translated by the word Tutelar
Genius, the Souls which the Indians give to the Bodies, which we esteem
inanimate: But these Genii are certainly in the Opinion of the Indians only
real Souls, which they suppose equally to animate all the Bodies wherein they
are present, but after a manner which corresponds not to the Physical Union of
our Schools.

The Figure of the World, according to their Doctrine, is eternal; What they
think of the Eternity of the World.
but the World which we see is not, for whatever we see therein, lives in their
Opinion, and must die; and at the same time there will spring up other Beings
of the same kind, another Heaven, another Earth, and other Stars; and this is
the ground of what they say, that they have seen Nature decay and revive again
several times.

No Opinion has been so generally received amongst Men, Of the nature of the
Soul according to them.
as that of the Immortality of the Soul; but that the Soul is immaterial, is a
Truth the knowledge of which is not so much propagated; Thus is it a very great
difficulty to give unto a Siamese the Idea of a pure Spirit; and this is the
Testimony which the Missionaries give thereof, that have been longest amongst
them. All the Pagans of the East do believe indeed that there remains something
of Man after his death, which subsists separately and independantly from its
body; but they give extent and figure to what ramains, and in a word they
attribute unto it all the same Members, and all the same solid and liquid
Substances whereof our Bodies are composed. They suppose only that the Souls
are of a matter subtle enough, to be free from touch and sight; though they
believe that if any one be wounded, the blood which flows from its wound, may
appear. Such were the Manes and Shades of the Greeks and Romans, and it is by
this figure of the Souls like unto that of the Bodies, that Virgil supposes
that Aeneas knew Palinurus, Dido, and Anchises in Hell.

The Absurdity of their Opinion.
Now what is altogether impertinent in this Opinion, is, that the Orientals
cannot tell why they attribute the humane Figure, rather than any other, to the
Soul, which they suppose able to animate all sorts of Bodies, besides the
humane Body. When the Tartar which now reigns at China, would force the
Chinese to shave their hair after the Tartarian fashion, several of them chose
rather to suffer death, than to go, they said, into the other World, to appear
before their Ancestors without hair; imagining, that they shaved the head of
the Soul, by shaving that of the Body.

Of the Punishments and Recompenses of the Soul after death.
The Souls therefore, though material, are yet imperishable in their Opinion; and
at their departure out of this life, they are punished or recompensed, with
Punishments or Pleasures proportioned in greatness and duration to their good
or evil works, until they re-enter into the humane Body, wherein they must
enjoy a Life more or less happy, according to the Good or Evil they have
committed in a former Life.

How they explain the Prosperity of the Wicked, and the Misfortunes of the Good.
If a Man is unfortunate before he has done amiss, as if he is dead-born, the
Indians believe that he has merited it in a former Life, and that then perhaps
he caused some Great-belly'd Woman to miscarry. If, on the contrary, they
observe a wicked Man to prosper, they believe that he enjoys the Recompense
which he has merited in another Life by good Actions. If the Life of the Man is
mixed with Prosperity and Adversity, it is because every Man, they say, has done
Good and Evil when he formerly lived. In a word, no Person suffers any
Misfortune, according to their Opinion, if he has always been innocent; nor is
he always happy, if he has at any time been culpable; nor does he enjoy any
Prosperity, which he has not merited by some good Action.

Of the several places where the Soul passes after death.
Besides the diverse manners of being of this World, as of Plant, or of Animal,
to which the Souls are successively linked after death, they reckon several
places out of this World, where the Souls are punished or rewarded. Some are
more happy, and others more miserable than the World wherein we are. They make
all these places as Stages in the whole extent of Nature, and their Books do
vary in the number; though the most common Opinion is, that there are nine happy,
and as many unhappy. The nine happy places are over our heads, the nine unhappy
are under our feet; and the higher a place is, the happier it is; as also the
lower it is, the more unhappy it is: so that the happy extend far above the
Stars, as the unhappy do sink a great way beneath the earth. The Siameses do
call the Inhabitants of the superior Worlds Theuada, those of the inferior
Worlds Pii, and those of this World Manout. The Portugueses have translated the
word Theuada by that of Angels, and the word Pii by that of Devils; and they
have given the Name of Paradise to the superior Worlds, and that of Hell to the
inferior.

It there revives again.
But the Siameses do not believe that the Souls in departing out of the Body do
pass into these places, as the Greeks and Romans thought that they went into
Hell: they are born, according to them, at the places where they go; and there
they do live a life, which from us is concealed, but which is subject to the
infirmities of this, and unto death. Death and a new Birth are always the road
from one of these places to another, and it is not till after having lived in a
certain number of places, and during a certain time, which ordinarily extends
to some thousands of years, that the Souls there punished or recompensed, do
happen to spring up again in the World wherein we are.

Now as they suppose that the Souls have a new habitation in the places where
they revive, they think they stand in need of the things of this Life; To live
a life full of Cares like this.
and all the ancient Paganism believed the same. With the body of a dead man,
the Gauls burnt the things which he had most esteemed, during his Life,
Movables, Animals, Slaves, and even free Persons, if he had any singularly
devoted to his Service.

They still practice worse than this, if it is possible, Why the Indian women
burn themselves with the body of their Husband.
among the Pagans of the true India, where the Wife glories in burning herself
alive with the body of her Husband, to meet his Soul in the other world. I well
know that some presume that this Custom was formerly introduced in the Indies,
to secure the Husbands from the Treason of their Wives, by forcing them to die
with them. Mandesh reports this opinion, and Strabo had reported it before him,
and had disapproved it, thinking it improbable either that such a Law was
established, or that such a reason for establishing it was true: Indeed,
besides that this Custom is extended to the Movables and Animals, things all
innocent, it is free in regard of the Women, none of which dies after this
manner, if she desires it not; and it has been received in too great a part of
the Country, to imagine that the Crimes of the Women have given occasion
thereunto. Wives to be Slaves, or as Slaves to their Husbands, are not either
more dissatisfied with their Condition, nor greater Enemies to their Husbands,
and they change no part of the Condition as to this regard, by a second
Marriage. Thus it is observed that the Indian Women have always looked upon the
Liberty they have of dying with their Husbands, not as a Punishment, but as a
Felicity which is offered them. The Women Slaves do sometimes follow their
Mistress to the Funeral Pile, but voluntarily and without compulsion. And
moreover it is not a thing without precedent in the Indies, that an Husband
enamored with his Wife, will burn himself with her, in hopes of going to enjoy
another Life with her.

Navarette reports it is a Custom of the Tartars, This Custom is received among
the Tartars, and is not without example among the Chinese.
that when there dies one amongst them, one of his Wives hangs herself, to
follow him into the other World; but that the Tartar which reigned at China in
1668. abolished this Custom: and he adds, that though it be not common to the
Chinese, nor approved by Confucius, yet it is not without example. He relates
one in his time, of the Viceroy of Canton, who being poisoned himself, and
feeling the approach of Death, called her whom he loved the best of his Wives,
and desired her to follow him: which she did by hanging herself so soon as he
was dead.

But certainly neither the Chinese, nor the Tonquineses, nor the Siameses, The
Economy of the Chinese and of their Neighbors in Burials.
nor the other Indians beyond the Ganges, have ever, as it is known, received
the Custom of permitting the Women to burn: and moreover they have by a wise
Economy established, that instead of real Furniture and Money, it should
suffice to burn with the dead bodies, those very things delineated in paper
cut, and oftentimes painted or gilded: under pretense, in my opinion, that in
matter of Types, those of the things in Paper were as good as those of the
things themselves, which the Paper represents. Wherefore the People report,
that this Paper which is burnt, is converted in the other Life to the things
which it represents. The richest Chinese cease not to burn at least some real
Stuffs, and they burn moreover so much Paper, that this expense alone is
considerable.

But all these Oriental People do not only believe that they may be helpful to
the dead, as I have already explained: The power of the Dead over the Living,
the Source of the worship of the Dead.
they think also that the dead have the power of tormenting and succouring the
living: and from hence comes their Care and Magnificence in Funerals; for it is
only in this that they are magnificent. Hence it comes also that they pray to
the dead, and especially the Manes of their Ancestors to the
Great-Grand-Father, or to the Great-Great-Grand-Father; presuming that the rest
are so dispersed by diverse Transmigrations, that they can hear them no more.
The Romans likewise prayed to their dead Ancestors, tho they believed them not
to be Gods. Thus Germanicus in Tacitus, at the beginning of a military
expedition besought the Manes of his Father Drusus to render it happy, because
that Drusus himself had made war in that Country.

They fear only their dead Acquaintance.
But by a prevention, which I see diffused likewise among the Christians, that
are afraid of Spirits, the Orientals neither expect nor fear any thing from the
dead of foreign Countries, but from the dead of their City, or of their
Quarter, or of their Profession, or of their Family.

CHAP. XX. Of the Burials of the Chinese and Siameses.
The Reason of speaking of the Burials of the Chinese.
THE Burials of the Chinese are described in several Relations, but I shall not
forbear speaking a word thereof, to render those of the Siameses more
intelligible; because that the Customs of a Country do always better illustrate
themselves, by the comparison of the Customs of the neighboring Countries.

What are the Principal Circumstances thereof.
The first care of the Chinese in Burials is to have a Coffin of precious Wood;
in which they do sometimes make an expense above their Fortune: and though they
bury their bodies without burning them, they forbear not, at their Interment,
to burn Goods, Houses, Animals, Money, and whatever is necessary to the
Conveniences of Life; but all in Paper, except some real Stuffs which are burnt
at the Funerals of the rich. Father Semedo reports, that at the Burial of a
Queen of China her goods were really burnt. The second care of the Chinese in
Burials is, to choose out a place proper for the Tomb. They choose it according
to the advice of the Soothsayers, imagining that the repose of the deceased
depends on this choice, and that of the felicity and repose of the living
depends on the repose of the dead. If therefore they are not the Proprietors of
the place declared by the Soothsayers, they fail not to buy it, and sometimes
dearly. And in the third place, besides the Funeral Train, which is great, they
give magnificent entertainments to the dead person, not only when they bury
him, but annually on the same day, and several times in the year.

The worship of the Dead.
In their House they have a Chamber designed for the Manes of their Ancestors,
where from time to time they go to render the same Devotions to their Figure,
as they rendered to their Body in interring it. They do again burn Perfumes,
Stuffs, and cut Papers; and they do make them new repasts. The Tonquineses,
according to Father de Rhodes, do intermix these sorts of repasts with
Paper-meats, which they burn. The same Author very largely relates the Prayers
which the Tonquineses make to the dead, how they demand of them a long and
happy Life; with what zeal they redouble their Worship and Prayers in their
Misfortunes, when the Soothsayers assure them that they ought to attribute the
cause thereof to the Anger of their Parents.

The Chinese at present are entirely impious.
Several Relations of China assert, that the learned men, which in this Country
are the most important Citizens, do consider the Ceremonies of Funerals, only
as civil Duties, to which they add no Prayers: That at present they have not
any sense of Religion, and do not believe the existence of any God, nor the
Immortality of the Soul; and that tho they render unto Confucius an exterior
Worship in the Temples which are consecrated to him, yet they demand not of him
the Knowledge, which the learned Men of Tonquin demand of him.

The Doctrine of the Ancient Chinese on the worship of the Dead, and that it
is very probable that they never prayed to the dead in Funerals.
But, whether the Funerals which the learned Chinese do make for their Parents
be without Prayers, or not; it is certain that the ancient Spirit of the
Doctrine of the Chinese, was to believe the Immortality of the Soul, to expect
good and evil from the dead, and to address some Prayers unto them, if not in
Burials, at least in the disgraces of Life to attract their protection.
Moreover, what opinion soever they have had of the Power of the dead to succor
the living, it is very probable that they thought, that the dead were in need
at the moment of the Burial, that is to say in the Entrance and Establishment
of another Life, and that it then belonged to the living to succor the dead,
and not to demand succor of them.

But it is time to relate what the Funerals of the Siameses are. The Burials of
the Siameses.
So soon as a man is dead his body is shut up in a wooden Coffin, which is
varnished and gilded on the outside: and as the Varnish of Siam is not so good
as that of China, and hinders not the stench of the dead body from passing
through the cracks of the Coffin, they endeavor at least to consume the
Intestines of the dead with Mercury, which they pour into his Mouth, and which,
they say, comes out at the Fundament. They sometimes make use also of Leaden
Coffins, and sometimes also they gild them: but the Wood of their Coffins is
not so precious as at China, because they are not so rich as the Chinese. Out
of a respect they place the Coffin on some high thing, and generally on a
Bedsted which has feet, and so long as the body is kept at the house, whether
to expect the Head of the Family, if he is absent, or to prepare the Funeral
Solemnities, they burn Perfumes and Tapers by the Coffin; and every night the
Talapoins come to sing in the Balie Language, in the Chamber where it is
exposed: they do range themselves along the Walls. They entertain them, and
give them some Money: and what they sing are some moral Subjects upon Death,
with the Road to Heaven, which they pretend to show to the Soul of the deceased.

Mean while the Family chooses a place in the Field, How they burn the bodies.
there to carry and burn the body. This place is generally a Spot near the
Temple, which the Deceased, or some of his Ancestors had built; or near some
other Temple, if there is none peculiar to the Family of the deceased, This
space is enclosed with a square enclosure made of Bambou, with some kind of
Architecture, almost of the same work as the Arbours and Bowers of our Gardens,
and adorned with those Papers Painted or Gilded, which they cut to represent
the Houses, Movables, and Domestic and Savage Animals. In the middle of this
Enclosure the Pile composed entirely or partly of Odoriferous wood, as are the
white or yellow Saunders, and Lignum Aloes, and this according to the Wealth
and Dignity of the deceased. But the greatest honor of the Funeral consists in
erecting the Pile, not in eagerly heaping up Wood, but in great Scaffolds, on
which they do put Earth, and then Wood. At the Burial of the late Queen, who
died seven or eight years ago, the Scaffold was higher than ever was yet seen
in this Country, and a Machine was desired of the Europeans, to raise the
Coffin decently to that height.

When it is resolved to carry the Corpse to the Pile (which is always done in
the Morning) the Parents and Friends do carry it with the sound of a great many
Instruments. The Body marches first, then the Family of the deceased, The Train.
Men and Women all clothed in White, their Head covered with a White Vail, and
lamenting exceedingly; and in fine, the rest of the Friends and Relations. If
the Train can go all the way by water, it is so done. In very magnificent
Funerals they carry great Machines of Bambou covered with painted and gilded
Paper, which represents not only Palaces, Movables, Elephants, and other
common Animals, but some hideous Monsters, some of which resemble the humane
Figure, and which the Christians take for the Figures of Devils. They burn not
the Coffin, but they take out the body which they leave on the Pile: and the
Talapoins of the Convent, near which the body is burnt, do sing for a quarter
of an hour, and then retire to appear no more. Then begin the shows of the Cone
and of the Rabam, which are at the same time, and all the day long, but on
different Theaters. The Talapoins think not that they can be present thereat
without Sin; and these Shows are not exhibited at Funerals upon any religious
Account, but only to render them more magnificent. To the Ceremony they add a
festival Air, and yet the Relations of the deceased forbear not to make great
Lamentations, and to shed many Tears, but they hire no Mourners, as some have
assured me.

About Noon the Tapacaou, or Servant of the Talapoins, sets fire to the Pile,
The Servant of the Talapoins lights the Funeral Pile.
which generally burns for two hours. The Fire never consumes the body, it only
roasts it, and oftentimes very ill: but it is always reputed for the Honor of
the deceased, that he has been wholly consumed in an eminent place, and that
there remains only his Ashes. If it is the Body of a Prince of the Blood, or of
a Lord whom the King has loved, the King himself sets fire to the Pile, without
stirring out of his Palace. He lets go a lighted Torch along a Rope, which is
extended from one of the Windows of the Palace to the Pile. As to the cut
Papers, which are naturally designed for the Flames, the Talapoins do
frequently secure them, and seize them to lend them to other Funerals; and the
Family of the deceased permits them to do it. In which it appears that they
have forgot the reason, why the neighboring Nations dispense not from burning
such Papers effectually: and in general it may be asserted, that there are no
Persons in the world, which do ignore their own Religion so much as the
Talapoins. It is very difficult, say some, to find any one amongst them that
knows any thing. It is necessary to seek their Opinions in the Balie Books,
which they keep, and which they study very little.

Alms at Funerals.
The Family of the deceased entertains the Train, and for three days it bestows
Alms: viz. On the day that the body is burnt, to the Talapoins which have sung
over the body, the next day to their whole Convent, and the third day to their
Temple.

Funerals redoubled.
This is what is practiced at the Funerals of the Siameses: to which it is
requisite only to add, that they imbellish the Show with a great many
Fireworks, and that if the Funerals are for a man of great consequence, they
last with the same Shows for three days.

Bodies dug up to receive greater Funeral Honors.
It sometimes also happens that a Person of great Quality causes the body of his
Father to be dug up again, though a long time dead, to make him a pompous
Funeral; if when he died, they made him not such a one, as was worthy of the
present Elevation of the Son. This participates of the Customs of the Chinese,
who communicate as much as they can to their dead Relations, the Honors to
which they arrive. Thus when a man not born a Kings Son arrives at the Crown of
China, he will with certain Ceremonies cause the Title of King to be given to
his deceased Father.

What the fire consumes not, is buried under Pyramids: and how the Siameses do
call these Pyramids.
After the body of a Siamese has been burnt, as I have said, the whole Show is
ended; they shut up the remains of his Body in the Coffin, without any Order;
and this depositum is laid under one of those Pyramids, wherewith they
encompass their Temples. Sometimes also they bury precious Stones, and other
Riches with the body, because that it is to put them in a place which Religion
renders inviolable. Some there are who say, that they cast the Ashes of their
Kings into the River, and I have read of the Peguins, that they make a Paste of
the Ashes of their Kings with Milk, and that they bury it at the mouth of their
River when the Sea is retired: but as the Fire never consumes all, and as it
principally spares the Bones, the Siameses and Peguins do put these remains of
their Kings under Pyramids. These Pyramids are called Pra Tchiai di. Pra is
that Baly Term, which I have frequently mentioned. Tchiai-di signifies Good
Heart, that is to say Contentment, as I have explained it in the other part: So
that Pra Tchiai-di amounts to these words sacred repose, as much as those of
Repose and Contentment do resemble.

From whence came the fancy of Pyramids for Tombs.
A Tomb quite flat like ours would not in their opinion be honorable enough,
they must have something of Eminence: and this is the fancy of the Pyramids of
Egypt, and the Mausolea. Some People yet more vain have joined Epitaphs
thereto: and because that time effaces the Inscriptions, which are exposed to
view, others have secretly put their names on the principal Stones of certain
stately edifices: So that when they are discovered, their work is already
demolished to the Foundation. The Siameses still keep to the first degree of
Vanity, which is single Pyramids without any Epitaph, and so slightly erected,
that those which last longest, do never last an Age.

Why the Siameses love to build Temples.
Those that have neither Temple nor Pyramid, do sometimes keep at their house
the ill burnt remains of their Parents: But there hardly is a Siamese rich
enough to build a Temple, who does it not, and who buries not the Riches he has
remaining. The Temples are inviolable Sanctuaries, as I have said, and the
Kings of Siam, as well as particular persons, commit their Treasures to them. I
know that the Siameses have demanded some smooth Files of the Europeans, to cut
the great Iron Bars which linked the Stones in the Temples, under which there
was Gold concealed. The Siameses which have not wherewith to build a Temple,
cease not at least to make some Idol, which they give to some of the Temples
already built: Which in these People is a sentiment of Vanity or Religion,
whereas the building of Temples may be as much the Interest of preserving their
Riches to their Family, as any other thing.

The Poor interr their Parents without burning them; The Funerals of the Poor.
but if it is possible for them, they invite the Talapoins, who stir not
without a Gratuity. Those that have not wherewithal to pay the Talapoins, do
think they do honor enough to their dead Parents, to expose them in the Field
on an eminent place; that is to say on a Scaffold, where the Vulturs and the
Crows devour them.

I have already said, Funeral honors retarded.
that in Epidemical Distempers they bury the Bodies without burning them; and
that they dig them up and burn them some years after, when they think all the
danger of the Infection is past.

But they never burn those that Justice cuts off, nor Infants dead-born, Those
that are deprived of Funeral Honors.
nor Women that die in Childbed, nor those which drown themselves, or which
perish by any other extraordinary disaster, as by a Thunderbolt. They rank
these unfortunate persons amongst the guilty, because they believe that such
Misfortunes never happen to innocent Persons.

Mourning at China is prescirbed by the Law, Mourning.
and that for the Father and Mother lasts three years, and deprives or bereaves
the Son during this time, of all sorts of public Employment, if it is not
Military: though to me it seems that this exception as to Millitary
Employments, is a late establishment. On the contrary, the Siameses have no
forced Mourning: they give marks of Sorrow only as much as they are Afflicted;
so that it is more common at Siam, that the Father and the Mother put on
Mourning for their Children, than that the Children wear it for their Father
and Mother. Sometimes the Father turns Talapoin and the Mother Talapoinesse, or
at least they shave the head one of the other: but there is only the true
Talapoins, that can likewise shave the Eyebrows.

To me it appeared not that the Siameses invoke their dead Parents, Whether the
Siameses pray to the Dead.
what enquiry soever I have made upon it; but they cease not to believe
themselves frequently tormented with their Apparitions: and then they carry
Viands to their Tombs, which the Beasts do eat; and they give Alms for them to
the Talapoins, because they think that Charity is a Ransom for the Sins of the
dead, as well as of the living. Besides this the Siameses almost on all
occasions, do offer up Prayers to the good Genij, and imprecations against the
bad, of which I have already given some examples; And these Genij are certainly
in their opinion only Souls, all as I have said, of the same Nature.

The wicked Genij are the Souls of those, which dye, How it must be understood
that the Souls of the Good are changed into Angels, and the Souls of the wicked
into Devils.
either by the hand of Justice, or by some of those extraordinary misfortunes,
which make them to be judged unworthy of Funeral Honors. The good Genij are all
the other Souls, esteemed more or less good, according as they have been more
or less Virtuous in this life. And this wholly resembles the Opinion of Plato,
who requires that one should adhere to Virtue during life, to the end that the
custom thereof may continue after death. This amounts likewise to that Ancient
Opinion, which was spread also amongst some of the Ancient Christians, that the
Souls of the good are changed into Angels, and the Souls of the wicked into
Devils. But amongst the Indians, this doctrine is no other, than that the Souls
of the good, spring up again after Death, in one of those places, which the
Portugueses have called Paradise, and the Souls of the wicked, in one of those
other places, which they do call Hell. Some continuing to be good after Death,
do good to men, others continuing to be wicked, do hurt to men, and every thing
else, as much as they can. And who knows whether these several Paradices which
they believe, are not a confused remembrance of the several Orders of the
Celestial Spirits.

Now through an incredible blindness, The Indians have no God which is the
Judge of Humane Actions.
the Indians admit not any Intelligent Being, which judges of the goodness or
badness of Humane actions, and which orders the Punishment or Recompense
thereof. Upon this account they admit only a blind fatalility, which, say they,
is the reason that Prosperity accompanies Virtue, and Misfortune Vice; as it
determines heavy things to descend, and light things to ascend. And because
that nothing more repugns reason, than to suppose an exact Justice in chance,
or in the Necessity of Fate, the Indian People incline themselves to believe
something Corporeal in good or bad works, which, they say, has the power of
doing unto men, the Good or Evil which they deserve. But since we have often
said, that the Indians do own the distinction of good or bad Works, it is
necessary to set down the Principles of of their Morality.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Principles of the Indian Morals.
Five Negative Precepts.
THey are reduced to five Negative Precepts, very near the same in all the
Cantons of the Indies. Those of the Siameses are such as follow.

1. Kill nothing. 2. Steal nothing. 3. Commit not any impurity. 4. Lie not. 5.
Drink no intoxicating Liquor, which in general they call Laou.
The first Precept extends to Plants and Seeds.
The first Precept is not limited to the Killing either Men or Animals: but it
extends to Plants, and to Seeds; because that by a very probable Opinion, they
believe that the Seed is only the Plant it self in a Cover. The Man therefore
observing this Precept, as they understand it, can live only on Fruit;
forasmuch as they consider the Fruit not as a thing which has Life, but as a
part of a thing which has Life, and which suffers not, though its Fruit be
plucked. In eating the Fruit it is necessary only not to eat the Kernel nor
Stone, because they are Seeds: and it is necessary not to eat Fruit out of
season, that is to say, in my opinion, before the Season; because that it is to
make the Seed, which the Fruit contains, abortive, by hindering it from
ripening.

And to the not destroying any thing in Nature.
Besides this, the Precept of not killing, extends to the not destroying any
thing in Nature: by reason they think that every thing is animated, or if you
will, that there are Souls every where, and that to destroy any thing whatever,
is forceably to dispossess a Soul. They will not, for instance, break a Branch
of a Tree, as they will not break the Arm of an innocent Person. They believe
that it is to offend the Soul of the Tree. But when once the Soul has been
expelled out of a body, they look upon this as a Destruction already wrought,
and think nothing to be destroyed in nourishing themselves with this Body. The
Talapoins make not any scruple of eating what is dead, but of killing what they
think alive.

In several things they do more abhor Blood than Murder.
In several things they testify a greater Abhorrence of Blood, than of Murder:
It is prohibited them to make any Incision, from whence there gushes out Blood;
as if the Soul was principally in the Blood, or that it was only the Blood. And
this perhaps is a confused remembrance of the ancient Command of God, who
permitting unto man the use of Meats, prohibited him from eating the Blood of
the Animals, because that the Blood supplys in them the place of the Soul.
There are some Indians which dare not to cut a certain Plant, because there
comes out a red Juice, which they take for the Blood of this Plant. The
Siameses do scruple to go a fishing, only on the days when the Talapoins shave
their Head. This done, it seems to them that when they fish, they commit no
Crime; by reason they think not themselves guilty of the Death of the Fishes.
They say they only pull them out of the Water, and shed not their Blood. The
least evasion suffices them to elude the Precepts. Thus they think not to sin
by killing in War, because they shoot not direct at the Enemy: though at the
bottom they endeavor to kill, as I have already explained it, discoursing of
their manner of fighting.

But if any one tells them, that according to the opinion of the
Metempsychosis, The Opinion of the Metempsychosis favorable to the Murder of
the unhappy, if it renders not all Murder indifferent.
Murder oftentimes appears laudable, seeing that it may deliver a Soul from a
miserable Life: They answer that forceably to dispossess Souls is always to
offend them; and that moreover they are not relieved, because they re enter
into the like Bodies, there to fill up the rest of the time, during which they
are designed for this sort of Life. But they consider not that this reason
would also prove that they did no real Injury in killing: and the Chinese who
in this do think otherwise than the Siameses, do kill their Children when they
have too many, and they allege that it is to make them spring up more happy.
To kill themselves appears to them a very laudable thing.


Moreover all the Indians do think, that to kill themselves is not only a thing
permitted, because they believe themselves Masters of their selves; but that it
is a Sacrifice advantageous to the Soul, and which acquires it a great degree
of Virtue and Felicity. Thus the Siameses do sometimes hang themselves out of
Devotion, on a Tree which in Balie they call Pra sa maha Pout, and in Siamese
Ton po. These Balie words do seem to signify the excellent, or the holy Tree
of the great Mercury; for Pout signifies Mercury, in the Balie Name of
Wednesday. The Europeans do call this Tree, the Tree of the Pagodes, because
the Siameses do plant it before the Pagods. It grows in the Woods like the
other Trees of the Country, but no particular Person can have thereof in his
Garden; and it is of this Wood, that they make all the Statues of
Sommona-Codom, which they would make of Wood. But in that Zeal which sometimes
determines the Siameses to hang themselves, there is always some evident
subject of a great distaste of Life, or of a great Fear, as is that of the
Anger of the Prince. The Story of a Peguin which burnt himself.


It Is about six or seven years since a Peguin burnt himself, in one of the
Temples, which the Peguins at Siam have called Sam-Pihan. He seated himself
cross-leg'd, and besmeared his whole body, with a very thick Oil, or rather
with a sort of Gum, and set fire thereunto. 'Twas reported that he was very
much discontented with his Family, which nevertheless lamented exceedingly
about him. After the Fire had smothered and roasted him well, his body was
covered with a kind of Plaster; and thereof they made a Statue which was
gilded and put upon the Altar, behind that of the Sommona-Codom. They call
these sorts of Saints Pra tian tee; tian signifies true, tee signifies
certainly. Behold then how the Siameses understand the first Precept of their
Moral Law. The Prohibition of Impurity extends to the Prohibition of Marriage.


I have nothing particular to say upon the second: but as to the third which
prohibits all manner of Uncleanness, it extends not only to Adultery, but to
all carnal Commerce of a Man with a Woman, and to Marriage itself. Not only
Celibacy is amongst them a state of Perfection, but Marriage is a state of Sin:
either through that Spirit of Modesty, which amongst all Nations is annexed to
the use of Marriage, and which seems therein to suppose an evil whereat they
blush: or through a general Aversion to all natural indecencies, some of which
were legal Impurities among the Jews. They wash themselves amongst certain
People after having seen their Wives, as after some other sort of Pollution.
Mahomet thought Women unworthy of Paradise, and without declaring what they
shall become, he promises some fairer and more beautiful to his Elect. The
Chinese Philosophers esteem Divorce a Virtuous Action.


The Chinese Philosophers do say, that a Wife is a thing evil in itself, and
that one must neither keep his own, nor take another, when he has Children,
that may render unto their Parents from whom they are born, and to their
Ancestors, the Duties which the Christian Religion thinks necessary to the
repose of the dead. Without this pretended necessity they would believe
Marriage unlawful, and so soon as they have Children, they think it a Virtue to
make a Divorce. They cite the example of Confucius, who quitted his Wife when
he had a Son: they allege the example of this Son, who likewise quitted his;
and the example and opinion of several other Chinese Philosophers, who have
made a Divorce with their Wives, and who have esteemed the Divorce amongst the
virtuous Actions. They condemn as a Corruption of the ancient manners of China,
the Opinion of the modern Chinese People, who as well as the Siameses, guided
by the sentiments of Nature, look upon Divorce, if not as an Evil, at least as
a Misfortune. I know nothing concerning the fourth Precept, which deserves to
be explained.

Every Liquor which intoxicates, is prohibited.
The fifth not only prohibits intoxicating, but the drinking of any Liquor,
which may intoxicate, though one makes not himself drunk therewith. They esteem
a thing evil in itself, which may hurt by the quantity.

It Is thus that they understand their Precepts, neither do they believe that
real Virtue is made for every one, but only for the Talapoins. They think that
what is Sin in itself, is Sin for all; and the Talapoins make neither Vow, nor
any thing whatever, which is a Sin in them, which is not a Sin to all the
World; but according to them, the Trade of Seculars is to sin, and that of the
Talapoins not to sin, and to exercise Repentance for those that sin. They
comprehend like us, that those who are designed to expiate the Sins of others
by Repentance, ought to be more pure than others; and that the Punishment due
and necessarily annexed to Sin, may yet pass from the guilty to the innocent, if
the innocent will willingly submit himself to deliver the guilty. Moreover they
conceive the Nature of Sin very grossly, and very materially; for the Talapoins
content themselves with abstaining from Actions which they think wicked, but
they scruple not to make the Seculars commit them, to get Advantage thereby.
Thus when they would eat Rice, Rice being a Seed they cannot boil it without
Sin, because it is to kill it: But they make their Tapacaou, which are their
Domestic Seculars, or rather they cause the Talapoin-Children, which they
educate, to commit this pretended Sin; and when the Rice is boiled, then they
eat it. They are also prohibited to piss on the Fire, or in the Water, or on
the Earth, because that this would be to extinguish the Fire, or to corrupt
those two other Elements: they piss in some Vessel, and a Secular Servant pours
it where he pleases, and it matters not whether he sins. The Seculars do
therefore observe, or elude the Precepts only through the fear of the public
Chastisements, or through the natural strangeness which they might have to what
they shall think Sin; but they ransom their Sins by their good Works, which
principally consist in bestowing Alms on the Temples and Talapoins, according
to the ancient Tradition known perhaps throughout the Earth, and so frequently
repeated in the Holy Scripture, that Alms deeds ransom Sins. It is easy also
to observe in them a very natural and very just sentiment, which is that they
much more condemn the Sins which may be easily avoided, than those which are
inevitable, though they think that all are Sins. But to the end that the
Morality of the Talapoins may be better understood, I will insert at the end of
this Work, most of their Maxims verbatim, as they were given me. I will add
only some Remarks to make them better understood.

The Spirit of the Maxims of the Talapoins.
There will be seen the respect which they have for the Elements, and for all
Nature. They are prohibited to speak injuriously of any thing natural; to dig
any hole in the Earth, and not to fill it up again after they have done it; to
boil the Earth, as to boil Rice; to kindle the Fire, because it is to destroy
that with which it is kindled; and to extinguish it when it is once kindled.
There we shall see that they take care of Purity and Decency, as much as of
real Virtue: that they have some Idea's of almost all the Virtues, and that
they have hardly any that is exact; because they carry some to superstitious
scruples, and that they live short of others.

Virtue according to them is impossible.
Moreover these Maxims are only for the Talapoins; not that they think that any
person can violate them without Sin: but it is that they see it is impossible
for any one not to infringe them: as for example, it is very necessary that
some person make the Fire. They are surprised at the Beauty of our Morality,
when it is told them that it equally invites all men to Virtue, because they
comprehend not that this can be a thing practicable: but when they are made to
understand it, and are informed that Virtue consists not in those impossible
things, wherein they place it, they contemn what is told them, and do believe
themselves more pure and virtuous than the Christians: or rather they return
again to believe that they alone are Creeng, that is to say pure, and that the
Christians are Cahat, or designed to sin, like the rest of Mankind: A
prevention which must quite confound us, and which proves the extreme necessity
which humane reason has of a superior Light, not to err in the knowledge of
good and evil, the Idea's of which do nevertheless appear unto us so easy, and
so natural.

If therefore the Talapoins do think themselves only virtuous, The Vanity of
the Talapoins.
it is no wonder if they likewise allow themselves all the Pride imaginable in
regard of the Seculars. This Pride appears in all things; as in that they
affect to seat themselves higher than the Seculars, never to salute any
Secular, and never to bewail the death of any person, not even that of their
Parents. They have a Practice which resembles Confession, for from time to time
they seem secretly to render an account of their Deportments to their Superior;
but are so far from confessing themselves Sinners, that they only run over the
Precepts, to say they have not violated them. I have not stolen, say they, I
have not lied, and so of the rest. And in a word they are not humble, and they
have rather the Idea's of Humiliations and Mortifications than of Humility.

They seem to understand Entertaining and Retirement. A Talapoin sins, Some
Appearances of certain Monastic Virtues in the Talapoins.
if in walking along the Streets, he has not his Senses composed. A Talapoin
sins, if he meddles with State Affairs. They concern not themselves therein,
without a great deal of Distraction, and without attracting the Envy and Hatred
of several; which suits not to a Talapoin, who ought only to mind his Convent,
and to edify every one by his Modesty. But moreover I believe that a wise
Policy has greatly contributed to interdict State Affairs to persons, who have
so great a Power upon the Minds of the People. They understand Religious
Obedience. Obedience is the Virtue of every one in this Country, and it is no
wonder that it is found in their Cloisters. They likewise understand Chastity.
A Talapoin sins, if he coughs to attract on him the Eyes of the Women, if he
beholds a Woman with Complacency, or if he desires one; if he uses Perfumes
about his Person, if he puts Flowers to his Ears: and in a word, if he adorns
himself with too much Care. And some would likewise say, they understand
Poverty, because it is prohibited them to have more than one Vestment, and to
have it precious: To keep any thing to eat from the Evening, till the next day;
to touch either Gold or Silver, or to desire it. But at the bottom, as they may
abandon their Profession, they act so well, that if they live poorly whilst
they are Talapoins, they fail not to heap wherewith to live at their Ease, when
they cease to be so. And these are the Idea's which the Siameses have of Virtue.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Supreme Felicity, and Extreme Infelicity amongst the
Siameses.
IT remains for me to explain wherein they place perfect Felicity, Perfect
Felicity.
that is to say, the supreme Recompense of good Works, and the utmost Degree of
Unhappiness, that is to say the greatest Punishment of the Guilty. They believe
therefore that if by several Transmigrations, and by a great number of good
Works in all the Lives, a Soul acquires so much Merit, that there is not in any
World any mortal Condition, that is worthy of it; they believe, I say, that
this Soul is then exempt from every Transmigration, and every Animation, that
it has nothing more to do; that it neither revives, nor dies any more; but that
it enjoys an eternal Unactivity, and a real Impassibility. Nireupan, say they,
that is to say this Soul has disappeared: it will return no more in any World:
What the Portugueses have called Paradise and Hell, are neither the Perfect
Felicity, nor the extreme Infelicity, according to the Siameses.
and it is this word which the Portugueses have translated it is annihilated;
and likewise thus, It is become a God, though in the Opinion of the Siameses,
this is not a real Annihilation, nor an Acquisition of any divine Nature.

Such is therefore the true Paradise of the Indians: for though they suppose a
great Felicity in the highest of the nine Paradices, of which we have already
discoursed; yet they say that this Felicity is not eternal, nor exempt from all
Inquietude; seeing that it is a kind of life, where one is born, and where one
dies. By the like reason, their true Hell is not any of those nine places which
we have called Hell, and in some of which they suppose Torments and eternal
Flames: for though there may eternally be some Souls in these Hells, these will
not always be the same: No Soul will be eternally punished; they will revive
again to live there a certain time, and to depart thence by death.

The utmost degree of Infelicity.
But the true Hell of the Indians is only, as I have already said, the eternal
Transmigrations of these Souls, which will never arrive at the Nireupan, that
is to say, will never disappear in the whole duration of the World, which they
do think must be eternal. They believe, that it is for the Sins of these Souls,
and for their want of ever acquiring a sufficient merit, that they shall
continually pass from one Body to another. The Body, whatever it be, is always
according to them, a Prison for the Soul, wherein it is punished for its Faults.

The Wonders which they relate of a Man that deserves the Nireupan, and how
they consecrate their Temples to him.
But before that a Man enters into the supreme Felicity, before that he
disappears, to speak like them, they believe that after the Action, by which he
concludes to merit the Nireupan, he enjoys great Privileges from this life.
They believe that it is then that such a Man preaches up Virtue to others with
much more efficacy; that he acquires a prodigious Science, an invincible
strength of Body, the power of doing Miracles, and the knowledge of whatever
has befallen him in all the Transmigrations of his Soul, and of whatever should
happen to him till his death. His death must likewise be of a singular sort,
which they think more noble than the common way of dying. He disappears, they
say, like a Spark, which is lost in the Air. And it is to the memory of these
sorts of Men, that the Siameses do consecrate their Temples.

Though they believe in several, they honor only one named Sommona-Codom.
Now though they say that several have attained to this Felicity, (to the end, in
my opinion, that several may hope to arrive thereat) yet they honor only one
alone, whom they esteem to have surpassed all the rest in Virtue. They call him
Sommona-Codom; and they say that Codom was his Name, and that Sommona signifies
in the Balie Tongue, a Talapoin of the Woods. According to them, there is no
true Virtue out of the Talapoin-Profession, and they believe the Talapoins of
the Woods much more virtuous than those of the Cities.

No Idea of a Divinity amongst the Siameses.
And this is certainly the whole Doctrine of the Siameses, in which I find no
Idea of a Divinity. The Gods of the ancient Paganism which we know, governed
Nature, punished the wicked, and recompensed the good; and though they were born
like Men, they came of an immortal Race, and knew not death. The Gods of
Epicurus took care of nothing, no more than Sommona-Codom; but it appears not
that they were Men arrived through their Virtue at that state of an happy
Inactivity, they were not born, neither did they dye. Aristotle has
acknowledged a first Mover, that is to say a powerful Being, who had ranged
Nature, and who had given it, as I may say, the swing, which preserved the
harmony therein. But the Siameses have not any such Idea, being far from
acknowledging a God Creator; and so I believe it may be asserted, that the
Siameses have no Idea of any God, and that their Religion is reduced all entire
to the worship of the dead. And it is necessary that the Chinese understand it
thus, and that they think not that Pagode signifies God: for Father Magaillans
informs us, that they are offended when Confucius is treated as a Pagode;
because this is to treat him not as God, which would not be an injury to
Confucius: but as a Man arrived at the supreme Virtue of the Indians, which the
Chinese do think very much inferior to the Virtue of Confucius.

CHAP. XXIII. Concerning the Origin of the Talapoins, and of their Opinions.
It seems that it may be found in the Chinese Antiquity.
WHen I would seek by what degrees Humane Reason could precipitate itself into
such strange Digressions, I think to find the Footsteps thereof in the Chinese
Antiquity.

The Chinese are so ancient, If the ancient Chinese acknowledge the Deity,
they soon corrupted the Idea thereof.
that it must be presumed that at the beginning they knew the true God, and by
him good and bad Works, and the Recompenses or Punishments which the one and
the other were to expect from that Omnipotent Judge, but that by little and
little they have obscured and corrupted these Idea's. God, that Being so pure
and so perfect, is at most become the material Soul of the entire World, or of
its most beautiful part, which is the Heaven. His Providence and his Power have
been no more than a limited Providence and Power, though nevertheless a great
deal more extensive than the strength and prudence of Men. It seems, says
Father Trigaut, in the first Book of his Christian Expedition to China, chap.
10. That the ancient Chinese have believed the Heaven and the Earth animated,
and that they have adored the Soul as a Supreme God, calling him the King of
Heaven, or simply the Heaven and the Earth. Father Trigaut might raise the same
doubt upon all things; for the Doctrine of the Chinese has continually
attributed Spirits to the four parts of the World, to the Planets, to the
Mountains, to the Rivers, to the Plants, to the Cities and their Ditches, to
Houses and their Chimnies, and, in a word, to all things. And all the Spirits
appear not good to them; they acknowledge some wicked ones, to be the immediate
cause of the mischiefs and disasters to which the humane life is subject.
Moreover, as they thought the Earth and the Sea fixed to the Heaven by the
Horizon, they have attributed but one Spirit or one Soul to the Heaven and the
Earth; though nevertheless, and perhaps by some thought contrary to their first
opinion, they have built two different Temples, the one consecrated to the
Heaven, and the other to the Earth.

As therefore the Soul of Man was, in their opinion, They have taken from God
the infinite Providence and Omnipotence.
the source of all the vital Actions of Man; so they gave a Soul unto the Sun,
to be the source of its qualities and of its motions: and on this Principle the
Soul's diffused every where, causing in all Bodies the Actions which appear
natural to these Bodies, there needs no more to explain in this opinion the
whole oeconomie of Nature, and to supply the Omnipotence, and infinite
Providence, which they admit not in any Spirit, not even in that of the Heaven.

In truth, as it seems that Man, using things natural for his nourishment, They
have made God as a King of all Nature, but not a King always obeyed.
or for his convenience, has some power over things Natural, the ancient
opinion of the Chinese, allowing such a like power proportionably to all the
Souls, supposed that that of the Heaven might act over Nature, with a prudence
and strength incomparably greater than Humane Prudence and Power. But at the
same time it acknowledged in the Soul of every thing, an interior force,
independent by its nature from the Power of Heaven, and which acted sometimes
against the Designs of Heaven. The Heaven governed Nature as a powerful King:
the other Souls paid Obedience to him: He almost continually forced them, but
some there were which sometimes dispensed with obeying him. Confucius believes
extreme Virtue impossible, and consequently he thinks the Idea we have of God
impossible.


Confucius discoursing of boundless Virtue, which is the true Idea that we have
of the Divinity, thinks it impossible. How virtuous soever, says he, a man is,
there will yet be a degree of Virtue, to which he cannot attain. The Heaven and
the Earth, adds he, though so great, so perfect, and so curiously wrought, cannot
yet satisfy the Desires of all; by reason of the Inconstancy of the Seasons,
and of the Elements: so that Man finds in them wherewith to reprehend, and even
just Subjects of Indignation. Wherefore if we thoroughly comprehend the
greatness of extreme Virtue, we shall necessarily confess that the whole
Universe can neither contain nor sustain the weight thereof. If, on the
contrary, we think upon that subtle and concealed point of Perfection in which
it consists, we shall confess that the whole World can neither divide nor
penetrate it. These are the words of Confucius, as Father Couplet has given
them us, by which this Philosopher seems to have had no other intention, than
to describe the real Divinity, which he believes impossible, seeing that he
finds it no where, not even in the Spirit of the Heaven and the Earth, which is
what he conceived most perfect. The Worship due to the Creator divided amongst
the Creatures by the Ancient Chinese.


The Divine Power and Providence being thus distributed as by Piece-meals, to
an infinite number of Souls, the ancient Chinese thought themselves obliged to
address to this infinite multitude of Souls and Spirits, the Vows and Worship
which they owed only to one alone.

Of Nature they make a State like to theirs.
Of Nature they make an invisible Monarchy, which they mould theirs upon, and of
which they believe that the invisible members had a continual correspondence
with the members of the Chinese Monarchy, which they thought to possess near
the whole Earth. To the Spirit of Heaven they allot six principal Ministers, as
the King of China has six, which are the Presidents of the six chief Tribunals,
wherein they only have a determinative Voice. They believe that the King of
Heaven (for they give this Title to the Spirit of Heaven) intermeddled only
with the person and manners of the King of China: That all men ought to honor
this supreme Spirit, but that the King of China only was worthy to offer
Sacrifices unto him; and for these Sacrifices they had no other Priest. The
Ministers of China offered Sacrifices to the Ministers of Heaven: and every
Chinese Officer thus honored an Officer like to him near Heaven. The People
sacrificed to a multitude of Spirits diffused every where, and every one was
Priest in this sort of worship: there being not any Order, or Religious body,
for the service of the Temples, and for the Sacrifices.

What the Indians have added to these Errors.
The Indians do now believe, like the ancient Chinese, some Souls, as well good
as bad, diffused every where, to which they have distributed the Divine
Omnipotence. And there is yet found some remains of this very Opinion amongst
the Indians, which have embraced Mahumetanism. But by a new Error the Pagans of
the Indies have thought all these Souls of the same nature, and they have made
them all to roll from one body to another: The Spirit of the Heaven of the
ancient Chinese had some Air of Divinity: It was, I think, immortal, and not
subject to wax old, and to die, and to leave its place to a Successor: but in
the Indian Doctrine of the Metempsychosis, the Souls are fixed no where, and
succeeding one another every where, they are not one better than another by
their nature: they are only designed to higher or lower functions in Nature,
according to the merit of their work.

Why the Indians have consecrated no Temple to the Spirits, not even to that of
Heaven.

The Ancient Chinese have divided the Justice of God.

The Justice of Heaven was principally busied in punishing the Faults of the
Kings of China.


Thus the Indians have consecrated no Temples to the Spirits, not so much as to
that of Heaven: because they believe them all Souls, like all the rest, which
are still in the course of Transmigration, that is to say in Sin, and in the
Torments of different sorts of life, and consequently unworthy of having Altars.

But if the ancient Chinese have, as I may say, reduced the Providence and
Omnipotence of God into piece-meals, they have not less divided his Justice.
They assert that the Spirits, like concealed Ministers, were principally busied
in punishing the hidden faults of men; that the Spirit of Heaven punished the
faults of the King, the Ministering Spirits of Heaven the faults of the King's
Ministers, and so of other Spirits in regard of other men.

On this Foundation they said to their King, that though he was the adoptive
Son of Heaven, yet the Heaven would not have any regard to him by any sort of
Affliction, but by the sole consideration of the good or evil, that he should
do in the Government of his Kingdom. They called the Chinese Empire, the
Celestial Command; because, said they, a King of China ought to govern his
State, as Heaven governed Nature, and that it was to Heaven, that he ought to
seek the Science of Governing. They acknowledged that not only the Art of
Ruling was a Present from Heaven; but that Regality it self was given by
Heaven, and that it was a present difficult to keep; because that they supposed
that Kings could not maintain themselves on the Throne without the savor of
Heaven, nor please Heaven but by Virtue.

How they believe their Kings responsable to Heaven for the manners of their
Subjects.
They carried this Doctrine so far, that they pretended that the sole Virtue of
Kings, might render their Subjects Virtuous; and that thereby the Kings were
first responsible to Heaven for the wicked manners of their Kingdom. The Virtue
of Kings, that is to say, the Art of Ruling according to the Laws of China,
was, in their Opinion a Donative from Heaven, which they called Celestial
Reason, or Reason given by Heaven, and like to that of Heaven: The Virtue of
Subjects, according to them, the regards of the Citizens, as well from one to
another, as from all toward their Prince, according to the Laws of China, was
the work of good Kings. It Is a small matter, said they, to punish Crimes, it is
necessary, that a King prevents them by his Virtue. They extol one of their
Kings for having reigned Twenty two years, the People not perceiving, that is
to say, not feeling the weight of the Royal Authority, no more than the force
which moves Nature, and which they attribute to Heaven. They report then that
for these Twenty two years there was not one single Process in all China, nor
one single Execution of Justice; a Wonder which they call to govern
imperceptably like the Heaven, and which alone may cause a doubt of the
Fidelity of their History. Another of their Kings meeting, as they say, a
Criminal, which was lead to Punishment, took it upon himself, for that under
his Reign he committed Crimes worthy of Death. And another seeing China
afflicted with Sterility for seven years, condemned himself, if their History
may be credited, to bear the Crimes of his People, as thinking himself only
culpable; and resolved to devote himself to death, and to sacrifice himself to
the Spirit of Heaven, the Revenger of the Crimes of Kings. But their History
adds, that Heaven, satisfied with the Piety of that Prince, exempted him from
that Sacrifice, and restored Fertility to the Lands by a sudden and plentiful
Rain. As the Heaven therefore executes Justice only upon the King, and that it
inflicts it only upon the King for what it sees punishable in the People, the
Ministers of Heaven do execute Justice on the secret Faults which the King's
Ministers commit, and all the Officers which depend upon them: and after the
same manner the other Spirits do watch over the Actions of the Men, that in the
Kingdom of China have a rank equal to that, which these Spirits do possess in
the invincible Monarchy of Nature, whereof the Spirit of Heaven is King.

Besides this the natural Honor which most men have of the dead, The Chinese
fear their dead Parents.
whom they knew very well in their Lifetime; and the Opinion which several
have of having seen them appear to them, whether by an effect of this natural
Honor, which represents them to them, or by Dreams so lively, that they
resemble the Truth; do induce the ancient Chinese to believe that the Souls of
their Ancestors, which they judged to be of very subtle matter, pleased
themselves in continuing about their Posterity; and that they might, though
after their death, chastise the Faults of their Children. The Chinese People
still continue in these opinions of the temporal Punishments, and Rewards which
come from the Soul of Heaven, and from all the other Souls; though moreover for
the greatest part they have embraced the Opinion of the Metempsychosis, unknown
to their Ancestors.

But by little and little the Men of Letters, that is to say, The Impiety of
the present Chinese which are men of Learning.
those that have some degrees of Literature, and who alone have a Hand in the
Government, being become altogether impious, and yet having altered nothing in
the Language of their Predecessors; have made of the Soul of Heaven, and of all
the other Souls, I know not what aerial substances, uuprovided of Intelligence;
and for the Judge of our Works, they have established a blind Fatality; which,
in their opinion, makes that which might exercise an Omnipotent and Illuminated
Justice. How ancient this Impiety is at China, belongs not to me to determine.
Father de Rhodes in his History of Tonquin, accuses Confucius himself
therewith: Father Couplet, to whom we owe the Translation of several of this
Philosophers Works, pretends to justify him; and he at the same time recites
several Arguments of the modern Chinese, by which they endeavor to
demonstrate, that it is a thing wholly conformable to the Principles of Nature,
that by the secret, but certain sympathies, between Virtue and Felicity, and
between Vice and Infelicity, Virtue must always be prosperous, and Vice always
unhappy: but in truth their Arguments are so elevated, and so forced, and
correspond so ill to the Language of their Ancestors, that it is very apparent
that they are only the effect of a great extravagancy of Imagination, which was
not in their Ancestors.

The Siameses do not less dread Spirits, than the Chinese; The Siameses have
no other Judge of Humane Actions than Fatality
though they imagine not perhaps the Conformity between the Kingdom of the dead
and theirs; and moreover they have not lost the Idea of the Divinity less than
the Chinese, and that they have yet preserved this ancient Maxim, which
promises Rewards to Virtue, and which threatens Sin with Punishments; they have
found out no other way, than to attribute this distributive Justice to a blind
Fatality. So that according to them, it is the Fatality which makes the Soul to
pass from one state to a better or a worse, and which retains them more or less
proportionably to their good or bad works. And it is by these degrees that men
are wholly fallen from the Truth, when they would guide themselves by that weak
reason, in which they so mightily glory.

The Indians believe the Talapoins and their Doctrine as Ancient as Mankind.
As to the Origin of the Talapoins and their Compeers, which are spread
throughout the East, under several Names, as Bramins, Jogues, and Bonzees; it
is so obscure in Antiquity, that it is difficult, in my opinion, ever to
discover it. It appears that the Indians do believe this kind of men, and their
Doctrine, as ancient as the World. They name not their Founder; and they think
that it is of this Profession, that all the men have been, whose Statues are
honored in their Temples, and all those others which they suppose to have been
adored before those, which they now adore.

The Chinese do name Che-Kia for the Author of this Doctrine.
The Chinese report, that the Bonzees and their Doctrine came to them from the
Indies, in the eighth year of the Reign of Mim-ti, which answers to the 65th of
our Salvation: and as they love to give the Origin of all things, they say that
it was a Siamese named Che Kia, who was the Author thereof, about One Thousand
years before the Nativity of Jesus Christ, though the Siameses themselves do
pretend no such thing, and who boasting Antiquity in all things, like all the
other Indians, they imagine that the Doctrine of the Metempsychosis, is as
ancient as the Souls themselves. The Japponneses do call the Che-Kia of the
Chinese, Chaka, and the Tonquineses have corrupted this same word after
another manner: for according to Father de Rhodes, they call it Thika.

That this Che-Kia is certainly the Siamese name of the Talapoins.
Now these words Che-Kia, and Chaka, do nearly enough approach these Siamese
words Tchaou-ca, and Tchaou-cou, to make suspect that they are only a light
corruption thereof. Tchaou-ca and Tchaou-cou signifies Lord, or literally Lord
of me, with this difference, that the word ca which signifies me, is used only
by Slaves in speaking to their Masters, or by those who would render such a
respect to him, to whom they speak: whereas the word cou which likewise
signifies me, is not so respectful, and is joined to the word Tchaou, to speak
in the third Person to him that discourses of his Lord. In speaking therefore
to a Talapoin, they will say unto him Tchaou-ca, and in speaking of him to
another they will call him Tchaou-cou. But what is remarkable is, that the
Talapoins have no other name in Siamese: so that they say literally, crai pen
Tchaou-cou, I would be Lord, to signify I would be Talapoin. Their
Sommona-Codom they call Pra-poute Tchaou, which verbatim signifies the Great
and Excellent Lord, and it is in this sense that they speak it of their King:
but these words may also signify, the Great and Excellent Talapoin. After the
same manner amongst the Arabians, the word Moula, which signifies a Doctor of
Law, properly signifies Lord, and the word Master is equivocal in our Language:
it is spoken of a Doctor, and likewise of the King. I find therefore some
reason to believe, that the Chinese having received the Doctrine of the
Metempsychosis from some Siamese Talapoin, they have taken the general Name of
the Profession, for the proper Name of the Author of the Doctrine: and this is
so much the more plausible, as it is certain that the Chinese do also call
their Bonzees by the Name of Che-Kia, as the Siameses do call their Talapoins
Tchaou-cou. It Is therefore impossible to assert, from the Testimony of the
Chinese, that there was an Indian named Che-Kia, Author of the Opinion of the
Metempsychosis, a Thousand years before Jesus Christ: seeing that the Chinese,
who have received this Opinion since the Death of Christ, and perhaps much
later than they allege, are forced to confess, that they have nothing related
concerning this Che-Kia, but upon the Faith of the Indians; who speak not one
word thereof, not thinking that there ever was any first Author of their
Opinions.

The Ancient way of Instructing the People, was by Poetry and by Music.
Before the Bonzees came from the Indies to China, the Chinese had not any
Priests nor Religious; and they have none as yet for their Ancient Religion,
which is that of the State. Amongst them, as amongst the Greeks, the most
Ancient way of instructing the People, was by Poetry and Music. They had three
hundred Odes, whereof Confusius made great Esteem, like to the Works of
Solomon: for they contained not only the knowledge of the Plants, but all the
Duties of a good Chinese Citizen, and doubtless all their Philosophy: and it
may be that these Odes are still preserved. The Magistrates took care to have
them sung Publicly, and Confusius complains for that in his time he saw this
Practice almost extinguished, and all the Ancient Music lost. According to
him, the most sure mark of the loss of a State was the loss of the Music; and
Plato, like him, thinks Music essential to good Policy. These two great
Philosophers had learnt that Manners cannot be preserved, without the continual
instruction of the People, and that the Laws, that is to say, the only
Foundation of the Public Authoriry and Repose, cannot long continue, where the
Manners are corrupted: for where the Manners are corrupted, they only Study to
Violate or Elude the Laws. The Learned remark in the Pentateuch, the Tracts of
such a like Poetry, which contained the History of Illustrious Men, even of
those that were more Ancient than the Deluge: Moses cites certain places
thereof, wherein is remarked the Poetic Style.

I conceive therefore that Men being wearied with singing always the same
things, and losing by little and little the sense of the old Songs, How the
Talapoins and their Brethren might have succeeded the Ancient Poetry and Music.
have ceased to sing them, and have sought some commentaries on the Verses,
which they they sung no more, for lack of understanding them: That then the
Magistrates left the care of these Commentaries to other Men, and that they by
little and little imposing on the belief of the People, have inserted in their
Lectures, many things to their particular advantage, which are the Source of
the Superstitious Veneration, which the Indians do still retain for the
Talapoins and their Fellow-Brethren.

However it be, their Habit, their Convents, and their Temples are inviolable,
though the Revolutions of this Country, may have showed some examples of the
contrary. V^iet whom I have often quoted, relates that when the present King's
Father seized on the Crown, he thought it impossible securely to make an
attempt upon the Person of one of the Princes of the Royal Family, till he had
cunningly made him first to quit the Talapoins Pagne which he wore. After the
same manner when this Usurper was dead, his Son who now Reigns, seeing his
Uncle by the Father's side seize on the Throne, turned Talapoin to secure his
Life, as I have reported at the biginning of this Relation.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Fabulous Stories which the Talapoins and their Brethren
have framed on their Doctrine.
THE Talapoins are therefore obliged to supply the ancient Music, Fables
common to all the Indians.
and to explain their Balie Books unto the People with an audible Voice. These
Books are filled with extravagant stories, grafted on the Doctrine which I have
explained: and these Fables are almost the same throughout India, as the ground
of the Doctrine is every where the same, or very near. They every where believe
the Metempsychosis, and that it is only a way to punish the Souls for their
faults, and to carry them gradually unto Perfection. They believe Spirits every
where diffused, good and bad, capable of aiding and of hurting, but which are
no other than the Souls of the dead; and they admit the Worship of these
Spirits, though they raise no Altars to them; but only to the Manes of the men,
whom they conceive to be arrived at the highest degree of Virtue, as far as
they think Virtue possible. They all have some Quadruped, which they prefer
before all others; some favorite Bird, and some Tree, which they principally
adore. They all believe the same thing of the pretended Dragon which causes the
Eclipses, and of the pretended Mountain, round which the whole Heaven turns, to
make the Days and the Nights. They have almost the same five Precepts of
Morality, they reckon near the same number of Hells and Paradise. They all
expect other men, who ought to merit Altars, like those to whom they have
already consecrated some; to the end that every one may have the Field free to
pretend to the supreme Virtue. They all suppose that the Planets, the
Mountains, the Rivers, and particularly the Ganges, may think, speak, marry and
have Children. They all relate the ridiculous Metempsychoses of the men whom
they adore, in Pigs, Apes and other Beasts. Abraham Roger in his Book of the
Religion of the Bramins relates, that the Pagans of Paliacata, on the Coast of
Coromandel, do believe that their Brama whom they adore, was born almost, as
some Balie Books do say Sommona-Codom was born, viz. of a Flower, which was
sprung from the Navel of an Infant, which, they say, was a leaf a Tree in the
form of an Infant biting its Toe, and swimming on the Water, which alone
subsisted with God. They take no notice that the Leaf-Infant, subsisted too:
and according to Abraham Roger, they in this Country believe in God, but in a
God which is not adored: and without doubt he has with as little ground
advanced, that others have writ that the Siameses believe a God.

The Fables which the Siameses relate of their Sommona-Codom.
It Is no fault of mine that they gave me not the life of Sommona-Codom
translated from their Books, but not being able to obtain it, I will here
relate what was told me thereof. How mavelous soever they pretend his Birth
has been, they cease not to give him a Father and a Mother. His Mother, whose
Name is found in some of their Balie Books, was called, as they say, Maha
Maria, which seems to signify the great Mary, for Maha signifies great. But it
is found written Mania, as often as Maria: which proves almost that these are
two words Man-ya, because that the Siameses do confound the n with the r only
at the end of the words, or at the end of the Syllables, which are followed
with a Consonant. However it be, this ceases not to give attention to the
Missionaries, and has perhaps given occasion to the Siameses to believe, that
Jesus being the Son of Mary, was Brother to Sommona-Codom, and that having been
crucified, he was that wicked Brother whom they give to Sommona-Codom, under
the Name of Thevetat, and whom they report to be punished in Hell, with a
Punishment which participates something of the Cross. The Father of Sommona
Codom was, according to this same Balie Book, a King of Teve Lanca, that is to
say, a King of the famous Ceylon. But the Balie Books being without Date, and
without the Author's Name, have no more Authority than all the Traditions,
whose Origin is unkown. This now is what they relate of Sommona-Codom.

It Is said, that he bestowed all his Estate in Alms, and that his Charity not
being yet satisfied, he plucked out his Eyes, and slew his Wife and Children,
to give them to the Talapoins of his Age to eat. A strange contrariety of
Idea's in this People, who prohibit nothing so much as to kill, and who relate
the most execrable Parricides, as the most meritorious works of Sommona-Codom.
Perhaps they think that under the Title of Property a Man has as much Power
over the Lives of his Wife and Children, as to them it seems he has over his
own: For it matters not if otherwise the Royal Authority prohibits particular
Siameses from making use of this pretended Right of Life and Death over their
Wives, Children and Slaves; whereas it alone exerts it equally over all its
Subjects, it may upon this Maxim of the despotic Government, that the Life of
the Subjects properly belong to the King.

The Siameses expect another Sommona Codom, I mean another miraculous man like
him, whom they already name Pra Narotte, and whom they suppose to have been
foretold by Sommona-Codom. And they beforehand report of him, that he shall
kill two Children which he shall have, that he will give them to the Talapoins
to eat, and that it will be by this pious Charity that he will consummate his
Virtue. This expectation of a new God, to make use of this Term, renders them
careful and credulous, as often as any one is proposed to them, as an
extraordinary Person; especially if he that is proposed to them, is entirely
stupid, because that the entire Stupidity resembles what they represent by the
Inactivity and Impassibility of the Nireupan. As for example, there appeared
some years since at Siam, a young Boy born dumb, and so stupid, that he seemed
to have nothing humane but the Shape: yet the Report spread it self through the
whole Kingdom, that he was of the first men, which inhabited this Country, and
that he would one day become a God, that is to say arrive at the Nireupan. The
People flocked to him from all parts, to adore him and make him Presents, till
that the King fearing the consequences of this Folly, caused it to cease by the
Chastisement of some of those, that suffered themselves to be seduced. I have
read some such thing in Tosi's India Orientale, Tom. I. page 203. He reports
that the Bonzees of Cochinchina, having taken away from them a stupid Infant,
showed him to the People as a God, and that after having enriched themselves
with the Presents which the People made him, they published that this pretended
God would burn himself; and he adds that they indeed burnt him publicly, after
having stupefied his Senses by some Drink, and calling the insensible state,
wherein they had put him, Ecstasy. This last History is given as a crafty Trick
of the Bonzees, but it demonstrates, as well as the first, the Belief which
these People have, that there may daily spring up some new God, and the
Inclination which they have to take extreme Stupidity, for a beginning of the
Nireupan.

Sommona-Codom being disingaged, by the Alms-deeds which I have mentioned, from
all the Bands of Life, devoted himself to Fasting, to Prayer, and to the other
Exercises of the perfect Life: But as these Practices are possible only to the
Talapoins, he embraced the Profession of a Talapoin; and when he had heaped up
his good works, he immediately acquired all the Privileges thereof.

He found himself endowed with so great a Strength, that in a Duel he
vanquished another man of a consummated Virtue, whom they call Pra Souane, and
who doubting of the Perfection whereunto Sommona-Codom was arrived, challenged
him to try his Strength, and was vanquished. This Pra Souane is not the sole
God, or rather the sole perfect Man, which they pretend to have been
contemporary with Sommona-Codom. They name several others, as Pra Ariaseria, of
whom they report that he was Forty Fadoms high, that his Eyes were three and a
half broad, and two and a half round, that is to say, less in Circumference
than Diameter, if there is no fault in the Writing from whence I have taken
this Remark. The Siameses have a time of Wonders, as had the Egyptians and the
Greeks, and as the Chinese have. For Instance, their principal Book, which
they believe to be the work of Sommona-Codom, relates, that a certain Elephant
had Three and thirty Heads, that each of its Heads had seven Teeth, every Tooth
seven Pools, every Pool seven Flowers, every Flower seven Leafs, every Leaf
seven Towers, and every Tower seven other things, which had each seven others,
and these likewise others, and always by seven; for the numbers have always
been a great Subject of Superstition. Thus in the Alcoran, if my Memory
deceives me not, there is an Angel with a very great number of Heads, each of
which has as many Mouths, and every Mouth as many Tongues, which do praise God
as many times every day.

Besides corporal strength, Sommona-Codom had the power of doing all sorts of
Miracles. For example, he could make himself as big and as great as he pleased:
and on the contrary, he could render himself so little, that he could steal out
of sight, and stand on the head of another man, without being felt either by
his weight, or perceived by the Eyes of another. Then he could annihilate
himself, and place some other man in his stead: that is to say, that then he
could enjoy the repose of the Nireupan. He suddenly and perfectly understood
all the things of the World: He equally penetrated things past and to come, and
having given to his body an entire Agility, he easily transported himself from
one place to another, to preach Virtue to all Nations.

He had two principal Disciples, the one on the right Hand, and the other on
the left: they were both placed behind him, and by each other's side on the
Altars, but their Statues are less than his. He that is placed on his right
Hand is called Pra Mogla, and he that is on his left Hand is called Pra
Scaribout. Behind these three Statues, and on the same Altar, they only
represent the Officers within the Palace of Sommona-Codom. I know not whether
they have Names. Along the Galleries or Cloisters, which are sometimes round
the Temples, are the Statues of the other Officers without the Palace of
Sommona-Codom. Of Pra Mogla they report, that at the request of the damned he
overturned the Earth, and took the whole Fire of Hell into the hollow of his
Hand: but that designing to extinguish it, he could not effect it, because that
this Fire dried up the Rivers, instead of extinguishing, and that it consumed
all that whereon Pra Mogla placed it: Pra Mogla therefore went to beseech Pra
Pouti Tchaou, or Sommona-Codom, to extinguish Hell Fire: but though Pra Pouti
Tchaou could do it, he thought it not convenient, because, he said, that men
would grow too wicked, if he should destroy the Fear of this Punishment.

But after that Pra Pouti Tchaou was arrived at this high Virtue, he ceased not
to kill a Mar, or a Man (for they write Mar and Man, though they pronounce
always Man) and as a Punishment for this great fault, his Life exceeded not
Eighty years, after which he died, by disappearing on a sudden, like a Spark
which is lost in the Air.

The Man were a People Enemies to Sommona-Codom, whom they called Paya Man; and
because they suppose that this People was an Enemy to so holy a Man, they do
represent them as a monstrous People, with a very large Visage, with Teeth
horrible for their Size, and with Serpents on their Head instead of Hair.

One day then as Pra Pouti Tchaou eat Pig's flesh, he had a Chollick fit which
killed him: An admirable end for a man so abstemious: but it was necessary that
he died by a Pig, because they suppose that the Soul of the Man whom he slew,
was not then in the Body of a Man, but in the Body of a Pig: as if a Soul could
be esteemed, even according to their Opinion, the Soul of a Man, when it is in
the Body of a Pig. But all these inventers of Stories are not so attentive to
the Principles of their Doctrine.

Sommona-Codom before his Death, ordered that some Statues and Temples should
be Consecrated to him, and since his Death he is in that State of repose, which
they express by they word Nireupan. This is not a place but a kind of Being:
for to speak truly, they say Sommona-Codom is no where, and he enjoys not any
Felicity: he is without power, and out of a condition to do either Good or Evil
unto Men: expressions which the Portugueses have rendered by the word
Annihilation. Nevertheless on the other hand the Siameses do esteem
Sommona-Codom happy, they offer up Prayers unto him, and demand of him whatever
they want: whether that their Doctrine agrees not with it self; or that they
extend their worship beyond their Doctrine: but in what Sense soever they
attribute Power to Sommona-Codom, they agree that he has it only over the
Siameses, and that he concerns not himself with other People, who adore other
Men besides him.

That it is probable that Sommona-Codom never has been.
As therefore they report nothing but Fables of their Sommona-Codom, that they
respect him not as the Author of their Laws and their Doctrine, but at most as
him who has re-established them amongst Men, and that in fine they have no
reasonable Memory of him, it may be doubted, in my Opinion, that there ever was
such a man. He seems to have been invented to be the Idea of a Man, whom
Virtue, as they apprehend it, has rendered happy, in the times of their Fables,
that is to say beyond what their Histories contain certain. And because that
they have thought necessary to give at the same time an opposite Idea of a Man,
whom his wickedness has subjected to great Torments, they have certainly
invented that Thevetat, whom they suppose to have been Brother to
Sommona-Codom, and his Enemy. They make them both to be Talapoins, and when
they allege that Sommona-Codom has been King, they report it, as they declare
he has been an Ape and a Pig. They suppose that in the several Transmigrations
of his Soul he has been all things, and allways excellent in every kind, that
is to say he has been the most commendable of all Pigs, as the most commendable
of all Kings. I know not from whence Mr. Gervaise judges that the Chinese
pretend that Sommona-Codom was of their Country: I have seen nothing thereof in
the Relations of China, but only what I have spoken concerning Chekia or Chaka.

The Life of Thevetat was given me translated from the Baly, but not to
interrupt my discourse, I will put it at the end of this Relation. It Is also a
Texture of Fables, and a curious specimen of the thoughts of these men,
touching the Virtues and Vices, the Punishments and Rewards, the Nature and the
Transmigrations of Souls.

I must not omit what I borrow from Mr. Harbelot. A conjecture upon the
Etymology of Sommona-Codom, and what Language the Baly may be.
I have thought it necessary to consult him about what I know of the Siamese;
to the end that he might observe what the words which I know thereof, have in
common with the Arabian, Turkish and Persian: and he informed that Suman, which
must be pronounced Souman, signifies Heaven in Persian, and that Codum, or
Codom, signifies Ancient in the same Tongue; so that Sommona-Codom seems to
signify the eternal, or uncreated Heaven, because that in Persian and in
Hebrew, the word which signifies Ancient implys likewise uncreated or eternal.
And as touching the Baly Tongue, he informed me, that the ancient Persian is
called Pahalevi, or Pahali, and that between Pahali and Bahali the Persians
make no Difference. Add that the word Pout, which in Persian signifies an Idol,
or false God, and which doubtless signified Mercury, when the Persians were
Idolaters, signifies Mercury amongst the Siameses, as I have already remarked.
Mercury, who was the God of the Sciences, seems to have been adored through the
whole Earth; by reason doubtless that Knowledge is one of the most essential
Attributes of the true God. Remarks which may hereafter excite the curiosity of
the learned men, that shall be designed to travel into the East.

But I know not whether to this hour it is not lawful to believe that this is a
proof of what I have said, It seems to prove that the worship of the Chinese
is more ancient at Siam than the Opinion of the Metempsychosis.
that the Ancestors of the Siameses must have adored the Heaven, like the
ancient Chinese, and as perhaps the ancient Persians did, and that having
afterward embraced the Doctrine of the Metempsychosis, and forgot the true
meaning of the name of Sommona-Codom, they have made a man of the Spirit of
Heaven, and have attributed unto him all the fables that I have related. It Is a
great Art to change the belief of the People, to leave unto them their ancient
words, by clothing them with new Idea's. Thus, it may be, that the Ancestors
of the Siameses have thought that the Spirit of Heaven ruled the whole Nature,
though the modern Siameses do not believe it of Sommona-Codom: they believe on
the contrary, as I have said, that such a care is opposite to the supreme
felicity. They believe also that Sommona-Codom has sinned, and that he has been
punished, at the time that he was worthy of the Nireupan, because they believe
the extreme virtue impossible. They believe that the worship of Sommona-Codom
is only for them, and that amongst the other Nations there are other men, who
have rendered themselves worthy of Altars, and which those other Nations must
adore.

All the Indians in general are therefore persuaded, What is the Spirit of the
Faith of the Indians, or the Submission which they have to their Traditions.
that different people must have different Worships, but by approving that
other People have each their worship, they comprehend not that some would
exterminate theirs. They think not like us that Faith is a Virtue: they believe
because they know not how to doubt; but they persuade not themselves that there
is a Faith and Worship which ought to be the Faith and the Worship of all
Nations. Their Priests preach not that a Soul shall be punished in the other
world, for not having believed the Traditions of his Country in this, because
they understand not that any of them denies the Fables of their Books. They are
ready to believe whatever is told rhem of a foreign Religion, how
incomprehensible soever it be: but they cannot believe that their own is false:
and much less can they resolve to change their Laws, their Manners, and their
Worship. One had better to show them the contrarieties and gross Ignorance in
their Books: they do sometimes agree herein, but for all this they reject not
their Books; as for some falsity we reject not every Historian, nor every
Physical Book. They believe not that their Doctrine has been dictated by an
eternal and infallible Truth, of which they have not only the Idea; they
believe their Doctrine born with the man, and written by some men, which to
them appear to have had an extraordinary knowledge, and to have led a very
innocent life: but they believe not that these men have ever sinned: nor that
they could be ever deceived. As they acknowledge no Author of the Universe, so
they acknowledge no first Legislator. They erect Temples to the Memory of
certain men, of whom they believe a thousand Fables, which the superstition of
their Ancestors have invented in the course of several Ages: and this is what
the Portugueses have called the Gods of the Indies. The Portugueses have
thought that what was honored with a Public Worship, could be only a God: and
when the Indians accepted this word God for those men, to the Memory of whom
they consecrate their Temples, it is that they understand not the force thereof.

That the worship of the Siameses proves not that they believe a Divinity.
There is nothing that may be taken in more various Senses, nor which may
receive more different Interpretations than exterior Worship. Statues have not
always been the Marks of a Divine Honor. The Greeks and the Romans have erected
them, like us, to Persons yet living, without any design to make them Gods. The
Chinese do proceed further, and they not only consecrate Statues to some
Magistrates yet living, but they erect unto them some sorts of Temples, and
sacred Edifices: They establish to them a Worship accompanied with
Protestations, Perfumes and Lights; and they preserve certain things of their
Apparel as Relics: though it cannot be thought that they respect these
Magistrates, yet living as Gods, but as men very much inferior to the King of
China their Master, of whom they make no Divinity. There are several Christian
Princes which are served upon the Knee, and the Deputies of the third State
speak to the King only in this Posture. We give Incense to particular Persons
in our Churches; and the Christians do honor their Princes with many and great
Marks of exterior Worship. Thus the exterior Worship of the Indians is not a
proof that they acknowledge, at least at present, any Divinity; and hitherto we
ought rather to call them Atheists than Idolaters. But when they offer
Sacrifices to others than to God, and they join Vows to render themselves
propitious, we cannot excuse them of Idolatry: for in having entirely forgotten
the Divinity, they only are greater Idolaters, when they terminate their
Worship to what is not God, and that they make it the sole Object of their
Religion.

CHAP. XXV. Diverse Observations to be made in preaching the Gospel to the
Orientals.
That our Belief scandalizes the Orientals in several things; that one must not
preach to them without caution, if one has not the gift of Miracles.
FRom what I have said concerning the Opinions of the Orientals, it is easy to
comprehend how difficult an enterprise it is to bring them over to the
Christian Religion; and of what consequence it is, that the Missionaries, which
preach the Gospel in the East, do perfectly understand the Manners and Belief
of these People. For as the Apostles and first Christians, when God supported
their Preaching by so many wonders, did not on a sudden discover to the
Heathens all the Mysteries which we adore, but a long time concealed from them,
and the Catechumens themselves, the knowledge of those which might scandalize
them; it seems very rational to me, that the Missionaries, who have not the
gift of Miracles, ought not presently to discover to the Orientals, all the
Mysteries nor all the Practices of Christianity. 'Twould be convenient, for
example, if I am not mistaken, not to preach unto them, without gteat caution,
the worshipping of Saints: and as to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, I think it
would be necessary to manage it with them, if I may so say, and not to speak to
them of the Mystery of the Incarnation, till after having convinced them of
the Existence of a God Creator. For what probability is there to begin with
persuading the Siameses to remove Sommona-Codom, Pra Mogla, and Pra Saribout
from the Altars, to set up Jesus Christ, St. Peter and St. Paul, in their
stead? 'Twould not perhaps be more proper to preach unto them Jesus Christ
crucified, till they have first comprehended that one may be unfortunate and
innocent; and that by the rule received, even amongst them, which is, that the
Innocent might load himself with the Crimes of the Guilty, it was necessary
that a God should become Man, to the end that this Man-God should by a
laborious life, and a shameful, but voluntary Death satisfy for all the Sins
of men: but before all things it would be necessary to give them the true Idea
of a God Creator, and justly provoked against men. The Eucharist after this
will not scandalize the Siameses, as it formerly scandalized the Pagans of
Europe: forasmuch as the Siameses do believe that Sommona-Codom could give his
Wife and Children to the Talapoins to eat. That the reading of the Holy
Scripture ought to be permitted to them only with Caution.


On the contrary, as the Chinese are respectful toward their Parents even to
a scruple, I doubt not that if the Gospel should be presently put into their
Hands, they would be scandalized at that place, where when some told J. Christ
that his Mother and his Brethren asked after him, he answered in such a manner,
that he seems so little to regard them, that he affected not to know them. They
would not be less offended at those other mysterious words, which our divine
Savior spoke to the young Man, who desired time to go and bury his Parents.
Let the dead, says he, bury the dead. Every one knows the trouble which the
Japponneses expressed to St. Francis Xavier upon the Eternity of Damnation, not
being able to believe that their dead Parents should fall into so horrible a
Misfortune, for want of having embraced Christianity, which they had never
heard of. It seems necessary therefore to prevent and mollify this thought, by
the means which that great Apostle of the Indies used, in first establishing
the Idea of an omnipotent, all-wise, and most just God, the Author of all good,
to whom only every thing is due, and by whose will we owe unto Kings, Bishops,
Magistrates, and to our Parents, the Respects which we owe them. These Examples
are sufficient to show with what precautions it is necessary to prepare the
minds of the Orientals, to think like us, and not to be offended with most of
the Articles of the Christian Faith.

The Chinese do not less respect their Teachers than their Parents; It Is
necessary to speak to the Orientals with an esteem of their Legislators.
and this sentiment is so well established amongst them, that they chastise the
Tutor to the Prince, the presumptive Heir of the Crown, for the Faults which
that Prince commits; and that there are some Princes, who being made Kings,
have revenged their Tutors. The Indians do likewise greatly honor the Memory
of those, whom they believe to have preached up Virtue efficaciously: they are
those, whom they have judged worthy of their whole Worship; and they take
Offense that we are scandalized thereat. Could we, say they, do less for those,
who have preached unto us so holy a Doctrine? Father Hierom Xavier, a
Portuguese Jesuit, having published at Agra a kind of Catechism, under the
Title of the Mirror of Truth: A Persian of Ispahan named Zinel Abedin wrote an
answer thereunto, under the Title of the Mirror repulsed, which the
Congregation de Propaganda fide thought necessary to have confuted: and it
committed the care thereof to Father Philip Guadagnol, of the Order of the
Regular Minimes. But he spoke so unworthily of Mahomet, that his confutation
proved ineffectual; because that the Mission of Ispahan dared never to publish
it: and this Mission desiring Father Guadagnol somewhat to moderate his Satyr,
this good Father running into the other extreme, made a Panegyric upon
Mahomet, which drew upon him a Reprimand from the Congregation de propaganda.
It Is therefore necessary in these sorts of matters to observe a wise
Moderation, and to speak respectfully, at least to the Indians, of Brama,
Sommona-Codom, and all the rest, whose Statues are seen on their Altars. It Is
necessary to agree with them that these men have had great natural lights, and
intentions worthy of Praise; and at the same time to insinuate to them, that
being men, they are deceived in several things important to the eternal
Salvation of Mankind, and principally in that they have not known the Creator.

But next to this Blindness, which it is necessary to demonstrate inexcusable,
That these Lawgivers may be praised in some things.
why should we not praise the Legislators of the East, as well as the Greek
Legislators, for that they have applied themselves to inspire into the People,
what to them has appeared most virtuous, and most proper to keep them in Peace
and Innocence? Why should we blame them for the Fables, which a long succession
of Ages full of Ignorance has invented upon their account, and of which
probably they have not been the Authors: considering that when they had spoken
magnificently of their persons, they had only done what is pardonable in almost
all other Legislators? They have the merit of having known before the Greeks
some intelligent Beings superior to man, and the Immortality of the Soul.

That the Doctrine of Metempsychosis may be excused by Physical Reasons.
But if they have believed the Metempsychosis, they have been thereto induced by
apparent Reasons. Ignoring all Creation, and establishing moreover that a Soul
cannot proceed from a Soul, and that there could not be an infinite number of
Souls; they were forced to conclude that the infinite number of the living,
which had succeeded one another in the World, during all this past Eternity,
which they supposed that the World had already lasted; could not be animated by
this finite number of Spirits, unless they had passed an infinite number of
times from one body to another. The Opinion of the Metempsychosis is therefore
founded on several Principles which we receive; and certainly contains only one
Falsity, which is the pretended Impossibility of the Creation.

And by Politic Reasons.
As to the natural consequences of this Doctrine, the Prohibition of Meats is
very wholesome in the Indies, and the Horror of Blood would be every where
useful. The great Barcalon, elder Brother to the first Ambassador of Siam,
ceased not to reproach the Christians for the bloody Madness of our Wars. On
the other hand, the Opinion of the Metempsychosis comforts men in the
Misfortunes of Life, and fortifies them against the Horrors of Death, by the
Hopes which it gives of reviving another time more happily: and because that
men are credulous in proportion to their desires, it is observed that those, who
esteem themselves the most unhappy People in this Life, as Eunuchs, do strongly
adhere to this hope of another better Life, which the Doctrine of the
Metempsychosis has given to good men.

The fear of the dead Parents excused by Politic Reasons.
But if Error can be advantageous, what other can be so much as that Fear of
Children for their dead Parents. Confucius makes it the only Foundation of all
good Policy. And indeed it establishes the Peace of Families, and of Kingdoms:
it bends men to Obedience, and renders them more submissive to their Parents
and to their Magistrates; it preserves good Manners and the Laws. These People
comprehend not that they can ever abandon the Opinions and Customs, which they
have received from their Fathers, nor avoid, if they did, the Resentment which,
in their Opinion, their Ancestors would express thereat. The Chinese Doctrine
has no other Paradise, nor Hell, than this Republic of the dead, where they
believe that the Soul is received at the departure out of this Life, and where
it is well or ill entertained with the Souls of its Ancestors, according to its
Virtues or its Vices.

This fear causes the stability of the Laws of China.
It Is upon this consideration, that the Lawful Kings of China have abstained
from making any Innovations on the Government. None but Usurpers dare to do
this, not only by the Right which force gives them, but because that not being
descended from the Kings their Predecessors, they have not thought any respect
due to their Establishments.

Yet it has its Inconveniences.
Nevertheless as all errors have bad sides, Confucius being asked by one of his
Disciples, whether the dead had any sense of the Respects which their Children
paid them, answered, That it was not fitting to make these overcurious sorts
of Questions; that by answering negatively, he feared to abolish the respect of
Children for their dead Parents; The Talapoins must not be thought knowing and
Interested Impostors.

That it is necessary with the Orientals to use all the insinuations which our
Religion and the example of the first Christians can permit us.


and by answering affirmatively, he dreaded the exciting the best Persons to
kill themselves, to go and join their Ancestors.

'Twould also be, I know not what Injustice to treat the Talapoins as
Impostors, and interessed Persons. They deceive only because they are first
deceived: they are not more cunning, nor more intetested than the Seculars.
When they preach to the Seculars to bestow Alms upon them, they think their
Preaching their Duty; and in every Country the Ministers of the Altar do live
on the Altar.

I am therefore convinced, that the true secret of insinuating into the mind of
these People, supposing one has not the Gift of Miracles, is not directly to
contradict them in any thing, but to show them, as at unawares, their Errors in
the Sciences, and especially in the Mathematics and Anatomy, wherein they are
most palpable: It Is to change the Terms of their Worship the least Imaginable,
by giving to the true God, either the Name of Sovereign Lord, or that of King
of Heaven and Earth, or some other Name which signifies in the Language of the
Country, what is most worthy of Veneration, as the word Pra in Siamese: But at
the same time it be necessary to instruct them to annex unto these Names the
entire Idea of the Deity, an Idea so much the more easy to receive, as it only
heightens and embellishes the mean Idea's of the false Gods. Got which now
signifies God in German, was anciently, according to Vossius, the Name of
Mercury, who seems to have been every where adored. Certainly the words Theos
and Deus have not always signified in Greece and Italy the God, which we adore.
What then have the Christians done? They have accepted these Names in the stead
of the ineffable Name of God, and they have explained them after their manner.
From the Knowledge of an eternal, spiritual God and Creator, it would be easy
to descend to the Faith of Jesus Christ: and these People would make no
Opposition, if first they saw themselves cured of some sensible Ignorance. The
Spirit of man is such, that he almost implicitly receives the Opinions of him,
who has visibly convinced him of his first Errors. Thoroughly convince a sick
person that the Remedy which he uses is not good, and he will immediately take
yours.

But in my opinion it is one of the most important Articles of the conduct of
the Missionaries, How the Missionaries ought to accommodate themselves to the
simple customs of the Orientals, in what concerns not Religion.
to accommodate themselves entirely to the simplicity of the Manners of the
Orientals, in their Food, Furniture, Lodging, and whatever the Rules of the
Talapoins prescribe, wherein they have nothing contrary to Christianity. The
example of Father de Nobilibus the Jesuit is famous. Being in Mission to the
Kingdom of Madura in the Indies, he resolved to live like a Jogue, that is to
say, like a Bramin of the Woods; to go with his Feet naked, and his Headbare,
and his Body almost naked, in the scorching Sands of this Country, and to
nourish himself with that excess of frugality, which appeared intolerable: and
it is reported that by this means he converted near forty thousand persons. Now
as this exact imitation of the Indian severity is the true way to make some
Conversions, so the further one should remove therefrom, the more one should
attract the hatred and contempt of the Indians. It is necessary to learn in
these Countries, to make a shift with whatever they do, and not to sustain the
necessities, or rather the superfluities of these Countries, if one would not
cause Jealousy and Envy to some Nations, the particular persons of which
conceal their fortune, because they can preserve it only by hiding. The less
the Missionaries appear settled, the more the Mission is established, and the
better it promotes Religion. As the East is not a Country of settlement for
private persons, it would be an injury to think to accomplish it: the Natives
of the Country do not themselves enjoy any solid fortune; and they would not
fail to pick quarrels with those that should appear richer than them, to
deprive them of their Riches. Moreover, the Orientals seem to have no prejudice
for any Religion; and it must be confessed, that if the beauty of Christianity
has not convinced them, it is principally by reason of the bad opinion, which
the Avarice, Treachery, Invasions, and Tyranny of the Portugueses, and some
Christians in the Indies, have implanted and rivetted in them. But it is time
to conclude this Relation with the Life of Thevetat, the Brother of
Sommona-Codom, and with all the other things that I have promised.

The End of the First Tome.
A NEW Historical Relation OF THE KINGDOM OF SIAM.

BY Monsieur DE LA LOVBERE, Envoy Extraordinary from the FRENCH KING, to the
KING of SIAM, in the years 1687 and 1688.

Wherein a full and curious Account is given of the Chinese Way of Arithmetic,
and Mathematick Learning.

TOME II. Illustrated with SCULPTURES.

Done out of French, by A. P. Genesis R. S.S.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Tho. Horn at the Royal Exchange, Francis
Saunders at the New Exchange, and Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCIII.

TO THE READER.
I Have almost no other hand in this Volume, than the collecting the Pieces
thereof. Some are Translations, which are not mine, in some others I only have
held the Pen, whilst the substance thereof was dictated unto me. If there are
any which appear too foreign to a Relation of Siam, they are not so to my
Voyage; the History of which would perhaps have pardoned me, if I had
undertaken to do it: and much less to the general Knowledge, which I have
endeavored to give of all the East, thereby to make known the Genius of the
Siameses. However, I crave Pardon for two or three Pieces at most, which will
not perhaps displease in themselves, and which I have given to satisfy the
Curiosity of some Persons, whom I honor.

A TABLE OF THE PIECES contained in this VOLUME.
THE Life of Thevetat, translated from the Balie. Page 145 An Explication of
the Patimouc, or Text of the Vinac. Page 157 The Principal Maxims of the
Talapoine of Siam; translated from the Siamese. Page 158 An Account of the
Charges of Justice, translated out of the Siamese. Page 163 Concerning the
Measures, Weights, and Moneys of Siam. Page 164 A List of the Movables, Arms,
and Habits of the Siameses, and of the parts of their Houses. Page 165 The
Names of the Days, Months, and Years of the Siameses. Page 168 Of the Monsons
and Tides of the Gulf of Siam. Page 170 A Description of the Principal Fruits
of Siam. Page 171 Of the Siamese and Balie Tongues. Page 173 A Smoking
Instrument made use of by the Moors which are at Siam. Page 180 The Chess-Play
of the Chinese. Page 181 The Abacus or Counting-Table of the Chinese. Page
182 Of the Cape of Good-Hope. Page 183 Rules of the Siamese Astronomy for
calculating the Motions of the Sun and Moon, translated from the Siamese, and
since examined and explained by M. Cassini of the Royal Academy of Sciences.
Page 186 Reflections upon the Indian Rules. Page 199 The Problem of the Magical
Squares according to the Indians. Page 227 The Care of the Manners amongst the
Chinese, and of the Antiquity of their History. Page 247 Reflections on the
Chinese Chronology by Monsieur Cassini. Page 252 Concerning the Isle Taprobane
by Monsieur Cassini. Page 259
THE LIFE OF THEVETAT, Translated from the Balie.
AFter the birth of Pouti Sat This is one of the names of Sommona-Codom: Sat,
in my Opinion signifies Lord in Baly, as Tchaou in Siamese, and so he is called
Pouti Sat, and Pouti Tchaou; the word Pouti is Baly.
, who by his good works in process of time arrived at the Nireupan, his Father,
King Taousoutout, consulted the Soothsayers to know what would betide him, and
the fortune that a Son would have, at whose Nativity there had appeared so many
Wonders. They all assured him that he had great reason to rejoice, seeing that
if his Son did continue in the World, he would be Emperor of the whole Earth;
or that if he turned Talapoin, by abandoning the Pleasures of the Age, he would
arrive at the Nireupan. It is necessary to know that this Emperor had seven
sorts of things, which were so peculiar to him, that there was none besides him
that had them. The first was a Glass-bowl, which he made use of to rid himself
of his Enemies, by throwing it against those whom he would kill; which being
let go, went to cut off the Enemies head, and then returned of it self. The
second were Elephants and Horses of an extraordinary goodness and beauty, which
did fly with the same facility as they walked. The third was a piece of Glass,
by the means of which he could have as much Gold and Silver as he pleased: for
to this end he needed only to throw it into the Air, and of the height that it
went, there would grow a Pillar of Gold or Silver. The fourth was a Lady, come
from the North, of a mavelous Beauty, who had a great glass Pot sustained by
three Columns of the same: then when she would boil any Rice, she needed only
to put never so little Rice therein, and the Fire would kindle of it self, and
extinguished also of it self when the Rice was boiled: the Rice multiplied so
exceedingly in the boiling, that it would feed five hundred men and more. The
fifth was a man, who took care of the House, and who had Eyes so penetrating,
that he did see Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones in the Bowels of the Earth.
The sixth was a great Mandarin of an extraordinary Strength and Valor. The
last was, that he had a Thousand Children by one Queen, which indeed did not
all come out of her Womb. One alone came out thence, and the rest were
engendered of the Water, Blood, and whatever comes out at the Delivery. Every
one of these Children in particular being grown up, was capable of subduing and
vanquishing all the Enemies, which their Father could have. Now there was one
of the Soothsayers, who taking the Father aside, told him, that assuredly his
Son would abandon the World, would quit the Kingdom, and would consecrate
himself to Repentance by turning Talapoin, to be able by his good works to
arrive at the Nireupan.

His Relations, to the Number of Ten Thousand, understanding by the Answer of
the Soothsayer, that the Universal Demesne of this whole World, or the Nireupan
were ascertained to this young Prince, resolved amongst themselves every one to
give him, when he should be a little advanced in years, one of their Sons to
make up his Train; and so they did. When therefore this Prince, after the
Repentance of some seven years, which he performed in the Woods, was become
worthy of the Nireupan, a great many of these young men, whom we mentioned,
which were of his Retinue, turned Talapoins with him; but amongst this great
Company there were six, who though they were his Relations, and in his Train,
would not yet follow him. We will recite the Names thereof, by reason that in
the sequel we shall speak only of them. The first is called Pattia, the second
Anourout, the third Aanon, the fourth Packou, the fifth Quamila, the sixth The
Siameses report that Thevetat was the Brother of Sommona-Codom, by this History
he only is his Relation.
Thevetat: and it is of this last that we wrire the History. One day the
Fathers of these six young Princes being accidentally met together, after
having discoursed a long time about several indifferent things, one of them
observed to the rest that not any of their Sons had followed the Prince to turn
Talapoin; and they said amongst themselves, is it because that not any of our
Children will turn Talapoins, that we shall upon this account cease to be his
Relations? Hereupon therefore the Father of Anourout, one of these six young
Princes, who was the Successor of Taousoutout, said to his Son, that though he
was of Royal Blood, yet if Sommona-Codom would receive him into his Company as
a Talapoin, he would not hinder him, though some Persons of his Quality would
not follow this Example.

Prince Anourout being accustomed to his Pleasures, and to have whatever he
desired, understood not what this word of refusal, No, did mean. One day as
these six young Princes diverted themselves at Bowls, and played for Confects
for a Collation, Anourout having lost, sent a Man to his Mother, to entreat her
to send him some Confects, which she did: having eaten them, they played for a
second Collation, then a third and a fourth; and his Mother sent him some
Confects, till all were gone: But as Anourout still sent to have more, his
Mother then told the Servant: No, there are no more. Which being related to the
Son, and the Son not understanding what these words, No there are no more, did
signify, having never heard them spoken, thought that his Mother meant that she
had yet others more excellent, the name of which must be these words, No there
are no more. He therefore sent back his Servant to his Mother, desiring her to
send him some of the Confects No there are no more; his Mother perceiving
hereby that her Son understood not these words, No there are no more, resolved
to explain them to him. She took a great empty Dish, covered it with another,
and gave it to the Servant to carry to her Son. But then the Genij of the City
Koubilepat reflecting on all that had passed between Prince Anourout and his
Mother, and knowing that the Prince understood not these words, No there are no
more, (because that formerly in another Generation he had Charitably given to
the Talapoins his Portion of Rice, and had demanded and desired, that in
process of time, when he should come to revive again in this World, he might
not understand what these words, No there are no more, did mean; neither did he
understand or know the place where the Rice did grow) they said that it was
necessary speedily to assemble themselves with the other Genij, These Genij are
not invulnerable, and their care is to recompense and punish.
to consult what was proper to be done, because that if Anourout found the
Plate empty, their head as a Punishment would be broke in seven pieces. It was
therefore resolved that they would fill it with Confects brought from Heaven,
which they did. The Servant who carried the Plate, having laid it at the place,
where these young Princes were diverting themselves, Anourout, who only
expected this to pay his Debt to his Companions, ran to the Plate and uncovered
it, and found it as before, full of Confects, but so excellent that the whole
City was perfumed with their Odor: The excellent taste which they found in
these Confects, diffused it self through their whole Body. The Plate was soon
empty, and hereupon Anourout reflecting on the goodness of these Confects said
unto himself: It must needs be that my Mother has scarcely loved me till now,
seeing that she never gave me the Confects, No there are no more. Returning
home, he went to ask his Mother, whether she loved her Son. His Mother, who
passionately loved him, was exceedingly surprised at this question, and
answered him that she loved him as her own Heart, and Eyes. And why, if what
you say is true, have you never given me the Confects, No there are no more.
For the future I beseech you to give me no other: I am resolved to eat only of
these. His Mother, astonished to hear her Son speak thus, addressed her self to
the Servant, who had carried the Plate, and asked him secretly, whether he saw
any thing therein, to whom he answered yes, that he saw the Dish filled with a
kind of Confects, which he had never seen before: and then the Mother of
Anourout comprehended the Mystery, and judged rightly that the Ancient Merit of
her Son had procured him these Confects, and that the Superior Genij had
rendered him this good Office. Afterward therefore when the Prince demanded
these Confects of his Mother, she only took an empty Dish, covered it with
another, and sent it him, and the Plate was always found full as I have said.

Anourout understood not likewise the meaning of these words, to assume the
Pagne or Talapoins Habit, and having one day desired his elder Brother Pattia
to explain them to him, Pattia informed him what he knew, that to assume the
Talapoins Habit, was entirely to shave his Hair and Beard, to sleep on a
Hurdle, and to cloth himself with a yellow Pagne. Which Anourout
understanding, he told his Brother that being accustomed to live at his ease,
and to have all things at pleasure, he should find much difficulty to lead this
Life: And Pattia replied, seeing then my Brother that you will not resolve to
turn Talapoin, consider which is best: but also not to live Idly, learn to work
and continue at my Father's House as long as you please. Anourout asked him
what he meant by this word to Work, which he understood not: Pattia then said
unto him, how can you know what it is to work, seeing that you neither know
where nor how the Rice grows? One day indeed Quimila, Pattia, and Anourout
discoursing together upon the Place where the Rice might grow, Quimila replied
that it growed in the Barn: Pattia, said no, and asserted that it grew in the
Pot: And Anourout told them both that they understood nothing, and that it grew
in the Dish. The first having one day observed that the Rice was taken out of
the Barn, thought it was there that it grew. The second had seen it taken out
of the Pot, and it is that which gave him occasion to think that it grew in the
Pot: But the third who had never seen it otherwise than in the Dish, really
believed that the Rice grew in the Dish, when one had a desire to eat: and thus
all three knew nothing of the matter.

Anourout declared afterward to the other two that he was not inclined to
work, and that he chose rather to turn Talapoin: and he went to ask leave of
his Mother. She refused him two or three times: but as he would not be denied,
and as he continually pressed her more and more, she told him that if Pattia
would turn Talapoin, she would permit him to follow him. Anourout went
therefore to solicit his five other Companions to make themselves Talapoins,
and they resolved to do it seven days after. These seven days being elapsed
they went out of the City, with a great Equipage, seeming to go to divert
themselves in the Country. In their retinue they had a great many Mandarins
mounted on Elephants, with a good number of Footmen. But principally they had
in their Train a Barber by Profession, named Oubbali. Being atrived at the
Confines of the Kingdom, they sent back all their retinue except Oubbali: then
they stripped themselves of their Clothes, folded them up very neatly, and put
them into the hands of Oubbali, to make him a present thereof, telling him that
he should return into the City, and that he had wherewithal to live at his ease
the remainder of his days. Oubbali, very much afflicted to separate himself
from these six Princes, and yet not daring to contradict what they ordered him,
after having taken his leave of them departed weeping, and took his road
toward the Ciry, from whence they had set out together. But it presently came
into his mind, that if he returned, and that the Parents of these young Princes
should see the clothes of their Children, they would have reason to suspect him
of their death, and likewise to put him to death, not believing that these
young Princes would have quitted such precious Habits to give them to him.
Hereupon he hung up these Habits on a Tree, and returned to seek out these
young Lords. So soon as they saw him, they demanded the reason of his return,
and having declared it to them, he testified that he would continue with them,
and assume the Habit of a Talapoin. These young Princes presented him then to
Sommona-Codom, beseeching him to give the Habit to him, rather than to them:
for finding themselves yet full of the Spirit of the World, and proud of heart,
and willing to humble themselves, they desired that Oubbali, who was very
inferior to them in the World, might be their Elder in Religion, to the end
they might be obliged to respect him, and to yield to him in all things: the I
suppose that this is a remark which the Translator has inserted into the Text,
and we may therein remark some other.
Rule, requiring that between two Talapoins the Eldest have all the Honors,
though the youngest be much the more Learned. Sommona-Codom granted them their
Request, and they assumed the Habit a little while after Oubbali. Being
therefore entered into the time of Repentance, Pattia by his merit had a
Caelestial Heart, Eyes, and Ears; that is to say he understood every thing, he
knew the Hearts of others, he saw all things, and heard every thing,
notwithstanding the distance and all obstacles. One day after Sommona-Codom had
preached, Anourout was advanced to the degree of an Angel. At the same time
Aanon a Talapoin, dear to Sommona-Codom, went to Sonda the first degree of
Perfection. Packou and Quimila after having a long time exercised themselves in
Prayer and Meditation, were advanced to be Angels. There was Thevetat alone
that could obtain no other thing than a great strength, and the power of doing
Miracles The Miracles of Jesus Christ persuade them that he is Thevetat: but it
is necessary to evince to them that the Miracles which they attribute to
Thevetat are to do Evil, and that those of Jesus Christ are for Good.
.

Sommona Codom being gone with his Talapoins to the City of Kousampi, the
Inhabitants came daily to make them presents, sometimes to Sommona-Codom,
sometimes to Mogla and to Saribout, his two principal Favorites, one of which
sat on his Right hand, and the other on his Left: some to Kasop and Pattia,
others to Quimila and Packon, or to Anourout; but what is remarkable, no body
presented to Thevetat: and they spoke no more of him than if he had never been
in the world, whereat he was extremely enraged. Is it, said he, that I am not a
Talapoin as well as the others? Is it that I am not of the Royal Blood like
them? Why has no one made any Present to me? He therefore resolved instantly to
seek out some body that should present him, and to allure some Disciples. The
King of the City Pimpisaan, was arrived to the first degree of Perfection, with
One Hundred and Ten Thousand men, all Disciples of Sommona-Codom: and he had a
Son as yet young, and who knew not what Evil was, Thevetat contriving to seduce
this Son, to make use of him in his wicked designs, went from the City of
Pinmesan, to go to Rhacacreu, and assumed by the power he had, the shape of a
little Infant, with a Serpent round each Leg, another round his Neck, and
another round his Head. Besides this he had one, who embracing him on the left
Shoulder, descended underneath the right Shoulder before and behind. In this
equipage he took wing, and went through the Air to the City of Rachacreu. He
lights at the Feet of Achatasatrou, who was that young Prince the Son of the
King of the City of Just before he said Pimpisaan.
Pimmepisan, and who seeing Thevetat after this manner, with his whole body
twisted about with Serpents, conceived a great Terror thereat. Being affrighted
at a thing so strange, he asked Thevetat who he was, and Thevetat having told
him his Name, and entirely confirmed him, reassumed his first shape, that is
to say his Talapoins Habit, and his Serpents disappeared. Achatasatrou hereupon
conceived a great esteem of Thevetat, and made him great Presents, an Honor
which effected the ruin of Thevetat by the Pride he conceived thereat; for
from that time he contrived the design of making himself Master and Chief of
his Brethren. He went therefore to Sommona-Codom; he found him out who preached
to the King, saluted him, approached him, and after some discourse told him,
that being already in a very advanced Age, it was not fit that for the future
he should take so much Pains, but that he ought to think of spending the rest
of his days pleasantly and at his own Ease. I am, added he, ready to assist you
to the utmost of my power, and as the care of so many Religious overwhelms you,
you may for the future discharge it upon me. This is the Language, which the
extreme desire of seeing himself above all, did put into his Mouth.
Sommona-Codom who knew him, refused and contemned his demand, whereat Thevetat
was so enraged, that he only plotted ways to revenge himself. He returned to
the City of Rachacreu to find out Achatasatrou his Disciple, and persuaded him
to get rid of his Father, the sooner to get upon the Throne, and afterward to
afford him the means of putting Sommona-Codom to Death, and of setting up
himself in his stead. Achatasatrou then caused his Father to be put into a
Dungeon loaded with Irons, and seized on the Throne: Thevetat expressed unto
him his Joy, and desired him to remember the Promise he had made him. The new
King presently granted him 500 men armed with Arrows, to go and kill
Sommona-Codom. They found him walking at the Foot of a Mountain; and his sight
alone impressed in them so much Fear and Respect, that there was not any one
who dared to let fly an Arrow; they all remained immovable, every one with
their Bow bent. Sommona-Codom entreated them to tell him the Author of their
Enterprise; and when they had informed him, he preached a Sermon unto them, at
the end of which they arrived at the first degree of Perfection, and returned
home. So soon as Thevetat saw that they had missed their blow, he went himself
on the Mountain, and applied himself to roll down Stones to the bottom,
designedly to kill Sommona-Codom: and when he thought he had thrown down enough
to kill him, he descended thence, and called him two or three times by his
Name; Sommona-Codom who had ascended the Mountain at one side, when Thevetat
descended at the other, answered that he was at top: Thevetat presently
re-mounted, and at the same time Sommona-Codom, who knew him without seeing
him, descended without being seen. Thevetat re-ascended again in vain, and he
died with rage. Mean while Sommona-Codom seeing himself thus persecuted, said
unto himself, what Crime, what Sin have I committed? Now that I am at the
height of perfection, that I have performed so great a Penitence that I have
preached so much and taught so holy a doctrine, yet they cease not to persecute
me to kill me. And by thus examining himself he remembered, that one day being
drunk, Sommona-Codom sins and is punished in Hell.
*he had hit a Talapoin with a little stone which he had flung, and which had
drawn out a little blood, and he knew that he was to be punished in five
hundred Generations successively; that he had already been punished in 499, and
that this was the five hundredth: besides which, he had been a long time in
Hell. Wherefore knowing moreover that if he permitted not Thevetat to do him
some mischief, he should kill him with rage, and go into Hell after his death,
he rather chose that a small shiver of a Flint which Thevetat threw at him, and
which dashed in pieces against another, should wound him in the foot to draw
out a little blood. 'Twas he that stretched out his foot to receive the blow,
and thereby he appeased the anger of Thevetat, who for some time forgot the
Resolution of killing him.

One day as Sommona-Codom went to beg Alms in the City of Rachacreu, Thevetat
being advertised thereof, procured the King to send his most mischievous
Elephants to do him a mischief, if he did not retreat. Sommona-Codom ceased not
to continue his road with his Talapoins: and as they came near the Elephants,
Aanon went before his Master, to secure him from the fury of the Elephants, by
exposing himself, but they hurt no body.

At his departure out of the City, Sommona-Codom retired into a Pagod, where
the people brought him to eat. He eat, and preached afterward to all this
multitude, which was come out to the number of Ten Millions of persons, to hear
him: and he converted fourscore and four Thousand, some of which went to the
first degree, others to the second, others to the third, others to the fourth
degree of Perfection. Several enlarged themselves on the Praises of Aanon, who
loved his master so dearly, as to expose his life for him. Whereupon
Sommona-Codom informed them, that this was not the first time Aanon had done
it. Another time he said unto them, when I was King of the Ong ('it is a kind of
Bird) Aanon being also an Ong, and my younger Brother, he saved my life by
exposing his in my place. When the King Achatasatrou had heard Aanon thus
commended, for having exposed his life for his Master, he recalled the 500 men,
which he had given to Thevetat: and thus Thevetat saw himself abandoned by
every one. He had leave to beg, but no body gave him wherewith to live: being
reduced to the extremity of seeking a livelihood himself, he returned to
Sommona-Codom, and offered him five Propositions, which he entreated him to
grant. The first was, that if there were some Talapoins who would oblige
themselves to live in the Woods, and sequestered from the World, he would
permit them. The second, that those who would engage themselves to live only on
Alms, might submit themselves thereto. The third, that he would grant the
liberty of clothing themselves poorly to such who would desire always to do
it, and who would oblige themselves to be always contented with old Pagnes,
patched and nasty. The fourth, that he would permit those which should desire
it, to refuse all their life to have any other Convent or Lodging, than under a
Tree; and in fine, that they who would never eat Meat or Fish, might deprive
themselves thereof. Sommona-Codom answered him, that it was necessary to leave
to every one his own will, and to oblige no person to more than he would, or
even than he could. Thevetat rose up after Sommona-Codom's Answer, and cried
aloud to all the Talapoins that were present; let all those that would be happy
follow me: and immediately a Troop of ignorant persons, to the number of five
hundred, deceived by the specious appearance of his false intentions, resolved
to follow him, and exactly to keep the five things which he proposed. They had
some devoto's which nourished them, and which supplied all their wants:
although they knew that Thevetat had kindled the War amongst the Talopoins, by
separating himself from his Master. When Sommona-Codom saw that he took so
wicked a Conduct, he endeavored to reclaim him, by diverse Sermons which he
made to him, to convince him that there was not a greater Crime than this.
Thevetat heard him very patiently, but without making any benefit thereby: for
he briskly quitted Sommona-Codom. On the Road he met Aanon, who demanded
Charity from door to door in the City of Rachacreu, and told him that he had
just quitted his Master, to live for the future after his own humor. Aanon told
it to Sommona-Codom, who replied, that he knew it very well, that he saw that
Thevetat was an unhappy wretch, that he would go into Hell. This, adds he, is
exactly as Sinners do; they commit great Crimes, and this they call doing Good,
and what is Good they call Evil. Virtuous Men do good without trouble, whereas
it is a punishment to the wicked; and on the contrary, Evil displeases the
Good, and the wicked make a pleasure thereof. Knowing therefore the place and
quarter where Thevetat was retired with his 500 Disciples, he sent Mogla and
Saribout thither to bring them away. They found Thevetat preaching, and when he
saw them, he thought that like him they had quitted their Master. Wherefore
after his Sermon, he said unto them: I know that when you were with
Sommona-Codom you were his two Favorites, and that he made you to sit one at
his right hand, and the other at his left, I desire you to accept the same
thing from me. Not to know him, and the better to cover their design, they told
him that they kindly accepted it, and seated themselves indeed at his sides.
Then he entreated them to preach in his stead whilst he went to repose.
Saribout preached, and after his Sermon all those 500 Talapoins arrived at the
perfection of an Angel, rose up into the Air and disappeared. Conkali the
Disciple of Thevetat ran to wake him and tell him, what had past. I had well
advised you not to trust them, said he unto him: than he began to be vexed, and
to such a degree, that he beat Conkali so as to make his Mouth to bleed. On the
other hand, when the Talapoins, which were with Sommona-Codom, saw Mogla and
Saribout return with their Company, they went immediately to acquaint their
Master, and to express unto him the astonishment wherein they were to see Mogla
and Saribout return so well accompanied, after having seen them depart alone.
Mogla and Saribout came also to salute their Master, and the new come Talapoins
told Sommona-Codom that Thevetat imitated him in all things. You very much
deceive your selves, said he unto them, to think that he does what I do:
formerly indeed he Counterfeited me, but now he practices the same. Then his
Disciples said unto him, we know our dear Master that Thevetat Counterfeits you
at present, but that he has Counterfeited you in times past we know nothing
thereof, wherefore we desire you to explain it to us. He then opened his mouth
and said, you know that heretofore being a Bird, but a Bird which sought his
living sometimes in the Water, sometimes on the Land, Thevetat at the same time
was a Land-Fowl and had great Feet. After my example he would catch Fish, but
he entangled his Neck in the Weeds, not being able to pluck it out, and died
there. I remember also that I once was one of these little red Birds, which do
eat the Worms of the Trees. Thevetat was a Bird of another sort, and he
affected to nourish himself like me. I sought the Worms in the Trees, which
have the heart included in the middle of the Trunck, and I sought out these
Trees in a great and spacious Forest, he sought the Worms in Trees without
heart, but which have an appearance thereof; and his head was bruised as a
punishment. Another time I was born a Rachasi, and he was born a wild Dog. Now
the Rachasi do live only on the Elephants which they kill in the Woods, and the
Dog of the Woods would act like me, but he reapt the evil thereof: for the
Elephants trampled him under their Feet and crushed him in pieces.

Another day Sommona-Codom preaching to his Disciples, spoke to them of
Thevetat, and said unto them. Once I was one of the Land-fowl with great Feet,
and he was Rachasi. In eating of meat he would swallow a bone, which sticking
in his Throat would strangle him. I had compassion on him, I drew the bone out
of his Throat at the request he made me, confessing that what force soever he
had used, yet he could not relieve himself. I entered therefore into his great
Throat, which he opened, and plucked out this bone with my Beak: and as he had
promised me a recompense, I only demanded of him something to eat, but he
answered me, that having permitted me to enter into his Throat, and to come out
safe and sound, was the greatest Favor he could show me. Another time I was a
Stag, and Thevetat a Hunter. Going one day a Hunting, he climbed upon a Tree,
which bore the little Fruits which Stags do eat, and there made himself as it
were a little Hutt, to keep himself close and concealed in, expecting his Prey:
and as the Stag It Is one of the names of Sommona-Codom.
Poutisat was come very near the Tree, Thevetat threw him some Fruits to entice
him to approach nearer: but the Stag Poutisat seeing these Fruits fall on
either side, doubted of the business, and observed the Hunter upon the Tree, to
whom he said 'twas in vain to wait longer, that he would not approach him
nearer. It Is thus that Thevetat desires much. Another time Thevetat was a
Fisherman. Having one day thrown his Line, the Hook caught on a Tree fallen
into the water, he thought that the hook held a great Fish, and considering
already that he must share it among his Friends, he was troubled thereat,
because that these presents would deprive him of the greatest part. To prevent
this inconvenience he sent his Son whom he had with him, to carry unto his Wife
the news of the prize he thought to catch, and orders to go immediately to
quarrel with all her Neighbors. She then took her little dog, and repaired
presently to the nearest, went into the house, and began to scold at him and
his Wife: from thence she went to another, and at last to them all. In the mean
time Thevetat was looking after his Line which he could not get out, so that to
have it he stripped himself, laid his Clothes on the bank of the River, threw
himself into the water, and gave such an unhappy blow against the Tree, that he
beat out borh his Eyes. The Passengers stole away his Clothes: and the quarrel
of his Wife with his Neighbors, cost him all the little Money he had, by a
Suit which they brought against him for this injury. After this Sommona-Codom
departed out of the City of Rachacreu to go to Savati: he was there sick in a
Convent where he lodged: and at the same time Thevetat was likewise sick of a
distemper, which held him nine Months. He had an extreme desire to see his
Master Sommona-Codom, and he signified it to his disciples, desiring them to do
him the kindness to carry him to him. They asked him how he dared to think
thereof, and what Good and Succor he could expect from him, after having
persecuted him so much. It Is true, said he unto them, that for the Good he has
done me, I have only returned him Evil; but that is no matter carry me to him,
that suffices me. They obeyed him, and having laid him on an Hurdle, they set
out on the road, to seek out Sommona-Codom. As they approached, the Disciples
of Sommona-Codom ran to acquaint their Master, that Thevetat being sick came to
visit him. I know it, answered he, I know that he comes, but he shall not see
me. Since that you refused him, replied the Disciples, the favor he demanded
of you, touching the five Articles which he desired to observe, we have not
hitherto seen him. Upon these words Sommona-Codom said unto them: Thevetat is a
miserable wretch, who has always followed his own capricious humor, and never
took care to keep the Rule, which I have taken so much pains to teach him;
wherefore, though he comes purposely to visit me, and how good a mind soever he
has thereunto, yet he shall not see me; because he has endeavored to oppose
me, and raise a division among my Disciples. As Thevetat was within a Mile of
the Place, where Sommona-Codom was, his Disciples went again to advertise him
thereof; and he still told them, I know it very well, but yet Thevetat shall
not see me. When Thevetat was within a half a mile of the City, the Disciples
returned to acquaint Sommona-Codom: It Is true, said he, yet he shall not see
me. When Thevetat was arrived at the Pool, which they call Bukoreni, near the
place where Sommona-Codom was, the Talapoins went again to Sommona Codom to
tell him that he was near at hand; to which he replied, how near soever he be
yet he shall not see me. Thevetat being therefore come to this Pool, his
Disciples set him on the ground on the bank of the water: and as he endeavored
to walk, his Feet sunk, and entered into the Earth, and by little and little he
sunk up to the Neck, and then to the Chin. Seeing himself in this condition he
began to recommend himself to Sommona-Codom, and offer himself to him,
confessing that he was very perfect, very great: that he brought back Persons
strayed out of the good way, as does a Groom, who takes care to beat his
Horses, to correct them when they are mischievous: that he knew and understood
every thing: that he was full of merit. He humbled himself, acknowledged the
fault he had committed, and desired pardon. Mean while Sommona-Codom
considering on this wretch, said unto himself, Why have thou received him into
thine house? Why have thou given him the habit? Would it not be better to let
him continue in the world? But no, replied he, for if he was settled there, he
would have continued only to transgress the five By this place it appears what
the five Commandments of the Siameses are.
Commandments, and to sin. He would destroy the life of an infinite number of
Animals: He would seize on another estate, wherever he could entrap it: He
would be permitted to run into all sort of Impurity: He would have been a Liar
and Impostor: he would always be seen drunk, like a Beast: and in fine, he
would never have done any good, and would never have meditated for the Future.
This is the reason why I have received him. After this Sommona Codom prophesied
that after an hundred Thousand Perhaps it must be Lan, that is to say Ten
Millions, to say Ten Millions of years: as in other places of the Indies Lec is
taken for an Hundred Thousand years, though Lec signifies simply an Hundred
Thousand. It is seen by this place how they pretend that the Souls of the
wicked may purify themselves by the force of Transmigrations. It appears also
that the word Pout which signifies Mercury, enters into this name of God, and I
doubt not that the Bali Adjective Pouti comes from Pout, though I have seen the
Siameses write these two words with different Letters; but they are not exact
in their Orthography.
Kan, Thevetat should be a God and be named Attisaripothiequepout. Mean while
Thevetat was buried in the Earth, and even to Hell where he is without
possibility of removing, for want of having loved Sommona-Codom. His Body is
the height of a Jod, that is to say, Eight Thousand Fadom: he is in the Hell
Avethi, 650 Leagues in greatness: on his head he has a great Iron pot all red
with fire, and which came to his Shoulders: he has his Feet sunk into the Earth
up to the Ankles, and all inflamed. Moreover a great Iron Spit which reaches
from the West to the East, pierces through his Shoulders and comes out at his
Breast. Another pierces him through the sides, which comes from the South, and
goes to the North, and crosses all Hell. And another enters through his Head,
and pierces him to the Feet. Now all these Spits do stick at both ends, and are
thrust a great way into the Earth. He is standing, without being able to stir,
or lie down. The disciples of Sommona-Codom discoursed amongst themselves of
the poor Thevetat, saying, that he was able to come only to the lake Bukoreni,
and not to the Convent, which is near it: And Sommona-Codom taking up the
discourse, told them, that this was not the first time that such a punishment
had happened to Thevetat, to be swallowed up and buried in Hell. I remember,
pursued he, that Thevetat in one of his Generations was an Hunter, and that
then I was an Elephant of the Woods. One day then as he was hunting, and as he
wandered and was lost, not knowing where he was, I seeing him in so great an
affliction had Compassion upon him, I took him upon my back, drew him out of
the Woods, set him down near his House, and then returned. Going another time a
hunting, as he saw me with very excellent Teeth, it came into his mind, that if
he had such, he could sell them very well, and hereupon he cut off the two ends
of mine. Having swallowed the Silver that he had made thereof, he returned to
cut off as much more, and a third time he made an end of cutting what remained.
I was extremely afflicted thereat, and expressed all the resentments whereof I
was capable: but he carried not his crime very far, for as he left me, the
earth opened and swallowed him up, without giving him time to ask pardon. Upon
these words of Sommona-Codom, every one rejoiced at Thevetat's death: And
Sommona-Codom said likewise, I remember that anciently Thevetat was born King
of the City of Paranasi. His name was Pingqueleracha. He so tormented his
Subjects that not one of them loved him: on the contrary every one desired to
see him dead: and his death happened when he least expected it. Every one made
public rejoycings, except the Porter of the City, who wept heartily: and being
demanded the reason thereof: Ah! said he, I weep because that this wretch,
wicked as he is, will torment the Devils, as he has tormented us, and the
Devils not being able to bear him, will restore him to us, and we shall be as
miserable as before. This is the cause of my Tears.

Sommona-Codom ceasing to speak, the Talapoins desired him to inform them where
Thevetat was then, and in what place he was gone to revive: and he told them
that he was gone to revive in the great Hell Avethi: but, said they to him, is
it that after having suffered so much in this Life, he is gone likewise to
suffer in Hell? yes, replied Sommona-Codom, for you must know that all Sinners,
whatever they are, and of what condition soever they may be, whether Talapoins,
or Laics, after all the sufferings of this World, will have others
incomparably greater and more grevious.

The End of Thevetat's Life.
This Life was given me at the Moment that I departed for my Return; and I
received it without having time to peruse it. At the end I found the beginning
of another Work, on which I could interrogate no Person. I give you what I have
thereof.

An Explication of the Patimouc, or Text of the Vinac.
THere are four things, that we ought to do before we enter into the
Explanation of the Patimouc, according to what Sommona-Codom has taught. 1. It
is necessary to sweep the Hall where they assemble. 2. It is necessary to light
the Lamps or Wax-candles. 3. They ought to prepare water in the Spout-pots, or
in other Vessels designed to this purpose, for those that shall desire to
drink. 4. They ought to spread Matts or Carpets to sit upon. After the
disciples have swept it, they go to tell it to the Master, who answers them
that they have done well: then they acquaint him that they have lighted the
Lamps, and the Master replys that it was not necessary seeing that the Sun
shines, and it is broad day. Afterward the disciples inform him that they have
brought the Water, and spread the Matts: Good, said the Master unto them, this
is good. Behold then, said the disciples to the Master, these four things which
Sommona-Codom has taught and ordained before they begin the reading of the
Vinac. Yes, replied the Master. The Disciple. What are the four things which it
is necessary to do after those which we have mentioned, and which Sommona-Codom
has likewise prescribed; are they not these? 1. When there comes in any new
Talapoins, after the explication begun, if they are fewer in number than the
Auditors, they are obliged to declare that they believe and heartily receive
what they have already explained: that if, on the contrary, those that come are
more in number than the first, it is necessary to begin again what they have
already read. 2. It is necessary to know and to tell in what Season of the Year
it is. 3. To count the number of the Auditors. 4. To instruct. Begin then, if
you please with the first of these four things.

The End of the Fragment.
The Principal Maxims of the Talapoins of Siam, translated from the Siamese.
KIll no Man. The Talapoins do not only not kill, but they never strike any
Person.

Steal not.

Commit not the Sin of the Flesh.

Glorify not your self, saying, that you are arrived at Sanctity. Every Man,
who is not a Talapoin, cannot become holy, that is to say he cannot arrive at a
certain degree of Merit.

Dig not the Earth. It Is out of respect to this Element.

Cause not any Tree to die. They are prohibited to cut any branch thereof.

Kill not any Animal.

Drink not any intoxicating Liquor.

Eat not Rice after dinner. They may eat Fruit in the Evening, and chew Betel
all the day long.

Regard not Songs, Dances, nor Players on Instruments.

Use no perfumes about you.

Neither Sit nor Sleep in a place so high as that of your Superior.

Keep neither Gold nor Silver. They are prohibited to touch it; but they ill
observe this Rule, the Trade of a Talapoin is a Trade to grow Rich, and when
they are Wealthy enough, they quit the Cloister and Marry.

Entertain not your self with things, which concern not Religion.

Do no work, which is not the work of Religion.

Give not Flowers unto Women.

Draw not water in a place, where Worms are engendered.

A Talapoin that goes to do his Needs, and who has not first drawn water, to
wash himself, Sins. Natural Impurities seem faults unto them.

Contract not Friendship with Seculars, in hopes of receiving Alms from them.

Borrow nothing of Seculars.

Lend not unto Usury, though it be only a single Cory.

Keep neither Lance, nor Sword, nor any Arms of War.

Eat not excessively.

Sleep not too much.

Sing not worldly Songs.

Play not on any Instrument, and eschew all sorts of Sports and Diversions.

Judge not your Neighbor; say not, He is good, this is wicked.

Shake not your Arms in walking. They little observe this Precept.

Climb not upon Trees. It Is for fear of breaking any Branch thereof.

Bake no Tile, nor burn any Wood. It Is out of Respect to the Earth and Wood. It
is as bad to bake a Tile as Rice, and it is a wicked act to destroy the Wood.

Twinkle not with your Eyes in speaking, and look not with Contempt.

Labor not for Money. They ought to live on Charity, and not on the Work of
their hands.

Give not strong Medicines to Women with Child. For fear of killing the Infant.

Look not upon Women to please your Eyes.

Make not any Incisions that may cause the blood to come out.

Neither sell nor buy any thing.

In eating make not the noise tchibe tchibe, tchiabe tchiabe, as do Dogs. It Is
the unpleasant noise which certain Persons do make in chewing slowly and
gently. The Siameses do take a great care of Decency.

Sleep not in a place exposed to view.

Give no Medicine wherein Poison is put. By reason of the danger of killing.
The Art of Physic is not prohibited them: they practice it very much.
Wherefore the Siameses are so far from being scandalized, to see the
Missionaries practice Physic, that it is principally upon this account that
they suffer them, and love them. It is necessary that the Missionraies do
freely cure the sick, either by the Art of Medicine, or by Miracle.

A Talapoin sins, if in walking along the Streets he has not his Senses
composed.

A Talapoin who shaves not his Beard, his Hair, and his Eyebrows, and who puts
not on his Nails, sins. I know not whether this has any other Foundation than
an excess of Neatness.

A Talapoin who being seated, has his Feet extended or suspended, sins.
Modesty, in their Opinion, requires that the Legs be crossed, and the Feet
placed near the Knees.

After that you have eaten, gather not the remains for the next day. They give
them to the Beasts.

Have not several Garments. The People frequently gives them some out of
Charity, and they distribute them to their Family.

A Talapoin who loves the lesser Talapoins, and caresses them as if they were
Women, sins.

A Talapoin who seems to be as austere as a Talapoin of the Woods, and to keep
the Rule more exactly than another, who performs Meditation to be seen, and who
being alone, observes nothing of all this, he sins.

A Talapoin who has received an Alms, and who goes presently to bestow it on
another, sins.

A Talapoin who speaks to a Woman in a secret place, sins.

A Talapoin who concerns himself in the King's Affairs, which respect not
Religion, sins.

A Talapoin who cultivates the Earth, or who breeds Ducks, Poultry, Cows,
Buffalo's, Elephants, Horses, Pigs, Dogs, after the manner of Seculars, sins.
Not to cultivate the Earth is a respect for this Element; the rest purely
represents the Monastic Poverty.

A Talapoin who in Preaching speaks not Balie, sins. This Maxim is not well
rendered by the Translator. Their way of preaching is to read out of the Balie,
where they ought to change nothing, but they must begin in Siamese, and say
nothing which is not in the Balie.

A Talapoin who speaks one thing, and thinks another, sins.

A Talapoin who speaks evil of another, sins.

A Talapoin who being waked rises not immediately, and turns himself on one
side, and on the other, sins. It is necessary that it be the hour of rising,
that is to say, that they may discern the Veins of their Hands.

A Talapoin who seats himself on the same Mat with a Woman, sins.

A Talapoin who embraces a Woman, sins.

A Talapoin who bakes Rice, sins, because it is to kill the Seed.

A Talapoin who eats any thing which has not been offered to him with joined
hands, sins. It Is a Vanity, for the respect in this Country, requires that
every thing be given with both hands. The Talapoins believing themselves holy,
are very vain in respect of the Seculars, whom they think loaded with Sin. They
salute no Person, not the King himself, and when the Sancrat preaches, or
speaks to the King, the King is behind a Vail to conceal his Majesty: but when
this Prince cannot avoid a Talapoin, he salutes him, and the Talapoin salutes
not the Prince.

A Talapoin who dreams in his sleep that he sees a Woman, so that the effect of
the Dream wakes him, sins. Though all this be involuntary.

A Talapoin who covets another's Estate, sins.

A Talapoin who pisses on the Fire, on the Earth, or in the Water, sins. This
would be to extinguish the Fire, and corrupt the two other Elements. Mandeslo
reports, that the Banians are prohibited to piss upon the ground. He knew not
the whole Precept; and he has been deceived, when he thought it grounded on the
fear of killing some Insect. If this were so, the Banians would be prohibited
to spill any Liquor, and moreover, they do not believe any Insect in the Fire.
Pythagoras forbad pissing against the Sun.

A Talapoin who reviles the Earth, the Wind, the Fire, the Water, or any other
thing whatever, sins.

A Talapoin who excites Persons to fall out, sins.

A Talapoin who goes upon an Horse, or an Elephant, or in a Palenquin, sins* He
ought not to burden man, nor beast, nor tree.

A Talapoin who clothes himself with rich Garments, sins.

A Talapoin who rubs his body against any thing, sins.

A Talapoin who puts Flowers in his Ears, sins.

A Talapoin who uses Shoes, which conceal his Heels, sins.

A Talapoin who plants Flowers, or Trees, sins. They think it not lawful to dig
holes in the ground.

A Talapoin who receives any thing from the Hand of a Woman, sins. The Woman
lays the Alms which she bestows on the Talapoin in some place, and the Talapoin
^akes it where the Woman puts it.

A Talapoin who loves not every one equally, sins. That is not to say, that he
must love another as well as himself.

A Talapoin who eats any thing that has Life, as for example, the Grains which
may yet bear Fruit, sins. They forbid not to eat any thing that has had Life.

A Talapoin who cuts, or plucks up any thing, which has yet Life, sins.

A Talapoin who makes an Idol, sins. It Is, say they, because that the Idol is
above the man, and that it is incongruous that the Idol should be the work of
the man, forasmuch as in Justice the Work, is inferior to the Workman. The
Secular therefore who makes the Idol, sins also, but according to them the Sin
is inevitable to the Seculars. In a word, particular Persons have no Idol
amongst them, and the Siameses do make and sell them only to set up in the
Temples.

A Talapoin who fills not up a Ditch, which he has made, sins. He sins in
making the Ditch, and he sins in not repairing the Evil which he has done.

A Talapoin who having no work to do, tucks up the Tail of his Pagne, sins.

A Talapoin who eats in Gold or Silver, sins.

A Talapoin who sleeps after having eaten, instead of performing the Service of
Religion, sins.

A Talapoin who after having eaten what has been given him in Charity, pleases
to say, this was good, or this was not good, sins. These Discourses do savor of
sensuality, and not of Mortification.

A Talapoin who glorifies himself, saying, I am the Son of a Mandarin, my
Mother is rich, sins.

A Talapoin who wears red, black, green, or white Pagnes, sins. Under these
four Colors, and under the yellow, they comprehend all the other Colors, except
the Colors of Animals, which have frequently some particular Names. The yellow
and fevillemorte, for example, have one Name, blue and green the same; the blue
they call little green.

A Talapoin who in Laughing raises his Voice, sins.

A Talapoin who in Preaching changes something in the Baly Text to please, sins.

A Talapoin who gives Charms to render invulnerable, sins. They believe it
possible to render themselves invulnerable against the blows of the
Executioners, in the Execution of Justice.

A Talapoin who boasts himself to be more learned than the rest, sins.

A Talapoin who covets Gold or Silver, saying: when I shall go out of the
Convent I will Marry, and be at expense, sins.

A Talapoin who grieves to lose his Relations by death, sins, It is not Lawful
for the Creng, that is to say, the Saints, to lament the Cahat, or the Seculars.

A Talapoin who goes out in the Evening to visit other than his Father, or his
Mother, or his Sisters, or his Brethren, and who unawares contrives to quarrel
in the way, sins.

A Talapoin who gives Pagnes of Gold or Silver, to other than his Father and
Mother, Brethren and Sisters, sins.

A Talapoin who runs out of the Convent, to seize Pagnes, or Gold or Silver,
which he supposes that some has stolen, sins.

A Talapoin who sits upon a Carpet interwoven with Gold or Silver, which has
not been given him, but which himself shall have caused to be made, sins.

A Talapoin who sits down, without taking a Pagne to sit upon, sins. This Pagne
is called Santat, and serves to raise the Talapoin, when he is seated.
Sometimes they make use of a Buffalo's skin folded in several doubles for this
purpose.

A Talapoin who walking in the streets, has not buttoned a Button which they
have in their habit, sins: and if going into a Balon, he has not unbuttoned
this very Button, he sins also. It Is the Button of the Angsa. I know not the
reason of the Precept.

A Talapoin who seeing a company of Maidens sitting, coughs, or makes a noise,
to cause them to turn their head, sins.

A Talapoin who has not the under Pagne edged, sins: and if that which he has
on the shoulder consists not of several pieces, he sins likewise.

A Talapoin who puts not his Clothes on very early in the morning, sins.

A Talapoin who runs in the street, as pursued, sins.

A Talapoin who after having washed his Feet, makes a noise with his Feet,
either on Wood or on Stone, then goes to the house of a Secular, sins. This
noise is to make the cleanness of his Feet observed.

A Talapoin who has not learnt certain numbers, or calculations, sins. They are
superstitious numbers. Father Martinius in his History of China, p. 16. informs
us, that the Chinese are likewise extremely superstitious on numbers; and that
amongst other things, they think the number 9 the most perfect and most lucky
of all, and that of 10 the most imperfect and most unlucky. For this reason,
the King of China has for the service of his Palace 9999 Barks, and not 10000,
and in one of his Provinces he has 999 Stues, or Fish Ponds, and not 1000. He
prefers the lucky and odd number, before the even and unlucky. When the
Chinese salute him, it is with nine Prostrations.

A Talapoin who going into any one's House makes a Noise with his Feet, and
walks heavily, sins. In several of these Rules are discovered several things,
wherein the Siameses do partly place politeness, for they require it extremely
in the Talapoins.

A Talapoin who raises his Pagne to pass the Water, sins.

A Talapoin who raises his Pagne in walking the streets, sins.

A Talapoin who judges of the persons that he sees, saying, This is handsome,
that unhandsome, sins.

A Talapoin who boldly looks upon men, sins.

A Talapoin who derides any one, or who rails at him, sins.

A Talapoin who sleeps on something high, sins. They have no other Bedsted than
a Hurdle.

A Talapoin cleaning his Teeth with a certain Wood common to this purpose, if
the Wood is long, or if he cleanses them in discoursing with others, he sins.

A Talapoin who eats, and who at the same time wrangles with any one, sins.

A Talapoin who in eating, lets Rice fall on one side and on the other, sins.

A Talapoin who after having eaten, and washed his Feet, picks his Teeth, and
then whistles with his Lips, in presence of the Seculars, sins.

A Talapoin who girds his Pagne under his Navel, sins.

A Talapoin who takes the Clothes of a dead person, which are not yet pierced,
sins. They willingly accept from a man that is a dying.

A Talapoin who threatens any one to bind him, or to have him put to the
Cangue, or to be buffeted, or who threatens him with any other punishment, or
to inform the King, or some great man against him; that Talapoin who does thus
to make himself feared, sins.

A Talapoin who going any where, resolves not to keep the Commandments, sins.

A Talapoin who washes his body, and takes the current of the water above
another Talapoin more ancient than him, sins.

A Talapoin who forges Iron, sins. This is not performed without extinguishing
the Fire, with which the Iron is red.

A Talapoin who meditating upon the things of Religion, doubts of any thing,
which he does not clearly understand; and who out of Vanity will not ask
another, that might illustrate it, sins.

A Talapoin who knows not the three Seasons of the Year, and how he ought to
make Conferences at every Season, sins. I have said in discoursing of the
Seasons, that the Siameses have only three, the Winter, the Little Summer, and
the Great Summer.

A Talapoin who knows that another Talapoin owes Money to any one, and who
nevertheless enters into the Temple with this Talapoin, sins. We have before
seen a Rule which prohibits them to borrow of Seculars.

A Talapoin who is at Enmity, or in a rage with another Talapoin, and who
nevertheless comes with that Talapoin to the Conferences, which are made about
the things of Religion, sins.

A Talapoin who terrifies any one, sins.

A Talapoin who causes any one to be seized, by whom he loses Money, if it is
less than a Tical, sins; if more than a Tical, this Talapoin must be cashiered.

A Talapoin who gives Medicines to a man, who is not sick, sins. They allow no
preventing Medicines.

A Talapoin who whistles with his mouth to divert himself, sins. This Precept
is general. The Talapoins are prohibited to whistle upon any account whatever,
and to play on any Instrument: So that these words, with his Mouth to divert
himself, which are in this Precept, are not to extenuate the signification, but
only because the Siamese tongue loves to express the manner of the things which
it expresses. The Hebrew tongue is of the same Nature, mulier si suscepto
semine pepererit filium, etc. And this Remark may be applied to some other of
these Maxims of the Talapoins.

A Talapoin who cries like Robbers, sins.

A Talapoin who uses to envy any one, sins. Some would say that, according to
them, an Act of Envy is no Sin; but it may be that in this the Translation
corresponds not exactly to the natural sense of the Precept.

A Talapoin who makes a Fire himself, or who covers it, sins. It is not lawful
to kindle the Fire, because it is to destroy what is burnt; nor to cover the
Fire for fear of extinguishing it. Pythagoras prohibited the striking a Sword
into the Flame.

A Talapoin who eats Fruit out of the Season of this Fruit, sins. I am
persuaded that these words, out of Season, must be understood before the
Season, because that it is to kill the seed, which is in the Fruit, by not
permitting it to ripen.

A Talapoin who eats one of these eight sorts of Flesh, viz. of a Man, of an
Elephant, of an Horse, of a Serpent, of a Tiger, of a Crocodile, of a Dog, or
of a Cat, sins.

A Talapoin who goes daily to beg Alms at the same place, sins.

A Talapoin who causes a Basin to be made of Gold or Silver, to receive Alms,
sins. They receive Alms in an Iron Plate.

A Talapoin who sleeps in the same Bed with his Disciples, or any other Persons
whatever, sins.

A Talapoin who puts his hand into the pot, sins. It Is for this reason that the
affront of the Spoon in the Pot, is the greatest that can be given to a Siamese.

A Talapoin who pounds Rice himself, winnows it, and cleanses it, or who takes
Water to boil it, sins. To be a Servant to Sin, is Sin.

A Talapoin who in eating besmears himself round the mouth, like a little
Child, sins.

A Talapoin who begs Alms, and takes more than he can eat in one day, sins.

A Talapoin who goes to do his Needs in an open place, sins.

A Talapoin who takes Wood, or any thing else to make a Fire, in a place where
some Animal uses to take his repose, sins. In the expression of this Precept
there is something of the Genius of the Siamese tongue, for this Precept does
not intimate that the Talapoin may for any reason whatever, take Wood in a
place, where any Animal has used to take his repose, nor that he may kindle a
Fire with any Wood whatever; but the meaning of the Precept is, that it is a
double Fault to make the Fire, and take the Wood in a place, where some Animal
has chosen his Lodging.

A Talapoin who going to beg Alms coughs, to the end that he may be seen, sins.
He sins likewise as often as he coughs to attract the Eyes of others, though it
be not in going to crave Alms.

A Talapoin who walking in the Streets, covers his Head with his Pagne, or puts
on a Hat, as do sometimes the Seculars, sins. The Talapoins shelter themselves
from the Sun with their Fan, in form of a Screen, which they call Talapat.

A Talapoin who takes off his Pagne, that his body may be seen, sins.

A Talapoin who goes to sing, or rather to rehearse, at a dead man's House,
sins, if he reflects not upon Death, upon the Certainty of all Persons dying,
upon the Instability of humane things, upon the Frailty of Man's Life. This is
partly the matter of their Song over dead bodies.

A Talapoin who in eating has not his Legs crossed, sins. In general they
cannot sit otherwise on any occasion.

A Talapoin who sleeps in a place where others have lain together, sins.

A Talapoin who being with other Seculars, and wrangling with them extends his
Feet, sins. Modesty requires that they cross their Legs.

An Account of the Charges of Justice, translated out of the Siamese.
WHen the Judge receives the first Petition, for this 1 Livr.

The Judge, or Tchaou Meuang counts the Lines and the Cancellings, and affixes
his Seal to the Petition, for this 3 Livres.

The Tchaou-Meuang sends the Petition to one of the Counselors, such as he
pleases, but generally to the Nai of the Parties, to examine, and to show the
habitation of both the securities of the Parties, 1 Livre.

For him that goes to summon the two Parties to come to the Hall of Justice, 3
Livres.

When he must lie a Night on the Road, 4 Livres.

To have the Liberty of giving each a Security, for the Judge 16 Livres, for
the Clerk that writes 3 Livres; this is the receiving of the Bail.

For copying the reasons of the two Parties to present to the Judge, to the
Clerk 3 Livres. to the Judge 3 Livres.

For the Clerk who goes to hear the Witnesses, 3 Livres. And if there is a day
and a Night on the road, 4 Livres. In this Country they go to find the
Witnesses at their Houses, to receive their Depositions, and for this purpose
there is deputed only one Clerk. The Law prescribes neither a Re-examination
nor confronting of Witnesses, though the Judges cease not sometimes to confront
the Accuser with the Accused. Reproaches against the Witnesses are not here in
use, and oftentimes the Accused knows not who are the Witnesses that depose
against him.

If the Parties do examine several Witnesses, he takes one Livre for every
Witness.

To copy the Evidences or Testimonies of the two Parties, and to make them fit
to be presented to the Judge, to judge thereof, Four Livres, as well to the
Councellor as to the Clerk.

For the Governor or Judge to sit in the Hall of Justice, five Livres. When
there are Oc-Pra for Second or Belat, and for Counselors, to each five Livres.
To the Oc-Louang three Livres.

When the Case is judged, for him that keeps it, three Livres.

A Collation or Entertainment for the Counselors, three Livres.

When it is ordered and judged to consult the Law of the Country, which they
call, Pra Rayja cit di caa ajat caan; for the Councellor who reads it, whom
they call Peng, three Livres. More a white Cloth of about four Else, more
about five pound weight of Rice, more a Taper of yellow Wax, more five
mouthfuls of Arek and Betel, more a Hen, more two Pots of Arak, more some
Flowers and a Mat to put under the Books. Of which the two Parties do pay as
much one as the other.

Concerning the Measures, Weights and Moneys of Siam.
The Measures.
THe Siamese Measures are formed or composed after this manner.

Peet met caou pleuac, that is to say, eight Grains of whole Rice, the first
cover of which has not been bruised in the Mill, amount to a Fingers breadth,
in Siamese niou.

Twelve Fingers breadth do make a Keub, that is to say, a Palm, or the opening
of the Thumb and the middle Finger.

Two Keub do make a Sok, that is to say, from the Elbow to the ends of the
Fingers.

Two Soks do make a Ken, that is to say a Cubit, from the ends of the Fingers
to the middle of the Breast.

Two Kens make a Fadom, which they call Voua, and which is near an Inch less
than our Toise; so that within a very little their eight Grains of Rice, which
do make their Fingers breadth, do amount to 9 of our Lines, which we esteem
equal to 9 Barley Corns.

Twenty Voua do make a Cord, which they call Sen.

And an hundred Sens, that is to say an hundred Cords, do make one of their
Leagues, which amounts to two Thousand Fadom. They call their League roe neng,
that is to say, a Hundred, roe signifies a Hundred, and neng signifies One.
Thus the Italians do say a Thousand.

In a word, four of their Leagues, or 8000 Voua or Fadom, do make a Jod. And
these are all their Measures of Lengths.

The Weights and Moneys.
The Names and Values of the Weights and Moneys together are these. It Is true
that some of these names do not signify the Moneys, but the Values or the
Sums; as in France, the word Livre signifies not a Money, but the value of a
pound weight of Copper, which is a Sum of Twenty Sols.

The Pic is worth Fifty Catis.

The Cati is worth Twenty Teils.

The Teil four Ticals.

The Tical is a Silver Coin, and is worth four Mayons, and it is the weight of
half an Ounce, by reason of which the Cati weighs two pounds and a half.

The Mayon is a Silver Coin, and is worth two Fouangs.

The Fouang is also a Silver Money, and is worth four Pays.

The Pay is not a Coin, and it is worth two Clams. But the Song-Paye, that is
to say the two Pays, are a Silver Coin, which is worth half a Fouang.

The Clam likewise is not a Coin, but it is thought to weigh twelve Grains of
Rice. This is what was told me, and upon this ground the Tical should weigh 768
grains of whole Rice, which I have not tried.

All these names are not Siamese, but common amongst the Europeans which are at
Siam. I know not of what Tongue the word Pic is. In the Levant it signifies a
sort of Ell, nine of which do make five of Paris: At Siam it is the weight of
One Hundred twenty five Pounds, of sixteen Ounces to the Pound.

The word Cati is Chinese, and is called Schang in Siamese, but the Chinese
Cati is worth two Siamese Cati's.

Teil, or as others do write Tael, is also a Chinese word, which is called
Tamling in Siamese, but the Siamese Cati is worth but eight Chinese Taels,
whereas it is worth twenty Siamese, as I have said.

Tical and Mayon are words the Origin of which I am Ignorant of, and which the
Siameses do call Baat and Seling. Fouang, Pay and Clam are of the Siamese
Language.

As to the Agreement of this Money with ours, to take it vulgarly, and without
this exactness, which is not necessary to Commerce, a Baat or Tical, although
it weighs only half a Crown, yet it is worth Thirty seven Sols and a half of
our Money, by reason of which a Cati is worth Fifty Crowns.

A List of the Movables, Arms, and Habits of the Siameses, and of the Parts of
their Houses.
PRa, a great Cleaver which serves them instead of a Hatcheth. Instruments
common to all


Ciou, a Joyner's Chisel.

Leuai, a Saw.

Kob, a Joyner's Plane.

Kabila, a Wimble.

Quiob, a Spade.

Reuang, a House.

Saou the Bambou-Pillars which bear the House, being four or six in number, The
parts of a House.
planted at equal distances in two rows: They are twelve or thirteen foot above
the ground.

Root, the two Transomes or Bambous laid across, like Beams on Piles, along
the front, and along the back part of the House.

Raneeng, the other Transomes or Bambous laid on the Piles, two or three in
number, along both the sides of the House, and on the two middle Piles, when
the House is set upon six Pillars.

Preuang, Hurdles serving to plank the lower, or first Floor.

Fak, Sticks flatted and joined together at equal distances, to lay over the
Floor, instead of a Carpet: They lay them also on the Hurdles, which serve the
wall instead of Wainscot.

Mefa, the Mother wall, they are the Hurdles or Wainscoting, which serves as
the outward wall.

Fa, the Hurdles which do make the principal enclosures.

Louk fa, the Son of the Enclosure, that is to say, the lesser Enclosures.

Paktou, the fore mouth or door of the House. Pak signifies a mouth.

Na-tang, a Visage-keeper or Window, they are kind of Penthouses which are
raised, and supported with a stick, and which are let down again when they
would shut the Window. There is no Glass. Na signifies a Visage, tang, to keep.

Keu, the Hurdle which serves for the upper Floor, or Cieling.

Dang, the two Bambou Pillars to bear the roof.

Okkai, the Transome or Bambou laid on these two Pillars, to make the Ridge of
the Roof.

Cloon, the Hurdles of the Roof laid sloping on both sides the Okkai.

Kiak, Foliages which serve instead of Straw.

Krabouang, the Tiles: but the Houses of particular persons have none if they
are not of Brick; on which account they belong to the Europeans, the Chinese
or the Moors.

Pe, the Roof.

Hong, a Chamber.

Gadai, the Ladder of the House.

Tongue, the two Bambou's which make the two sides of the Ladder.

Kan gadai, the Rounds.

Seua, a Matt of Bulrush.

Te-non, the place where the Bed is laid to lie upon, Their Movables.
when they have no Bedsted. Non signifies to Sleep. Ti signifies a Place.

Tiang-non, a Bedsted without Posts or Head, but with four or six feet, which
are not joined by overthwart Beams. The bottom of this Bedsted is a Lettice of
Bulrush, like as have the Chairs which come to us from England, and the Wood of
which the English do send to the Indies, to be there garnished with Bulrush.

Cre, such a sort of Bedsted, but without feet. All these Bedsteds are very
narrow, because they only serve a single person. It Is only some of the meaner
people, who lie in the same Bed with their Wives; and they have no Bedsted.
Amongst the Rich every one has his Bed and his Chamber apart, but in little.

Fouk-rong-non, the Mattress, or rather the Bed of Capoc, a kind of Cottonwool,
instead of Feathers. They are not quilted; rong signifies under, non to sleep.

Pa-pou-non, the under Sheet to sleep on. They have no upper Sheet, which is
other than the Coverlet.

Pa-houm-non, the upper Sheet, that is to say the Coverlet. They are only
single Cotton-sheets.

Mon, a longish Pillow, but when they lie together, every one has his own, as
in Spain. Mon signifies also a Cushion to lean on, for they never sit thereon.

Man-can ti-non, a Curtain before the Sleeping-place. Man signifies a Curtain
or Tapistry. Can signifies before. They put a Curtain before their Bed, to
prevent being seen, because that from one Chamber to the other there is no Door
which shuts.

Man-can-fak-reuan, a Linen Curtain. Man a Curtain, can before, fak the flat
sticks fastened at equal distances, to serve as Wainscot, reuan signifies a
House.

Prom, a Carpet for the Feet.

Kiam, it is the same thing.

Tloum, Tables with a Border and without Feet, called otherwise bandeges, and
by our Merchants flat and thin Tables. When they eat together, every one has
his Table at Siam, as at China. They have neither Table-cloaths nor Napkins,
but the varnished Wood of their Tables is very easily cleansed with hot water:
and so they easily make a shift without a Table-cloath.

Hip, a Chest.

Hip chipoun, a Japan Chest.

Hip-lin, a Cabinet with Drawers.

Tad, a Copper Dish, they generally serve up their Fish therein.

Me-can, a Pot to put Water in; Can signifies a Pot, Me signifies Mother.

Can-nam, a bouli of Copper to boil Water for Tea; nam signifies Water.

Can-nam-noi, a little Cannam. It Is a Cup round at the bottom, and without Feet.

Kon thoo, a Drinking-pot.

Kon thii, an earthen bouli for Tea.

Tioc noy, a little Tea-Cup.

Tioc yai, a larger Cup.

Taboi-tong-kin-nam, a Copper Ladle to drink Water. They also have some of Coco
for this use: They bore a Cup of Coco on both sides, and thrust a Stick into
the two holes, which crosses the Coco, and serves as a handle. Tongue equally
signifies Gold and Brass, Tongue di, good Gold; Tongue Leuang, false Gold or
Latten. Kin signifies equally to eat and drink, according as it is spoken of a
thing solid or liquid. Thus the words, to take and to swallow are common in our
language, to solid Aliments and to Liquors.

Touac, the Ladle in the Pot. It Is the greatest affront that can be spoken to
any one, as if one should tax him to be such a Glutton, as with his own hand to
take out of the Pot, and not to stay till the Pot be emptied into the Dish.
None but Slaves take the Ladles out of the Pot, or use them.

Touas, a Porcelane Plate, or Dish.

Tcham, a Porcelane Bowl to put Rice in. They use a great deal of Porcelane,
because they have some very course, and very cheap.

Tian, a little Saucer to put under the Tea-dish.

Mo-caou, a Skellet to boil the Rice; Mo a kind of Pot or Skellet, caou, Rice.

Quion, a Spoon. They use it only to take the Sweetmeats, which are always
served in little Porcelane Saucers with the Tea. They have neither Fork nor
Salt-seller. They use no Salt at Table.

Mid, a Knife. They have every one a little one to cut the Arek; they use it
not like us, by holding what they would cut between the Thumb and the edge of
the Knife, but they always place the Thumb on the back of the Knife, and they
guide the edge with the forefinger of the Right hand, which they keep extended.

Mid-coune, a Razor or Knife to shave. Their Razors are of Copper; coune
signifies to shave.

Tin-quian, a Candlestick; quian is a Candle of yellow Wax. They know not how
to whiten the Wax, which they have in abundance; and as they have no Butchers
meat, they have no Tallow; and Tallow in this Country would be of a nasty use,
it would melt too much by reason of the heat.

Pen, another sort of larger Knife, which they carry about them for their use,
and which might serve them for Arms in case of need.

Mid-tok, a sort of Knife to cut the Wood, with which they fasten the foliage
which serves them for Straw.

Krob, a Gold or Silver Box for the Arek and the Betel. The King gives them,
but it is only to certain considerable Officers. They are large, and covered,
and very light: They have them before them at the Kings Palace, and in all
Ceremonies.

Tiab, another Box for the same use, but without a lid, and which lies at the
house. It Is like a great Cup, sometimes of Wood varnished; and the higher the
family is, the more honorable he is. For ordinary use they wear a Purse about
them, wherein they put their Arek and their Betel, their little Cup of Red
Calx, and their little Knife. The Portuguese do call a Purse Bosseta, and they
have given this name to Krob, which I have discoursed of, and after them we
have called them Bossettes.

Ca-ton, a Spitting-pot, which they all use by reason of the Betel, which makes
them to spit very much.

Reua, a Balon, or strait and long Boat for a single Officer.

Creu, a Balon for a whole Family.

Moung, a Fly-net. It Is a Testern and close Curtain of Tiffany, which the
Talapoins alone do use, not to be incommoded with the Gnats, and to prevent
being forced to kill them. The Seculars have none of these Fly-nets, but they
kill the Gnats without scruple.

Kaou-i, a Chair of State. None but the King and Talapoins have thereof, to
seat themselves higher than others. The Talapoins do think themselves very much
above other men.

Monamout, a Chamber Pot. The Talapoins alone do use them, because they are
prohibited to piss upon the ground, or in the water, or in the fire.

Lom-pok, a Bonnet of Ceremony. Lom signifies a Bonnet, pok high. Their Habits,
It is commonly White, but in Hunting and in War it is Red.

Pa-noung, a Linen Sash. It Is the Pagne which they wear round their Reins and
Thighs. The King gives the finest, which are called Pasompac, and no person can
wear them of this fineness, to whom he does not give them,

Seua-kaou, the Muslin Shirt, which is their true habit. The word Seua
signifies also a Mat, but then it has another Accent, and the Siameses do write
it with other Characters.

Tchet-na, a Handkerchief. The Lords have it carried by their Slaves, and do
take it themselves only in entering into the Palace; but they dare not to wipe
themselves before the King: the generality are without Handkerchiefs.

Pahoum, the upper Linen. It Is that Linen, which they wear like a Mantle
against the cold, or like a Scarf on their Shoulders and round their Arms.

Rat-sa-you, a Belt into which they put their Dagger. They wear it also like a
Scarf over the Coat of Mail.

Pasabai, a Woman's Scarf.

Seua creuang, a Vest to put under the Muslin Shirt.

Seua houm, a close Coat of Mail, or Red Shirt for the War, and for Hunting.

Moak, a Hat. They love them of all colors, high, pointed, and the edge about
a fingers breadth.

Peun-nok-sap, a Musket or Fusil. Peun signifies a Cannon, Their Arms.


Peun yai, a great Cannon.

Touan, a Lance after the Siamese fashion.

Stok, a Zagaye or Lance, after the Moors fashion; it is like the blade of a
Sabre at the end of a Stick.

Dab, a Sabre. They have it carried by a Slave, who holds it respectfully on
his Right Shoulder, as we carry the Musket on the Left.

Krid, a Dagger which the King gives to the Mandarins. They wear it thrust into
a Girdle on the Left side, but very much before. The Europeans do corruptly
call it Crist.

Kautar, a Bow.

Lo, a round Target.

Na-mai, a Cross-bow; may signifies a Stick.

Lan, a Dart. It Is a Bambou armed with Iron.

Laou, a Dart of Bambou, hardened in the fire, without Iron. Laou writ after
another manner signifies all intoxicating Liquors.

Mai-taboug, a Battle-axe.

Mai-taou, a Trunchion.

The Names of the Days of the Months and of the Years of the Siameses.
The Dys.
VAn in Siamese signifies a Day. The names of the Days are,

Van Athit, Sunday.

Van Tchan, Monday.

Van Angkaan, the days of Mars, or Tuesday.

Van Pout, the day of Mercury, or Wednesday.

Van Prahaat, the day of Jupiter, or Thursday.

Van Souc, the day of Venus, or Friday.

Van Saou, the day of Saturn, or Saturday.

The names of the Planets are therefore Athit, Tchan, Angkaan, etc. It is true
they name not the Planets without the names of the Days, without giving them
the Title of Pra, which, as I have several times declared, denotes a very great
excellency. Thus Pra Athit signifies the Sun, Pra Tchan the Moon, Pra Pra
Prahaat Jupiter: but the word Pra is written with a P. stronger than that which
is in the first syllable of the word Prahaat: In short all these names are of
the Baly Tongue, the Sun is called Tavan, and the Moon Done, in Siamese.
Abraham Roger in his History of the Manners of the Bramines has given us the
names of the Days in Samscortam, which, says he, is the learned Language of
the Bramines of Paliacata on the Coast of Coromandel. They are taken also from
the Planets. Suriawaram Sunday, Jendrawaram Monday, Angaracawaram Tuesday,
Buttawaram Wednesday, Brahaspitawaram Thursday, Succrawaram Friday, Senniwaram
Saturday. It is evident that Waram signifies Day, that Suria is the name of the
Sun, perhaps with some inflection to denote the Genitive; and that Jendra is
the name of the Moon, perhaps also with some inflection, which being taken
away, would leave some resemblance between this word, and the Bali Tchan. As to
the other names, Angaraca participates enough of Angkaan: Butta, which it is
necessary to pronounce Boutta, is no other than Pout: Prahat agrees with the
beginning of Brahaspita, and Succra and Souc are the same word. Senni and Saou
appear more remote, and Suria and Athit have nothing common: but what the same
Author adds, is remarkable, that Sunday is called Aditawaram in the vulgar
Language of Paliacata: for it is there that we do again find the Baly word
Athit.

The Chinese, according to Father Martinius in his Historia Sinica, p. 31. do
not name the Days by the Planets, but by the sixty names, which they give to
the sixty Years of every Cycle: so that their Week, so to explain my self, is a
Revolution of sixty Days.

The Months.
The Siameses do call the Months in their Order.

Deuan signifies a Month

Deuan ai, the first Month.

Deuan Tgij, the second Month.

Deuan Sam, the third Month.

Deuan Sii, the Fourth Month.

Deuan Haa, the Fifth Month.

Deuan Houk, the Sixth Month.

Deuan Ket, the Seventh Month.

Deuan Peet, the Eighth Month.

Deuan Caou, the Ninth Month.

Deuan Sib, the Tenth Month.

Deuan Sib and, the Eleventh Month.

Deuan Sib-Song, the Twelfth Month.

The Siamese People understand not the Words Ai and Tgii, which are the names
of the two first Months; but it is probable that these are two old numerical
Words, which signify One and Two; and this is evident from the Word Tgii,
because that the Siameses do say Tgii-Sib, to signify Twenty, which verbatim
is two Tens. All the other names of Months are still in use to signify
Numbers, with this difference, that when they are put before the Substantive,
they signify pure Numbers; and that when they are placed after, they become
Names, which denote Order. Thus Sam Deuan signifies Three Months, and Deuan
Sam, the Third Month.

Pii signifies a Year. The Twelve Names of the Year are: The Years.


Pii ma mia, the Year of the Little Mare.

Pii ma me, the Year of the Great Mare.

Pii Vok, the Year of the Ape.

Pii Rakaa, the Year of the Crow.

Pii Tchio, the Year of the Sheep.

Pii Counne, the Year of the Pig.

Pii Chouat, the Year of the Rabbet.

Pii Tchlou, the Year of the Lizard.

Pii Kan, the Year of the Hens.

Pii Tho, the Year of the Goat.

Pii ma Rong, the Year of the Sea-Gull.

Pii ma Seng, the Year of the Great Serpent.

Most of these Names are also of the Balie Tongue. Now as the Siameses do make
use of the Cycle of Sixty Years, they ought to have Sixty Names to name the
Sixty Years of every Cycle; and yet the Persons, whom I have consulted, could
give me no more than Twelve, which are repeated five times in every Cycle, to
arrive at the Number of Sixty: But I doubt not that it is with some additions,
which do make the differences thereof; and I think to find the proof thereof in
two dates of Siamese Letters, which I have carefully taken from the Originals.
The first is thus: In the First Month, the Ninth Day after the Full Moon in the
Era 2229, the Year Tchlou Sapsoc. And the second is thus: The Eighth Month,
and the First Day of the Moon's Decrease in the Year Pii Tho Sapsoc of the Era
2231. The Word Era in these two dates simply signifies Year, according to the
Spanish language; so that it is all one to say the Era 2229, and to say the
Year Tchlou Sapsoc: to say the Era 2231, and to say the Year Pii Tho Sapsoc.
Besides, as the Word Pii signifies Year, they might put Tho Sapsoc instead of
Pii Tho Sapsoc, as they have put Tchlou Sapsoc, and not Pii Tchlou Sapsoc. Now
these two Years which are the Years 1685, and 1687 of Jesus Christ, are not
called simply either by Tchlou and Tho, that is to say of the Lizard and Goat;
but to the Words Tchlou and Tho, is added the Word Sapoc, which I understand
not, and which was added to the Names of the Twelfth of the Years, which run
then to distinguish it from the four other Twelfths of the Years of the same
Cycle.

Of the Monsons and Tides of the Gulf of Siam.
WE find upon our Seas, that though the Winds be very variable, yet they change
with this almost infallible Rule, of passing from the North to the South only
by the East; or from the South to the North, only by the West; or from the East
to the West, only by the South; or from the West to the East, only by the
North. So that the Wind continually veers about the Heaven, passing from the
North to the East, and from the East to the South; and from the South to the
West, and from the West to the North; and almost never in the contrary manner:
Yet in the temperate Zone, which is on the South of the Line, when we navigated
those Seas which are on the East of Africa, we experimented in our return from
Siam, that the Winds went always contrary to this Rule; but to assert whether
this may be always so, requires more than one Proof. However it be, the Wind
goes not so in the Gulf of Siam, but it only encompasses the Heaven in a year;
whereas on our Seas it does it in a small number of days, and sometimes in one
day. When in the Indies the Wind blows round the Compass in a day, it is
stormy: This is what they properly call a Hurricane.

In the Months of March, April and May, the South Wind prevails at Siam, the
Heaven is disordered, the Rains begin, and are very frequent in April. In June
they are almost continual, and the Winds do turn to the West, that is to say,
do blow from the West and the South. In July, August, and September, the Winds
are in the West, or almost West, and always accompanied with Rains, the Waters
overflowing the Earth to the breadth of nine or ten Miles, and above One
hundred and fifty to the North of the Gulf.

During this time, and especially toward the middle of July, the Tides are so
strong, that they ascend up to Siam, and sometimes to Louvo; and they decrease
in twenty four hours with that measure, that the Water becomes sweet again
before Bancock in an hour; though Bancock be seven Miles from the mouth of the
River, yet the Water is always somewhat brackish.

In October the Winds do blow from the West and the North, and the Rains do
cease. In November and December the Winds are North, do clear the Heavens, and
seem so exceedingly to lower the Sea, that in few days it receives all the
Waters of the Inundation. Then the Tides are so insensible, that the Water is
always sweet two or three Leagues in the River, and that at certain hours of
the day, it is the same for a League in the Road. But at Siam there never is
more than an Ebb and Flood in twenty four hours. In January the Winds have
already turned to the East, and in February they blow from the East and the
South.

It Is a considerable Circumstance, that at the time when the Winds are in the
West, or that they blow from the West, the Currents of the Gulf do rapidly
carry the Ships on the Eastern Coast, which is that of Camboya, and do hinder
them from coming back again; and that at the time when the Winds are to the
East, or that they blow from the East, the Currents do run on the Western
Coast, so that then in Sailing it is necessary to fear being bore away. Now
this proves, in my opinion, that the Winds have a great share in the motions of
the Sea, forasmuch as some have proved, that these Currents are only in the
upper parts of the Waters, and that underneath they have a quite contrary
Current, because that the upper Waters being continually rolled on the Shore,
returns underneath toward the Coast from whence it came. After the same manner
it seems that they are the South-winds, which drive on the Flux, and maintain
it for six Months further up in the River, and that they are the North-winds
which do hinder it the entrance of the River for the six other Months.

The Bananier.
A Bunch of Banana's

The Jacquier.
The Tree which: bears the Durions
The Potatos-Tree
The Ananas.
The Mango Tree.
The Coco Tree.
Three Siamese Alphabets

1
Ko ^ Kho ^ Kho ^ Kho ^ Khoo ^ Khoo-ngo ^ cho ^ cho ^ cho ^ So ^ choo ^ yo ^ do
^ to ^ tho ^ tho ^ thoo ^ no ^ ^o ^ po ^ ppo ^ fo ^ ppo ^ mo ^ no ^ to ^ lo ^
vo ^ So ^ So ^ So ^ ho ^ lo ^
2
Ka ^ Ki ^ Ki ^ Keu ^ Keu ^ Kou ^ Ku ^ Ke ^ Ke ^ Ka ^ Kaai Ko ^ Kaon ^ Kam ^ Ka
^ Keuy ^ Kaai ^ Kaou ^ Kiou ^ Kuon ^ Keuy ^ Keui ^ Kouy ^ Koui ^
3
Keon ^ Keou ^ Kouy ^ Koi ^ Kouai ^ Kiaou ^ Kia ^ The Sequel of this Alphabet
is in the following Plate.




A Description of the principal Fruits of Siam.
THE Figs of India, which the Siameses do call Clouey-ngouan-tchang, Elephant's
Trunks, have not the taste of our Figs, and, in my mind, they are not so good.
Thus the Melons of Siam are not true Melons, but the Fruit of a Tree known in
the Isles of America under the name of Papayer. I have not eaten of this Fruit.
But to return to the Fig, it is of the size and shape of a Sausage. Its green
Skin, which waxes yellow and spotted with black in its maturity, is easily
separated from its soft and clammy pulp, and it is that which has given it the
name of Fig; but in the midst of its pulp there is no vacuity, nor any of those
kernels which do make as it were a little gravel in our Figs, when they are a
little dried. Its taste is strong, and it has something of sharpness and
sweetness both together.

The Bananas, which the Siameses do call Clouey-ngaa-tchang, or Elephant's
Tooth, is almost the same thing as the Fig, save that it is greener and longer,
and that it has Angles, and Faces or flat Sides, which are reunited point-wise
at both ends. These Fruits do hang like Nosegays, or rather like great Bunches
of Grapes, from the top of the Trunk of the Trees which bear them. The Figs
grow hard in the Fire, the Bananas which are not altogether so delicate raw, do
wax soft again, do there lose their sweetness, and do acquire the taste of our
Pippins ripened on the Apple Tree.

The Goyaye (in Siamese Louc-Kiac, Louc signifies Son, Kiac is the name of the
Goyavier) is about the size of a middling Apple. Its Skin is of a grayish
green, like that of certain Pears: under this Skin is a pulp of the consistence
of that of the Citron, but not so white. When it is put into the mouth, it
savors the Strawberry; but this Strawberry taste soon loses itself, because it
becomes too strong. This pulp, which exceeds not the thickness of a
Crown-piece, contains a liquid substance like Broth, but grayish, and which
would not be less pleasant to eat than the pulp, if it was not mixed with an
innumerable number of small kernels so hard, that it would be difficult to chew
them.

The Jacques, in Siamese Ca-noun, are of the shape of a great Melon ill
rounded. Under a grayish Skin fashioned like Chagrin, they have a very great
number of kernels, or stones; stones, if we consider their magnitude, which is
almost like a Pigeon's Egg: kernels, by the thin and smooth wood which incloses
them. These stones therefore or kernels being broiled or boiled, differ not
from our Chestnuts either in taste or consistence, excepting that they are, in
my opinion, more delicate. At one end they stick to a pulp which invelops them
all, and separates them one from the other. It is easily torn off, according to
the course of its fibers; it is yellow, juicy, clammy, and glutinous, of a
sweet taste, and strong smell. It is not possible to chew it, they only suck it.

They gave us a Fruit like to Plums, and we at the first appearance were
deceived. It had the pulp and taste of a Medler, and sometimes two, sometimes
three stones, but bigger, flatter, and smoother, than the Medler has them. This
Fruit is called Moussida in Siamese.

The Ox-heart was so named by reason of its size and shape. The Skin thereof is
thin, and this Fruit is soft, because that on the inside it is only a kind of
white Cream, and of a very agreeable taste. The Siameses do call it Mancout.

The Durion, in Siamese Tourrion, which is a Fruit very much esteemed in the
Indies, appeared insupportable to me for its ill smell. This Fruit is of the
size of our Melons covered with a prickly Coat like our Chestnuts. It has also,
like the Jacques, several stones, but as big as Eggs, in which is contained
what they eat, in the inside of which there is also another stone. The fewer
there is of these stones in a Durion, the more pleasant the Fruit is. There
never is less than three.

The Mango, in Siamese Ma-mouan, participates at first of the taste of the
Peach and the Apricot; toward the end this taste waxes stronger, and less
agreeable. The Mango's are highly esteemed, I have seen some as big as a
Child's hand, they are flat and oval, but pointed at the two ends almost like
our Almonds. Their Skin is of the consistence of that of our Peaches, of color
inclining to yellow; but their meat is only a pulp which must be sucked, and
which quits not a great flat stone which it envelops.

I have not seen the Mangoustan, which is said to be much better than the
Mango's.

The Siameses have some sharp Fruits which quench the thirst, and which upon
this account appeared unto me the most agreeable of all. They are small as
Plums, and have a stone encompast with a white pulp, which easily melts in the
mouth.

The Tamarinde is also sharp. It Is a Fruit enclosed in a shell like an Almond,
and then several of these Fruits are likewise included in a Cod. I preserved
some, and found the Syrup thereof very pleasant during my return; but by little
and little it lost its sharpness, and there remained only the taste of the
Pimpernel. The Tree which bears it, and which is very large, has a Leaf
resembling Pimpernel.

From this Country I brought several sorts of liquid Sweetmeats, which were
come from China to Siam about two years, and they ceased not to keep very well
to Paris. The Syrup especially was very good, and had nothing of Candy,
notwithstanding the heat of the Climats through which it had passed. These
Sweetmeats had perhaps been made with Sugar Candy, whith is the sole Purifier
that the Orientals have. I refer my self to the Confectioners.

I speak not of the Sugarcanes wherewith Siam abounds, nor of the Pepper,
because I saw none thereof. The King of Siam, they say, has caused an hundred
thousand thereof to be planted. It Is a Plant which needs Props like the Vine,
and the Pepper hangs thereon also by little Bunches, like to those of Currents.

The Ananas, in Siamese Saparot, has the meat white, and the taste of our
Peaches. Its meat is mixed with a little wood, not a wood which separates, as
there is in our Nuts, but with a wood that adheres thereto, and which is only
the meat over-hardned; and it is at the Center that it begins to grow hard. The
Ananas is believed unwholsom, because that its juice, they say, corrodes Iron.
It is yellow when it is ripe, and then to smell it without opening it, it has
the scent of a roasted Apple. Its Figure is like a great Pine Apple, it has
little rindes curiously ranged, under which, to behold them, one would think
that the kernels are. The Plant which produces it bears it at the top of its
stalk, which is not three foot high. The Ananas keeps directly upon the little
end; and at the great end there is a tuft of Leaves, like little Corn-flags,
short, bent outward, and toothed. Sometimes from the body of this Fruit, and
at the sides, there grows like Wens, one or two other little Ananas, which have
also their Tufts. Now every Tuft cut and put in the ground, may produce another
Ananas, but every Plant bears only one, and bears no more than once.

The Coco, in Siamese Ma-praou, is a kind of Filbert, but much bigger indeed
than a Filbert, as may be seen by those Cups of Coco which they sell us. It Is
the wood thereof which is naturally covered like that of our Nuts, with a brou
or green bark an inch thick, and full of fibers, whereof Cordages may be made.
In the wood of the Coco is a very pleasant liquor, and the wood thereof is so
full, that it spurts a great way when it is pierced. As this Fruit ripens, this
liquor congeals at the extremities, that is to say near the wood, and there
forms a Nut very white, and of a very good taste; the water which is not yet
congealed remains still at the Center of the Fruit, and at length it all
congeals.

Of the Siamese and Balie Languages.
THE Siamese Tongue has Thirty seven Letters, and the Baly Thirty three, but
they are all Consonants. As to the Vowels and Dipthongs, of which there is a
great number in the one and the other Language, they have indeed some
particular Characters, whereof are made other Alphabets: but of these
Characters some are placed always before the Consonant, some others always
after, others above, others underneath: and yet all these Vowels, and all these
Dipthongs thus variously disposed in respect of the Consonant, must only be
pronounced after it.

But if in the Pronunciation the Syllable begins with a Vowel, or with a
Dipthong, or if it is only a pure Vowel, or a pure Dipthong, then they have a
mute Character, which supplys the place of a Consonant, and which must not be
pronounced.

This mute Character is the last in the two Alphabets, the Siamese and Balie.
In the Siamese it has the figure of our o, and indeed it countervails an o,
when it must be pronounced, and not be a mute Consonant, that is to say, when
it is preceeded with a Consonant or by it self. In the Balie Alphabet this last
Character countervails ang, when it is not a mute Consonant; but its figure has
no resemblance to any one of our Letters. Thus the first Letter of the Hebrew
Alphabet, which is Aleph, serves as a mute Consonant, in relation to which they
place the Points which are the Vowels; and it is probable that the Aleph was
anciently pronounced like the Alpha of the Greeks, which has taken its name
from the Aleph.

The Siamese Pronunciations are very difficult for us to imitate, and they
correspond so ill to most of ours, that of ten Siamese words written in French
Characters, and read by a Frenchman, there will not perhaps be one, that is
known and understood by a natural Siamese, what care soever is taken to
accommodate our Orthography to their Pronounciation.

They have the r, which the Chinese have not. They have our v Consonant, but
they pronounce it frequently like the w of the High-Germans, and sometime like
the w of the English. They have likewise the ng of the Germans, which we have
not: For the Germans pronounce Engel, for example, after a manner that we
hardly apprehend, and which is only a g pronounced before the e, and the i as
before the a, but very softly and much through the Nose.

They have a middle Pronunciation between our two Pronunciations of yo and jo,
and from hence it is that the Europeans do say sometimes Camboja, and sometimes
Camboya, because they know not how to pronounce these sorts of words exactly
after the Siamese.

It Is the same as to the word Kiai, which signifies, Heart. It is not known
whether they rather say Kiai than Ciai, pronounced after the Italian manner,
because that indeed they do not exactly speak either the one or the other, but
something which partakes of the one and the other.

They have our Aspiration, which yet they pronounce very softly, and when they
put the Character thereof before a Consonant (which the French tongue never
permits) they do it only to weaken the pronunciation of the Consonant: and in
general they speak so softly, that it is not known often whether they pronounce
an m or a b, tio or tchio.

They have not our u Vowel which the Chinese have, but they have our e, such
as we pronounce it in our Monosyllables, ce, le, me, que, se, te: but this e
suffers no elision in their Tongue as in ours. I dare even affirm that they
have no other e than this, not in the Cries of the Pagayeurs, ho, he, he, which
they pronounce as we would pronounce ho, heu, heu; nor in the Syllables which
end with a Consonant, like this, Pet, which signifies a rough Diamond, and
which they rather pronounce peut, than pet.

They have an a extremely short, which they write with two points, thus:, and
which they pronounce clearly at the end of the words, as in this Balie word
Pra, which they give to whatever they honor most; but when this a is found in
the middle of a word, it passes so quick that it is not discerned, and that it
answers to our e mute. Hence it is that the word Pa-ya, which we have
translated by that of Prince, and of which the first a written with the two
points, is pronounced Pe-ya, or Pia, though in the Relations we find it written
Peja and Puja, by the confusion of the e mute with the u, and of the y with the
j consonant. This a marked with two points suffers no other Letter after it in
the same Syllable.

It Is a thing very singular that in the Syllables which end with a Consonant,
they pronounce it not after our manner: but their tongue remains fixed either
to the palate of the Mouth, or to the Teeth, according to the nature of the
Consonant; or rather their Lips remain shut: and it is thus that they terminate
these sorts of pronunciations, I mean without unloosing the Tongue, and opening
the Lips again. They cannot pronounce an Aspirate at the end of a Syllable, was
it in the middle of a word. They pronounce Petpayatong, though they write
Petchpayatong. The Convent of the Palace they call vat Si-Sarapet, though they
write Sarapetch. Thus when they would say un oeuf they said un oeub, but they
opened not their Lips again to finish after our manner the pronunciation of the
b. By the same reason they will pronounce an n for an r and for an l, at the
end of a word, because that at the end of the words they unloose not the Tongue
from the Palate, and it is necessary to unloose it in the pronunciation of the
r or of the l: for in that of the l, the Tongue cleaves not to the Palate at
sides. They will write Tahar and Mar, and they will say Tahan and Man.

They have a great deal of Accent, like the Chinese: they do almost sing in
speaking: and the Siamese Alphabet begins with six different Characters, which
do all countervail only a K, more or less strong, and variously accented. For
though in the pronunciation the Accents be naturally upon Vowels, yet they do
mark some by varying the Consonants, which otherwise are of the same weight.
From whence it is perhaps permitted to conjecture that they writ at first
without Vowels, like the Hebrews, and that at last they have marked them by
some strokes foreign to their Alphabet: and which for the most part are placed
out of the rank of the Letters, like the Points, which the modern Hebrews have
added to their ancient manner of writing. Whoever therefore has learned to give
the true Accent to the six first Characters of the Siamese Alphabet, easily
pronounces the rest; because that they are all ranged with that art, that in
their pronunciation it is necessary to repeat almost the same Accents. They
read the Balie Alphabet after the same manner, save that they give it only five
Accents, which they repeat five times in the twenty five first letters, the
eight last having no accent. And as far as I can judge of the Hanscrit by the
Alphabet, which Father Kirker has given us thereof in his China Illustrata,
this Tongue, which is the learned Tongue of the Mogul's States, has five
Accents like the Balie Tongue: for the Characters of its Alphabet are divided
by fives.

Of the first Siamese Alphabet.
THe first Alphabet is of Consonants, which are thirty seven in number, and
which I have placed in their natural order, with their value at the top, as far
as to me has been possible. This double stroke (II) which is found six times,
is to denote the places where they stop in saying their Alphabet by heart; for
it is a kind of Song. They say seven Letters at first, and then the others six
and six.

The little stroke which is between the names of two Letters, denotes that they
pronounce the Letter which precedes the stroke very quick, and that it makes a
shank with the following Letter, when they say their Alphabet by heart.

I have put an h after the K, it is to show that the K must be pronounced with
an Aspiration after the German way, and not so simply as our c hard: and where
I have put two pp, it is to denote a p harder than ours.

The Ngo is pronounced before all the Vowels, like our g before the a, the p
and the u; with this difference, that it is pronounced a great deal more
carelessly, and altogether from the Nose, which gives it something of n at the
beginning of its pronunciation. At the end of the words, it is pronounced
without loosing the Tongue from the roof of the Mouth: they will say Tongue, and
not Tongue.

The three first Letters of the second division are pronounced between the quio
and cio of the Italians.

The co is pronounced after the Castilian manner by lisping.

The do which is in the third division, is pronounced like a to at the end of
words, and they have no other to final.

They have a double yo, the one at the second division and the other at the
fifth: they pronounce them between our yo and our jo, and there is no other
difference between these two Letters, save that the last yo which is that of
the fifth division, is the true yo final: they place it after the Vowels to
make Dipthongs, though they cease not sometimes to place the other there, but
through ignorance: for this Orthography is not in their Alphabet, where all
their Dipthongs are. Now these yo are however thought Consonants, as the i is
thought a Consonant in German and Spanish in these Dipthongs ja, je, jo, ju,
with which a Vowel which preceeds them in Verses, is not confounded, but makes
its Syllable apart. And yet though the Siameses put the yo among the
Consonants, they so clearly perceive that they sound like Vowels, that in
writing the words, which begin with a yo in the Pronunciation, they place an o
mute at the head, as they do at the head of the words, which begin with the
Vowel: this is not regular, but they are all incapable of all these little
attentions.

The No which is the last Letter of the third division is not pronounced at the
end of words like our n, but like the n of the Gascons and Spaniards. I have
writ it with an u simple, in writing the Siamese words with our Characters; and
sometimes to avoid ill agreement, which these words caused with those of our
Language, I have thereunto added an e feminine, although this be ill, in that
the Siameses pronounce it not, seeing that they unloose not not the Tongue from
the roof of the Mouth, in pronouncing their n at the end of words.

The Vo is pronounced indifferently like our v Consonant, or like the w of the
High-Germans, which is a b pronounced softly, or without closing the Lips, or
in fine like the w of the English, that is to say like our ou in the word oui.
The Vo is likewise put after Vowels to form certain Dipthongs, in which case it
is pronounced like our ou.

The three So of the last division, have the accent somewhat more sharp one
than the other, the Voice ascending gradually to the last.

The ho is put sometimes before the Consonants, to mollify the pronunciation
thereof.

The o is a mute Consonant, as I have said, which serves to place the Vowels,
as the Aleph serves to place the Points of the Hebrews, when the Syllable
begins with a Vowel, or when it is only a Vowel: but the o becomes a Vowel, and
is pronounced like our o when it is preceded by another Consonant, or by itself.

Of the second Siamese Alphabet.
THe second Siamese Alphabet is that of the Vowels placed in respect of the
first Ko, as they are placed in respect of every other Consonant, and in
respect of the o mute.

Eu, ou and ai are simple Pronunciations, though we write them each with two
Letters.

Ai is a Dipthong and not a single Vowel, and is pronounced as in our
exclamation of complaint, ai.

Aou is also a Dipthong, which must be pronounced as au in Italian and in
Spanish; but the Siamese Orthography is altogether fantastical: for it answers
to ea.

Am is a Syllable and not a Vowel. The a is there clearly marked after the Ko,
and that little o which is at top, denotes the m final. They have put the m
final amongst the Vowels, because they have marked it above the Consonants,
after the manner of the Vowels. They do sometimes also place at the end of the
Syllables and Words, the m which is in their Alphabet of Consonants.

The last a which is marked with two points is an a very short, which suffers
no other Letter after it in the same Syllable, and which is pronounced only at
the end of words: for in the middle it is frequently lost, and becomes our e
mute, such as the first e of purete: wherefore in several Siamese words I have
omitted this a, and sometimes I have written it with an e. Thus I have put
Jocbat for Joccabat, Blat or Belat for Balat, by reason that this Orthography
more nearly approaches their Pronunciation.

The Character of the first a is always joined to the Consonant, and is always
placed after it, it is an a long, which is as two, as we anciently write aage
for age.

The four following Vowels are placed always over the Consonant, and the long
are marked with a stroke also. The two Vowels after, viz. the sixth and the
seventh are placed underneath, and the seventh is only the double stroke of the
sixth. The five following are placed before the Consonant, and the e long is
only the e short redoubled.

The aou consists in two Characters, which answers ea as I have said, and the e
is always put before the Consonant, and the a after, according to their Nature.

The m final marked with a little o is placed always on the Consonant, and is
pronounced without opening the Lips.

The a short and sharp, marked with two points, is always put after the
Consonant, and suffers no Letter after it in the same Syllable.

All these Vowels thus disposed, sometimes above, sometimes below, sometimes
before, sometimes after the Consonant, are always pronounced after it, as I
have already declared. This would be a trouble to us, when the Syllable begins
with a Mute and a Liquid, like pret, the Letters of which they would range thus
eprt, so that we could not know if it were necessary to say pret or pert: but
they always pronounce the Liquid before the Vowel, saying pret, and not pert.
They cannot pronounce pert but pent: they will also say pent for pelt, and they
will range the Letters in this manner, lept, or rept, or nept, The e
pronouncing itself always after the Consonant, which follows it in the writing,
leaves not any doubt to them in this Orthography. For pnet, or pent, pmet or
pemt, they will always pronounce pent and pemt.

Of the third Siamese Alphabet.
THis Alphabet is of Dipthongs, most of which are truly orthographized and
easy to read: but some of which are pronounced after a manner very different
from their Orthography. We shall observe in these that the Vowels are
pronounced according to their disposition; those which precede the Consonant
pronounced first, although they nevertheless are pronounced after the Consonant.
Whence it appears, that designing to place certain Vowels before the Consonant,
they have chosen those, which in the pronunciation of the Dipthongs are first
pronounced. In this Alphabet there is also some Syllables, which are not
Dipthongs.

Of a fourth Siamese Alphabet, which I have not graved.
THis Alphabet is of the Syllables which begin, and which end with Consonants,
and it teaches two things. First, there are two Vowels, an a and an o, which
must never begin the Syllable nor end it, but be always between two Consonants.
They have a particular Accent. The a is marked with a sharp accent, oftentimes
very much lengthned, and always placed over the first Consonant of the
Syllable; and the o is marked with a double Accent sharp, which they put
likewise over the first Consonant of the Syllable. When in the pronunciation
the Syllable ends not with a Consonant, they put the o mute in the place of the
second Consonant, as may be seen in the Syllable Ko in the Alphabet of the
Siamese Dipthongs: yet they sometimes dispense therewith after the accent,
which marks the a, but never after the two accents, which mark the o. Sometimes
also instead of the double accent, which marks the o, they put a little o over
the first Consonant, and sometimes they put nothing; and as often as two
Consonants make a Syllable, it is the o that must be understood. The second
thing which this Alphabet teaches, are the final Consonants, viz. the first ko,
the ngo, the do, the no, the mo, and the bo. As often as they end a Syllable,
with any other Consonant, it is a fault against their Orthography. They
pronounce these only at the end of the Syllables, and they never show their
Children any Syllable to read, which ends with any other Consonant, than with
those I have mentioned. It is true that they pronounce the do like a to, and
the bo like a po at the end of some Syllables and Words.

Of the Balie Alphabets.
THey are not difficult to understand, after what I have related of the
Siamese: The stroke shows that the two Letters between which it is found, do
make a halt in the pronunciation. The five which follow the twentieth are not
now of different value from the five, which immediately precede them: but
perhaps this was otherwise, when this Tongue flourished.

Of the Siamese Ciphers.
I Have nothing to say of the Siamese Characters, save that an experienced man
informed me that they resembled those, which he had found on some Arabian
Medals between four and five hundred years old. The Siamese names of the Powers
of the number Ten are these.

Noee, which they pronounce Noai, signifies Number.

Sib, which they pronounce Sip, signifies Ten, and Tenth.

Roi, which they pronounce Roe, signifies a Hundred, and Hundredth.

Pan, a Thousand.

Meuing, Ten Thousand.

Seen, or Sen, an Hundred Thousand, or Hundredth of Thousand. Abraham Roger, p.
104. Of the Manners of the Bramines, says that at Paliacata, Lac signifies an
Hundred Thousand; and Bernier says Laque, in his Relation of the Gentiles of
Indostan, page 221.

Cot, a Million. Abraham Roger in the before-quoted place, says that at
Paliacata, Coti signifies Ten Millions.

Lan, Ten Millions.

The numbers are placed before the Substantive, as in our Tongue: but these
numbers are put after the Substantive, to signify the names of Orders. Thus
Sam Deuan signifies Three Months, and Deuan Sam the Third Month.

Of the Pronouns of the First Person.
COu, ca, raou, atamapap, ca Tchaou, Ca-ppa, tchaou, atanou, are eight ways of
expressing I or we: for there is no difference between Singular and Plural.

Cou, is of the Master speaking to his Slave.

Ca, is a respectful term from the Inferior to the Superior, and in civility
amongst equals: the Talapoins never use it, by reason that they believe
themselves above other men.

Raou, denotes some superiority or dignity, as when we say We in Proclamations.

Roub, properly signifies body, it is as if one should say my body: to say me,
it is only the Talapoins that use it sometimes.

Atamapapp, is a Balie term, more affected by the Talapoins than any other.

Ca Tchaou, is composed of ca, which signifies me, and Tchaou, which signifies
Lord; as who should say me of the Lord, or me who belong to you my Lord; that
is to say, who am your Slave. The Slaves do use it to their Masters, the common
people to the Nobles, and every one in speaking to the Talapoins.

Ca-ppa Tchaou, has likewise something more submissive.

Atanou is a Balie word, introduced within three or four years into the Siamese
Tongue, to be able to speak of himself with an entire indifference, that is to
say without Pride and without Submission.

Of the Pronouns of the Second and Third Persons.
TEV, Tan, Eng, Man, Otchaou, do serve equally to the Second and Third Persons
for the Singular and Plural Numbers: but oftentimes they make use of the Name
or Quality of the person to whom they speak.

Teu, is a very honorable term, but is used only for the third person, or for
the Talapoins in the second, that is to say in speaking to them.

Tan, is a term of Civility amongst equals. The French have translated it by
the word Monsieur, Sir.

Eng, to an inferior person.

Man, with contempt.

Otchaou, to a mean person unknown.

Of the Particles which supply the place of Conjugations.
THe Present Tense is without Particle: As for example, pen signifies to be,
and raou pen, signifies I am; eng pen, thou art, and he is. And again, raou
pen, signifies we are. Tan tang-lai pen, ye be. Kon tang-lai pen, they are.
Tang lai signifies all, or a great many; and it is the mark of the Plural. Kon
signifies People, as who should say the People are, to say in general, they
are, or he is.

The Imperfect is verbatim at this time, I being, or time this, or when I
being, to say I was, moua nan rao pen. Moua signifies time, or when, nan
signifies this. The Perfect is denoted by dai, or by leou, and sometimes by
both. But dai is placed always before the Verb, and leou after: Thus dai pen,
or rao dai pen, I have been, or rather raou pen leou, or rather yet Raou dai
pen leou. Dai signifies to find, leou signifies end.

The Pluperfect is composed of the Particles of the Imperfect, and the Perfect.
Thus to say, when you came I had already eaten, they will say, moua tan ma,
raou dai kin sam-red leou; that is to say word for word, time, or when you
come, I already to eat end. Ma signifies to come, and with other Accents and
another Orthography, it signifies Horse and Dog. Kin signifies to eat, sam-red
signifies to end: and this term is added to the Perfect to form the Pluperfect.

Tcha is the sign of the Future: raou chapen, I shall or will be; this Particle
always precedes the Verb.

Hai denotes the Imperative, and is put before the Verb. Teut also denotes it,
and is placed always at the end of the Phrase: haikin eat, or rather kin teut,
or rather hai kin teut. Hai properly signifies to give, and is used likewise to
signify to the end.

Reu is the Note of Interrogation. Kin le ou reu? Has he eaten? or have you
eaten? Leou, as we have said, is the sign of the Perfect, reu is placed always
at the end of the Phrase.

To say I did eat, they say I would eat, tcha erai ken. Tcha is the sign of the
future, crai signifies to will, and so tcha crai signifies I would, and kin
signifies to eat.

To say if I was at Siam, I should be satisfied, they would say word for word,
if me to be City Siam, my heart good much. Heart good signifies content, and
the Verb I should be is there understood.

Of the Construction.
THey have Pronouns demonstrative, and not relative. They have Prepositions and
Adverbs, or at least Nouns taken in this sense.

The Nominative always precedes the Verb, and the Verb precedes the governed.

The Preposition precedes also what it governs.

When two Substantives come together, the latter is taken in the Genitive. Van
athit, day of the Sun, athit which signifies Sun is in the Genitive.

The Adjective is always after the Substantive, and the Adverb after the
Adjective, or after the Verb to which it refers.

Their Construction is always shorter than ours, because it wants Articles, and
a great many Particles which we have, and oftentimes a Verb; but the turn of
their expressions seems long to us, if we translate them word for word. To say,
How is this thing named? they say, ny scheu rai, that is to say verbatim, this
thing name how? where they suppress the Verb. But to say, bring me that, they
will say, go, take that, and come. To say, give some Rice to thy Child, they
say, take Rice, give Child to eat: The Construction is always short, but the
turn of the expression is long, because they express all the circumstances of
the Action.

In naming particular things, they do almost always make use of the general
word, to which they add another word for the difference. They say, Head of
Diamond, to signify a Diamond; and they have two words, the one for the Rough
Diamond, pet, and the other for the Diamond set in work, Ven: houa pet, houa
ven. Houa signifies Head.

To say a Man, they say pou tchay, to say a Woman, pou ying, which they
pronounce almost pou-ging, and pou signifies person: to name the Beasts, they
put the word body; body of an Ox, body of a Cow. Louk signifies Son, Louk
Schaou, young Son, that is to say Daughter; Schaou in Siamese, signifies young,
as nang in Balie. To denote the Female amongst the Animals, they use the word
mia. They join the word ban, which signifies Village, to almost all their Names
of their Villages. Ban-pac-tret yai, Village of the Mouth of the great Strait.
Banc-pac-tretnoe, Village of the Mouth of the little Strait. Ban-vat Village of
the Convent. Banc-pacnam, Village of the Mouth of the Water.

The Pater Noster, and Ave Maria in Siamese, with an Interlineary Translation.
PO raou Savang. Scheu Pra hai prakot touk heng kon tang-lai touai Pra pon.
Meuang Pra co hai dai ke raou. Hai leou ning tchai pra Meuang Pendin semo
savang. Ahan raou touk Van co hai dai ke raou Van ni, co prot bap raou, semo
raou prot pou tam bap ke raou. Ya hai raou tok nai kouan bap: hai poun kiac
anerai tang-poang. Amen.

The Ave Maria.
AVE Maria Ten anisong, Pra you heng Nang is that Balie word, which signifies
young, and which added to Nouns Masculine renders them Feminine.
Nang. Nang soum-boui yingkoua Nang Tang-lai. Toui louk outong, heng nang Pra,
Ongkio Yesu soum-boui ymgkoua Tanglai. Sancta Maria Me Pra thoui ving von Pra
pro raou kon bap teit-bat-ni le moua raou It Is the Latin Word.
tcha tai. Amen.

A Smoking Instrument made use of by the Moors, which are at Siam.
THey have a glass bottle of the figure of our Caraffas, excepting that it has
a foot to be more firm, they fill it up half with water, and into the neck,
which is all of a bigness and very long, they put a silver Pipe wound about
with a Fillet, to the end that it close the better: but this Pipe enters only
the length of two Fingers breadth, though it be more than half a Foot long. At
the upper end is a little Cup, either of Silver or Porcelane, which has the
bottom perforated to communicate with the Pipe; and in this Cup is the Tobacco,
on which they put a live coal. From the side of the Pipe there proceeds another
much less in form of a Spout, or rather it is the little one which enters into
the great one at the side, and it descends within the great one, and as far as
the great one it self, yet without filling the whole capacity thereof, but
leaving a space through which the smoke of the Tobacco, which is consumed in
the Porcelane Cup, may descend into the Bottle. In fine, to the inferior
Orifice of the little Pipe, they put another little Pipe of Bambou, bound about
also with a little Ribbon or black Silk, which descends into the water. Now he
that would smoke, setting this glass bottle, or rather all this Machine which I
have described upon the ground, puts into the superior orifice of the little
silver pipe, the end of a Bambou-slip, which though of one single shoot is
sometimes between seven and eight foot long. The two ends thereof are garnished
with Gold or Silver, and besides this one of the two is garnished with a little
Crystal Pipe, which he that smoaks puts between his Lips. From this manner it
seems that in smoking, he would attract to his Mouth the Water of the Bottle,
by reason of the Communication that there is from the Mouth of the Smoaker to
the Water of the Bottle, viz. through the great Bambou slip, through the little
Silver Pipe to which it joins, and through the little Bambou Pipe which enters
into the Water, and which unites at the lower end of the small silver Pipe: but
instead of this, the exterior air not being able to enter into the Bottle, the
Smoke of the Tobacco descends along the great silver Tube, not only into the
Bottle, but even into the Water, to insinuate it self into the little tube of
Bambou, from whence it ascends to the Mouth of the Smoaker. So that he who
invented this Instrument, has very ingeniously apprehended that it would be
more natural that the Smoke should be drawn into the water, and from the water
to the Mouth of the Smoaker, then that the water, which is heavier than the
smoke, should yield to the force of this Attraction.

Sometimes there are several small Tubes round the great one, to the end that
several persons may smoke in company with the same Instrument, and the better
to settle it, it is placed on a copper Basin, covered in that place with a
little piece of cloth, which hinders the foot of the Bottle from slipping over
the Basin.

The Chess-Play of the Chinese.
THeir Chess-board is composed like ours of 64 squares, A Description of their
Chess-board, and the number of their Men.
but which are not distinguished by white and black. Neither do they place
their pieces in the Squares, but at the corners of the Squares, that is to say
at the points where the lines of the Chess-board do intersect. Moreover the
Chess-board is divided into two halves, thirty two Squares for each of the two
Players, and these two halves are separated by a space, which they call the
River. It is about the bigness of a row of Squares, and runs not from one
Player to the other: but after the same manner wherewith the pieces are ranged
on the Chess-board. It Is not therefore the Squares which are the Points of
their game, but the corners of the Squares. And so they have nine Points on
each line, and there are five times nine or forty five on each half of the
Chess-board; I have marked them with circles.

They have thirty two Men like us, sixteen for each Gamester, the one white,
the other black; but these Men are not all the same as ours, and they dispose
them not altogether after the same manner. Every Gamester has a King and no
Queen, two Guards, two Elephants, two Horsemen, two Wagons, two Cannons, and
five Pawns. Each Gamester places nine Men on the first Line of the Chess-board,
which is on his side, at the Points where this first Line is divided, and on
those where it is terminated. These nine Men are, the King, whom they place in
the middle; the two Guards which are next him, the one on the right and the
other on the left; the two Elephants which are next the Guards, the one on the
right and the other on the left; then the two Horsemen, the one on the right
and the other on the left; and in fine the two Wagons which take up the two
corners of the Chess-board. The two Cannons are placed in the second Point
before the two Horsemen, and the Pawns in the first, third, fifth, seventh, and
ninth Points of the fourth Line, that is to say on that which is our
Chess-board, separates the first Points before the Men, from the second.

The King makes only one step as in our Game, The motion of their Men.
but he cannot do it every way: he goes forward, or backward, or side ways, as
do our Rooks, but he marches not bias-wise like our Bishops. Moreover he cannot
stir out of a Square, which is his field of Battle or his Palace, and which
contains four Squares, which on our Chess-board are those, where we place the
King and Queen, and the Pawns of the King and Queen.

The two Guards do not move also out of the Square, and they never make more
than one step, but bias-wise like our Bishops, and not otherwise.

The two Elephants do move after the manner of our Bishops, but they do always
make two steps, and never more nor less, and they pass not the River: they
enter not into the Enemy's Camp. I understood that the Elephant is called fill
in Arabia, and that it is from this word fill that we have taken that of fol or
Bishop for that of our Chess-men which answers to the Elephant.

The Horseman skips two points like our Knight, the one of which is according
to the march of our Rooks, and the other is according to the walk of our
Bishop. But their Horseman leaps not over the other Men: it is necessary that
he have the way open, at least on one side. I explain my self. The walk of the
Horseman is composed of two steps, as I have said, the one of which is
according to the march of our Rook, and the other according to that of our
Bishop. It is therefore necessary that the first step of the Horseman, be free
in one sense, that is to say, either according to the march of the Rook, or
according to that of the Bishop. Besides the Horseman may pass the River, and
the breadth of the River is esteemed one of the two steps that he must take, as
if it was a Rank of Squares.

The Wagons march like our Rooks, and may pass the River. The Cannons have
also the walk of our Rooks, and may pass the River.

The Pawns do only make one step as amongst us, and they never have the liberty
of making two, not even the first time that they are used. They may pass the
River which is always reckoned for one step, and when they have passed it, they
may move not only forwards, but also sideways like the Rook, and never
bias-ways like the Bishop, and like our Pawns when they take, nor also
backward, not even when they have been at the end of the Game, which we call
making a Queen.

The design of the Game.
The design of the Game is to give Check-mate, as amongst us; and the King is
obliged amongst them, as amongst us, to free himself from Check, either by
removing place, or by covering himself from Check.

How their men do take.
Every Man takes, by putting it self in the place of the Man which it takes,
provided that the walk from the one to the other be free. There is only the
Cannon which requires that there be a Man between it, and that which it takes,
and it matters not whether this Man be Friend or Enemy. It Is said that it
serves as a carriage. Thus it is necessary that there be a Man between the
Cannon and the King, for that the Cannon gives Check to the King; and if the
Man which is between both, is on the King's side, he whose King is in Check,
may free him from Check by taking away this Man, and by exposing the King
before the Cannon. In a word one Cannon may serve as a carriage to another
Cannon.

Their Pawns take not bias-ways like ours, but in the natural sense of their
walk, which is forward, when they have not passed the River: and forward or
sideways according to the march of our Rook, when they have passed the River.

One cannot put nor leave his King opposite to the other King, when there is
not a Man between both, he that should do it, or would take the Man that is
between both, would himself put his own King in Check, which cannot be done,
yet the King can take nothing but what is at a point near him, and according to
the march of our Rook, and not according to the march of our Bishop.

The Abacus, or Counting-Table of the Chinese.
THe Counting-Table which the Chinese use, is a wooden frame of a square
figure, but much longer than broad. It is divided into two long squares, with a
flat stick of Lath parallel to the two great sides, and terminated at the two
little ones. These three parallel sticks, (I mean the two great sides of the
frame and the middle stick) are threaded at right Angles, by several small
sticks of wood, or copper wires, which are all parallel to one another, and
parallel to the two little sides of the Frame, and placed at equal distances
for Decency. And in fine, on each of these sticks are put seven Beads or Balls,
two on one side of the middle piece, and five on the other, which will slide,
or come along the Sticks; that is to say, to approach to, and remove from the
middle Lath, or Partition.

This Instrument, which is composed at most of Twenty, or Twenty five sticks,
for the number thereof is uncertain, is laid flat, and not on the side, and one
turns to him the ends of those sticks, which do each bear five Beads, or Balls.
The way of using it is grounded, 1st. On this, that the Beads do signify only
when slid near the middle Lath or Partition. 2d. On this, that each of the five
Beads stands for a point, and each of the two Beads five points, as A Prospect
of the Cape of Good Hope when one is in the Road at the Letter A the Road.
The Wind Mountain

The Table Mountain

The Lion Mountain

A Prospect when one is at Sea.
The Lion Mountain

The Table Mountain.

The Lion Mountain at ye. East S.E.

The Table Mountain at E.S.E.

The Dutch Factory at the Cape of Good Hope by Mr. Volan the Kings Engineer.
A. The Road. B. The Fort. C. The Garden. D. The Houses of ye Town E. The
Gardn: House F. Several Springs G. Island Robin H. The Cabanes of ye Hotantots.
L. The Conduit where the Ships do take in fresh water. K. The Top of the Lion
Mountain. L. The Bottom of ye: same Mountain. M. The Table Mountain. N. The
Wind Mountain. O. The Windmill. P. The Place where M. Volan was when he drew
this Design.


The Whale Rock.

The Hotantots the Natural Inhabitants of the Cape of Good Hope.
often as these Beads do stand for any thing, that is to say, as often as they
approach them near the middle Partition. 3d. On this, that the sticks are
reckoned, from the right to the left, and do stand for Number, or Unites, Tens,
Hundreds, and Thousands, and all the other powers of the number ten in their
natural Order. In a word, one may at the same time denote several sums in
diverse places of this Instrument, by taking such sticks, as one will to denote
Unites, and the next on the left to denote Tens and Hundreds, and so
successively. And this is sufficient to illustrate the use of this Instrument
to those, that know how to reckon with Counters. The Swiftness with which I
have seen the Chinese, which are at Siam, make use thereof, is inconceivable;
but they say that it is an effect of two years Apprenticeship. The Instrument
may be more simple if one will, by putting only four Beads on one side, and one
on the other, because that this is sufficient to mark to nine on each stick,
which is all that is required; and in this simplicity was the Roman Instrument,
which in my Relation I have mentioned, that Pignorius has given us. From whence
the Learned may, at their pleasure, draw their Conjectures, to decide which of
these two Instruments is probably the Original, either the most compound, or
the most simple. The Simple seems a Correction of the Compound, the Compound
seems to have added to the Simple, for the more facility and exactness in
practice.

Of the Cape of Good-Hope.
I Have given three different Prospects thereof, two of which are entirely new,
and the third, which is that whose place of view is in the Road, is copied
after a very good Dutch Map.

Every one knows that the Dutch have an important Establishment there, which
secures their Navigation from the East Indies. The Fort which defends it, would
perhaps be no considerable thing in Europe; but it is sufficient in a Country,
where there is no Neighbor to fear, and where there can go no considerable
Enemy, but from a great distance, and consequently with a great deal of
difficulty.

The Company's Garden, the Platform whereof is in one of these Prints, is very
spacious, as may be judged by comparing it to the Fort: And though the Soil be
not over-good, it plentifully produces Coleworts, Citruls, Oranges,
Pomegranets, and, in a word, Pulse and Fruits, which keep at Sea, and of which
the Mariners are desirous in long Voyages. In a corner, and under a shelter, I
saw a Camphire-Tree, an European Fig Tree, and a Shrub about two Foot high,
which was said to be that which bears the Tea, and which I had taken for a
young Pear Tree. It had neither Flowers nor Fruit, and very few Leaves. Close
by, and under another shelter, were two or three Foot of Ananas, and this was
all the Rarity they showed me for the Country. The Grape is not more rare, but
there is only that which the Hollanders have planted there. The Wine thereof is
white, and very good. Some of our Crew went to the top of the Table Mountain,
to seek some extraordinary Plants, but they found none. Nevertheless, upon a
strict Scrutiny, there is not any that has not something particular, which the
Plants of these Countries have not. The shells there found are not the Remains
of the Deluge, as some have conjectured. The Birds, the Apes, and the
Hotantots, do bring them, and leave them there.

The Walks of the Garden do almost spontaneously maintain themselves, because
that the Soil produces only Moss if it is not cultivated: Besides the neatness
of the Garden has nothing, which savours not a wise economy, nor any thing
which savours a too great negligence, like a Kitchen Garden of Merchants, more
wedded to the profit, which they reap thence, than to the Pleasures, which they
could not enjoy.

The water which waters it through several little Channels, enters therein at
the going out from a Mill which it turns, and underneath the Garden, it serves
for blanching. They only divert a part thereof, which is conducted to a
Cistern, which is on the bank of the Road, and where the Ships do go to take in
their fresh water.

The Garden is divided into several great Squares, almost like the Plot of the
place Royal. They are encompassed with Pales, to shelter them from the Winds,
which are sometimes furious enough to wreck the Ships in the Road, if they have
not good Anchors and good Cables. These Winds are formed of the thick Clouds,
which do sometimes assemble between the Table-Mountain, and that which is
called the Mountain of the Wind, by reason of these Storms. A walk of
Citron-trees and Orange Trees planted in Earth, which go from one end of the
Garden to the other, do altogether resent their fury. Next to this the
situation of the Garden, and that of the Village which is a little nearer to
the Road, are very good; for they are wholly exposed to the Sun, and sheltered
from the South Winds, which are the cold Winds of this Country. The Hollanders
which are settled there, do say, that if the South-west Wind blows not during
their Summer, which is our Winter, the Distempers of the Lungs are frequent and
dangerous.

The short stay that I made, permitted me not througly to instruct my self
concerning the Manners of the Hotantots, the natural Inhabitants of the Cape,
though in the extreme Simplicity in which they live, this can be no long study.
They are called Hotantots, because that when they dance, they always in singing
say this word Hotantot. The Love of the Tobacco and Brandy, which the Strangers
offer them, and which has made them to receive the Hollanders into their
Country, makes them to dance so long as one will, that is to say, to stamp
sometimes with one Foot, and sometimes with the other, as he that treads the
Grapes, and incessantly, and vigorously to say, Hotantot, Hotantot, but with a
very low voice, as if they were out of breath, or that they feared to awaken
any one. This mute Song has no diversity of Tones, but of Measure: the two
first Syllables of Hotantot are always two Blacks, or Crochets, and the last
always a White or Minime.

They go all naked, as may be seen in the figure, which I have given. They have
but one skin over their Shoulders, like a Cloak; yet do they quit it at every
place: and then they have only a little Leather Purse, hung to their Neck by a
string, and a piece of a Skin a little bigger than one's Hand, hung before, and
fastened with another string round their body: but this little piece covers them
not, either when they show themselves side-ways, or when they do make a brisk
motion.

Their stature is acceptable, and their gate more easy, than can be expressed.
They are born as white as the Spaniards, but they have their Hair very much
frizled, and Features participating somewhat of those of the Negro's: and
besides they are always very black; because that they grease their Body and
Face. They do also grease their Head, and we smell them twenty Paces, when they
have the Wind. Our men gave them Pots, and Cauldrons to bath in; and before all
things, they took the Fat by hands-full, and herewith anointed their whole
Body, from the Head to the Feet. The Grease defends them from the Air and the
Sun, renders them sound and well disposed, and they prefer these natural
Advantages before Sweet Scents and Pleasure. They are so active, that several
among them do outrun Horses. There is no Brook which they swim not over. They
are expert in drawing the Bow, and throwing the Dart; and they have Courage
even to Undauntedness. They do sometimes worst a Lion, provided they have Skins
enough, and Furniture enough to garnish their left Arm. They do thrust it thus
into the Throat of this Animal, and they pierce it with a Dart or Knife, which
they will have in their right hand. If they are two, the one kills the Lion,
whilst the other amuses him. If they are several, and they have nothing to
secure themselves from the Claws of the Lion, they fail not to expose
themselves all at once: The one of them generally perishes, but the Lion
perishes likewise by the Blows which the others give him. Sometimes they are
all saved, and they kill the Lion.

Their Wives do likewise grease themselves, though they affect some Ornament;
as to fasten little Bones and Shells to their short Cottony, and greasy Hair.
They also have Necklaces with diverse colors of Glass, Bone, or such other
matter, according as the Foreigners do give them, or sell them to them. On each
Leg they have fifty Rings of Leather, which do beat one upon the other, and
make some Noise when they dance, and which defend them from the Briers, when
they go to get Wood: for this care concerns them, and not their Husbands.

The Men and the Women did eat Guts, almost without cleansing them, when our
men presented them therewith, and they did hardly put them a moment on the
Coals. If we offered them Brandy, they would gather up the first Shell, they
found on the ground to receive it, and after having blowed therein, they used
to drink in it. They eat their Lice, as well as the Cochinchinese: and when we
thought it strange, they answered pleasantly, that it is because their Lice eat
them.

They lodge under little Huts made of Branches, or great Bulrush Mats, the top
of which hardly reached to my middle; and to me it seemed that I could not lie
therein, my whole length. Under these Mats they make a hole in the ground, and
in this Hole, about two Foot deep, they make their Fire, not caring for the
Smoke, whereof their Huts do not empty themselves. They live on Hunting,
Fishing, Milk and the Flesh of their Flocks.

In this Poverty they are always merry, singing and dancing continually, living
without Pains and Business: and caring for Gold and Silver, only as far as it
is necessary for them to buy a little Tobacco and Brandy; a Corruption which
the Foreign Commerce has introduced into their Customs.

As some amongst them were exercising themselves, in throwing the Dart before
us, I offered them five or six Papers of Necklaces with Beads of colored
Glass; and they all so exactly seized my Hand, that I could not open it to let
go the Necklaces, and I could not besides explain my self unto them. I was
sometime in this perplexity, till they perceived that they must set me at
Liberty to obtain what they desired. They love these Necklaces for their Wives,
and when we had set sail again, I understood that a Laquais of ours had sold
one for a Crown to one of them. The little Money they have, and of which they
have little esteem, is the Wages for the Service which they render sometimes to
the Hollanders, and to the other Foreigners, which land at the Cape: but they
care but little to work.

Every one has but one Wife, their Chief only has three, and Adultery amongst
them is punished with Death. They kill their Children, when they have too many:
and as they marry those which they keep, exceeding young, there is seen amongst
them a great many Grand-Daughters, already Widows; who want a Joint in their
little Finger: For when a Woman loses her Husband, she cuts off a Joint of the
little Finger, or of the fourth Finger, if she has so often been a Widow, as to
have her whole little Finger cut off. Nevertheless she may dispense therewith,
if she please: and there are some Husbands who dispense not therewith, when
they have lost their Wife. Most of them do make themselves Ridgils, to be more
fit for the Women; and when the Age of renouncing comes, they make themselves
entirely Eunuchs, to deprive themselves wholly of their Commerce, and to enjoy
a more vigorous old Age. The Hollanders had educated an Hotantot Infant after
the European manner, and had sent him into Holland. Sometime after they caused
him to return to the Cape, where he might be useful to them amongst those of
his own Nation. But so soon as he found himself again amongst them, he
continued there, and renounced the Dutch Habit, and Manner of living.

They commit no Robbery amongst themselves, nor in the Houses of the
Hollanders, where they are received without Care: and if the thing happens,
they punish it with Death. Nevertheless in the Country, when they can do it
securely, and that they think not to be discovered, they do sometimes
assassinate to rob; and do show that the Contempt of Riches is, amongst them,
only the Hatred of work.

The Dutch do nominate their Chief, and this Chief is their Judge: but those
who could not bear this Foreign Dependence, are gone further into the Country,
to live with the other Caffres.

Some informed me at first, that they had no sense of Religion; but at last I
understood, that tho they have neither Priests nor Temples, yet they make
public rejoicing, which savor of Worship, at the New and Full Moons. I suspect
that they have some Tincture of Manicheisme, because that they acknowledge a
Principle of Good, and another of Evil, which they call the Captain above, and
the Captain below. The Captain above, they say, is good, it is not necessary to
pray to him, it is only needful to let him act freely, he always does good: But
the Captain below is wicked, he must be prayed to, and entreated to divert him
from mischief. It Is thus that they speak, but it appears not in their exterior
Conduct, that they pray much. A Dutchman of Wit and Knowledge informed me, that
amongst the Hotantots, he had found the Names of Asdrubal and of Bocchus.

Rules of the Siamese Astronomy, for calculating the Motions of the Sun and
Moon, translated from the Siamese, and since examined and explained by M.
Cassini, a Member of the Royal Academy of Sciences.
MOnsieur de la Loubere, the King's Ambassador extraordinary at Siam brought
back a Siamese Manuscript, which comprehends the Rules for calculating the
motions of the Sun and Moon, according to the method of that Country, the
Translation thereof he likewise brought from Siam, and communicated unto me.

This method is extraordinary. They make no use of Tables; but only of the
Addition, Substraction, Multiplication, and Division of certain numbers, of
which we do not presently discern the Ground, nor to what these numbers refer.

Under these numbers are concealed diverse Periods of Solar Years, of Lunar
Months, and other Revolutions, and the Relation of the one with the other.
Under these numbers are likewise concealed several sorts of Epoches which are
not distinguished, as the Civil Epoche, the Epoche of the Lunar Months, that of
the Equinoxes, Apogaea, and Solar Cycle. The numbers in which the difference
between these Epoches consists, are not ordinarily at the head of the
Operations to which they serve, as they ought to be according to the Natural
Order: they are often mixed with certain numbers, and the Sums or differences
are multiplied or divided by others, for they are not always simple numbers,
but frequently they are Fractions, sometimes Simple, sometimes Compound,
without being ranged after the manner of Fractions, the Numerator being
sometimes in one Article, and the Denominator in another; as if they had had a
contrived design to conceal the Nature and Use of these numbers. In the
Calculation of the Sun, they intermix some things which appertain only to the
Moon, and others which are not necessary, either to the one or to the other,
without making any distinction. They confound together the Solar and the
Lunisolar Years, the Months of the Moon, and the Months of the Sun, the Civil
and the Astronomical Months, the Days Natural and the Days Artificial. The
Zodiac is divided sometimes into twelve Signs, according to the number of the
Month of the Year, sometimes into 27 parts, according to the number of the Days
that the Moon runs through the Zodiac, and sometimes in 30 parts, according to
the number of the Days, that the Moon returns to the Sun. In the Division of
the Day there is no discourse of Hours; but therein is found the 11th the 703d
and the 800th parts of the Day, which result from the Arithmetical Operations
which are prescribed.

This Method is ingenious; and being illustrated, rectified, and purged from
Superfluities, it will be of some use, being practicable without books, by the
means of diverse Cycles, and of the difference of their Epoches. Wherefore it is
that I have endeavored to decypher it, what difficulty soever I found at
first, not only by reason of the confusion which every where appeared, and of
the Names which are wanting in the supposed numbers; but likewise by reason of
the extraordinary names, which are given to what results from the Operations,
of which there are more than Twenty which have not been interpreted by the
Translator, and of which I could never have found the Signification, if I had
not first discovered the method; which has likewise evinced to me, that the
Interpretation, which the Translator has made of three or four other names, is
not very exact.

In this research I have first distinguished, and separated from the other
numbers, those which belong to the Epoches, having observed that these numbers,
are those which were given to add or to substract, either simply, or by
dividing or multiplying them by certain other numbers.

Secondly, I have considered the Analogies which result from the
Multiplications and Divisions of the other numbers, separated from the Epoches;
and it is in the Terms of these Analogies, that I have found the Periods of the
Years, of the Months, and of the Days, and the differences of the one from the
other, which the experience of things Astronomical, and the occasion of diverse
operations which I have made, has given me to understand.

I thought that the Missionaries, to whom Astronomy gives admittance amongst
the great and learned throughout the East, might reap some advantage from this
work, for the Understanding, and for the Explication of the Oriental Astronomy,
which might easily be rectified and adapted to ours, with a little altering the
Method, by correcting the numbers which it uses.

I thought also that it would not be useless to reduce the Astronomy of Europe
to this form, to be able to supply the want of the Tables which greatly abridge
the work. This method would be much more easy to practice in the form of the
Julian and Gregorian year of which we make use, than in the form of the
Lunisolar year, which the Orientals observe: for their principal difficulty
consists in reducing the Lunisolar years and the Civil Lunary months to the
years and months of the Sun, which the form of our Calendar immediately gives
us; and what has given me the most trouble, has been to find out the method
which they use to reduce them, in which the several sorts of Years, Months and
Days, which are supposed and sought, are not distinguished. Wherefore the
reason of the Explication which I give, and of the Determination of the Genus
to the Species which I make in the beginning, will not presently be understood;
but in the sequel it will be comprehended by the Connection of things, and by
what necessarily results therefrom.

Concerning the Astronomical Epoch of this Method.
I Have endeavored to discover what is the Epoch, from whence they here begin
to compute the Motions of the Sun and Moon; and to what year, what month, and
what day of our Calendar it refers: for it is not treated of in this extract,
which supposes it either known, or explained perhaps in the preceding Chapters
from whence this extract has been taken, seeing that without the knowledge of
the Epoch, it is absolutely impossible to practice this Method.

I have found that this Epoch is Astronomical, and that it is different from
the Civil, which I have understood, because it is here prescribed to begin to
compute the Months of the Year, current with the fifth Month in the Leap Year,
which consists of 13 Months, and with the sixth Month in the common Year, which
consists of 12 Months. For this would not be intelligible, if they supposed not
two different Epoches of Years, the one whereof, which must be the
Astronomical, begins sometimes in the fifth, and sometimes in the sixth Month
of the other, which is the Civil. That which likewise evinced to me that the
Astronomical Epoche, is different from the Civil Epoch, not only in the
Months, but also in the Years, is the Operation which is here made to find the
Year of ones Nativity, by substracting his Age from the number of the Years
elapsed since the Epoch; for this Operation would be useless, if they demand
only the Year of the Birth after the Civil Epoch, which is immediately known,
and which is compared to the Year current, to know the Age of a Person.

This being supposed, I have first searched out the Age to which this
Astronomical Epoch may refer; and having found in the Calculation of the Sun,
performed by this method, that two Signs and twenty Degrees which are therein
employed, can only denote the place of the Zodiac, where was found the
Apogaeum of the Sun in the Epoch, which Apogaeum must be in the twentieth
Degree of Gemini; I judged that this Epoch must be about the seventh Age,
where the Apogaeum of the Sun is found in the twentieth Degree of Gemini
according to most Astronomical Tables.

Secondly, having found that the number 621, which is intermixed in the
Calculation of the Sun, can only be the number of the days comprised, between
the Astronomical Epoch, and the return of the Moon's Apogaeum, to the
beginning of the Zodiac; and that the number 3232, which is afterward
employed therein, can be only the number of the Days, during which, this
Apogaeum makes a Revolution; I have confirmed that the Apogaeum of the Moon,
which in 621 Days makes two Signs and nine Degrees, was in this Epoch, in the
21 Degrees of Capricorn: And because that the Moon's Apogaeum by the Revolution
it makes in eight Years three quarters, returns to the same degree of the
Zodiac twelve times in one Age; I have distinguished the Years of the Age, in
which the Moon's Apogaeum is found in this Degree, and I have excluded the
other Year.

Thirdly, having found by the method here used for Calculating the place of the
Sun, that this Astronomical Epoch is very near the vernal Aequinox, which in
the seventh Age fell on the 20th or 21st of March; Amongst these select Years I
have found one in which the Moon's Apogaeum, arrived at this Degree of
Capricorn, about the 21st of March, which is found but once in 62 Years,
wanting some Degrees; and I have found that in the 638th Year of Jesus Christ,
the Apogaeum of the Moon was at the 21st Degree of Capricorn the 21st of March.

Fourthly, I have remarked that this Astronomical Epoch must have begun at a
new Moon; because the Lunar Months are reduced into Days, to find the number of
the Days from the Epoch, and the value of the whole Months being deducted from
the Sum of the Days, the rest serves to find the Moon's distance from the Sun.

In the 638th Year of Jesus Christ, the Aequinoxial new Moon happened the 21st
of March at three a Clock in the Morning at Siam, when the Sun by its middle
Motion ran through the first degree of Aries, the Sun's Apogaeum being in the
20th Degree of Gemini, and the Moon's in the 21st Degree of Capricorn. This Day
was likewise remarkable for a great Eclipse of the Sun, which happened the same
day, but 14. Hours after the mean Conjunction.

Fifthly, By the manner of finding the day of the week, which is here observed,
it appears that the day of the Epoch, was a Saturday; and the 21st of March,
in the Year 638 was also a Saturday. This likewise confirms the certainty of
this Epoch, and demonstrates the Knowledge and Judgment of those that have
established it, who contented not themselves with a Civil Epoch, as other
Astronomers have done: but who have chosen an Astronomical one, which was the
Natural Principle of several Revolutions, which could not begin again, till
after several Ages. This Epoch is 5 Years and 278 Days distant from the
Persian Epoch of Jesdegerdes, the first year of which began on the 16th of
June, in the Year of Jesus Christ, 632. Yet these Indian Rules are not taken
from the Persian Tables related by Crisococa; for these Tables do make the
Sun's Apogaeum two degrees more backward, and the Moon's Apogaeum above six
degrees forwarder; which agrees not so exactly with our modern Tables. The
Persian Tables do also make the Sun's Aequation 12 Minutes less, and that of
the Moon 4 Minutes greater; which agrees better with the Moderns.

These Indian Rules are not drawn neither from the Tables of Ptolomy, where the
Sun's Apogaeum is fixed to the 5th degree and a half of Gemini; nor from the
other Tables since made, which have all this moveable Apogaeum. It seems
therefore that they have been invented by the Indians; or that perhaps they
have been taken from the Chinese Astronomy, as may be conjectured from this,
that in this extract the Numbers are written from the top downwards, after the
manner of the Chinese: but it may be that this way of writing the numbers
might be common to these two Nations.

Having found the Astronomical Epoch of this method, and the Relation it has
with the Julian years; we may rectify the Epocha's of the motions of the Sun
and Moon by the modern Tables, by adding about a Minute a Year to the Sun's
Apogaeum, and by correcting the other Periods. Thus there will be no
difficulty, to reduce the Years and Months since the Epoch into days; and if
the Equations are likewise corrected conformably to the modern Tables, we shall
by the same Method, find the place of the Sun and Moon with a great deal more
exactness. We will give this Correction, with the Supplement of what is wanting
in these Rules, after that we have explained them.

Rules to find the place of the Sun and Moon at the time of any Person's Birth.
I.
1st. SET down the Era.

Era in this place is the number of the years since the Astronomical Epoch
from whence is taken the motion of the Planets to the current year; which will
appear in the sequel.

2d. Substract the Age of the Person from the Era, you will have the Age of
the Birth.

The Age of the Person, is the number of the Years from his Birth to the Year
current, which being deducted from the Era, there remains the Age or Time of
the Birth, that is to say, the Year from the Astronomical Epoch in which the
Nativity happened.

3d. Multiply it by 12.



4th. Add hereunto the number of the Months of the year current: and for this
purpose if the year current is Attikamaat, that is to say, if it has 13 Lunar
months, you shall begin to compute with the 5th month; but if it is not
Attikamaat, you shall begin to compute with the 6th month.

Attikamaat, of 13 lunar months. For that they begin to compute the months, not
with the first month of the year, but with the fifth, if it is Leap-year, and
with the sixth if it is not: I have inferred that there are two Epocha's, and
two forms of different Years, the one Astronomical and the other Civil: that
the first Month of the Astronomical Year begins in the fifth Month of the Civil
Leap-year, which would be the sixth Month without the intercalation of the
Leap-month, which is not reckoned amongst the 12 Months, and which is supposed
to be inserted before; and that in the other Years, all the Months of which are
successively computed without Intercalation, the first Month of the
Astronomical Year, is computed only from the sixth Month of the Civil Year.

But as it is not expressly determined here, whether one ought to begin to
compute an entire month at the beginning or end of the 5th or 6th month, it may
be that for the first month of the Astronomical Year they take, that which ends
at the beginning of the months whereof it is discoursed in this Article. In
this case, the Interval between the beginning of the Civil Year, and the
beginning of the Astronomical Year, would be only of 3 or 4 entire months:
whereas if an entire month is reckoned only at the end of the 5th or of the 6th
month, and that the first month which is reckoned, according to this Rule, be
the first of the Astronomical Year; the interval between the beginnings of
these two sorts of years, will be 4 or 5 whole months. We shall see in sequel,
that the Indians have diverse sorts of Astronomical Years, the beginnings of
which are different, and are not much distant from the Vernal Aequinox; whereas
the Civil Year must begin before the Winter Solstice, sometimes in the month of
November, sometimes in the month of December of the Gregorian Year.

They add the number of the months of the current year, which are lunar months,
to those that they have found by the third Article, which are solar months; and
they suppose that the sum, as heterogeneous as it is, should be equal to the
number of the solar months elapsed from the Astronomical Epoch. They neglect
the difference that there may be, which in a year cannot amount to an entire
month: but they might be deceived a month in the succession of the years, if
they took not good heed to the Intercalations of the months, after which the
number of the months which are computed in the Civil Year, is lesser than that
which they would reckon without the precedent Intercalations.

5th. Multiply by 7 the number found Art. 4.

6th. Divide the sum by 228.

7th. Join the quotient of the division to the number found Art. 4. This will
give you the Maasaken (that is to say, the number of the months) which you
shall keep.

Epoch, discoursed of in the 1st. Article, to the beginning of the current
month: which is performed by reducing the solar months, which are supposed to
have been found above, into lunar months, by the means of the difference, which
is between the one and the other. In the operations which are made, is is
supposed that as 228 is to 7, so the number of the solar months given, is to
the difference which the number of the lunary months surpasses the number given
of the solar months elapsed, during the same space of time; that thus in 228
solar months, which do make 19 years, there are 228 lunary months, and 7 months
more, that is to say 235 lunary months. This therefore is a Period like to that
of Numa and Meto, and to our Cycle of the golden number of 19 years, during
which the Moon rejoined it self 235 times to the Sun.

Yet in the sequel we shall see, that these Periods which accord together in
the number of the lunar months and solar years, agree not in the number of the
hours, by reason of the greatness of the solar year and of the lunar month,
which is supposed various in these several Periods: and that the Indian is not
subject to a fault so great, as the ancient Cycle of the Golden Number, which
they have been obliged to expunge out of the Roman Calendar, in the Gregorian
correction, because it gave the new Moons later than they are, almost a day in
312 years; whereas the New Moons determined by this Indian Period, agree with
the true in this interval of time to near an hour, as will be found by
comparing these Rules with the following.

II.
1. Set down the Maasaken.

2. Multiply it by 30.

3. Join thereunto the days of the current Month.



4. Multiply the whole by 11.

5. Add thereunto also the number of 650.

Epoch, since that an eleventh part of the natural day, and an eleventh of the
artificial had began together under the meridian of the Indies, to which these
Rules are accommodated.

6. Divide the whole by 703.

7. Keep the Numerator which you shall call Anamaan.

8. Take the quotient of the Fraction found Art. 6. and substract it from the
number found Art. 3. The remainder will be the Horoconne (that is to say, the
number of the days of the Era) which you shall keep.



One may find the greatness of the Lunar Month, which results from this
Hyphothesis: for if 703 Artificial Days do give an excess of 11 Days; 30 of
these Days which do make a Lunar Month, do give an excess of 330/703 in the
Day; and as 703 is to 330, so 24 Hours are to 11 Hours, 15 Minutes, 57 Seconds;
and deducting this Overplus from 30 Days, there remains 29 Days, 12 Hours, 44
Minutes, 3 Seconds for the Lunar Month, which agrees within a Second to the
Lunar Month determined by our Astronomers.

As to the value of 59 Days and 1/11 which is added before the Division, it
appears that if 703 Days do give 11 to substract, 59 Days and 1/11 do give
650/703 in the Day, which do make 22 Hours, 11 Minutes and a half, by which the
end of the Artificial Day, must arrive before the end of the Natural Day, which
is taken for the Epoch.

The Anamaan is the number of the 703 parts of the Day, which remain from the
end of the Artificial Day, to the end of the current Natural Day. Use is made
hereof in the sequel to calculate the motion of the Moon, as shall be
afterward explained.

The Quotient which is taken from the number of the Days found by the third
Art. is the difference of the entire Days, which is found between the number of
the Artificial Days, and the number of the Natural Days from the Epoch.

The Horoconne is the number of the Natural Days elapsed from the Astronomical
Epoch to the current Day. It should seem that in rigor the Addition of the
Days of the current Month, prescribed by the third Article, should not be made
till after the Multiplication and Division, which serves to find the difference
of the Artificial Days from the Natural, because that the Days of the Current
Month are Natural, and not Artificial of 30 per mensem: but by the sequel it
appears that this is done more exactly to have the Anamaam which serves for the
calculation of the motion of the Moon.

III.
1. Set down the Horoconne.

2. Divide it by 7.

3. The Numerator of the Fraction is the day of the Week.

Note, That the first day of the Week is Sunday.

Sunday; and if nothing remains, it will be a Saturday: the Astronomical Epoch
of the Horoconne is therefore a Saturday.

If it be known likewise what day of the Week is the day current, it will be
seen whether the Precedent Operations have been well made.

IV.
1 Set down the Horoconne.

2. Multiply it by 800.

3. Substract it by 373.

4. Divide it by 292207.

5. The Quotient will be the Era, and the Numerator of the Fraction will be
the Krommethiapponne, which you shall keep.

Epocha's, or from some correction, seeing that it is always the same number
that is subtracted. The Epoch of this fourth Section may therefore be 11
hours and 11 minutes after the former.

The Era will be a number of Periods of Days from this new Epoch, 800 of
which will make 292207. The Question is to know what these Periods will be? 800
Gregorian Years, which very nearly approach as many Tropical Solar Years, do
make 292194 Days. If then we suppose that the Era be the number of the
Tropical Solar Years from the Epoch, 800 of these Years will be 13 Days too
long, according to the Gregorian correction.

But if we suppose that they are Anomalous Years, during which the Sun returns
to his Apogaeum, or Astral Years during which the Sun returns to the same fixed
Star; there will be almost no error: for in 13 Days, which is the overplus of
800 of these Periods above 800 Gregorian Years, the Sun by its middle motion
makes 12d. 48. 48. which the Apogaeum of the Sun does in 800 Years by reason of
57. 39. per annum. Albategnius makes the Annual motion of the Sun's Apogeum 59.
4. and that of the fixed Stars 54. 34. and there are some modern Astronomers
which do make this annual motion of the Sun's Apogaeum 57. and that of the
fixed Stars 51; Therefore if what is here called Era, is the number of the
Anomalous or Astral Years: these Years will be almost conformable to those
which are established by the ancient and modern Astronomers. Nevertheless it
appears by the following Rules, that they use this form of Year as if it were
Tropical, during which the Sun returns to the same place of the Zodiac, and
that it is not distinguished from the other two sorts of Years.

The Krommethiapponne which remains after the preceding Division, that is to
say, after having taken all the entire Years from the Epoch, will therefore be
the 800 parts of the Day, which remain after the Sun's return to the same place
of the Zodiac: and it appears by the following Operations that this place was
the beginning of Aries. Thus according to this Hypothesis the Vernal middle
Aequinox will happen 11 Hours 11 after the Epoch of the preceding Section.

V.
1. Set down the Krommethiapponne.

2. Substract from it the Era.

3. Divide the ramainder by 2.

4. Neglecting the Fraction, substract 2 from the Quotient.

5. Divide the remainder by 7. the Fraction will give you the day of the Week.

Note, That when I shall say the Fraction, I mean only of the Numerator.

Horoconne, after a very easy manner, it is needless to stay on this which is
longer and more compounded.

VI.
1. Horoconne.

2. Substract from it 621.

3. Divide the remainder by 3232. The Fraction is called Outhiapponne, which
you shall keep.

Horoconne, what number soever the Horoconne contains, denotes an Epoch, which
is 621 days after the Epoch of the Horoconne.

The number 3232 must be the number of Days, which the Moon's Apogaeum employs
in running through the Circle of the Zodiac: 3232 Days do make 8 Julian Years
and 310 Days. During that time this Apogaeum finishes a Revolution after the
rate of 6. 41. which it performs in a Day, even according to the Astronomers of
Europe. The Apogaeum of the Moon does consequently finish its Revolution 621
days after the Epoch of the Horoconne. It Is here performed then; as 3232 days
are to a Revolution of the Apogaeum, so the number of the days is to the number
of the Revolutions of the Apogaeum. They keep the remainder which is the number
of the days called Outhiapponne. The Outhiapponne will therefore be the number
of the days elapsed from the return of the Moon's Apogaeum to the beginning of
the Zodiac; which will more evidently appear in the sequel.

If you would have the day of the Week by the Outhiapponne, take the Quotient
of the aforesaid Division; multiply it by 5, then join it to the Outhiapponne,
then substract thence two days, divide it by 7, the Fraction will show the day.

Whatever is before is called Poulasouriat, as if one should say the Force of
the Sun.



Notwithstanding the name of the Sun's Force which is here given to the
precedent Operations, it is certain that what has hitherto been explained,
belongs not only to the Sun, but likewise to the Moon.

VII.
1. Set down the Krommethiapponne.

2. Divide it by 24350.

3. Keep the quotient, which will be the Raasi, that is to say, the Sign where
the Sun will be.

Krommethiapponne are the 800 parts of the day which remains after the Sun's
return to the same place of the Zodiac, and that the solar year contains 292207
of these parts, as has been declared in the explication of the fourth Section.
The twelfth part of a year will therefore contain 24350 and 7/121 of these 800
parts: wherefore the number 24350 denotes the twelfth part of a solar year,
during which the Sun by its middle motion makes a Sign.

Seeing then that 234 350/800 of a day do give a Sign, the Krommethiapponne
divided by 24350 will give to the Quotient the Signs which the Sun has run
since his return by his middle motion to the same place; The Raasi then is the
number of the Signs, run through by the middle motion of the Sun. They here
neglect the Fraction 7/12, so that the solar year remains here of 292 200/800,
that is to say, of 365 days, like the Julian year.

4. Lay down the Fractien of the aforesaid Division, and divide it by 811.

5. The Quotient of the Division will be the Ongsaa, that is to say, the degree
wherein the Sun will be.



6. Set down the Fraction of this last Division, and divide it by 14.

7. The Quotient will be the Libedaa, that is to say the Minute.

8. Substract 3 from the Libedaa.

9. Place what belongs to the Libedaa, underneath the Ongsaa, and the Ongsaa
underneath the Raasi: This will make a Figure which shall be called the
Mattejomme of the Sun, which you shall keep. I suppose it is locus medius Solis.



It is here prescribed to put the Degrees under the Signs, and the Minutes
under the Degrees in this manner.

Raasi, Signs. Ongsaa, Degrees. Libedaa, Minutes.
This Disposition of the Signs, Degrees, and Minutes one under the other is
called a Figure, and it here denotes the middle place of the Sun.

VIII.
To find the true place of the Sun.

1. Set down the Mattejomme of the Sun, that is to say, the figure which
comprehends what is in the Raasi, Ongsaa, and Libedaa.

2. Substract 2 from the Raasi. But if this cannot be, add 12 to the Raasi, to
be able to do it, then do it.

3. Substract 20 from the Ongsaa. But if this cannot be, deduct 1 from the
Raasi, which will amount to 30 in the Ongsaa, then you shall deduct the
aforesaid 20.

Raasi in the second Article, and the number 20 in the third Article, are 2
Signs and 20 degrees, which doubtless denotes the place of the Suns Apogaeum
according to this Hypothesis; in which there is not seen any number which
answers to the motion of the Apogaeum. It appears then that this Apogaeum is
supposed fixed to the 20th degree of Gemini, which precedes the true place of
the Apogaeum, as it is at present 17 degrees, which this Apogaeum performs not
in less than 1000 years, or thereabouts: From whence it may be judged that the
Epoch of this method is about a thousand years before the present age. But as
the greatness of the year agrees better here with the Suns return to the
Apogaeum and the fixed Stars, than with the Suns return to the Equinoxes; it
may be that the beginning of the Signs here used, is not at present in the
Equinoxial point, but that it is advanced 17 or 18 degrees, and so it will be
necessary to be corrected by the Anticipation of the Equinoxes. Here then they
substract the Suns Apogaeum from its middle place called Mattejomme, to have
the Suns Anomalia: and the number of the Signs of this Anomalia is that which
they call Kenne.

4. What will afterward remain, shall be called Kenne.

5. If the Kenne is 0, 1, or 2, multiply it by 2, you will have the Kanne.

6. If the Kenne is 3, 4, or 5; you shall substract the figure from this figure
5 29 60
which is called Attathiat, and amounts to 6 Signs.

7. If the Kenne is 6, 7, 8; substract 6 from the Raasi, the remainder will be
the Kanne.

8. If the Kenne is 9, 10, 11; substract the figure from this figure 11 29 60
which is called Touataasamounetonne, and amounts to 12 Signs: the remainder in
the Raasi will be the Kanne.

9. If you can deduct 15 from the Ongsaa, add 1 to the Kanne, if you cannot,
add nothing.

10. Multiply the Ongsaa by 60.

11. Add thereunto the Libedaa, this will be the Pouchalit, which you shall
keep.

12. Consider the Kanne. If the Kanne is 0, take the first number of the
Chaajaa of the Sun, which is 35; and multiply it by the Pouchalit.

13. If the Kanne is some other number, take according to the number, the
number of the Chajaa aattit, and substract it from the number underneath. Then
what shall remain in the lower number, multiply by it the Pouchalit. As for
example, if the Kanne is 1, substract 35 from 67, and by the rest multiply. If
the Kanne is 2, substract 67 from 94, and by the rest multiply the Pouchalit.

14. Divide the Sum of the Pouchalit multiplied by 900.

15. Add the Quotient to the superior number of the Chajaa, which you have made
use of.

16. Divide the Sum by 60.

17. The Quotient will be Ongsaa, the Fraction will be the Libedaa. Put an 0 in
the place of the Raasi.

18. Set the figure found by the preceding Article over against the Mattejomme
of the Sun.

19. Consider the Ken aforesaid. If the Ken is 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; It is called
Ken substracting: Thus you shall substract the figure found in the 17 Article
from the Mattejomme of the Sun.

20. If the Ken is 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, it is called Ken additional: So you
shall join the said figure to the Mattejomme of the Sun: which will give out at
last the Sommepont of the Sun, which you shall precisely keep.

Kanne is the number of the half-signs of the distance of the Apogaeum or
Perigaeum, taken according to the succession of the Signs, according as the Sun
is nearer one term than the other: So that in the 5th Article is taken the
distance of the Apogaeum according to the succession of the Signs; in Article
6th the distance of the Perigaeum, against the succession of the Signs: in
Article 7th the distance of the Perigaeum according to the succession of the
Signs; and in Article 8th the distance of the Apogaeum, contrary to the
succession of the Signs. In the 6th, 7th, and 8th Articles it seems, that it
must always be understood. Multiply the Raasi by 2, as it appears in the sequel.

In the 6th Article when the degrees of the Anomalia exceed 15, they add 1 to
the Kanne; because that the Kanne, which is a half Sign, amounts to 15 degrees.

The degrees and minutes of the Kanne are here reduced into minutes, the number
of which is called the Pouchalit.

It appears by these Operations, that the Chaajaa is the Aequation of the Sun
calculated from 15 to 15 degrees, the first number of which is 35, the second
67, the third 94; and that they are minutes, which are to one another as the
Sinus of 15, 30, and 45 degrees from whence It follows that the Equation of 60,
75, and 90 degrees are, 116, 129, 134. 35 67 94 116 129 134
which are set apart in this form, and do answer in order to the number of the
Kanne, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

As for the other degrees they take the proportional part of the difference of
one number to the other, which answers to 15 degrees, which do make 900
minutes, making: as 900, to the difference of two Equations; so the minutes
which are in the overplus of the Kanne, to the proportional part of the
Equation, which it is necessary to add to the minutes which answer to the Kanne
to make the total Equation. They reduce these minutes of the Equation into
degrees and minutes, dividing them by 60. The greatest Equation of the Sun is
here of 2 degrees, 12 min. The Alphonsine Tables do make it 2 degrees, 10
minutes: We find it of 1 degree, 57 minutes. They apply the Equation to the
middle place of the Sun, to have its true place which is called Sommepont.

19. This Equation, conformably to the rule of our Astronomers in the first
demi-circle of the Anomalia, is substractive; and in the second demi-circle,
additional. Here they perform the Arithmetical operations placing one under the
other, what we place side-ways; and on the contrary, placing side-ways, what we
place one under the other. As for Example: The Mattejomme, The Chayaa, The
Sommepont, Raasi, 8 0 8 Signs. Ongsaa, 25 2 27 Degrees. Libedaa, 40 4 44
Minutes. Middle Place. Equation. True Place.

IX.
1. Set down the Sommepont of the Sun.

2. Multiply by 30 what is in the Raagi.

3. Add thereto what is in the Ongsaa.

4. Multiply the whole by 60.

5. Add thereunto what is in the Libedaa.

6. Divide the whole by 800, the Quotient will be the Reuc of the Sun.

7. Divide the remaining Fraction by 13, the Quotient will be the Naati reuc,
which you shall keep underneath the Reuc.

Indians divide the Zodiac into 27 equal parts, which are each of 13 degrees,
40 minutes. For by the six first Operations the signs are reduced into degrees,
and the minutes of the true place of the Sun into minutes; and in dividing them
afterward by 800, they are reduced into 27 parts of a Circle; for 800 minutes
are the 27th part of 21600 minutes which are in the Circle, the number of the
27 parts of the Zodiac are therefore called Reuc, each of which consists of
800 minutes, that is to say, of 13 degrees, 40 minutes. This division is
grounded upon the diurnal motion of the Moon, which is about 13 Degrees, 40
Minutes; as the division of the Zodiac unto 360 Degrees has for foundation the
diurnal motion of the Sun in the Zodiac, which is near a Degree.

The 60 of these parts is 13, as it appears in dividing 800 by 60, wherefore
they divide the Remainder by 13, neglecting the fraction, to have what is here
called Nati-reuc, which are the Minutes or 60 parts of a Reuc.

X.
For the Moon. To find the Mattejomme of the Moon.

1. Set down the Anamaan.

2. Divide it by 25.

3. Neglect the Fraction, and join the Quotient with the Anamaan.

4. Divide the whole by 60, the Quotient will be Ongsaa, the Fraction will be
Libedaa, and you shall put an 0 to the Raasi.

Anamaan is the number of the 703 parts of the day, which remain from the end
of the Artificial day to the end of the Natural day. Although according to this
rule, the Anamaan can never amount to 703; yet if 703 be set down for the
Anamaan, and it be divided by 25, according to the 2d Article, they have 28
3/25 for the Quotient. Adding 28 to 703, according to the third Article, the
sum 731 will be a number of minutes of a degree. Dividing 731 by 60, according
to the fourth Article, the Quotient which is 12d. 11, is the middle diurnal
motion, by which the Moon removes from the Sun.

From what has been said in the II Section, it results that in 30 days the
Anamaan augments 330. Dividing 330 by 25, there is in the Quotient 13. Adding
this Quotient to the Anamaan, the sum is 343, that is to say, 5d. 43. which
the Moon removes from the Sun in 30 days, besides the entire Circle.

The European Tables do make the diurnal motion of 12d. 11. and middle motion
in 30 days, of 5d. 43, 21, besides the entire Circle.

5. Set down as many days as you have before put to the month current. Sect.
II. n. 3.

6. Multiply this number by 12.

7. Divide the whole by 30 the Quotient, put it to the Raasi of the preceding
figure which has an 0 at the Raasi, and join the fraction to the Ongsaa of the
figure.

8. Join this whole figure to the Mattejomme of the Sun.

9. Substract 40 from the Libedaa. But if this cannot be, you may deduct 1 from
the Ongsaa, which will be 60 Libedaa.

10. What shall remain in the figure is the Mattejomme of the Moon sought.

Anamaan, they seek the signs and degrees which agree to the Artificial days of
the current month. For to multiply them by 12, and to divide them by 30, is the
same thing as to say, If thirty Artificial days do give 12 Signs, what will the
Artificial days of the current month give? they will have the Signs in the
Quotient. The Fractions are the 30ths of a Sign, that is to say, of the
degrees. They join them therefore to the degrees found by the Anamaan, which is
the surplusage of the Natural days above the Artificial.

The Figure here treated of is the Moons distance from the Sun, after they have
deducted 40 minutes, which is either a Correction made to the Epoch, or the
reduction of one Meridian to another: as shall be explained in the sequel. This
distance of the Moon from the Sun being added to the middle place of the Sun,
gives the middle-place of the Moon.

XI.
1. Set down the Outhiapponne.

2. Multiply by 3.

3. Divide by 808.

4. Put the Quotient to the Raasi.

5. Multiply the fraction by 30.

6. Divide it by 808, the Quotient will be Ongsaa.

7. Take the remaining fraction, and multiply it by 60.

8. Divide the sum by 808, the Quotient will be Libedaa.

9. Add 2 to the Libedaa; the Raasi, the Ongsaa, and the Libedaa will be the
Mattejomme of Louthia, which you shall keep.

Outhiapponne is the number of the Days after the return of the Moon's
Apogaeum, which is performed in 3232 Days: 808 Days are therefore the fourth
part of the time of the Revolution of the Moon's Apogaeum, during which it
makes 3 Signs, which are the fourth part of the Circle.

By these Operations therefore they find the motion of the Moon's Apogaeum,
making as 808 Days are to 3 Signs; so the time passed from the return of the
Moon's Apogaeum is to the motion of the same Apogaeum during this time. It
appears by the following Operation that this motion is taken from the same
Principle of the Zodiac, from whence the motion of the Sun is taken.

The Mattejomme of Louthia, is the Place of the Moon's Apogaeum.

XII.
For the Sommepont of the Moon.

1. Set down the Mattejomme of the Moon.

2. Over against it set the Mattejomme of Louthia.

3. Substract the Mattejomme of Louthia from the Mattejomme of the Moon.

4. What remains in the Raasi will be the Kenne.

5. If the Kenne is 0, 1, 2, multiply it by 2, and it will be the Kanne.

6. If the Ken is 3, 4, 5, substract it from this figure, 5 29 60


7. If the Ken is 6, 7, 8, substract from it 6.

8. If the Ken is 9, 10, 11, substract it from this figure 11 29 60


9. If the Kenne is 1 or 2, multiply it by 2; this will be the Kanne.

10. Deduct 15 from the Ongsaa, if possible; you shall add 1 to the Raasi; if
not, you shall not do it.

11. Multiply the Ongsaa by 60, and add thereunto the Libedaa, and it will be
the Pouchalit, that you shall keep.

12. Take into the Moons Chajaa the number conformable to the Kanne, as it has
been said of the Sun; substract the upper number from the lower.

13. Take the remainder, and therewith multiply the Pouchalit.

14. Divide this by 900.

15. Add this Quotient to the upper number of the Moons Chajaa.

16. Divide this by 60, the Quotient will be Ongsaa, the Fraction Libedaa, and
an 0 for the Raasi.

17. Opposite to this figure set the Mattejomme of the Moon.

18. Consider the Ken. If the Ken is 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, substract the figure of
the Moons Mattejomme; if the Ken is 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, join the two figures
together, and you will have the Sommepont of the Moon, which you shall keep.



The difference in the Chajaa of the Moon, discoursed of in the 14th and 15th
Article. This Chajaa consists in these numbers.

77 148 209 256 286 296
The greatest Equation of the Moon is therefore of 4 degrees 56 minutes, as
some Modern Astronomers do make it, though the generality do make it of 5
degrees in the Conjunctions and Oppositions.

XIII.
Set down the Sommepont of the Moon, and operating as you have done in the
Sommepont of the Sun, you will find the Reuc and Nattireuc of the Moon.

Zodiac.

XIV.
1. Set down the Sommepont of the Moon.

2. Over against it set the Sommepont of the Sun.

3. Substract the Sommepont of the Sun from the Sommepont of the Moon, and the
Pianne will remain, which you shall keep.

Pianne is therefore the Moon's distance from the Sun.

XV.
1. Take the Pianne and set it down.

2. Multiply the Raasi by 30, add the Ongsaa thereunto.

3. Multiply the whole by 60, and thereunto add the Libedaa.

4. Divide the whole by 720, the Quotient is called Itti, which you shall keep.

5. Divide the Fraction by 12, the Quoent will be Natti itti.

The end of the Souriat.

Zodiac, which do each consist of 12 degrees, and are called itti; dividing
the remainder by 12, they have the minutes, or sixtieth parts of an itti, which
do each consist of 12 minutes of degrees, which the Moon removes from the Sun
in the sixtieth part of a day; these sixtieth parts are called natti itti.

Reflections upon the Indian Rules.
I. Of the particular Epocha's of the Indian Method.
HAving explained the Rules comprised in the preceding Sections, and found our
several Periods of Years, Months, and Days, which they suppose: It remains to
us particularly to explain diverse particular Epocha's, which we have found in
the numbers employed in this Method, which being compared together may serve to
determine the Year, the Month, the Day, the Hour, and the Meridian of the
Astronomical Epoch, which is not spoken of in the Indian Rules, which suppose
it known.

By the Rules of the I. Section, is sought the number of the Lunary Months
elapsed from the Astronomical Epoch. The Epoch which they suppose in this
Section is therefore that of the Lunar Months; and consequently it must be at
the Hour of the middle Conjunction from whence begins the Month wherein the
Epoch is.

By the Rules of the II. Section, they first reduce the Lunar Months elapsed
from the Epoch into Artificial Days of 30 per mensem, which are shorter than
the Natural Days, from one Noon to the other, by 11/703 a Day, that is to say
by 22 Minutes 32 Seconds of an Hour. These Artificial Days have therefore their
beginning at the new Moons, and at every thirtieth part of the Lunar Month; but
the Natural Days do always begin naturally at Midnight under the same Meridian.
The Term of the Artificial Days agrees not then with the Term of the Natural
Days, in the same Hour and same Minute, unless when the Month, or one of the 30
parts of the Month, begins at Midnight under the Meridian given at the choice
of the Astronomer. After this common beginning the end of the Artificial Day,
prevents the end of the Natural Day under the same Meridian 11/703 a Day, in
which does then consist the Anamaan, which always augments one 703d of a Day to
every eleventh part of the Day, until that the number of the 703 parts, amounts
to 703, or surpasses this number; for then they take 703 of these parts for a
Day, whereby the number of the Artificial Days surpasses the number of the
Natural Days, elapsed since the Epoch; and the remainder, if there is any, is
the Anamaan. The day of this meeting or concourse of the term of the Artificial
days with the term of the Natural Days under the Meridian which is chosen, is
always a new Epoch of the Anamaan, which is reduced to nothing, or to less
than 11, after having attained this number 703; which arrives only at every
Period of 64 Days, as it appears in dividing 703 by 11, and more exactly eleven
times in 703 Days. At every time given for the Epoch of the Anamaan they then
take the Day of the preceding rencounter of the beginning of the Artificial
Days with the beginning of the Natural Days, which under the same Meridian
happens only five or six times in a Year.

Seeing then that in the fifth Article of the II. Section, they add 650
elevenths of a Day to those which are elapsed from the Epoch of the I.
Section, they suppose that this Epoch was proceeded from another Epoch which
could only be that of the Anamaan, of 650 elevenths of a Day; that is to say of
59 Days 1/11^, which do give 650/703 of a Day for the Anamaan, under the
Meridian of the East Indies, to which the Rules of this II. Section are
accommodated; which shows that under this Meridian the middle Conjunction which
gave beginning to the Artificial Day since the Astronomical Epoch, was 650/703
of a Day before the end of the Natural Day in which this conjunction happened;
And consequently that it happened at one a Clock 49 Minutes in the morning,
under the Meridian which is supposed in the same Section: but in the 9th
Article of the 10th Section, they deduct 40 Minutes from the motion of the
Moon; and in the 8th Article of the 7th Section, they deduct 3 minutes from the
motion of the Sun: which removes the Moon 37 minutes from the Sun, at the hour
that they suppose the middle Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun, in the II.
Section.

Wherefore I have judged that the 40 minutes taken from the motion of the Moon,
and the 3 minutes taken from the motion of the Sun, do result from some
difference between the meridian to which these Rules were accommodated at the
beginning, and of another meridian to which they have since reduced them: so
that under the meridian supposed in the II. Section, the new Moon in the Epoch
arrived at one a Clock 49 minutes in the morning; but under the meridian which
is supposed in the 9th Article of the X. Section, at the same hour of I. and 49
minutes after midnight, the Moon was distant from the Sun 37 minutes, which it
makes in an hour 13 minutes; therefore under the Meridian supposed in the 9th
Article of the X. Section, the new Moon could not arrive till 3 a Clock 2
minutes after midnight. The meridian to which these Rules have been reduced,
would therefore be more oriental than the meridian chosen at the beginning by 1
hour 13 minutes, that is to say, 18 degrees and a quarter; and having supposed
that they have reduced them to the meridian of Siam, they would be accommodated
from the beginning, almost, to the meridian of Narsinga.

What more convinces that this substraction of 40 minutes from the motion of
the Moon, and of three minutes from the motion of the Sun, is caused from the
difference of the meridians of 1 hour 13 minutes, is that in 1 hour 13 minutes
the Moon makes 40 minutes, and the Sun 3. It Is therefore by the same difference
of 1 hour 13 minutes, that they have deducted 3 minutes from the motion of the
Sun, and 40 minutes from the motion of the Moon.

Without this correspondence of what they have deducted from the motion of the
Sun, with what they have taken from the motion of the Moon, which appears to
have for foundation the same difference of time, and consequently the same
difference of meridians, one might have reason to believe that the substraction
of these 40 minutes has been made a long time after these first rules; because
that it is perceived in process of time, that the motion of the Moon was not
exactly so quick, as it results from the preceding Rules, which do make the
lunar month about three quarters of a second shorter than the modern Tables;
and this difference amounts to 1 hour and 13 minutes in 450 years, or
thereabouts. Thus, if 450 years after the Epoch they had compared the first
rules to the observations, one might have judged that the Moon retarded, in
respect of these first rules, 1 hour and 13 minutes, or 40 minutes of a degree.
But this difference, which is always the same, when attributed to the
difference of the meridians, would not be always the same if it depended on the
motion of the Moon, for it would augment one minute to 12 years; to which
'twould be necessary to have regard in the Correction of these Rules.

II. The Determination of the Astronomical Epoch of the Indian Method.
SEeing that these Indian Rules have been brought from Siam, and that the Civil
year of the Siameses begins in the season that we think it ought to begin
according to the Rules of the I. Section, as we shall show in the sequel, it is
reasonable to suppose that the meridian to which these Rules have been reduced
by the additions mentioned in the VII. and X. Sections, is the meridian of
Siam: therefore by the calculation which we have made, the new Moon which they
have taken for the Epoch, must happen at 3 a Clock in the Morning at Siam. As
the lunar month of this method agrees to near a Second with the lunary month
established by all the European Astronomers, it may be supposed that this hour
of the new Moon of the Epoch is very precise, since it may have been deduced
from the Observations of the Eclipses of the Moon, which are much more easy to
determine than all the other Phenomenon of the Planets. We may therefore make
use of the common Tables to seek the new Moons which happened about the seventh
Age at three in the morning in the meridian of Siam, the difference of which
from the meridian of Paris is very exactly known to us by several observations
of the Eclipses of the Moon, and the Satellites of Jupiter, which the Jesuits
sent by the King into the East in quality of his Majesty's Mathematicians have
made at Siam, and by the Observations of the same Eclipses made at the same
time at Paris in the Royal Observatory; by the Comparison of which Observations
it is found that the difference of the meridians of these two Cities is 6 hours
34 minutes.

To this Character of time we might add the Circumstance of the middle Aequinox
of the Spring, which according to the Hypothesis of the IV. Section, must
happen at 11 hours 11 minutes after the midnight which followed the middle
Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun taken for the Epoch, according to what
has been said on the 5th Article of the IV. Section, where they deduct 373/800
of a day, that is to say, 11 hours and 11 minutes from the days elapsed since
the Epoch, which distinguishes as much as the Krommethiapponne, which we have
declared to be the time elapsed from the Suns return to the the point of the
Zodiac, from whence is taken the motion of the Sun and Moon, which must be the
Aequinoxial point of the Spring.

But it must not be pretended that the modern Tables do give the very hour of
this Aequinox: for they do not exactly agree together in the Aequinoxes, by
reason of the great difficulty which is found to determine them precisely. They
agree not with the ancient Tables of Ptolomy in the middle Aequinoxes, to near
3 or 4 days: wherefore it is sufficient that we found by the modern Tables a
new Moon to happen at Siam at 3 a Clock in the morning, within a day or two of
the middle Aequinox of the Spring found by the modern Tables.

The place of the Suns Apogaeum, which according to what we have drawn from the
Rules of the 2d and 3d Articles of the VIII. Section, was at the time of the
Astronomical Epoch in the 20th degree of the sign Gemini, denotes the Age
wherein it is necessary to seek this new Aequinoxial Moon, which according to
the modern Tables, was about the seventh after the Nativity of Jesus Christ.

It is true that as these Rules give not motion to the Sun's Apogaeum, it may
be doubted, whether it was not in this degree at the time of the Epoch, or at
the time of the Observations upon which these Rules have been made. But the Age
of this Epoch is likewise determined by another Character joined to the
former: It Is the place of the Moon's Apogaeum, which according to what we have
drawn from the 2d and 3d Articles of the VI. Section, was at the time of the
Epoch in the 20th degree of Capricorn, and to which these Rules do give a
motion conformable to that which our Tables do give it; although they agree not
together in the Epoches of the Apogaea, but to one or two degrees.

In fine, the day of the Week must be a Saturday in the Epoch, seeing that
according to the 3d Section, the first day after the Epoch was a Sunday; and
this circumstance joined to what has been said, that the same day was near the
Equinox, gives the last determination to the Epoch.

We have therefore sought a new Equinoxial Moon, to which all these Characters
do agree; and we have found that they agree to the New Moon, which happened in
the 638th year after the Birth of Jesus Christ, on the 21 of March, according
to the Julian form, on Saturday at 3 a Clock in the morning, in the Meridian of
Siam.

This middle conjunction of the Moon with the Sun, according to the Rudolphine
Tables which are now most used, happened on this day at Siam on the very same
hour, the reduction of the meridians being made according to our Observations:
And according to these Tables 'twas 16 hours after the middle Aequinox of the
Spring; the Sun's Apogaeum being at 19 degrees of Gemini; the Moon's Apogaeum
21 degrees of Capricorn; and the Node descending from the Moon at 4 degrees of
Aries: so that this Aequinoxial Conjunction had also this in particular, that
it was Ecliptic, being arrived at so little distance from one of the Nodes of
the Moon.

This Astronomical Epoch of the Indians being thus determined by so many
Characters, which cannot agree to any other time, by these Indian Rules are
found the middle Conjunctions of the Moon with the Sun about the time of this
Epoch, with as much exactness as by the modern Tables, amongst which these are
some which for this time do give the same middle distance between the Sun and
the Moon, to one or two minutes, the Reduction being made to the same meridian.

But from this Epoch, as they remove from it, the middle distances from the
Moon to the Sun found by these Rules, do by one minute in twelve years surpass
those which the modern Tables do give, as we have before remarked: from whence
it may be inferred that if these Indian Rules, at the time that they were made,
gave the middle distances from the Moon to the Sun more exact than they have
given them since, they have been made very near the time of the Epoch
established by these Rules. Yet they might be established a long time after, on
some Observations made very near the time of the Epoch, thus they would more
exactly represent these Observations than those of the other times remote from
the Epoch: as it ordinarily happens to all the Astronomical Tables, which do
more exactly represent the Observations upon which they are founded, than the
others made long before and after.

III. Of the Civil Epoch of the Siameses.
BY the Rules of the first Section I judged, that the Civil Epoch which is in
use at the East Indies, is different from the Astronomical Epoch of the Indian
method which we have explained-

I have at present new assurances by several dates of Siamese Letters, which
have been communicated to me by Mr. De La Loubere, and by other dates of the
Letters which Father Tachard published in his second Voyage, in the year 1687;
by which it appears that the Year 1687, was the 2231st from the Siamese civil
Epoch, which consequently refers to the 544th year before the Birth of Jesus
Christ; whereas by the 2d and 3d Rules of the 8th Section, and by other
Characters of this Indian method, it is evident that the Astronomical Epoch
refers to the 7th Age after the Birth of Jesus Christ.

This Civil Siamese Epoch is in the time of Pythagoras, whose dogmata were
conformable to those which the Indians have at present, and which these people
had already in the time of Alexander the Great, as Onesicritus, sent by
Alexander himself to treat with the Indian Philosophers, testified unto them,
according to the report of Strabo lib. 15.

The Letters which the Ambassadors of Siam wrote the 24th of June 1687, were
dated according to Mr. de la Loudere, in the eighth month, the first day of the
decrease of the year Pitosapsec of the Era 2231. And according to Father
Tachard, the eighth month, the second full Moon of the year Ihoh napasoc of the
Era 2231. The full Moon happened not till the day following; and the lunary
month which then ran, was the third after the Vernal Equinox; the first after
this Equinox beginning the 12th of April in the same year, therefore the first
month from the Equinox was the sixth month of the Civil year, which must begin
the 15th of November, 1686.

It appears also that the same year was Leap-year of 13 months, and that there
was one which is not put in the number of the others: for the 20th of October
in the same year they reckoned the fifteenth day of the eleventh Moon of the
year 2231, and between the full Moon of June and that of October there were 4
lunar months. Nevertheless they reckoned only three, seeing that at the full
Moon in June they reckoned the eighth month, and at that of October they
reckoned only the eleventh; there was therefore in this interval of time a
Leap-month which is not reckoned. This Intercalation is likewise found by
comparing the Letter from the Ambassadors with three of the King of Siam's
Letters, of December 22 of the year 1687, recited by Father Tachardin, page
282, 287, and 407, which are dated the 3d of the decrease of the first Moon of
the year 2231: and it appears that if the Moon of June was the eighth Moon of
the Civil year 2231, that of December was the fourteenth of the same Civil
year, which is reckoned for the first Moon of the succeeding years, tho the
year be yet named 2231, whereas according to the preceding dates, it ought to
be named 2232.

Perhaps they changed not the name of the Civil year, till it was sufficiently
advanced, and had attained the beginning of the Astronomical year: or rather
unto this time they do name it after two ways, For another date which Mr. de la
Loubere communicated unto me, is thus, the eighth of the increase of the first
Moon of the Year 223. 2. which is the eleventh of December 1687. It seems that
this manner of date denotes that the year may in this month be named either
2231, or 2232: which has relation to the form now used in the Northern
Countries, where the dates are frequently set down in two ways, viz. according
to the Julian, and according to the Gregorian Calendar; and to the ten first
days of the Gregorian year, is set a Year more than in the Julian.

By comparing the date of October 20th which supposes that the first of the
Moon was the 6th of this month (which day was also that of the new Moon) with
the other date of December the eleventh, which supposes that the first of the
Moon was the 4th of this month, there are found 59 days in two months, as the
motion of the Moon requires. According to these dates the 22d of December must
be the 19th of the Moon, that is to say, the fourth day of the decrease, which
in the King of Siam's Letters is set down the 3d of the decrease, the full of
the Moon being supposed on the 15th which should denote the Intercalation of a
daymade to the full of the Moon, unless Letters should be antedated one day, or
that there is one day wanting in the resemblance which is made thereof to our
Calendar.

Amongst the preceding dates, and some others which we have examined, there
are only those of October 20th and December 11th that agree well together, and
with the motion of the Moon, and in which they take the very day of the Moon's
Conjunction with the Sun by the first day of the month. The other dates differ
some days among them; for in those of June 24th they take for the first day of
the month a day which precedes the Conjunction; on the contrary in the dates of
December 22d they take for the first day of the month a day which follows the
Conjunction. Thus the dates which for the first day of the Month do take the
very day of the Conjunction, may be thought the most regular. We have
calculated these Conjunctions, not only by the modern Tables, but also by the
Indian Rules, after the manner as we shall herein after declare, and we have
found that they agree together in the same days of the year.

These Indian Rules may therefore serve to regulate the Calendar of the
Siameses, though they be not at present exactly observed in the dates of the
Letters, without a Calendar where the Intercalations of the months and days be
regulated according to this method, it would be impossible to make use of these
Indian Rules in the Calculation of the Planets, without committing the same
Error which would be slipped into the Calendar: unless that this Error was
known by the exact History of the Intercalations, and that regard was thereunto
had in the Calculation.

Though by the Indian Rules is sought the number of the months elapsed from one
Epoch, by the means of a Cycle of 228 solar months, supposed equal to 325
lunar months, which is equivalent to the Cycle of our golden number of nineteen
years, in the number of our solar and lunar months, which it comprehends: yet
it is seen by most of the Siamese dates which we have been able to observe,
that the first day of their month, even in this age, is hardly distant from the
day of the Moons conjunction with the Sun; and that the Calendar of the Indians
is not run into the Error into which our old Calendar was fallen, where the new
Moons were regulated by the Cycle of the golden number, which gives them more
slow than they are: so that since they have introduced this Cycle into the
Calendar (which was about the fourth Age) to the Age past, the error was
amounted to above four days. But the Indians have avoided this fault; by making
use of the Rules of the I. Section to find the number of the lunar months; and
of the Rules of the II. Section, to find the number of the days and hours which
are in this number of months; which being founded on the Hypothesis of the
greatness of the lunar months, which differs not from the real one, a second
cannot want above a day in 8000 years; whereas the Ancient Cycle of our golden
number supposes that in 235 lunar months there are the number of days and hours
which are in 19 Julian years, which do exceed 235 lunar months one hour 27; 33,
which do make 5 days in 1563 years.

It appears also that the Calendar of the Indians is very different from that
of the Chinese, who begin their year with the new Moon nearest the fifteenth
of Aquarius, according to Father Martinius; or the fifth of the same Sign,
according to Father Couplet (which happened but a month and half, before the
Vernal Equinox, and who regulate their Intercalations by a Cycle of sixty
years; which the Tunquineses do likewise, according to the report of Father
Martinius in his Relations.

IV. The Method of comparing the Siamese dates to the Indian Rules.
TO examine whether the Siamese dates agree with the Indian Rules, we have
found by these Rules the number of the months comprised in the years elapsed
from the Astronomical Epoch, and the year current, and we have thereunto added
the month of the year current, which we have begun to compute by the sixth
month of the Civil year, for the first date which was of the eighth month
before the Intercalation of a month; and for the second date which was of the
eleventh month, and after the Intercalation of a month, we have begun to
compute the months of the current year, with the fifth of the eleven months
which were then computed, which is the same month that they have reckoned for
the sixth before the Intercalation of a month, according to the Explication
which we have given to the fourth Article of the I. Section.

We have done the same thing for the following dates, having verified that it
is necessary to begin to compute from the fifth month, during the residue of
the Astronomical year, and during that which immediately follows the
Intercalacation. And having afterward calculated the number of the days
comprised in these sums of months according to the Rules of the II. Section, we
have found that the number of the days found by these Rules, agrees with the
number of the days comprehended between the Astronomical Epoch of the year
638, and the days of the Conjunctions from whence they have taken the beginning
of the months in several of these dates, and particularly in those of October
20, and of December 8, which to us have appeared the most regular.

This method, which we have used to compare the Siamese dates to the Indian
Rules, has made known to us the terms in our Calendar, between which must
happen the new Moon of the fifth month of the Civil year after the Leap-year,
or of the sixth month of the year after a common, whereby they must begin to
compute the months according to the 4th Article of the I. Section, and which
may be considered as the first new Moon of a kind of lunisolar Astronomical
year, which we have judged ought to begin after the Vernal Equinox, wherefore
it is necessary largely to give an example of this Comparison, which will
demonstrate the use of these Rules, and will serve as a demonstration of the
Explication that we have made thereof.

EXAMPLE for the I. DATE.
WE have sought what, according to the Indian Rules, ought to be the number of
the days comprised between the Astronomical Epoch, and the middle conjunction
of the eighth month of the Indian year 2231, in this form.

By the Rules of the I. Section.
FRom the Astronomical Epoch of the Julian year of Jesus Christ 638, to the
year 1687, there are 1049 years, which is the Era according to the 1st
Article; having multiplied it by 12, according to the 3d Article, there are
12588 solar months.

It is necessary to add the months of the current year, Article 4; and because
the Ambassadors computed the eighth month of the year 2231, before the
Intercalation of a month, we have begun to compute from the sixth of these
months, according to our Explication; thus to the eighth month, we shall have
three months to add to 12588, which will make the sum of 12591.

Multiplying them by 7, Article 5thly, the Product will be 88137.

Dividing it by 228, Article 6thly, the Quotient will be 386, to add to 12591,
Article 7thly; and the sum will make 12977 lunar months.

By the Rules of the II. Section.
MUltiplying this number of months by 30, Article 2d, the Product will give
389310 artificial days.

Multiplying them by 11, Article 4th, the Product will be 4282410.

Dividing this Product by 703, Article 6th, the Quotient will be 6091 437/705.

Having subtracted it from 383310 artificial days, Article 8, there remains
383218 266/703. which is the number of the natural days elapsed from the
Astronomical Epoch to the new Moon of the eighth month of the Indian year 2231.

The Fraction 266/703 being reduced, gives 9 hours 4, 34, which this
Conjunction happened later at Siam, according to these Rules, than that of the
Astronomical Epoch of the year 638.

By the means of our Calendar is found the number of the days elapsed between
the twenty first month of the Julian year 1638, and June 10th of the Gregorian
year 1687, by this Calculation.

From the year 638, which was the second after the Bissextile 636, to the year
1687, which was the third after the Bissextile 1684, there are 1049 years,
amongst which there were 262 Bissextiles, which give 262 days more than as many
common years. In 1049 common years of 365 days, there are 282925 days; and
adding thereunto 262 days for the Bissextiles, there will be 483187 days in
1049 years, as well common as Bissextile, between March 21st. of the Julian
year 638, and March 21st. of the Julian year 1687, which is March 31st. of the
Gregorian year.

From March 31. to June 10th, there are 71 days, which being added to 383147,
do give 383218 days between the 21st. of March of the Julian year 638, where is
the Indian Epoch of the new Moons, and the 10th of June of the Gregorian year
1687, the day of the new Moon of the eighth month of the Siamese year 2231.
This number of days is the same that we have found between these two new Moons,
according to the Indian Rules.

To find the same number of days by the one and the other method in the
Conjunction of October of the same year 1687, after the Intercalation, which
appears, by comparing the date of this month with that of the month of June
foregoing; it is necessary to compute 8 months, beginning with the fifth of of
the eleven which were reckoned. In the Conjunction of November are reckoned 8;
and in that of December, from whence begins the first month of the year 2232,
are computed 9, adding 8 months to those of the current year, to the new Moon
of the 31st. of March 1688, from whence began the fifth month of the year 2232.
They began to reckon from this 5th month during the whole year, which follows
the Intercalation, and which was common; and they began to compute from the 6th
month only at the new Moon, which happened the 19th of April of this year 1689.
They will also begin to compute from the 6th month, at the new Moon, which
shall happen the 9th of April, to the Intercalation which shall be made in the
fame year, after which they will follow the same order as after the preceding
Intercalation. We have thought fit; distinctly to relate these Examples,
thereby the more precisely to determine the 4th Article of the I. Section, in
which it was possible to err, if it was not illustrated; and it could not be
determined without several Calculations made according to the preceding method.

V. The Terms of the first Months of the Julian Years.
HAving by the same method calculated, according to the Indian Rules, the
middle Conjunctions of the Moon with the Sun for several years of this and the
following Age, we have always found that every one of these Conjunctions fell
upon a day whereon the middle Conjunction happened according to our Tables, but
almost three hours later than by the Indian Rules.

By this means we have determined in our Calendar the Terms between which the
new Moon must happen, from whence it is necessary to begin to compute the
months of the year current, according to the 4th Article of the I. Section; and
we have found that in this Age this new Moon is that which happened between the
28th of March, and 27th of April of the Gregorian year, which are at present
the 18th of March, and 17th of April of the Julian year.

We have likewise found that these Terms in the Gregorian Calendar, do advance
a day in 239 years, and do go back a day in the Julian Calendar in 302 years;
which it is necessary to know, to be able to make use of these Indian Rules
amongst us.

To determine in these Calendars the Terms between which the new Moon must
happen, from whence the Civil year of the Siameses ought to begin according to
these Rules, it is necessary to establish a System of common and Bissextile
years well digested in the Cycle of 19 years, which System should be such, that
the fifth month of the first year after the Bissextile, and the sixth month of
the other years, do begin in this Age between March 28th, and April 27th of the
Gregorian year.

According to this Rule, the Civil year should begin in this Age before the
12th of December. For if it begins the 12th the year following, which would
begin, December 1. would be after the common year, and according to the Rule
they would not begin to reckon from the fifth month, which would happen the
29th of March, but with the sixth month, which would begin the 28th of April;
which is contrary to what we have found by the Calculation, that in this Age it
is necessary to begin to compute with the month which begins between March
28th, and April 27th. One might therefore be mistaken in the use of these Rules
in the years which would begin after December 11th of the Gregorian year.

We find likewise by our Calculations, that according to these very Rules, the
Siamese year should begin on the 12th of December in the Gregorian year 1700,
which will not be Bissextile. This will therefore be the most advanced Term,
that must be a whole month distant from the preceding Term. Thus the new Moon,
which will happen the Age following between the 12th of November, and the 12th
of December, will be that from whence according to these Rules the Civil year
of the Siamese ought to begin.

Nevertheless we have lately seen a date of the first of January 1684, wherein
it is supposed that the beginning of the Siamese year was at the new Moon,
which happened the 18th of December 1683. This date being compared with those
of the Ambassadors of Siam, wherein it is supposed that the beginning of the
year 2231, was at the new Moon, which happened the 16th of November 1686, would
show that the Terms of the first month of the Siamese year, according to the
usage of these times, are at least 32 days distant from each other, although
according to the Rules, they ought not to be more than a lunary month, or
thirty days distant.

This confirms what we have already remarked, that in this Age they conform not
exactly to these Rules in the dates, although they differ not much therefrom. But
as these Rules are obscure, and that it is necessary to supply some
Circumstances which are not distinctly expressed, it may easily happen that the
People be mistaken.

Thus after having determined what should be done according to these Rules, it
is necessary to learn from the Relations of Travelers what is actually
practiced. Mean while we know by the dates which we have seen, that the present
Practice is not much different from these Rules.

VI. Diverse Sorts of Solar Years according to the Indian Rules.
EVery one of these Terms whereof we have discoursed, may be considered as the
beginning of a kind of Solar Year, the greatness of which is a mean between the
Julian and Gregorian Year, seeing that we have remarked, that in the succession
of Ages these Terms do advance in the Gregorian Year, and go backward in the
Julian: the Term which falls at present on the 28th of March, is so near the
Vernal Aequinox, that it might be styled the Aequinoxial Term, and might be
thought the beginning of a Solar Astronomical Year.

It Is not possible to reconcile together the Rules of diverse Sections which
speak of the number of the years elapsed from the Epoch, under the name of
Era, without supposing diverse sorts of Indian years.

The Era is spoken of in the I. Section, where we have said that the Era is
the number of the years elapsed from the Astronomical Epoch. In the same
Section it is resolved into solar and lunar months; and in the 2d Section the
lunar months are resolved into artificial days of 30 for every lunar month, and
into natural days such as are of common use.

The Era is likewise spoken of in the IV. Section, wherein it appears that it
is composed of a number of those very days which are found in the II. Section;
so that it would seem at first, that this was the Synthesis of the same Era,
the Analysis of which is made in the I. and II. Section.

But having calculated by the Rules of the I. and II. Section, and by the
Supplement, of which we shall speak, the number of the days that ought to be in
800 years, which number in the IV. Section is supposed to be 292207, we have
there found only the number of 292197 days, 8 hours, and 27 minutes; which is
less by 9 days, 15 hours, 33 minutes, than that of 292207 days, which are
supposed in the IV. Section, ought to be found in that very number of years.
This difference is greater than that which is found between 800 Julian years,
which consist of 292200 days; and 800 Gregorian years, which consist only of
292194 days, the difference of which is 6 days; and in 800 of these years,
which result from the Rules of the two first Sections, there is a surplusage
above the Gregorian years of 13 days, 8 hours, 24 minutes; whereas 800 years of
the IV. Section, do 7 days exceed 800 Julian years, and 13 days the like number
of Gregorian.

As the Gregorian is a Tropical year, which consists in the time that the Sun
employs in returning to the same degree of the Zodiac, which degree is always
equally distant from the points of the Aequinoxes and Solstices; there is no
doubt that the year drawn from the Rules of the I. and II. Section, does nearer
approach the Tropic, than the year drawn from the Rules of the IV. Section,
which, as we have remarked, approaches the Astral year determined by the return
of the Sun to a fixed Star, and the Anomalistick determined by the Sun's return
to its Apogaeum, which several ancient and modern Astronomers distinguish not
from the Astral, no more than the Indians, supposing that the Sun's Apogaeum is
fixed amongst the fixed Stars, though most of the moderns do attribute a little
motion to it.

Nevertheless, it appears that the Indians make use of the Solar year of the
IV. Section, as we make use of the Tropic, when according to the Rules of the
VII, VIII, X and XI. Sections, they calculated the place of the Sun and his
Apogaeum, and of the Moon and her Apogaeum. For the time elapsed from the end
of this year called Krommethiapponne, serves them to find the Signs, Degrees
and Minutes of the middle motion of the Sun. They suppose then that this year
consists in the Sun's return to the beginning of the Signs of the Zodiac like
our Tropical year.

It Is true, that at present the Signs of the Zodiac are taken amongst us in
two ways, which were not formerly distinguished. When the Ancients had observed
the tract of the Sun's motion through the Zodiac, which they had divided into
four equal parts by the points of the Aequinoxes and Solstices; and that they
had subdivided every fourth part into three equal parts, which in all do make
the 12 Signs, they observed the Constellations formed of a great number of
fixed Stars, which fell in every one of these Signs, and they gave to the Signs
the name of the Constellations which are there found, not supposing then that
the same fixed Stars would ever quit their Signs.

But in the succession of Ages, it is found that the same fixed Stars were no
more in the same degrees of the Signs, whether that the Stars were advanced
toward the East in regard of the points of the Aequinoxes and Solstices, or
that these very points were removed from the same fixed Stars toward the West;
and it is now found that a fixed Star passes from the beginning of one Sign to
the beginning of another in about 2200 years.

Therefore seeing that Ptolomy in the second Age of Jesus Christ, confirmed
this as yet doubtful discovery, which had been made three Ages before by
Hipparchus; there is a distinction made between the Zodiac, which may be
called local, which begins from the Aequinoxial point of the Spring, and is
divided into 12 Signs, and the Astral Zodiac composed of 12 Constellations,
which do still retain the same name, though at present the Constellation of Aries
has passed into the Sign of Taurus, and that the same thing has happened to the
other Constellations which have passed into the following Signs.

Yet the Astronomers do ordinarily refer the places and motions of the Planets
to the local Zodiac, because it is important to know how they refer to the
Aequinoxes and Solstices, on which depends their distance from the Aequinoxial
and Poles, the various magnitude of the Days and Nights, the diversity of the
Seasons, and some other Circumstances, the knowledge of which is of great use.

Copernicus is almost the sole person amongst our Astronomers, who refers the
places and motions of the Planets to the Astral Zodiac, by reason that he
supposes that the fixed Stars are immovable, and that the Anticipation of the
Aequinoxes and Solstices, is only an appearance caused by a certain motion of
the Axis of the Earth. But they who follow his Hypothesis, cease not to denote
the places of the Planets, in regard of the points of the Aequinoxes in the
local Zodiac, by reason of the Consequences of this Situation which we have
remarked.

'Twould be an admirable thing that the Indians who follow the Dogmata of the
Pythagoraeans, should herein conform to the method of Copernicus, who is the
restorer of the Hypothesis of the Pythagoraeans.

Yet there is no appearance that they designed to refer the places of the
Planets rather to any fixed Star, than to the Aequinoxial point of the Spring.
For it seems that they would have chosen for this purpose some principal fixed
Star, as Copernicus has done, who, for the Principle of his Zodiac, has chosen
the Point to which refers the Longitude of the first Star of Aries, which was
found in the first degree of Aries, where was the Aequinoxial Point of the
Spring, when the Astronomers began to place the fixed Stars in regard of the
Points of the Aequinoxes and Solstices.

But at the place of the Heavens, where the Indians place the beginning of the
Signs of the Zodiac according to the IV. Section, and the following Sections,
there is not any considerable Star; there are only thereabouts some of the
smallest and most obscure Stars of the Constellation of Pisces, but it is the
place where was the Aequinoxial Point at the time of their Astronomical Epoch,
from whence the fixed Stars advanced afterward toward the East; so that the
Sun, by its annual motion, returns not to the same fixed Star till about 20
minutes after its return to the same Point of the local Zodiac. It was
difficult to perceive this little difference in few years to the Ancients, who
did not immediately compare the Sun to the fixed Stars, as it is at present
compared, and who compared only the Sun to the Moon during the day, and the
Moon to the fixed Stars during the night, though from the day to the night the
Moon changes place amongst the fixed Stars, as well by its own motion, which is
quick and irregular, as by its Parallax, which was not well known to the
Ancients. Wherefore they very lately only perceived the difference that there
is between the Tropical year, during which the Sun returns to the Points of the
Aequinoxes and the Solstices, and the Astral year during which it returns to
the same fixed Stars; and then they had a Solar year of 365 days and a quarter,
which is found at present to be the mean between the Tropical and the Astral,
and that it surpasses the Tropical by 11 minutes, and is shorter than the
Astral by 9 minutes.

VII. The Determination of the Magnitude of the two sorts of Indian Years.
IT is easy to find the greatness of the year which is supposed in the IV.
Section, by dividing 292207 days by 800 years, each of which is found to
consist of 365 days, 6 hours, 12, 36.

It is a little more difficult to find that which results from the I. and II.
Sections, in which it is necessary to supply some Rules which are there
wanting, to be able to make this use thereof. For in the I. Section it is
supposed that the years are composed of entire lunar months, and that the
number of the months which remain, is known besides: And in the II. Section it
is supposed that the entire months have been found by the I. Section, and that
the number of the days which remain, is known besides: yet a number of solar
years, which is not but very rarely composed of entire lunar months, must have
not only the number of the months, but also the number of the days determined.
Indeed, we find that these Rules do tacitly suppose a solar year composed of
months, days, hours and minutes, which regulate the lunisolar years.

The way of finding it by these Rules, is to resolve a year into solar and
lunar months, by the 3d, 5th, 6th and 7th Rules of the I. Section, and not to
neglect the fraction which remains after the division made by the 6th Article
of the same Section; but to reduce it into days, hours, minutes and seconds, or
into the decimal parts of a month, going to a thousand millions, to prepare it
for the operations which must be performed according to the 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th,
6th and 8th rules of the II. Section, as well for this fraction, as for the
whole months; and in fine, to reduce after the same manner the fraction called
Anamaan in the II. Section.

After a plainer manner may likewise be found the greatness of this year, by
making use of the Hypotheses, which we have infolded in these two Sections, to
find a period of years, which should be composed of a number of entire lunar
months, and likewise of a number of entire days.

By supposing, according to our explication of the Hypotheses of the II.
Section, that a lunar month is equal to 30 artificial days, and that 703
artificial days are equal to 692 natural days, it will be found that in 703
lunar months there are 20760^ natural days; and adding thereunto the Hypothesis
of the I. Section, according to which the number of 228 solar months which do
make 19 years) are equal to 235 lunar months, it will be found that in 13357
solar years there are 165205 entire lunar months, which do make 4878600 natural
days, from whence it results that a lunar month, according to these Hypotheses,
consists of 29 days, 12 hours, 44, 2, 23, 23, and the solar year of 365 days, 5
hours, 55, 13, 46, 5.

This Indian year concealed in the tacit Hypotheses of these two Sections,
agrees within two seconds with the tropical year of Hipparchus and Ptolomy,
which consists of 365 days, 5 hours, 55, 12; and to near 13 seconds with that
of Rabbi Adda an Author of the third Age, which consists of 365 days, 5 hours,
55, 26. If it could be verified that these years and these months, had been
determined by the Indians on the Observations of the Sun, independently from
the Western Astronomy, this agreemet of several Astronomers, of different
Nations, so remote one from the other, would serve to prove that the Tropical
year has anciently been of this bigness, though at present it is found lesser
by 6 minutes, which in 10 years do make an hour, and in 240 years a whole day.
But it is probable that this greatness of the year has been determined only by
the Observations of the Eclipses and other Moons, and by the Hypothesis that
Nineteen solar years are equal to Two hundred thirty five lunar months; which
Hypothesis so nearly approaches the truth, that it was difficult to observe the
difference thereof, but in the succession of Ages; which prevented Hipparacus
and Ptolomy from departing therefrom in the determination of the greatness of
the solar year.

VIII. The Antiquity of these two sorts of Indian years.
WE have not a more precise knowledge of the Indian years, than that which we
have drawn from these Rules. Scaliger who has carefully collected all the
Memoirs that he could gather from the ancient Authors, from the Patriarch of
Antioch, from the Missionaries, and different Travelers, and who has inserted
them, not only in his work de Emendatione temporum, but also in his
Commentaries upon Manilius, and in his Isagoge Chronologica, judging that these
Memoirs might please all those that have any curiosity for Learning,
establishes nothing thereon which satisfies Patavius; and it is certain, that
Scaliger's Indian year refers neither to the one nor the other of those which
we have now found.

But in the Cardinal de Cusa's Treatise of the Calendar, there are some
vestigia of these two sorts of Indian years. That which we have drawn from the
IV. Section, is there found almost in formal terms; that which we have drawn
from the Comparison of the I. and II. Section is found there also, but after a
manner so obscure, that the Author himself who relates it has not comprehended
it.

This Cardinal says, that according to Abraham Aven Ezra, an Astronomer of the
Twelfth Age, the Indians do add (to the year of 365 days) the fourth part of a
day, and the fifth part of an hour, when they speak of the year in which the
Sun returns to the same Star. This year consists then of 365 days, 6 hours, and
12; and it agrees to near 36 seconds with the year that we found by the
Hypothesis of the IV. Section. This Author adds, that they who speak of the
year according to which the Indians do regulate their Feasts, do allege that
from the fourth part there results a day more in 320 years. Ex quarta plus 320
annis diem exurgere: which he explains after a manner which cannot subsist.
This year, says he, is greater than our common year, by one fourth, 23
seconds, and 30 thirds, which in 353 years do make a day. The means of drawing
a reasonable sense from this explication is not evident. For a day divided in
three hundred fifty three years gives to each year 4 minutes, 4, 45; and not
23, 30. The true sense of these words, Ex quarta plus 320 annis diem exurgere,
is in my opinion, that 320 years of 365 days and a quarter, do by one whole day
surpass 320 of these Indian years. One day divided in 320 years, gives to each
4 minutes, 30 seconds; which being deducted from 365 and a quarter, do leave
365 days, 5 hours, 55 minutes, and 30 seconds; which will be the greatness of
the year, which regulates the Indian Feasts. This year exceeds not but by 16
seconds, the greatness of the year, which we have found by the comparison of
the Hypotheses of the I. and II. Section of the Indian Rules: wherefore there
is no reason to doubt but it is this which is here treated of.

IX. The Epoch of the Synodical solar years of the Indians
THis sort of solar years, drawn from the rules of the two first Sections, may
be called Synodical, because that it results from the Equality which is
supposed to be between 19 of these solar years, and 235 lunar months, which
terminate at the Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun. For the Epoch of these
years may be taken the day and hour of the middle Conjunction of the Moon with
the Sun. which happened the very day of the Astronomical Epoch, to near a day
of the middle Equinox of the Spring; tho some may infer from the 5th, 6th, and
8th Articles of the II. Section, that for the Epoch of these years they take
the minute which immediately follows this middle Conjunction, at the Meridian
to which the rules of this Section were accommodated. Thus in particular
calculations, there will be no more need of the Operation prescribed in the 5th
Article of the II. Section, which is founded on the difference which was
between the instant of this middle Conjunction and the midnight following, at a
particular Meridian more occidental than Siam; nor of the Operations prescribed
in the 8th Article of the VII. Section, and at the 9th Article of the X.
Section, which we have judged to denote the minutes of the motion of the Sun
and Moon, between the Meridian of Siam, and the Meridian to which the rules of
the II. Section had been accommodated; and it will suffice to have had regard
to these three Articles once for all.

The Epoch of these Synodical years will therefore be the 21st of March in the
638th year of Jesus Christ, at 3 a clock, 2 minutes in the morning at the
Meridian of Siam.

The greatness of these years, according to the VII. Chapter of these
Reflections, consisting of 365 days, 5 hours, 55, 13, 46, 5, we shall find the
beginning of the following years in the Julian years, by the continual addition
of 5 hours, 55, 13, 46, 5, deducting a day from the sum of the days which
results from this addition in the Bissextile years; thus we shall find the
beginnings of these solar Synodical years, the dates of which we have examined
as we have here calculated them, at the Meridian of Siam with the hours
computed after midnight.

In the Julian Years. Days H. M. 1683 March 17 21 57 Biss. 1684 March 17 3 52
1685 March 17 9 47 1686 March 17 15 42 1687 March 17 21 38 Biss. 1688 March 17
3 33 Astronomical years complete. In the Gregorian years. Days. H. M. 1045
March 27 21 57 1046 March 27 3 52 1047 March 27 9 47 1048 March 27 15 42 1049
March 27 21 38 1050 March 27 3 33

These beginnings of years happen a day and a half before the middle Equinoxes
of the Spring, according to Ptolomy; and five days and a half before the same
Equinoxes, according to the moderns: wherefore they may be taken for a kind of
middle Equinoxes of the Indians. The first new Moon after the beginnings of
these solar Synodical years, must be the fifth of the Civil year when the
Intercalation precedes these beginnings, as it happened in the year 1685 and
1688; and it must be the sixth of the Civil year in the other years.

These are the first new Moons since the Equinoxes of this sort, calculated for
the preceding years.

Astronomical years complete. Gregorian years current. 1045 1683 1046 Biss.
1684 1047 1685 1048 1686 1049 1687 1050 Biss. 1688 Solar Astronomical years
current. The first Conjunctions of the Astronomical years current. Afternoon.
Days. H. M. 1046 April 25 22 41 1047 April 14 7 30 1048 April 3 16 18 1049
April 22 14 50 1050 April 11 22 38 1051 March 31 7 27

Of the Indian Period of the 19 years.
TO know the first Conjunctions of the solar synodical Indian years in our
Calendar, it is sufficient to calculate the beginnings of the year from 19 to
19 years after the Epoch.

For every nineteenth solar synodical year from the Epoch ends with the middle
Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun, from whence begins the twentieth year.
The greatness of this period is found by resolving 19 years into lunar months
by the 3d, 5th, 6th and 7th Articles of the I Section, and by resolving the
lunar months into days by the 2d, 4th, 6th and 8th Articles of the II Section;
and in fine, by reducing the fraction of the days called Anamaan, into hours,
minutes, seconds and thirds: and by this means it will be found that the Indian
period of 19 years, consists of 6939 days, 16 hours, 29 minutes, 21 seconds, 35
thirds.

Tho this Indian Period of 19 years agrees in the number of the lunar months,
which it comprehends, with the periods of Numa, Meton, and Calippus, and with
our Cycle of the Golden number, as we have remarked in the Explication of the
I. Section; yet it is different in the number of the hours.

That of Meto which contains 6940 days is longer by 7 hours, 30 minutes, 38
seconds, 25 thirds, than the Indian. That of Calippus and of our golden number
which contain 6939 days and 18 hours, are longer by 1 hour, 30 minutes, 38
seconds, 25 thirds, than the Indian. That of Numa must be of a number of whole
days, according to Titus Livius, whose words are these: Ad cursum Lunae in
duodecim menses describit annum, quem (quia tricenos dies singulis mensibus
Luna non explet, desuntque dies solido anni, qui solstitiali circumagitur orb)
intercalares mensibus interponendo, ita dispensavit, ut vigesimo anno ad metam
eandem solis unde orsi essent, plenis annorum spatiis dies congruerent. In all
the Manuscripts that we have seen, it is read vicesimo anno, and not vigesimo
quarto* as in some printed Copies.

The period of 19 years of the Indians is therefore more exact than these
periods of the Ancients, and than our golden Cycle; and it agrees to 3 minutes,
and 5 or 6 seconds with the period of 235 lunar months established by the
moderns, which do make it of 6939 days, 16 hours, 13 minutes, 27 seconds.

This is the beginning of the current Indian period of 19 years, and of the
rest which follow for above an Age in the Gregorian Calendar, at the Meridian
of Siam, with the hours after midnight.

Days. H. M. 1683 March 27 21 57 1702 March 28 14 26 1721 March 28 6 56 Biss.
1740 March 27 23 25 1759 March 28 15 54 1778 March 28 8 24 1797 March 28 0 53
Biss. 1816 March 28 17 22

Of the Indian Epacts.
THE Epact of the months, is the difference of the time which is between the
new Moon, and the end of the solar month current; and the annual Epact is the
difference of the time, which is between the end of the simple lunar or
embolismic year, and the end of the solar year which runs when the lunar year
ends.

According to the exposition of the I Section, 228 lunar months, more 7 other
lunar months are equal to 228 solar months. Dividing the whole therefore by
228, 1 lunar month more 7/22^ of a lunar month is equal to a solar month.

The Indian Epact of the first month, is therefore 7/22^ of a lunar month.

The Epact of the second 14/228 and so of the rest; and the Epact of 12 months,
which do make a simple lunar year, is 84/228: the Epact of two years: 168/228
the Epact of 3 years would be 252/22^ but because that 228/228 are a month, a
month is added to the third year, which is Embolismic, and the rest is the
Epact. 24/22^ Thus the Epact of six years, is ^8/22^ The Epact of 18 years, is
1^4/22^ And adding thereunto the Epact of a year, which is ^^4/22^ The Epact of
19 years would be 22^/228 which do make a lunar month*

To the nineteenth year is added a thirteenth month, to make it Embolismic;
thus the Epact at the end of the nineteenth year, is 0.

If the lunisolar years are ordered after this manner, they will always end
before the synodical Equinox, or in the Equinox it self. But they may be so
ordered, that they end always after the synodical Equinox: which will happen,
if when the Epact is 0, they begin them with the new Moon, which happens a
month after the synodical Equinox: and after this manner the first month of the
Astronomical year will commence at the beginning of the fifth month of the
Civil year after the Embolisme; whereas in the year of the first method, the
first month would end at the beginning of the fifth month of the Civil year
after the Embolisme.

This Indian Epact is a great deal more exact than our vulgar Epact, which
augments 11 days by the year; so that they deduct 30 days, when it exceeds this
number, taking 30 days for a lunar month, and the nineteenth year they
substract 29 days to reduce the Epoch to nothing at the end of the nineteenth
lunisolar year.

The Indian Epact of a month, being reduced to hours, consists of 21 hours 45,
33, 46. The Epact of a year consists of 10 days, 21 hours, 6, 45. The Epact of
3 years is 3 days, 2 hours, 36 minutes, 13 seconds. The Epact of 11 years which
is the least of all in the Cycle of 19 years, is 1 day, 13 hours, 18, 7.

The Indian Epact may be considered in respect of the Julian and Gregorian
years: and it will serve to find the beginning of the Civil and Astronomical
years of the Indians in our Calendar, after they shall have established an
Epoch and denoted the Terms.

From a Common or Bissextile year, to the succeeding common, Julian or
Gregorian year, the Indian Epact consists of 10 days, 15 hours, 11. 32.

From a common year to the following Bissextile year, the Indian Epact is 11
days, 15 hours, 11, 32.

The annual Epact must be subtracted from the first new Moon of a year, to
find the first new Moon of the following year.

But when after the Substraction, the new Moon precedes the Term; they add a
month to the year to make it Embolismic. Thus having supposed the first new
Moon after the synodical Equinox of the year 1683, as in Chapter IX, on the
25th of April, 22 hours, and 41 minutes after noon, that is to say, on the 26th
of April, at 10 a clock, 41 minutes of the morning in the Meridian of Siam: to
have the first new Moon of the following year 1684, which is Bissextile, they
will substract from this time 11 days, 15 hours, 11 minutes, 32 seconds, and
they will have the 14th of April, at 19 hours, 29 minutes, 28 seconds of the
year 1684: and to have the first new Moon of the solar synodical year, of the
year 1685, which is common, they will substract from the preceding days, 10
days, 15 hours, 11 minutes 32 seconds; and they will have the 4th of April at 4
hours, 17 minutes, 56 seconds.

In fine, to have the first new Moon of the solar synodical year of the
following year 1686, which is common, deducting likewise the same number of
days, they will have the 24th of March, at 13 hours, 6 minutes, 24 seconds. But
because that this day precedes the term of the synodical years, which for this
Age has been found the 27th of March; it is necessary to add a lunar month of
29 days, 12 hours, 44 minutes, 3 seconds; thus the year will be Embolismic of
13 Moons, and they will have the first new Moon of the synodical Indian year
the 23d of April at 1 hour, 50 minutes, 27 seconds in the morning at Siam, and
continuing after the same manner, they will have all the first new Moons of the
following years.

In these Indian rules the name of an Embolismick or Attikamaat, agrees to the
year which immediately follows the Intercalation.

The lunisolar years may likewise be ordered in such a manner, that the
addition of the intercalary month may be made when the Epact exceeds 114/228,
which do make the half of the month; to the end that the term might be as a
medium between the several beginnings of the years, some of which commence
sooner, and others later; as it is practiced in our Ecclesiastical years, which
began before the Vernal Equinox, when the Equinox arrives before the 15th of
the Moon; and which begin after the Equinox, when the Equinox happens after the
14th of the Moon. But it is more commodious for the Astronomical Calculations
to begin the year always before, or always after the Equinox, as it is
practiced in the Astronomical Indian year, according to our Explication.

Nevertheless it is necessary to remark that the point of the Zodiac, which
the Indians do take for the beginning of the signs, according to the Rules of
the IV. and following Sections, and which they consider in some sort as the
Aequinoxial point of the Spring, is in this Age removed 13 degrees from the
Astronomical Term of the years discoursed of in the I. Section; so that the Sun
arrives there the fourteenth day after the synodical Aequinox. Wherefore a part
of the Astronomical lunisolar years which begin after the Term established by
the Rules of the I. Section, will begin in this Age before this sort of
Aequinox: and the other part will begin after; so that this sort of Aequinox is
as it were in the middle of the several beginnings of the lunisolar years which
begin in the fifth and sixth month of the Civil year.

XII. A Correction of the lunar Months, and of the solar Synodical years of the
Indians.
IT is very easy to accommodate the lunar months of the Indians and their solar
synodical years to the modern Hypotheses.

After having made the calculations according to the Indian Rules, it is
necessary to divide the number of the years elapsed since the Astronomical
Epoch by 6 and by 4. The first Quotient will give a number of seconds to
substract from the time of the new Moons calculated according to these Rules.

EXAMPLE.
In the year of Jesus Christ 1688, the number of the years elapsed from the
Astronomical Epoch of the Indians is 1050. This number being divided by 6, the
Quotient, which is 175, gives 175 minutes, that is to say 2 hours, 55 minutes
to add.

This same number being divided by 4, the quotient is 262, which gives 262
seconds, that is to say 6 minutes, 22 seconds to substract; and the Equation
will be 2 hours, 48 minutes, 38 seconds. Having added this Equation to the
first Conjunction of the solar Synodical year 1051, which, according to these
rules, happened the 31st of March, in the year 1688, at 19 hours, 28 minutes,
24 seconds, after midnight; the middle Conjunction will be the 31st of March,
at 22 hours, 17 minutes, 12 seconds, at the Meridian of Siam. The same Equation
serves to the Synodical years which result from the time of 235 lunar months
divided into 19 years.

The first division by 6 will suffice, if they take once and a half as many
seconds to substract, as there are found minutes to add.

XIII. The difference between the solar Synodical, and the Tropical years of
the Indians.
IF the Indians take for a Tropical year the time which the Sun employs in
returning to the beginning of the Signs of the Zodiac, according to the fourth
and following Sections; the difference between these years and the Synodical is
considerable, as we have already remarked. According to the Western Astronomy,
the beginning of the Signs is the point of the Vernal Equinox, where the
ascending demicircle of the Zodiac, terminated by the Tropicks, is intersected
by the Equinoxial; for they hold no more to the Hypothesis of the Ancients, who
placed the Equinoxes at the eighth parts of the Signs: and the Tropical year is
the time that the Sun employs in returning to the same point, whether
Equinoxial or Tropical.

The Conjunctions of the Moon with the Sun, which happen in the points of the
Equinoxes, return not precisely at the end of the nineteenth Tropical year: for
this nineteenth year ends about two hours before the end of the 235th lunar
month, which terminates the nineteenth Synodical year.

I say, about two hours: for in this the modern Astronomers agree not among
themselves to 9 or 10 minutes, because that the time of the Equinoxes being
very difficult to determine exactly, they agree not in the exactness of the
Tropical year but to near half a minute; tho they be almost unanimously agreed
even to the thirds, in the greatness of the lunar month. Those that do make the
greatness of the Tropical year of 365 days, 5 hours, 49 minutes, 4 seconds, and
36 thirds, will have the period of 19 solar Synodical years above two exact
hours longer than the period of 19 Tropical years: They that make the Tropical
year longer, will have a lesser difference; and they that make the Tropical
year shorter, as most of the Astronomers do at present, will have it greater.
It may here be supposed that this difference would be 2 hours wantting 3
minutes, seeing that the defect of the lunar Indian months in 19 years is 3
minutes; and that the Tropical year would consist of 365 days, 5 hours, 48
minutes, 55 seconds. Thus, if at every 19th year from the Astronomical Epoch
of the Indians, they deduct 2 hours from the Equinoxial Term, calculated by the
Indian rules without the correction; and if they deduct also 14 hours 46
minutes for the time by which it may be supposed that the middle Equinox
precedes the Epoch of the new Moons, according to the modern Hypotheses; they
will have the middle Equinox of the Spring of the year proposed since the
Epoch, conformable to the modern Hypotheses.

EXAMPLE.
In the year 1686 the number of the years since the Astronomical Epoch of the
Indians is 1048. This number being divided by 19, the Quotient is 55 3/19,
which being doubled gives 110 hours, 19 minutes, that is to say, 4 days, 14
hours, 19 minutes; to which having added for the Epoch 14 hours, 4 minutes,
the sum is 5 days, 5 hours, 5 minutes: and this sum being deducted from the
term of the same Synodical year 1048, which has before been found on the 27th
of March, 1686, at 15 hours, 42 minutes of the evening; there remains the 22d
of March, 10 hours, 37 minutes of the Evening, at the Meridian of Siam, for the
middle Equinox of the Spring of the year 1686.

XIV. An Examination of the great lunisolar period of the Indians.
IN the VII. Chapter of these Reflections we have found, that the Period of
13357 years is composed of 165205 entire lunar months, which do make 4878600
whole days, according to the Rules of the II. Section. This Period according to
the Hypothesis of these Rules, brings back the new Moons which terminate the
Indian synodical years, to the same hour and to the same minute under the same
Meridian.

But having examined it by the method of the XII. Chapter of these Reflections,
it will be found that it is shorter than a period of a like number of lunar
months, according to the modern Astronomers, by 1 day and 14 hours, which is
almost the Epact of 11 years: and by the method of the XIII. Chapter, it will
be found that the Anticipation of the Aequinoxes in regard of this number of
synodical years of the Indians is 54 days and 5 hours. If they retrench 11
years from this period, there will be one of 13346 years, composed of 165069
lunar months, or of 4874564 days, which will be more conformaable to the modern
Hypothesis.

XV. The great lunisolar Equinoxial period, conformable to the preceding
corrections.
BUt instead of correcting the great period foregoing, it is more proper to
find out a much shorter, which brings back the new Moons and the Equinoxes to
the same hour under the same Meridian, thereby to establish some Astronomical
Epocha's more near, and to abridge the Calculations which are so much the
longer, as the Epocha's are more distant from our time.

It is extremely difficult, or rather it is impossible to find some short and
precise periods, which conjunctly reduce the new Moons and the Equinoxes to the
same Meridian. Vieta proposes one for the Gregorian Calendar of 165580000
years, which comprehends 2047939047 lunar months.

It is not possible to verify the exactness of these periods by the comparison
of the Observations that we have, the ancientest of which are only of 25 Ages;
and these long periods serve not our design, which is to bring the Epocha's
nearer.

It is better to make use of the shortest, tho less exact periods, and to
denote how they want of being exact according to the Hypotheses which we follow.

By the rules of the first Section, and by our additions, it is found that 1040
synodical Indian years do make 12863 lunar months, and 157851/1000000; and by
the rules of the II. Section it is found that this number of 12863 months
without the fraction makes 379851 days, 21 hours, 24 minutes, 19 seconds.

According to the correction made by the method of the XII. Chapter of these
Reflections, to this number of days it is necessary to add 2 hours and 49
minutes, to render it conformable to the Hypotheses of the Modern Astronomers:
thus in this number of 12863 months, there are 379852 whole days, and 13
minutes, 19 seconds of an hour.

The same number of months, with the fraction according to the Rules of the II.
Section, and according to our additions, makes 379856 days, 13 hours, 16
minutes, 43 seconds; which do make 1040 synodical Indian years.

The difference by which these years exceed the Tropical years, by our method
of the XIII Chapter of these Reflections, is found of 4 days, 13 hours, 28
minutes, 25 seconds; and this difference being deducted from 379856 days, 13h,
16, 43, there remains 379851 days, 23 hours, 48 minutes, 28 seconds, for 1040
Tropical years, and to make 379852 whole days, there wants only 11 minutes and
32 seconds, during which the proper motion of the Sun is not sensible.

XVI. A Modern Epoch of the New Moons, extracted from the Indian Epoch.
HAving added 1040 years to the Indian Epoch of the 638th year of Jesus
Christ, there will be the year 1678 for a new Epoch, in which the Conjunction
of the Moon with the Sun will happen the day of the middle Equinox, 13 minutes
of an hour later in respect of the same Meridian, and 25 minutes later in
respect of the middle Equinox; so that the Conjunction happening in the year
638 at Siam, at 3 a clock, 2 minutes in the Morning: in the year 1678 it will
there happen at 3 a clock, 15 minutes in the Morning.

During this interval the Anticipation of the Equinoxes in the Julian Calendar
is 8 days, which being deducted from 21, there remains 13; and thus the middle
Equinox, which in the year 638 was on the 21 of March, is found in the year
1678 on the 13 of March of the Julian year, which is the 23 of the Gregorian
year. The middle Conjunction will therefore happen in the year 1678, on the 23
of March at 3 a clock, 15 minutes in the morning at the Meridian of Siam; that
is to say, the 22 of March at 8 a clock, 41 minutes of the Evening at the
Meridian of Paris.

XVII. Modern Epocha's of the Apogaeum, and Node of the Moon.
BEcause that in this Epoch the new Moons, the Apogaeum, and Node of the Moon
were too remote from the Equinox, we have found an Equinoxial Epoch of the
Apogaeum, which precedes by 12 years that of the new Moon; and an Epoch of the
Nodes, which follows it 12 years.

At the middle Equinox of the Spring, in the year 1666, the Apogaeum of the
Moon was at the Twentieth degree of Aries; and at the end of the present Julian
year 1689, the North Node of the Moon will be at the beginning of Aries; but at
the middle Equinox of the Spring 1690, it will be in the 26 degree and half of
Pisces, at 3 degrees and half of the Sun.

The Apogaeum of the Moon performs a revolution according to the succession of
the Signs in 2232 days, according to the Indian Rules; or in 2231 days and a
third, according to the modern Astronomers. The Nodes of the Moon, of which
there is no mention in the Indian Rules, do perform a revolution contrary to
the succession of the Signs in 6798 days.

By these Principles there will be found as many Epocha's of the Apogaeum and
Nodes, as shall be desired.

XVIII. An Epoch of the new Moons near the Apogaeum, and the Nodes of the
Moon, and the middle Equinox of the Spring.
IT is not found that the Equinoxial new Moon should happen nearer our time,
and altogether nearer its Apogaeum and one of its Nodes, than the 17 of March
in the year of J. Christ, 1029. This day at noon, at the Meridian of Paris, the
middle place of the Sun was in the middle of the first degree of Aries, at 3
degrees and half from the middle place of the Moon, which joined with the Sun
the Evening of the same day.

The Apogaeum of the Moon preceded the Sun a degree and half; and the
descending Node of the Moon preceded it a degree, the Apogaeum of the Sun being
in the 26th degree of Gemini.

'Twould be needless to seek out another return of the Moon to its Apogaeum, to
its Node, to the Sun, and to the Vernal Equinox. The concourse of all these
circumstances together being too rare, it is necessary to rest satisfied with
having some Epocha's separated at diverse other times, of which here are three
the most exact.

The middle conjunction of the Moon with the Sun in the middle Equinox of the
Spring, happened in the year of J. Christ 1192 on the 15 of March about Noon at
the Meridian of Rome.

The Apogaeum of the Moon was at the beginning of Aries, in the middle Equinox
of the Spring, Anno 1460, on the 13 of March.

The descending Node of the Moon was at the beginning of Aries, in the middle
Equinox of the Spring, Anno 1513, on the 14 of March.

'Twill not be needless to have some particular Epocha's of the new Moons
proper for the Julian Calendar, to which most of the Chronologers do refer all
the times past.

Julius Caesar chose an Epoch of Julian years, in which the new Moon happened
the first day of the year. 'Twas the 45th year before the birth of Jesus
Christ, which is in the rank of the Bissextiles, according as this rank was
afterward established by Augustus, and as it is still observed.

The first day of January of the same forty fifth year before Jesus Christ, the
middle conjunction of the Moon with the Sun happened at Six a clock in the
Evening, at the Meridian of Rome.

And the first of January in the 32d year of Jesus Christ, the middle
conjunction happened precisely at Noon at the Meridian of Rome.

The most commodious of the Epocha's, near the middle conjunctions in the
Julian years, is, that which happened the first of January, Anno 1500, an hour
and half before Noon at the Meridian of Paris.

XIX. An Ancient Astronomical Epoch of the Indians.
IN the III. Chapter of these Reflections we have remarked, that the Siameses in
their dates make use of an Epoch, which precedes the year of Jesus Christ by
544 years, and that after the twelfth or thirteenth month of the years from
this Epoch, which do now end in November or December, the first month which
follows, and which must be attributed to the following year, is yet attributed
to the same year: which has given us ground to conjecture, that they attribute
also to the same year, the other months to the beginning of the Astronomical
year, which begins at the Vernal Equinox. This conjecture has been confirmed by
the report of Mr. de la Loubere, who likewise judges that this Ancient Epoch
must also be an Astronomical Epoch.

The extraordinary manner of computing the first and second month of the same
year after the twelfth or thirteenth, may cause a belief that the first month
of these years, which begins at present in November or December, began
anciently near the Vernal Equinox, and that in process of time, the Indians,
either through negligence, or to make use of a Cycle too short, as would be that
of 60 years which the Chinese do use, have sometimes failed to add a
thirteenth month to the year which ought to be Embolismick, whence it has
happened that the first month has run back into the winter; which having been
perceived, the winter months, now called first, second and third, have been
attributed to the preceding year, which according to the ancient institution
ought not to end but at Spring.

Thus the Indian year, which was called 2231, at the end of the year 1687 of
Jesus Christ, ought not to end, according to the Ancient Institution, till the
Spring of the year 1688. Having subtracted 1688 from 2231, there remains 543,
which is the number of the complete years from the ancient Epoch of the
Indians, to the year of Jesus Christ. This Epoch appertains therefore to the
current year 544 before Jesus Christ, according to the most common way of
computing.

In this year the middle conjunction of the Moon happened between the true
Equinox, and the middle Equinox of the Spring, at 15 degrees distance from the
North Node of the Moon, the 27th of March, according to the Julian form, a
Saturday, which is an Astronomical Epoch almost like to that of the year 638,
which has been chosen, as more modern and more precise than the former.

Between these two Indian Epocha's there is a period of 1181 years, which being
joined to a period of 19 years, there are two periods of 600 years, which
reduce the new Moons near the Equinoxes.

XX. The Relation of the Synodical years of the Indians, to those of the Cycle
of the Chinese of 60 Years.
ACcording to the Chronology of China which Father Couplet published, and
according to Father Martinius in his History of China, the Chinese do make use
of lunisolar years, and they destribute them into sexagenary Cycles, the 74th
of which began in the year of J. Christ 1683; so that the first Cycle should
have begun 2697 years before the birth of Jesus Christ.

By the Indian Rules of the first Section, in 60 synodical years, there are 720
solar months, and 742 lunar months, and 24/228 It is necessary to reject this
fraction, because that the lunisolar years are composed of entire lunar months.
Yet this fraction in 19 sexagenary Cycles, which do make 1140 years, amounts to
456/22^ which do make two months: therefore if the sexagenary Cycles of the
Chinese are all uniform, 1140 Chinese years are shorter by two months, than
1140 synodical years of the Indians. Wherefore if the Indians have regulated
the Intercalations of their civil years by uniform sexagenary Cycles, the
beginning of the civil year 2232, ought to precede by a little less than four
months, the term of their synodical years, which is at present on the 27 of
March of the Gregorian year; as it happened indeed; which confirms what we have
conjectured in the foregoing Chapter of the anticipation of the civil years.

To equal the years of the sexagenary Cycle to the synodical years regulated
according to the Cycle of 19 years, it would be necessary that among 19
sexagenary Cycles there were 17 of 742 lunar months, and 2 of 743; or rather it
would be necessary that after 9 Cycles of 742 months, which do make 740 years,
the tenth Cycle following, which would be accomplished in the year 600, was of
743 months.

But there is ground to doubt whether they use it thus, seeing that the Chinese
year has several times had occasion of being reformed, to refer its beginning
to the same term; in which nevertheless the modern Relations accord only to 10
degrees: Father Martinius denoting it at the 15th degree of Aquarius, and
Father Couplet at the 5th of the same Sign; as if the Term had retreated 10
degrees since the time of Father Martinius.

It is unquestionable that a great part of the Eclipses, and of the other
Conjunctions which the Chinese do give as observed, cannot have happened at
the times that they pretend, according to the Calendar regulated after the
manner as it is at present, as we have found by the Calculation of a great
number of these Eclipses, and even by the sole examination of the Intervals
which are remarked between the one and the other: for several of these
Intervals are too long, or too short, to be possibly determined by the
Eclipses, which do happen only when the Sun is near one of the Nodes of the
Moon; where it could not possibly return at the times denoted, if the Chinese
years had been regulated in the past ages, as they are at present. Father
Couplet himself doubts of some of these Eclipses, by reason of the Compliment
which the Chinese Astronomers made to one of their Kings, whom they
congratulated, for that an Eclipse, which they had predicted, had not happened;
the Heaven, they said, having spared him this misfortune: and this Father has
left to Mr. Thevenot a Manuscript of the same Eclipses, which he has printed in
his Chronology, entitled Eclipses verae and falsae, without distinguishing the
one from the other.

But without accusing the Chinese of falsehood, it may be said, that it may be
that the Eclipses set down in the Chinese Chronology might happen, and that the
contradiction which appears therein may proceed from the Irregularity of their
Calendar, on which no Foundation can be laid.

XXI. A Composition of the lunisolar Periods.
THE Interval between the two Epocha's of the Indians, which is 1181 years, is
a lunisolar period, which reduces the new Moons near the Equinox, and to the
same day of the week.

This period is composed of 61 periods of 29 years, which are longer than 1159
tropical years; and of two periods of 11 years, which are shorter than 22
tropical; the defect of the one, partly recompencing the excess of the others.

As the mixture of the lunisolar years, some longer, others shorter, than the
tropical, does more or less recompense the defect of the one by the excess of
the other, as far as the Incommensurability which may be between the motions of
the Sun and Moon permits it: It makes the lunisolar periods so much the more
precise, as they reduce the new Moons nearer the places of the Zodiac where
they arrived at the beginning.

The Ancients have first made the trial of the little periods, the most famous
of which has been that of 8 years, which has been in use not only amongst the
ancient Greeks, but also amongst the first Christians; as it appears by the
Cycle of St. Hippolytus, published at the beginning of the third Age.

This period, composed of five ordinary and three Embolismick years, being
found too long by a day and half, which in 20 periods do make above a month;
they were obliged to retrench a month in the twentieth period. But afterward
the period of 8 years was joined to another of eleven years, composed of seven
ordinary and four Embolismick, which is too short about a day and a half* and
thereof was made the period of 19 years, which was supposed at first to be
exact, tho it has since had occasion of amendment in the number of the days and
hours which it comprehends. The correction of this period was the origin of
the period of 76 years, composed of 4 periods of 19 years, corrected by
Callippus, and of the period of 304 years, composed of 16 periods of 19 years,
corrected by Hipparchus.

The Jews had a period of 84 years, composed of four periods of 19 years, and
one of 8 years, which reduces the new Moons near the Aequinox on the same day
of the week.

But the most famous period of those which have been invented to reduce the new
Moons to the same place of the Zodiac, and to the same day of the week, is the
Victorian of 532 years, composed of 28 periods of 19 years.

Yet the new Moon which should terminate this period, happened not till two
days after the Sun's return to the same point of the Zodiac, and two other
days before the same day of the week, to which the conjunction was arrived at
the beginning of the period; and these defects are multiplied in the succession
of the times, according to the number of these periods. Nevertheless, after
that the defects of this period were known by every one, several famous
Chronologers have not ceased to make use thereof, and they terminate it on the
same day of the week and on the same day of the Julian year, which in this
interval of time exceeds the solar tropical year 4 whole days, and the
lunisolar year somewhat less than two days.

They do also multiply this period by the Cycle of 15 years, which is that of
the Indictions, the origin of which is not more ancient than 13 Ages, to form
the Julian period of 7980 years, of which they establish the Epoch 4713 years
before the common Epoch of Jesus Christ. They prefer this imaginary period, in
which the errors of the Victorian period are multiplied 15 times, to the true
lunisolar periods, and they do likewise prefer this Ideal Epoch which they
suppose more ancient than the World, to the Astronomical and Historical
Epocha's: even so far that they refer thereto the Historical Acts of the
ancient times before Jesus Christ, and before Julius Caesar; tho the Indictions
were not as yet in use, that there was then no Calendar to which this period
could serve to regulate the days of the week, and that in fine the Cycle of 19
years extended to this time, demonstrates not the state of the Sun nor of the
Moon; which are the three principal things for which these three Cycles which
from the Julian period, have been invented. Wherefore it gives not so exact an
Idea of the ancient times, which were not regulated after this manner, as of
those of the thirteen last Ages, which were regulated amongst us according to
the Julian year.

But the lunisolar periods of 19 years, which in regard of the tropical years
are somewhat too long, being joined to the periods of 11 years which are too
short, do form other periods more precise than those which compose them. Among
these periods the first of the most precise are those of 334, 353, and 372
years, the last of which is terminated also on the same day of the week; and
might be placed in the stead of the Victorian.

XXII. Lunisolar Periods composed of whole Ages.
THE first lunisolar period composed of whole Ages, is that of 600 years, which
is also composed of 31 periods of 19, and one of 11 years. Though the
Chronologists speak not of this period, yet it is one of the ancientest that
have been invented.

Antiq. Jud. l. 1. c. 3.
Josephus, speaking of the Patriarchs that lived before the Deluge, says that
God prolonged their Life, as well by reason of their Virtue, as to afford them
means to perfect the Sciences of Geometry and Astronomy, which they had
invented: which they could not possibly do, if they had lived less than 600
years, because that it is not till after the Revolution of six Ages, that the
great year is accomplished.

This great year which is accomplished after six Ages, whereof not any other
Author makes mention, can only be a period of lunisolar years, like to that
which the Jews always used, and to that which the Indians do still make use of.
Wherefore we have thought necessary to examine what this great year must be,
according to the Indian Rules.

By the Rules of the I. Section it is found then, that in 600 years there are
7200 solar months, 7421 lunar months and 12/228. Here this little fraction must
be neglected; because that the lunisolar years do end with the lunar months,
being composed of entire lunar months.

It is found by the Rules of the II. Section, that 7421 lunar months do
comprehend 219146 days, 11 hours, 57 minutes, 52 seconds: if therefore we
compose this period of whole days, it must consist of 219146 days.

600 Gregorian years are alternatively of 219145 days, and 219146 days: they
agree then to half a day with a lunisolar period of 600 years, calculated
according to the Indian Rules.

The second lunisolar period composed of Ages, is that of 2300 years, which
being joined to one of 600, makes a more exact period of 2900 years: And two
periods of 2300 years, joined to a period of 600 years do make a lunisolar
period of 5200 years, which is the Interval of the time which is reckoned
according to Eusebius his Chronology, from the Creation of the World to the
vulgar Epoch of the years of J. Christ.

XXIII. An Astronomical Epoch of the years of Jesus Christ.
THese lunisolar periods, and the two Epocha's of the Indians, which we have
examined, do point unto us, as with the finger, the admirable Epoch of the
years of J. Christ, which is removed from the first of these two Indian
Epocha's, a period of 600 years wanting a period of 19 years, and which
precedes the second by a period of 600 years, and two of nineteen years. Thus
the year of Jesus Christ (which is that of his Incarnation and Birth, according
to the Tradition of the Church, and as Father Grandamy justifies it in his
Christian Chronology, and Father Ricciolus in his reformed Astronomy) is also
an Astronomical Epoch, in which, according to the modern Tables, the middle
conjunction of the Moon with the Sun happened the 24 of March, according to the
Julian form re-established a little after by Augustus, at one a clock and a
half in the morning at the Meridian of Jerusalem, the very day of the middle
Equinox, a Wednesday, which is the day of the Creation of these two Planets.

De Trin. l. 4. c. 5.
The day following, March 25th, which according to the ancient tradition of the
Church reported by St. Augustine, was the day of our Lords Incarnation, was
likewise the day of the first Phasis of the Moon; and consequently it was the
first day of the month, according to the usage of the Hebrews, and the first
day of the sacred year, which by the Divine institution, must begin with the
first month of the Spring, and the first day of a great year, the natural
Epoch of which is the concourse of the middle Equinox, and of the middle
Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun.

This concourse terminates therefore the lunisolar periods of the preceding
Ages, and was an Epoch from whence began a new order of Ages, Eclog. 4.
according to the Oracle of the Sybil, related by Virgil in these words: Magnus
ab integro Saeclorum nascitur ordo:
Jam nova progenies Coelo dimittitur alto.
This Oracle seems to answer the Prophecy of Isaiah, Parvulus natus est nobis;
c. 9. v. 6. and 7.
where this newborn is called God and Father of future Ages; Deus fortis,
Pater futuri Saeculi.

The Interpreters do remark in this Prophecy, as a thing mysterious, the
extraordinary situation of a Mem final (which is the Numerical Character of
600) in this word (...) ad multiplicandum, where this Mem final is in the
second place, there being no other example in the whole Text of the Holy
Scripture, where ever a final Letter is placed only at the end of the words.
This Numerical Character of 600 in this situation might allude to the periods
of 600 years of the Patriarchs, which were to terminate at the accomplishment
of the Prophecy, which is the Epoch, from whence we do at present compute the
years of Jesus Christ.

XXIV. The Epoch of the Ecclesiastical Equinoxes, and of the vulgar Cycle of
the Golden number.
THe Christians of the first Ages having remarked that the Jews of this time
had forgot the ancient Rules of the Hebrew years; so that they celebrated
Easter twice in one year, as Constantine the Great attests in the Letter to the
Churches, do borrow the form of the Julian years re-established by Augustus,
Eusebius. de vlta Constantini lib. 3. c. 9.
which are distributed by periods of 4 years, three of which are common of 365
days, and a Bissextile of 366 days, and do surpass the lunar years by 11 days.
They denote therefore in the Julian Calender the day of the Equinox and the
days of the Moon with their variation, and they regulate it, some by the Cycle
of 8 years, others by the Cycle of 19 years; as it appears by the regulation of
the Council of Caesarea in the year of Christ 196, and by the Canon of St.
Hyppolytus, and by that of St. Anatolius. But afterward the Council of Nice,
held in the year 325, having charged the Bishops of Alexandria, as the most
experienced in Astronomy, to determine the time of Easter, these Prelates made
use of their Alexandrian Calendar, where the year began with the 29th of
August; and for Epoch they took the lunar Cycles of 19 years, the first
Egyptian year of the Empire of Dioclesian; because that the last day of the
preceding year, which was the 28th of August, of the 284th year of Jesus
Christ, the new Moon happened near Noon at the Meridian of Alexandria. By
reckoning from this Epoch backward the Cycles of 19 years, they come to the
28th of August in the year preceding the Epoch of Jesus Christ; so that the
first year of Jesus Christ is the second year of one of these Cycles. It Is thus
that these Cycles are still computed at present, since that Dionysius the Less
transported the Cycles of the Moon from the Alexandrian Calendar to the Roman,
and that he began to compute the years from the Epoch of Jesus Christ, instead
of computing them from the Epoch of Dioclesian, denoting the Equinox of the
Spring on the 21st of March, as it had been set down in the Egyptian Epoch.

For the Epoch of the lunar Cycles they might have taken the Equinoxial
conjunction of the same year of Jesus Christ, rather than the conjunction of
the 28th of August of the former year, and renew it after 616 years, which
reduce the new Moons to the same day of the Julian year, and to the same day of
the week: which is what they demanded of the Victorian period; but they thought
only to confirm themselves to the rule of the Alexandrians, which was the sole
method to reconcile the Eastern and Western Church. Thus these Rules have been
followed to the past Age; although it has been long perceived, that the new Moons
thus regulated, according to the Cycle of 19 years, anticipated almost a day in
312 Julian years, and that the Equinoxes anticipated about 3 days in 400 of
these years.

XXV. The solar Gregorian Period of 400 years.
ABout the end of the past Age the Anticipation of the Equinoxes since the
Epoch chosen by the Alexandrians, was mounted to 10 days: and that of the new
Moons in the same years of the lunar Cycle continued without interruption was
mounted to 4 days: wherefore in several Councils there was discourse concerning
the manner of correcting these defects; and in fine, Pope Gregory XIII. after
having communicated his design to the Christian Princes, and to the most famous
Universities, and having understood their Advice, deducted 10 days from the
year 1582, and reduced the Equinox to the day of the year wherein it had been
at the time of the Epoch, chosen by the Deputies of the Council of Nice.

He established also a period of 400 years, shorter by 3 days than 400 Julian
years, making common the hundred years for the reserve of each 400, to compute
from the year 1600; or which amounts to the same thing, to reckon from the
Epoch of Jesus Christ.

These periods of 400 Gregorian years reduce the Sun to the same points of the
Zodiac, to the same days of the month, and of the week, and to the same hours
under the same Meridian, the greatness of the year being supposed 365 days, 5
hours, 49, 12.

According to the modern Observations, in the hundred Bissextiles the middle
Equinox happens the 21st of March, at 20 hours after noon, at the Meridian of
Rome; and the 96th after the hundredth Bissextile it happens the 21st of March,
2 hours, 43 minutes after noon, which is the Equinox that happens the soonest.
But the 303d year after the hundredth Bissextile, the middle Equinox happens
the 23d of March, at 7 hours, 12 minutes after noon, which is the slowest of
all the rest.

By these Epocha's, and by his greatness of the year, it is easy perpetually
to find the middle Equinoxes of the Gregorian Calendar.

XXVI. The Rule of the Gregorian Epacts.
IN the Gregorian correction they interrupt not the succession of the Cycles of
19 years, drawn from the ancient Alexandrian Epoch, as they might have done;
but they observe on what day of the Moon the Gregorian year ends, at every year
of the Alexandrian Cycle. This number of the days of the Moon at the end of a
year is the Epact of the following year. It Is found that after the correction
of the first year of the Cycle, the Epact is 1. Every year it is augmented by
11 days, but after the 19th year it is augmented by 12, always deducting 30
when it surpasses this number, and taking the rest for the Epact; which is done
in this Age.

They observe also the Variation which the Epacts do make from Age to Age in
the very years of the Ancient lunar Cycle, and they find that in 2500 Julian
years they augment 8 days; which supposes the lunar month of 29 days, 12 hours,
44, 3, 10, 41.

Greg. Calend. c. 2. Explic. Calend. Greg. c. 11. n. 10.
But to find the Gregorian Epacts from Age to Age, they made three different
Tables, of which it was judged the Construction could not be clearly explained
but in a Book apart, which was not finished till twenty years after the
correction. 'Twas thought at first that the whole Variation of the Gregorian
Epacts was included in a period of 300000 years: But this not being found
conformable to the project of the correction, they were forced to have recourse
to some difficult equations, of which there is not found any determined period.

XXVII. A new lunisolar and Paschal Period.
TO supply this defect, and to find the Gregorian Epacts for future Ages
without Tables, we do make use of a lunisolar period of 1600 years, which has
for Epoch the Equinoxial Conjunction of the year of Jesus Christ, and which
reduces the new Moons since the correction, to the same day of the Gregorian
year, to the same day of the week, and almost to the same hour of the day,
under the same Meridian. According to this period we give to each period of 400
years since Jesus Christ, 9 days of Equinoxial Epact, by deducting 29 when it
surpasses this number: and we add 8 days to the Equinoxial Epact since the
correction, to have the Civil Gregorian Epact, by deducting 30, when the sum
surpasses this number.

At every hundredth year, not Bissextile, we diminish the Equinoxial Epact 5
days, in respect of the hundredth preceding, and we take every hundredth year
for Epoch of 5 periods of 19 years, to find the Augmentation of the Epacts for
an Age at every year of the Cycle, after the accustomed manner.

Thus, to have the Equinoxial Epact of the year 1600, which is distant from the
Epoch of Jesus Christ 4 periods of 400 years, multiplying 4 by 9 there is 36;
from whence having deducted 29, there remains 7, the Equinoxial Epact of the
year 1600, which shows that the middle Equinox of the year 1600 happened 7 days
after the middle Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun: adding thereunto 8 days,
there are 15, which is the Civil Gregorian Epact of the year 1600, Expl. Call.
p. 420.
as it is set down in the Table of the Moveable Gregorian Feasts.

It is evident that the Equinoxial Epact of the year 11600, which terminates
this period, must be 0. But to find it by the same method, since that the year
11600 is removed from the Epoch of Jesus Christ 29 periods of 400 years,
multiplying 29 by 9, and dividing the product by 29, the quotient is 9, and the
remainder 0 for the Equinoxial period: Adding 8, there is the Civil Gregorian
Epact of the year 11600, which will be 8, as Clavius had found it by the
Gregorian Tables, in the 168th page of the Explication of the Calendar; which
demonstrates the conformity of the Epacts of the future Ages, found by the
means of this period, after a method so easy, with the Gregorian Epacts, found
by the means of three Tables of the Gregorian Calendar.

If the hours and minutes of these Equinoxial Epacts in the 400 years are also
demanded, thereunto shall be always added 8 hours, and besides and 1 1/10 of as
many hours as there are whole days in the Epact, and a third of as many
minutes. Thus for the year 1600, whose Equinoxial Epact is 7 days; one third of
7 hours is 2h, 20; a tenth is 0h, 42; a third of 7 minutes is 2: the sum added
to 7 days 8 hours, makes 7 days, 11h, 4, the Equinoxial Epact of the year 1600.

Deducting this Epact from the time of the middle Equinox, which in 1600
happened the 21 of March, at 20 hours after noon at Rome, the middle
conjunction preceding will be on the 14th of March, at 8h, 56: adding thereunto
half a lunar month, which is 14 days, 18h, 22, the middle opposition will be
found on the 29th of March, at 3h, 18. In the Table of the moveable Feasts,
Expl. Call. p. 420.
where the minutes are neglected, it is set down on the 29th of March, at 3
hours.

To have by hours and minutes the Equinoxial Epact in the hundreds, not
Bissextiles, from the Epact found in the preceding hundredth Bissextile, shall
be deducted 5 days, 2h, 12, for the first, double for the second, triple for
the third (borrowing a month of 29 days, 12h, 44, if it is required) and you
will have the Epact in the hundred proposed, which shall be made use of in the
preceding example, comparing it with the middle Equinox of the same year.

By this method will be found the middle oppositions in the hundred years, not
Bissextile, a day before that they are set down, Expl. Call. p. 484. ad 561. p.
201. 284.
from the year 1700 to the year 5000 in the Table of the Movable Feasts, which
is in the Book of the explication of the Calendar, where they are set down a
day later than the Gregorian Hypotheses require. Ap. 596. ad p. 609. p. 634.
Which has happened also in the precepts, and in the examples of finding the
progresses of the new and full Moons, and in the Epocha's of the hundred years
not Bissextile, and in all the Calculations which are deduced thence) as is
found by comparing together the new Moons calculated in the same Table, the
Anticipation whereof, which from one common year to another must always be 10
days, 15 hours, is found sometimes 9 days, 15 hours, as from the year 1699 to
the year 1700; sometimes 11 days, 15 hours, as from the year 1700 to 1701; and
so likewise in the other hundreds not Bissextile.

Upon this account there were some differences which gave occasion carefully to
examine the progress of the new Moon, from one Gregorian hundredth to the
other; Expl. Call. p. 595.
and yet these disputes were not capable of unfolding, at that time, the real
differences that there is between several hundred Common and Bissextile years.
But as these Calculations of the full Moons have been made only to examine the
Epacts, which were regulated otherwise, the differences fell only under
examination, which being rectified, demonstrates the exactness of these
Gregorian Epacts much greater, than the very Authors of the Correction supposed
it.

It Is a thing worthy of remark, that the Astronomical Hypotheses of the
Gregorian Calendar, are found at present more conformable to the Celestial
motions, than they were supposed at the time of the correction; for as it
appears by the project which Pope Gregory XIII. sent to the Christian Princes,
in the year 1577, he proposed in the regulation of the years to follow the
Alphonsine Tables, which were judged to be preferable to the others; but to
retrench three days in 400 Julian years, he was obliged to suppose the solar
year shorter by some seconds than the Alphonsine, and to prefer this
convenience to a greater exactness: and yet all the Astronomers, which have
since compared the modern observations with the ancient, have found that the
Tropical year is indeed somewhat shorter than the Alphonsine, although they be not
agreed in the precise difference.

The greatness of the lunar month which results from the Gregorian Hypothesis
of the Equation of the Epacts, which is 8 days in 2500 Julian years, is also
more conformable to the modern Astronomers, than the lunar month of the
Alphonsine, and the disposition of the Gregorian Epacts and the new and full
Moons which result therefrom, are also oftentimes more precise than they which
finished the correction pretended.

In fine, the whole system of the Gregorian Calendar has some Beauties which
have not been known by those who were the Authors thereof, as is that of giving
the Epacts conformable to those which are found by the great lunisolar period,
which has for Epoch the same year of Jesus Christ, and the very day, which
according to the ancient tradition, immediately precedes the day of the
Incarnation; from whence may be drawn the Equinoxes and new Moons with more
facility than from the Egyptian Epoch of the Golden number, of which they
would in some manner keep the relation.

'Twere to be wished that, seeing that in the project sent to the Christian
Princes and to the Universities, Expl. Call. p. 4.
it was proposed to retrench 10 or 12 days from the Julian year about the end
of the past Age; they had retrenched 12, which is the difference between 1600
Julian years and 1600 Gregorian years, to place the Equinoxes on the same days
of the Gregorian year as they were in the Julian year, according to the form
re-established by Augustus, in the Epoch of Jesus Christ, rather than to
restore them to the days whereon they were at the time of the strange Epoch
chosen by the Alexandrians for their particular convenience: and that instead
of regulating the Epacts by the defective Cycle of the Alexandrians, and of
seeking Equations and Corrections for the Epacts born by this Cycle, they had
also taken heed to the great lunisolar period of 11600 years, that we have
proposed, which immediately gives the true days of the Epacts: which reduces
the new Moons to the same day of the year and of the week, and which has the
most august and most memorable Epoch amongst the Christians that can be
imagined.

I doubt not that if from this time they had found this period which we have
proposed, they would have employed it not only for the Excellency of its
Epoch, but also because the greatness of the month which it supposes is as
conformable to the Alphonsine Tables, as the greatness of the year which they
establish to conform themselves to these Tables, the most that the convenience
of the calculation did permit.

For this period is composed of 143472 lunar months, and of 4236813 natural
days; and consequently it supposes the lunar month 29 days, 12h, 44, 3, 5, 28,
48, 20; and the Alphonsine Tables do suppose it 29 days, 12h, 44, 3, 2, 58, 51,
which is shorter by 2, than that of our period.

According to Tycho Brahe, the lunar month is 29 days, 12h, 44, 3, 8, 29, 46,
48, which exceeds ours by three; thus this month is a mean between that of
Alphonsus, and that of Tycho Brahe.

Therefore this great period composed of a number of these whole months; and of
a number of Gregorian periods of 400 years, and consequently of entire weeks,
and entire days, might be proposed to serve as a Rule to compare all the other
periods together, and to relate the times before and after the Epoch of Jesus
Christ, which would be the end of the first of our periods, and the beginning
of the second; and as this great period has been invented in the exercises
which are performed in the Royal Academy of Sciences, and in the Observatory
Royal, under the Protection and by the Orders of the King; it seems that if the
Julian period has taken its name from Julius Caesar, and the Gregorian from
Gregory XIII, this might also justly be named the lunisolar period of LOVIS LE
GRAND.

Note, That what is said at the beginning of Page 189, that in this extract the
numbers are written from the top to the bottom, after the manner of the
Chinese, must be understood, that they place the sum of the minutes under that
of the degrees, that of the seconds under that of the minutes, that of the
thirds under that of the seconds, and so successively, as we place the sums one
under the other, when we would make the Addition thereof: but in every
particular sum, whether of degrees, or minutes, seconds, thirds or others, the
Ciphers are ranged in this extract according to our manner of ranging them.

Note, Also, that the word Souriat, which is found Page 193 and elsewhere, is
the name of the Sun in the learned Language of Paliacata, and that the word
aatit, which is found Page 195 is likewise the name of the Sun, but in the
Balie Tongue, and also in the vulgar Language of Paliacata, as it has been
before remarked in the Chapter of the Names of the days, of the months, and of
the years.

The End.
The Problem of the Magical Squares according to the Indians.
THis Problem is thus:

A square being divided into as many little equal squares as shall be desired,
it is necessary to fill the little squares with as many numbers given in
Arithmetical progression, in such a manner that the numbers of the little
squares of each rank, whether from top to bottom, or from right to left, and
those of the Diagonals do always make the same sum.

Now to the end that a square might be divided into little equal squares, it is
necessary that there are as many ranks of little squares, as there shall be
little squares to each rank.

The little squares I will call the cases, and the rows from top to bottom
upright, and those from right to left transverse; and the word rank shall
equally denote the upright and transverse.

I have said that the Cases must be filled with numbers in Arithmetical
progression, and because that all Arithmetical Progression is indifferent for
this Problem, I will take the natural for example, and will take the Unite for
the first number of the progression.

Behold then the two first examples, viz. the square of nine Cases, and that of
16, filled, the one with the nine first numbers from the unite to nine, and the
other with the sixteen first numbers from the unite to 16: So that in the
square of 9 Cases, the sum of every upright, and that of every Transverse is
15, and that of each Diagonal 15 also: and that in that of 16 Cases, the sum
of every upright, and that of every Transverse is 34, and that of each Diagonal
34 also.

4 9 2 3 5 7 8 1 6 1 15 14 4 12 6 7 9 8 10 11 5 13 3 2 16

This Problem is called Magical Squares, because that Agrippa in his second
Book De Occulta Philosophia, cap. 22. informs us that they were used as
Talismans, after having engraved them on plates of diverse metals: the cunning
that there is in ranging the numbers after this manner, having appeared so
mavelous to the ignorant, as to attribute the Invention thereof to Spirits
superior to man. Agrippa has not only given the two preceding Squares, but five
successively, which are those of 25, 36, 49, 64, and 81 Cases; and he reports
that these seven squares were consecrated to the seven Planets. The
Arithmeticians of these times have looked upon them as an Arithmetical sport,
and not as mystery of Magic: And they have sought out general methods to range
them.

The first that I know who labored therein, was Gaspar Bachet de Meziriac, a
Mathematician famous for his learned Commentaries on Diophantus. He found out
an ingenious method for the unequal squares, that is to say, for those that
have a number of unequal cases: but for the equal squares he could find none.
It Is in a Book in Octavo, which he has entitled, Pleasant Problems by numbers.

Mr. Vincent, whom I have so often mentioned in my Relation, seeing me one day
in the Ship, during our return, studiously to range the Magical squares after
the manner of Bachet, informed me that the Indians of Suratte ranged them with
much more facility, and taught me their method for the unequal squares only,
having, he said, forgot that of the equal.

The first square, which is that of 9 cases, returned to the square of Agrippa,
it was only subverted: but the other unequal squares were essentially different
from those of Agrippa. He ranged the numbers in the cases immediately, and
without hesitation; and I hope that it will not be unacceptable that I give the
Rules, and the demonstration of this method, which is surprising for its
extreme facility to execute a thing, which has appeared difficult to all our
Mathematicians.

1. After having divided the total square into its little squares, they place
the numbers according to their natural order, I would say by beginning with the
unite, and continuing with 2, 3, 4, and all the other numbers successively; and
they place the unite, or the first number of the Arithmetical Progression
given, in the middle case of the upper transverse.

2. When they have put a number into the highest case of an upright, they place
the following number in the lowest case of the upright, which follows toward
the right: that is to say, that from the upper transverse they descend
immediately to that below.

3. When they have placed a number in the last case of a transverse, the
following is put in the first case of the transverse immediately superior, that
is to say, that from the last upright, they return immediately to the first
upright on the left.

4. In every other occurrence, after having placed a number, they place the
following in the cases which follow diametrically or slantingly from the bottom
to the top, and from the left to the right, until they come to one of the cases
of the upper transverse, or of the last upright to the right.

5. When they find the way stopped by any case already filled with any number,
then they take the case immediately under that which they have filled, and they
continue it as before, diametrically from the bottom to the top, and from the
left to the right.

These few Rules, easy to retain, are sufficient to range all the unequal
squares in general. An example renders them more intelligible.

17 24 1 8 15 23 5 7 14 16 4 6 13 20 22 10 12 19 21 3 11 18 25 2 9

This square is essentially different from that of Agrippa; and the method of
Bachet is not easily accommodated thereto; and on the contrary, the Indian
method may easily give the squares of Agrippa, by changing it in something.

1. They place the unite in the Case, which is immediately under that of the
Center, and they pursue it diametrically from top to bottom, and from the left
to the right.

2. From the lowest case of an upright, they pass to the highest case of the
upright which follows on the right; and from the last case of a Transverse they
return to the left to the first case of the Transverse immediately inferior.

3. When the way is interrupted, they reassume two cases underneath that which
they filled; and if there remains no case underneath, or that there remains but
one, the first case of the upright is thought to return in order after the
last, as if it was indeed underneath the lowest.

An Example taken from Agrippa.
11 24 7. 20 3 4 12 25 8 16 17 5 13 21 9 10 18 1 14 22 23 6 19 2 15

As Bachet has not given the demonstration of his method, I have searched it
out, not doubting but it would give me also that of the Indian method: But to
make my demonstration understood, it is necessary that I give the method of
Bachet.

1. The square being divided by cases, to be filled with numbers in the Magical
order, he augments it before all things by the square sides in this manner. To
the upper part of the first transverse, he adds another transverse, but
contracted by two cases, viz. one at each end. Over this first transverse
contracted he adds a second contracted by two new cases. To the second he adds
a third more contracted than he former, to the third a fourth, and so on, if it
is necessary, until that the last transverse have but one case. Underneath the
last transverse he adds likewise as many transverses more contracted one than
the other: And in sine, to the first upright no the left, to the last upright
on the right, he adds also as many uprights thus contracted.

EXAMPLES.

a b a b b a b a b a b b b a b b b b b b b b a b b b a b

aa are the squares of 9 and 25 cases, bb are the cases of Augmentation.

The square being thus augmented, Bachet there places the numbers according to
the natural order, as well of the numbers as the cases, in the following manner.

1 4 2 7 5 3 8 6 9 1 6 2 11 7 3 16 12 8 4 21 17 13 9 5 22 18 14 10 23 19 15 24
20 25

In this disposition it is evident that the cases of the true square are
alternately full, and alternately empty, and that its two Diameters are
entirely full. Now the full cases receive not any change in the sequel of the
operation, and the Diameters remain always such as they are by position in the
square augmented: but for the cases of the true square, which are likewise
void, they must be filled with the numbers which are in the cases of
Augmentation, by transporting the high ones lower, and the low ones higher,
each into its upright; those of the right to the left, and those of the left to
the right, each into its transverse, and all to as many cases, as there are in
the side of the real square. Thus in the square of 9 cases, which has only
three in its side, the unite, which is in the case of Augmentation at the top,
is removed to the third case below in the same upright; 9, which is in the case
of Augmentation below, is removed to the third case above in the same upright;
3, which is in the case of Augmentation on the right, is removed toward the
left, to the third case in the same transverse; and in fine, 7, which is in the
case of Augmentation on the left, is removed toward the right, to the third
case in the same transverse.

After the same manner, in the square of 25 cases, which has 5 in its side, the
numbers, which are in the cases of Augmentation above, do descend 5 cases below
each in its upright. Those of the cases of Augmentation below do ascend five
cases above each in its upright. Those of the cases of Augmentation on the
right do pass 5 cases to the left, each in its transverse: and those of the
cases of Augmentation on the left do pass 5 cases to the right, each also in
its transverse. It ought to be the same in all the other squares
proportionably, and thereby they will become all Magical.

Definitions.
1. IN the augmented square of Bachet, the ranks of Augmentation shall be
called Complements of the ranks of the true square, into which the numbers of
the ranks of Augmentation must be removed: and the ranks which must receive the
Complements, shall be called defective ranks. Now as by Bachet's method every
number of the cases of Augmentation must be removed to as many cases as there
are in the side of the true square, it follows that every defective rank is as
far distant from its Complements, as there are cases in the side of the true
square.

2. Because that the true square, that is to say, that which it is necessary to
fill with numbers according to the Magical Order, is always comprehended in the
square augmented, I will consider it in the square augmented, and I will call
its ranks and its diameters, the ranks and diameters of the true square: but
its ranks, whether transverse or upright, shall comprehend the cases, which
they have at both ends; because that the numbers which are in the cases of
Augmentation, proceed neither from their transverse nor from their upright,
when removed into the cases of the true square, according to Bachet's method.

3. The diameters of the square augmented are the middle upright. and middle
transverse of the true square, and they are the sole ranks which are not
defective, and which receive no complement. They neither acquire, nor lose any
number in Bachet's operation: they suffer only the removal of their numbers
from some of their cases into others.

4. As the augmented square has ranks of another construction than are the
ranks of the true square, I will call them Bands and Bars. The Bands descend
from the left to the right, as that wherein are the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, in
the preceding example, the Bars descend from the right to the left, as that,
wherein are the numbers 1, 6, 11, 16, 21, in the same example.

Preparation to the Demonstration.
THE Problems of the Magical squares consists in two things.

The first is that every transverse and very upright make the same sum, and the
second that every diameter make likewise that same sum. I shall not speak at
present of this last condition, no more than if I sought it not. And because
that to arrive at the first, it is not necessary that all the numbers, which
ought to fill a Magical square, be in Arithmetical proportion continued, but
that it suffices that the numbers of a Band be Arithmetically proportional to
those of every other Band, I will denote the first numbers of every Band by the
letters of the Latin Alphabet, and the differences between the numbers of the
same Band by the letters of the Greek Alphabet: and to the end that the numbers
of a Band be Arithmetically proportional to the numbers of every other Band, I
will set down a b ota c otb pscha d otc pschb chta e otd pschc chtb phcha ote
pschd chtc phchb psche chtd phchc chte phchd phche the differences of the
numbers of each band by the same Greek Letters.

1. Nothing hinders why the Sign --, may not be placed instead of the Sign,
either before all the differences, or before some, provided that the same Sign
be before the same difference in each band: for so the Arithmetical proportion
will not be altered.

2. The greater a square shall be, the more Latin and Greek Letters it will
have; but every band will never have but one Latin Letter, and all the Greek
Letters; and the Latin Letter shall be different in each band. Every bar on the
contrary shall have all the Latin Letters, and all except the first shall have
a Greek Letter, which shall be different in every bar.

Demonstration.
FRom hence it follows. 1. That the diameters of the augmented square have each
all the Latin and all the Greek Letters, because that they have each a case of
every band, and a case of every bar, and that the cases of every band do give
them all the Latin Letters, and the cases of each bar all the Greek. The sum
then of these two diameters is the same, viz. that of all the Letters, as well
Greek as Latin, taken at once. Now these two diameters do make an upright and a
transverse in the Magical square, because that in the operation of Bachet,
their sum changes not by the loss or acquisition of any number, as I have
already remarked.

2. As the ranks of the true square, whether transverse or upright, are as
distant from their complements, as there are cases in the side of the true
square, it follows that the bands, and the bars, which begin with a complement,
or above this complement, touch not, that is to say, have no case at the
defective rank of this complement; and that the bands and the bars which begin
with a defective rank or above, have no case in its complement: the Letters
then of the defective rank, are all different from those of the complements;
because that different bands have different Latin Letters, and that different
bars have different Greek Letters. But because that all the bands, and all the
bars, have each a case in all the defective ranks, or in their complements:
then every defective rank whatever, will have all the Letters, when it shall
have received its complement; it will have all the Latin, because that all the
bands, passing through every defective rank, or through its complement, do
there leave all the Latin Letters; and it will have all the Greek, because that
all the bars, passing also through every defective rank, or through its
complement, do there leave all the Greek Letters. And thus all the defective
ranks will make the same sum in the Magical square, and the same sum as the
diameters of the square augmented, which are the two sole ranks not defective
of the true square.

That this Method cannot agree to even Squares.
THE Demonstration which I have given, agrees to the equal squares, as well as
to the unequal, in this that in the augmented equal square, every defective
rank and its complement do make the sum, which a range of the Magical square
ought to make: But there is this inconvenience to the equal squares, that the
numbers of the cases of Augmentation, do find the cases of the true square
filled with other numbers, which they ought to fill; because that every case is
full, which goes in an equal rank after a full case, and that in the equal
squares, the cases of the defective ranks do come in an equal rank, after those
of the complements, the defective ranks being as remote from the complements,
as the side of the square has cases, and the side of every equal square having
its cases in equal number.

Of the Diameters of the unequal Magical Squares.
BY Bachet's operation it is clear, that he understands that the diameters are
such as they ought to be, by the sole position of the numbers in the augmented
square: and this will be always true, provided only that it is supposed, that
the number of the case of the middle of each band, be a mean Arithmetic
proportion between the other numbers of the same band, taken two by two: a
condition, which is naturally included in the ordinary Problem of the Magical
squares, wherein it is demanded that all the numbers be in Arithmetical
proportion continued. Alternando the mean number of each bar, will be also a
mean Arithmetic proportional between all the numbers of the same bar taken two
by two: and hereby every mean, taken as many times as there are cases in the
band, or in the bar, which is all one, will be equal to the total sum of the
band, or of the bar. Therefore all the means of the bands, taken as many times
as there are cases in every band, or which is all one, in the side of the
square, will be equal to the total sum of the square: then taken once only,
they will be equal to the sum of one of the ranks of the Magical square; and it
will be the same of the means of the bars: and because that the means of the
bands do make one diameter, and the means of the bars the other, it is proved
that the diameters will be exact by the sole position of the numbers in the
augmented square, provided that every mean of a band, be a mean Arithmetic
proportional between all the numbers of its band, taken two by two.

In a word, as in the squares there are no augmented pairs, nor true square,
nor diameters of the true square, because that the bands of the equal squares
have not a mean number, it is likewise a reason, which evinces that this method,
cannot be accommodated to the equal squares.

Methods of varying the Magical Squares by Bachet's Square augmented.
1. BY varying the order of the numbers in the bands, or in the bars, provided
that the order which shall be taken, be the same in all the bands, or the same
in all the bars, to the end that in this order the numbers of a band or of a
bar, be Arithmetically proportioned to those of every other band or bar: but it
is necessary that not any of the diameters loses any of its numbers.

2. Or rather (which will amount to the same) by varying the order of the bars
amongst them in the augmented square: for this troubles not the Arithmetical
proportion, which is the ground of the preceding demonstration: but it is
necessary to remember to leave always in their place the band and the bar,
which do make the two diameters.

3. By not putting the first number of each band, in the first case of each
band: As for example d e a b c a a d b c c e a d b b c e a d b c a d e d, a, e,
c, b, are the five letters of the first band, the order of which is arbitrary,
and the letter d, which is in the first case of this first band, is not found
in the first case of any other band: but in the fourth case of the second band,
in the second of the third, in the fifth of the fourth, and in the third of the
fifth. Besides the succession or order of the Letters must be the same in every
band. But because that in the bands where the Letter d is in a case lower than
the first, there remains not case enough underneath, to put all the other
Letters successively, the first cases of the bands do return in order after the
last, and are in this case thought the last cases of their bands. A
circumstance which it is necessary carefully to observe.

If then in an augmented square the numbers are disposed in each band, as in
the bands of this square I have disposed the Letters a, b, c, d, e, and which
one continues to operate like Bachet, that is to say, to remove as he does, the
numbers of the cases of Augmentation into the void cases of the real square,
the true square will be Magical, at least as to the ranks, whether transverse
or upright, for I speak not as yet of the Diameters.

I shall call those capital cases, wherein are found the Letters like to the
Letter which is put in the first case of the first band, which I will call the
first capital case.

Preparation to the Demonstration.
1. IT is necessary to observe in disposing these Letters, that after having
chosen the capital case of the second band, near a Letter of the first band,
which I will call the Letter of Indication, so that this second capital case be
also the second case of the bar which begins with this Letter of Indication,
one may choose the capital case of the third band, near the Letter of the second
band, like to the first Letter of Indication, so that this third capital case
be the third of the bar, wherein shall be the second Letter of Indication.
After the same manner shall be determined the capital case of every band, near
the Letter of Indication of the precedent band. From whence it follows, that
there are as many capital cases as bands, and no more.

It follows also, that not only the Letter d is always under the Letter c in
the same bar, but that all the other Letters are always under the same Letters
in the same bars, and that the Letters have likewise the same order in all the
bars, as they have the same in all the bands, though the orders of the Letters
in the bars, is not the same as the order of the Letters in the bands.

1. The choice of the capital case of the second band, which determines that of
the rest, is not entirely arbitrary. To regulate it it is necessary to have
regard to the number of the ranks of the true square, which is the number 5 in
the preceding example, and which is always the square root of the number, which
expresses the multitude of the cases of the true square, and so I will call it
the root of the square.

Take then a number at your own choice, provided nevertheless that it be less
than the root of the square, and first to this very root, and that by adding
two points, it be still first at the same root of the square: 'Twill be by this
number, that we shall determine the choice of the second capital case: and we
call it the number determining.

The second capital case must not be the second case of the second band,
because that this second case is found in the upright diameter of the augmented
square, and that there must not be two Letters alike in any of the diameters of
the augmented square: and so as the first capital case is already in the
upright diameter, the second cannot be there. It is necessary on the contrary,
that the case which you shall choose in the second band, for the second capital,
be as far distant from the second case of the upright diameter, as your
determining number shall have Unites, and at the same time your second capital
shall be removed from the first capital case as many transverses, as your
determining number 2 shall have Unites. Thus in the preceding example, the
second capital case, viz. the case of the second band, where is the Letter d,
is the second case after that, which is in the upright diameter, and it is in
the fourth transverse underneath the first capital case, which alone is looked
upon as a transverse, and the number 2, which determines this second capital
case, is first to 5, which is the root of the square, and 2 2 that is to say 4,
is likewise first to 5, the third case of the second band is therefore the
first, which removes from the upright diameter, and it is with this that it is
necessary to begin to compute the distance of the rest: so that the first case
of this second band is in this sense the remotest of the second case, though to
reckon after a contrary sense it touches it.

You may then in the preceding example, where the root of the square is 5, take
either 1 or 2, or 4, which do give you three different cases, of which you may
make your second capital case, 1 is first to 5, and 1 will give you the case
wherein is b, three transverses distant from the first capital case. 2 is first
to 5, and 2 2 that is to say 4, is also first to 5, and 2 will give you the
case wherein is d, 4 transverses distant from the first capital case. 3 is also
first to 5, but because that 3 2, that is to say 5, is not first to 5, 3 can
give you in this example only a false capital case. 4 is first to 5, and 4 2
that is to say 6, is also first to 5, but from 6 it is necessary to deduct 5
which is the root, and there will remain 1. And 4 will give you the case
wherein is e, the fourth in distance from the case of the diameter rising, and
has a transverse near the first capital. The number 4 will give you then
Bachet's disposition, who has placed all the capital cases in the first bar:
and as often as for a determining number you shall take a less number by an
Unite, than the root of the square, you will fall into Bachet's disposition.

3. From hence it follows, that the diameter ascending will not have any other
capital case than the first, which it has already, and that so it will not have
twice the Letter, which shall be in the capital cases. To prove it let us
suppose that our bands be sufficiently extended toward the right, to make as
many new uprights as we desire; and let us mark the first upright, which shall
be as distant from the diameter ascending, as the root of the square has
Unites: that is to say, which shall be the fifth on the right of the diameter
ascending, if the root of the square is 5. And at a like distance from this
first upright marked, let us mark a second, and then a third, and a fourth,
always at an equal distance one from the other, until that there are as many
uprights marked, as the determining number has Unites. In this case as the
determining number and the root of the square are first amongst them, the last
upright marked will be the sole one, whose distance to take it from the
diameter ascending, would be divisible by the determining number.

Suppose also, that now the bands are long enough, the capital cases are marked
all together, and without ever returning to the first cases of the bands, as it
was necessary to do, before that the bands were extended, because that then
they had not cases enough after the capital, to receive all the Letters
successively. I say that in these suppositions, none of these marked uprights
will have a capital cases except the last: because that it is the sole marked
upright, whose distance from the diameter ascending unto it, is divisible by
the determining number: for as the uprights, wherein are the capital cases, are
as remote ( viz. the first from the upright, the second from the first, the
third from the second, and so successively) as the determining number has
Unites, it follows that no upright has a capital case when the distance from
the upright diameter unto it, is not divisible by the determining number. It Is
proved then that no marked upright, except the last, will have a capital case:
and the capital case which it shall have will be the first beyond the number of
the cases necessary to your augmented square, because that in counting the
first capital case, there will be as many others before this, as the root of
the square has Unites.

Now when you mark the capital cases in a square augmented, according to the
methed which I have given, so that when you arrive at the last case of a band,
you return to its first case, as if it was after the last, you do no other
thing, than successively to place all the capital cases, in respect of the
diameter ascending, as in the case of the extension of the bands, you will
place one after the other in regard of all the uprights successively marked.
And none of your capital cases, except a first supernumerary, can fall into
your ascending diameter, as no other, except a first supernumerary, could fall
into your last upright marked.

4. But if you consider the first capital case, as a transverse, and that you
make the same suppositions as before, so that there are as many transverses
marked, as the determining number 2 shall have Unites, and as distant ( viz.
the first from the first capital case, the second from the first, the third
from the second, and so successively) as the root of the square shall have
Unites: From this that the root of the square and the determining number 2 are
first amongst them, and from this that the determining number 2 expresses the
distance of the transverses, wherein will be the capital cases, you will prove
that there shall be only the last transverse marked, which has a capital case,
which will be the first supernumerary: and consequently, that the defective
rank, the first capital case of which is the complement, will have no capital
case, because that it is the first transverse marked: and you will prove also
that the first supernumerary capital case must return to the transverse of the
first capital case, and as it must return likewise to the upright diameter, it
follows that the first supernumerary case, that is to say, that which you would
mark after the last of the necessary, is the first capital case, because there
is only this which is common to its transverse, and to the upright diameter.

5. From the order of the letters, alike in all the bands and alike also in all
the bars, you will prove that all the letters alike, are at the same distance
one from the other, and in the same order amongst them, as the letters of the
capital cases amongst them, and that so all the cases which contain letters
alike may be considered as capital, so that two letters alike, are never found
in the same upright, nor in the same transverse, nor in a defective rank, nor
in its complement. Which needs no other demonstration.

Demonstration.
THis supposed, the demonstration of the Problem is easy, for whereas no
letter is twice in any of the diameters of the augmented square, nor in any
defective rank and its complement, it follows that every of the two diameters,
and every defective rank and its complement have all the letters, and that
consequently they make the same sum.

Of the Diameters.
THe Band which makes one of the diameters being Magical by position, as it
ought to be, continues Magical, because that it receives not any new Letter,
nor loses any of its own. The bar which makes the other diameter is found
Magical by the disposition, and the proof is this.

As far as the bar of the second capital case is removed from the first bar, so
much the bar of the third capital case, is removed from the bar of the second,
and so successively, the first bars to which you return, being reckoned in this
case as coming after the last. Now the bar of the second capital case is as far
distant from the first as there are Unites in the determining number 1.
Therefore if the determining number 1 is first to the root of the square, the
preceding demonstration suffices to prove, that not any bar will have two
Letters alike, wherefore the bar which shall serve as the diameter, will not
have two Letters alike, and so it will have all the Letters once.

But if the determining number 1 is an aliquot part of the root of the square,
then each bar will have as many Letters alike, as there shall be Unites in the
determining number 1, and there will be as many different Letters, as there
shall be Unites in the other aliquot part of the root of the square, which
shall be the quotient of the division made from the root by the determining
number 1. These several Letters will be therefore in an odd number, because
that this quotient can be only an odd number, being an aliquot of an odd number
Of these Letters in an odd number, the one will be the middle of the first
band, the others, taken two by two, will be like to the Letters of the first
band, which taken also two by two, will be equally remote from the middle, the
one toward the head of the band, the other toward the tail: So that if the
order of the Letters of the first band, is as the middle by its situation, or
middle proportional between all the others, which, taken two by two, shall be
equally remote from it, then the bar which shall serve as diameter will be
Magical, because that if it has not the middle Letters of all the bands, it
will have the power thereof; for the other Letters, which shall not be mean, if
being taken two by two, the one is weaker than the middle of its band, the
other will be stronger as much as the middle of its own; and thus the two
together will countervail the middle of their bands. As for example, in the
square of 81 cases, the root of which is 9, if the determining number is 2, as
2 1, that is to say, 3 is the aliquot part of 9, the corresponding aliquot of
which, that is to say that, which returns from the division of 9 by 3, is also
3, there will be in each bar three several Letters which will every one be
there repeated three times. The first of the different will be the middle of
the first band, the two others between the different, will be alike to two of
the first band equally distant from the middle. After the same manner in the
square of 225 cases, the root of which is 15, if the determining number is
likewise 2, as 2 1, that is to say, 3 is the aliquot part of 15 (of which 5 is
the aliquot corresponding) it will happen that in every bar there will be 5
several Letters repeated every one three times. The one will be the middle of
the first band, the 4 others will be alike to 4 of the first band, which taken
two by two will be equidistant from the middle.

The Conclusion is then, that when the determining number 1, is first to the
root of the square, the bar which serves as diameter can only be Magical: but
that if the determining number 1, is aliquot of the root of the square, the bar
which serves as diameter cannot be Magical; that the middle Letter of the first
band, cannot be the middle Arithmetic of all the other Letters of its first
band two by two, and that it is not the Letters of its band, which, taken two
by two, are at equal distances from it, and the like of which ought to enter
into the bar, which shall serve as diameter. After this the order of the
Letters of the first band is arbitrary.

In a word, the nearest of these equidistant Letters, shall be each as distant
from the middle, as the determining number 1 shall have Unites, the following
shall be as remote from these first, every one from its own, and so
successively.

I have said that it is necessary to take the second capital case in the second
band, tho it may be taken in such other band as one pleases, provided that the
band of the third capital case be as distant from the band of the second case,
as this shall be from the first, and that the band of the fourth capital case
be at this very distance from the band of the third, and so successively, the
first bands returning in order after the last. But besides this, it is
necessary that this distance be expressed by a number first to the root of the
square, and the thing will return to the same, that is to say, to put a capital
case in each band. But if you put the second capital case in a band, whose
distance from the first band, was not expressed by a number first to the root
of the square, then several capital cases would fall in the first band, which
being supposed full of all the different Letters, could not receive the like
Letters, which fill the capital cases.

Another way of varying the Magical Squares.
YOU shall double the preceding variations, if you perform in the bars what you
did in the bands, and in the bands what you performed in the bars; taking for
one of the diameters, a bar which should be Magical by position, and rendering
Magical by disposition the band which shall be the other diameter.

From these Principles it follows, that the square of 9 cases is always the
same, without being able to receive essential varieties, because that it can
have only two for the determining number: and because that the removing of the
bands, or of the bars amongst them, makes only a simple subversion, by reason
that there are only two bands and two bars subject to transposition, and that
the band and the bar which serve as diameters cannot be displaced.

It follows also, that always one of the diameters at least must be Magical by
position: and that the greatest and least of the number proposed to fill a
Magical square, can never be at the center, because that the center is always
filled by one of the numbers of the diameter by position, in which, be it band
or bar, the greatest nor smallest number cannot be.

On the contrary, the middle number of the whole square, that is to say, that
which by the position is at the center of the augmented square, will remain at
the center of the Magical square, as often as the diameter by position shall
have the capital case at one of its ends, but in every other case it will go
out thence, and yet it will never depart from the diameter by position.

All which things must be understood according to the suppositions above
explained. Besides I know that the uneven Magical squares may be varied into a
surprising number of ways, unto which all that I have said would not agree.

In fine, one of the diverse methods, which result from the Principles which I
have explained, is Indian, as may be proved, by removing into an augmented
square the numbers of an Indian Magical square, in such a manner, that the
cases of Augmentation be full of the Numbers, which they must render to the
true square. It will be seen how the numbers shall be ranged in the augmented
square, in one of the methods which I have explained.

An Illustration of the Indian Method.
AS I had communicated to Mr. de Malezieu, Intendant to the Duke of Main, the
Indian unequal squares, without saying any thing to him of my Demonstration,
which I had not as yet fully cleared, he found out one which has no relation to
Bachet's augmented square, and which I will briefly explain, because that the
things which I have spoken, will help to make me understood.

Let there be a square which we will call natural, in which the numbers should
be placed in their natural order in this manner.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25

The business is to dispose these numbers magically into another square of as
many cases and empty.

1. In considering this square, I see that the two diameters, and the middle
upright and transverse means do make the same sum: which Mr. de Malezieu
thought to have given ground to the Problem, out of a desire of rendering the
other transverses and other uprights equal also, without destroying the
equality of Diagonals.

2. I see that the first transverse contains all the numbers, from the unite to
the root of the square: that the second transverse contains these same numbers
and in the same order, but augmented every one with a root: that the third
contains also these very numbers in the same order, augmented every one with
two roots: that it is the same in every transverse, save that the fourth has
every one of these numbers augmented with three roots, that the fifth has them
augmented with four roots, and so in proportion of the other transverses, if
there were more.

3. It therefore occurs naturally to my mind to consider another square, where
in every transverse I will place the same numbers, which are in the first, that
is to say from the unite to the root of the square, without augmenting them
with any root in any transverse; and I find presently that the transverses will
be equal in their sums, having each the same numbers; and that the uprights of
this new square, will have the same surplusage one over the other, as the
uprights of the natural square, because that the difference of the uprights in
the natural square, proceeds not from the roots affixt to the numbers, but from
these numbers which are repeated in every transverse, as it is seen in this
example, where the strokes annexed to the numbers, do denote the roots wherewith
each number is augmented in the natural square.

1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5

4. It is evident that in this square all the transverses are equal, in that
they have every one the same numbers, and that the uprights are only unequal
because that they have not every one all those different numbers which are in
every transverse, but on the contrary one alone of these numbers repeated as
many times as there are squares in every upright. Therefore I shall render the
uprights equal to one another, if I make that not one of these numbers be twice
in every upright, but that all be there once. And because that these very
numbers do bear every one the same number of roots in the same transverse, I
shall also render the transverses equal, if I make that every transverse have
not all these several numbers of it self, but that it borrows one of every
transverse. Thus the diameters are already equal, because that they have every
one the several numbers that it is necessary to have, and that they take one
from every transverse, that is to say, one without the root, the other
augmented with a root, the other with 2, the other with 3, and so successively.

The true secret then is to dispose all the numbers of every transverse in a
diametrical way, that is to say slanting, so that having placed one number, the
following will be in another transverse and another upright at the same time.
Which cannot be better performed than after the Indian manner.

1 5 4 3 2

These are the numbers of the first transverse placed slanting --, so that
there is not two in the same upright nor in the same transverse. I must
therefore dispose the numbers of the second transverse after the same manner,
and because that I must avoid placing the first number of this transverse,
under the first of the other, I cannot do better than to place it under the
last in this manner.

1 3 5 2 4 1 5 3 2 4

With the same Economy I dispose the other transverses, placing always the
first number of the one under the last of the other; and for one of the
diameters I put the middle transverse, because that naturally it is Magical.

2 4 1 3 5 3 5 2 4 1 4 1 3 5 2 5 2 4 1 3 1 3 5 2 4

It is clear that in this disposition not any transverse, nor any upright have
two numbers, neither from the same transverse, nor from the same upright of the
natural square, and that the diameter which we have not made by position, has
also only one number from every transverse, and every upright of the natural
square. This is what M. de Malezieu thought, without having had the leisure to
fathom it further; and it is evidently the Principle, on which the Indian
Method and that of Bachet are grounded, and all the others, of which I have
shown, that it is possible to vary the Magical squares. And if care be taken
that in a Magical square the ranks parallel to the diameters are defective, and
that they have their complements, it will be seen that Bachet's augmented
square, and the Magical square have opposite proprieties. In the augmented
square, the bands which are the true ranks, are not Magical, and its defective
ranks augmented with their complements are. On the contrary, in the Magical
square the ranks are Magical, and the defective ranks and their complements do
contain, every one, what a band of the augmented square contains.

To finish what M. de Malezieu has thought, it is necessary only to accommodate
what we have said concerning the choice of the capital cases: and because that
this is easy to do, I will speak no more of it.

M. de Malezieu thought likewise, that this principle might serve to the even
squares, and this is true: but here likewise there is found difficulty in the
execution, because that in the even squares, the defective ranks and their
complements have every one a case in the same diameter, or have none at all, so
that by dispersing the numbers from a transverse into a defective rank, and its
complement, two numbers of this transverse are put into the same diameter, or
else none at all, and the one and the other of these two things is equally bad.
Besides there is no transverse in the even squares, which can furnish a
diameter by position: and so it would be necessary to remove a little into the
even squares, after the Indian manner of dispencing the numbers, and to put one
into each rank and one into each diameter. But the Method presents not it self
immediately. However here is the first example thereof.

8 11 14 1 2 13 12 7 9 6 3 16 15 4 5 10

Of the Indian Method of the Even Squares.
I Thought to have divined it from the examples of the squares of 16, 36, and
64 cases, which Agrippa has given us.

1. As the ranks are in even number in the even squares, they may be considered
two by two. Comparing then the first to the last, the second to the last save
one, the third to the last but two, and so successively, by equally removing us
from the first and the last ranks, we will call them opposite, be they
transverse, or upright.

Now because that the numbers of one rank, are arithmetically proportional with
those of another rank of the same way, it is clear to those who understand
arithmetical proportion, that two opposite ranks do make the same total sum as
two other opposite ranks, and that if this sum be divided into two equals, each
half will be the sum that a Magical rank ought to make.

2. The opposite numbers are also the first and last of the whole square, the
second and last save one, the third and last but two, and so successively, by
removing as equally from the first and last numbers: so that the sum of two
opposite numbers is always equal to the sum of other opposites.

From hence it is evident, that the numbers opposite to those of one rank, are
the numbers which are in the opposite rank, and that to render the sums of two
opposite ranks equal, it is necessary only to take the moity of the numbers of
one of the ranks, and to exchange them for their opposites, which are in the
other. As for Example 1 14 15 4 13 2 3 16 1, 2, 3, 4, do make the first natural
rank of the square of 16 cases, and 13, 14, 15, 16, do make the last rank
thereof. To render them equal, it is necessary only to take 2 and 3, which are
the moity of the numbers of the first, and to exchange them for 14 and 15,
their opposites; and so 1, 14, 15, 4, will make the same sum as 13, 2, 3, 16.

The transverses between them, and the uprights between them, may render
themselves equal by this Method: but because that the choice of the opposite
numbers may be made after several ways, the Indians have chosen one, that is
easy to retain, which leaves the diameters such as they are in the natural
square, because that they are such as they ought to be, and ranges the
uprights, when it is intended only to range the transverses. The whole Method
consists then in knowing how to range two opposite transverses* and the rules
are these.

1. They take the half of the numbers of the upper transverse, and remove them
to the lower: and they take their opposite numbers in the lower transverse, and
remove them to the upper.

2. The numbers which remain in each rank, do remain there in their natural
place, and in their natural order: the transprosed do place themselves every
one in the case of its opposite, and consequently in a subverted order.

3. The first and the last numbers of every rank do continue in their natural
rank, the second and third are transprosed, the fourth and the fifth remain,
the sixth and the seventh are transprosed, and so alternatively two are
transprosed, and two remain.

EXAMPLE.
1 63 62 4 5 59 58 8 57 7 6 60 61 3 2 64

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, do make the first natural rank of the square of 64
cases; 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, do make the last thereof. 1 and 8 the
first and last numbers of the first rank remain there, and in their natural
place, 57 and 64 the first and last numbers of the last rank do remain there
and in their place. Afterward 2 and 3 are transprosed, 4 and 5 remain, 6 and 7
are transprosed: and after the same manner the numbers of the opposite rank 58
and 59 are removed, 60 and 61 do remain, 62. and 63 are removed. 1, 4, 5, 8,
which remain in the first rank, are in their natural cases, and consequently in
their natural order. 2, 3, 6, 7, which are removed, are in the cases of their
opposites, and are in a subverted order. After the same manner 57, 60, 61, 64,
which remain in their rank, are in their natural cases, and in their natural
order. 58, 59, 62, 63, which are removed, are in the cases of their opposites,
and in a subverted order.

All the opposite ranks must be ranged according to these few rules: but it is
not always certain that it may be necessary to put the first number of the rank
in the first case on the left; for after this manner the first and last
uprights would keep all their natural numbers, and would not be equal.
Therefore it is necessary to render them equal by the same rule as the
transverses, by removing half of the numbers of the first upright into the
cases of their opposites, leaving the first and the last in their upright,
removing the second and the third, leaving the fourth and the fifth, removing
the sixth and the seventh, and so successively according to the rules that we
have given for the transverses. The head of every transverse will be then on
the right, or on the left, according as its first number shall be continued or
removed, to the first or to the last upright, to the right or to the left.

An Example of the Square of 64 Cases.
1 63 62 4 5 59 58 8 56 10 11 53 52 14 15 49 48 18 19 45 44 22 23 41 25 39 38
28 29 35 34 32 33 31 30 36 37 2 26 40 24 42 43 21 20 46 47 17 16 50 51 13 12 54
55 9 57 7 6 60 61 3 2 64

But these rules suffice only to the squares equally even; and there is some
particular observation for them unequally even.

Every square unequally even, if you thence deduct a compass (that is to say
the first and the last transverses, the first and the last uprights) leaves a
square equally even, which must be ranged according to the aforesaid rules with
a little alteration, which we will declare. It is necessary therefore to see
how the first and last transverses do range themselves, because that the first
and last uprights do range themselves after the same manner.

1. The transverses, being of a square unequally even, have each a number of
cases unequally even: but if care be not taken about the two middle cases of
each transverse, then there will remain in every one a number of cases equally
even, which we will call the cases equally even. The first rule is therefore to
remove half of the numbers of the cases equally even, and to remove those,
which should be chosen for this purpose, into a transverse of a square equally
even. Thus the first and the last numbers do remain in their cases, the second
and the third are removed, the fourth and the fifth continue, the sixth and the
seventh are removed, and so successively: but I speak only of the numbers of
the cases equally even, and I only comprehend those in the account which I
make, no more than if the middle cases had no numbers.

2. The removed numbers pass not to the cases of their opposites, but into the
cases which are against theirs, that is to say in their upright: and so they
are not found in a subverted order in the transverse into which they pass.

An Example taken from the Square of 100 Cases.
1 4 7 10 2 3 8 9

I have not set down the numbers 5 and 6 in this example, because that they are
those of the two middle cases of the first transverse, and that the number of
the two middle cases of the first transverse, in every square unequally even
have a particular rule, which I will give. As to the eight other numbers, 1, 2,
3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, which are those of the cases equally even, they are, ranged
according to the rules which I have given. 1. The first and last are in their
natural cases, then the second and third are removed, the fourth and the fifth
remain in their natural cases, the sixth and the seventh are removed. 2. The
removed, viz. 2, 3, 8, 9, are in the cases over against theirs, and in their
natural order, and not in an inverted order.

3. As to the two middle numbers, the first continues, and the second is
removed: but the first remains not in its natural case. It passes to the case
of the second, and the second is not removed to the case which is over against
its own, but into that of its opposite: because that it is not necessary that
the first leaves its natural case to its opposite, which shall be transported
into this first transverse, and that the second leaves also to its opposite,
the case which is over against its own.

1 4 5 7 10 2 3 6 8 9

The numbers 5 and 6 are the middle. 5 remains in its transverse, but it passes
to the case of 6, and 6 is removed to the case of its opposite, and not to that
which is over against its own.

4. The numbers of the last transverse are ranged after this manner. The first
and the last remain in their cases, the others fill the cases which are vacant,
in the two transverses, and it is necessary to place them there successively,
but in an inverted order. After this manner the two transverses become equal,
because that they have given one to the other half of the numbers of the cases
equally even, and that their middle numbers do make the like sum in every
transverse, the opposites being together, and not in different transverses. It
is possible if desired to range the second transverse as we have ranked the
first, but then 'twould be necessary to rank the first as we have marked the
second.

1 99 98 4 96 5 7 93 92 10 91 2 3 97 6 95 94 8 9 100

The numbers 91 and 100, which are the first and the last of the last
transverse, do remain in their natural places, the others which are 92, 93, 94,
95, 96, 97, 98, 99, do fill the cases, which remained vacant in the two
transverses, and they are there placed successively, but in an inverted order.

5. The first and the last uprights of the squares unequally even do rank
themselves one in relation to the other, as the first and the last transverses:
and by this means the whole square unequally even is found Magical, and by a
Method easy to retain, and to execute by Memory.

The demonstration thereof is palpable. For to consider the numbers, as we have
ranked them in the first and last transverses; it is evident that the opposite
numbers, taken two by two, are there placed either diametrically in the first
and last cases of every transverse, or directly opposite in the same upright,
and because that the opposite numbers taken, thus two by two, do always make
equal sums, it follows that these two transverses being at the top and at the
bottom of the squares equally even, and interior already Magical, will add
equal sums to the diameters, and to the uprights of this interior square
equally even; and that so the uprights and diameters of the square unequally,
will be equal in their sums. It will be the same of the transverses of the
square unequally even, because that its first and its last uprights will
likewise add equal sums to the transverses of the interior square equally even.
And our demonstration would be complete, were not the two numbers mean as well
of the first, and last transverses, as of the first and last uprights: for
these numbers not being placed every right against its opposite, do add unequal
sums to the middle transverses and uprights of the interior square equally
even. Therefore to repair this inequality, which is only of two points, it is
necessary to make a little alteration in the interior square equally even,
which will be the last rule of this Method.

6. By ranging the interior square equally even, according to the rules of the
Magical squares equally even; it is necessary to invert the order, which
according to these rules of the squares equally even, the two middle numbers of
the last transverse of the square of 16 cases, which is at the center of all,
and the two middle numbers of the last upright of the same square of sixteen
cases, ought to have, you will thus weaken the first middle upright, and the
first middle transverse of the square equally even: forasmuch as in the first
transverse of the square of 16 cases, the first middle number is always
stronger than the second, and that in the last upright of the same square of 16
cases, the middle superior number is stronger than the inferior.

A Square of Thirty six Cases.
1 35 34 3 32 6 30 8 28 27 11 7 24 23 15 16 14 19 3 17 21 22 20 18 12 26 9 10
29 25 31 2 4 33 5 36

This square is that of Agrippa, save that I have placed on the right, what he
has put on the left, because that he has taken the squares which he gives,
after the Hebrew Talismans, where the natural order of the numbers is from the
right to the left, according to the Hebrew's manner of writing.

A Square of 100 Cases.
1 99 98 4 96 5 7 93 92 10 90 12 88 87 15 16 84 83 19 11 80 79 23 24 76 75 27
28 72 21 31 69 33 34 66 65 37 38 62 70 60 42 58 57 45 46 44 53 49 51 41 52 48
47 55 56 54 43 59 50 61 39 63 64 35 36 67 68 32 40 30 29 73 74 26 25 77 78 22
71 20 82 18 17 85 86 14 13 89 81 91 2 3 97 6 95 94 8 9 100

In the square of 36 cases the numbers 9 and 10, which are the middle of the
last transverse of the square of 16 cases, which is at the center, are in an
order contrary to that which they ought to have, according to the rules of the
squares equally even. Thus 14 and 20, which are the middle of the last upright
of the same square of 16 cases, are in a contrary number, to that which they
ought to have by the same rules: for it would be necessary that 10 was before
9, and 14 under 20.

In the square of 100 cases at the seventh transverse, the middle numbers 35
and 36 are placed against the very rules of the squares equally even: 36 ought
to precede 35 according to the rules: and 44 and 54 which are the middle of the
seventh upright are also inverted, because that 44 ought to be under 54.

In every square equally even ranged Magically, according to the rules which I
have given, it is infallible that in the transverse, which is immediately under
the middle transverses, the two middle numbers should be in an inverted order,
that is to say, the strongest precedes the weakest: for either these middle
numbers are removed, and consequently in an inverted order, or they are not
removed, and they are likewise in an inverted order, because that then their
transverse begins at the right: forasmuch as if the middle numbers of each rank
are not removed as it is supposed, the middle of the first upright are not, and
so the middle transverses begin on the left, therefore the transverse
underneath begins on the right. By a like ratiocination it will be proved, that
according to the rules of the squares equally even, the middle numbers of the
upright, which is immediately after the middle uprights, are ranged in such a
manner, that the strongest is always above the weakest.

This is Agrippa's Method of the even squares, which in my opinion are the
Indian, the merit of which consists not in giving the sole possible manner of
ranging the even squares, but the most easy to execute by memory: For it is to
this principally that it seems, that the Indians should addict themselves. In a
word, the Indian even squares are also Magical in the Geometrical Progression.

The Indians have two Principles for the Problem of the Magical squares, the
one of which they have applied to the uneven squares, and the other to the
even. The Mathematicians of this Country, which have labored herein, have
known only one of these two Principles, which is that of the even squares; but
they have adapted it likewise to the uneven squares, and moreover they have
added a singular condition to this Problem, which is that the Magical square be
so ranged, that in deducting its first compass, that is to say its first and
its last transverses, its first and its last uprights, the interior square
which shall remain is found Magical, after this very kind, that is to say,
being able to lose all its compasses one after the other, and to leave always
for the rest a Magical square, provided that this residue have at least 9, or
16 cases; because that the square of 4 cases cannot be Magical.

Monsieur Arnoud has given the solution of this last Problem at the end of his
Elements of Geometry, and before that he had printed it the first time, I had
also resolved this Problem in its whole extent, having been proposed to me by
the late Monsieur de Fermat, Counselor in the Parliament of Toulouse, whose
Memory is yet in Veneration amongst the learned: but then I divined not
Agrippa's Principle of the unequal squares, nor the reason of Bachet's Method.

In fine, I am obliged to render this Testimony to Monsieur Sauveur, Professor
of the Mathematics at Paris, that he found out a Demonstration of the Indian
uneven squares, which Monsieur de Melezieu communicated unto him: and that he
has also invented a Method to range the even squares. I leave unto him the care
of publishing this, and several other things of his own Invention, because that
this Chapter is already too long.

The Care of the Manners amongst the Chinese, and of the Antiquities of their
History.
CHina is happily situated, having no foreign war to fear. It has no other
Neighbors then Tartary on the North, and Tonguin on the West. Every where else
it is bounded either by the Ocean, or with a desert of several days Journey, or
with Woods, and Mountains almost impassable. Tonquin is a very little state, if
compared to China: and it is seated under those hot climates, from whence it
never comes out as Conqueror. The Tartar is continually accustomed only to make
incursions on his Enemies, and not wars in form. A wall on the frontiers of
China, which stops the passages, has sufficed during a long succession of Ages,
to stop all the Enterprises of the Tartars.

It is no wonder then if the Chinese are little addicted to War, and if the
Tartars, tho more weak, and otherwise less proper to make Conquests, have yet
subdued them twice in the space of three or four thousand years.

But as much as the Chinese have ignored war, as much are they experienced in
the knowledge of Government. Their good natural wit has made them to improve it
with so much care in the repose which their Country has almost continually
enjoyed, that next to the Laws which God gave unto Moses, there are none
perhaps which do make a compleater body of Policy, nor whose parts concur
better to the same end, than the Chinese Laws. Thus this people is the most
numerous that has ever been in the World, except perhaps the people of God:
which, in my opinion, is the best sign of an happy Government.

I have sufficiently declared in my relation, how the Chinese have suited
their Religion to their Policy, by making of the spirit of Heaven, and of the
other spirits an invisible Republic like to theirs, of which they suppose that
the members have a secret correspondence with the members of theirs, and that
they punish the hidden faults of their Kings, of their Magistrates, and of
every one of their Citizens in particular.

I have observed likewise how they have provided for the Perpetuity of their
Laws, by the dread of their dead Parents, whom they suppose to be provoked in
the other life, with the faults which their Children commit in this, and
especially with the great want of respect which it would be in the Chinese
toward their Ancestors, to change the Laws which they have left them. It Is not
therefore a vain Ceremony that they mourn for three years with an extreme
Austerity, and separated from all public Employment, which the Chinese Laws do
order Children to observe at the death of their Father and Mother, and from
which they dispense not even their Kings. They cannot too much imprint in their
minds this respect, which has always been their greatest support.

But what I most admire in the Laws of China, is the care which they have taken
to form the Morals, seeing that it is only good manners, which can maintain the
Laws, as it is only good Laws that can make good manners. Plato, methinks,
understood the whole importance of this Maxim, and if my Memory fails me not,
he requires in some places of his Laws, that they intermeddle with the privacy
of the Economy of his Citizens: and because he feared that this might appear
too new to the People, so free as the Greeks were in his time, he sought some
excuse for the little which he delivered thereof.

The Chinese, on the contrary, have not scrupled to give Laws to almost all
the Actions of men. One of their most ancient Books regulates not only the
Rites, which concern Religion and the Sacrifices, but all the Duties of
Children to their Father, and of the Father toward his Children; of the
Husband to the Wife, and of the Wife to the Husband; of Brethren and Friends to
each other; of the King to his Subjects, and of the Subjects to their King; of
the Magistrates to the People, and of the People to the Magistrates. In this
Book, which has the Authority of a Law, the old men are considered as the
Fathers of all the People, and of the King himself, the Orphans are there
considered as his Children, and all the Citizens as Brethren amongst them.
Father Martinius reports, Hist. sin. p. 352.
that there is almost no humane action, how small soever it be, to which this
Book prescribes not Laws, even to cause trouble for an exceeding small
particular. I doubt not that all the Europeans would judge like him, if this
Book came to our knowledge, but this is nevertheless a very ancient Testimony,
of the extreme care which the Chinese have continually taken of good manners.

And because they knew the prevalency which the example of Kings has over
People, their greatest study has always been to inspire Virtue into their
Kings. The People, they say, is like the Ears of Corn wherewith a field is
covered, the Morals of the Prince are like the Wind, which inclines them, where
it lists.

Their Policy has therefore no particuluar manners for their Kings, and other
manners for the People. Their Kings are obliged to respect old men: they
nourish them in every City; and the Chinese History honorably mentions such of
their Kings, which have rendered them most respect, and some others, who have
caused their illegitimate Brethren, which precede them in Age, to sit down at
their Table, and above them. Their Kings are obliged to the three years
mourning upon the death of their Father and their Mother, and to abstain during
this time from the cares of the Government, although perhaps this Law has lost it
Vigor in the last times. When China was as yet divided into little States,
which were as so many Fiefs of this great Empire, Ven-cum King of Cin chased
out of his little Kingdom by his Stepmother, would not undertake a war to
re-enter, till he had mourned for his Father three years.

They believe amongst other things, that their dead Parents can shorten or
prolong the life of their Children; they desire of them a long and happy life,
and upon this ridiculous ground, they have in the same terms with us, this
precept, which we have from God himself, and of which his eternal verity is
protecter unto us: Honor thy Father and thy Mother that thou may enjoy a
long life.

Xin the first King of the Race Cina, having banished his Mother for her
incontinence, and because that his Adulterer made use of the favor of this
Princess to revolt, and to assemble a great Army, was constrained by all his
Ministers to recall her from exile, although he had made himself King by force,
and that thereby he seemed to be stronger than the Laws.

Hoei the second King of the Race Hana, having also an unchaste Mother, dared
not to punish her: but not being willing to reign and suffer her debaucheries,
he abandoned the Government to her out of an extreme Piety, and plunged himself
into debauchery: so that Hiaovu the sixth King of the same Race, put the Queen
his wife to death, for fear of leaving behind him a debauched Widow, and a
Mother incommodious to his Successor.

I should not end if I would relate all the examples of the extreme respect
which the Chinese have for their Father, and for their Mother: I will add only
that they change not their Officers, as they innovate nothing in their Laws.

They are instructed also not to have less respect for their Governors, than
particular persons have for their masters. Their Governor they call Colao, whom
they generally make their chief Minister, as the Grand Segnior calls his Grand
Vizier Lala, that is to say Governor. This respect is so entire amongst them,
that they chastise, as I have said, in some place of my Relation, the Governor
of the Prince the presumptive Heir of the Crown, for the faults which that
Prince commits, and that there are found some Princes, who being become Kings
have revenged their Governors.

Besides the Colao, who is the King's principal Council, he has other Officers,
whose sole Function is to reprehend him publicly for his Faults. Yvus the first
King of the race Hiaa, who according to their History began to reign 2207 years
before Jesus Christ, gave full liberty to all good persons to give him counsel:
and yet because that he found himself once reproved with too much sharpness, in
the presence of his principal Counselors, he was so vexed thereat, that he had
resolved to put him to death who had given him this affront: but his Wife
appeased him. Being adorned more than ordinary, she presented her self before
him: and as he was smitten with this dress, which in the perplexity wherein he
was, seemed to him improper, she told him, that she came to congratulate him,
for having in his Court such courageous and faithful Servants, as dare to tell
him the truth. This liberty of admonishing the Prince, passed afterward into a
Law: There were, as I have said, some Offices purposely created for the
exercising it; yet without taking it away from any other Officer of State: and
the Chinese have always been so jealous of this Prerogative, that several have
died to maintain it, and that there have been some examples, even in this Age,
that when the King was obstinate not to hear any important reproof, the
Officers of the Court, to the number sometimes of two Thousand, have entered
into his Palace, there to lay down the Badges of their Offices. So that it is
impossible that a King of China can continue King, if he is vicious to a
certain degree. Thus, some tell him incessantly, that it is his example, which
must render the Magistrates, and the People virtuous; and that if he departs
from the Virtue of his Ancestors, the Magistrates and People growing debauched
in their Morals, would forget their fidelity which they owe him, and which is
their first duty, and their first Virtue. Examples hereof are frequent in their
History: in which they have not better provided for the security of their
Master, than all the other Despotic States. According to them it is 4000 years
that their Kingdom has continued in these Maxims, which render it the
admiration of all its Neighbors. St. Francis Xavier reports in his Letters that
the Japponeses incessantly objected to him, that the Christian Religion could
not be true, seeing that it was not known by the Chinese. Yet I know that the
Chinese have some Vices, but they perhaps sin less against their Moral Law,
than we do against ours. How much have our Morals degenerated from those of our
Ancestors? and the Chinese, more ancient than us, do still esteem it a
disgrace to violate their Morals in public, and to fail in the respects which
they owe to one another, either by any disobedience to their Parents, or by any
quarrel with their equals. They are Infidels, say some, in Commerce; but it may
be they are only so with Strangers; as the Hebrews lent money to usury to
Strangers only: and besides, the Chinese which have Commerce with Strangers,
are those of the Frontiers, whose manners this very foreign Commerce has
depraved.

The greatest Vice of the Chinese is doubtless an extreme Hypocrisy: but
besides that it reigns every where, because it is a Vice which is free from the
censure of the Laws, it is perhaps a less evil, than a public corruption.

But if the Chinese History may be credited, it is Virtue alone that has formed
this great Empire: the love of their Laws, which were at first established in a
corner of this Country, gradually drew all the Neighboring Provinces under the
same yoke, it not appearing that the Chinese have conquered these Provinces by
any war. It is true that all these little States, which were at the beginning
as so many hereditary Fiefs given usually to the Princes of the Royal Blood,
have been reunited to the Crown by Civil Wars, when the Royal race has changed,
and that Usurpers have expelled the lawful Kings from the Throne; but it
appears that the first subjection of all these little States to the Crown of
China has been voluntary. They say that 44 Kingdoms, enamoured with the Virtue
of Venvam, submitted to his Laws. He reigned over the two thirds of China, when
it was yet divided. However it be, the Chinese have been continually Enemies
to war, as the principal cause of the corruption of manners, and they have
preferred Morality before all the Glory of Conquests, and all the advantages of
Commerce with Strangers.

King Siven, the ninth of the Race Hana, 60 years before the birth of Jesus
Christ, dreading the consequences of any motion of the Tartars, which sometime
before had been confined within their Mountains by Hiaovu, and who were
returned to seize on the flat Country, resolved to prevent them, and make war
upon them, before they had put themselves in a condition to carry it into
China. In another Country this Prudence might have been approved, but it was
not at China, where the care of good manners is the main affair of the State.
The History therefore relates, that his Chief Minister dissuaded him from this
Enterprise by this discourse. What, Sir, do you think to invade foreign
Countries, when there are such great things to reform in your own. A Prodigy to
this hour unheard of amongst us! in this year a Son has slain his Father, seven
younger Brothers have killed their 25 elder Brethren. These are the signs of an
intolerable boldness, and which presage a very dangerous corruption in our
manners. It Is what we ought to be alarumed at; it is to what a speedy remedy
must be applied; for so long as these Crimes shall not be suffered at China,
China will have nothing to fear from the Tartars: but if they were once
permitted, I fear that they would not only extend themselves into all the
Territories of the Empire, but even into the Imperial Palace.

Under Juen, the Tenth King of the same race, the Provinces of Qnantong, and
Quangsi, and the Isle of Hainan revolting, he levied as many forces as it was
possible to reduce them to their Obedience: but Kiasu, whom he appointed for
their General diverted him from this war, by these words. Anciently the Kingdom
of China, was bounded on the East by the Ocean, on the West by the Sandy
Desert, and on the South by the River Kiang: but by little and little it
enlarged its limits less by Arms, than by Virtue. Our Kings do kindly receive
under their Empire, those who voluntarily submit themselves out of Love to our
Justice and Clemency, and several neighboring Provinces submitted thereunto:
not any was compelled by force. It Is my advice that you abstain from this war,
and that imitating the good Kings which have lived before you, you may make
them to revive in your Maxims. The way to reduce a rebelious People to
Obedience, is by the allurement of Virtue, and not by the horror of Arms.

Yet China has had some conquering Kings, but two or three at most, if I am not
mistaken: though they say, that Hiaovu, who was one of these, repented of the
wars which he had made, and took no care to preserve his Conquests.

Gu-Cupn one of the Disciples of Confucius, asked him one day what things were
necessary to a good Government, Plenty of Provisions, replied he, a sufficient
quantity of Soldiers and Ammunition for War, of Virtue in the King and his
Subjects. I understand what you tell me, replied the Disciple, but if it were
necessary to lack one of these three things, which will you quit the first? The
Soldiers, answered the Philosopher. But if there was a necessity also of
lacking Provisions or Virtue, which of these two losses would you choose? I
would choose, says he, to want Provisions. He could not better testify the
Contempt of War, and the Love of good Morals. Plato would have but a small
number of Citizens in his Republic, because that he dreaded the corruption in
too great a Multitude, and that he cared not so much as his Republic should
last, as that it should be happy, and consequently virtuous, so long as it did
last.

In fine, the Chinese have never neglected the instruction of the People.
Besides that it is easy to know the Laws which are public, and which never
alter, they publish every fifteen days, by Proclamation a small number of
Precepts, which are the ground of their Moral Law, as the Commandments of God
are ours.

They have not neglected Punishments, seeing that the Magistrates do answer for
the faults of their Family, the Parents for the faults of their Children, the
Superiors for the crimes of their Inferiors, and that they all have a right to
punish the faults of those, for whom they answer: but I have already handled
these things, and some others in my Relation,

This is what I had to say, concerning the care which the Chinese have had to
to preserve their Morals, the duration of which is doubtless the greatest
wonder, that we have seen among men. It may be suspected, that their History is
flattering in some things. They can lie, without fearing to be contradicted by
their Neighbors: and it is probable that they have not always spoken the Truth,
seeing that their History is the work of their policy. The Office of an
Historian is amongst them a public Office. The History of a King is written
after his death, by the order of his Successor, who sometimes has been his
Enemy; and not any History is published, till the Race of the Kings whereof it
treats, is extinct, or at least driven from the Throne. It is not lawful for
any Historian, to call in question the History already written, nor for any
particular person to write History: every one only may make Abridgments of the
Histories already published. There is therefore but one single general History,
and no particular Memoirs. Yet there is no appearance that they have corrupted
the most important of the Events; and the Roman Historians cannot perhaps have
been more faithful in what they have writ to the Honor of their Country, and to
the Shame of their Enemies.

But a particular reason casts a great doubt on the Chinese History, from the
beginning of their Monarchy to about 200 years before Jesus Christ, because
that Xin the first King of the Race Cina, who reigned about 200 years before
Jesus Christ, burnt as far as it was possible, all the Books of China, which
treated not of Medicine or Divination. Their History shows that he exercised
great cruelties, against those which concealed Books, and that so few escaped
his fury, and almost none entirely: A very singular event amongst those who
continually destroy the Memorial of things past. This therefore suffices in my
opinion to doubt, if one will, whether this great Empire could be formed
without any war.

Notwithstanding this loss of their Books, the Chinese cease not to give a
complete History not only from the beginning of their Monarchy, but from the
Origin of Mankind, which they make to re-ascend several thousands of years
beyond the Truth. Nevertheless they themselves acknowledge that their History
has the semblance of a Fable in whatever precedes the beginning of their
Monarchy; but it has been hitherto difficult to persuade them that they had not
had a long succession of Kings before Jesus Christ, which remounts beyond the
time where our common Chronology places the flood: insomuch that several
amongst the Missionaries have thought it necessary to have recourse to the
Chronology of the Septuagint, according to which the Deluge is more ancient by
several Ages, than according to the common Chronology. What rendered the
Chinese History more probable, is, that under every King it records the
Eclipses, and other celestial Phenomenon of his Reign: but Monsieur Cassini
having examined the time of a Conjunction of the Planets, which they place
under their fifth King, he has found it above 500 years later than their
History makes it: and he proves this very misreckoning of 500 years by another
Astronomical remark, referred to the Reign of their seventh King. Thus the
Chinese Monarchy appears less ancient by 500 years than the Chinese have
thought, and it may be presumed that in this succession of Kings, which they
give us, they have put those who have reigned at the same time in diverse
Provinces of China, when it was divided into several little Feudatary States
under the same Lord.

Monsieur Cassini having given me his Reflections upon this subject, I have
thought fit to add them here, and once again to adorn my work with a Chapter
after his fancy. And because he has communicated unto me a thought which he had
about the sitution of the Taprobane of the Ancients, I have besought him to
give it me: whatever respects the Indies being not improper in this Book, and
whatever comes from Monsieur Cassini being always well received by all.

Reflections on the Chinese Chronology, by Monsieur Cassini.
I. The System of the Chinese.
THe years of the Chinese are lunisolar, some of which are Common of 12 lunar
Months, others Embolismick of 13.

The first day of the month is ordinarily the first day after the Conjunction
of the Moon with the Sun, so that the Eclipses of the Sun do ordinarily happen
the last day of the month, as may be seen in the Chinese Chronology of Father
Couplet.

If the beginnings of the months do remove from this Epooha of the
Conjunctions, it is easy to restore them after the observation of an Eclipse
of the Sun.

The order of the Common and Embolismick years, is regulated by the Cycle of 60
years, in which 22 are Embolismick, and the others Common.

According to Father Martinius in his Chinese History, the years at the Moons
Conjunction with the Sun, the nearest the fifteenth degree of Aquarius: that is
to say, the point of the Zodiac which is at equal distances from the points of
the Winter Solstice, and of the Vernal Equinox: which according to this Author
has been observed from the twenty fifth Age before the Birth of Jesus Christ to
the present Age: tho this beginning has varied according to the will of diverse
Emperors, and that they have been obliged sometimes to correct the year, from
the Errors which were crept therein.

There may be more error in the Epoch of the years, than in the Epoch of the
months, because that the points of the Zodiac, which determine the first month
of the year, are not immediately visible, as the Eclipses of the Sun, which
determine the beginnings of the months.

It is certain, as Father Martinius remarks, that after a period of 60
lunisolar years, the Conjunctions of the Moon with the Sun return not to the
same point of the Zodiac, but that they anticipate three degrees, which the
Sun runs through only in three days, which in ten periods of 60 years amount to
30 days. Thus to hinder the beginning of the year from removing above a Sign
from the fifteenth degree of Aquarius, it would be necessary that the Chinese
should add to every period of 600 years a month extraordinary, above the 22
months which are added to every period of 60 years. Yet Father Martinius
relates that they have no need of any intercalation: which I suppose it is
necessary to understand of these three days apart, but not of the extraordinary
intercalations of the months, when this difference of three days is mounted to
an whole month.

II. Doubts upon the Chinese Chronology.
BUt it is not known whether this be regularly practiced, or whether the
Chinese do add some months extraordinary to their years without rule, when
they perceive that the beginning of the year is too remote from the middle of
Aquarius; and whether the Intercalations of the months, as well ordinary as
extraordinary, are made on purpose.

We have reason to doubt of what Father Couplet, who has been a long time in
China, says in his Treatise of the Chinese Chronology, that the Chinese begin
their years at the Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun the nearest the fifth
degree of Aquarius, which must be so at present: So that from Father Martinius
to the present Epoch of the Chinese years, they would have run back 30 degrees.

If the Observation related by Father Martinius in his seventh Book of his
History was true, the beginning of the Chinese year would be several Signs
distant from the fifteenth degree of Aquarius, since the time that this degree
has been assigned for a middle limit of the Chinese years: for he says that
according to the Chinese Historians, whose credit he suspects, the 204th year
before the Epoch of Jesus Christ, in the beginning of the year, five Planets
appeared in the Constellation of Cing, which at present extends from the
beginning of Cancer to the beginning of Leo, and then consequently extended
from the 4th or 5th of Gemini to the same degrees of Cancer. It may be seen
without any other calculation, that this observation agrees not to the System
of the Chinese years: for seeing that Mercury removes not from the Sun above 28
degrees, nor Venus above 48; it is certain that Venus could not be in the
Constellation Cing, before that the Sun had passed half of the Sign Aries,
which is two whole Signs distant from the middle of Aquarius; and that Mercury
could not appear in this Constellation unless the Sun had passed the beginning
of Taurus, and because it was necessary that at least one of these two Planets
should appear in this Constellation to accomplish the number of five, or both,
if the Moon meet not therein: (for the Sun in this Hypotheses could not be
there) it is certain that the Sun could not be less remote from the middle of
Aquarius than two whole Signs in the beginning of the year, at which this
Conjunction is marked. The Chinese History remarks also, that at several times
there is found some digressions in the Chinese years, which have obliged
several Emperors to restore them to the first Epoch. These digressions may
have happened for having intercalated the months too frequently, or for having
neglected the intercalations of the months when it was necessary to make them,
and as we have not the History of these intercalations, it is not possible to
remove the perplexities which there is, for this cause, in the Chinese
Chronology.

It is known what has been that of the Chinese in this very age: for
notwithstanding the Antiquity of their magnificent Observatories, furnished
with all sorts of Instruments, and the ample Colleges and Governments of
Astronomy, this Nation so very jealous of its own Glory, and an Enemy to
Strangers, has been obliged to join with its Astronomers for the correction of
their Calender, the Jesuits, which went thither to introduce a Religion
contrary to theirs, and to heap Honors on the Fathers Licci, Schall, Verbiest,
and Grimaldi, who in the time of his absence in Italy, was elected by the
Emperor of China for President of Astronomy. From whence it may be judged that
the Chinese had not so certain a method of regulating their years, that they
have owned, that they are not capable of regulating them all alone without
great Errors.

III. An ancient Observation of the meeting of the Planets in the Constellation
Xe.
FAther Martinius attributes to the fifth Emperor of China, whom he reports to
have reigned from the year 2513 to the 2435th year before Jesus Christ, the
rule of beginning the year with the new Moon nearest the 15 of Aquarius.

He says that, according to the Author of the Chinese History, this Emperor saw
five Planets joined together on the same day of the Conjunction of the Sun and
Moon in the Constellation Xe, which at present begins about the eighteenth
degree of the Sign Pisces, and extends to the fourth degree of Aries, and that
he took this day for the beginning of the year.

He relates not in what year of his Reign the Conjunction of the Planets was:
but as this Conjunction is very rare, we may search whether it could happen
between the 2513 and 2435th year before Jesus Christ in this Constellation of
Xe.

This research is important, forasmuch as this Epoch would be several Ages
ancienter than the Deluge, according to the calculation of those who place it
about 2200 years between the Deluge and the Birth of Jesus Christ.

IV. Of the Chinese Constellations.
FOR the understanding of this Celestial Character, we have examined the
Chinese Constellations, of which Martinius in his History and in his Chinese
Atlas gives the Catalogue calculated for the year 1628, after the European
method, and we have compared them with our Constellations calculated for the
same year.

We have found by this comparison, that every Chinese Constellation begins
ordinarily with some considerable fixed Star, which in the year 1628 is found
in Tycho's Catalogue almost always in the same minute, as the beginning of the
corresponding Constellation in the two Catalogues of Father Martinius, except 3
or 4, in which it appears, that there is a mistake of numbers in the two
Catalogues, where the distance taken from the point of the Equinox, accords not
with the degrees and minutes of the Sign of the Zodiac, to which these
Constellations are referred, as it agrees in the other Constellations.

Wherefore we do here insert them after two ways, according to the numbers of
Father Martinius, and according to our correction.

Constellationes Sinenses ex P. Martini historia, and ex ejus Atlante Sinico ad
annum 1628.
Nomen. Longitudo. Gradus. Signa. Kio 198 39 18 39 Kang 209 14 29 14 Ti 219 54
9 54 Fang 237 48 27 48 Sing 242 34 2 34 Vi. 250 7 20 7 corrige 260 7 Ki 265 43
25 43 Teu 275 3 5 3 Nieu 298 54 28 54 Neu 306 35 6 35 Hiu 318 14 18 14 Guei 328
13 28 13 Xe 346 20 18 20 corrige 348 20 Pi 4 1 4 1 Quei 15 32 15 32 Leu 28 46
26 46 corrige 28 46 Cuey 41 46 11 46 Mao 53 37 23 37 Pie 63 16 3 16 Sang 77 14
17 14 Cu 78 35 18 35 Cing 90 8 0 8 Qu'ei 120 33 0 33 Lieu 125 9 5 9 Sing 142 9
22 9 Chang 150 32 0 32 Ye 168 36 18 36 Chin 185 36 5 39

Fixae ad initia Constellationum Sinensium ex comparatione Tabulae praecedentis
cum Tychonica deductae Longitudines Tychonicae ad annum 1628.
Nomina. Fixae. Grad. Min. Kio. Spica Virginis 18 39 Kang. Austrina in fimbria
Virginis 29 14 Ti. Lucida lancis australis 9 54 Fang. Austr. trium in front
Scorp. 27 49 Sing. Praeced. lucent. in corp. Scorp. 2 34 Vi. Dexter humerus
Ophiuci. 20 8 Ki. Cuspis Sagittarij 25 43 Teu. Antecedens in jaculo Sagitt. 5 3
Nieu. Austr. in cornu praeced. Capr. 28 54 Niu. Antecedens in manu Aquarij 6 35
Hiu. In humero sinistro Aquarij 18 14 Guei. Dexter humerus Aquarij 28 12 Xe.
Prima alae Pegasi. 18 20 Pi. Extrema alae Pegasi. 4 1 Quei. In sinistro brachio
Andromed. 15 32 Leu. Sequens in cornu austr. Ariet. 28 46 Guey. In femore
Arietis. 11 46 Mao. Occid. trium lucid. in Pleiad. 23 37 Pie. Oculus Tauri
Barcus. 3 16 Sang. Recedens Balthei Orientis. 17 14 Cu. In extremo cornu austr.
Tauri 19 35 Cing. Pes sequens praeced. Gemin. 0 7 Qu'ei. Borea praec. in quad.
lat. Canc. 0 33 Lieu. Septentrion. in rostro Canc. 5 30 Sing. Cor Hydrae 22 9
Chang. In medio corpore Virginis 0 37 Ye. In basi Crateris. 18 36 Chin. Tertia
in ala austrina Virg. 4 59

This agreement of the numbers of these Tables with those of Tycho, almost in
the same minute, gave me ground to imagine that these Tables have been
calculated by the Jesuits, who went about an Age since to China, and not by
the Chinese. For what probability is there, that without being drawn from
Tycho's Tables they should be so conformable thereto? Our Astronomers of this
Age find difficulty to agree in the same minute in the place of the fixed
Stars: and it is known that between the Catalogues of Tycho, ane that of the
Landgrave of Hesse, made at the same time by excellent Astronomers, there is a
difference of several minutes. Wherefore it is not very probable that the
Observations of the Chinese, should agree almost always with the Observations
of Tycho in the same minute.

V. The Method of terminating the Chinese Constellations at any time.
FAther Martinius remarks, that the Chinese do determine the Longitude in the
Heaven by the Poles of the World; that is to say by great Circles drawn through
the Poles perpendicular to the Equinoxial, where we denote the right ascensions
of the Stars. Therefore the stars which are between two Circles, that do pass
through the Poles, and through the two fixed Stars which terminate a
constellation, relate to that very constellation.

But it appears by the comparison of the two preceding Tables, that the
longitudes are not set down differently in the Table of Father Martinius from
what they are noted in Tycho's Table, which reduces the Stars to the Ecliptic,
and not to the Equinoxial. They are not therefore set down after the Chinese
manner; but to reduce them after the Chinese method, it is necessary to refer
the Stars which are at the beginning of every constellation to the Equinoxial,
and to find their right ascensions, and the points of the Zodiac which shall
have the same right ascensions, will be at the beginning of these
constellations.

When a Star falls in the Colure of the Solstices, as the foot of Gemini in
that Table where begins the constellation Cing, there is no difference between
its longitude after our manner, and its right ascension, which is the longitude
after the Chinese; but as the Stars remove from the Colure of the Solstices,
the difference of their longitudes and of their right ascensions augments so
much more, as the latitudes or declinations of the Stars are greater. And
because that the fixed Stars remove continually from one Colure and approach
the other by a motion parallel to the Ecliptic, and oblique to the Equinoxial,
this difference varies continually, and otherwise more constellation than in
another: whence it happens that from one Age to the other the same Chinese
constellation determined by two fixed Stars enlarges, or contracts, and
comprehends not always the same number of fixed Stars.

Therefore to know in what Chinese constellation a Planet falls at a certain
time, it is necessary to find for this time the right ascension of the Planet,
and the right ascension of the fixed Stars adjoining, which determine the
beginning and end of the Constellations; which we should not have known without
the reflection which we have made, that every Constellation begins with a
certain fixed Star, and without the advice which Father Martinius gives us,
that the Chinese longitudes are taken from the Poles of the world, that is to
say, differently from what they are set down in this Table.

It appears by this Table, that the Constellation Xe here treated of, begins
with the first of the Wing of Pegasus, and ends with the last of the same Wing,
seeing that according to the second Column of this very Table, this
Constellation began in the year 1628, at 18 degrees and 20 minutes of Pisces,
where we find at the same year the first of the Wing by Tycho's Table reduced
to the same time; tho the first Column of the Chinese Table gives two degrees
less, which is doubtless an error of the impression or calculation, which has
crept into the two works of Father Martinius.

The Originals of the Tables of Tycho and Longimontanus do likewise give the
last of the Wing at 4 degrees and a minute of Aries, where ends the
Constellation Xe, and where begins the following Constellation Pi, though the
Rodolphine and Philolaick Tables with those of Father Ricciolus do show the
same Star at 4 degrees of Pisces, which certainly is an error of the
Transcribers, which is slipped into the works of these Astronomers. As these two
Stars have a great Northern longitude, the first being 19 degrees and 26
minutes, the second 12 degrees and 35 minutes; the difference between their
longitude and their right ascension, which the Chinese take for longitude, is
considerable at present, forasmuch as these Stars are near the Colure of the
Equinoxes, where this difference is greater than elsewhere. But it was not so
considerable anciently, when these Stars were near the Colure of the Solstices.

VI. A Determination of the time of the meeting of the five Planets in the
Constellation Xe.
HAving reduced these Stars to the Equinoxial in the twenty fourth and twenty
fifth Age before the Birth of Jesus Christ, we have not found, that between the
Circles of the declinations which pass through these Stars, five Planets could
be found joined together, neither in these Ages, nor in two others before and
after, whilst that the Sun was in the sign of Aquarius, as the Chinese History
imports.

But we have found that Saturn, Jupiter, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon met in
that Chinese constellation determined by this method, the Sun being in the 20th
of Aquarius, in the 2012 year before the Epoch of Jesus Christ, the 26th of
February according to the Julian, the 9th according to the Gregorian form,
which runs at present, and that the day following 10/27 of February at 6 a
Clock in the morning at China, happened the conjunction of the Moon with the
Sun, which may be that which was taken as the Epoch of the Chinese years.

Then according to the Catalogue of Tycho, and the motion which he gives to the
fixed Stars, the first of the wing of Pegasus from which began the
constellation Xe, was at 26 degrees 50 minutes of Capricorn, and the Circle of
its declination cut the Ecliptic at 24 degrees of the same sign.

The last of the wing of Pagasus was at 12 degrees and a half of Aquarius, and
its Circle of Declination cut the Ecliptic, and carried it back to the
eleventh degree of the same sign.

The Morning of February 8/2^ in the Crepusculum at China.

The beginning of the Constellation Xe was 24 Saturn. 24 Jupiter. 26 Mercury.
27 Venus. 4 The Moon. 8 The end of the Constellation Xe. 11 And in 24 hours or
thereabouts happened the Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun.

The Chinese Chronology places the Conjunction of the Planets between the 2513
and 2435 years before the Birth of Jesus Christ. There will be therefore a
difference of 5 Ages between the time denoted by this Chronology and the true
time. Thus the Chinese Epoch will be five Ages later then the Chinese
Historians suppose it.

VII. An Ancient Observation of a Winter Solstice made at China.
THis difference of five Age whereby it appears according to this calculation,
that the Chinese do make their Epoch too ancient, is confirmed by another
place of Father Martinius his History, where this Author reports that under Jao
the seventh Emperor of the Chinese, the Winter Solstice was observed about the
first degree of the constellation Hiu, which at present begins about the 18th
of Aquarius, so that since this time the Solstice is removed above 48 degrees
from its first place; he refers this Observation to the 20th year of Jao, which
he reports to have been the 2341 before the Birth of Jesus Christ.

It appears by the Table that this constellation Hiu began with the Star which
is in the left shoulder of Aquarius, which in the year 1628 was at 18 degrees,
16 Minutes of Aquarius; but the 20th year of Jao it was in 29 degrees of
Sagitarius and some minutes, seeing that the Winter Solstice, which is always
at the beginning of Capricorn, was at the first of the constellation Hiu. The
distance between these two places of the Zodiac is 49 degrees 16 minutes, which
the fixed Stars according to Tycho's Table do make in 3478 years, by reason of
51 seconds per annum: from whence having deducted 1625 years at most, which are
elapsed from the Epoch of Jesus Christ, the 20th of Jao would be the 1852 year
before the Birth of Jesus Christ, which Father Martinius according to the
Chinese History places in the 2347th year before Jesus Christ, making it more
ancient by about 497 years. Thus there are about 5 Ages difference between this
Epoch taken from the Chinese History, and the same drawn from the motion of
the fixed Stars made in this interval of time, as we have found by the
Examination of the Observation of the 5 Planets in the Constellation Xe.

According to Father Martinius in the beginning of his History of China, it
seems that the Chinese do reckon but five Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus, and Mercury, and that they suppose at the time of their fifth Emperor,
the concourse of those five Planets in the Constellation Xe, on the same day
that there was a Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun. But if this Chinese
observation must be thus understood, 'twould be a mere groundless mistake: such
a concourse having not happened at the time denoted by the Chinese, nor long
before it, so that it cannot be known perhaps how to take it.

The Historians supported with Astronomical Observations, do merit therefore to
be examined beforc that credit be given thereunto. Thus an account of Eclipses,
which is at the beginning of Diogenes Laertius, and which he relates after
Sotion, is condemned as false by Monsieur Cassini. Sotion reckoned 48863 years
between Vulcan and Alexander the Great, and in this interval he placed 373
solar Eclipses, and 832 lunar.

A too ready belief must not likewise be given to an History, because it gives
us a well ranged succession of Kings. The Persians do give us one of this
Nature, which we know to be full of falsities: and we have the Genealogies of
our Kings from Adam, which are yet more spurious. It Is not only from a well
adjusted succession, that the Histories to which we give credit, do take their
certainty, but from that they are confirmed one by the other: All the Nations
that can have a knowledge of the same things, relating them after the same
manner, at least as to the most important circumstances, so that where there is
a diversity of advice we fall into doubt. The History of the Chinese has
neither been contradicted, nor confirmed by their Neighbors: no Authority can
be drawn from their silence; and thus all that we have to do, is to believe it
true in the gross, especially from about 200 years before Jesus Christ; but not
in what oppugns our Histories, which are better attested than theirs.

Concerning the Isle Taprobane, by Monsieur Cassini.
THE situation of the Isle Taprobane, according to Ptolomy in the seventh Book
of his Geography, was over against the Promontary Cari.

This Promontary is placed by Ptolomy between the Rivers Indus and Ganges,
nearer Indus than the Ganges.

This Isle Taprobane was divided by the Equinoxial Line into two unequal parts,
the greatest of which was in the Northern Hemisphere, extending to 12 or 13
degrees of Northern Latitude. The least part was in the Southern Hemisphere,
extending to two degrees and a half of Southern Latitude.

Round about this Island there were 1378 little Isles, among which there were
19 more considerable, the name of which was known in the West.

The Promontory Cory could be no other than that, which is at present called
Comori, or Comorin, which is also between the Indus and Ganges, nearer the
Indus than the Ganges.

Over against this Cape there is not at present so great an Isle as Taprobane,
which could be divided by the Equinoxial, and environed with 1378 Isles: but
there is a multitude of little Isles, called Maldivae, which the Inhabitants
report to be to the number of 12 Thousand. According to the Relation of Pirard,
who lived there five years, these Isles have a King, who assumes to himself the
Title of King of 13 Provinces, and 12 Thousand Isles.

Every one of these thirteen Provinces is an heap of little Isles, each of
which is environed with a great bank of Stone, which incloses it all round like
a great wall: they are called Attolons. They have each Thirty miles in
circumference, a little more or less, and are of a figure almost round, or
oval. They are end to end one from the other, from the North to the South; and
they are separated by Channels of the Sea, some broad, others very narrow,
These Stone-banks which environ every Attollon, are so high, and the Sea breaks
there with such an impetuosity, that they which are in the middle of an
Attollon, do see these banks all round, with the Waves of the Sea which seem as
high as the Houses. The Enclosure of an Attollon has but 4 Avenues, two on the
North-side, two others on the South Side, one of which is at the East, the
other at the West, and the largest of which is 200 paces, the narrowest
somewhat less than 30. At the two sides of each of these Avenues there are some
Isles, but the Currents and great Tides do daily diminish the number thereof.
Pirard adds, that to see the inside of one of these Attollons, one would say
that all these little Isles and the Channels of the Sea, which it incloses, are
only a continued plain, and that it was anciently only a single Island, cut and
divided afterward into several. Every where almost is seen the bottom of the
Channels, which divide them, so shallow they are, except in some places: and
when the Sea is low, the water reaches not up to the girdle, but to the middle
of the leg almost every where.

There is a violent and perpetual Current, which from the month of April to the
month of October comes impetuously from the West, and causes the continual
rains which do there make the Winter; and at the other six months the Winds are
fixed from the East, and do bring a great heat, without any rain, which causes
their Summer. At the bottom of these Channels, there are great Stones, which
the Inhabitants do use to build with, and they are also stored with a kind of
Bushes, which resemble Coral; which renders the passage of the Boats through
these Channels extremely difficult.

Linscoten testifies that according to the Mallabars, these little Isles have
formerly been joined to the firm Land, and that by the succession of time they
have been loosed thence by the Violence of the Sea, by reason of the lowness of
the Land.

It Is therefore probable that the Maldivae are a remainder of the great Island
Taprobane; and of the 1378 Islands which did encompass it, which have been
carried away, or diminished by the Currents, there remaining nothing else but
these Rocks, which must formerly be the bases of the Mountains: and what
remains in the enclosure of these Rocks, where the Sea dashes so, that it is
capable only of dividing, but not of carrying away the Lands which are included
within their Circuit.

It is certain that these Isles have the same situation in regard of the
Equinoxial and Promontory, and of the Rivers Indus and Ganges, that Ptolomy
assigns to several places of the Isle Taprobane.

The Lords Prayer and the Ave Mary in Siamese, with the Interlineary
Translation, to be inserted in Page 180.
Father our Po raou who art in Heaven. you savang. The Name of God Scheu Pra be
glorified hai pra kot in all places touk heng by People all kon tang tai offer
to God praise. touai Pra pon The Kingdom of God Meuang Pra I pray to find co
hai dai with us ke raou to finish hai leou conformable ning to the heart of God
tchai pra in the Kingdom of Meuang the Earth Pen-din even as semo of Heaven.
savang The Nourishment of us Ahan raou of all days touk van I pray co to find
hai dai with us ke raou in day van this ni I pray co to pardon prot the
offenses bap of us raou even semo as we raou pardon prot persons pou who do tam
offenses bap to us ke raou. do not let Ya hai us raou fall tok into nai the
cause kovan of Sin bap deliver hai poun out of kiac evil anerai all.
tang-poang. Amen.

Ave Maria full of Grace Ten anisong, God be Pra you in the heng place of you.
nang. You just-good Nang soum-bou more than yingkoua all nang tang tai. With
Toui Sons louk Womb cutong, in the place heng of you nang God pra the person
Ongkiao of Jesus Yesu just charitable soum-boui more than ying koua all. tang
tai. Sancta Maria Mother Me of God Pra assist thoui by prayer ving to God von
Pra for pro us raou people kon of Sin bap now teit-bat-ni and te in the time
moua of our dying, raou tcha tai, Amen.

ERRATA.
PAge 20. line 25. read particular, p. 24. l. 34. r. a Tree, p. 33. l. 8. which
are, p. 36. l. 36. r. obliged to honor, p. 39. l. 11. r. Eresypeli, l. 16. r.
are, l. 43. r. not bow to, p. 68. l. 38, 39, 43, 46. add Bells, p. 73. l. 23.
r. Tical, p. 81. l. 33. r. gold., p. 87. l. 50. r. is evicted, p. 103. l. 15.
1. certain. p. 104. l. 50. r. extinguish, p. 108. l. 37. r. returns, p. 109. l.
2. dele till: p. 120. l. 5. r. remains, l. 8. r. wounded, p. 125. l. 18. r.
prescribed, l. 58. r. fatality, p. 135. l. 17. dele they, p. 136. l. 11. r.
leaf of, p. 159. l. 1. r. Missionaries, p. 160. l. 9. r. takes, p. 165. l. 46.
r. Ti-non, p, 166. l. 42. r. Taouac, l. 45. r. Touai, p. 169. l. 50. r. Sapsoc,
p. 172. l. 23. r. which, p. 174. l. 23. r. at the sides, p. 175. l. 35. dele
not, p. 175. l. 1. dele it is. p. 194. l. 32. r. the number, l. 20. which is
subtracted from the Onglaa in the third, p. 198. l. 7. r. difference is only
in, l. 8. r. in the 12th, p. 201. l. 33. dele the, p. 202. l. 43. r. unless
these, p. 210. l. 28. r. Agreement, l. 36. r. Hipparcus, p. 212. l. 43. dele
the, p. 213. l. 19. r. Anno, p. 214. l. 15. r. for a lunar month to reduce the
Epact, p. 217. l. 18. r. how much, p. 221. l. 47. r. which form, p. 225. in
marg. r. 424. p. 230. l. 10. r. the former. l. 12. r. upright to, p. 231. l.
49. r. every, p. 236. l. 12. r. determining, l. 18. r. method. p. 238. l. 21.
r. 9 Cases. p. 244. l 42. dele not, p. 151. l. 12. r. Cu-cum, p. 252. l. 45. r.
the years begin, p. 253. l. 27. r. 10 degrees, p. 254. l. 7. r. Ricci, p. 255.
l. 36. after deductae add. p. 256. l. 16. r. these Chinese, l. 22. r. and, l.
51. r. otherwise in one Constellation.

FINIS.

