THE TEMPLE: ESPECIALLY As it stood in the days OF OUR SAVIOVR.

Described by JOHN LIGHTFOOTE.

LONDON Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook at the Green-Dragon in Paul's
Churchyard, 1650.

CLARISSIMO HONORATISSIMOQUE VIR O Dno. GVILIELMO LENTHALLO Summi Senatus
Parliamentarii PROLOCUTORI Dignissimo.

HANCCE QUALEM QUALEMCUNQUE TEMPLI HIEROSOLYMITANI DESCRIPTIONEM J. L.

GRATITUDINIS AT QUE OBSERVANTIAE ERGO HUMILLIME D. D. D.

To the Reader.
I Could with as little pains and travail have journyed to Jerusalem to have
taken a view of the Temple, had it now stood, as this has cost me to survey it
by the eyes of others in their writings, as I have done: And for all my labor,
how I shall speed in the acceptance of the Reader, I must leave it to the
common doubtful fate of Books, being neither willing to beg it, nor to despair
of it. If I have come short either of the worth of the matter treated of, or
failed the expectation of the Reader, the difficulty of the Subject may plead
my Apology, and my desire to benefit, may lighten my censure.

There is hardly a harder task in Study then to describe structures and places
not seen, and at distance; and the Scripture has hardly a more obscure
description of any thing then of this fabric. In that I have added so much of
Jewish intelligence about it, it is because I find not where better
information (after the Scriptures) is to be had. I know they hear as ill as any
men for their writings, and that very often not without very good cause, yet give
them leave to tell the story of their own customs and antiquities as soon as
another man, and if you will not believe them what they say, to produce others
that speak more credibly, in the matter in hand I believe will be next
impossible.

I shall not plead for them in all they write, lest I should be like unto them;
in things of historical nature, I cannot but give some credence to them, as
being likely to be the best recorders of their own Antiquities.

It is well known to the studious how much light has been held out by some
learned men toward the explication of abundance of difficulties in Scripture,
by the discovery of the Jewish customs and Antiquities, to which the New
Testament speaks and alludeth exceeding copiously and frequently: I need not
to go far for examples of learned men that have been choicely happy in such
illustrations: A matchless pair in our own Nation, second to none in any
Nation whatsoever, Mr. Hugh Broughton in the last generation, and Mr. Seldom in
this, may be instances sufficient. Now though it is far enough from my
thoughts and hopes to dream of atchieving to the least degree and measure of
their skill in these studies, and their happiness in such explanations: yet can
I not but from such encouragements of experience in others, go on with the more
delight in the perusal of such Monuments my self, not without hope that I may
reap some profit by them to my self, and hold out something from them which
may not be altogether useless to others.

What may redound of this kind out of this present volume, I must leave to the
Readers censure, and not be my own judge: This I hope I may say of it without
arrogance or falsehood, that this Subject has scarcely been so largely handled
in our English tongue heretofore, and that what is here produced out of Jewish
records, does for the most part carry so fair possibility and probability with
it, and is so little dissonant either to Scripture or reason, and so consonant
to Josephus, whose credit is commonly reputed above Talmudicall, that if on the
one hand there is not undeniable ground to believe it, neither is there on the
other hand, undeniable ground to gainsay it.

I had undertaken a task of a far larger time, toil, and volume, and the same
way of workmanship that I have done this; namely, from Scripture, and from
Talmudicall and Jewish writers, to have given a description of the land of
Canaan, so far am I satisfied of the benefit of these Authors if dexterously
managed. And certainly if my judgment do not much fail me, exceeding singular
use might be made of them in such a work, and hundreds or rather thousands of
learned rarities as to that Subject produced out of them, not to be found in
any Authors but themselves, which tend not a little to the illustration of the
chorography and story of that Land: But when I had spent a good large time and
progress in that work, I found that I was happily prevented in that Subject
by a more learned and acute pen; Mr. Tho. Fuller, B. D.
which though it went not the same way in that work that I had done, yet was
it so far before me both in progress and in accuracy, that I knew it would be
lost labor for me to proceed further. Hereupon I left off that task, lest I
should actum agere, and diverted my thoughts to this survey, because of a
promise which had a tie upon me for something of this nature.

With the working up of this piece, I also drew up a large Map of the Temple
structures, according to the verbal description of them in this volume, the
sight and comparing of which would have made the things here described a great
deal more easy and pleasant to be understood, could it have been published;
but I have not yet met with the faculty and fortune of bringing it to that
issue: and I thought to have suppressed this Tract till that also might have
come forth with it; but I have been overcome to let it out, partly by the
importunity of others, and partly by this Reason of mine own, that it might
not be amiss to try what acceptance this Treatise will find, before I add
more pains and charge for the ingraving of the Map. If any of my learned
friends upon perusal of this Tract, shall think the publication of that may
be material, I shall be ready to embrace such animation, and use my best
endeavor to effect the thing if it will be effected.

Much-Mundon in Herfordsh
April 3. 1650.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Situation of Mount Moriah. (...) page 1. CHAP. II. The measure
of the Floor of the mountain of the Temple. (...) p. 4. CHAP. III. The East
gate of the Mountain of the House (...) Shushan gate. The Prospect of Mount
Olivet, and part of the City before it. p. 8. CHAP. IV. Of the two South gates:
(...) The gates of Huldah p. 13.
CHAP. V. Of the West gates Shallecheth, or Coponius, Parbar, Asuppim. p. 15.
Sect. 1. The gate of Shallecheth, or Coponius. p. 16. Sect. 2. Parbar gate. 1 Chronicles. 26. 18. p. 17. Sect. 3. The two gates and house of Asuppim. p. 20.

CHAP. VI. The North gate (...) Tedi or Tadde. p. 24. CHAP. VII. The Tower
Antonia. (...) p. 27. CHAP. VIII. Cloisters along the outmost wall within
(...). p. 29. CHAP. IX. Tabernae, Shops: The great Sanhedrin sitting
thereabout. p. 33. CHAP. X. The dimensions and form of Solomon's Temple: And of
that built by the returned out of captivity. p. 37. CHAP. XI. The measures and
platform of the Temple as it stood in the time of our Savior. p. 45. CHAP.
XII. The breadth, chamhers, and stairs of the Temple. p. 52. CHAP. XIII. The
Porch. Sect. 1. The steps up to it. p. 58. Sect. 2. The two pillars Jachin and
Boaz. p. 60. Sect. 3. Closets for the butchering instruments (...) p. 71. Sect.
4. A golden vine in the porch, and a golden candlestick, and a golden and
marble table. p. 73.

CHAP. XIV. The holy place. Sect. 1. The Temple door. page 75. Sect. 2. The
veil. p. 78. Sect. 3. The holy place it self. p. 79. Sect. 4. The
Candlestick. p. 82. Sect. 5. The Shewbread table. p. 84. Sect. 6. The Altar of
Incense. p. 85.

CHAP. XV. The most holy place. Sect. 1. The partion space, (...) p. 86. Sect.
2. The Veil. p. 88. Sect. 3. The most holy place it self. p. 89. Sect. 4. The
Cherubims and Arc. p. 39. again

CHAP. XVI. The Courts of the Temple. p. 93. CHAP. XVII. The Enclosure. (...).
p. 95. CHAP. XVIII. The Court of the women. p. 99. CHAP. XIX. Of the
Gazophylacia or Treasuries. p. 110.
CHAP. XX. The gate of Nicanor, or the East gate of the Court. p. 117. Sect. 1.
A credible wonder of the brazen gate. p. 125. Sect. 2. A Sanhedrin sitting in
this Gate. p. 126.

CHAP. XXI. Of the gates and buildings in the Court wall on the East and South
sides. p 131.
CHAP. XXII. The chamber or room Gazith, the seat of the great Sanhedrin. p.
135. Sect. 1. The Presidents of the Sanhedrin from the captivity till its
dissolution. p. 140.

CHAP. XXIII. The Draw-well-roome (...). p. 144. CHAP. XXIV. The Watergate
(...) and the room of Abhtines (...). p. 149. CHAP. XXV. The Woodroome (...)
and the room Parhedrin (...). p. 153. CHAP. XXVI. The gate of the firstlings.
p. 156. CHAP. XXVII. The Gate (...) Hadlak or of kindling or of the burning
fire. p. 159. CHAP. XXVIII. The gates and buildings in the Court wall on the
North side. p. 163. CHAP. XXIX. Beth Mokadh (...) p. 166. CHAP. XXX. Of the
gate Beth Mokadh called the gate of Corban. And of the other gate of Corban
called also the gate of the women. p. 170. CHAP. XXXI. The room of Salt, of
Parvah, and of the washing. p. 175. CHAP. XXXII. The gate and house Nitsots
(...) the house of stone vessels. p. 178. CHAP. XXXIII. The Court of Israel and
of the Priests: and the Levites deskes where they sung. p. 180. CHAP. XXXIV. Of
the Altar of burnt-offering. p. 189. CHAP. XXXV. The Contents of the Court
betwixt the Altar and the North side of it: and betwixt the Altar and the South
side. p. 209. CHAP. XXXVI. The space between the Altar and the Porch. p. 215.
CHAP. XXXVII. Concerning the vessels and utensils of the Temple. Sect. 1. The
laver (...) p. 219. Sect. 2. Solomon's ten Lavers. p. 223. Sect. 3. The molten
Sea. p. 230. Sect. 4. Basins, Chargers, Dishes, etc. King Ptolemies and Queen
Helens Tables. p. 233. Sect. 5. The Priests garments. p. 237. Sect. 6. The
anointing oil. p. 240.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Emblem of the divine glory at the Temple, Ezekiel. 1. Esaias.
6. Rev. 4. etc. explained. page 242. CHAP. XXXIX. The motions and stations of
the Arc and Tabernacle. p. 261.
CHAP. XL. The state and fate of the first Temple. p. 267. Sect. 1. The state
of the second Temple under the Persian Monarchy. p. 270. Sect. 2. The
occurrences of the Temple under Alexander. p. 274. Sect. 3. A brief of the
state of the Temple in the times of these Kings. p. 277. Sect. 4. The state of
the Temple under the Romans. p. 284.

Books published by Mr. Lightfoote.
1 Miscellanies, octavo. 2 Observations on Genesis, quart. 3 Observations on
Exodus, quart. 4 Commentary on Acts, quart. 5 The Harmony of the four
Evangelists, the first part, quart. 6 The second part, quart. 7 The third part,
quart. 8 Three Sermons preached before the Parliament, quart. 9 The Temple
Service, and the Temple. quart.
ERRATA.
Page 3. lin. 24. for sink read s^^k, lin. 28. for an abyss of uncle annesse,
r. an abyss uncleanness, p. 13. l. 10. for Ophila r Ophla. l. 11. leave that
out, p. 17. l. 26 for admitted r. admits, l. 29. for Parbar r Parvar. p. 2
^.l. 19 for stand wide r. stand void p. 30. last l. but one, for 15 cubits high
r. 25 cubits high p. 31. l. 16. for godliest r. goodliest, p. 34.19, 10. for
Tsipp^ris r. Tsipporis. 1 8. r. Iabneh, and so 1. 15, 16. l. 2 r. for Antonius
r. Antoninus p. 44. l. 3. for the next verse r. the next year, p. 49. l. 4 for
about it r. above it, p. 60. l. 16. r. then the flower, and in the middle of
the line blot then out, p. 61. l 20. for (...) r. (...) p. 81. l. 18. for
Angels r. Ministe^s. p. 83. l. 14.; for carried in either of them in a golden
r. carried either of them a golden, p. 84. l 9. for hallow r. ballow, p. 90. l.
8. for where r. were, l. 19. for them from r. from them, p. 91. l. 24 for Joah
r. Josiah, p. 95. l. 3.7. for (...) r. (...) p. 98. l. 3 for pa^^^ r. panes, p
110. l. 17. for captivity r. capacity, 119. l. 28. for pets r. petters, p. 122.
l. 21. for but names r. been names, p. 125. l. 31. for thy best r. thy lot, p.
134. l. 13. for of the wood-r^^m^ r. and the wood-rooms, p. 145. l. 4. for
wrought r. raught, p. 152. l. 1. for mad r. made, p. 155. l. 9. r. this
sec^ety, p. 156. l. 28. for the Lord loosed r. they loosed. p. 159. l. 7. for
relieved r. redeemed, p 199. l. 13. for we not r. we may not, p. 223. l. 6. for
arowe r. as once.

A PROSPECT OF THE TEMPLE ESPECIALLY As it stood in the days of our SAVIOVR.
CHAP. I. Of the Situation of Mount MORIAH: (...)
MORIAH 2 Chronicles. 3.1. Is. 2.2.
The Mountain of the Lords House, from whence soever it had its denomination
(about which there are various conjectures) it is certain, it had its
designation for that use and honor to which it was employed, 1 Chronicles. 21.26.
and 22.1.
by fire from Heaven, and of old time, Gen: 22.2, etc.
by Abraham's offering up his son Isaac there in a figure. R: Sol: in Genesis 22.
Some are of opinion that it was called Moriah from (...) Instruction, because
from thence there went forth a law and doctrine for all Israel: Onkel ibid.
others conceive the name to have been derived from the word (...) Mor which
betokens Myrrh and spicery, because it was to be the only place of offering
incense: Fuller missel. lib. 2. cap. 15.
others from (...) Mor^eh jah, The Lord will be visible, because the Son of
God was to appear there in humane flesh. And so they all repute, that it
carried a notation predictive, or referring to something that was to occur
there in time to come. But if we will apply the etymology of it to that ^i^^e
present, when it and the Country about it, did first take that name of the land
of Moriah, we may construe it, The Land of a teacher of God, (as John 3.2.) or
the Land of the Lord my teacher, as being the Territory of Sem, or Melchisedek,
the great teacher of the ways of the Lord, (while the Canaanites round about
did walk in blindness, and were led by teachers only of delusion) and the
Land which the Lord his teacher had designed to him in the prediction of his
father Noah.

Joseph. An. 114. lib. 15. c. 14.
This Mouut was so seated in the midst of Jerusalem, that the City lay (...),
in form of a Theater round about it. Vid. Ezekiel. 40.2 and Kamch. ibid. and
Tosaph. ad Kelim.
On the South lay Jerusalem it self built upon Mount Acra, and Acra naturally
higher then Moriah, Joseph. de Bell. lib. 5. c. 13.
but much levelled by the Asmonean family in the time of their reign, and the
valley betwixt, well raised and filled up with earth, that both the Temple
might overtop the buildings on Acra, and that the coming up from the City to
the Temple, might be the more plain and easy, compare Luke 3.5. Psalm. 48.2.
A^en Ezra ibid. ^
On the North side lay Mount Sion furnished with the gallant buildings of the
Palace, Court, and City of David. These two Mountains Acra and Sion, and the
Cities built upon them (the London and Westminster, City, and Court of the Land
of Canaan) did so decline and descend upon their South-east and North-east
points, that on the East and West of the Temple they met and saluted each other
in a valley, having also a deep valley betwixt them and the Temple on every
side, but only on the South, where it was the less deep because of the
levelling, mentioned immediately before.

Although this Mount Moriah were not so high of it self as the two hills on
either side it, yet was it of a great pitch and steepness Id. de Bell. lib. 5.
c. 14.
(...) A strong heap, steep, and deep on every side. And it was a discerning
note of a young male child, Hagigab per. 1.
That he was bound to appear before the Lord, at the three festivals, if ^e
were once come to be able, to go up the Mountain of the Temple holding his
father by the hand.

This Mount fell so in the division of the Land, that part of it was in the lot
of one Tribe, and part of it in another; Aveth R. Na^han per. 34. Zevachin pe.
5. in Geinara.
For most part of the Courts was in the portion of Judah, but the Altar, Porch,
Temple, and most holy place were in the portion of Benjamin. And that part that
lay in the portion of Judah was made hollow under (...) with arches built upon
arches underneath, (says Maimony) Beth ^abbekirah per. 5.
because of the Tent of defilement.

Now this that he calls The Tent of defilement, might very well be supposed
to be a Sink, or common Shore, made under ground, and arched over for the
conveyance of all the filth and wash of the Courts away, (and that there was
such a thing we shall see hereafter) but he explaineth himself in another
place, and says that (...) Maym. Parah per. 2.
All the Mountain of the house (that is, the outmost space) and all the other
Courts were hollow under, because of an abyss or deep grave. Now the
Talmudicks use to call a sink, unseen, or unsuspected grave, (...) Talm Bab.
Parah per. ^. gloss. ibid.
An abyss grave, (...), in the Gospel language, Luke 11.44. And so they call
an unseen or unknown uncleanenesse, (...) Nazir. per. ^ and Maym. in Biath
Mikd^^ per. 4.
an abyss of uncleanenesse, and they oppose to it (...) An uncleanenesse
known of. Wherefore that they might be sure, that there should be no graves
secretly made in any of the Courts of the Temple, by which they might be
defiled, they arched all the Courts under ground, so as that there were (...)
arches upon arches (as my Author expresses it, which he explaineth in another
Id. in Parah per. 3.
place, in another story of the like nature) (...) one arch set upon two
arches, so that the feet of an arch stood upon two arches that were under it.
And so it was either impossible to bury above the arch for want of soil, or if
it were possible to bury below the arches, it was deep and far enough from
defiling.

CHAP. II. The measure of the floor of the Mountain of the Temple.
(...).
THE Compass of the floor of Moriah Ios. de Bell. lib 5. cap. 14.
did increase by time and industry (somewhat though not much) above what it was
when Solomon first began the Temple there: For 1 Chr. 21.8. and 22.1.
whereas David by divine direction had built an Altar, and God by divine fire
upon it, had fixed that very place for the place of the Altar of the Temple;
the Mountain possibly in some part of it, might want here and there somewhat
upon the edge of it, by bendings and windings in, so that the square for all
the Courts which was intended, and which was to be measured from the Altar as
from the standing mark, could not run even, but did meet with some small hiat
us through the want and pinching in of the hill in certain places: whereupon
Solomon and the succeeding generations, were still increasing the spaciousness
and capaciousnesse of it, by filling up the valley or precipice where the want
was, insomuch that the compass and space of it at the last, under the second
Temple was Mid. per. 2.
(...) five hundred cubits upon five hundred cubits, that is, a perfect square
of 500 cubits upon every side, 2000 cubits in the whole compass about: Maym in
Beth habbechir. per. 5.
And this square piece of ground was enclosed with a Wall. Not but that there
was some more space upon the floor of the Mount then barely this measure, for
Pisk. Te^^ ^^ph. ad Midd.
(...) the Mount was far larger then 500 cubits square, but only so much was
taken in for the holy ground.

This number of 500 cubits upon every side of the square, is so agreeable to
the number of Ezekiel. 42.20. and 45 2.
Ezekiel, that that helps to confirm and justify this proportion and
account: and although his large measure, do differ far from this of ours, yet
does his cubit measure and state the cubit that we have in hand, so well, that
it would be very hard, if not impossible otherwise among the various sizes of
cubits that we meet withal, to determine any thing of it: For we find
mention of the Kimch. in Ezekiel. 45. and 43.13. and R. Sol. ibid.
common cubit of five hand bredths, Kelim. per. 17.
of the middle of six, of the cubit half a fingers breadth larger then the
cubit of Moses, and the cubit half a finger breadth larger then that: but
Ezekiel has flinted his Ezekiel. 4 5.
cubit to be a cubit and a hand breadth (that is the common cubit of 5 hand
bredths, and one hand breadth over;) And so the Jews conclude upon the same
measure in this received maxim: (...) Kelim ubi supr. Kimch. in 2 Chronicles. 3.3.
The cubit by which the Temple buildings were measured was 16 hand bredths, but
the cubit by which the vessels were measured was but five.

The hand breadth therefore being Kimch. in M^^ol in voce (...)
the four fingers breadth as they be laid close together, which make but three
inches, the cubit of six hand bredths, (which is the cubit we embrace here)
arises to 18 inches or just half a yard, and so by this computation, the 500
cubits upon every side of the square was 250 yards, and the whole compass of
the wall was a 1000 yards about.

Antiq. lib. 15. c. 14.
Josephus has allotted a just furlong to every side of the square: (...), and
so has made the whole compass to be exactly half a mile about, reckoning
according to the common cubit, and according to the measure best known among
the Greeks and Romans, for whom he wrote.

And now if any one will take up the full circuit of the wall that encompassed
the holy ground, according to our English measure, it will amount to half a
mile, and about 166 yards. And whosoever likewise will measure the square of
Ezekiel, chap. 42.20. he will find it 6 times as large as this chap. 40.5. the
whole amounting to three miles and an half, and about 140 yards, a compass
incomparably larger then Mount Moriah diverse times over; and by this very thing
is showed that that is spiritually and mystically to be understood.

The description of the Temple and City, that he has given in the end of his
book, as it was a prediction of some good to come, so was that prediction true,
thus far according to the very letter, namely that there should be a Temple
and a City newly built: and so it was a promise and a comfort to the people
then in captivity, of their restoring again to their own land, and there
enjoying Jerusalem and the Temple again, as they had done in former time,
before their removing and captivating out of their own country: But as for a
literal respondency of that City and Temple, to all the particulars of his
description, it is so far from it, that his Temple is delineated larger then
all the earthly Jerusalem, and his Jerusalem larger then all the land of
Canaan. And thereby the scope of the Holy Ghost in that ichnography is clearly
held out to be, to signify the great enlarging of the spiritual Jerusalem and
Temple, the Church under the Gospel, and the spiritual beauty and glory of it,
as well as to certify captived Israel, of hopes of an earthly City and Temple
to be rebuilt, which came to pass upon their return under Cyrus.

Yet had this his space of the holy ground its bounds, though they were
exceeding large; but when John in his Revelation is upon the measure of his
Temple, this outer Court or space is left boundless, and not measured nor
enclosed at all, and the reason is given because that Court was given to the
Gentiles, and they should tread the holy City (as men trod Gods Courts when
they came to worship) two and forty months, Rev. 11.1, 2, 3, etc. still
clearing the reason of the Prophetical enlarging of the holy ground, which was
to denote the abundant and numerous worshippers of God which should be under
the Gospel.

The Wall that encompassed and went about the square of the holy ground, was of
very fair stone, Jos. de Bell. lib. 5. c. 14.
and it was five and twenty cubits, or twelve yards and an half high, that is,
as one stood within the compass of it, in the holy ground; for without it
stood over a very deep and sharp precipice, and so there was an exceeding great
height from the bottom of the trench beneath, to the top of the wall, but
within it was no higher then 25 cubits, and that height it carried about the
whole square.

Now whereas it is a very common Tenet amongst the Talmudicks that (...) Mid.
per. 2. and Kimch. ubi supr.
The Eastern wall w^^ six cubits high and no more, It is not to be understood
of the whole East side Wall, for that was 25 cubits high as well as the rest,
but it is to be understood only of the wall or battlement that was just over
the East gate: and so it is explained by some of them thus, (...) Mid. per. 1.
Sect. 1.
For whereas the Priest that was sprinkling the blood of the red Cow upon Mount
Olivet, was to look directly by this East gate, upon the gate of the Temple,
and whereas Maym. in Beth habbechir. per. 6.
the floor of the Porch of the Temple was two and twenty Cubits higher ground
then the floor of this East gate, and so the Priest looking from Olivet
through this gate R. Sh^m. ^ in Mid.
could not see above the eight step before the Porch, Pisk. T^saph. ibid.
therefore it was needful that the wall that was just over the East gate
should be low, that what he could not see through the gate he might see over it.

CHAP. III. The East gate of the Mountain of the House (...) Shushan gate. The
Prospect of Mount Olivet, and part of the City before it.
IN the surveying of the gates and buildings that were in this outmost wall,
and virge of the holy ground, we will begin at the East quarter which faced
Mount Olivet, and in which side of the square there was only one gate: this and
all other the gates, both in this wall and in the other that encompassed the
Courts Mid. per. 2.
were twenty Cubits high and ten Cubits broad, as the Hebrew writers do
constantly reckon.

In which account they and their Countryman Josephus, who wrote in another
language, do not differ (although that Jos^de Bell. lib. 5 c. 14.
his constant measure that he gives of all the gates, be 30 Cubits high and 15
Cubits broad) but they do in this diversity explain the thing the better. The
height of the whole gatehouse of every gate, or of the pile where the gate was
set, was 30 Cubits, and so it rose 5 Cubits above the wall, but the very
entrance of the gate, or the door of it, was but 20 Cubits high. And so the
very breadth of the entrance of the doors of every gate was but 10 Cubits, but
the che^ks of the gate on either side was 2 Cubits and an half, and so the
breadth of the whole pile, was 15 Cubits in all: The height of this East gate
only came short of the rest, 4 Cubits, for Maym. in Beth habbekirah per. 6.
Gl^ss. in Mid.
it rose but but 6 cubits above the entry or light that was passed through,
whereas the rest did rise ten, and so it rose but one cubit above the height of
the wall, whereas the rest did five; and the reason was given immediately
before, because the Priest that burned the red Cow on Mount Olivet might look
over it upon the Temple; for so they conceive that command bound him when he
sprinkled her blood. He shall sprinkle of her blood directly before the
Tabernacle of the Congregation seven times, Numb. 19.4. Observe Christ and his
Disciples, having gone out of this gate from the Temple, now sitting upon Mount
Olivet before this gate, and looking back on the sumptuous building of the
Temple, and Christ discoursing concerning their ruin, Mat. 24.1, 2, 3, etc.

This gate stood not just in the very midst of this Eastern wall, as if it
had 245 cubits of the wall on either side it, but it stood more toward the
North, because it was to stand directly in the front, or over against the porch
of the Temple. Now the Altar being pitched and fixed so by a divine
appointment, that the Mountain did not allow an equal space of ground on either
side it, they were forced to build the Temple so, as to stand in its proper
parallel with the Altar, and to cast the Courts so, as that (...) Mid. ubi supr.
The greatest space of the Mount was on the South, the second on the East, the
third on the North, and the least Westward.

Id.per. 1
Upon this East gate was pourtraied and pictured the resemblance of the City
Shushan, the royal Seat of the Persian Monarchy, and the gate it self, at
least some part of it was called by this name, (...) The Talmud says Kelim.
per. 17.
There were two sorts of Cubits in Shushan, the Palace, one which exceeded the
cubit of Moses half a finger, and this was upon the North-east corner, and the
other which exceeded that, half a finger more, and that was on the South-east
corner. Now the Gloss explains it thus, that Shushan the Palace was a room in
the East gate where Shushan was pourtraied. And the reason of that picture is
given by some to be Aruch. in Shushan.
That Israel might see it and remember their captivity in Shushan: by others,
R^mbam in Mid. per. 1. Gloss. in Mishnaioth in 8. ibid.
Because when they came out of captivity, the King of Persia commanded to
picture Shushan upon the gates of the house, that the fear of that Kingdom
might be upon them, But here Abraham Zaccuth does move a just quere. The
Kingdom of Persia Iuckasin fol. 65. col. 2.
(says he) and Shushan lasted but a little while after the second Temple was
built, namely about some 34 years, and then how came it to pass that that
picture continued there all the time of the second Temple? But there are some
that resolve it thus, That the children of the captivity made this
pourtraiture, that they might remember the wonder of Purim, which was done in
Sushan, Esth. 9.26. and this is a good resolution: so he.

This gate is called The Kings Gate, 1 Chronicles: 9.18. not for any special or
ordinary entrance of the King through it (for his common coming in, was at the
clean opposite quarter, namely on the West side) but it is so called, because
King Solomon built it and the rest of the wall that way, at an extraordinary
pains and charge, fetching up the foundation with huge stones, from the
bottom of the deep valley that lay under: of which anon.

But before we part from this gate, let us stand a little in it and take the
prospect that is there before us Eastward, for the better understanding of some
places of Scripture, that speak of the places thereabout.

Mount Olivet faced Jerusalem, and the Temple, and Sion upon the East, winding
likewise Northward, so as that it faced Sion also something upon the North.
Betwixt Jerusalem and it, was the valley of Hinnom or Tophet, where was the
horrid and hideous practice of their irreligious religion, of butchering their
children, in causing them to pass through the fire, or burning them to Molech.
For Solomon had built an high place for Chemosh the abomination of Moab in this
hill that was before Jerusalem, and for Molech the abomination of the children
of Ammon, 1 King. 11.7. namely on the right hand of the Hill, as you looked
upon it from Jerusalem, 2 King. 23.13. In this text of the Kings it is called
(...) Har hammashchith, instead of (...) Har hammishchah, The Mount of
corruption, instead of The Mount of Unction, or of Olives, the Holy Ghost
branding the fact, and the place for the fact, with so visible and notable a
mark of distaste and displeasure at it. To so great a contrariety to what he
once was, when he was himself, had Solomon's idolatrous wives bewitched him,
that as he had built a sumptuous Temple on Mount Moriah to the true God, so
they persuade him to build an Idolatrous Temple to their abominations on Mount
Olivet, in the face of the Temple, and affronting it. The valley beneath this
accursed Idoleum, was called The valley of Tophet, and the valley of the son or
the sons of Hinnom, Jer: 7.31, 32. and 19.6. etc. The valley of Topbet, that
is, Vid. Buxt. Heb. Lex. in (...)
The valley of Drums or Tabers: from the noise that was made with such kind
of instruments to drown the cries and shrieking of the burning children: And
the valley of the sons of Hinnom, that is, the valley of children of
shrieking and roaring; from the woeful cries of those poor children frying in
the fire. This was probably that which is called the valley of the carcasses or
the dead bodies, Jer. 31.40. of which name the Chaldee Paraphrast in that place
has given this reason, Because the dead bodies of the Camp of the Assyrians
fell there: and to which Josephus also gives testimony when he relates that a
place was called Jos. de Bell. lib. 6. c. 26. and 31.
The Assyrian Camp. And here may we give a check a little to the
peremptorinesse of Rabbi Solomon upon the Text of Jeremy, lest he grow too
proud, who glosseth the fortieth verse thus, R. Sol. in Ier. 31.40.
The valley of dead bodies is the valley where the carcasses of the Camp of
Senacherib fell: and the valley of the Ashes, is the place whither they carried
the ashes forth, which was without Jerusalem: These places they shall bring
within the City even within the walls: And this Prophecy is to be accomplished
in the last redemption in despite of the Heretics, for it was not
accomplished under the second Temple. By Heretics he virulently means
Christians, who deny any other Messiah yet to come, and that there shall be any
more an earthly Jerusalem. For he would construe those words of the Prophet
strictly according to the letter, as if there should be a time when these
valleys should be walled within Jerusalem, really and indeed; whereas the
Prophet in mentioning of those most defiled and polluted places to be taken
into the City, means only the bringing in of the Heathens, who had been
polluted with all manner defilement of Idolatry and other abominations, into
the spiritual Jerusalem which is above, or the Church. And yet if we would
follow him even in his literal construction, we might show, out of his own
Authors the Talmudists, how Bethphage, the Town that stood even in these
places mentioned by the Prophet, though it stood out of the walls of Jerusalem,
yet by their own confession is it reckoned as a member or part of Jerusalem:
and so was that prophecy literally fulfilled by their own chorography at the
coming of our Messiah; But here is not a place for such disputes.

This was the prospect that you had before you on the right hand as you stood
in the East gate of the Mountain of the Temple; namely a part of Mount Olivet
divided from the City Jerusalem by the valley of Tophet, and by the valley of
Ashes; on the side of the valley, near Jerusalem stood the Town Bethphage,
and on the hill on the further side of the valley over against it, stood
Bethany, renowned for the raising of Lazarus from the dead there, and for our
Saviors frequent resort thither, and ascension thence.

Directly before you, was the place upon Mount Olivet where they used to burn
the red Cow into purifying ashes, when they had occasion to do such a work: and
Maym. in Parah per. 3. and in Shekalim (...) 4.
thither went a double arched Causey, of the same manner of arching that we
have mentioned under the Temple Courts: and for the same caution, namely for
security against graves, by which the Priest that went about that employment
might have been defiled, and so the work ^ard.

Upon your left hand as you stood, ran Mount Olivet still, and the valley
betwixt you and it and all along on the East point and on the North side of
Sion, was called the valley of Kidren, of famous memory and mention in
Scripture, 2 Samuel: 15.23. 2 Kings 23.6. John 18.1. etc. At the foot of the hill,
beyond this valley you might see Gethsemany or the place of the oil Presses,
whither they brought the Olives they had gathered upon Mount Olivet to be
pressed, and the oil got out. And there it was whither our Savior went after
his last Supper, and where he was apprehended having supped that night as it is
most likely in Sion or the City of David.

CHAP. IV. Of the two South Gates (...) The Gates of Huldah.
AS the East quarter of the enclosing wall, did face Mount Olivet, so did the
South quarter face Jerusalem the City it self; For take we the whole City,
either built upon seven Hills Ielammed. f^l. 52.
as Tan^huma asserts it, or upon three, Acra, Moriah, and Sion, as it is
commonly described, or add Bezetha and Ophila if you will, the situation of it
will be found thus, that (...) Tosaph. ad Kelim.
That the Mountain of the Temple will be found lying Northward of Jerusalem,
and Sion Northward of the Mountain of the Temple. And thus do the Jews in
their antiquities generally seat it, and that not without sufficient warrant of
the Scripture. For how can those words of the Psalmist, Beautiful for
situation, the joy of the whole earth is Mount Sion on the sides of the North,
Psalm: 48.2. be more properly and plainly interpreted then as Aben Ezra does
interpret them; Aben. Ezr. in Psalm. 46.
Sion on the North side of Jerusalem? And those words of Ezekiel, He set me
upon a Mountain, by which was the frame of a City toward the South, Ezekiel:
40.2. who can give them a sense more genuine and proper then Kimchi has done,
when he says Kimch. in Ezekiel 4.2.
The Mountain is the Mountain of the Temple, and this City is Jerusalem on
the South?

On this side therefore that faced Jerusalem, or that looked South, there were
two Gates that were called Talm. in Mid. per. 1.
The Gates of Huldah, and they were so placed, as that they were in an equal
distance from the two Angles of the Wall, East and West, and of the same
distance one from another. And so is Josephus to be understood when he says
(...) Joseph. Antiq. lib. 15. c. 14.
The fourth part of the Wall was toward the South, and it had gates in the
middle; that is, the gates were so set, as that there was an equal space
betwixt gate and gate, and betwixt either gate and the corners of the wall.

From whence these gates did take their name to be called The gates of Huldah,
is hard to determine, whether from (...) Huldah, which signifies a Weesell, of
which creature Vid. Aruch. in (...)
the Hebrews write many Stories; or Constable. Lemper. in Mid. page 12.
from the Syrian word (...) which translateth the Greek word (...), To creep
into, 2 Timothy 3.6. or from (...) This, or hither is common ground, or Vid. R.
Sol. in 2 Kings 22.
from the Prophetess Huldah, who was of so great esteem in her time among the
Jews, as that they say Avoth R. Na. han per. 34.
there was never any buried within Jerusalem, either man or woman (unless of
the house of David) but only she: or from whence else they were denominated,
it will not countervaile the labor to search, nor is it very hopeful to find.

We shall not need to spend time in describing the form, fabric and
dimensions of these gates, since these and the rest of the Gates were all
suitable to that in the East quarter which we have described before, saving that
their Gate house was higher, and that they were not charactered with the
picture of Shushan as that Gate was. Let us therefore only take the prospect
as we stand in either of these Gates before us, toward the South upon which
they opened, as we did in the other toward the East.

What Streets, Houses, Turrets, Gardens, and beauteous buildings were to be
seen in Jerusalem as it lay before you, may better be supposed in so goodly a
City then described: only if you will observe the situation of it, or how it
lay, you may view it situate thus. It lay upon the Hill Acra, which rising in
the middle, descended with an easy declining toward the East and West, and
with a descent also toward the North or toward the Temple. Upon the very
highest pitch of the Hill, and from whence it had a fall either way there
sprang the sweet and gentle fountain Siloam, without the City, and ran to
either end of the City, both East and West in a contrary channel; as it made
toward the East it left the Fullers field upon the right hand and saluted the
Sheep gate on the left, and so turned Eastward and fell into the Poole called
Solomon's Poole, which may well be supposed to be Bethesda. As it ran
Westward, it coasted along the broad wall, the Tower of the Furnaces, the
valley gate, and dung gate, and after a while fell into the Poole of Siloam.

CHAP. V. Of the West gates Shallecheth or Coponius, Parbar, Asuppim.
IN the Talmuds Survey of the Temple, there is but one Gate mentioned or spoken
of upon the West quarter, but Josephus does mention four, and that agreeably
to the Scripture. Not but that the Talmudists did very well know there were so
many Gates upon this quarter, but they reckon only those by name, Mid. per. 1.
and Tamid. per. 1.
that had Guards kept at them, whereas Josephus reckons all that were in being:
His words are these; (...). Joseph. Antiq. lib. 15. c. 14.
On the West quarter of this outmost bound, there were four gates: The first
leading to the Kings Palace, the valley between being filled up for the
passage: Two others went into the Suburbs, and the other into the other City,
having many steps down into the valley, and many up again to the pitch or
coming up. We will survey these Gates particularly, and take them in the order
that he had laid down, beginning first with that Gate that led to the Kings
Palace.

SECT. 1. The Gate of Shallecheth, or Coponius.
THe Gate that led toward the Kings Palace, was that that stood most North in
this West quarter, of all the four, being set directly and diametrically
opposite to the Gate Shushan in the East. In the time of the first Temple, this
Gate was called Shallecheth, 1 Chronicles. 26.16. but in the time of Herod's Temple,
it was called Midd. per. 1. Maym. in Beth habbechir. per. 5.
The Gate of Coponius: The Jews write it (...) Kiponus; about the derivation
of which, word there are various conjectures. Some deduce it from Aruch. in
voce.
(...) A hole or entrance; Some from L. Lemper. in Mid. page 12.
(...) A back door, some from (...) A thorough-passage; but I should rather
derive it from Coponius, the Roman Commander. Josephus records that when
Cyrenius was sent by Augustus to be Governor of Syria, Coponius also General
of the Horse, was sent with him for ruler in Judea, Joseph. An. lib. 18. cap. 1.
(...). Now this was so near about the time of Herod's finishing the building
of the Temple, that it gives fair occasion to think that he named this gate
in honor of that great Commander Coponius, as he did a building hard by it,
Antonia, in memory and honor of his great friend Antony.

The word Shallecheth, by which name this Gate was first called, in the time of
Solomon, does signfie a casting up, and so says Michol in (...)
Kimchi, it is rendered by the Chaldee Paraphrast in the sense of (...) Now this
gate is said in 1 Chronicles. 26.16. to have been by the Causey going up; which
going up is that renowned ascent that Solomon made for his own passage up to
the Temple 1 King. 10.5. 2 Chronicles. 9.4. And the Causey is that that Josephus
means, when he says, A gate led to the Kings House from the Temple, the
valley between being filled up for the passage, which was a very great work,
for the valley was large and deep: Therefore it may very well be concluded that
it was called Shallecheth, or the casting up, from the Causey that was cast up
to lead to it from the Kings Palace, this being his ordinary way to the Temple.

This Causey is held by some Vid. R. So^ in Esaias 6.
to have been set on either side with Oaks and Teyle trees, which grew up
there, and served for a double benefit, the one to keep up the Causey on either
side, that it should not fall down; and the other was to make the King a
pleasant walk, and shade, with trees on either side, as he came, and went.
And so they render that verse in Esaias 6.13. where the word is only used
besides in all the Bible: In it shall be a tenth, and it shall return and be
^aten, as a Teile tree, or as an Oak by Shallecheth: that is, as the rows of
trees on the sides of this Causey.

SECT. 2. Parbar Gate, 1 Chronicles: 26.18.
FRom the Gate Shallecheth or Coponius, that lay most North on this Western
quarter, let us walk toward the South, and the next Gate we come to, was
called Parbar; of this there is mention in the book of Chronicles in the place
alleged; where the Holy Ghost relating the disposal of the Porters at the
several gates of the Mountain of the House, faith, At Parbar Westward, two at
the Causey, and two at Parbar. By which it is apparent sufficiently, that this
Gate was in the West quarter, and reasonably well apparent that it was the next
gate to the Causey or Shallecheth because it is so named with it, but by that
time we have fully surveyed the situation of it, it will appear to have been
so plain enough. The word Parbar, admitted of a double construction, for it
either signifies (...) An outer place, Gloss. in Tamid. per. 1. Kimch. in
Chron. 26. Aruch. in voce, etc.
as many of the Jews do construe it, or it concurres with the signification of
the word Parbar, (which differs but one letter from it, and that very near,
and of an easy change) which betokens Suburbs, both in the Hebrew Text, 2
Kings 23.11. and in the Chaldee tongue, as Kimch. i^ 2 Kings 23.
David Kimchi averreth there.

And here Josephus his words which we produced a little before, may be taken up
again, and out of all together we may observe the situation of the Gate in
mention. He says, that of the four Gates upon this Western quarter, one led
toward the Kings Palace, (that is Shallecheth that we have viewed already) and
the two next, (...), into the Suburbs. These Suburbs that he means, were
indeed that part of the City which in Scripture is called Millo, which was the
valley at the West end of Mount Moriah, in which Jerusalem and Sion met and
saluted each other, replenished with buildings by David and Solomon in their
times, 2 Samuel 5.9. and 1 Kings 11.27. and taken in as part and Suburbs of Sion,
and so owned always in after times.

And to this purpose is the expression of Josephus in his words that we have in
hand, observable, when he says, that two of these Western gates were into the
Suburbs, (...), and the other into the other City, that is, into Jerusalem,
which he makes as another City from the Suburbs of which he spoke. Take the
word Parbar therefore in either of the significations that have been mentioned,
either for an outer place, or for the Suburbs; this Gate that we have in survey
might very properly be called by that name, because it was a passage from the
Temple into Millo, which was an outer place, and the Suburbs of Sion
distinguished and parted from Sion by a wall, yet a member of it, and belonging
to it.

Now whereas the other gate that stood next to this that we are about, toward
the South, did lead also into the Suburbs as well as this, as is apparent from
Josephus, yet is it not called by the same name Parbar: the reason of this may
be given, because it bare a name pecullar and proper, suitable to that singular
use to which it was designed, or to that place where it was set, rather then
suitable to that place whither it gave passage.

And here because we are in mention of the Suburbs, it may not be amiss to
look a little upon that text, that speaks of the Suburbs, and out of which
we have taken that signification of the word Parbar, namely 2 Kings 23.11. It
is said there, that Josiah took away the Horses that the Kings of Judah had
given to the Sun, at the entering in of the House of the Lord, by the Chamber
of Nathan mel^^h the Chamberlain which was in the Suburbs. Whether these
Horses were given to the Sun, to be sacrificed to it, or to ride on to meet
and salute the Sunrising, as the Jews suppose, we shall not trouble our selves
to enquire into, it is the place that we have to look after at this time,
rather then the thing.

These Stables of such Horses, (and it is like the Kings common Stables were in
the same place) are said to be in the Suburbs, and at the entering in of the
House of the Lord, and we cannot better allot the place, then that whereupon
we are, namely that they stood here in Millo, before this gate Parbar, or
thereabout, and from thence there was a way to bring the Horses up to the Kings
house, when the Kings would use either those horses that they had dedicated to
the Sun for their irreligious use, or their other Horses for their common use.
As they went out of Millo to rise up into Sion, they passed through a gate
which was in the wall that parted between Millo and Sion, which wall and gate
was but a little below the Causey that went up to the gate Shallecheth: and
this helps to understand that passage about Athaliahs death, 2 Kings 11.11.
They laid bands on her, and she went by the way by which the Horses came into
the Kings house, and there she was slain. That is, they got her out of the
Mountain of the Temple, brought her down by the gate Shallecheth and the
Causey, and when she came near the horse gate, through which the horses went
up out of the Stables in Millo, to the Kings house, there they slew her. There
was a Horse gate indeed in the maine wall of the City, on the Fast part of it,
Neb. 3.28. Jer. 31.39. but that was distinct from this, which was peculiar for
the Kings horses, and therefore a distinctive character is set upon this,
namely, that it was the Horse gate toward the Kings, house, 2 Chronicles. 13.15. It
should be rendered toward the Kings house rather then by the Kings house, for
neither of these gates, either that on the East which was a gate of the City,
nor this on the West which was a gate into Millo, were near the Kings house,
but a good distance off; See the LXX there.

SECT. 3. The two Gates and House of Asuppim.
IN the story of the designing of the Porters to their several places and
charges, in 1 Chronicles. 26.15, 17. it is said thus, To Obed Edem Southward, and to
his sons the House of Asuppim. Eastward were six Levites, Northward four a
day, Southward four a day, and toward Asuppim two and two.

Now there are two things, that have justly moved diverse learned men to
conceive, that Asuppim does betoken the treasuries of the Temple, or the places
where the offered and dedicate things were referved and laid up. The one is the
signification of the word it self, for it betokens gatherings or
collections; and the other is, because Obed Edom, whose sons are said here to
be at Asuppim as at their charge, is said in 2 Chronicles: 25.24. to have had the
keeping of the treasury. For there it is recorded that Joash the King of Israel
took all the gold and silver and Vessels that were found in the house of God
with Obed Edom.

Now if this be granted, that Asuppim did betoken and mean the treasuries, yet
are we still to seek where Asuppim was, and indeed there is not a more
difficult matter, in all the survey of the Temple, and of the buildings and
affairs, belonging to it, then to determine aright and clearly concerning the
Porters, treasuries and treasures and all their charges; there is so much
variety of expressions about these in Scripture, and so little explanation and
resolution of this matter in other writers, we shall do the best we can for
their discovery as we come to the view of the several places that refer to any
such thing.

The word Asuppim is used again, in speech concerning the Porters, Neh: 12.25.
where fix men there named are said to be Porters keeping the ward (...) at the
Asuppim of the Gates. Aben Ezra and Kimchi say it is but the same with Sippim
the thresholds, and so it is rendered in our English Text. But if it be taken in
that sense in this place of the Chronicles that we have in hand, there can be
no difference between the sons of Obed Edom and the rest of the Porters in
this respect, for all of them may be said to be Porters at Asuppim as well as
they, since they were all alike Porters at the thresholds.

In the naming of the Porters, and placing them in their stations, there are
the East, West, North and South quarters mentioned, and Asuppim comes in as if
it were out at all: At the East gate were six of Shelemiahs younger sons; And
his eldest son Zechariah and his sons at the North. At the West were six
sons of Hosa and Shuppim, four at Shallecheth, and two at Parbar. And four of
Obed Edoms eight sons at the South, and the other four at the house of
Asuppim, which seems out of square and who can tell where?

For the searching out of this place, which lies so very covert, and obscure in
the Text, it may not be impertinent to consider these four particulars: 1 That
there were four gates on the West side as has been observed, namely the gate
Coponius, two gates into the Suburbs, and one into the City. 2. That the holy
Ghost reckoning the Porters as they were disposed after the return out of
captivity, places them only upon the four quarters of this outmost wall, 1 Chronicles: 9.23, 24. (for the wall that encompassed the Courts had no gate on the
West at all, and therefore those verses cannot be understood of that, but of
this outmost boundary wall) And why should we hold that he goes in a different
style here? 3 Those Porters lodged round about the house of God, and opened the
doors every morning, 1 Chronicles. 9.27. Now neither Priests nor Levites had any
lodgings in the Gates of the Court, nor did the Levites open those doors, but
the Priests. And 4 That though there were four and twenty guards, three of
Priests, and one and twenty of Levites every night about the Temple, yet was
there not any such by day at the Court gates, or at those places by the Court
wall where they were by night: But here the Text does expressly tell that these
Porters atendance was by day.


These things therefore considered, 1. We cannot place the House of Asuppim in
any other part, then in some place in this outmost wall that encompassed the
Mountain of the House, even as the rest of the gates and the Porters stood. 2.
The expression used in the Text does argue that these sons of Obed Edom that
stood Porters at Asuppim artended in two places or at two gates, for he says
that at Asuppim there were two and two. 3 Since the Porters at two of the gates
only of the four that were on the West quarter are named, namely, Shallecheth
and Parbar, it cannot be otherwise conceived in reason, but that the other two
gates on that quarter go here under the name of Asuppim, and had their Porters
two and two. For 1. Since there were four gates there, why should two of them
go without Porters, when all the rest were so exactly manned? And 2 why should
we go place these four sons of Obed Edom as Porters we know not where, and
where we never read of any Porters at all, and let these two gates stand wide
and none to attend them?

I make no scruple therefore to conclude, that Asuppim were the two gates in
this Western wall, which stood most South or nearest to Jerusalem, and The
house of Asuppim, was a large piece of building, that ran between them,
which was a treasury, or diverse rooms for treasuring and laying up something
for the use of the Temple. The treasuries of the Temple were diverse and in
diverse places, and committed to diverse persons; but the general distinction of
them is into the Treasures of the House of God, and the Treasures of the
dedicate things, 1 Chronicles. 26.20.

By the Treasures of the house of God, is meant those things that were in
ordinary use and imploiment, as the vessels, vestments, tithes, wine, oil, and
other things which were commonly used, and with these we may join whatsoever
was offered to the Treasury either as due, as was the half shekel, or
voluntary as money or vessels for the repair of the house, and advancement of
the Service. But by the Treasures of dedicate things, is understood whatsoever
the Kings, Captains or great men had consecrated and dedicated, which lay as
the stock of the Temple, and as the monuments of their devotion. The former
Treasures were some of them under the care and charge of the Porters, 1 Chronicles.
9.26, 27, etc. and the rest and the latter, under the hand of other Levites, 1 Chronicles: 26.20, 22, 26, etc. The Porters had their treasuries at every one of
their gates: and so should I render (...) The Treasuries of the Gates in Neh:
12.25. whereas some of them kept vestments, some instruments, some one thing,
and some another, and these sons of Obed Edom kept the silver and gold
vessels, which were the richest utensils of the Temple, and therefore their
gates and the buildings between are called Asuppim or Treasuries, by an
Emphaticall dignity above the rest.

Before we part with this West quarter, let us take our prospect outward as
we have done from the two sides we have been upon before. As you stood on the
middle of this wall, Millo lay before you, and there might you see, besides the
Kings stables and other buildings, the poole of Siloam, and the Kings Gardens:
On the left hand was the descent of Acra and the buildings of Jerusulem upon
it: on the right hand, the rising of Sion, and the stairs that went up into
the City, and by which the King came down to Shallecheth, and so into the
Temple. And as you rose higher was the place of the Sepulchers of David's
family, and another poole, Neb: 3.15, 16.

CHAP. VI. The North gate (...) Tedi, or Tadde.
ON the Northside, to which we are now come, there was but one gate (as there
was but one on the East quarter) which was situate just in the middle of the
wall between the East and West end of it, but how to give it its right name
there is some dispute. Misnajoth in Octave in Midd: C. Lemper. ibid. page: 13.
Some write it (...) Teri with r, which signifies moistness or purulency
because that they of the Priests, whose seed went from them by night, went
through this gate to bath themselves from that uncleanness. But the reading of
old, has bin so resolvedly (...) with d Talm. Bab. and Aruch.
Tedi, or as some vowel it Buxt: Talm: Lex.
Tadde, that Pisk Tosaphoth ad Middoth goes about to give its Etymology. He
mentions a double notation: namely that either it betokens (...) obscurity
and shamefac'dnesse, because of its rare use and passage, and because the
Priests that had suffered Gonorrhoea by night, went out through it to the Bath
with some shame and dejectedness: Or that the word refers to actors or poets,
and he produces a sentence in which by its conjunction with another word, it
seems so to signify, for other sense I know not to put upon it. The sentence
is this (...) Tragedians and Poets used it before the chief of the captivity.
But what sense he would make of this Etymology, I do not understand. But be the
notation of the word what it will, the Talmud sets two distinguishing marks
upon the gate it self, for which it was singular from all the rest of the gates
that we have mentioned, Talm. in Mid. per. 2.
The first is that it had not so fair a rising Gate house and chambers above
it as the rest had, but only stones laid flat over it, and the battlement of
the wall running upon it and no more. And the other is (...) Ibid. per. 1.
That it was not a common and ordinary passage in and out, as the other gates
were, but only a passage upon occasion; the uselessness whereof we shall have
occasion to look at again ere it be long.

The Mount Moriah did afford some space of ground upon this side, without the
wall and compass of the holy ground, which it did upon none of the sides
beside; for here was built the large and goodly Tower of Antonia, which we
shall survey by and by, whereas on every one of the other sides the
incompassing wall that closed in the holy ground did stand near upon the very
pitch and precipice of the hill. So that looking about you as you stood out at
this gate, this Tower Antonia stood on your left hand and spoiled your prospect
on that side, and you could see nothing that way but it. Before you was Mount
Sion, and the goodly buildings of the Kings Palace and other houses; upon the
bending toward the East angle, was the place called Ophel or Ophla, the
habitation of the Nethenims, Neh: 3.26. and when Ophla was turned East, then
was there the horse-gate and watergate before the Temple.

Thus lay The Mountain of the Lords house, encompassed with the City round
about, and enclosed with a fair and high wall which separated it from the
common ground: On the one side of it lay Sion the seat of the King, on the
other side Jerusalem, the habitation of the people and the Temple, and its
service in the middle between, even as the ministry is in mediation betwixt
God and his people. The wall that encompassed it, had eight gates of goodly
structure and beauteous fabric, all of one fashion, save only that the North
and East gates were not topped the one in height, and the other in fashion as
the other were. At all of these gates were Porters by day, and at five of them
were guards by night, as we shall observe hereafter: the access to them on the
East and West was by a great ascent, but facilitated by steps or causeys for
the peoples ease, and for the coming up of the beasts that were to be
sacrificed, of which there were some that came up daily. On the South side the
ascent was not so very great, yet it had its rising in the like manner of
access as had the other. On the North what coming up there was, it was more
for the accommodation of the residents in the Tower Antonia, then for the
entrance into the Temple, the North gate Tedi being of so little use as has
been spoken.

At any of the gates as you passed through, the entrance it self, through which
you went, was ten cubits wide, twenty cubits high, and twelve cubits over, six
of which cubits were without the holy ground, and six within: and as you
entered in at the East gate, had you seen the ground before any buildings were
set in it, or any thing done to it, but only the building of this wall, you
might have seen the hill rising from the East to the West, in such an ascent,
that the Western part of it was very many cubits higher then where you stood,
as we shall have occasion to observe as we pass along.

This bank was once well stored with bushes and brambles, Gen: 22.13. and
afterward with worse briers and thorns, the Jebusites, who had it in possession
till David purchased it for that divine use and structure, that we are looking
after: Here was then a poor threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite, but
afterward the habitation of the God of Jacob: A place and fabric as sumptuous
and eminent, as it was possible for man, and art, and cost to make it; the
glory of the Nation where it was, and the wonder of all the Nations round about
it; but in fine, as great a wonder and monument of desolation and ruin, as
ever it had been of beauty and gloriousness. Before we step further toward the
survey of it as it stood in glory, we must keep yet a while along this wall
about which we have been so long, and observe some buildings and beauties that
joined and belonged to it, besides the gates that we have surveyed in it
already.

CHAP. VII. The Tower ANTONIA. (...)
Upon the North side Joseph. Antiq. lib. 15. c. 14. and de Bell. lib. 5. cap.
25.
and joining up to the Western angle (but on the outside of the wall that we
have surveyed) stood the Tower of Antonia, once the place where the
Highpriests used to lay up their holy garments, but in aftertimes a Garrison
of Roman Soldiers for the awing of the Temple. When it served for the former
use, it was called Baris, (it may be from (...) ad extra because it was an
outer building) but when for the latter, it bare the name of Antonia: Herod the
great having sumptuously repaired it, as he did the Temple, and called it after
the name of the Roman Prince Antony. It stood upon the North-west point of
Moriah, and was a very strong and a very large pile: so spacious a building
with all its appurtenances, that it took up two furlongs compass. The rock it
stood upon, was fifty cubits high and steep, and the building it self was
forty cubits above it, it was 4 square, encompassed with a wall of 3 cubits
high, which enclosed its courts, and had a Turret at every corner, like the
white Tower at London, but that it was more spacious, and that the Turrets were
not all of a height, for those at the North-east and North-west corners were 50
cubits high, but those on the South-east and South-west were 70 cubits high,
that they might fully over-looke the Temple. It had cloisters or walks about
it, and baths and lodgings and large rooms in it, so that it was at once like
a Castle and like a Palace. There was a passage out of it into the North and
West cloisters of the Mountain of the House (of which we shall speak next) and
by that the Roman Garrison Soldiers went down at every festival of the
Jews, to take care against tumults and seditions in those great concourses of
the people: And the Governor of this Tower is called the Captain of the
Temple, Acts 4.1. Luke 22.52.

Id. Ant. lib. 18. c. 6.
Hyrcanus the High Priest the first of that name, took up this place for his
Mansion, and for the laying up of his holy garments, and so did his successors
after him: And Herod when he repaired it and called it Antonia, he suffered the
Highpriests to lay up and to have the keeping of the robes here still, and so
did Archelaus his son after him. But when the Romans put Archelaus from his
Kingdom, they took the custody of these garments into their own power, but
yet they let them lie in the same place, till Vitellius the Pro-consul of Syria
(in the time of Tiberius) coming to Jerusalem, and well pleased with his
entertainment there, upon the Jews Petition restored the keeping of those
robes to them again. Howbeit they enjoyed not that privilege very long, but
in the time of succeeding Emperors and Governors the custody of them was
taken from them again.

And now that we have seen Antonia on the outside of the North wall, let us
come in again at the North gate Tedi, and look a little more upon that, as we
come through it. We observed before, the name of this gate to signify Hiding
or obscurity, and as for the nature of it, we saw that it was in a manner
altogether unfrequented: Now two things may be conjectured toward the reason
and cause of both these; as 1. The insolency of the Roman Garrison might make
the people have but little mind to come that way, and it might be to them,
Porta Taedii, a gate of grievance; for let us cast out a Latin Etymology, so
near a Latin Garrison. And 2. a reason why it carries hiddennesse in its
name, Josephus seems to give in this passage (...). Id. de Bell. lib. 5. cap.
15.
because the hill Bezetha did shadow the Temple on that North side, and spoil
its prospect, whereas no other side of the square had any such cloudings.

CHAP. VIII. Cloisters along this outmost wall within. (...)
THUS has the outmost virge and bounds of the Mountain of the House been
laid before us; Now there is a thing that deserves our pains and observation
again in another survey, and that is, the walks or cloisters that were along
the wall within between gate and gate round about.

Shabbath fol 16.
The Talmud in one place expresses it, (...) Porticus duplicata, and so Jos.
de Bell: lib. 5. c. 14.
Josephus (...); which both the Talmud Shab: fol: 13. Maym. in Beth habbechir.
per. 5.
in another place and also Maymony do utter more largely (...) It was all
floored or roofed over, and one porch was before another.

The word (...) is so plainly the Greek word (...), that I make no scruple to
render it by that word in Greek and by Porticus in Latin, but how to
translate any of them into our English tongue, is of some doubtfulnesse,
because our word Porch by which they are constantly rendered, does not reach to
their sense in our English use, but is commonly taken in another. For what
Kimch. in 1 Kings 6.4.
Kimchi says concerning the word (...) that it means the same thing that by
the language of the Talmud is called (...) The house of the gate, is also most
true concerning the proper signification of the English word Porch, for that
most ordinarily and commonly is taken among us for the building over or before
the house door. But these words that we are about, do signify Cloister-walks
or rows, where men used to walk or sit free from rains and weather, the one
side open, supported with pillars, and all floored, or covered over head.

So was this large compass along the wall, it was double Cloistered round
about (for give me leave to use that word, till I find a better) having a roof
or floor over head, which lay almost as high as the top of the Wall, save what
was left for the walls battlements: and it was supported with a treble row of
Marble pillars (the inmost row joining to the wall) and it was distinguished by
the middle row of Pillars into a double walk. We need not go far for a
copy, the stately new building ( Piazza, walk, cloister, call it what you
will) at the West end of Paul's, may very well be our pattern. For it was much
about that height, twelve yards and an half; it joined on one side to the
wall, as that to the Church, and was borne up with gallant white Marble
Pillars: It was 30 cubits, or 15 yards broad; either walk, half that breadth
pillars and all, and had battlements above the leads, both at the wall, and on
the other side, as that at Paul's is crested on the outside. Where buildings
stood out into the Mountain of the House (as we have observed they did) there
these Cloisters were carried accordingly: being either cut off at the building,
if it stood 30 cubits out, or the one half or more of the Cloister cut off if
the building were narrower, and the rest of the Cloister carried on before it.

Only upon the South side of the Square there was some difference of the
Walks or Cloister from what was in the other parts.

For here was the (...) the Cloister royal as Ant. lib. 15. c. 4.
Josephus calls it, and of which he makes a very large and eminent description
to this purpose: 1. That it was treble walked or rowed all along from East to
West, whereas the Cloisters of any of the other sides were but double. 2. That
this whole frame was borne up by four rows of Pillars that stood even one
against another, the inmost row joining to the wall as it was on the other
sides. 3. The inmost and the outmost walk of these three (that is, that that
was next to the wall, and that that was outmost toward the open space of the
Mountain of the House) were equal in height and breadth with the walks or
Cloisters on any of the other sides, namely 15 cubits high and 15 cubits broad
apeece: but the middlemost walk was 42 cubits and an half broad and 50 cubits
high, and so the two rows of Pillars that stood on either side of this middle
walk were 50 cubits high, so that the roof of this walk was as high again
as the roof of the Walks on either side, and these altogether were as the
upper and lower leads of a Church, and every one of them had a crest or
battlement round about: Finally the whole fabric was so gallant and sumptuous,
(...), that it is incredible, says my Author, to those that never saw it, and
an amazement to those that did. 4. Had one stood at the top of the highest
Leads at either end and looked down, there was so steep a trench or valley
under (...); that to look down it would make one giddy, and he could hardly
see to the bottom; and Josephus proclaims this fabric to be (...), one of
the godliest works under the Sun.


Now though this gallant Southside Cloister, did, and that very deservedly,
bear the name of The Cloister Royal (...), yet is not this the same with
that, which in the Scripture is called Solomon's Porch, of which there is
mention, John 10.23. Acts 3.11. for that (as the same Josephus gives us
intimation) was upon the East side of this square (that we have in hand) and
not upon the South, his words are these Id. ib. lib. 20. cap. 8.
(...): The People persuaded the King Agrippa (the second) to repair the East
Porch or Cloister: Now this Cloister was in the outmost space of the Temple:
standing over an exceeding deep valley: raised upon a Wall of 400 cubits which
was made of square white stones of 20 cubits long, and 6 cubits high apeece,
the work of King Solomon who first built the Temple.

His meaning about the foundation of this East wall and cloister he tells
elsewhere to this purpose, De Bell. lib. 5. c. 14.
that Solomon to find room enough this way, was put to fill and bring up a
part of the deep trench with such great stones, and (...), and upon this strong
foundation, so brought up from the bottom of the valley, he built this porch,
or Cloister that we have in mention.

Now when the Temple was destroyed by the Babylonian, and all the buildings
ruined, yet this great and wonderful foundation that Solomon had brought up so
high as to equal the floor of the Mount, was not ruined or pulled down but
continued still, and in aftertimes, the Porch or Cloister of that Eastern
quarter, was built upon the same foundation of Solomon's: and from that it took
and bare the name still of Solomon's Porch, and the East gate here, upon the
same occasion was called the Kings gate, as was said before.

And now to take a Prospect of this space, and wall, and buildings, and
Cloisters that we have spoken of at one view: By many steps, or at the least by
a great rising, you were to come up to any of the gates that have been
mentioned, let the East gate (or the gate of Shushan) be conceived for our
entrance. Ezekiel. 40.6.
The Gate House or threshold was 12 cubits over, 6 without the doors and 6
within; being got within you saw the great square within, most stately double
cloistered round about on every side but only on the South, where the cloister
was trebble: on the West side were 4 gates, on the South two, on the North one,
and one on the East where you came in: and at all these gates more or less
buildings. Mid. per. 1.1.
In five of these gates (namely in the East gate Shushan, the two South gates
Huldah, the North gate Tedi, and the West Shallecheth) was a guard kept of the
Levites by night for the safety and honor of the Temple, and so there was in
every corner of this great square within.

These gallant and sumptuous walks thus round about the whole compass, were
for the people to stand, walk or sit under, in heat or rain, or according as
they had a mind or occasion: And so it is said that our Savior walked here,
John 10.23. the Apostles James and John stood here and the people about them,
Acts 3.11. And there were benches set by the walls round about for people to
sit down when they thought good: And therefore D. Kimchi Kimch. in 2 Kings
11.14.
interprets (...) a bench on which men sit: And R. Nathan Aruch in (...)
makes it to be the same with (...) which he says, is benches on which men set
down their wares, and on which they sit themselves.

CHAP. IX. Tabernae Shops: The great Sanhedrin sitting thereabout.
THere is very frequent mention in the Talmuds and Talmudicall writers, of a
place in the Mountain of the House which was called (...) Hhanoth or
Hhanijoth: which the learned in these Antiquities, do commonly render by the
Latin word Tabernae: which though in that language it be a proper expression
of the Hebrew word, yet cannot we so properly in English render it Tavernes:
because, that, in our usual acceptance, that word is taken for houses where
wine only is sold; whereas these were shops where wine, oil, salt, meal, and
such like things were sold, which were in constant use for Sacrifices and
offerings in the Temple. And Rabbi Nathan relates that Aruch in (...)
there were Clerks of that Market appointed to look to the weights and
measures of these Shops, and to see the Shopkeepers did not sell too dear.

But the most famous thing concerning these Tabernae that the Jews speak of,
is, that the great Sanhedrin sat here, having removed hither from the room
Gazith the place of their common sitting. The story hereof is dispersedly
mentioned in the Talmud in several places, particularly it is thus at large in
the Gemara of the Treatise Rosh hashanah per. 4.

Tal. in Rosh hashan. fol: 31.
Rabbi Iohanan says, The divine glory had ten flittings: 1 From the Mercy seat
to one of the Cherubs. 2 From that Cherub to the other. 3 From the Cherub to
the threshold. 4 From the threshold to the Court. 5 From the Court to the Altar
side. 6 From the^^ to the Alt^r top. 7 From thence to the outmost wall. 8 From
that wall to the City. 9 From the City to Mount Olivet. 10 From Mount Olivet to
the wilderness, and from the Wilderness it went up. So also the great
Sanhedrin had ten flittings: From the Chamber Gazith, to Hhanoth (the Tabernae
or place of the Shops) From Hhanoth to Jerusalem. From Jerusalem to Jabueh.
From Jabueh to Osha (...). From Osha to Shepharaam (...) From Shepharaam to
Beth Shaaraim. From Beth Shaaraim to Tsipperis in Galilee. From Tsipperis to
Tiberias.

Now whereas there are but eight removes here mentioned, yet they speak of
ten, it is to be understood, as the Gloss gives us notice, that from two of
these places they removed forward and backward and forward again, as from
Jabueh to Oshah, from Osha back to Jabueh, and from Jabueh to Osha a second
time.

Gloss. ibid. Rab. Simeon.
Their first coming to Jabueh was in the days of Rabban Johanan ben Zaccai;
from Jabueh to Osha, in the days of Rabban Gamaliel the last; and to Jabueh
back again in the days of Rabban Simeon. To Shaaraim and to Tsipperis in the
days of Rabbi Judah: And to Tiberias in the days of Antonius.

These their flittings, by their own confession, began forty years before the
destruction of the. Temple. (...) Shabbath fol: 51.
Forty years say they, before the destruction of the Temple, the Sanhedrin
flitted and betook it self to sit in Hanoth, or the Tabernae. And the reason
is given Ib. and Aruch in (...)
Because there were then many Thieves and Murderers, and they judged not of
capital matters: which means to this purpose: They held that while they sat
in the room Gazith, they were bound to judge and determine of all matters that
came before them, and that all their determinations were obliging, but now,
when beside the curb of the Roman power that was upon them, by which their
power was abridged, villainy and insolency was also grown too strong for them,
they thought as the Gemara in Avodah Zarah, speaks their mind, Avodah Zarah
fol: 8.
It is good for us to rise and flit from this place, of which it is written,
And thou shall do according as the men of that place shall show thee.

Now in what part of the Mountain of the House Hhanoth or the Tabernae were
placed, may be best conceived, by observing the place of the great Sanhedrins
sitting, before they came to sit in the room Gazith; And for this purpose a
Text of Jeremy does give us light, which is in chap. 35.4. where it is said
thus, I brought the Rechabites into the House of the Lord, into the Chamber of
the sons of Hanan the son of Igdaliah a man of God, which was by the
chamber of the Princes, which was above the chamber of Maaseiah the son of
Shallum the keeper of the door. Now by the Princes we cannot understand the
Princes of the blood, for what had Jehojakims sons to do here? their
residence was in the palaces of Sion, and their way into the Temple, was at the
gate on the West quarter, which was called Shallecheth and Coponius, whereas
this gate whereof the son of Shallum was keeper or porter, was the East gate,
as is apparent from 1 Chronicles: 9.17, 18.

By the Princes therefore are to be understood, the great men of the Sanhedrin,
(...), Acts 4.8. who sat in Counsel and Judicature in a Chamber near the
East gate or the gate Shushan, namely, over the Porters lodge. Here they sat
in the time of the first Temple, but under the second Temple, namely, from the
times of Simeon Ben Shetah, they removed further inward and sat even by the
side of the Court of Israel, in the room called Gazith, which we shall survey
in its due place.

Now when they were put to remove and flit out of Gazith, and to sit there no
more, whither should they betake themselves, but to some room near to the
East gate again, where the place of the Sanhedrins fitting had been of old? It
is observable in Jeremy, that in his time, they sat in two East gates of the
Temple, some times in the one and sometimes in the other, namely, in this East
gate of the Mountain of the House, as appears by the Text produced: and in
the East gate of the Court, which was also called The New gate, Jer. 36.10. of
which hereafter.

Now in after times when they sat in the room Gazith, there was a Sanhedrin
of three and twenty Judges sat in either of these gates, as is copiously
testified by the Jewish records and antiquities. By the East gate therefore of
the Mountain of the house may we best conclude, the Hhanoth or Tabernae, to
have been seated, namely, that they were as Shops in the lower rooms of the
buildings that stood on either side of the gate Shushan, and the rooms over
head were employed for some other use, and among the rest, one for the sitting
of the great Sanhedrin, when they were removed from Gazith; and when they sat
in Gazith, for a Sanhedrin of twenty three.

And whereas Maimony speaks of (...) Maym. in Sanhedr. per. 3.
A Divinity School in the Mountain of the House, where the Sanhedrin sat
upon holy days, we know not where better to place it then hereabout, where
their sitting was in the first and last times of the Temple. All the gates that
we have viewed were beautified with gallant buildings on either side them, but
the East most eminent, because the greatest and commonest entrance into the
Temple. And whereas there is mention in Scripture of Women lodging in the
Temple, as 2 Chronicles: 22.11, 12. Jehoshebeath and Joash and his Nurse lodged many
years there: and Luke 2.37. Hannah is said not to have departed from the
Temple for many years more: their lodgings were in the buildings near some of
the gates of this outmost wall (but which undeterminable) for that all within
this enclosing was called The Temple in the Scripture, and the common language,
is so apparent, that it needs no demonstration.

CHAP. X. The dimension; and form of Solomon's Temple, And of that built by the
returned out of Captivity.
HAving thus gone through and observed the compass of the Mountain of the
Temple, and the wall that did enclose it in so large a square, with the
Cloisters, gates and buildings that were in that wall and affixed to it: before
we can come to cast out the Courts, Partitions, and buildings that were within,
and speak of their places and uses particularly, it will be necessary in the
first place, to take a survey of the measure and situation of the Temple it
self, that from it, and from this outer wall as from standing marks, we may
measure all the proportions, fabrics and distances, that we are to go through.

The floor of the Mountain of the House was not even, but rising from East to
West, so much in the whole, Maym. in Beth habbechir. per. 6.
that the floor of the porch of the Temple was two and twenty cubits higher
then the floor of the Gate Shushan, or the East gate in the outmost wall:
which in equality was cast into several levels one above another; and the
outmost wall accordingly did sometime run level, and sometime rise from
level to level, even as the evennesse or risings of the floor it self did
call for it.

The measures of the Temple built by Solomon, are said to have been, by the
first measure, 2 Chronicles: 3.3. that is, by the same cubit, that measured the
first Tabernacle, which is the same that we fix upon; and by this measure to
have been seventy cubits long, 1 Kings 6.2, 2 Chronicles. 3.3. in these several
spaces. The most holy place twenty cubits, the holy place forty cubits and the
Porch ten. And the breadth of all these was 20 cubits.

About the height there is some obscurity, for the book of Kings says it was
30 cubits, but the book of Chronicles names no sum at all; only it says
that the Porch was 120 cubits high. Now Kunch. in les. allegat.
David Kimchi does dispute it, whether this was the height of the Porch only,
or of the whole house throughout: and he shows how it maybe construed of the
whole house, namely, that the height of it to the first floor was thirty
cubits (according to the reckoning of the book of Kings) and then the chambers
over in several stories did rise to 90 cubits more. Yet both he and Ralbag in
1 Kings 6. Aben. Ez^. in Ezr. 6.
R. Levi Gershom could well be persuaded to think that the Temple it self was
but 30 cubits high, but are somewhat swayed by the opinion of some of their
Rabbis which runs another way. For from their words it appears (say they)
that there were chambers over the Temple and over the Porch: and this they hold
from 1 Chronicles: 28.11.

The words of that Text are these, David gave to Solomon his son the Pattern
of the Porch and the houses thereof, and the Treasuries thereof, and the upper
chambers thereof, and the Parlours thereof and the place of the mercy seat:
where all these particulars are so couched together (except the last) as if
they were all within the Porch: But the holy Ghost speaks of the Porch, as
the first part in sight, as you came up, it being the front of all, and the
rest of the parcels mentioned, are to be conceived of not as all crowded in it,
but as distributed and disposed in other parts of the fabric, as the Holy
Ghost relates and lays down elsewhere. And as for the upper chambers here
spoken of, we need not to confine them so, as to set them all either over the
porch (though there were some,) nor over the body of the Temple, but to place
them also as the Text does elsewhere, round about the house without, in
several stories.

The careful considering the measures of the Temple built by the Children of
the Captivity, will reasonably help to put us out of doubt about the matter
that we have in dispute. The measures they brought along with them out of
Persia in Cyrus his Commission, Ezr. 6.3, 4.
The foundations to be strongly laid, the height sixty cubits, and the breadth
sixty cubits, with three rows of great stones and a row of new timber and the
expenses to be given out of the Kings house.

Where we may observe, Aben Ezr. in loc.
1 That the length is not mentioned, because that was to be of the former
measure. 2 That the breadth, doubled the breadth of Solomon's building, the side
chambers and all taken in. And 3 That the height was double to the height of
Solomon's as it is expressed in the book of Kings, and as indeed the height of
the Temple was, though the porch were higher. For it seems utterly against
reason, that Cyrus should offer to build the house as broad again as it was
before, and yet not so high as it was before by half. It is no doubt but Cyrus
had consultation with some of the Jews about the building, and that either they
counselling him, should advise the abatement of so much of the height, or he
enlarging the breadth and the house one way, should cut it short of the height
and lessen it the other way, is exceeding improbable; the length could not be
doubled, because that would have lessened the measure of the Courts before it,
which might not be endured, but the two other ways of dimension which could be
allowed, he allowed double to what they were before.

Therefore the two Texts in Kings and Chronicles, are to be taken properly as
they there lie before us, namely, that the Porch was 120 cubits high, and that
the rest of the Temple was but 30; and the form of the whole house was thus. It
stood East and West, the most Holy place Westward, and the Porch or entry
Eastward, and the length of all from East to West was 70 cubits, the breadth 20
cubits, besides the breadth of the side chambers; The height of the holy and
most holy place 30 cubits, and the porch stood at the East end like one of our
high steeples 120 cubits high: And indeed Solomon's Temple did very truly
resemble one of our Churches, but only that it differed in this, that the
Steeple of it (which was the porch) stood at the East end.

Now round about the sides thereof, North and South, and the West end, Solomon
built chambers of three stories high and five cubits was the height of every
story, the whole being 15 cubits high in all, and they joined to the wall of
the house without. The highest story was a cubit wider then the middle, and the
middle a cubit wider then the lowest, and yet the outmost wall of them was even
and straight, and jutted not over at one story or other, any whit at all. But
the reason of this different breadth of the Stories was this, the wall of the
Temple for five cubits from the ground upward, was thicker by a cubit then it
was from thence above. At the height therefore of those five cubits there was a
bench of the wall of a cubit breadth left outerly round about the house, on
which they laid one end of the beams and timber, which was the roof of the
lowest rooms, or the floor of the second Story. And then again for five
cubits above that, the wall was thicker by a cubit, then it was above; and at
the height of those five cubits there was such another bench left again, and on
that they laid the beams for the roof of the second story, which was the
floor of the third. And so likewise for five cubits above that, the wall was
yet thicker by a cubit, then it was above, and there the like bench was left
again, and there were laid the beams of the roof of the third story and of
the whole building.

And this is the meaning of that verse 1 Kings 6.6. The nether most chamber
was five cubits broad, the middlemost six cubits broad, and the third was
seven cubits broad, for he made abatings to the house on the outside round
about: that the beams should not have hold of the very walls of the house.

And thus did these chambers take up half the height of the house, being as
the lower leads of our Churches to the higher: the use of the chambers we shall
observe hereafter.

Now above these chambers in the wall of the Temple, and in the outer wall of
these chambers themselves there were windows to let in light, which the Text
says were (...) open and shut, or broad and narrow, which Chald par. in 1
Kings 6.4.
the Chaldee Paraphrast and Vid. Nobil. in LXX in loc.
Theodoret have well interpreted, wide within and narrow without: namely,
narrow without to receive the light, and wide within to disperse and dilate it.
Though there Vid. R. Sol. and Kimch. in loc.
be some Jews, that construe it the clean contrary way, viz. broad without
and narrow within, different from all other windows (...) for God, say they,
had no need of such light.

The people that returned out of captivity, were Joh. 2.20.
forty and six years in building their Temple before they could complete it,
and bring it to perfection, and yet when all was done, it proved so far
inferior in beauty and stateliness to that of Solomon's, as that to those that
had seen both, Hag. 2.3.
it was as nothing: the dimensions made not the difference, for it was two
ways, as large again as his, (even as his was every way as large again as
Moses Tabernacle) but this wanted that sumptuousness and bravery of building
that his had. And it wanted those five things which were the glory and
excellency of the former, namely, R: Sol: in Hag. 1.18.
The Arc, Vrim and Thummim, Fire from Heaven, The Cloud of glory upon the
Mercy seat, and The spirit of Prophecy; The Ezr. 3.10.
weeping therefore of those persons that had seen the former house, at the
laying of the foundation of this was not as if they saw any lessening of the
house in comparison of the former, in compass and measure, (for the
foundations promised a larger) but it was upon remembering the glory of the
former, both in its magnificence, and in these five excellencies, and to think
of the burning of that, and it was also in comparing their present servile and
poor condition, with the liberty, state, and gallantry of the Nation when the
other stood.

Their measures were prescribed by Cyrus, not because he would curb the
building, but enlarge it, for whereas Solomon's Temple was but 30 cubits broad,
chambers and all, he gave liberty of 60 cubits breadth; and whereas Solomon's
was but 30 cubits high all the body of the house, he doubled the measure to 60.

And therefore those words of Josephus are cautelously to be understood when he
says that Joseph. Antiq. lib. 8. c. 2.
they brought up the roof of Solomon's fabric, of white stone, the height 60
cubits, the length as much, and the breadth twenty. In which account of the
height of it, he differs both from Scripture and from all other of his own
Nation, and by what measure or counters he reckons it is hard to understand:
And so is it also to construe that which follows: (...): which I english thus,
And by this there was another piece raised of equal measures.: so that the
whole height of the Temple was an hundred and twenty cubits: By which piece I
conceive he means the Porch, and his own words clear it; but how to
apprehend that it was of equal measure with what he had spoken of before, I
acknowledge I do not understand. And whereas he says that the whole height of
the Temple was 120 cubits, his own context shows that he cannot mean, that it
was so high throughout, but it is to be construed of the porch of which he is
speaking, namely, that the Temple in some part of it rose to an hundred and
twenty cubits high.

And so are those words of Herod to be understood in the Oration that he made
to the people, when he tells them of his resolution to build the Temple. Id. ib.
lib. 15. cap. 14.
Our fathers (says he) built this Temple to the great God after their coming
up again from Babylon, (...), But it wanted as to the greatness of it, sixty
cubits in height: for so much did the former Temple which Solomon had built
exceed it. Which is not to be understood of the whole house, but of the Porch
only: for the children of the captivity either built no porch at all, (and then
their Temple was a perfect Cube, length and height and breadth exactly equal)
or if they did, yet did not the height of it exceed the rest of the house, as
Solomon's did, but only equal it, the whole being sixty cubits high, all alike
according to the dimensions that Cyrus had prescribed.

Now in his patent for the building of the Temple, there are these words, which
are of no small difficulty to be understood (...) Ezr. 6.4. Josephus renders
this passage thus, (...) Joseph. Antiq. lib. 11. c. 1. and 4.
Three houses of hewn stone, and one house of wood within: By the three
houses, seeming to mean the three parts of the Temple, Porch, holy, and most
holy Place; and by the one wooden house, the seiling of the house within. And
in this sense Rabbi Solomon seems also to understand it, who renders the
words to this sense, R: Sol: in Ezr. 6.
The walls were of Marble, and there was a wall of wood within, like the
building of the house which Solomon built. The Septuagint have translated (...)
houses, and Josephus followed them in so rendering it: But the Chaldee
Paraphrast does use the word, to signisie Ranks or Rows of stone or timber,
as Hag. 2.15. Before a stone was laid upon a stone; he utters it (...) and so
he renders (...) by the word (...) Ezekiel. 46.23. etc. And in this sense does
Aben Ezra understand the word, and so has our English translated it, Three
rows of great stones, and a row of new timber.

But we are yet to seek for the meaning of the clause, though we be satisfied
with this sense of the word: Three rows of stone, and one of timber? Is this
to be understood of three rows of stone pillars and one of wood, all standing
up, or of three rows of stones laid in the walls, and one row of timber lying
upon them? And is this meant in the body of the Temple it self, or in some
other walls that were about it? If we look into 1 Kings 6.36. I suppose some
resolution of these doubts may arise thence, for there it is said parallel to
what is spoken Ezr. 6.4. That Solomon built the inner Court with tree rows of
hewn stone; and one row of Cedar beams: And it is almost past peradventure,
that Cyrus gave his Commission after that pattern, having learned it from some
Jews that were about him. Having therefore prescribed the dimensions of the
Temple it self, in ver. 3. he gives also warrant and platform for walling in
the Court, even after the fashion that Solomon had used, namely, three rows of
great stones to bring up the wall, and a row of Cedar beams, either to crest
it, or to lie between as the wall rose. And so do Levi Gershom, and D. Kimchi
expound these words, in 1 King. 6. The walls were three rows of hewn stones,
and one of timber of Cedar upon them.

The Jews upon their return out of Captivity, did first build the Altar, before
they set upon the building of the house, Ezr. 3.3. for their necessity and
occasions did call upon them to sacrifice, and the very place did warrant their
sacrificing, though the Temple were not yet built. In the second year after
their return, in the second month of the year, which was the second year of
Cyrus, they lay the foundation of the house, but in the next verse the work is
bindred, and so continues forlorn till the second year of Darius, Ezra 4.24. On
the 24 day of the 6. month of that year they begin to prepare for the building
again, and on the 24 day of the ninth month they set to work; Compare Hog.
1.15. and 2.18.

The fashion and pattern which they followed in the particular structures and
fabrics about the house, was Mid. per. 2. and 3. and Kimch. in Ezekiel. 40.
as the Authors of their own nation assert, the Temple which Ezekiel has
described, chap. 40. and 41. etc. The children of the captivity (say they) made
the building according to the form that they saw in the building of Ezekiel in
diverse things; which although they could not imitate to the full, especially in
the spaciousness of his measures and sumptuousness of his fabric, (that
pattern of his being as well a figure of a Temple not earthly, and not built
with hands, as it was an earnest and promise of an earthly Temple, to be built
by them upon their return) yet did they lay that copy before them, and did in
very many things imitate that fashion and form, and platform their buildings,
and Courts thereafter: And so did Herod by the counsel of the wise men that
were in his favor (as Hillel, Shammai, and Menahem, etc.) when he repaired, or
rather rebuilt the Temple, though he did in diverse things exceed the dimensions
of the childrens of the Captivity, yet did he observe their platform and
fashion as they had done Ezekiels. And so (as to the form and composure of the
things and places themselves) there is so little difference betwixt the
buildings of the returned Captives, and the buildings of Herod, that the
Talmudicks do still account both but one Temple, and account that that stood to
the destruction of Jerusalem, to be but (...) The second Temple, to Solomon's
first; and so indifferently shall we take it up.

CHAP. XI. The measures and platform of the Temple, as it stood in the time of
our Savior.
HEROD (surnamed the great) Jos. ant. lib. 14. cap. 17.
when he was a young gallant, before he came to be King had slain one Ezekias,
and some others with him, for which he was called before the Sanbedrin to be
judged for killing a man: where some of the Council fearing him, and some
favoring him, and not executing justice as he had deserved, Shammai the
Vice President of the Council, did boldly and plainly tell them, before his
face, That whereas they were so favorable and partial to him now, the time
would come when he would not show them such favor, but should kill them. And
so Herod did, when he was King afterward, destroying the whole Sanhedrin,
unless it were two men, Hillel the President, and Shammai the Vice President
who had been so plain with him. And afterward, as it were in way of expiation
of this horrid fact, Iuckasin fol. 19.
he was persuaded by Baba ben Bota to repair the Temple, which he did so
thoroughly, that Ios. Ant. lib. 15. cap. 14.
he made it (...), Larger in compass, and most glorious in height, taking
doan the old foundations, and laying new. This work he began in the eighteenth
year of his reign, and in 8 years he finished it (some nine years before our
Saviors birth:) in all which time, if you will believe the Jews, they will
tell you, Iuchasin ubi sup.
that it never rained in the day time left the work should be hindered. The
sumptuousness of this building the same Authors in the Treatise Succah per. ^
in Gemara.
Succah in the Gemara do magnify in these expressions. He that never saw
Jerusalem in her glory, never saw lovely City. And he that never saw the
Sanctuary with its buildings, never saw goodly buildings. Rab. Hasda says, It
was Herod's building, And of what did he build it? Rabba says Of goodly stone
and marble. And some say, (...) of marble painted or full of curious veins and
diverse colors. (...), one border or edge went in and another out; which the
gloss expresses thus, (...); It seemed like the wavings of the sea, one row
of stones did so curiously go in, and another come out.

The measures of this Temple, as it stood in our Saviors time, and till the
destruction of Jerusalem was (...) Mid. per. 4
An hundred cubits long, an hundred cubits broad, and an hundred cubits high:
And yet not an exact cube, but very far from it, as we shall show ere long, for
it narrowed so behind, says Mid. ibid. Maym. in Beth habbech. per. 4. and 5.
the Talmud and Maymony, that it did carry the proportion of a Lion.

The form and fashion of this pile on the outside (for of that only we will
take a survey as yet) was thus. It was built of white marble (as Jos. ubi sup.
Josephus says) in which were such veins and colors as are spoken of before;
the stones of a cize and bigness unto admiration, and the walls rose to that
great height of an hundred cubits by these distinctive measures.

1. Mid. ibid.
(...) the foundation six cubits high: not in the ground (though there was also
a foundation laid deep enough) but from the ground 6 cubits upwards. As it is
commonly seen in stone buildings of a great pile, that near the ground, the
fabric is made thicker then the wall above, to support the whole weight the
better, even so was it here for six cubits height.

2. (...). The height of the wall forty cubits. That is, from this foundation
the wall rose 40 cubits plain, without any juttings, borderings or standings
out as there was elsewhere. And then was

3. (...) A carved and curiously wrought border, of a cubit broad. I translate
(...) a curious wrought border, upon the warrant of R. Nathan Aruch. in (...).
who partly out of the Talmud, and partly out of the Chal. par. in 2 Samuel 7.2.
Chaldee Paraphrast render it (...) Picturing or Pourtraying (with which there
is the concurrency of R. Obad de Bartin. in. Mid. in loc.
Bartenora, who says, it was called (...) because it was gilt with gold and
graven with curious ingravery: It may be along the length of the building the
stones were so laid in and out as to resemble the waving of the sea, as the ^
almud speaks, but there was no crossing border (as it may be called) till the
wall came to this height: Above this imbroidered border was

4. (...) A ledge or gutter to take off the rain, and to carry it clear from
dropping upon the wall below (...) Maym. ubi sup.
The height of two cubits was prepared for the droppings to come in there, for
so does sense and necessity cause the word to be interpreted, though Baal Aruch
tell us, that there be some that give it another construction; when we have
observed the two next particulars above this, we shall understand what this
was the better.

5. (...) The timber or place for the laying on of the roof, a cubit.

6. (...) The roof it self a cubit. The word (...) is of some difficult
construction: It seems to be derived, Aruch in voce.
as R. Nathan gives intimation, from that word, Neh. 3.8. (...) which our
English has rendered; They fortified R. Sol. and Ah. Ezr. in Neh. 3.8.
and R. Solomon, They raised with earth. And there Aben Ezra speaks of this
very word that we have in hand, and says that (...) there and the word we have
before us, are both of the same sense: and so the same, word (...) is used
again, Neb. 4.2. And he tells us withal that there are some that do render
that clause (...), Exodus 23.5. according to this construction: If thou see the
Ass of him that hates thee lying under his burden, Thou shall surely raise
him with him.

But as for our word (...) which is not to be found in scripture, but used by
the Talmudick writers, we must have recourse to the Talmud for the meaning of
it: And there as Aruch points us to the places we find it spoken of and
handled in the Treatise Baba Mezia, and Baba Bathra. In the former Tract are
these words, Baba Mezia per. 10.
Is a house and a chamber over it in two men's pussession? and the chamber over
goes to decay: if the Owner of the house (below) will not help to repair it:
let him that owes the chamber, go and dwell below till he do repair: R. Jose
says, the Owner of the lower room is to lay on the roofe-timber, and the
Owner of the upper room the (...). And in the other Tract are these words Baba
bathra per. 2.
A man shall not set up a furnace (or oven) within a house unless there be the
space of sour cubits over it (namely, for fear the flame should catch in the
roof or floor above) And if he do (...) up a surnace in an upper room, it is
necessary that there be a (...) of three fingers thick under it. And the reason
is also given for fear of danger of fire.

Now the Gemara upon the former place in explanation of the word, and Aruch in
explanation of the Gemara say, that it was a crustednesse made of diverse
materials, as reeds, chall^^ stones and such like plaistering; which it
seems by the former place cited was laid on the top of the house in stead of
leads to keep out wet, and by the latter, to be made under their furnaces in
upper rooms to prevent fire, burning downward. And the determination of R.
Iose ( that the dweller below should lay on the rooofe, and the dweller above
the (...), seems to result to nothing else but this, that the one should lay on
the timber of the roof, and the other a cover of plaster to be laid on the
roof upon reeds, of such materials tempered together as should keep out the
rain from dropping through: And so do I understand the word in our work that
we are viewing; that this was a thick well wrought plaster of materials to
compact, that being once grown hard was as a stone, and this was as leads on
the roof to keep out wet; the use of sheets of lead being either unknown to
them, or lead being scarce and not to be had: And thus are we come up to the
lower leads; for so let me call them, as being an expression best known among
us.

And here let us take in a passage of Josephus. He speaking of the measures of
the Temple, and of the stones of which it was built, says, that they were 25
cubits long, 8 cubits high, and 12 broad An. lib. 15. cap. 14.
(...) says he, (...) etc. It was made after the fashion of the royal
cloister, lower on either side, and highest in the middle, so that it was to be
seen many furlongs off, etc. Now the Cloister royal was so built (as was
observed before) that three walks running along together, roofed over and born
upon pillars, the roof of the middle was raised far higher then the two of
eithensi dit.

And so we are by Josephus to understand accordingly of the Temple. It was
indeed of a 100 cubits high, but not so as rising in an equal square, from the
bottom to the top, but rising square fifty one cubits, as has been
proportioned out: The main foundation 6 cubits high: the wall plain about it
40 cubits, a carved border above that one cubit; the place for casting of the
raines two cubits; above that the floor laying on one cubit thick, and the
plaster cover one cubit thick; but then the rise of the building grew
narrower; for from thence it was carried up so toward the middle, as that
there were left leads, as one may call them, on the North and South sides all
along, from the East unto the West: A familiar example of this for the better
understanding of it we have in the building of exceeding many of our Churches:
the pile rises of a like breadth to the lower leads, and then it rises only
in the middle, to the height or roof of the Church: And so was it with the
Temple: Go either to East or West end, and stand in the middle and look up,
and it was 100 cubits, but go any whit like toward the right or left hand, and
it was but half so high, for there were the lower leads. Leads I cannot but
call them, for that language is best understood amongst us, though they were
not covered with lead (a covering not so well known in those times as now) but
with a plaster or parget of a cubit thick, and so strongly wrought, and
tempered, as that it differed not from the hardness of stone.

We must not forget (...) that we passed over even now, but must look back
upon it a little, before we leave these leads, or this first rising that we are
now upon. For the passing away of the rains that dropped off this roof, that
they should not run down along the wall, and so both moulder and deface the
stones, there was immediately above the imbroidered border that was spoken of,
a row of stones that jutted out of the building more then their fellows, which
were neatly and artificially guttered or riggeted, and as artificially jointed
together in the guttering (that no rain should drop through) the rigget laid
just under the edge of the leads, (or spouts from the leads) that cast off the
raines, that the droppings falling therein were conveyed away to either end of
that side on which they were, and so sent to the ground either in pipes, or in
a great fall from these gutters.

And now to follow the building up still to its perfect heights conceive it to
be narrowed now to half the breadth, and so to rise in the middle of the pile,
as that the leads on either side were 25 cubits broad.

1. (...): The height of the room above, or the rising above the leads in a
straight wall was 40 cubits: this is called (...), or an upper room, because
it was directly over the holy and most holy places.

2. (...) Another carved or engraven border: such a one as was mentioned
before, the breadth of one cubit.

3. (...), The gutter 2 cubits as before, for putting off rains, not that this
gutter was two cubits deep, but that it was two cubits from those gutters to
the laying on of the roof.

4. (...). The floor or roof, a cubit.

5. (...), The plaster cover, a cubit.

6. (...), The battlements three aubits; This word is used, Deuteronomy. 22.8. and
Aben Ezr. in Deuteronomy. 22.
not elsewhere in Scripture, and yet says Aben Ezra, is the sense of it plain
enough from the Text. And so indeed it is, for the Lord there enjoineth, that
when a man builds a new house he should make (...) battlements, lest any one
should fall off, and so bring blood upon his house; The roofes of their houses
were flat in those Countries. Jos. 2.6. 2 Samuel 16.22. Act. 10.^9, etc. and
there they used to walk, 1 Samuel 9.25. and therefore lest any should fall off,
they were to make battlements round about, D. Kime. in Mid.
10 handbreadths, or 2 common cubits high at the least, lest any one should
fall off, and be shine or maimed: so howsoever it may be well supposed, that
they walked not upon the Temple roof so ordinarily as they did upon their own
houses (nor was the Temple roof altogether so flat as their roofes) yet were
battlements also made to it, partly, because it should not come short of the
beauty of other buildings, and partly because there was occasion sometimes to
go upon the roof of it.

7. (...), The scarcrow, one cubit; what this was, let us first take R. Nathans
Aruc. in (...)
information for it. Because, says he, of the holiness of the first Temple,
and the divine glory dwelling there birds slew not on it at all: But as for the
second Temple, they feared, that the holiness of it should not be as the
holiness of the first; and lest birds should fly over it, and leave some
defilement upon it, therefore they set up a picture, to cause birds to keep off
the roof of the Temple, and they called it, (...) the scarscrow, as meaning,
that it keeps the Ravens from flying upon the Temple roof, and this image or
picture was such a one as they use to set upon corn: But by other of the Jews
it is defined to be Maym. in Beth babbechir. per. 4.
(...), A pike of iron like a rapier of a cubit high, upon the top of the
battlements round about, made that birds might not light upon it. And by some
again concluded, that there were no such thing as either the one or other R.
Judah in Mid. perk. 4.
but only that the battlement was 4 cubits high: But howsoever it may be a
fancy not to be fancyed, that there was or could be any such course taken as to
keep birds off the roof of the Temple, (see Psalm. 84.34.) yet upon the so
concurrent testimony of the Hebrew writers as is to be found, joined with the
thought of what an ornament it would add to the building it self, it may very
well be concluded, that there were pinnacles upon the battlements round about:
as Kings College Chapel in Cambridge is decked in the like manner to its
great beauty. (...) is construed according to this sense by diverse Expositors,
Mat. 4 5. The roof was not a perfect flat, as was the roof of other houses,
but rising in the middle (...) Semajah in Mid.
till the very crest of the middle came up as high as the height of the
battlement; as Kings College Chapel may be herein a parallel also; And the
like battlements and pinacles are likewise to be allotted to the lower leads.

CHAP. XII. The Breadth, Chambers, and Stairs of the Temple.
THus were the risings of the Temple to its height, in the parcels named: it is
now equally requisite to take notice also of the length and breadth of it, and
to observe into what lesser measures those dimensions were divided.

Mid. per. 4.
The length of it was from East to West, and it was an hundred cubits, and so
was the breadth from North to South, in some part of it, but not in all. That
part of it that bare this breadth, was only the porch, for the building behind
it was only seventy cubits broad. And the porch stood before it as a cross
building, reaching fifteen cubits South, and fifteen cubits North further out
then the breadth of the Temple; which spaces on either side were thus taken up,
Maym. in Beth babbechir. per. 4.
The thickness of the wall of the porch at either end was five cubits, and
from that wall to the wall of the Temple on either side were ten cubits.

So fair a front there was at the entering: an hundred cubits broad, and an
hundred and twenty cubits high; for so is Josephus to be understood, when
speaking of the Temple built by Herod, he says, it was (...) Joseph. Ant. lib.
15. cap. 4.
An hundred long, and twenty cubits above an hundred high; Not all the house
throughout so high, for that the Talmud denies, giving so particular and exact
account of an hundred only, as we have observed, but the porch of this height
rising twenty cubits above the height of the rest of the house.

Just in the middle of this fair front Mid. per. 3.
was the gate of the porch, 40 cubits high, and 20 cubits broad: Maym. ubi supr.
It had no dootes to it at all, but Joseph. de Bell. lib. 5. c. 14.
it was an open gate, into which whosoever stood in the Court might look and
see the space of the porch within. (...), etc. All this front was gilt with
gold and through it, all the first house (that is, the porch within) might be
seen, and that glittered with gold also: Now by all this front, Josephus, (for
they are his words) means not the whole face of the porch, or all the hundred
cubits long, and hundred and twenty high, but the very front of the gate, or
entrance only, which he shows to have been 70 cubits high, and 25 broad: And
herein the Talmud and he do not clash, though the Talmud say, that the height
was only forty cubits, and the breadth but twenty, for it speaks only of the
very hollow entrance, but he speaks also of the Posts and head or front of the
whole gate house, as we observed about the other gates before.

Mid. ubi sup
The Talmud likewise speaks of five (...) beams of some choice wood (the
learned Buxtorfius translates it quercinoe) that were laid over this gate,
curiously wrought with knots and flowers, and a row of stone still laid between
beam and beam: The lowest beam that lay on the head of the gate was a cubit
on either side longer then the gate was broad: then was laid on that a row of
stone: After that another carved beam a cubit on either end longer then the
other; and then a row of stone. Then another beam, and so of the rest, every
beam being a cubit at either end longer then that that lay below it. These were
thus laid over the gate to bear the weight that was above; they rose to a great
height were curiously engraven, and gilt, and from the highest there was a neat
descending border gathered at either end of the beams, still inward and inward
as the beams shortened, and at last it ran down by the cheeks of the entry two
cubits and an half broad, on either side the gate: And this was the front that
Josephus means.

And now turn behind this porch at whether end you will, and look Wellward:
There ran the body of the Temple it self, pointing exactly upon the middle of
the porch, or just upon this entrance that we have been speaking of, the
breadth of it between wall and wall, just equal with the breadth of this
entrance; but the walls and chambers built on either side, of such a breadth,
as that the whole came to seventy cubits broad: and thus does Ariel or the Lion
of God, as the Jews interpret it, represent the proportion of a lion, broad
before in the large front the porch, which was of an hundred cubits breadth,
and narrow behind, in the buildings of the house reduced in breadth to seventy
cubits; which breadth to take up in its several parcells, we will begin at the
North side, and thus we find these particular measures.

Ibid. per. 4.
1. (...), The wall of the Gallery five cubits thick, this was the outmost wall
of all, and it rose to the battlements or first leads mentioned before; where
the foundation for six cubits high, was said to be six cubits thick: but that
odd cubit is not here reckoned, because the count it not from the very
foundation, but from the wall above, as any one would count in such a building.

2. (...), The gallery three cubits broad.

3. (...), The wall of the chambers five cubits thick.

4. (...), The chambers themselves six cubits broad.

5. (...), The wall of the Temple, six cubits thick.

6. (...), The breadth of the Temple within, from wall to wall twenty cubits.

7. (...), The other wall of it six cubits thick.

8. (...), The breadth of the chambers six cubits.

9. (...), The wall of the chambers five cubits thick.

10. (...), The place of the coming down of the water, three cubits broad.

11. (...), The outmost wall five cubits. Seventy in all.

Ibid. Sect. 3.
Now the chambers were in number eight and thirty, fifteen upon the Northside,
fifteen upon the South, and eight at the West end. They were in three stories,
five in the lowest stories, and five over them, and five over those, thus on
the North and South sides; but at the West end there were three on the ground,
and three over them, and two over those. Every chamber was six cubits broad,
and twice as long (only the two highest chambers at the West end were of a
greater length) See Ezekiel: 40.21.
And there was a space between the chambers on the same floor, in manner of an
entry of some 7 cubits and an half broad, that you might pass in it betwixt
chamber and chamber, to every chamber door which was upon the side.

Before these chambers there ran a gallery from the East end of the building to
the West (but at the West end there was none such) of three cubits broad, by
which you were carried along to any of these Entries between the chambers, and
so to any chamber door: In the outmost wall of the fabric, toward the North
and the South, there were four doors on either side, into four entries (for
so many there were between five chambers) but as soon as you were come within
the doors, there ran a gallery along on your right hand and left, over which
you stepped into the entry that was before you: or if you went not in at the
door that was just opposite to the entry that you would go to, you might go
in at any door you thought good, and this gallery would lead you to that entry.

Thus was it with the lowest chambers, and the like gallerie and entries were
also in the middle story, and in the highest: Now the way to go up into them,
was by a large pair of turning stairs, in a turret at the North-East corner of
the North side; by which stairs you went up to the first floor, and there if
you would, you might land in the gallery, and go there to what entry or chamber
you would, or if you would go higher, you might do so likewise into the
gallery in the third story; and if you had a mind, you might yet go higher up
these staire, up to the leads, to walk over the chambers, on the roof, round
about their whole pyle.

But besides this stair case-turret, which thus conveyed to the roof of the
buildings, there was such another, at the furthest end of every one of the
entries that have been spoken of, which carried up to the first and second
floor, or to the upper chambers, but went not so high, as to convey to the
roof: And so had you gone in at any of the fo^m doors to the ground chambers,
either on the north side of the house, or on the south, stepping over the
gallery, you come into the entry between two chambers, one on your right hand,
and another on your left, and their doors opening into the entry, and facing
one another, but before you, toward the Temple wall, there was a round large
turret-like staire case, into which you might go out of either chamber, and so
go up stairs into the chambers over head: and from thence up stairs again,
into the chambers over them. And thus are we to understand that Talmudick
passage, of no small difficulty at the first fight. Mid. ubi su.
There were three doors to every one of the Chambers,(...) One to the Chamber
on the right hand, and another to the Chamber on the left (that is, one door to
the entry on the one side, and another to the entry on the other,) and one to
the Chamber over head) that is, into this stair case that carried up to the
Chambers above. And thus Eze: 41.7.
one went up from the lowest story to the highest by the middle: for 1 Kin. 6.8.
they went up with winding stairs into the middle story, and out of the middle
into the third.

The West end Chambers had no gallery at all before them, but you stepped
immediately through the doors that were in the outmost wall into the entries,
and at the end of the entries there was such a stair-ease as this, which
conveyed and carried you up from story to story. On the South there were such
galleries in the three heights, as there were on the North, and such stair
cases at the end of the entries, joining to the Temple-wal, but that space
where the galleries were, was called by another name. Not (...) Mesibbah, as it
was called on the Northside, but (...), the place of the coming down of the
water: Not as if here were the gutters to carry off the raines from the whole
house, but because in this space were laid the pipes that brought water down
from the fountane Etam, to the Cistern or Well, in the Well-roome that was made
to receive them: They were so laid, as that they hindered not the access or
passage in the galleries, to any of the Chambers, and it may be they were not
to be seen at all, but lay under ground in the ground-gallery; but they were
glad thus to distinguish between the North and South sides, by these different
names, as that they might the easier and quicker be understood, when they
spoke of a chamber in the Mesibbah, or of a chamber in the conveyance of the
water.

These chambers, which where of this number, measure, posture and composure
that has been spoken, and whose floor and roof beams rested upon benches in
the Temple wall, as was observed before, were for the laying up some choice
treasures and utensils, as also for corn, wine, and oil, and whatsoever was
brought in of (...), and first fruits for the sustenance and subsistence of
the Pri^^^ that attended upon the Altar, and they were as measuries or
storehouses for that purpose, Neh. 12.44. Mal. 3.10.

And now let us go up the stairs of the great turret, in the North-east corner
on the North side (for there was none such on the South) that will carry us to
the roof of this building, or on the leads. At the top of the stains he went
out at a wicket, and his face was then toward the West. Mid. ubi su.
He walked upon the leads along upon the Northside (...) came to the West
corner: when he came thither be turned his face toward the South corner: when
he came to the South, be turned his face, Eastward, and went all along on the
Southside, till he came up a good way, and there was a door through the Temple
wall into the rooms over the holy and most holy place. In this room over them
(which was ^^y cubits from the ground, and so were the leads wh^^^ were these
threathings worth taking notice of.

1. That as soon as a man was stepped within the d^^e. (...) were two Codar beams
or trees said close together; sloping still upward, and lying along the wall,
by which (they were said so handsomely slope, and steps were either (...) in
them, (...) upon them) one might go to the very top of the Temple, and this was
the way to the higher leads.

2. Ju^^ over the parting between the holy and most holy pl^^^ them (...) some
little pi^^asters (...) the partition.

3. In the floor, over the most holy places, there were diverse holes like
trapdores, through which, when (...) required, they let down workmen by (...),
to (...) of the (...) as there was (...). And they let them down in (...) some
such thing where they could (...) before the^^, and the reason of this is given
by the Je^^s, (...) (...) holy (...) Ma. in Beth habbech. per. 4.
(...) and (...), they whited the Temple walls within: and for this and other
necessary work about the house within, it was desiced and endeavored that
Priests or Levites, should do the work; but if such were not found to do it,
then other Israelites were admitted, and they were admitted to go through the
doors into the most holy place, if Chests or Trunks, were not to be found in
which to let them down.

CHAP. XIII. The Porch.
Sect. 1. The steps up to it.
IN taking particular account of the length of the building from East to West,
(which was 100 cubits) we will first be in at the Porch (which was the
beautiful front Eastward) and view severally every special place and parcel
till we come to the West end.

See. chap.
The spreading of the Porch in length was 100 cubits, and in height 120; twenty
cubits higher then the height of the Temple: And this Porch which was a cross
building to the Temple it self, and so high above it, may not improperly be
conceived to be that place whither Satan brought our Savior in his temptation,
when he is said to have brought him (...), properly to the wing of the Temple.

There were several things at this front, before we stir from it, that were
very remarkable, and cannot be passed without observation: And the first that
we will look upon, shall be the steps that rose up out of the Court into this
entrance, which were Mid. per. 3.
twelve in number, every step half a cubit (...) fing, six cubits in the whole
rise, and so much was the floor of the Porch higher then the floor of the
Court. And here we meet with a passage in the Treatise Middeth, in the place
cited in the (...), which is exceeding ^ard to be understood; and the very same
also in Maymonides and in him it is harder. The words are these. Having spoken
of the steps that went up to the Porch, that they were twelve, and that the
rise of every step was half a cubit, and the breadth of it to stand upon a
cubit, it comes on and says, (...), Which applied to the steps, and their
rising I should translate to this sense, At every cubits rise there was a half
pace of three cubits broad, and at the highest cubits rise there was a half
pace of four cubits broad. The meaning this, that as you had gone up two (...)
which being half a cubit high a piece made but a cubit (...) ^he third step
the space you tread upon was enlarged, and was three cubits broad, whereas the
steps themselves that you had come up were but one cubit breadth: And so from
this enlarged breadth or half pace, step two steps further and there was
another, and after two steps more another, and after two steps yet more there
was the highest, which was an half pace, or enlargement of four cubits
breadth: And so every third step of the twelve was an half pace, or such an
enlargement, which made the ascent exceeding beautiful and stately. And this
helps to understand a passage in the treatise Joma, which at the first
reading is not easy to be understood. Where relating how when the high P^^est
on the day of Expiation had slain his own bullock, he gave the blood to one to
(...) it to keep it from congealing, it says (...), Ioma per. 4.
That he stirred it about, upon (...) of the Temple; which Maymony expresses
(...) Maym. in Ioma habbech. per. 5.
be first it about that it (...), upon the fourth half pace of the Temple
without; that is; upon the very top of these twelve steps that went up into the
Porch* The word (...), Ar. in (...)
Baal Aruch (after the production of many examples of it) renders by (...)
standings, or pillars, or (...) find not a (...) word for it here to express
it by then (...)

Now Per. 4. versus finem.
Maymony in B^^h habbiebirah or in his (...) of the Temple, having to deal
with these words of the Tahund that we have been speaking of, does utter them
thus, (...) Round about the walls of the Porch from below upward they were
thus: One cubit plain, and then an half pace of three cubits, one cubit plain
(or an ordinary rising of steps) and then another half pace of three cubits,
and so up; so that the half (...) go about the walls of the Porch: His meaning
is the same with what was said before, but he adds somewhat more, and that
is, that these twelve steps thus beautifully spreding, every third step into an
half pace, did not only go up to the entrance into the Porch, but also there
were such steps all along the front of the Porch Eastward: (...) such steps at
either end of it, North and South; and (...) of this was because the floor of
the Porch was higher (...) the floor of the Court, and there then were doors
in the building besides the great door that gave passage into the Temple, and
into these doors you could not get without such steps.

Sect. II. The two Pillars Jachin and Boa^
OF the gate or enmance into the Porch, and so into the Temple, and of its
dimensions and beauty has been spoken before, and therefore as to that
particular we need say no more here, but may be silent: but one maine part of
the ornament and beauty of it was there omitted, and reserved to this place,
and that is the two famous pillars that in Salom^^^ Temple stood at the cheeks
of the entrance or passage in, Liebin and Boa^. I find not indeed mention among
the Jews Antiquities of any such pillars set at the entrance of the Temple,
that we are surveying (which was the Temple built by Herod, the Temple that was
in the days of our Savior) though E^^kiel speak of such pillars at the door
of his Temple, (...) yet because we desire to give account (...) of wh^^ we
find recorded in Scripture concerning the Temple in (...) we cannot pass
over two such memorable monuments as these two pillars of whom the story and
relation is (...) by the Scripture so largely and exactly.

1. These two pillars (which were of brass) consisted either of them of two
parts, the pillar it self, (...) the boll and (...) that was set on the head of
it. The pillar it self was hollow, the circle incompassing the the hollow,
four fingers thick and the compass of that circling twelve cubits about, Jer.
(...) 1 King. 7.15. R. Sol. in 1 Kin. 7. R. Le. Gers. ibid.
the whole thickness or diameter of either pillar 4 cubits, or 3 cubits, and 4
fifth parts of a cubit, as is the reckonng of Levi Gersom. The chapter or boll
likewise of either pillar was hollow, and was a huge piece of brass bowse or
ovall fashion, which had a very large hole in it, into which the top of the
pillar was let, and so this chapter sat upon it.

2. The length or height of either Pillar was eighteen cubits, besides the
Chapter, for the Text does clearly rockon the height of pillar and chapter
distinctly. Now the book of Chronicles summeth the length of both pillars
together, and says they were five and thirty cubits high, 2 Chro. 3.15. in
which it comes short a cubit of that account and (...) that is given in the
book of Kings and Jeremy, which say that (...) pillar was eighteen cubits, and
so the whole of both was (...) and thirty: But half a cubit of either pillar
was taken up, and bid in the hole of the chapter that fate upon it: and so
(...) in the book of Chronicles, measures them as they stood with the
chapiters upon them; two and twenty cubits and (...) high, pillar and chapter
and all.

3. The chapter or ovall on the head of either pillar it ^^^led in the Hebrew
(...), which Rabbi Solo^^^ tenders in the vulgar (...) Pamells, Kimchi, A
Crown, who which (...) Chal^^^ agrees, who expresses it by (...) Cor^^^; but
(...) (...) more exactly, says, is was like two Gro^^nes (...) together. It
was a huge great ovall of five cubits high, and did not only sit upon the head
of the pillars, but also flow^ed or (...) over them, being larger about a great
deal then the pillars themselves.

4. Wherein it is said both in King. 7.16. (...) that the height of either
chapter was five cubits; and (...) (...) 17. is said, (...) height of the
chapter was (...); it is (...) and well answered by the Jews, that the lowest
two cubits of the chapter were plain, and without any graving or imbroide^^g,
but the three upper cubits were of such imbroidery. To which may be added, and
some of them do add it, that the two lower cubits were but the rising into the
spreading or belly of the chapter, and that they there are not reckoned in
that place, but only from the belly upward the account is taken.

5. The ingravery or imbroidery, or both of these chapiters is thus described
by the holy Ghost in various particulars; as,

1. (...), 1 King. 7.17. which our English renders, Nets of checker work: And
so the Lxx. uses the word Nets also: The original word does properly signify
the inwrapping and enfolding of the branches of trees one within another, as
Neh. 1.10. Genesis 22.13. Jer. 4.7. Esaias 10.34. At vines or thickets (says
Miclol. in (...).
Kimchi explaining the word) that are caught and infolded one within another:
And so some others express this clause (...), That the imbroidery was like the
branches of Palm trees: or like the handful of branches they used to carry in
their hands at the feast of tabernacles: This I conceive to be the proper
meaning of the words, that the chapiters were curiously wrought with
branch-work, seven goodly branches standing up with their feet from the belly
of the ovall, and their boughs, and leaves curiousty and lovelily intermingled
and inwoven one with another. And the words might not improperly be translated
thus, for the cleerer understanding of their meaning, and of the manner of the
work it self With thickets of branch-work, and wreaths of chaine-worke.

2. (...), Wreathes of Chaine-worke. The word (...), in Deuteronomy. 22.12. signifies
the fringes that they wore upon their garments for memorials of the law, (...)
((...)) in the Chald^^ Paraphrast: And according to such a sense is it to be
taken here, that about the belly of the chapter was a curious fringe or border
of wreathen and in wined work, upon which border stood the feet or root of the
branch-work spoken of before, and those branches from thence went upward
spreading upon the swelling of the chapter, and bowing toward the top of the
ovall as the ovall bowed, and they there growing into their contracted tops.

3. (...), Two rows of Pom^gr^nats, were wrought artificially below the boughs
of these branches, as if they had been the apples that those branches bare, but
only that they were not scattered dispersedly among the branches, as apples use
to be in their trees, but were ranked into two several rows or borders
severally below them.

But here we had need to look upon the text with much seriousness, for in two
things about this very thing it speaks obscurely and with much difficulty: For
first in speaking of these rows it says, that the chapiters were above or
upon the Pomgranats, 1 King. 7.18. Now it is so harsh to hear of the chapiters
being upon the Pomegranats, whereas it is most undoubted that the Pomegranats
were upon the chapiters, that some Copies, as David Kimchi tells us, have been
so bold as to change the word, and instead of (...) upon the head of the
Pomegranats, to read (...) upon the head of the pillars; but as he well
observes, the Masor^th by putting a (...) upon it, or a note that it is not
read so any where else, does conclude that it is and must be read so here, upon
the head of the Pomegranats: Now the construction of this may be fetched from
2 Chrom. 3.16. where it is said, that he put the Pomegranats upon the chains;
that is, the two rows of the Pomegranats were close above the fringe or border
of chaine-work, which was as it were the bottom and basis of the imbroidery;
and so the bulk and body of the chapter where the imbroidery was, was above
these rows of the Pomegranats, and though the stalks of the branches rested
upon the fringe or chaine-work, yet did they not spread into their leaves and
branches til their stalks had carried them above the Pomegranats: therefore the
construction and sense of that verse, viz. 1. King. 7.1^. is to be taken thus.
Th^s he made the pillars: And there were two rows round about by the
branch-work, which branch-work was (...) cover the chapter, even that of the
chapter that was above the young (...) Secondly, there is no small scruple
about the number of the Pomegranats, because the text does sum them up in (...)
for in (...) Chr. 8.16. there is mention only of an hundred. In 1 Kin. 7.20 of
two hundred. And in 1 Kin. 7.42. of four hundred: In all which diversity the
main difficulty refts in the count of Jeremy; for there was a hundred
Pomegranats in every row, according to the reckoning of the book of
Chronicles; and so there were two hundred upon either chapter, as is the
account of the book of Kings in the former place cited, that is 400 upon both
chapiters, according to the sum of the later quotation; but what to make of
Jeremies ninety six is somewhat intricate at the first sight: His words are
these, (...); whereof the last word is hard to translate, and breeds all the
scruple. The Chald^e and Lxx. render it, The Pomegranats were ninety six on a
side, and so does the Italian and our English; but this is of a very hard
construction, since the rows of Pomegranats were in circles, the chapter
being round; and whereas there were but an hundred in a row, how could ninety
six of them be upon one side. The word is more easy to paraphrase, then
verbatine to translate. The meaning of the clause is this, that whereas there
was an hundred Pomegranats in every row; when the pillars were set to the wall,
four of every row could not be seen, but ninety six might, the other four being
hid behind the pillar as it stood close up to the wall: And so the Pomegranats
were 96 only in sight. Therefore the word (...) may well be translated in the
clause thus, And the Pomegranats were ninety six on the open sides, or toward
the open air: for in this sense I conceive (...) to stand here.

4. It is said moreover, in the text in the book of Kings, (...), 1 Kings 7.
19. And the chapiters which were on the top of the pillars bad lilly work in
the porch four cubits; for so should I rather translate is, then were of lilly
work; and that upon those grounds. 1. Because the work of the chapiters is so
exactly described before to be of branch-worke and Pomegranats, and that but
for three cubits or thereabout, that I cannot possibly imagine how they should
be said besides, to be of lilly work four cubits. 2. The text expressly tells
afterward, That the lilly-work was on the top of the pillars, ver. 22. and not
on the top or sides of the chapiters. 3. The word (...), In the Porch, or by
the Por^^, Math its special emphasis and intention; for it is not said at all,
that either the chapiters or the Pomegranate-work were In the Porth, but the
thing is referred only to the lilly work.

The meaning therefore of the verse appears to be this that at the head of
the pillar, even at the setting on of the chapter, there was a curious and a
large border or circle of lilly-work, which stood out four cubits under the
chapter, and then turned down, every lilly or long tongue of brass, with a
neat bending, and so seemed as a flowred crown to the head of the pillar, and
as a curious garland whereon the chapter had its seat: And that particular
expression that it was in or by the Porch, intends to show that these long
tongues of brass which were made like lillies, did not suddenly decline, and
li^ down upon the sides of the pillars, nor suddenly ascend and stick upon the
sides of the chapter, but stood out into and along the porch a four cubit
circle, after the manner of a spread lilly, and then the tongue bended
downward, as the lilly does.

And this construction of that verse, helps to clear and explain the next
verse that follows after it, which otherwise would cost some pains to
translate it out of the original, or to make facil sense of it being
translated: In consonancy and contexture to the verse before, so understood as
has been held out, this verse may be interpreted and paraphrased thus: And the
chapiters upon the two pillars were also above this lilly work, for they sat
upon the growing out of it, even from over against the belly, which was by the
branch-work; for the lilly-work raught out, as far as the belly of the
chapiters raught out, with an accurate bowing or swelling upwards toward the
belly, where the stalks of the branch-work, and the rows of the Pomegranats
were; even as a lilly gently swells up, before the tongue or utmost point of
it turns down again.

5. The place where these pillars stood is somewhat uncertain; the text indeed
says, they stood before the house, 2 Chr. 3.15. and before the Temple, ver.
17. but yet it is to seek, whether within the porch at the entering in, or
without the porch, or within the porch at the Temple door, which last is the
opinion of Robbi Sol. upon the text cited. Upon these four reasons I am induced
to conceive that they stood within the porch, even at the very entering into it,
joining or standing up to the very cheeks of the gate or entrance. 1. Because
Ezekiel has so placed his two pillars in the porch of his Temple, namely, at
the top of the steps, by the posts or cheeks of the entrance it self, Ezekiel.
40.49. 2. Because, as we observed before, it is said, that the lilly-work under
the chapiters was four cubits in the porch. 3. Because the book of Kings
says, that Solomon set up the pillars, (...), for the porch, as the word
properly signifies, though David Kimchi, and our English translate it. In: The
expression seems to intimate these two things, first that the pillars were
set up for the porch door, and not for the Temple door, as was the opinion of
Solomon Jarchi cited before: And secondly, that they stood for the porch, or
very entrance into the building, as door cheeks or posts at that entrance
(...), Ios. antiq. lib. 8. c. 2.
At the door cheeks of the porch, as says Josephus. 4. That obscure passage of
Ezekiel. chap. 40.48. The breadth of the gate was three cubits on this side, and
three cubits on that side, cannot be so understood, as if the entry or passage
into the porch were but six cubits broad (and why also should he speak of this
side, and that side, if he meant but one entire breadth?) but it is well
understood by Kimcbi to mean, that on either side of the entry there was
something standing out into the breadth of the entry, three cubits, which made
the passage it self but fourteen cubits broad: which measure of three cubits,
though it fell short one cubit of the thickness of these pillars cast by
Solomon, yet suiting with the measure of Ezekiels pillars, it may do this for
us, as to show us how these pillars that we have in hand were placed, by the
disposing and placing of those of his, namely, on your right hand, and on your
lest, as soon as ever you were stepped within the porch.

The names of the two pillars (to omit the fancies of some Jews about them)
were Iachin and Boaz, 1 King. 7.21. which words denote Establishment and
Strength, Jachin signifies het will establish: from Gods promise to establish
the throne of David, and his people Israel: And Boaz denotes Herein is
strength; namely, alluding either to Gods promise, in which was all their
strength and settlement: or to the Arc which was within, which is called, The
strength of the Lord, Psalm. 80.2. and 105.4.

Sect. III. Closets for the Butchering instruments. (...)
YEt before we enter into the porch, and so into the Temple, there is one thing
more calls for our observation, and that is, certain closets or places that
were in this pile of the porch, in which were laid up the knives and
instruments that were used by the Priests, about the killing, and flaying, and
cutting up of the beasts to be sacrificed. The treatise Middoth gives
intelligence and account of these places in these words, (...), Mid per. 4.
Sect. 7.
The Porch was broader then the Temple, fifteen cubits on the North, and
fifteen cubits on the South, and that that exceeded was called Beth
hachillapoth, where they laid up the knives.

The word (...) does signify the butchering knives of the Temple, Ezr. 1.9.
from (...) says Vid. Ab. Ez. in Ezr. 1.
Aben Ezra, as it betokens cutting off, which it does, Esaias 2.18. Prove. 31.8.
And Kimch. Ib.
so says Kimchi on the same place (...), are knives: And of this sense is Beth
hachillapoth, for because they laid up the knives there; therefore the place
was called, The chamber of the laying up of the knives (...).

There was therefore on either end of the extent of the porch for that space
that it stood out further then the buildings of Temple a chamber, one at the
end toward the North, and another at the end toward the South, in which two
large chambers were four and twenty little closets; wherein the knives were
laid up severally for the four and twenty courses of the Priests: And these
and such like little closets the Jews call (...) Fenestrae or windows; because
they were closets or boxes joining to the wall. And besides these that we are
speaking of where the butchery instruments were laid up, Maymony reckons
fourscore and sixteen more, for the laying up of other things, four for every
one of the four and twenty courses. Maym. in ^ele Migd. per.
There were (says he) 96 closets (...) in the Temple, wherein to lay up the
vestments, four closets for every Course. And the name of every course was
written upon their closets, and they were all shut: And when the men of any
course came into the service upon the Sabbath, they opened their closets, and
took cut the utensils: and when they went out of the service, they restored
their vestments to their closets again, and shut them up. And why made they
four closets for every course? Namely, that the utensills might not be jumbled
together, but all the breeches were in one closet, and upon it was written
Breeches; Girdles in another closet, and upon it written, Girdles; All the
Bonnets in another closet, and all the coats in another.

Now he neither tells where these closets were; nor speaks he among them
all, of these for the knives, that are before us: and the reason of this
latter, is easily given, because in the place where he has the words that are
produced, he is only speaking of the installing and arraying of the Priests:
But where to find these 96 closets he has left us at uncertainty. Were they in
the rest of the building of this porch? It is not like they were, because the
Priests usually came ready with their vestments on, into the Court, and
especially so high as the Porch, and came not thither for their vestments to
put them on there was room enough in the other buildings about the Courts to
lodge all these closets in; but where to point them out we must suspend.

But what became of the other rooms of the porch, besides the entrance; and
these two at either end of the building; fon there were 25 cubits between the
entrance and these chambers on either side upon the ground, and there were
diverse chambers and several stories over head, the building being so very
long, and so very high? There is not express intimation to be had, either in
Scripture, or in the Jews Antiquities, as far as I can find, how these
several parts were disposed of, and therefore we can assert nothing, but leave
it to censure.

A renowned monument the Jews speak of, Mid. per. 3. Sect. 8. Kimch. and
larch. in Zech. 6.
namely, crowns that were laid up (...), In closets, for a memorial: as it is
said in the prophet Zachary (for they take that literally) Zach. 6.14. And the
crowns shall be to Helem, and to Tobiah, and to Jedaith; und to Hen the son of
Zephauiah, for a memorial in the Temple of the Lord. And they say, that the
young men or Candidates of the priesthood did use to climb up golden chains
which were fixed to the roof of the entry of the porch, that they might look
up into the closets to see these crowns.

Sect. IV. A golden vine in the porch, and a golden candlestick: and a marble,
and a golden table.
ANd now let us go in at the entrance of the porch. And there Josephus his
prospective does represent it to us in these colors, Jos. de bell. lik. 5.
cap. 14.
(...), etc. That it had no doors, because it did represent the open heaven,
and all the front of the gate was gilt with gold; and through the gate you
might see all the porch within, which was large (for it was twenty cubits long,
and eleven over) and all about the inner door shining with gold.

Over this inner door (which means the door of the Temple) there was a great
golden vine, of so vast a bigness, that (as Id. ibid.
the same Josephus relates) it had (...) bunches of grapes as big as the
proportion of a man. And like a true natural vine, it grew greater and
greater, till it came up to so great a bigness by time and degrees, for (...)
men would be offering, some gold to make a leaf, some a grape, some a bunch,
and these were hung up upon it, and so it was increasing continually.

Over the Temple door also there was a golden candlestick, which was given
thither by Helena the Queen of Adiabeni, a woman of famous renown, and of
great benefactorship, toward the Jews; of whom, and of whose sons Izates and
Monobazes, Josephus has a large story, Antiq. lib. 20. cop. 2. whither I
refer the Reader. Of this Candlestick of her bestowing, there is mention in
the Talmudick treatise Joma, in this passage. Joma per. 3.
Ben Kattin made the twelve cocks for the laver, whereas before it had but two;
he also made the engine for the laver (of which hereafter) that the water of it
might not be unclean, by staying in it all night. Munbaz (Monobazes) the King
made all the handles of the vessels which were for the servics of the day of
Expiation of gold. Helena his mother made the golden Candlestick over the
Temple door: she also made the golden Table whereon was written the section
about the suspected wife, etc.

Maym. in beth habbech. per. 3.
In the porch on either side of the Temple door there was a Table. On the right
side, a Table of Marble, and on it they set down the shewbread as they
carried it new into the Temple: And on the left side was a Table of Gold on
which they set the old bread down for a while, when they fetched it out: And
the reason why they began on the marble Table, and tended on the golden was
(...) Because they rose higher and higher with holy things, and went not lower
and lower.

CHAP. XIV. The Holy place.
SECT. 1. The Temple door.
THe entrance out of the porch into the Temple was through two gates, and
either gate had 2 doors or folding leaves: for the better understanding of
which, let us first look upon the dimensions of this passage as we have done
upon the others.

The Talmud and Josephus do seem at the first sight exceedingly to differ,
about the measure of this gate the Mid. per. Sect. 1.
Talmud reckoning it but twenty cubits high, and ten broad; and Joseph. de
bell. lib. 5.6.14.
he five and fifty cubits high and sixteen broad. In which diversity, if we
take the proper meaning of either party, the difference between them will not
be so vast, as at the first skanning it does seem to be. It is the manner of
the Talmud in measuring of the gates to speak only of the open space through
which the passage was, but Josephus, as has been observed before, measures
(...) the whole front of the gate both above the open space and the spreading
of the posts on either side it: and after this their usual manner they both of
them measure this gate through which we are going: The very open space that
gave the passage was but twenty cubits high and ten broad, and of this measure
were the two doors: but the front of the gate was three cubits (curiously
wrought and richly gilt) on either side, and five and thirty cubits above the
gate to the roof or first floor of the entry of the porch: and this is the
meaning of Josephus as it appears plainly enough by these his two passages.
For as to the first he says (...) (...) That the gate of the house (meaning
this that we are about) was gilt all over, and so was the wall all about it:
And as to the second, he has this saying somewhat difficult, but well
understood resolving the matter according as has been spoken. (...) But the
Temple having two floores, or being double roofed, that within was lower then
that without and had gilded doors of 55 cubits high, and 16 broad.

Now by what he says that the Temple was (...), or double floored or roofed,
his meaning is, that as you stood in the Temple there was a first floor over
your head, and a room above that which was called (...) of which we have
spoken before, and above that there was the roof; Had all the house been open
to the very roof as our churches are, there could have been no difference
between the height of the holy and most holy place to the roof, but both had
been alike.

But both places being floored over, and having an supper chamber above them,
there was a difference made in the height of this first floor: for in the holy
place it was five and fifty cubits from the ground, but in the most holy place
it was but twenty, as shall be showed. Now the porch had its floor lay at the
least as high if not higher then the floor of the holy place: and so the space
above the gate to the first floor was a goodly space, and made a fair front:
It seems by our Author that the first floor of the porch was 90 cubits high,
yet does he reckon the height of the gate but five and fifty, because he
reckons only to the height of the floor of the holy place, and the height of
the front of the gate of the Oracle, for he speaks of them both alike.

Thus much being observed concerning the height and breadth of this gate, it is
also to be remembered that the wall of the Temple was six cubits thick, as was
observed when we measured the breadth of the building. Mid. ubi supra. Ezekiel.
4.14.
The two leaves of the gate therefore which were five cubits broad apeece, were
hung up a little within the thickness of the wall from the porch, so that when
they were opened they covered the whole thickness of the wall on the right
hand and the left, that as you passed thorough you could not see it.

Now at the very furthest of the thickness of the wall toward the holy place,
there was a two leaved door likewise paralleld to this that we have surveyed,
which when the leaves opened, they fell back to the wall which was at the lower
end of the house, and covered a place which was unguilded: for all the walls
were gilded but only the places where the leaves of the doors fell back.

And thus had you two several doors of two folding leaves apeece to go through
between the porch and the Temple, the one standing within a cubit of the
porch, and the other at the very edge of the Wall within, and so when they were
both shut there was a five-cubits space betwixt them, which was so much space
in the thickness of the Temple wall.

The outer door, is called commonly by the Jews the great door of the Temple,
not but that the inner door was as big, but because of the great front that
this gate had, which the other had not: And of this outer door there are these
memorials or remarkable things recorded among them. First that the morning
Sacrifice was never killed till this door was opened: And so it is recorded in
the Treatise Tamid or concerning the daily sacrifice (...) Tamid. per. 3. Maym.
in Tamid per. 6.
That he that was to slay the Sacrifice, killed him not till he heard the noise
of the great gate opening.

And there they relate that the noise of this gate might be heard to Jericho,
and so the noise of diverse other things there mentioned, in which they do
hyperbolize for the glorifying of the matters of the Temple. And a second thing
for which this door is renowned among them, is, for that it had two wickets in
it, in either lease one, one in the North leaf and another in the South: And
that through that in the South no man passed, but that that was it of which
Ezekiel says, Ezekiel. 44.2.
This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened and no man shall enter in by
it, etc.

Now for the opening of these doors every morning, the way was thus: One took
a key and opened the wicket in the North lease of the door and went in, into
the five cubit space between the two doors: and there he went in at a door
into the very wall where there was a hollow passage into the holy place,
coming forth in the place where one of the leaves of the inner door fell to
the wall.

Being come in he opened that inner door, and then he came and opened the
outer door, at the noise of the opening of which the killer of the morning
Sacrisice went about that work: Sotah per. 2.
In this five cubits space between the two doors even behind the leaf of the
door on the right hand, there was a marble flag of a cubit square lay loose in
the floor with a ring fastened in it to pull it up, and when the Priests tried
any suspected wife, they came hither and pulled up this stone, and took dust
from under it, to put into the water to make her drink as was injoined Numb.
5.17. etc.

SECT. 2. The Veil.
BEtween these two doors also in this five cubits space, there hung a veil
answerable to the veil at the door of the Tabernacle, Exodus 26.36. And so it
is testified by Josephus, Joseph. de Bell. l. 5. c. 14.
who speaks of two veiles, one at the entering into the holy place, and another
to distinguish betwixt the holy and the most holy. And he describes the veil
to have been of the measures that he had newly spoken of before, namely 55
cubits deep and 16 cubits broad (yet the gate where it hung was but ten) and
that it was (...), ((...) Josh. 7.21.) Babylonian tapistry work, of blue
purple scarlet and fine owined linen, which he resembles to the four
elements.

Other Jews likewise give us intimation of such a veil hanging at the
entrance into the holy place. For the Talmudick treatise Tamid. per^q.
Tamid, mentioned but a little before, speaking of the High priest going into
the holy place to worship, says, there were three that held him, one by his
right hand and another by his left hand, and a third by the precious stones in
the breast plate: And when the president hears the sound of the High priests
feet coming out, he lifts up the veil for him: and then himself goes in
and worshippeth, and after him his brethren the Priests go in and worship.

Maym. in Kele Mikdash per. 7.
There were 13 veiles in all about the Temple: namely, 7 for the seven gates of
the Court: one at the gate of the porch, one at the gate of the Temple, and two
betwixt the holy and the most holy place, and two just over them in the room
above: Shekalim Per. 5.
And there was an overseer of the veiles, that took care for the supply and
the right ordering of them: and if they were defiled by any common uncleanness,
they were taken down and washed and hung up in the (...) chel to dry: And when
new veiles were made, they were hung up on the gallery in the Court of the
women, that they might be viewed by all the people to see that they were right.

SECT. 3. The holy place it self.
1 King. 6.2, 17.
THis place was forty cubits long and twenty broad: and in Solomon's Temple it
was thirty cubits high, having no floor at all on this side the roof, Joseph.
ubi supr.
but in Herod's Temple it was sixty: For the children of the captivity building
their Temple sixty cubits high, they floored it not over but left it open to
the roof in the holy place as Solomon's Temple had been, and according to the
same height was the floor laid, when it was floored over in the time of Herod.

And here two things are to be remembered; 1. that whereas the lower leads of
the building which were over the side chambers, were but 50 cubits high, as
has been described, and there was a passage off those leads into the upper
chamber over the holy place, and it was by steps of ten cubits high, partly
without the wall, and partly within the thickness of the wall it self. a That
there was an inequality of the height of the floores in the three parts of the
house, the porch, the holy place and the most holy. The first floor of the
porch was 90 cubits high, the holy place 60, and the most holy but 20. And
therefore whereas there was a floor over the most holy place, even with the
floor over the holy place, viz. at 60 cubits height, that was not the first
floor over it, but there was another floor 40 cubits beneath that.

The beauty and richness of this place was exceeding great: The floor of it
upon which they trod was planked with fur boards, and they gilt with gold;
and the walls were also fieled or wainscoted with cedar, and that gilt
likewise: This gilding was from the ground floor, even to the floor over
head, all the 60 cubits high up the walls; and this is meant when the Text says
(...) He built the walls of the House within with boards of Cedar from the
floor of the house to the walls of the covering: that is, up to the very walls
of the floor over head, as it is well expounded by the Rabbis upon that place.

For fifty cubits height of the walls was the imbroidery of branches and open
flowers, etc. and for the ten cubits above, it was the place of the windows:
for the side chambers without the house, in three stories, did take up the
height of fifty cubits high, so that for so high no windows could be made into
the house, but the space of ten cubits above, was the place for the windows
which were made narrow without and broad within.

The deckage or carving of the wainscot of the walls is said to be (...) The
carving of knops and open flowers as our English renders it: but the Hebrew
Doctors are somewhat nice about the construction of these words. The Chaldee
expounds it, the ingraving of the likeness of eggs (ovalls) and wreathes of
Lillyes: as if he meant that he wrought the walls with the work of Lilly
garlands, and an ovall in the midst of a garland: Levi Gers. (...) King. 6.
Levi Gershem understands (...) ovalls as the Chaldee does, but he takes them
to be such ovalls as are the buds of flowers, and that out of them came (...)
the flowers spreading and opening as in their maturity. Kimch. i^
David Kimchi takes (...) for wild gourds, and so our English has it also in
the Margin; and this I take to be the proper construction of the words and this
the imbroidery of the walls: That there was the carving of Cherubims and palm
trees and the carving of gourds and open flowers interchanged thus: first a
border of gourds or pompions or such like apple-fashioned sculpture intermixed
with marigolds, gilliflowers, and such opening flowers, and this border or
wreath went round about the house: upon this wreath as upon a base, were set
the feet of Cherubims, and the rooting of palm trees both which stood up from
this wreath 1 King. 6.29 Ezekiel. 41.18, 19.
a Cherub and a Palm tree, a Cherub and a Palm tree round about: above the
heads of the Cherubims and Palm trees was such another wreath, and Cherubims
and Palm trees set upon that again, and so interchangeably to the top. By all
which was signified the atendance of Angels, Heb. 1.14. and flourishing
condition, Psalm. 92.12, 13. of those that serve the Lord and wait upon him.
Every one of the Cherubims was pictured with two faces, one of a man that
looked toward the Palm tree on one hand, and the other of a Lion that looked
toward the Palm tree on the other.

Whereas it is said that twenty cubits were built on the sides of the house
with boards of Cedar from the floor to the walls, 1 Kings 7.16. the Jews do
expound these twenty cubits by way of breadth and not of height, as thinking
that they mean, that besides the sides of the house on either hand, which were
40 cubits long, he also made the like work upon either end of the room, which
was twenty cubits broad: But the Text does speak it more peculiarly of the
most holy place, and shows what was the height of that, which was different
from the outer room or holy place, as we shall see hereafter.

Sect. 4. The Candlestick.
THere were three remarkable and renowned things in this room of the holy
place, which next come to our observing, and those were the Candlestick, the
Table of Shewbread, and the Altar of Incense, the first of gold, and the other
two gilded, so that here in this room could nothing be seen but gold. Joseph.
ubi ^upr.
Josephus sets out these three things with this Encomium. (...) That they were
three most wondrous workmanships, and to be renowned amongst all men: And that
the seven Lamps in the Candlestick resembled the seven Planets: And the twelve
loaves upon the Shewbread table, the twelve signs in the Zodiac or the
year: And the Incense Altar, whereon incense was offered, which came partly
out of the Sea, and partly from land, denoted that all things are of God and to
him.

Maym. in beth habbech. per. 3.
The Candlestick was eighteen hand breadth high, which according to the cubit of
six hand breadth was a yard and an half: It had three feet, which almost lay
flat upon the ground: At three hand breadth height, there was a flowring of a
coronet work curiously spreading out, then went the shaft up, two hand breadth
high; and there was a dish, a bosse, and a flowring above the bosse, and all in
a hand breadth compass: thence the shaft went up again, plain for two hand
breadths, and then was there a bosse of a hand breadth, and there went out two
branches, which were carried out, bowed on either side, till they were to be
brought up straight to an equal height to the top of this middle shaft out of
which they proceeded. Then was there an hand breadth of the shaft plain, and a
bosse of an hand breadth, and then came out two branches more on either side:
And again, one hand breadth of the shaft plain, and a bosse again of an hand
breadth, and then came out two branches more: Above them was two hand breadth
of the shaft plain: And for the three hand breadths above, there were three
cups, and three bosses, and three flowrings in that space, and so the lamp
stood in a flowring.

In every branch that came out of this middle shaft, there were three cups at a
handsome distance one from another, and above the highest a bosse, and above
that a flowring, and in that flowring the lamp stood: And before the
Candlestick there was a stone with three steps cut in it, on which he that
mended the lamps stood, and on which he set down his dishes whilst he was
about that work.

This Candlestick of seven branches (to which allusion is made, Apoc. 1.
Zechar. 4.2. Apoc. 11.4.) was set on the South side of the house, but so as
that the arms or branches of it spread North and South: All the lamps or
lights that were set in the six branches that came out of the shaft, were
turned bending, and looking toward the lamp which was in the middle in the
shaft it self, and the lamp in that, was turned bending toward the most holy
place, and therefore it was casled (...) The Western lamps: These seven lamps
(which denoted the seven Spirits of God, Re^. 4.5. and 5.6. which the Jews
call, the Seven Spirits of Messiah, from Esaias 11.1, 2, 3.) did burn
continually, or if any of them were gone out, every morning and evening they
were lighted again, and their perpetual light resembled the word and doctrine
of Salvation, the light of the Lord, in which we see light.

These lamps were called the candle of the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.3. where it is said,
before the candle of the Lord went out, the Lord called to Samuel, etc. upon
which words, David Kimchi gives this gloss: If this be spoken concerning the
lamps in the Candlestick, this was somewhat before day: for the lamps burnt
from even till morning, yet did they sometimes some of them go out in the
night. Kimch. in 1 Samuel 3. Vid. Lev. Gers. ibid.
They put oil into them by such a measure as should keep them burning from even
till morning; and many times they did burn till morning; and they always found
the Western lamp burning. Now it is said, that this prophecy came to Samuel,
before the lamps went out, while it was yet night, about the time of cocks
crowing, for it is said afterward, that Samuel lay till morning. Or
allegorically it speaks of the candle of Prophecy; as they say the sun arises,
and the sun sets: Before the holy blessed God cause the sun of one righteous
man to set, he causes the sun of another righteous man to rise. Before Moses
his sun set, Joshua's sun arose; before Elies sun set, Samuels sun arose, and
this is that which is said, Before the candle of God went out.

The Lord needed no light of candles (no more then he needed bread which was
set upon the Shewbread table) nor the Priests needed no candles in this room
neither, for the windows though they were high, yet did they give light into
the room abundantly, but God by these candles did as it were enlighten the
people to teach them spiritual things by these corporal, and to acquaint them
with the necessity of the light of his word, and the bread of Salvation which
came down from heaven. And therefore when Solomon did make 2 Chr. 4.
ten candlesticks, and ten tables, and set them intermixedly by five and five
on either side the house, he added nothing to God, but he added only more
splendour to the service, and more luster to the Doctrine, of the necessity of
the light of the word, and of the bread of life. Beal Hatturim in Lev. 24.
Our wisemen say ( says Baal Hatturim) that the Western lamp (which never went
out) was a testimony that the Divine glory dwelt amongst Israel.

SECT. 5. The Shewbread table.
ON the Northside of the house which was on the right hand, stood the
shewbread table of two cubits long, and a cubit and a half broad, Exo. 25.23.
in the Tabernacle of Moses, Maym. ubi sup.
but wanting that half cubit in breadth in the second Temple (the reason of
the falling short not given by them that give the relation.) It stood length
ways in its place, that is East and West, and had a crown of gold round about
it, toward the upmost edge of it, which Vid. Baal hatt. in Ex. 25.
the Jews resemble to the crown of the Kingdom.

Upon this Table there stood continually twelve loaves, which because they
stood before the Lord, they were called (...) Mar. 12.4.
(...), The bread of setting before, for which our English has found a very
fit word, calling it the Shewbread: The manner of making and placing of which
loaves was thus.

Maym. in Tamidin. per. 5.
Out of four and twenty (...) Sata (three of which went to an Ephah) that is,
out of eight bushel of wheat being ground, they sifted out Lev. 24.5.
four and twenty tenth deals Ex: 16.36.
or Omers of the purest flower; and that they made into twelve cakes, two Omers
in a cake; or the fifth part of an Ephah of come in every cake: They made the
cakes square, namely to hand breadth long, and five broad, and seven fingers
thick: They were made and baked in a room that was in the great building Beth
mokadh, on the Northside of the Court, as we shall show anon, and they were
baked on the day before the Sabbeth.

On the Sabbath they set them on the table in this manner: Four Priests went
first in, to setch away the loaves that had stood all the week, and other four
went in after them to bring in new ones in their stead; Two of the four last,
carried the two rows of the cakes, namely six a peace: and the other two
carried in either of them in a golden dish, in which the frankincense was to be
put to be set upon the loaves, and so those four that went to fetch out the old
bread, two of them were to carry the cakes, and the other two the dishes: These
four that came to fetch the old bread out, stood before the table with their
faces toward the North, and the other four that brought in the new stood
betwixt the table and the wall, with their faces toward the South; those drew
off the old cakes, and these as the other went off slipped on the new, so that
the table was never without bread upon it, because it is said, that they should
stand before the Lord continually.

They set the cakes in two rows, six and six, one upon another, and they set
them, the length of the cakes cross over the breadth of the table (by which it
appears, that the crown of gold about the table, rose not above the surface
of it, but was a border below edging even with the plain of it, R: Sol: in
Exodus 25.
(as is well held by Rabbi Solomon) and so the cakes lay two hand bread the
over the table on either fide; for the table was but six hand breadth broad,
and the cakes were ten hand breadth long: Now as for the preventing that, that
which so lay over should not break off, if they had no other way to prevent it
(which yet they had, but I confess that the description of it in their authors
I do not understand, yet their manner of laying the cakes one upon another,
was such, as that the weight rested upon the table, and not upon the points
that hung over.

The lowest cake of either row they laid upon the plain table: and upon that
cake they laid three golden canes at distance one from another, and upon those
they laid the next cake; and then three golden canes again, and upon them
another cake, and so of the rest; save only that they laid but two such canes
upon the fifth cake, because there was but one cake more to be laid upon. Now
these which I call golden canes (and the Hebrews call them so also) were not
like reeds or canes, perfectly round and hallow through, but they were like
canes or kexes slit up the middle, and the reason of laying them thus betwixt
cake and cake, was, that by their hollowness air might come to every cake, and
all might thereby be kept the better from moldinesse and corrupting; and thus
did the cake lie hollow, and one not touching another, and all the golden canes
being laid so, as that that they lay within the compass of the breadth of the
table, the ends of the cakes that lay over the table on either side, bare no
burden but their own weight.

On the top of either row was set a golden dish with a handful of
frankincense, which when the bread was taken away, was burnt as incense to the
Lord, Lev. 24.7. and the bread went to Aaron and his sons, or to the Priests as
their portions to be eaten.

What these loaves did represent and signify, is variously guessed: the number
of twelve in two rows seem to refer to the twelve tribes, whose names were
so divided into six and six in the two stones on the high Priests shoulders:
And as bread is the chief subsistence and staff of our mortal life, so the
offering of these might denote an acknowledgement of the people, of their
receiving of all their subsistence from the Lord, to whom they presented these
as their tribute: and these as well as the lamps standing before the Lord, might
show, that their spiritual and temporal support were both before him. But our
pursuit is to look after the things themselves, leaving the allegorizing of
them unto others: for in such things men are most commonly more ready to give
satisfaction to themselves, then to take it from others, for as much as the
things themselves may be bended and swayed to various application.

Sect. 6. The Altar of Iucense.
THe Candlestick stood on the one side of the house, and the Table on the
other, and this Altar in the middle: not just betwixt them, but somewhat higher
in the house toward the most holy place then they were: These three ornaments
and furnitures of the holy place (...) Maym in Beth habbec. per. 3.
were set in a third part of the house; that is, whereas the house (meaning the
holy place) was forty cubits long, when you had gone up six and twenty cubits,
and two third parts of a cubit into the room, there stood the table and
candlestick, and somewhat further higher toward the vail stood this Altar.

Ex: 30.1, 2. Maym. ubi sup.
It was a cubit square, and two cubits high, had four horns at the four
corners of it, and a crown about the brim or edge of it, which the Jews say
denoted the Crown of the Priesthood: It stood not so nigh the vail of the most
holy place, but that one might go about it; and so how the Priest did on the
day of Explation, and besprinkled the horns of it with blood, we observe
elsewhere.

On this Altar (commonly called the golden Altar) incense was offered morning
and evening every day: a figure, if you apply the action to Christ, of his
mediation; and if to man, a resemblance of the duty of prayer. The twelve cakes
which resembled the sustenance and sustentation of the twelve Tribes, which was
ever before the Lord, were renewed only once every week, but the lampsdrest,
and the incense offered twice every day, for we have more need of the light of
Gods word, and of prayer, then of our daily food. And if we will apply all the
three to Christ, The Kingly office of Christ provided bread for his people, his
Prophetic office provided the light of his word, and his Priestly office the
incense of mediation.

CHAP. XV. The most Holy place.
Sect. I. The Partition space. (...)
THE Holy and the most. Holy place were divided asunder by a threefold
partition, namely by a cubit space, and by two veils, on either side of that
space: The partition space which Mid. per. 4.
was a cubit broad, and no more, by the Jews is called (...) which Aruch. in
voce.
Rabbi Nathan confesses to be a Greek word, and he says it signifies within
or without, as meaning, (...) that it was doubtful to them, whether is were
within or without; and thus it is interpreted Talm. Jerus. per. 5.
in the Jerusalem Tal^^d: Beth habbec. per. 4.
Maymony helps us to their meaning thus. In the Temple there was a wall which
parted between the Holy and most Holy place, a cubit thick. But when they
builded the second Temple, they doubted whether the thickness of that wall
belonged to the measure of the Holy place, or to the measure of the most Holy
place: Therefore they made the most Holy place twenty cubits long complete: and
they made the holy place forty cubits long complete. And they less a space
betwixt the holy and most holy place of a cubit breadth; and in the second
Temple they built not a wall there, but they made two veils, one at the end of
the most holy place (Eastward), and the other at the end of the holy place
(Westward) and between them, there was a cubits breadth, according to the
thickness of the wall that had been in the first Temple: But in the first
Temple there was but one veil.

The word (...) therefore is well conceived by the learned Constable Lemper. in
Mid, Page 164.
Lempereur to be the Greek (...) which signifies a disease in the eye,
distempering the sight, and hindering it, and so were the eyes of the
understanding of the builders of the second Temple at a stand about this place,
whether it should belong to the Holy, or most Holy place, and there upon they
called the place it self (...).

The wall that Solomon built for the parting of the Holy and most Holy place,
being a cubit thick (in stead of which this space was left), had these things
regardable and considerable in it, and not easy to be understood.

First, For the entering of the Oracle, be made doors of Olive tree. (...), 1
King. 6.31. These latter words are very difficult of construction, and if we go
to Glossaries for the explication of them, they will give us variety of senses,
but little facility of understanding. The Chaldee renders it only, Their posts
with its lintell were orderly set, taking the word (...) in the sense of (...)
ranked in order, and giving but very little light unto the obscure place. David
Kimc. and Rabbi Solomon seem to understand it, that the posts of the doors were
not four square but five square, if we may use such a word, or wrought into
five ribs, as their own words are. But Levi Gershom has a far fetch for it,
for he thinks (...) means the Fifth gate that was in the Temple as you went
forward; the Temple door the fourth, the Porch door the third, the door of the
inner Court the second, and of the outer Court the first.

To me the words seem to bear this construction; The post which was the door
checks was at the fifth cubit; meaning from either wall of the house, come
inward five cubits, and there was the door cheek, and so the house being twenty
cubits broad, the door hereby is concluded to be ten. And this may the rather
be so interpreted, because the text had been taking notice of the breadth of
the house immediately before; as when it was speaking of the Cherubims wings,
it says, the wing of the o^e touched the one wall, and the wing of the other
touched the other wall; and speaking of the adorning of the house, it says, all
the walls of the house were carved, and the floor gilt and then he comes on to
speak of the partition betwixt the one house and the other, and says, That the
Oracle had a two leaved door of Olive tree, and the fifth cubit from either
wall was the post which served for the checks of the door: And so it is sald in
ver. 33. He made for the door of the Temple posts of Olive tree, from the
fourth cubit; that is, four cubits from either side wall he set up an Olive
beam for a post on either side the door, of a cubit thickness, and so the
door came to be ten cubits broad.

A second thing of difficulty to be understood about this partition wall in
Solomon's Temple is that which is spoken in ve. 22. of the same Chapter (...)
And be made bars in chains of gold before the Oracle, and he overlaid it with
gold. All the difficulty lies in the first word, for it is generally agreed by
the best skilled in the language, the Chaldee and the Rabbis that (...)
signifies chains, but, what is meant by (...) is the Question. The word
properly signifies, He caused to pass over, but in this place, R. Solomon,
and D. Kimchi take it in a Chaldee propriety, as signifying to make hars,
because (...) bars, in the Hebrew is translated (...) in the Chaldee. The
sixteenth verse of 2 Chr. 3. gives some light to this obscurity, for there it
is said, He made chains as in the Oracle, and put them on the heads of the
pillars; by which he means the flower wreaths that we spoke of before that
went about the chapter, and the like is to be understood here. That upon this
wall which was before the Oracle, and divided betwixt the holy and most holy
place, be made borders or chained wreaths, with a swelling in the border like a
bar in it carried from the one side of the house to the other upon this wall.

Sect. 2. The Va^le.
THE Vailes were two as was observed before, and the reason given why; Maym. in
Kele Mik. per. 7.
and these two vails were renewed every year, the old ones taken away, and new
ones put in their room: It was woven of four colors, blew, purple, scarlet,
and fine white linen yarn, every one of these threads twisted six double, and
woven upon hair for the warp, of 72 hairs twisted into every thread. These two
vails rent at our Saviors death from the top to the bottom, Mat. 27.51. and
gave demonstration of the laying open and common of those Ceremonious things
which had thither to been reserved in such reclusenesse and singularity: The
Evangelist indeed calls it by the name of One vail, and so also does
Josephus, when he says, (...) De Bell. lib. 5. cap. 14.
It was parted by a vail. For, 1. Though they were two, yet hung they up to be
but as one partition. 2. Had they known where the proper place of one vail had
been, there had been but one in this second Temple, and no more.

Imagine what an amazement it would prove to the two Priests that were that
evening that our Savior suffered, to mend the lamps, and to burn the incense,
to see, and for the rest of the people to hear that the vailes rent of their
own accord from the top to the bottom, and no hand upon them. Had not a vail
been upon the eyes of that Nation, they might have seen more in this matter
then they did, and made a better use of it then they made. Whether that story
that is both in Josephus and in the Talmudicks, about the gate of the Temple
opening of its own accord, which we shall relate are long, refer not to this
story in the Gospel, be it referred to the Reader to judge. The Apostle
himself gives us the typical application of this piece of the Sanctuary, Heb.
10.19, 20. Having holdnesse to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus, by
a new and living way which be has consecrated for us, through the vail, that
is to say, his flesh.

SECT. 3. The most Holy place it self.
THE most holy place in Moses his Tabernacle was a perfect cube of ten cubits
long, and ten cubits broad, and ten cubits high: And the like was it in the
Temple that was built by Solomon of twenty cubits every way, 2 Chronicles. 3.8. For
though the Temple it self were thirty cubits high, yet did he floor over the
most holy place at twenty cubits height: And to this sense is that verse to be
understood in 1 King. 6.16. He built twenty cubits on the sides of the house,
both the floor and the walls with boards of Cedar; be even built them for it
within, even for the oracle, evan for the most holy place.

The beauty of the walls of this place, was agreeable to the other; decked with
Cherubitus and palme-trees, and some precious stones intermixed, floor and
walls, and roof and all gilded with gold. It is said in 2 Chronicles. 3.9. (...)
that the overlaid the upper chambers with gold, which may move a just Querie,
for over the Holy place there was no upper chamber at all, (that is, in the
Temple built by Solomon, for of that we are speaking) but it was all open to
the roose, being but thirty cubits high: and over the most holy place there was
indeed an upper room of ten cubits high, but why this should be called
chambers in the plural number, and why it should be gilded at all, since
there was no coming into it, nor no way to come there, is not easy to
apprehend: And as for the side chambers, that were set on the outside of the
house, is there warcant or reason to suppose them overlaid with gold, where
they were to lay up corn and wine, and such other things of tithes and first
fruits? therefore by (...) might be understood, not the upper chambers in the
common sense in which the word is used, for there was none over the Holy place
but the upper floor, or the roof of the holy and most holy place, and so the
text shows that the rooms were all overlaid with gold every where, both the
floor on which they trod, and the walls and the floor or roof over head.

But another text in the book of Chronicles helps to resolve this doubt, and
that is, 1 Chr. 29.3. Moreover because I have set mine affection on the house
of my God, I have of mine own proper good; of gold and silver which I have
given to the house of my God, over and above all that I have prepared for the
holy house: Even three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and
seventy thousand ^alents of refined filver, to overlay the walls of the houses
withal; where these two things are remarkable. 1. That he says this
preparation was above what he had prepared for the holy house, and yet he says
he had prepared it for the house of God. And 2. that here is mention of silver
to overlay the walls withal, whereas it is plain, that within the Temple it
self all the everlaying was of gold. Therefore it is thus to be understood,
that beside the store of gold that David had provided for the gildings of the
house within, in the Holy and most Holy place, he had also laid by a stock of
gold and silver both, to gild and overlay the chambers over the porch (for
there were upper chambers diverse in it, the height of it being 120 cubits) and
to beautify the side chambers, and the other chambers that were about the
Courts.

Now in the Temple after the captivity, we do not find that they were so
curious to reduce the compass of the most holy place to a cubick form, but
that the height of it did exceed the breadth, it being twenty cubits long, and
twenty cubits broad like that of Solomon's, but the height far more for ought I
find determined to the contrary.

SECT. 4. The Cherubims and Arc.
AS there were two Cherubims upon the Arc it self, so also did Solomon cause
two Cherubims besides, to be made to stand over the Arc, it standing between
them: they are so plainly and facilly described in 1 King. 6.23. that I shall
refer the reader thither for the story of them, and say no more concerning
them but only this, that as the two Cherubims upon the mercy seat, may very
well be resembled to Christ's two natures, so these two that stood by, to the
two Testaments; which in their beginning and end reach the two sides of the
world, The Creation, and the last Judgment, and in the middle do sweetly join
one to another.

The Arc ( the strength and presence of the Lord, Psalm. 105.4. and the glory
of Israel, 1 Samuel 4.22. the most pregnant and proper resemblance of our
Savior, in whom God dwells among men) described, Exodus 25.10, etc. and 37.
1. etc. Maym. is beth habbech. per. 4.
was set upon a stone, up toward the West end of the most holy place, even
under the middle wings of the two tall Cherubims that stood besides it: For the
Cherubims spread forth their two wings over the place of the Arc, and the
Cherubims covered the Arc, and the staves thereof above. And they drew out the
staves, that the ends of the staves were seen out in the Holy place before the
Oracle; and they were not seen without, 1 King 8 7, 8.2 Chron. 5.8, 9. For
before the Temple was built, while the Arc was in a moving posture, the staves
whereby the Ark was born, was of an equal length on either side it, ready for
the Priests shoulders when there was occasion for the Arc to flit; but now
when they had brought it in into Solomon's Temple, where it was to fix and
remove no more, they drew out the staves toward that side that looked down the
most holy place, R. Lev. Ger. ^n 1 King. 8.
Levi Gershom is of opinion, that these staves where not the same that were
made by Moses, but of a longer cize, and that they raught down to the very
door; and that though there were doors betwixt the Holy and most. ^oly place,
yet those doors could not shut because of these staves. Kimch. ib. and R:
Sol:ibid.
And Kimchi, and Iarchi come up very near to the same supposall, conceiving
that the Arc stood not up near the Western wall of the house, but more
downward, toward the door, and that the staves raught down to the door, and
on the day of Expiation, when the high priest went into the Holy place, he went
up to the Arc between these staves, and could not go off to one hand or other.

But that that has strained them from this conception is, 1. Because they have
strictly taken the word (...) in the text in the book of Kings, for the Holy
place without the vail, whereas the book of Chronicles does expressly render it
by the word (...) The Arc; for whereas the one place says, that the beads of
the staves were seen, (...), the other has it (...): And so the word (...)
means not the whole room, either of the Holy or most Holy place, but that
singularly Holy place that was under the wings of the Cherubims; for of that
place had the text spoken immediately before, when it said, The Priests brought
the Arc into the most holy place, under the wings of the Cherubims. For the
Cherubims spread forth their wings over the place of the Ark, etc. and then he
comes on and says. And they drew out the staves, so that the ends of the
staves appeared out of that holy place, meaning under the wings of the
Cherubims. And 2. The authors alleged, have strictly taken (...) to mean so,
as one standing at the door betwixt the Holy and most Holy place had the most
Holy place before him; whereas it signifies in the same sense that it does in
that clause in Genesis 1.20. Let the fowl fly upon the earth (...) which our
English has well rendered, in the open firmament of beaven. And so is it to be
taken here, and the verse in hand may be properly understood thus; And they
drew out the staves at length, so that the ends of the staves were seen from
that holy place in the open face of the Oracle: but they were not seen without.
The staves were the same that were made by Moses, and their length not great,
but only so much as to fit a man's shoulder on either side of the Arc; and now
when they had set the Ark between the two standing Cherubims on the floor, the
Cherubims inner wings covered the Ark, and the staves that were above at the
ends of the Ark, but the rest of the staves drawn out downward toward the
Oracle door shot out from under the Cherubims wings, and appeared in the open
face of the most Holy place, and the high Priest when he came to offer incense
at the Arc on the day of Expiation, he stood before the Arc between the
staves. Maym. ubi sup.
It is fancied by the Jews, that Solomon when he built the Temple, foreseeing
that the Temple should be destroyed, he caused very obscure and intricate
vaults under ground to be made, wherein to hide the Ark when any such danger
came, that howsoever it went with the Temple, yet the Arc which was as the
very life of the Temple might be safe. And they understand that passage in 2 Chronicles. 35.3. Josiah said unto the Levites, Put the Holy Arc in the house which
Solomon the son of David did build, etc. Kimch. in 2 Chronicles. 35.
as if Ioab having heard by the reading of Moses his Manuscript, and by Huldabs
prophecy, of the danger that hung over Jerusalem, he commanded to convey the
Arc into this vault, that it might be secured, and with it, say they, they
laid up Aarons rod, the pot of Manna, and the anointing oil: For while the
Arc stood in its place, upon the stone mentioned, they hold that Aarons rod
and the pot of Manna stood before it, but now were all conveyed into obscurity,
and the stone upon which the Arc stood, lay over the mouth of the vault. But
Rabbi Solomon, which uses not ordinarily to forsake such traditions, has
given a more serious gloss upon the place; namely, whereas that Manasseb and
Amon had removed the Arc out of its habitation; and set up images and
abominations there of their own, Josiah speaks to the Priests to restore it
to its place again: what became of the Arc at the burning of the Temple by
Nebucadnezzar we read not, it is most like it went to the fire also. How ever
it sped, it was not in the second Temple, and is one of the five choice things
that the Jews reckon wanting there. Yet had they an Ark there also of their own
making, as they had a breast plate of Judgment; which though they both wanted
the glory of the former, which was giving of Oracles, yet did they stand
current as to the other matters of their worship, as the former breastplate and
Arc had done.

And so having thus gone through the many parts and particulars of the Temple
it self, let us but take account of the several parcel measures, that made
up the length of it an hundred cubits, and so we will turn our eye and survey
upon the Courts.

Mid. per. 4.
1. The wall of the porch was five cubits thick. 2. The Porch it self eleven
cubits broad. 3. The wall of the Temple six cubits thick. 4. The Holy place
forty cubits long. 5. The space between Holy and most Holy place one cubit. 6.
The length of the most Holy place twenty cubits. 7. The Temple wall six cubits
thick. 8. The breadth of the chambers at the end six cubits. 9. The wall of the
chambers five cubits thick.
CHAP. XVI. The Courts of the Temple.
THe dimensions and platform of the Temple it self being thus laid out, we may
now the better observe the form and situation of the Courts that were before
it or about it: Where, in the first place it will be needful to remember that
again which was spoken before, which was, that the Temple and the Courts about
it; were not pitched so just in the middle of the Mount of the house, as that
they lay in an equal distance from the four sides of the incompassing wall,
Mid. per. 2.
but they were situate more toward the North side and West, in such manner, as
that they left less space betwixt them and the West, then betwixt them and the
North; and less betwixt them and the North, then between them and the East;
and less betwixt them and the East, then betwixt them and the South.

There were three which we may call Courts, belonging to the Temple, besides
that space in the mountain of the house without them, which was very large,
and which is ordinarily called by Christian writers, Atrium Gentium, or the
Court of the Gemiles. And these three were, The Court of Israel and the
Priests, the Court of the women, and The Chel, (...); but properly and
ordinarily the two former are only called Courts: That word in Hebrew is (...)
used in the text, 2 Chro. 4.9. and in the Chaldee Paraphrast, Esaias 1.12. 1 Samuel
3.3. Ezekiel. 43.8. and by the Rabbis most constantly when they speak of these
places, David Kimchi gives the Etymology of it (...) that Kimch. in 2 Chronicles. 4.
and in Michol.
it was called (...) (which signifies help) because that every one that came
to pray there with a good heart was helped by the Lord his God: And much to the
same purpose Rabbi Nathan, when he says, Ar. in (...).
they prayed there to the Lord to help them, etc. there being their last
recourse for help in all exigents, as, 1 King. 8.31, etc. the word is used in
Ezekiel. 43.14. in another sense, namely, for a border or half pace at the foot
of the Altar, on which the Priests that sacrificed stood, Kimch. in Ezekiel. 43.
as Kimchi expounds it upon that place, and which we shall meet with afterward.

These two Courts are sometimes so spoken of in scripture, as if they were
three, for there is mention of the Court of the Priests, and the great Court, 2
Chr. 4.9. and the Court of the women, as we shall observe by and by, and yet
they were indeed but two, for though the Court of the Priests, and the Court of
Israel were distinguished, yet were they not divided, but the Court of the
women was divided from them both.

The measure of the Court of Israel and the Priests (which is sometime called
Emphatically, The Court, and sometime, The Court of Israel) Mid. per. 5. Sect.
1.
was 187 cubits long; that is, from East to West, and 135 broad from North to
South. The Temple stood just in the middle of the breadth of it, so that the
front of the Temple or the porch being 100 cubits broad, this Court breadth lay
17 cubits and an half on either side of it; and the body of the temple it self
being but 70 cubits broad, this Court lay 33 cubits and an half broad on
either side it: Now behind the West end of the Temple it extended but 11
cubits; so measure from the utmost West side of it there, and you have 11
cubits behind the Temple, 100 cubits the length of the Temple, and then it
extended Eastward before the Temple 76 cubits.

Ibid. per. 2. Sect. 5.
The Court of the women lay just before this Court, joining to it, being of
equal breadth with it, namely, 135 cubits from North to South, but not so long
as it from East to West, for it was only 135 cubits that way also, and so it
was a perfect square.

CHAP. XVII. The Enclosure. (...) Chel.
ABout both these Courts thus laid, there was another enclosed space
incompassing them in, and this by the Jews is called The (...) Chel: The word
is used by Jeremy, Lam. 2.8. in that sense (as Maym. in beth habbech. per. 5.
some Jews do interpret) that we are to understand and describe here. Both the
(...) chel, and the wall mourn: by the wall, being meant the wall of the Court,
and by the (...) chel the space that encompassed it round about; and so
translated by the Chaldee (...) the incompassing or enclosure. The Scripture
frequently uses the word (...) for a wall, trench, or rampart, as 2 Samuel
10.15. 1 King. 21.23. Obad. ver. 20. Nab. 3.8. and it is rendered variously by
the Hebrew Expositors there, but of the sense of the word and nature of that
place at the Temple that we are looking after, they give us this unanimous
account Mid. per. 2. Sect. 3. Maym. ubi sup.
that it was a place or space of 10 cubits broad, encompassed with a wall,
between the mountain of the house and the Courts. I cannot find a better name
for it, then the enclosure or outer virge of the Courts.

The words of Rabbi Nathan in Aruch in two several plamay move two several
doubts about this place, for in one ces place be says that the (...) chel was
(...), Ar. in (...).
A place encompassed with a wall between the mountain of the House and the
Court of the women. And in another place he says, that (...). The (...) Id. in
(...)
chel was a wall higher then the wall called (...) Sor^g; Out of which words he
seems to hold out these two opinions; the one, that the (...) chel did not
incompasse all the Courts, but only the Court of the women; and the other, that
the (...) chel was not a space of ground, but a wall; but these two doubts we
shall clear as we go along.

And first to evidence that this (...) was a space of ground, and not a wall,
we have not only the testimony of the Talmud and diverse other Jews that measure
out the breadth of it to be 10 cubits, but we have mention abundantly in them
of peoples coming into it, and standing and sitting in it; as R. Nathan
himself gives one instance, Id. ubi ante.
when he speaks of a great (...) Divinity school in the (...) chel: And
Iuchas so. 21.
Abraham Zaccuth speaks of Rabban Johanan ben Zaccai having a Sanbedrin
there. Pesa. per. 2.
And Rambam relates at large how those that brought their Passoever lambs into
the Court when they were dispatched, went and stood in the (...) chel, and
diverse of the like examples might be added, which prove evidently enough what
kind of thing this (...) chel was, namely, not a wall but a space of ground.
And so R. Nathan means even when he says, it was a wall higher then the wall
(...): for so the word (...) at large when it is taken for other places then
this in the Temple, and is joined with the word (...) is defined by the Jews to
mean (...) R. Sol. in Lam. 2.8.
A wall, and a Son of a wall, or an inner and outer wall; that is, a lower wall
before a higher, as Rabbi Solomon construes it not close joined together, but
some space of ground between, and so our Author understands it, though he
speak so short.

The wall that enclosed the (...) is called (...) soreg in the Talmud and
Rabbis language, which Nathan renders plainly a wall, but R. Semajab in Mid.
some other expound it for a wall curiously lattized, and made of wood, but
Josephus comes and speaks further, somewhat like to both their senses, and
tells us that it was of stone, but curiously wrought: Let us a little examine
what he says upon this place: Joseph. de bell. lib. 5. c. 14.
(...)

As you went through this (that is, the mountain of the House) into the second
Temple, there was a stone wall that went about of three cubits high of very
curious work: wherein stood pillars at an even distance; some in Greck and
some in Latin letters giving notice of the holiness of the place; That no
stranger must enter within the holy place: for the second Temple was called
holy; and they went up 14 steps into it out of the first. And a little after
(...) And above the 14 steps it was 10 cubits to the wall (of the Court) and
all even. Out of whch relation we may observe these things remarkable

1. That the outmost space of all, that lay within the great incompassing wall
(that which the Jews distinctively call the Mountain of the house) was also
commonly call the first Temple: And in this very sense does the Gospel speak
very often, using the word Temple when it means but this outmost space, as John
2.14. Jesus found in the Temple those that sold Oxen etc. John 8.1, 3. Mat.
21.14, 15.

2. That within this (...) Chel no strangers might come but Jews only, and for
this purpose there were pillars in which there was so much written in Greek and
Latin sentences. And so the Jews say that the (...) Chel was more holy then
the Mountain of the house, because no stranger might come into it, Talm. in
Kelim. per. 1.
nor none polluted by the dead. And upon this very thing we may conclude if we
had no other ground to conclude it by, that the (...) Chel did incircle or
incompasse all the Courts and not the Court of the women only: for if the
ground along that Court for 10 Cubits next to it were so holy that a stranger
might not come upon it, certainly we must hold the ground along by the upper
Court as holy and as unaccessible for strangers every whit. And therefore
whereas R. Nathan in what was alleged before, says that the (...) Chel did
enclose the Court of the women, and speaks of enclosing no more, he does not
exclude the other, but speaks according as the (...) Chel lay to one that came
in at the East gate.

3 That into the (...) Chel there was the first rising, all being level from
the East gate thither, and the rising into the (...) Chel was 14 steps or 7
cubits Mid. per. 2.
or as the Talmud more truly reckons but 12 steps or 6 cubits (for every step
was half a cubit rise) and the (...) Chel being 10 cubits broad it was level
to the wall of the women's Court.

The wall that encompassed the (...) Chel was not high as were the other walls
about the Temple, but it was only as it were barnes before the higher wall of
the Court, but of 3 cubits high; the fashion or work of it being very curious,
wrought into paves or lattices, or such open work that one might look through
it as well as over it.

The passages into the (...) Chel through this wall were many, namely, one
before every gate that went into either of the Courts, and there on either side
the passage, was a pillar set up, with the inscription mentioned, advising
strangers to beware of coming upon the holy ground.

Now in the Syrogrecian Kings times when the Jews and Jerusalem lay in
subjection to those Kings (...) this wall that was the bar against strangers
going any further, Id. ibid.
was broken by those Kings in thirteen places, they scornfully and
disdainfully, and impiously breaking in upon the holy ground (...) But the
Jews made up the breaches again, and ordained thirteen adorations and
oraisons to be made against the Heathen Kingdoms upon any ones coming to any
of the places where the breach had been.

CHAP. XVIII. The Court of the Women.
THe Courts of the Temple (to the surveying of which we are now come) were
properly two, The Court of Israel and The Court of the Women: For though there
was indeed a distinction between the Court of Israel and the Court of the
Priests, as that the one was not the other, and they that came into the one,
might not come into the other, yet was the one so within the other, and the
partition between the one and the other so small, and but one boundary that
enclosed them both, that they were indeed not so very properly two Courts, as
two several places for the Priests and for the Israelites to stand in, in one
Court: But the Court of Israel and the Court of the women were so truly and
apparently two different Courts, that they lay one before another, and they
were parted and divided one from another, with a very high wall.

The Court of the women is not mentioned in Scripture by that express name and
title in any place, but yet it is spoken of there under two or three other
Epithets, or denominations. 1 It is called the New Court, 2 Chronicles. 20.5. where
it is said that Jchoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem in
the house of the Lord before the new Court: that is, he and all the
congregation stood in the mountain of the house Eastward before the Court of
the women. Now David Kimchi upon the place though he speak not out so much,
yet he concludes indeed that that new Court means the Court of the Women,
and he gives two reasons why it is called New: Kimch. in 2 Chronicles. 20.
either because it had gone to decay, and they had newly repaired it, or
because they had made some new Laws concerning it, (...) and had appointed
that none that were defiled, so as they needed to wash themselves the same day,
should come within the Camp of Levi: which is a peculiar prohibition in Kelim
per. 1.
the Talmud as concerning this court of the women: C. Lemper. in Mid. fol. 62.
But rather it was called new, because it was not made when the other Court was
by Solomon, but added in aftertime.

There is mention indeed of the Inner Court built by Solomon 1 Kings 6.36.
which infers an outer, but that outer means the whole mountain of the
house which lay without the Court of Israel, as is well observed by some of the
Hebrew Doctors, and that is it which is also called the great Court, in
contradistinction to the Court of the Priests, 2 Chronicles. 4.9. And in that there
is mention only of Solomon's building the inner Court, it is an argument that
he built but that Court, and that this that we are speaking of, was not extant
in his time, but taken in and built afterward, either by Asa or by Jehoshaphat,
before that time and occasion that the text mentioned in the book of Chronicles
speaks of: and so there came to be two Courts in the House of the Lord, 2
Kings 21.5.

2 It is called The outer Court, Ezekiel. 46.21. Mid. per. 2. and Kimch. in loc.
as that text is generally and truly understood by the Jewish writers, which
we shall have occasion to examine anon; and the reason of the name does easily
appear, namely because it lay on the outside of the Court of Israel, and
further off from the Temple.

3. It is also called The Treasury, John 8.20. the reason of which name we
shall observe before we have done with the survey of this Court.

But by the Jewish writers it is generally and ordinarily called (...) The
Court of the Women; and the reason of that name was, because the women might
go no higher or further, then into this Court. Joseph. de Bell. l. 5. c. 14.
and Antiq. l. 15. c. 14.
(...), This being the proper place for them to worship in, and (...), further
then this toward the Temple was unaccessible to them: only when a woman
brought a sacrifice, she might go into the Court of Israel, as we have
observed in another place.

This Court lay at the East end of the Court of Israel, and was parted from it
by a high wall, so that whosoever came to worship here, could see nothing of
the service in the other Court, and indeed hear but little unless they went
up the steps of the gate and looked in: for til you came to the middle of the
entry of the gate that went up into the upper Court, it was but of the same
holiness with the Court of the women, but beyond the middle, it was holier.

The floor of this Court was even and level throughout, Mid. ubi ant.
and it was a perfect square of 135 cubits long, and 135. cubits broad; and it
was curiously flag'd with marble, as indeed was all the space, both Courts,
Chel, and the other space that was within the wall that encompassed the holy
ground: And they have this tradition about the pavement of the Court, where the
Altar stood, Maym. in beth habbech. per. 1.
That all the Court was flag'd with fair stones, and if any flag were loosed,
although it lay still in its place, yet was it not lawful to stand upon it to
do any part of the service till it were fastened again.

The entering into the Court of the women was by three gates, one on the East,
one on the North, and one on the South, and there was a fourth on the West,
which went up out of this Court into the upper Court or that of Israel. All
these gates as also all the other that went into the upper Court (of which
hereafter) were Joseph. de Bell. ubi supr.
(...), gilt all over both posts and lintels, one only excepted, of which
instantly.

We will go up at the East gate out of the (...) Chel, out of which there were
five steps that rose up to the gate to land you in it. The gate it self was
exceeding sumptuous and exceeding beautiful: and this was that which was
called the beautiful gate of the Temple, Act. 3.2. at which the Creeple lay
begging of alms, both of men and women that went into the Temple; At this gate
began (...), The inner Temple, as Josephus does often call it, distinguishing
between that space that was enclosed within the boundary wall that encompassed
the whole holy ground, and that space that was enclosed within the wall that
encompassed the Courts: the former of them was called the outer Temple, and the
latter was called the inner, and both of them bare the name of the Temple: and
so in the Scripture, whosoever went but within the compass of the holy ground,
is said to have gone into the Temple.

Now this gate being the very front and entrance into the Inner Temple, or into
that space within which the choicest sanctity and bravery of the Temple was, it
was built and decked with such sumptuousness and singular gallantry, as was
fitting for the frontispice of so brave a place: And hence it came to bear the
name of beautiful, and that the rather also, in comparison of the gate
Shushan, or the outmost East gate that entered into the mountain of the house,
for that was but a low and homely gate house, for a reason that has been
observed heretofore: but this was goodly and lofty, and stood bravely mounted
upon the far higher ground.

This gate Josephus Joseph. ubi supr.
calls the Corinthian gate, because it was of Corinthian brass, whereas the
rest of the gates were gilt with gold. And here occurreth a difference betwixt
him and the Talmudicall writers; for they do unanimously hold the brazen gate
to be the gate of Nicanor (which we shall survey anon) which was the gate that
went out of the Court of the Women into the Court of Israel: but he does as
confidently affirm on the other hand, that it was that that went out of the
Chel into the Court of the women. His words are these Mia (...). There was one
gate without the Temple of Corinthian brass, which exceeded in glory those of
gold or silver: Now where this gate stood, namely, in that place that we are
upon, appears by this passage of his a little after. The gate above the
Corinthian gate which opened East, over against the gate of the Temple, etc.

It is not much material to determine whether of these Eastern gates were of
brass, it is only needful to be resolved which of them was that that was
called the gate of Nicanor, (because upon the knowledge of that there are
diverse things depending, and in the next chapter but one, shall be showed that
it was that gate that went out of the Court of the Women into the Court of
Israel.) But if I were to moderate between the differing parties, I should say
their difference in this matter is not real, but only apparent: Josephus
calls the gate that came into the Court of the Women, the brazen gate, because
it was all so, posts and lintell and all overlaid with brass, which shone
above gold: but the Talmudists say, the doors of the gate of Nicanor were only
of brass, but the whole front of the gate beside, all of gold: and so that was
not the brazen gate, but only brazen doors, but the other was properly the
brazen gate.

When Peter and John had healed the Creeple at this gate, the text says, that
he went with them into the Temple, that is, into the Court of the Women, which
was the common and ordinary place of worship for those that brought not a
Sacrifice, and from thence he went back again with them through this gate
into Solomon's porch or the Eastern cloister of the Mountain of the house, and
there they preach and convert five thousand. And now let us go up through this
gate into the Court, and survey it it self.

(...) Mid. ubi supr.
In the four corners of the Court of the women there were four rooms of forty
cubits, and they were not floored over, and thus they shall be in time to come,
say the Talmudicks from Ezekiel. 46.21,22. Now these four rooms were every one 40
cubits long from East to West, and 30 cubits broad from North to South, for so
may we best interpret it according to the place alleged in the Prophecy of
Ezekiel, His words are these, Then he brought me forth to the utter Court, and
caused me to pass by the 4 corners of the Court, and behold in every corner of
the Court there was a court. In the 4 corners of the Court were Courts (...) of
40 cubits long and 30 broad. The word (...) is of doubtful signification, and
diversely interpreted: The Lxx read it (...) little, for so they render it (...)
A little Court, and it is easy to see how they mistook (...) for (...): some
understand it according to the Chaldee transmutation of (...) changed into
(...) and think it means (...) joined, and so our English has it, and so
Aruch in (...)
Rabbi Nathan, produces some instances of the word in this sense, but
concludes that (...) the word (...) means nothing but that these buildings
were not floored over, and in the very same opinion does the Mid. ubi supr.
Talmud, R. Sol. and Kimch. in Ezekiel. 46.
Rabbi Solomon and David Kimchi join with him, and in the very same words; But
how to understand this is somewhat difficult: If we should conceive that they
were clearly open on the top without any covering at all, the constant works
that were done in them, and the things that were laid up in them will deny
that; and if we shall say they were roofed over, how shall we answer to the
general testimony of the Hebrew Doctors which holds otherwise. We will
therefore look first to what use these several rooms were constantly put,
and then we shall be the better in abled to judge of this matter.

Mid. ubi supr.
1 That in the South-east corner was a room for Nazarites (...): For there
they boiled their peace offerings, polled their hair and pnt it under the pot,
according to the Law, Numb. 6.18. Nazir. per. 1.
Nazarism was most ordinarily for thirty days: though sometime it was for
years and sometime for term of life. He whose vow was expired, was to bring
three beasts, one for a burnt-offering, another for a sin-offering, and a third
for a peace offering: Ibid. per. 6.
If he polled his head in the Country, as Paul did at Cenchrea, he was to bring
his hair and burn it under the Caldron where his peace offering was boiling,
which was in this place that we are speaking of: And if he polled it here, it
was the readier.

The Jews in the Treatise alleged in the Margin above, speak of (...) A
Samson Nazarite and an everlasting Nazarite, not but that Samson was a Nazarite
always: but they use this distinction in reference to the manner of the Vow
making. He that took on him to be a Nazarite like Samson, as saying. Behold I
will be a Nazarite like Samson, or like the Son of Manoah, or like the husband
of Delilah, or like him that carried away the gates of Azzah, or like him whose
eyes the Philistims put out: such a one might never cut his hair, but it must
ever grow upon him: and such a Nazarite did Absalom take upon him to be, but he
was forced to cut his hair once every year, it was so heavy: But he that was
a Nazarite everlasting (that is, that took upon him Nazarisme upon other
terms, as he that said I will be a Nazarite according to the number of the
hairs of my head, or the dust of the Earth, or sand of the Sea shore) he might
poll his head once in thirty days: but his hair was not to be thus burnt,
because his vow was not out. But he whose vow was expired, wheresoever he
polled his head was to come to this place, and here to boil his Peace Offering
and to burn his hair, and the Priest took the shoulder as it boiled, and a
Cake and a wafer of unleavened bread, and put all upon the hands of the
Nazarite, and waved them, and then was the Nazarite at liberty to drink wine,
and to be defiled by the dead. But R. Simeon says that as soon as any of the
blood of any of the Lambs was sprinkled on him, he was at this liberty: The
same tract also speaks of women Nazarites as Ibid. per. 3
Queen Helena who was a Nazarite first by her own engagement seven years, and
by coming into the land of Israel seven years more, and by a difilement, seven
years more, one and twenty in all: Ibid. per. 6
And Mary of Tarmud, who whilst the blood of her offerings was sprinkling on
her, word was brought her that her daughter was in danger of death, and she
went away, the sprinkling half done, and half undone, and found her daughter
dead: and came again and was sprinkled out: Now to inquire whether these women
cut their hair at the expiring of their vow, is not much to this place and
purpose, and therefore we shall not trouble our selves at present to hearken
after it. But me thinks that Iuchasin. fol. 15 trac. 1.
passage of Simeon the just, was to purpose, who in all his life time would
take a sin-offering but of one Nazarite only, and his reason was, because he
thought they made their vows in some paffion, and repented of it when they bad
done.

2. Mid. ubi. supra.
The North-east rooms (...) was the place of the wood, where the priests that
had blemishes did search the wood for worms; for any wood that had worms in
it was unclean for to burn upon the Alter. Maym. in biath hamikdash per. 6.
Mid. per. 5.
The great Sanhedrin sat in the building Gazith, and a main work of theirs
continually. was, that they judged of the Priesthood, and tried the Priests as
concerning their genealogy (whether they were truly of the Priestly line or
no,) and concerning blemishes (whether they were fit to serve or no) every one
that was found sailing of the right pedigree, was clothed with black, and
veiled with black, and got him out of the Court. But whosoever was found right
and perfect was clothed with white (compare Rev. 3.4. and 7.9. and went in and
served with the Priests his brethren: Whosoever war found of the right blo^d
of the Priests, but some blemish was found in him, he went and sat him down in
the woodroom, and wormed the wood for the altar, and had his portion in the
holy things, with the men of the house of his father, and eat with them. And
when a Priest was found without blemish, they made holyday and great rejoicing,
and blessed God for it with a Solemn prayer.

Mid. ubi supr.
3. The Northwest room (...), was the room of the lepers: After the many
rites for the cleansing of the leper abroad in the Country, at his own house,
Maym. in Tumeach tsoreah per. 11.
as killing a Sparrow and be sprinkling him with the blood mingled with water,
sending another sparrow flying in the open air, shaving himself with a razour
every hair off, etc. On the seventh day he was to shave himself again, and to
wash himself in water, and then he was clean from defiling and might come
within Jerusalem. On the eight day he brought three lambs, for a sin-offering,
trespasse-offering, and burnt-offering Talm. in Negain, per. 11.
(...) He bathed himself in the Lepers room, and went and stood in the gate
of Nicanor, and there the Priests besprinkled him, etc. the manner of which we
have observed elsewhere.

Mid. ubi supr.
4. The South west room was called (...) The house of the oil. Ibich et Mayin.
in Beth. habbech per. 5.
For there they laid up the wine and the oil, whereof there was so frequent and
constant use by the appointment of the Law in their meat and drink offerings,
see Numb. 15.

And now that we have seen the use and employment to which these rooms were
put, it is the more seasonable to consider of that which we mentioned before,
namely whether these four rooms in the four corners of the Court of the women,
were quite open to the skies, or roofed over, and in what sense to takethe word
(...)

Two things do here meet us which are considerable. 1. That these places in
Ezekiel are called Courts: 2. That he says in every one of them there were
boiling ranges, to boil the Sacrifices of the people. Ezekiel. 46.21, 21. And yet
does the Talmud allot them to these particular uses. All which, and what is
said moreover, that they were not roefed over, may very well consist together.
For grant every one of these spaces to be built within with chambers round
about: there might be very fair chambers and yet a good handsome open Court in
the middle: At either end chambers of 10 cubits broad, and yet an open space of
20 cubits between: And on either side chambers of seven or eight cubbits broad:
and yet an open space of fourteen or sixteen cubits between: Thus therefore
does the building in these places seem to be; that there were fair chambers
round about which were roofed over as other buildings, and in the middle was an
open court, round about which were boiling ranges, whose chimneys went up in
the inner walls of the chambers or the walls to the open place: And so the word
(...) to be rendered caminata, as it is by some, and as by our English Bibles
margin made with chimneys. And thus were these places roofed, but not as the
rest of the buildings about the Temple, with a continued roof, for here was a
void place or even quadrangle in the middle, and thus did the inner Court serve
for boiling places, and the rooms round about for other uses.

Such was the Platform of the Court of the women. It was a perfect square: in
the midst of every one of the walls of it was a gate: in every corner of it,
was one of these buildings: and now what was between these buildings along the
wall till it came to the gate? was it cloistered all along, as were the other
walls about the Temple? The Talmud answers that at first it was not (...) Piske
Tosapb. ad Mid.
The Court of the women was not cloistered about: but (...) Mid. ubi supr.
It was all plain at first, and nothing but pavement and bare walls: but upon
some experience of inconveniences that they found they made cloisters, and
balcones or galleries within the cloisters upon three sides of it, East, North
and South, all about: The inconvenience R. Nathan tells us was this (...) Aruch
in (...) Talm. in Succah. per. 5.
That men and women being promiscuously mingled together, it was occasion of
lightness and irreverence. Therefore they made a balcone ((...) in Nathan and
Maymony, but (...) in the Talmud) round about the Court, which came out from
the wall and was roofed over bead. And so the women stood in those galleries,
and men stood in the Court below: And it is a Tradition, that at the first when
they looked on the festivity of pouring out of water, the men were within, and
the women without, which caused some irreverence: whereupon they made three
galleries in the Court, upon three sides of it, that they might bebold from
above.

So that at first there were neither cloisters nor balcones in this Court, till
this inconvenience put them upon making of such: and then they were but
galleries or balcones, without any cloistering with the support of pillars, as
there was in the other Court: But in the sumptuous buildings that Herod made of
and about the Temple, this Court was cloistered with as much state and bravery
as was the other, or as was the mountain of the House which we have surveyed,
only whereas that was a double cloister all about, but on the South, where it
was treble, the cloisters of both the Courts were only single: Take the
Testimony of Josephus about this matter. Ios. de bell. lib. 5. cap. 14.
(...): He had been speaking immediately before concerning the gates and
passages into both the Courts, and it may not be amiss for the better
understanding of the passage before us, to take up his words a little at large.
(...) From thence (out of the (...) cbel) five steps brought you up unto the
gates, which on the North and South were eight in number, namely four on either
side: and two necessarily on the East, for the Court appropriated to the women
to worship in being walled on that quarter, there must needs be a second gate,
which opened just opposite to this first. And as for the other sides (of the
Court of the women) there was one gate on the South and another the North by
which they entered into the women's Court: For through the other gates (of the
Court of Israel) women might not enter, nor go beyond the enclosure of their
own Court. And that place was permitted for the Jews that dwelt in the land,
and that dwelt in foreign countries to worship in: Now the West quarter had no
gate at all, but the wall there was built continued (without any opening of a
gate in it) And then he comes on with this saying (...), etc. Now the cloisters
which ran between the gates along by the wall, turning inward before the
treasuries, were born up with exceeding fair and great pillars: But they were
single and they wanted nothing in their exceeding greatness of those that were
below.

Now in that he says these cloisters were (...), along by the wall turning
inward, his meaning is, that they were joining to the wall, and stood within the
Courts and not without, and so they ran along the Courts within from gate to
gate: And they wanted nothing of the greatness of the pillars and cloisters
that were below along the wall of the mountain of the house, but only that
those were double and these single: And as for the cloister in the Court of the
women, it had this difference, both from those in the mountain of the house,
and those in the Court of Israel, that this had a gallery made in it for women
to stand in and to look down into the Court, whereas the others had no
interposition but were uninterrupted to the roof.

This Court of the women was the place, where both men and women, did
ordinarily worship, that either came to pray at other times then the hours of
prayer, or that at the hours of prayer came and brought no Sacrifice with
them. In this Court it was, where Paul was laid hold upon, as a violater of the
Sanctity of the place in the peoples repute, who thought he had brought
Gentiles in hither, Act. 21.26, 27, etc. who might not go so much as into the
chel. In this Court did the High Priest once a year, namely at the Feast of
Expiation read a portion of the Law, and the King once in seven years, namely
at the Feast of Tabernacles in the year of Release: and here every year at the
Feast of Tabernacles was the great dancing, singing and rejoicing, for the
drawing and pouring out of water, of which and of the other particulars named,
I have given the full account, in the treatise of The Temple Service.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Gazophylacia or Treasuries.
BEfore we part out of this Court of the women, those words of Josephus, which
were cited even now, which say the cloisters of the court, were (...) turned
inward before the Treasuries, may justly challenge us to stay here a little and
look about us, whether we can find any Treasuries hereabout, or what may be
said to the Gazophylacium of the Temple, the name and mention of which is very
well known and ordinary both in Scripture and other Writers, but the situation
thereof about the Temple something difficult to find out: Now in these two
words of Josephus. (...), two maine things are observable, and to be looked
after toward that search that we are now about; the one is, the number,
importing more treasuries then one, and the other is, the situation of these
treasuries in reference to the cloisters mentioned, The cloisters were before
them.

The Treasuries of the Temple were of a twofold nature and captivity, namely
Treasure-chests and Treasure chambers, the former were called Sbopheroth, the
latter Lesacoth, and both bare the general name of Corban.

Talm. in Shekalim per. 6
There were thirteen treasure-chests at the Temple, which by the Jews are
commonly called (...) Sbopheroth which signifies properly Trumpets Maym. in
Shekal. per. 2.
because trumpet-like they were wide in the bottom and narrow in the top: that
money that was put in, might not easily be got out.

Id. ibid.
Two of these chests, were for the halfel shekel that every Israelite was to
pay for the redemption of his soul or life (for which the Law is given, Exodus
30.13.) the one chest for the payment of the last year (if he had missed to pay
at the due time) and the other for the half shekel for the year present.
Talm. ubi ant. per. 1.
On the first day of Adar which answers in part to our February, there was
general notice given throughout the Country, that they should provide to pay
their half shekel: and on the fifteenth day of that month the Collectors sat
in every City to gather it; and they had two chests before them, (as were at
the Temple) and they demanded the payment calmly and used no roughness or
compulsion. On the five and twentyeth day of the month, the Collectors began to
fit in the Temple, and then they forced men to pay, and if any one had not
wherewith to pay, they took his pawn, and sometime would take his very raiment
perforce: They had a Table before them to count and change the money upon (from
whence they were called (...) Trapezita or Mensarii, and two chests before them
to put into.

A man that brought a shekel to change, and must have half a shekel again, the
Mensarius or Collector was to have some profit upon the change: (...) Maym. ubi
sup. per. 3. et Aruch in (...).
And that addition or profit is called Kolbon ((...)) And how much profit did
be require for change? The twelth part of a Denarius, and never less: Nay if
two came together and paid a shekel for them both, so that there needed no
change, yet the receiver was to have some profit from them both: The Talmud and
the Authors cited in the margin do discourse exceedingly large about this
(...) Kolbon, and who was to pay it, and who to be quit from it, and how much
to be paid, and to the like purpose, but the general conclusion is still for
some profit, which exaction was that that caused our Savior to overthrow (...)
The tables of these Colbonists Job. 2.15. at the first Passover he came up to
Jerusalem after his baptism, and Matthew. 21.12. at his last: for these Receivers
began to sit in the Temple for that purpose, but eighteen or twenty days
before the Passover, and continued for that time when the concourse of the
people was greatest, and after it was over they had done.

And so the market that was in the Temple of sheep and oxen it is like it was
not constantly there, but for such times of concourse, when the multitude of
people and Sacrifices was so exceeding great, though indeed there was
merchandising of other things there, all the year long in the Tabernz. or
shpps. that we have spoken of before. The place where the marketing of the
sheep and oxen was, was the great space of the mountain of the house, that lay
upon the South fide of the Courts, for on the West and North sides the room
was too strait for such a matter, and on the East side was the most common
entrance of the people, and so these cattle would have stopped up the way: but on
the South there was a place exceeding roomy and spacious, and it they had taken
up for a market at such times, making the house of God an house of Merchandise.

Amongst those Authors that speak of these two half-shekel chests, I find not
any that does inform us, where they stood, or where these Collectors of the
poll-money did fit in the Temple to receive it: nor indeed is it of any great
import to inquire after it, since their sitting there was but for a short
space, as a month or such a matter, and so they had done: It is most probable
they sat about the East gate Shushan as being the chiefest and commonest
entrance.

Besides these two treasure-chests that were in use but for a certain time
every year, there were eleven more that were of constant and continual use,
and that stood in their places all the year long, and upon every one of them
was written what use and employment they were put unto.

1. Maym. ibid.
One was for them that were to offer two turtle doves or two young pigeons, the
one for a burnt offering, and the other for a sin-offering: they cast in their
price hither.

2. A second was, for them that were to offer a burnt offering of birds only.

3. A third, for whosoever offered money to buy wood for the Altar, he put his
money into that chest.

4. A fourth, for whosoever would offer money to buy Frankincense.

5. A fifth, for whosoever would offer Gold for the Mercy Seat.

6. A sixth, for the residue of a Sin-offering, that is, if a man had set apart
a sum of money for a Sin-offering, and it bought a Sin-offering and there was
to spare, that which was to spare was put into this chest.

7. A seventh, for the residue of a Trespasse-offering.

8. An eight, for the residue or surplus of an offering of birds, of men and
women that had issues, and of women after childbirth.

9. A ninth for the surplus of a Nazarites offering.

10. A tenth for a surplus of a lepers trespasse-offering.

11. The eleventh for whosoever would willingly offer a sacrifice of the herd,
the money wherewith to buy it, he cast into this chest.

These many chests stood continually in the Temple, with every one its title
written upon it, that told its use, that whosoever would offer any one of these
things mentioned, he could readily go by those directions, where to put the
money of his offering: And these are those Gazophylacia or Treasuries that
Josephus says the eloisters were before; that is, whereas the Courts were
cloistered round about, and those cloisters were, on the side toward the Court,
supported with pillars, these chests were set in the Court before those
pillars: as if such chests should be set in the quadrangle before the pillars
that bear up the cloister walks in the Royal Exchange London.

But in whether of the Courts were these chests disposed of, in the Court of
Israel, or the Court of the women, or in both, some in the one and some in the
other?

Ans. These considerations do evince, that they were placed in the Court of
the women: 1. Because thither was the access freer then it was into the Court
of Israel, and it is no doubt, these chests would be set in a place most
commodious for every one to come unto them: women might not come into the other
Court at all, nor men neither, so ordinarily as they might into this, and these
treasuries in all reason were to be set, where men and women did both resort.
2. In the upper Court, if these chests stood before or on the outside of the
Cloister, they stood in the Court of the Priests, and thither might not an
Israelite that was come into the upper Court, enter, unless it were upon three
singular occasions when he had a sacrifice, which we have mentioned elsewhere,
and putting money into the treasuries was none of them. 3. It is said in Mark.
12.41. That Jesus sat over against the Treasury and saw the people cast in
money, and be saw a widow throw in two mites: Now into the Court of Israel,
this widow might not come, and in that Court Christ might not fit, for they had
a tradition, that none might sit in that Court, but only the Kings of the
house of David: But the meaning of the place is, that Jesus fitting in the
Cloister of the Court of the women, saw the people cast money into these
chests, according as they were minded to offer for this or that occasion: and
there came a poor widow and threw in two mites which make a farthing. It is
the ordinary expression that the Hebrew authors use to signify the peoples
giving to the treasury by, to say (...) They cast in their money: which phrase
the Evangelists also follow in this story: And since we are upon this poor
widows offering, let it be without offense, to digress so much, as to give in
this ratetable of the Jews, for the understanding of the value of her two
mites, and how they made a farthing, and it may be it will be useful on other
occasions: Id. ibi. per. 1.
The shekel, or piece of silver mentioned in the Law, the weight of it was 320
barley corns: but the wisemen added to its weight, and made it of the same
weight with the coin called (...) Selaa: and what is the weight of the Selaa
(...) Three hundred eighty and four midling barley corns: The Selaa is four
Denarii. The Denarius is six (...) Meabs; now the Meab is that which in Moses
his time was called a Gerab: The Meab was two Pondions: The Pondion was two
(...) Issarin (...): And (...) A mite, was the eight part of an Issar (so two
mites make a fourth part) and the weight of a Meab which was the Gerab, was
sixteen barley corns: and the weight of an (...) Issar (Assarius) was four
barley corns: the weight of (...) a mite was balse a barley corn, etc.

The place then of these treasure chests was in the Court of the women, before
the Cloisters, some here and some there on the several sides of the Court,
(and therefore this place is also called the Treasury, Joh. 8.20. where it is
said, These things spoke Jesus in the treasury as be taught in the Temple,
etc.) and so the people both men and women had access to them, and offered as
their hearts or their occasions moved them, and theinscriptions of the chests
did give them direction.

As there were these treasure-chests, so also were there treasure chambers,
besides those that have been mentioned before, at the gates of the mountain of
the House, and besides those that joined to the body of the Temple: Besides the
chambers, where sithes, first fruits, vessels, and vestments were treasured up,
as they were in the chambers by the gates, and by the sides of the Temple,
there were three chamber treasuries of remarkable note, but the place where
they stood is something difficult to discover.

1. There was the chamber, or treasury, of the halfe-shekel poll money, into
which the two chests that have been spoken of, were emptied when they were
full, and the chamber locked and sealed up. Now at three set times of the
year, they took the money out of this chamber again: The Talmud and Maimony
in the treatise Shekalim do give the story, and the manner of that action
thus: Shekalim per. 3.
At three times of the year they emptied this chamber: Namely, fifteen days
before the Passover, fifteen days before Pentecost, and fifteen days
before the feast of Tabernacles: or as Rabba Akibathe son of Azai says, on
the uine and twentieth of Adar, the first of Sivan, and the nine and twentieth
of Ab: He that went in to fetch out the money, must not go in in any garment,
in which it was possible to hide money, nor in his shoes or sandals, no nor
with his Phylacteries on, because it was possible to hide money under them:
when he went in, a watch stood at the door without, and all the while be was
within they talked to him, and be again to them, that so he might be prevented
for putting any money into his mouth: He began not to empty out any money till
he gave them without, notice, by saying, I empty, and they answered him, Empty,
Empty, Empty, three times over: The money that was in the chamber was put up
when it was first brought in, into three great chests, containing nine Seabs,
or three bushels a piece: and if there were more brought in then would go into
these three chests, it was laid by somewhere in the chamber: He that went in
took three chests of three Seabs a piece, or every one containing a bushel,
and be filled them out of the great chests within. His three that be brought
in, had these three letters (...) written severally on thim, for distinction
sake: for one be filled in the name of the Jews of the Land of Israel, and
another in the name of those that were in towns and countries nearer band, and
the third, in the name of those in Babel and Media, and further off. And thus
having filled these three at one time, they were brought out, and the money
bestowed to buy the daily sacrifices, and additionall sacrifices, and
shewbread, and salt for the sacrifices, and wood for the altar, and other
things that were necessary for the service: and thus they laid out the money as
long as those three bushels would run, and at the next appointed time, he went
into the chamber again, and did the like.

2. There were two other treasure chambers, in one of which was laid up what
was offered toward the repair and service of the Temple, and another in which
was laid up what was offered for charitable uses. The Talmudicks speak of them
thus (...) Ibid. per. 5. and Aruch in (...)
There were two Treasure chambers in the Temple, one the chamber of the Silent,
and the other the chamber of the Vessels: The chamber of the Silent, was where
religious men did silently or secretly put in their offerings, and poor
children of honest parents, were brought up by them secretly. The chamber of
the Vessels was, where any that willingly offered any vessel, cast it in
there: and once in thirty days the treasurers opened the chamber, and fetched
out what they found fit for the supply of the Temple, and what was not of it
self fit, they sold and turned into some thing that was fit, etc.

Now whereabout these chambers stood, it is something difficult to discover: we
shall guess at their place when we come to survey the upper Court: the mention
of the Gazophylacia which we have found in this Court of the women that we are
about, has led us thus far aside as to speak of these chambers also, though
they were not in this Court but in the upper: we shall have so much the less
to say of them, when we come to their own place.

And now let us look over this Court that we have been so long about, at one
view: As you were entered into it at the East gate, you saw in every corner of
it, a piece of building that had a quadrangle in the midst of it: on the North
and the South sides there was a gate just in the middle between these
buildings: and from the buildings on either side, there ran a cloister
supported with goodly marble pillars unto the gates: and the like cloister
there was at the East quatter at which you entered: These cloisters had beaches
within them for the people to sit down when they thought good, as there were
in the cloisters that ran along the outmost wall that encompassed the mountain
of the house: Before these cloisters on the East, North, and South sides, stood
the treasure chests, and then you were come into the open Court. Before you as
you went up toward the Court of Israel, was a goodly rising of steps up to the
gate of that Court, called the gate of Nicanor which we are now to survey the
next: and upon this quarter there was no cloister at all.

CHAP. XX. Of the gate of Nicanor, or the East gate of the Court.
THe Court of the Women which was of the platform that has been described,
was parted from the Court of Israel by a high wall: namely of thirty two cubits
and an half high from the floor of the Court of the women, yet but only twenty
two cubits high from the floor of the Court of Israel it self; for so much
higher was the ground in that Court, then in the other.

Just in the middle of this wall, was the gate that conveyed out of the one
Court into the other: Mid. per. 2. Josephus de bell. lib. 8. cap. 14.
to which gate there was a rising of fifteen steps, every step half a cubit
high, the whole rising seven cubits and a half in all (so high was the Court
of Israel above the Court of the women.

Succah per. 5.
These fifteen steps, (says the Treatise Suceah) were answerable to the
fifteen Psalms of degrees in the book of Psalms (...) because upon these
the Levites steed and sought Not in the daily service, or in the ordinary
course of the Temple music, for their place of standing in that, was in the
Court (as shall be showed) but only on that solemn festivity at the fidst of
Tabernacles, which was called (...) The rejoy (...) at the (...) and pouring
out of water: of which we give account in its due place.

Mid. ubi supr.
These steps that rose up to the gate, went not laid in a square, or straight,
as steps are ordinarily laid, but they were laid in a semicircle. And one
reason of that may be for the gaining of room on either side them: Ibid.
For on either side of the gate and of the steps, there were underground
chambers in the wall, whose roof was even with the floor of the Court of
Israel, the doors opening into the Court of the women; in which rooms the
Levites used to lay up their musical instruments when they had done singing in
the daily service in the Court of Israel: They came down the fifteen steps
out of the Court, and at the bottom, stepping off either on the right hand or
the left, there were doors in the wall, into chambers where they laid their
instruments up.

This gate that we are now entering, or the gate between the Court of the
women, and the Court of Israel vid. Kimchi in Jer. 19.2. and in 2 King. 11. and
R. Sol. in 2 Chronicles. 23.
is held by some of the Jews to have been called by seven several names
(besides the gate of Nicanor, which in Herod's temple was the most common and
known name of it) of some of which the matter indeed is clear, but of other
there is doubting.

1. It was called The upper gate of the Lords house. 2. King. 15.35. 2 Chronicles.
27.3. and so the treatise Succab in the place cited before, does expressly
call it. Succah ubi supr.
The upper gate that goes down out of the Court of Israel, into the Court of
the women: and the east gate that went out of the Court of the women into the
Chel, was called Mains. in kel. Mikdash per. 7.
the lower. Now whereas it is said that Jotham built the upper gate, it
infers not, that there was no gate before, but it means that he repaired
it, or that he added some buildings to it.

2. It is called the new gate, Jer. 26.10. and 36.10. in both which places the
Chaldee paraphrast expressly calls it the East gate of the Sanctuary of the
Lord: It is apparent by that latter place in Jeremy, that it was the gate that
went into the upper Court, or the Court of Israel, and so it both appears that
it was the gate that we are about, and also the reason of the title of the new
gate, may be collected from what was spoken a little before, namely because it
had been repaired by Jotham. Kimch. in (...)
Some give this reason of the title (...), namely, That it was called new,
because the Scribes did there deliver new traditions ^ for there sat the
Sanbedrin: but this derivation is far fetched.

3. The gate Harsith, Jer. 19.2. is understood by some to mean this East gate
of the Court of Israel that we are upon, though both the very text of Jeremy
himself, and also the Chaldee parapbrast and other Jews with him, do not
clearly allow of such a construction, but place the gate Harsith in another
place.

1. The text of Jeremy does place Tophet at the entry of that gate Harsith,
which how improper it is to apply to the East gate of the Court of Israel is
easy enough for any one to judge, that does but know that there were two gates
betwixt this Court gate, and the valley that lay before the Temple, if that
valley had been Tophet. But 2. Tophet or the valley of the Sons of Hinnom, lay
a good way upon the right hand as you stood in the East gate of the Temple, as
was observed before, and faced the city Jerusalem, and not the Temple, and so
the gate Harsith must be one of the gates that went out of Jerusalem into that
valley, and not out of the Temple. 3. The Chaldee paraphrast does call it (...)
which David Kimchi expounds, the Dungport, and believes it to be the same
Dung-gate that is mentioned in Neb. 2.13. though I believe Nehemiabs dung-port
was in another quarter. The word Harsith is of a twofold construction: namely,
either as derived from Here Is (...) which signifies the Sun, and so out
English in the margin has rendered it the Sun-gate, having translated it the
Eastgate, in the text: or from Here Is (...) which signifies a Potsheard; for
there (says Rabbi Solomon) they cast out their broken Potsheards. We shall not
need to be inquisitive from whence this gate did bear its name (whether from
the Sun rising upon it, or from some. Idolatry committed to the Sun near
to it, or from the pots house hereabout, or from casting out of broken pitchers
at it) since it is not that gate that we are about in the Temple, but a gate of
the city Jerusalem, which we have not now to do withal.

4. Some of the Kimch. in Ier. 19. R. Sol. in Bzek. 40.
Hebrew writers do understand (...) The gate of entrance spoken of Ezekiel. 40.15.
to mean the gate that we are about, namely the East gate of the Court of
Israel: for which reason it may be the Chaldee parapbrast has translated it
(...) The middle gate, as being between the gate that comes into the Court of
the women, and the gate of the porch of the Temple it self.

5. Among the seven names that are given by the Rabbis to this gate, that name
of the middle gate was one, as appears by the authors in the places alleged,
and this was the reason of the name, and we need to seek no further for it.

6. They also conceive that it was called the gate Sur, 2 King. 11.6. Id. in 2 Chronicles. 23. ex. Jeruselami.
or the gate of departure, because there those that had been unclean, were
separated and put aside, and might go no further, till their atonement was
made.

7. And likewise the gate of the Foundation, 2 Chronicles. 23.5. but of these two we
shall have occasion to speak afterward, and shall there examine whether this
gate have those names or no.

8. But the name by which it was most famously known in the last days of the
temple (and which it carried to its grave, or till the Temple and it were
buried in ruin) was the gate of Nicanor. Maim. in kele Mikdash per. 7.
The upper gate (says Maymony) is the gate of Nicanor: And why is it called
the upper gate? Because it is above the Court of the women: And to the same
purpose, and in as plain terms speaks the gloss upon the treatise Sotah,
Sotah per. 1 gloss. Ibid.
The gate of Nicanor was the upper gate which was between the Court of Israel,
and the Court of the woman, Mid. per. 1. and per. 6.
And so the treatise Middoth, whenever it reckons the gates of the Court of
Israel, it still makes the gate of Nicanor to be the East gate: And that
Maxim in the Jerusalem Talmud (...) Talm. Jerus. in Sotah per. 1.
Every place where it is said, Before the Lord, it means the gate of Nicanor,
confirms the same things, as appears by the cleansing of the leper, and the
trial of the suspected wife, both which were set in this gate, and are said to
be set before the Lord Lev. 14.11. Number. 5.18.

And to take up, what is copiously said by the Talmudists concerning this gate,
and concerning the reason why it was so called, from the mouth of one man to
save more labor let us hear the author of Juchasin concerning this matter,
speaking thus at large.

Juchasin fol. 65. vid. etiam Talm. Jerus. in Joma. per. 3. Tosaphta ibid. per.
2. and Mid. per. 2. Aruch in voce Nicanor.
Nicanor was in the time of the second Temple: and I wonder at Rabb, that he
did not mention him in the Catalogue of those men that are upon record for
religiousnesse: As he mentions Hananiah the Son of Ezekiah, the Son of Garon,
in the beginning of the treatise Shabbath, into whose chamber the Scholars of
Shammai and Hillel came: And so Aba Saul ben Batuith, in the end of the
treatise Shabbath. Now this Nicanor that is often mentioned in the Mishueb was
one of the Chasidim (or religious) but the common people are not so. He is
mentioned in the first and second chapters of Middeth, as that there is a gate
in the Court on the East, which is the gate of Nicanor, and that it had two
wickets, one on the right hand, and another on the left. And so it is said in
the 6. Chapter of Shekalim, and that is set over against the most holy place
which was westward where the divine Glory dwelt: And therefore in the end of
the treatise Beraceth, it says, Let not a man use irreverence before this gate
of Nicanor, or the East gate: And so in the first chapter of Sotah. In the gate
of Nicanor, they make the suspected wife drink the bitter water, and they
purify women after Childbirth, and lepers. And in the end of the chapter (...)
(or the seventh chapter of the treatise Pesachin) It is said, that the gate of
Nicanor were not holy (as the Court) because lepers stood there, and put in
their thumbs and great toes into the Court: And so in the third chapter of
Joma, and the second chapter of Tosaphta there it is said, there were wonders
wrought with the doors of Nicanor, and they mention it renownedly: And if so,
then had it been fit to have recorded him. The story is thus. This Nicanor was
one of the Chasidim, and be went to Alexandria in Egypt, and made there two
brazen doors with much curiosity: intending to set them up in the Court of the
Temple, and be brought them away by sea: Now a great storm happening, the
mariners cast one of the doors over board to lighten the ship: and intended
also to throw over the other also. Which when Nicanor perceived, he bound
himself to the door with cords, and told them, that if they threw that in,
they should threw him in too: And so the sea ceased from her rage: And when he
was landed at Ptolemais, and bemoaned the loss of his other door, and prayed
to God about it, the sea cast up the door, in that place where the holy man
had landed. But some say a great fish cast it up: And this was the miracle that
was done about his doors, and they set them up on the East side of the Court,
before the Temple. But in the book of Joseph ben Gorion, be says, That the
gate of Nicanor was so called, because a wonder was done there, for there they
flew Nicanor a prince of the Grecians in the time of the Asmoneans, and so it
seems in the latter end of the second chapter of the treatise Taanith. Thus
Iuchasin.

I shall not insist upon it, to dispute it out, whether of these things
alleged were the cause of the name of this gate, or whether something else:
Some other conjectures might be added, as whether Nicanor that sent the doors
from Alexandria were not he that was the kings chief Master of the Ceremonies
there, of whom Josephus makes mention Jos. Ant. lib. 12. cap. 2.
and relates how he provided chambers and diet for the Septitagin^
translaters: or whether this gate were not so called in honor of Seleucus
N^canor the first king of Syria, who was a great favourer of the Jewish Nation
Ibid. cap. 3.
as the same Josephus also relates: But I shall leave the searching after the
Etymology and original of the name to those that have mind and leisure
thereunto: it suffices to know the gate by its name which was so renowned and
famous in all Jewish writers: only as to the story about Nicanor a Grecian
prince being slain here, compare 1 Maccab. 7.33, 34. etc. Joseph. Antiq. lib.
12. cap. 17.

Before we part from this gate, we must remember to say something about the
gate Sur, and the gate of the foundation of which there is mention 2 King.
11.6. and 2 Chronicles. 23.5. because that these are held by some, as was showed
before, to have but names of this East gate of the Court that we are about.

The texts where these names are mentioned do speak to this purpose in our
English translation.

2 King. 11. Ver. 5. A third part of you that enter in on the Sabbath, shall
even be keepers of the watch of the kings house. 6. And a third part shall be
at the gate Sur: and a third part at the gate behind the guard, etc. 7. And
two parts of you that go forth on the Sabbath, even they shall keep the watch
of the house of the Lord, about the King, etc.
2 Chronicles. 23. Ver. 4. A third part of you entering in on the Sabbath, of the
Priests and of the Levites shall be porters of the doors. 5. And a third part
shall be at the Kings house, and a third part at the gate of the foundation,
etc.



The two courses of the Priests and Levites now present, namely that course
that came in on the Sabbath, and the other that had served their week and were
now going out, Jeboiada divides either of them into three parts, into six in
all. They that came in on the Sabbath were to be: 1. A third part of them for
the Altar and service, the Priests for the sacrifices, and the Levites for
singers and porters as in the constant duty and attendance. For it was now the
Sabbath day, and had it been any other day, it is not to be imagined, that
Jebo^ada would neglect the affairs of God though he went about the affairs of
the King: But he provides for both, so that the Temple service may have its due
attendance, as well as the Kings coronation. And therefore ver. 5. of 2 King.
11. is necessarily to be rendered thus, A third part of you shall be those that
come in on the Sabbath: that is, a third part of you shall be as those that
come in on the Sabbath to attend the service as at other times. And so is 2 Chronicles. 23.4. to be translated, A third part of you shall be those that come in
on the Sabbath, for Priests, and Levites, and Porters: that is, to attend the
Altar, song and gates as in the constant service.

2. Another third part, for keepers of the watch at the Kings house.

3. And another third part at the gate Sur which is also called the gate of the
foundation.

Thus the tents in the two books laid together do plainly distribute the
course that was to come in on the Sabbath, as he will see that will carefully
compare them together in the original.

The course that was going out on the Sabbath was disposed, 1. One third part
of them to the gate behind the guard, 2. Two third parts to keep the watch of
the house of the Lord for the safety of the Kings.

Now the very disposal of these guards will help us to judge concerning the
gates that we have in mention, and will resolve us that they were not any gates
of the Temple at all, but that they stood in some place else. For the gates of
the Temple were guarded by the Porters of the course that came in as in the
ordinary manner: and there was an extraordinary guard added besides throughout
all the mountain of the house, and in the Court, of that course that was going
out, 2 King. 11.7, 8.11. Therefore the gate Sur or the gate of the foundation,
which was guarded by a third part of those that come in on the Sabbath, cannot
be supposed for any gate of the Temple, since the Temple was guarded by two
parts of those that went out. So that were I to describe the city as I am now
about describing the Temple, I should place the gate Sur somewhere in Sion, and
there also should I place the gate behind the guard: and it would not be very
hard to gather up fair probability of their situation there. Now though so
strong guards were set both in the Temple and in Zion, yet Athaliah for whom
all this ado is made, comes up into the Temple, so far as to see the young
King at his pillar in the Court before the East gate, and no man interrupts
her, partly because she was Queen, partly because she came alone, and chiefly
because they knew not Jehoiadas mind concerning her. But when he bids have her
out of the ranges, they laid hold upon her, and spared her till she was down
the causey Shalletheth, and then they slew her.

If by the ranges, the ranks of men that stood round about the mountain of
the house, be not to be understood, I should then think they mean either the
ranks of trees that grew on either side that causey, or the railes that were
set on either side it for the stay and safety of those that passed upon it. And
to this sense Levi Gershom does not unproperly expound those words in 1 King.
10.12. Of the Al^^g trees the King made (...) for the house of the Lord and for
the Kings house. The word (...) does properly signify a Prop or Support: yet
is expressed in 2 Chronicles. 9.11. The King made of the Algum trees (...) high
ways to the house of the Lord: And Ralbag in 1 King. 10.
I think (says the Rabbin) that in the ascent that he made to gee up to the
house of the Lord from the Kings house, he made as it were battlements (that is
railes on either side) of the Almug trees, that a man might stay himself by
them, as he went along the highway of that ascent. And so in other ascents of
the house of the Lord or of the Kings house, where there were not steps, at the
rise of the Altar, etc.

SECT. I. Aeredible wonder of the brazen gate.
WE will leave the belief of that wonder that has been mentioned about the
brazen door of Niconer in its shipwreck, to those that record it: but we may
not pass over another wondrous occurence related by Josephus, of the brazen
gate (whether this of Nicanor, or the other which he calls the brazen gate,
as by its proper name, we will not be curious to examine) which is a great
deal more worthy of belief, and very well deserving consideration: He
treating of the prodiges and wonders that presaged the destruction of
Jerusalem, amongst others he relates this. (...), etc. The Eastgate of the
inner Temple, being of brass and extreme heavy, los. de bell. lib. 6. cap 31.
and which could hardly be shut by twenty men; being barred and bolted
exceeding strong and sure, yet was it seen by night to open of its own
accord: which the simpler and more foolish people did interpret as a very good
Omen, as if it denoted to them, that God would open to them the gate of all
good things: But those of a deeper reach and sounder judgment, did suspect
that it presaged the decay and ruin of the strength of the Temple.

And with this relation of his do other writers of his own nation concur,
who report, Iuchasm. sol. 21.
That forty years before the destruction of the City, the doors of the Temple
opened of their own accord: Whereupon Rabban Jochanan ben Zaceai (afterward
chiese of the Sanhedrin) cried out, Open thy doors O Lebanon that the fire may
devour. And from that time the great Sanhedrin fitted from the room Gazith,
and so removed from place to place. The like says Rabbi Solomon on Zeob. 11.1.
Open thy doors O Lebanon: R. Sol. in Zech. 11.
He prophecieth (says he) of the destruction of the second Temple: and forty
years before the destruction, the Temple doors opened of their own accord:
Rabban Iochanan ben Zaccai rebuked them: and said, O Temple, Temple, how long
will thou trouble thy self? I know thy best is to he destroyed, for Zechariah
the son of Iddo prophesied thus of thee, Open thy doors O Lebanon that the
fire may devour thy Cedars, etc.

There are three remarkable things which the Jews do date from forty years
before the destruction of the Temple: namely this of the Temple doors opening
of themselves, and the Sanhedrins flitting from the room Gazith, and the
Scarlet list on the Scapegoates head not turning white, that are as
Testimoneyes against themselves about the death of Christ, which occurred
exactly forty years before the Temple was destroyed: Then the Lord showed them
by the Temple doors opening, the shaking of their Ecclesiastical glory, and
by the flitting of the Sanhedrin, the shaking of their Civil, and by the not
whitening of their Scarlet list which had denoted pardon of sin, their deep die
of sin and guilt for the death of Christ. Compare this self-opening of the
Temple doors with the renting of the vail of the Temple of its one accord, and
they may help the one to illustrate the other. And me thinks the words of
Rabban Iochanan upon the opening of the doors, O Temple how long wilt then
disquiet thy self? do seem to argue that before that opening there had been
some other such strange trouble in the Temple as that was, which might be the
renting of the vail.

SECT. 2. A Sanhedrin sitting in this Gate.
THis Gate of Nicanor or the Eastgate of the Court, was the place where the
suspected wise was tried by drinking of the bitter waters and where the Lever
cleansed stood to have his atonement made, and to have his clensing wholly
perfected, the rites of both which things we have described in their places.
In this Gate also did women after childbirth appear for their full
purification; here it was that the Virgin Mary presented her child Jesus to the
Lord, Luke ^.22.

Talm in Sanhedr. per. 11.
In this gate of Ni^an^r (not in the very passage through but in some room
above or by it) there sat a Sanhedrin of three and twenty Judges: Now there
were three ranks of Judicatories among the Jews. A Judicatory or Consistory of
three. A Iudicatory of three and twenty: and the great Sanhedrin of seventy
one. In smaller towns there was a Triumvirate or a Consistory set up consisting
only of three Judges: Ibid. per. 1.
these judged and determined about money matters, about borrowing, filching,
damages, restitutions, the forcing or enticing of a maid, pulling off the shoe,
and diverse other things that were not capital, nor concerned life and death,
but were of an inferior concernment and condition. In greater cities there
were Sanhedrins of three and twenty, which judged in matters of life and death
in some cases; but raught not to all: And there was the great Sanhedrin at
Jerusalem which was to Judge of the greatest matters. Now a Sanhedrin of three
and twenty was not set up in any great City, but only in such a one as in
which were 120 men fit to bear office. (...) How many are to ^hee in a City
that it may be fit to have a Sanhedrin set up in it? It is a question of the
Talmud, own proposing, and it gives this answer, That there are to be 120.
compare Act. 1.15. And into what offices or places these are to be distributed,
might be alleged out of the Gemarists and Maymony if it were pertinent to
this place: Only these many let us name of them. Maym in Sanhedr. per. 1.
Every Sanhedrin of three and twenty, had three fourms of Prebationers of three
and twenty in every fourne (...) And when there was need of a man in the
Sanhedrin, the highest in the first ^ourm was fetched in, and made Judge: and
the highest in the second fourm came in and sat lowest in the first fourm: and
the highest in the third fourm came up and sat lowest in the second: and some
other man was found out from abroad, to sit lowest in the third four fourm: and
so the Sanhedrin and the fourms were still kept sult.

Now as the grean Sanbedrin sat in the Temple, so also did two lesser
Sanhedrine of three and twenty a piece, the one in the gate Shusham or the gate
of the mountain of the House, and the other in this gate of Nicanor or the gate
of the Court: And their rising to be Judges in the highest Court of seventy
one, was first by degrees through these two. Id. ibid. per. 2.
Whosover was found a (...) of fit and competent qualifientions, he was first
made a Judge in his own City: and thence he was promoted into the Judicatory of
the gate of the mountain of the house, and from thence into the Judicatory in
the gate of the Court, and so at last into the great Sanhedrin. In some of
these Judicatories in the Temple our Savior showed his wisdom at twelve years
old, Luke 2.46. And some of these Judges were they that tempted him with the
question about the woman taken in Adultery, which was brought to be judged
before them, Ioh. 8.4, 5.

In the times before the captivity into Babylon the great Sanhedrin it self
sat in these two Gates, sometimes in the one, and sometimes in the other, as
they thought good, Ier. 34.4. and 26.10. and 36.10, but in after times when the
room Gazith was built, and the great Sanhedrin of seventy one betook it self
thither, these two gates were furnished, either of them with a lesser Sanhedrin
of three and twenty: The place of their sitting was in some room over the gate:
for as it was not possible for them to sit in the very passage through which
people went and came, so was it not lawful for them to fit in the gate of
Nicanor, in that part of the gate that was within the Court; for within the
Court might no man sit but the King only. Yet might they sit in the upper rooms
though they were within the compass of the Courts, for they held them not of
so great a holiness as was the space below.

This is the gate of which Ezekiel speaks, chap. 46.1, 2. The gate of the
inner Court that looks toward the East, shall be shut for the six working
days: but on the Sabbath it shall be opened, and in the day of the New Moon it
shall be opened: And the Prince shall come by the way of the porch of that
gate without, and shall stand by the post of the Gate, etc. Before this gate
within had Solomon pitched his brazen Scaffold, on which he kneeled and prayed
at the Consecration of the house. 2 Chro. 6.13. compared with 1 Kin. 8.22. and
in after times the Kings entering in at this gate had their station within it,
as he had given them example, and there stood the Kings pillar as it is called,
2 Chronicles. 23.13. that is, his seat was set within this gate in the Court by one
of the pillars that bare up the Cloister: For as this East quarter of the Court
was the most proper place for the people to worship in, so most especially in
that place of it which did most directly face the door of the Temple and the
Altar before it, and that was in the very entrance up from the gate it self,
and here was the King seated by one of the pillars. Something according to this
disposal of the King in his place in the Court does Ezekiel speak, though in
his description there is some kind of difference for mystery sake. You may
observe in him, that the East gate of the outer Sanctuary was contiuually shat,
and the East gate of the inner was shut all the six days of the week, which
were not indeed so in the common use of the Temple as it stood, for both the
gates were daily opened, but he has so charactered them for the higher
magnifying of that glory which he says was now entered into the Temple: And
whereas indeed the King in his worshipping did go within the Court, or within
the gate and there worship, and there fit down in the time of Divine Service,
he has brought in the Prince but to the posts of the gate and there standing
whilst his Sacrifice was offering: By his description every one that came up
to this gate, must either enter at the North gate or South gate of the Court of
the women, because the East gate was shut, chap. 44.1. and hereupon is that
injunction, that when the people of the land come before the Lord in the Solemn
Feasts, he that enters in by the way of the North-gate to worship, must go
out by the way of the South gate, and he that enters by the way of the South
gate, must go forth by the way of the North gate: he must not return by the
way of the gate whereby he came in. Chapter 46.9. Whereas in the common access to
the Temple as it stood either before or after the captivity, the East gate of
the Court of the women was constantly open and their most ordinary coming in
was at that gate, and so they went up through the Court of the women to the
gate of Nicanor, yea and oftentimes within it into the Court: Yet did they
imitate and follow this prescript of the Prophet, under the second Temple, in
not returning and going out at the same gate at which they had come in; The
Talmudists have this Tradition about this matter. (...) Mid. per. 2.
All that come to the Temple according to the custom of the place, come in at
the right hand, and fetch a compass and go out at the left, which means not
(as the Glossaries do explain it) that a man was always to go out at the gate
opposite to that gate at which he camein, but that he may not go out at the
same gate at which he came in but at some other: as came he in at the East
gate, he must not go out at the East gate again, but at the North or South:
Only they give exception in two sorts of persons (...) to whom particular
occurrences had befallen, for they went about still to the left hand. What is
the matter with thee that thou go that way? Because I am a mourner. Now he
that dwells in this house comfort thee. Or because I am an excommunicate: Now
he that dwells in this house put into thy heart that thou may hearken to
the words of thy fellows, and they may receive thee.

So that the common and ordinary way of coming into the Temple to worship, was
to come in at the East gate of the Court of the women, and up to the gate of
Nicanor, and there to worship and so back again, and out at the North or South
door of that Court: The Pharisee in the parable went up to this gate as far
as he could go, because he would put his seeming devotion to the farthest,
but the poor Publican stood a far off. Luke 18.13. Even the King himself though
he came in on the West quarter of the mountain of the house, yet came he down
hither to go into the Court of the women, and so up through the East gate of
the Court, to his seat which was before that gate. The stationary men, of whom
we have spoken in due place, they went within the gate into the Court of
Israel, and so did other Israelites at the solemn festivials when there were
abundance of Sacrifices, especially at the Passover, and he that brought a
single Sacrifice, went into the Court at one of the North gates of it, of which
we shall speak when its course comes: but ordinarily a man that came into the
Temple to pray or to worship, and brought not a Sacrifice, he worshipped
before the gate of Nicanor which faced the gate of the Temple, and so returned.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Gates and Buildings in the Court wall on the East and South
sides.
AND now are we come within the Court, where having very many things to survey
and take notice of, let us first begin with viewing the gates and buildings
that were in the wall which did enclose it, and first of all let us observe the
East quarter of the wall, in which the gate of Nicanor was, which we have
newly surveyed and at which we entered: There was never a gate but this in all
this East quarter, nor were there any buildings in the wall in this quarter,
but only two, which stood on either side of the gate one, and near to the gate,
on your right hand and on your left as you entered in.

Mid. per. 1.
That on your right hand was called (...) The chamber of Phineh as the wardrobe
man: of whom there is mention in the Treatise Shekalim, among the chief
Officers in the Temple, These are the chief Officers in the Sanctuary, ( Talm.
in Shekali, per. 5.
says the Talmud there) Jochanan the son of Phinehas over the Seals: Ahijah
over the Drinke-offerings: Mathia the son of Samuel over the Lots: Pethahiah
over the Birds (for Sacrifice) this Pethahiah was Mordecai, etc. Phinehas over
the Wardrobe, etc. Now the gloss upon that place says that these men named,
were the eminentest and worthiest men that ever were in these several Offices,
and that they were not all in one but in several generations: Bartenora
conceives that the Office of this Phinebas was, Barteniu. Mid.
to array the Priests, when they were to go into serve, and to disarray them
again when they had done, and to keep their clothes. Which we are not to
understand of his helping them on and off with their vestments every day, when
they went to and came from the service, for they put them on and off
themselves, but he provided vestments for them at their first entering into the
service, and when they were old he took them into his custody again and
provided new. Maym. in Kele Mikd. per. 7.
Now this provision was at the public charge, he only took care for it, and
the garments being overworn, they were returned again, for the Public use, for
we have observed elsewhere, that they were ravell'd into wick-yerne for the
Lamps and for the great lights at the feast of Tabernacles, at the Rejoicing
for the pouring out of water.

On the left hand of the gate was (...) The chamber of the Pastry man, for so
let us call him, a man that took care for the providing and preparing of the
Highpriests daily Meat Offering which in the Talmud language is commonly
called (...) Menochoth. fol. 96.
The two cakes of the High Priest, of which we have spoken in due place, and
this his daily offering was one thing, Maym. in Biath Mikd. per. 4.
whereby he was differenced from an ordinary Priest.

There is much diversity of opinion among the Jews, yea even in the Talmud it
self about the number of the gates into this Court: In some places it reckons
Mid. per. 1. and Ioma fol. 19.
seven, which indeed was the right number, but in some other places there is
mention of Mid. per. 2. and Shekalim per. 6.
thirteen: Nay ( Gloss. in Tamid. per. 1.
says the gloss upon one place) some there are that reckon seven, some five,
some three, some thirteen, but the generality hold for seven. Now the reason of
this difference is in regard that some of them reckon only the gates of most
constant and frequent passage which were, especially three, namely the Gate of
Nicanor on the East, and one on the North and one on the South, of which we
shall speak ere it be long: others reckon only the gates which were guarded;
which were only five: some it seems count what doors went out of the Court,
into buildings by it, as well as gates to pass through, and so they raise the
number thirteen: But the number that we fix upon is seven, as most generally
and most properly entertained, both by the Talmudicks and by Josephus, in the
second Temple And how many were in the first Temple, we shall say something to
before we have done with the Court. Mid. per. 5. and Maym. in beth habbech.
per. 5.
On the South sides were these three gates. 1. (...) The watergate, which was
most East of all the three. 2. (...) The gate of the Firstlings, called also
sometimes (...) The gate of offering, this was in the middle. And 3. (...) The
gate of kindling which was most West.

Now besides these three gates on the Southside, there were also three other
buildings in the wall which bare these names. 1. (...) The room-Ga^ith. 2.
(...) The room of the draw-well. And 3. (...) The room of the wood. And so we
have the materials or subject of our Survey on this South side before us: let
us now fall to work, and observe the situation and use of these several places.

And first Antiq. lib. 15. cap. 14.
Josephus as he gives testimony to this number that we fix upon, when he
says that (...) this inward bound had three gates, North, and South, so does
he also give us good light for the situation of them when he says, they were
(...) equidistant one from another. He had said much the like concerning the
gates that were in the outmost wall or bound, (namely that that enclosed the
mountain of the house), that the gates in it on the South side Idibid.
were (...) that is so set, as that there was an equal space betwixt gate and
gate, and betwixt either gate and the corners of the wall: And so does
Symmetrie and the rules of the best proportion engage us to understand his
expression about these gates in the like sense; namely, that they both stood at
an equal dista^^e one from another, and that the two on^most stood at the same
distance from those corners toward which they stood.

Now the length of the Court (and so of this wall) being an hundred eighty
seven cubits, the situation of the gates according to the Symmetrie will fall
into these proportions (...) from the East corner of the wall, 46 courts and
three quarters upwards toward the west, was the very middle of the water gate.
As much forward still, was the middle of the gate of the firstlings: the same
measure still forward, was the middle of the gate of kindling, and as much yet
forward, taught to the West Angle of the wall: And so may we best and most
uniformly conceive of the situation of the gates. And therefore whereas the
Hebrew writers do most ordinarily when they speak of these gates, say that
they were (...) Vid. Maym. ub^ and supr. and ibid. Mid.
Near the West, it is not to be so taken as if they were all crowded toward
the West corner, but it is spoken in comprehension of both Courts together, the
women's and this.

As for the three several buildings that were also on this side intermixed
with the gates, these things may be observed toward their posture and
situation. 1. That the water gate and the draw-well-roome do seem by their
very names to refer one to another, as that it is not proper to part them, and
howsoever there was something else in the reason of the name of the
water-gates, besides its standing so near the draw-well, yet shall we observe
hereafter that this might be also one reason of the name of it, and that those
two did indeed stand joining together. 2. The Talmud says the roofes of these
three pieces of building were even ( Mid. per. 5.) by which it seems that
they stood not at distance one from another but conjoyning, but only that a
gate interposed between them 3. We shall see anon out of the Jerusalem Talmud,
that the watergate of the wood-room stood joining together, 4. The Talmud,
Maymony, and other of the Jewish writers speaking of, and naming these three
rooms, do ever set Gazith first or last, and thereby they show that it stood
on the outside one way or other, East or West, and stood not in the middle. 5.
If we set it further West, it will then stand in the Lot of Benjamin, whereas
the great Sanhedrin which sat in it, Talm. in Ze^achin: fol. 54.
are held by the Jews, and that upon good ground, to have sitten in that part
of the Court that was in the Tribe of Judah, Genesis 49.10. Therefore in most
propriety (these things considered) must it be concluded that Gazith did stand
below the draw-well, the draw-well below the watergate, or more toward the
East corner of the Court; the watergate below the room of the wood, and all
these joining together, as their situation will be confirmed in our further
progress: we will first begin at the East corner where was the room or
building Gazith.

CHAP. XXII. The chamber or room Gazith, the seat of the great Sanhedrin.
THE building Gazith ( Aruch. in. (...)
so called because it was made of stone neatly wrought, as the word is used 1
King. 5.16) appears Iucha. f. 16.
by the Author of Juchasin to have been built by Simeon ben Shetah Avoth. pe^.
1. Sect. 8.
who was the Vice President of the Sanhedrin, when Judah ben Tabbai was Nasi in
the sixth Generation from Ezra, Iucha. ubi supra.
even in the time of Hyrcanus Januaeus the Asmonaean. It was (...) Ioma per. 2.
in Gemara fol. 25.
half of it holy, and half of it common, that is, half of it stood within the
Court, and half of it within the (...) chel, and it had a door into either
place. Maym. in beth. habbech. per. 5.
And in that half of it that stood in the (...) chel, did the great council or
Sanhedrin sit, of seventy one Judges: Now a special reason why they sat on
that side of the house, which was in the (...) chel was, because it was not
lawful for any man whosoever to sit within the verge of the Court unless it
were the King, (...) Vid. R. Sol. and Kimch. in 1 Kings 12 and Midr. Tillin. in
Psalm. 1. ab initio.
there is no man may sit in the Court unless it be out of the Kings of the
house of David. In the other part of this building which stood within the
Court, the Priests used to cast lots daily for the distribution of the Service
amongst them, of which we have spoken largely elsewhere.

We cannot come so near the great Sanhedrin, as to survey the room in which
they sat, but that we must take some notice of them before we go, and look
a little into their constitution, sitting, power and story: They will not take
it well if we pass by them and take no notice of them at all.

Talm. in Sanhedr. per. 1.
The number of the Judges in this high Court was seventy and one, answering to
Moses and the seventy Elders chosen by him, when God in the Wilderness did
first ordain this great Iudicatory, Numb. 11. They were to be indifferently
chosen of Priests, Levites, and Israelites, (the New Testament often expresses
the distinction, by chief Priests, Scribes and Elders) (...) but if Priests and
Levites fitly qualified were not to be found, Maym. in Sanbed. per. 1.
if all the Council were men of other Tribes it was good and lawful.

Id. ibid. ^er. 2.
Their qualifications must be, that they must be Religious and learned both in
Arts and Languages: must have some skill in Physic, Arithmetic, Astronomy,
Astrology, yea to know what belonged to Magic, Sorcery, and Idolatry, that so
they might know to judge of them: They were to be without maim or blemish of
body, men of years but not extreme old, because commonly such are of too much
severity, and they must be Fathers of children, that they might be acquainted
with tenderness and compassion.

Their manner of sitting was thus; The eminentest among them for worth and
wisdom, they appointed to be the chief in the Council, and him they called
the Nasi or President, and him they took to represent Moses. Then the next
eminent, they chose to be his second, and him they called Abh beth Din. The
Father of the Council or Vice President. He sat upon the right hand of the
Nasi, (compare the Phrase of sitting on the right hand of power, Matthew. 26.64.)
and then the whole Sanhedrin sat on the one hand and on the other in a
semicircle. On the right hand before them, and on the left there were two
clarks of the Council, one registered the acquitting votes and Testimonies, and
the other the casting compare, Matthew. 25.33.

Id. ibid. per. 3.
The proper and constant time of their sitting, was from the end of the morning
Service, to the beginning of the Evening Service, and so their sitting and the
Divine Service did not clash one with another: yet sometime did occasions that
came before them, prolong their session even until night, and then they might
determine the matter that they had been debating on by day: but they might not
begin a new business by night: They violated their own custom and tradition in
judging of Christ by night.

It was in their power and cognizance to judge all persons, and all matters
(yet inferior matters they meddled not withal, but referred them to inferior
Courts) in so much that they Judged a whole tribe, a prophet, the High Priest:
nay the King himself if there were occasion: Id. in.
If the High Priest did any thing that deserved whipping they whipped him
(says Maimony) and restored him to his dignity again: Id in Sanhedr. per. 2
And although they admitted not the King of the house of David to be a member
of the Sanhedrin (says the same author) yet did the Kings judge the people,
and the Sanhedrin judged them if there were occasion: They had these two
traditions clean contrary one to another, and yet both of force and took place
in their several seasons, (...) The King judges and they judge him: And (...)
The King judges not and they judge not him: Sanh. per. 2. in Gemar.
The former was in vigor, till King Jannai was convented before them, and then
because partiality could not be prevented they enacted the latter.

Ibid. per. 7.
Of capital penalties, in which kind of matters they especially judged, they
had four sorts: stoning, burning, slaying with the sword, and strangling. In
reference to which the Targum on Ruth has this gloss in the first chapter,
ver. 16. Targ. in Ruth. 1.16.
Naomi said unto her, we are commanded to keep Sabbaths and Holy days, so
that we may not walk above 2000. cubits: Ruth says, whithersoever thou go,
I will go: Naomi says, we are commanded not to lodge together with the
heathen; Ruth says, where thou lodgest I will lodge: Naomi says, we are
commanded to keep the six hundred and thirteen commandments; Ruth says, what
thy people observe I will observe as if they were my people: Naomi says, we
are commanded not to worship strange gods; Ruth says, Thy God shall be my God:
Naomi says, we have four judicial deaths for offenders, stoning with stones,
burning with fire, killing with the sword, and hanging on the tree, Ruth says,
as thou die I will die.

Sanhed. ubi supr.
1. Those whom they burned they used thus: They set them up to the knees in a
dunghill, and two with a towell about his neck pulled and strained him till he
opened his mouth wide, and then they powered in scalding lead which ran down
into his bowels.

2. These that were strangled, they also set up to the knees in a dunghill, and
two with a to well stifled and strangled him, the one pulling at the one end,
and the other at the other, till he died.

3. Those whom they slew with the sword, they did it by beheading them.

4. Ibid. per. 6.
Whom they stoned they stoned naked: first one of the witnesses threw him or
pusht him that he might dash his loins against a stone, if that killed him,
there was no more ado, if it did not, the other witness took a great stone
and dashed it on his breast as he lay on his back, if that killed him there was
an end, if not, all the people flang stones at him: This helps us to
understand what is meant by the witnesses laying down their garments at Saul's
feet, at the stoning of Steven, Act. 7.58. namely because they were to be
employed first in his stoning, and they laid by their upper garments that they
might not trouble them. And this illustrates that passage of our Savior, which
indeed alludes to this manner of stoning. Whosoever shall fall upon this stone
shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder,
Mat. 21.44. for he that was stoned, was first flung upon a stone, and then a
stone was dashed upon him. These that were stoned were also hanged: there is
some dispute among the Talmudists whether all were hanged that were stoned: but
howsoever, they conclude that blasphemers and Idolaters were: and this helps us
still to understand the usage of Steven whom they condemned and stoned for
blasphemy, for so they made it: He was first dashed upon a stone by one of the
witnesses, and then a huge stone dashed upon him by the other, yet died he not
by either of these, but recovered his knees again, and died kneeling and
praying, all the people flinging stones at him; and afterward he was hanged
upon a Gibbet: and that night taken down and buried: for so was the law that
he should not hang upon the tree all night: Now his burial was different from
the common burial of those that were executed: as Christ's was also being
begged by Joseph of Arimathea: for whereas the Sanhedrin had two burying places
for executed malefactors, one for those that were stoned and that were burnt,
and the other for those that were slain with the sword and that were
strangled, it appears that some devout christians took down the body of
Steven and made a solemn burial for him in some other place.

Although the Sanhedrin did sit in the Temple, yet were the executions without
the city 2 as Levit. 24.14. Deuteronomy. 17.5. Heb. 13.12. Act. 7.58. whipping and
stocking was executed often in the Temple, as Deuteronomy. 25.2. Jer. 20.2. and for
this purpose they had their (...) Sarjeants for officers ready attending them
continually for the execution of such a penalty. (...) Maym. ubi. supr. per. 1.
The Shoterim (says Maymony) were such as carriedreds and whips: and they
stood before the Judges: they went about the streets and innes to look to
measures and weights, and to beat every offender: and all their doings were by
the appointment of the Judges: and whomsoever they saw offending, they brought
him to the Judges, and they judged him according to his offense.

Id. in Mamrim per. 1.
This great Sanhedrin in Gazith (...) was the foundation of the traditionall
law and pillar of instruction (compare the phrase 1 Timothy 3.15.) and from them
decrees and judgments went out for all Israel. And whosoever believed Moses
and his law, was bound to rest upon them for matters of the law. Thus Maymony
in the place cited in the margin. Therefore in all doubts, about Judicial
matters, the ultimate recourse was hither as to a determiner not to be doubted
of or varied from. The manner was thus Talm. in Sanhed. per. 11.
Had a man occasion to inquire about any such matter, he went first to the
Judicatory that was in his own city: if they could resolve it, well and good:
if they could not, one of them went to the next Sanhedrin: if that could not
resolve it, he went to the Sanhedrin of the three and twenty in the gate of the
mountain of the house: if that could not, he went to the other Sanhedrin of
three and twenty in the gate of Nicanor: and if that could not, he went to this
in the room Gazith, and there he received a positive determination: which for
him being a judge to transgress against, it brought him under the notion of
(...) A rebellious elder, and in danger of trying for his life.

SECT. 1. The Presidents of the Sanhedrin from the captivity to its dissolution.
HAving digressed thus far in viewing the Judicatory that sat in the room
Gazith, let it be excuseable yet a little further to interrupt out further
survey so far as to take a Catalogue and notice also particularly of all the
heads or presidents of this court, in the generations from the return out of
the Babylonian captivity, till City, Temple and Sanhedrin came to nothing: as
their names and order are recorded in the Jewish writers: as in the Talmudick
treatise Avoth: in Avoth Rabbi Nathan: in the preface of Maymony to Jadh: in
the author of Juchasin: and in dispersed passages in the Talmuds.

1. The first was Ezra, of whom there is so renowned mention in the Scripture.
The Sanhedrin of his time, is ordinarily called by the Jews (...) the great
Synagogue, and those eminent persons are reckoned of it, which are named Ezr.
2.2. Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, etc. He is said
to have come up to Jerusalem in the seventh year of Darius Ezr. 7.8. which was
four and twenty years after the peoples return out of Babylon, and how the
Sanhedrin was disposed of before that time, is hard to determine. His Sanhedrin
or great Synagogue is ordinarily reckoned of 120 men (compare Act. 1.15.) but
whether all at once or successively, it is not much important to dispute here.
He lived by the computation of some chroniclers of his own Nation, till that
very year that Alexander the great came to Jerusalem, and then died on the
tenth day of the month Tebeth; and so by their account he wore out both the
Babylonian and Persian monarchies: they hold also that Haggai and Zachary and
Malachi died the same year with him, and then Prophecy departed. Compare Act.
19.2.

2. Simeon the Just: Some Hebrew writers that doubt not that he was head of the
Sanhedrin, do yet question whether he were high Priest, or an ordinary priest,
but Josephus who wrote in Greek, asserteth him for High Priest: And some again
that hold him to have been High Priest can find in their hearts to think that
he was the very same with Jaddna, but Josephus does clearly distinguish them,
placing Simeon after Iaddua and Onias between. The times of his government may
be discovered by observing that Eleazer his brother who succeeded him in the
High-priest-hood was he, to whom Ptolomy Philadelphus sent for the Septuagint,
to translate the Bible. There are exceeding high things spoken of this Simeon
by his countrymen, some of which, we have mentioned elsewhere, to which I shall
only add this record of him, That in his time the scarlet list on the
scapegoates head turned white: that the lot for the scapegoate ever came up in
his right hand: that the western lamp never went out, and the fire on the
altar ever burnt pleasantly, but when he died its force abated. This adagie is
ascribed to him: The world stands upon three things, upon the Law, upon
Religion, and upon (hewing Mercy; He was surnamed the Just (...) Both because
of his piety toward God, and his good will toward his nation, Joseph. Ant.
lib. 12. cap. 2.

3. Antigonus of Soco: He was the master of Sadoc and Baithus, who mistaking
and misconstruing his good doctrine, vented the Heresy against the
resurrection: his doctrine was this. Be not as servants that serve their master
because of receiving a reward, but be as servants that serve their master, not
because of receiving a reward, but let the fear of heaven be upon you: which
his crooked disciples construed into this impious sense, that there was no
reward at all to be had for the service of God, and so they denied the world to
come. But his scholars, Joseph ben Joezer and Joseph ben Iochanan held
orthodox.

4. Iosi, or Joseph, ben Ioezer of Zeredah ( Ieroboam^ town, 1 King. 11.26.)
he had Iosi or Joseph ben Iochanan of Jerusalem for his vice president. Here
the Talmudick records begin to reckon them (...) by couples, that is, the
President and Vice President both not but that there were vice-presidents
before, but they be not named, and so were there after the times of Hillel
also, though they be not named then neither.

This Joseph ben Ioezer, had children so untoward that he would not leave them
his land but bequeathed it to pious uses.

5. Joshua the son of Perehiah president: Nittaithe Arbelite vice president.
This Joshua is recorded to have lived in the time of King Iannai called also
Alexander, the son of Hyrcanus: This Hyrcanus was likewise called Iannai; he
affected the Kingdom, and thereupon the wise men or great ones of that time
would have put him from the High-priest-hood: but he maintained his station by
the sword, for he slew diverse of the wise men, which caused Joshua the son of
Perahiah to flee to Alexandria, but he was recalled, upon the mediation of
Simeon ben Shetah.

6. Judah the son of Tabbai president: Simeon ben Shetah vice president. A
gallant pair for integrity and justice: Were their lives to be written, most
eminent actions of theirs might be related which are recorded of them: as that
they hanged fourscore witches in one day: Judged King Iannai: the one of them
wept daily for an error of Judgment that he had committed, and the other
preferred the execution of justice, before the safety of his own son. This
Simeon ben Shetah is he whom we suppose the builder of this room Gazith that
we are surveying.

7 Shemaiah president, and Abtalion vice president: These were kinsmen, and of
the posterity of Sennacherib, but their mother was an Israelite.

8. Hillel president, and Shammai vice president: At first it was Hillel and
Menahem, but Menahem departed to the service of Herod: Hillel was one of the
eminentest that ever was among the Jewish Doctors both for birth, learning,
rule and children: He was of the seed of David by his mothers side, being of
the posterity of Shephatiah the son of Abital, David's wife. He was brought up
in Babel, from whence he came up to Jerusalem at forty years old, and there
studied the Law forty years more, under Shemaiah and Abtalion, and after them
he was president of the Sanhedrin forty years more: The beginning of his
presidency is generally concluded upon to have been just an hundred years
before the Temple was destroyed: by which account, he began eight and twenty
years before our Savior was borne, and died when he was about 12. years old.
He is renowned for his fourscore scholars, one among which was Jonathan ben
Vzziel the Chaldee paraphrast, etc.

9. Rabban Simeon, Hillels Son: this man was first dignified with the title
Rabban, he is supposed to be the Simeon mentioned Luke 2. that took Christ in
his arms, and for that, it is conceived that he is not of so frequent and
honorable mention among the Jewish writers as others of the same rank with
him are, they not well relishing his confession of Christ, whom they deny: He
began his presidentship about the thirteenth year of our Saviors age, if the
date and account of Hillels rule mentioned before be current, and how long he
sat president, no one mentions, but some assert that his rule was not long.
The author of Iuchasin relates that he is never mentioned in the Mishneb, or
in the Code of the Jews traditions; it may be his embracing Christianity made
him cool toward their traditions, so that there is none to father on him, as
there are on the other Doctors. It is like he was a secret professor of Christ,
as Nicodemus was, and kept both his place and profession.

10. Rabban Gamaliel, Simeons son: This was he under whom Paul was brought
up, Act. 22.3. and see Act. 5.34. He was president of the council when Christ
was arraigned: and lived two and twenty years after: O^kelos the Targumist of
the Law, did solemnly celebrate his funerals: He is commonly styled Rabban
Gamaliel the old, either because he was the first of that name, or because he
was of a long life: Of him they have this saying in the last chapter of the
treatise Sotah: From the time that Rabb^n Gamaliel the old, died, the honor of
the Law failed, and purity and Pharisaisme died.

11. Rabban Simeon, Gamaliels son: He was slain at the destruction of the
Temple: and so should his son also have been, had not Rabban Jochanan ben
Zaccai, being in favor with Caesar, begd his life: And thus have we followed
the succession of the presidents of the Sanhedrin till the Temple and city
fell: but the Sanhedrin fell not as yet, but continued in a flitting and
languishing condition for a good space still, and had its presidents till it
fell also, which were these.

12. Rabban Iochanan ben Zaccai: he was not of the blood of Hillel, but he was
his scholar: he came to be president upon the death of Rabban Simeon last
mentioned, his Sanhedrin sat at Iabneh.

13. Rabban Gameliel of Iabneh: this was Rabban Simeons son whom Rabban
Iochanan ben Zaccai begd from death, of the hands of Caesar, at the slaughter
of his father, his minority made him unfit for the presidency when his father
was slain, therefore Rabban Iochanan ben Zaccai, bare that place, and after
his death this Rabban Gamaliel succeeded.

14. Rabban Simeon the son of Gamaliel of Iabneh.

15. Rabbi Judah the son of this Rabban Simeon: he is eminently called Rabbi
and Rabbenu haccadosh: He collected and compiled the Mishnaioth.

16. Rabban Gamaliel the son of Rabbi Judah: Here the title Rabban expired:
and the Sanhedrin was gone.

CHAP. XXIII. The Draw-well room. (...)
AT the west end of this famous room Gazith, there was the House which was
called (...) the House or room of the Draw-well: and the reason of the name
was, (...) Mid. per. 5.
Because there was a well sunk there, with a wheel over it, and from thence
they fetched up water to serve all the Court.

It was not a little water that was used and spent at the Temple for the
filling of the lavers boiling the offerings, washing the sacrifices, nay for
washing of the Court, and filling cisterns for the Priests to bath in: It was
not a small quantity of water that did serve these turns, and yet the Temple
never wanted but had it always in great abundance: The place it self was dry
rocky and without water, Maym. in Biath. Mikdash per. 5.
but they conveyed their water in pipes thither from a place at some distance
where there was a springhead that lay convenient for such a purpose, which was
called (...) The fountain Etam: Of this the Babylon Talmud discourses in the
place alleged in the margin and to this purpose Zevachin per. 5. fol. 54. fac.
2.
The house of the Sanctuary was higher then the land of Israel, and the land of
Israel was higher then other lands: They knew not the like; as they produce in
the book of Joshua; It is written throughout. The border went down, and the
border went up, and the border wrought etc. But of the tribe of Benjamin it is
written the border went up, but it is not written the border went down. Learn
from hence, that this was a place thought fit to build the Sanctuary in, by the
fountain Etam, because it was high: But they said, let us bring it a little
lower, because it is written, And he shall dwell between his shoulders, Deuteronomy.
33.12. Their meaning is this; that whereas the Sanctuary was to be higher then
the rest of the land, and whereas the tenor and scope of the Scripture holds
out the tribe of Benjamin to be highest, because all ascending and no going
down is mentioned in the chorography of his tribe, therefore they thought of
building the Temple by the fountain Etam which was the highest ground of
Benjamin: but when they considered upon Moses his prophecy that God should
dwell between the shoulders of Benjamin and not upon his head; they thereupon
chose Moriah a lower ground, and brought their water from Etam thither: Talm.
Ierus. in Joma per. 3. fol. 41.
An Aquaeduct came from Etam, says the Jerusalem Talmud in the place quoted in
the margin: It is scarce within the bounds of the subject that we have in hand,
to go about to search where this Etam was. There is a place in the tribe of
Simeon that is called by this name, 1 Chronicles. 4.32. now though it is true that
Simeon and Judah lay intermixed in their habitations, yet I believe this
intermixture was not so near Jerusalem as our Etam was. There is mention of
the rock Etam, Judge. 15.8. and of the city Etam, 1 Chronicles. 11.6. let the reader
be his own chooser whether of these he will take for the place that we are
upon, or whether he will refuse both: I only mention them; It belongs rather
to a survey of the land, then of the Temple, to debate the matter to a
determination: The gloss upon the place of the Talmud cited above, says
Gloss. in Zenechin (...) supr.
It seems that the fountain Etam was the well of the waters of Nephtoah, of
which there is mention Josh. 18.15. And to the like purpose speaks Kimchi in
his comment upon that place of Joshua Kimch. on Josh. 18.
They say (faith he) that the well of the waters of Nephtoah was the well Etam
which is mentioned by our Rabbines: This place appears to have lain westward
of the Temple, and the pipes from it to have come down upon that quarter, and
to have passed along on the South side of the house it self, in the place
called the coming down of the waters, of which we have spoken before, and so
to have been disposed of into the several offices about the Court: and that in
such abundance, as, that it ran continually, and yielded water and to spare,
upon all occasions: we shall have occasion to look after it again when we
come to speak of the molten sea.

Of this conveyance of water, Aristeas an eyewitness and spectator of it,
gives testimony, in these words Aristeas Mist. Lux. interp. in Biblioth. patr.
tom. 2. Gracolat. page 866.
(...) etc. There was a continunll supply of water: as if there had sprung an
abundant fountain underneath. And there were wonderful and unexpressible
receptacles under ground, as appeared five furlongs space about the Temple:
each one of which had diverse pipes, by which waters came in on every side, all
these were of lead, under ground, and much earth laid upon them: And there were
many vents on the pavement, not to be seen at all, but to those that served: so
that in a trice and easily, all the blood of the sacrifices could be washed
away, though it were never so much. And I will tell you how I came to know of
these underground receptacles: they brought me out more then four furlongs
space out of the city, and one bade me stoop down at a certain place and
listen what a noise the meeting of the waters made.

Now whereas it seems by this testimony, that water came to the Temple from
several other places about Jerusalem, as well as from Etam, we shall not be
much scrupulous about it, though among the Talmudicks I meet with no such
intimation, but since they name Etam as the most eminent, and from whence the
chiefest vessels in the Temple were continually supplied, it may suffice to
look after that only, and this may be enough to have spoken of it.

The Draw-well, which and whose room we are now surveying Gloss. in Mish^ioth
in Svo in Midd. per. 5.
is said to have been sunk or dug by the children of the captivity upon
their return and building of the Temple. But whether to a spring that was in
that place, or whether as a cisterne to receive the water from Etam, if it
shall be questioned, there might be several reasons given to prove that it was
for the latter purpose: As 1. Because it not easy to conceive a spring in that
rocky place as mount Moriah was, especially there having been none there looked
after under the first Temple. 2. Because both the Talmudists and Aristeas cited
before, do bring all the supply of water from other places. 3. Because the
Laver is said in the testimony alleged out of the Jerusalem Talmud, to be
supplied from the well Etam, which that it was supplied from this Draw-well we
shall see hereafter. And 4. because there is mention of (...) The place of the
coming down of the water on the South side of the Temple, which has been
showed in its due place not capable of any construction so proper as this, that
the pipes from Etam came down along there.

The waters then from that fountain Etam being gathered into this well or
great cisterne, were from hence dispersed into the several offices and places
where water was necessary (as the new river from the water house into London) a
wheel being used to raise it and force it up into the pipes or conveyances
that were to carry it into the several receptacles and uses: For in some
places there were bathes on the very top of the gates and buildings, as we
shall observe as we go along, and to keep them full and in a continual
supply of water, was required, some enforcing of the water up, which was done
by the use and activity of this wheel.

Now over this well there was a fair building, suitable to the rest of the
buildings about the Court, and it had a door into the Court, that the priests
might readily and without going about, step out of the Court into it, when they
had occasion to fetch up water for any use. And so are we to understand of that
passage in the treatise Tamid, where speaking of him to whose lot it had fallen
to cleanse the burnt-offering altar in a morning, it says thus: Talm. in Tamid
per. 1.
He that had it allotted to him to cleause the altar must cleanse it: And they
say to him, Take heed that thou touch not the vessel, until thou have washed
thy hands and thy feet: (now the dish into which he was first to take up the
ashes, was set between the rise of the Altar and the Altar in a corner on the
west side of the rise:) No man went into the Court with him (for all the rest
of the priests staid still in the lottery room) nor bad be any candle in his
hand, but he went by the light of the fire on the Altar: and they saw him not
neither heard they his voice, until they heard the noise of the engine that Been Kattim made, namely the engine of the lover: and then they said he is about
washing his hands and feet at the laver. Now whatsoever this engine of Bin
Kattims making was, which we shall inquire into afterward, it is undoubted that
the water in which he washed at the laver, was drawn out of the Draw-well and
conveyed into it after what manner we shall see anon, for the water might not
stand in the laver all night: And so it is apparent that this priest that thus
washed his hands and feet, was got into the well-roome out of the Court, when
the gates of the Court were not yet opened, but went into it through a door
that went into that room out of the Court.

This helps to understand that passage of Ezekiel of the living waters Ezekiel.
47. which are said there to come down on the right side of the house on the
South side of the Altar ver. 1. alluding to the coming of the water into the
Temple from Etam a spring shut up and a fountain sealed for that purpose: for
the pipes that brought the water from it, came down on the South side of the
Temple, in the place that was called (...) The coming drums of the water, of
which we have spoken already, and so into this cisterne in the well-roome, just
over against the Altar, on the South side of it, and so was carried into the
several offices of the Temple, etc.

CHAP. XXIIII. The water gate (...) and the room of Abhtines. (...).
AT the west end of the Draw-well room, was a gate that opened directly upon
the Altar, which was called Mid. per. 5. and Maym. in beth habbechir. per. 5.
and Shekalim per. 5.
the water gate. The reader will readily conceive the reason of the name to
have been, because it joined so close to the water-house, and this Etymology
might be very current and allowable, but the Talmudists give other reasons of
the name besides. The Mishneh in the treatise Shckolim, has this speech upon
it. Shekalim ibid.
Why is the name of is called the Water-ga^^^ (...) through is they brought the
tankard of water, which was for the pouring out of water at the feast of
Tabernacles. Robbi (...) the son of Jacob says, because the waters ran out
thereby, which came from under the threshold Ezekiel. 47. Of these two reasons the
former is more generally entertained for current, and it is indeed the more
reasonable in it self. I have showed in the treatise of the Temple service,
chap. 16. Sect. 4. how high and how strange a solemnity the Jews had at the
feast of Tabernacles, of pouring out of water upon the Altar, and rejoicing
after it: For whereas all the year besides their libation (...) or pouring out
the drink offering was of wine alone, they now added and mingled water with it,
and took such joy and rejoicing upon that action, as the like was not used at
any other occasion: the manner and reason of which is fully discoursed in that
place: Succah. per. 4.
Now how was this libation of water? (says the (...) in Succ^^.) There was a
golden tankard that contained three logs: One filled it at Siloam, and brought
it in at the water gate: and the trumpets sounded etc. Siloam fountain lay
South of Jerusalem (although the poole of Siloam lay on the west) and from
thence the next way possibly to the altar was through this gate, it facing the
Altar and the rise to it, and it was no marvel, if, seeing the pouring out of
water in libation was reputed so high a matter, the gate through which it was
brought did take its name from the bringing of that water through it. And it is
not to be passed without observation, that they fetched their water for this
solemn libation from Siloam a great way off, when the Draw-well was so near at
hand to have supplied it.

There is mention of a Water gate in Nehem. 8.3. where it is said that Ezra
read in the book of the Law before the street that was before the Water gate:
but this was a gate of the city, and not of the Temple, as is apparent in the
same book of Nehem. chap. 3. ver. 26. and whether it took that name from the
waters issuing out of Solomon's poole and running that way, or from the waters
running that way from the Temple, as Ezekiel. 47.2. it is not a place here to
discuss.

Telmud. Jerus. in Joma per. 1.
Over this gate of the Temple that we are about, which was called the water
gate, there was a room or chamber which was called (...) The chamber of the
family of Abhtines. This Abhtines was one of the chief men that gave
denomination to the office of which they were, to succeeding generations (as we
observed ere while also about Phinehas the man of the wardrobe or vestry) and
he is mentioned in the treatise Shekalim, where all those chiese officers are
reckoned up, which record let us take out here at large Shekalim. per. 5.
These were chief officers which were in the Temple: Jochanan the son of
Phinebas over the seals: (what these seals were, I have showed in the Temple
Service page 16.) Abijah over the drink offerings. Mathia the son of Samuel
over the lots: (see there page 102, 103.) Pethahiah over the birds (ibid. 87,
88. This Pethabiah is Mordecai: And why is his name called Pethabiah? because
he opened and expounded matters, and he understood the 70. languages. Ben
Abijah over the diseased in their bowels. Nechonia the digger of cisternes.
(ibid. page 17.) Gevini Keroz the son of Gebber over the shutting of the gates.
Ben Bechi over the correction (to cudgel the Priests or Levites that were
found asleep upon the guards, ibid. page 50. 51.) Ben Arza over the cymball
(ibid. page 58.) Hagros ben Levi over the song: Beth Garmu over the making of
the shewbread: Beth Abhtines over the making of the incense: Eliezer over the
vailes; And Phinehas over the wardrobe.

So that this Abhtines was one that had the oversight of the making of the
incense: and all that succeeded in this office were called Beth Abhtines or the
family of Abhtines, and this room or chamber over the watergate, was the
place where they did their work in this employment.

Their traditionary receipt for the compounding and making of the incense wasth
is: Maym. in kele Mikdash per. 2.
They had eleven Aromatic simples of which they took these quantities: Of
Stacte onycha, Galbanum and frankincense of every one 70. pound weight: of
Myrrh, Cassia, Calamus, Crocus, ana sixteen pounds. Of Costus twelve pound,
of Cinnamon nine pound, of Cloves three, in all 368 pound. All these they
pounded very small in a morta^ (which was called Erach. per. 2. Aruch. en (...)
the mortar of the Sanctuary, and which mortar Avoth. R. Nathan ad fin.
was carried to Rome at the sacking of Jerusalem) and they added to it some
Sodom salt, Amber of Jordan (rarities not rarely spoken of in Jewish writers)
and an herb of an odoriferous smoke, which very few were acquainted with:
Every year they made this quantity of incense, and every day in the year
there was a pound of it offered, and so of the 368 pound there was 365 pound
gone: Of the three pounds that remain, the Highpriest took his handful on
the day of expiation: and the rest was called (...) The residue of the incense:
Not that the yearly stock was spent at the day of expiation, for it was not
spent till the beginning of the month Nisan, but that this was the account of
the expense of it: On the first day of the month Nisan or on their new years
day, they began upon a new stock: Maym. in Shekalim per.
And the two pounds and odd that remained of the old, was given to workmen
that repaired the Temple toward their pay: and then was bought of them again,
and used as of a new stock. Every single spicery was pounded by it self, and
all the while that he that pounded it, was about it, he still said (...) To be
pounded well, to be pounded well, etc. and then they mingled altogether.

It was a caution that (...) Id. ubi ante.
All the making and compounding of the incense should be in the Sanctuary in
the midst of the Court: By which whether the very open place of the Court, be
meant, or that part of this room of Abhtines that stood in the Court it is not
much important to dispute; this was the room in which the incense when it was
made was reserved, and likely it is that this also was the place where it was
made: And here it was pounded again twice a year, and aired and looked to
that it might take no hurt.

Talm. in Joma per. 1.
Into this room the High Priest was brought for a certain time against the
day of expiation, that he might learn to take his handfulls of ineense against
that day, as was required, Levis. 16.12. Aruch in (...)
For this was the place (says Aruch) where the incense was prepared: And they
brought him hither that they might teach him to take his handfulls of it.

In this room also the priests kept a guard every night, as it is related in
the Talmud in the treatise Tamid and Middoth in these words Tamid per. 1. and
Mid. per. 1.
In three places, the priests kept guards in the Sanctuary, nam^^ in Beth
Abhtines, and in Beth Nitsots, and in Beth Mohadh: Beth Abhtines and Beth
Nitsots were upper rooms, and there the younger priests kept, etc. which
nightly guarding was intentlonally as much for the honor of the sanctuary as
for its security, and these two guard chambers Abhtines and Nitsots, were both
over against the Altar, the one on the one side of the Court and the other on
the other: and here the younger sort of priests watched, but the grandees in
Beth Makadh. in the furthest end of the Court westward, as we shall see when
we come thither.

On the roof of this watergate, and of the room Abhtines, there was a bath,
in which the High Priest did wash himself the first time of his washing on the
day of explation: for although the Bathing place, on the top of the room of
Happervah (which we shall survey in its place) was the place where he washed
oftest on that day, yet here he washed first: for here had he spent some time
in the chamber of abhtines before the day came, and here was the sittestand
readiest place for him to bath when the day was come: Here he had been all the
night before, and when the morning was come, and he is to go about the
service, he first goes to the top of this gate and there batheth himself in
water. And this the treatise Joma intends when he says thus: Joma per. 3.
Five bathings of his body and ten washings of his bands and feet did the
High Priest use on that day, and all in the holy ground, on the top of the
room of Happarbah, but only the first, etc. This was a place most convenient
for a bath, it being so near the Draw-well room, as joining to it, and this
it may be helped forward the naming of it the watergate.

CHAP. XXV. The Wood room (...) and the room Parhedrin. (...)
THe Pile of building that we are now about, joined to the watergate on the
west side of it, and it carried a double name: for it was called either (...)
The chamber or room of the wood, or (...) The room of Parhedrin. It was
called the room of the wood, because that after the blemished priests had
wormed the wood, in a room of the same name in a corner of the Court of the
women, as we have observed, they brought that that they found fit for the
Altar, into this room that it might be near, and ready to be carried to the
Altar when there was occasion.

As for the other name that this building carried, it is written two ways Joma
per. 1.
The Babylon Talmud Beth habbechir. per. 5.
Maymony and some others read it with r and call it (...) The chamber of
Parhedrin. But the Jerusalem Talmud, In Ioma ubi supr.
Mishnaioth in octave, etc. read it with l and call it (...) The chamber of
Palhedrin: about which difference we shall not controvert: Now though the two
Talmuds do thus vary one letter in this matter of the name, yet they both
agree upon another matter and say that in old time, it had been called (...)
Talm: uterque in Gemae.
The chamber of the Counselors. I observe also from Maymony, that it was
called the Highpriests chamber, by a sigular Propriety: for speaking of putting
of the High Priest apart for seven days before the day of expiation into this
room (for so the Talmuds in the place cited in the margin inform us) he
expresses it thus (...) Maym. in Iom. haccipp. per. 1.
They put him apart from his own house into this chamber in the Sanctuary. And
so the Jerusalem Talmud does also call it, though it do not express it by the
proper name when it says (...) that Tal. Jerus. ubi supr.
The High Priest was put for a certain time into the chamber of Abhtines which
was over the Watergate, and which joined to his own chamber: And here by the
way you may observe, that this wood-roome, and room of Parbedrin did join to
the Watergate as we have seated it: the one room being over the other, the
wood room below and Parbedrin above.

Now it was called the Highpriests chamber, not so much for that he was put
apart hither for a few days in the year, as for that it was ordinarily
employed by the High Priest to call his brethren of the Priesthood together in
it, to consult about the affairs of the Temple and the service: so that it was
as the Vestry, or as I may so express it, the Deane and Chapter-roome, where
they met together in consultation about such matters: We have observed
Temple-Service, chap. 5.
elsewhere, that besides the High Priest, there was the Sagan, two Katholikin,
seven Immarcalin, and three Gizbarin, which were principal officers in the
Temple for the receiving, disbursing, and taking care of the stock of it, and
providing for the repaires of the buildings and the due administration of the
service: These were the (...) Counselors of the Temple, that advised and took
care for the welfare of it, and this was the room where they sat constantly
in counsel for that purpose: and hereupon it was called the chamber of the
Counselors. The reason of the change of its name into the chamber of
Palhedrin, or Parhedrin (read it whether way you will) the Gemara of the Talmud
in the place cited above gives in these words. It was called the chamber of
the Counselor still the High Priesthood began to be bought and sold for money,
and came to be changed often: these counselors were then also changed often
and then it was called the chamber of Parhedrin. The meaning seems to be
this, that whilst the High Priesthood stood and remained in its beauty and
integrity, the High Priest and his brethren, kept a solemn and grave counsel
table here for the benefit and advancement of the Temple, but when money and
prowling did make and change Highpriests, money and silver did also make
members of this council, and they sought themselves rather then the public,
the people therefore could not find in their hearts to call them Counselors,
but called them Parhedrin or Sitters only. Yet were they also called
Counselors even while they were called Parhedrin, to distinguish them from the
great Council: Joseph of Arimathea was on: of these Mark. 15.43.

The word Parhedrin is as like the Greek word (...), as Sanhedrin is like
(...), and it may very well be conjectured, that since the great Sanhedrin and
Society, were both Counselors, that this company was called Parhedrin, to
distinguish it from the Sanhedrin: especially considering how near they sat
together, there being but the Watergate and the Well-roome, between this
room and Gazith: There sat the great Council of the nation, and it was
called Sanhedrin, and here sat the Council of the Temple and it was called
Parhedrin: that is Assessores, or the Council that sat near the Sanhedrin:
And thus were there four Counsels in the Temple: three of them not only
Counsels but Judicatories, namely the great Sanhedrin of 71. and the two
lesser Sanbedrins of 23. And this of Priests which was not so properly a
Judicatory as merely a Council.

The Jerusalem Talmud expounds the word Palhedrin (...) (for so it reads
it) by the word (...), a word of as much obscurity as the other: It is like it
is some Greek or Latin word of Priority, but not easily pitched upon
particularly: Baal Aruch renders Palbedrin by a word as hard as it self too,
namely by (...) Agardemin: but he facilitates it it by this interpretation,
namely that it signifies Aruch in (...)
The overseers of the weights and measures, that were to look to the Ephah and
the Hin, that they were right, and sealed them, and they smote those that kept
shop in the mountain of the house, if they sold too dear, and they bade them
sell cheaper.

CHAP. XXVI. The Gate of the Firstlings.
THis Gate which was next beyond the buildings last mentioned, westward, was
called by two names. Sometimes (...) vid. C. Lemp. page 17. in Mid.
The gate of offering: so some read it: but most commonly (...) Mid per. 1. and
2. and Shekalim per. 6.
The Gate of the Firstlings: both which names redound but to one and the same
sense, for the gate took its denomination, Barten. in Mid.
from the bringing of the Firstlings through it to be offered up.

The law concerning consecrating to the Lord whatsoever first opened the womb
and matrix, Exodus 13. was intricated by the Jewish tradition with a world of
difficulties, but for an ultimate resolution, of what Firstlings were fit to be
offered and what not, there was one appointed whom they called (...) Mum^hth,
who did determine it: of this title the Glossaries give this interpretation and
account. Gloss. in Becoroth. per. 4.
Mumcheh is derived from the word Machah as it signifies in that clause (...)
And it reaches to the Sea of Cinnereth, Number. 34.11. which betokens going
straight: And this word Mumcheh means that he was skillful: and be received
authority from the president of the Sanhedrin or from a Sanhedrin in the land
of Israel, of men ordained. Maym. in Becor. per. 3.
The head of the Sanhedrin gave him power for this office saying to him (...):
Loose Firstlings concerning blemishes: that is, take thou power to bind and to
loose as concerning bleishes of Firstlings, to determine what blemishes do
hinder them from being offered and what not: The Talmudists do use the phrases
of binding and loosing in reference to things prohibited or permitted: as (...)
Tanch. fcl. 1 Col. 3.
Upon necessity the Lord loosed salvation on the Sabbath, that is, they
permitted it. Talm. in lesachin. per. 4.
The School of Shammai (...) bound working on the Eve of the Passover, that
is, prohibited it; but the School of Hillel (...) loosed it: that is,
permitted it, or held and taught that it was lawful. Maym. in Mamets etc. per.
1.
The Scribes have bound leaven: And Tanch. fol. 74. Col. 3.
The wise men have loosed all fat things, etc. It were not a very hard task to
produce hundreds of examples out of Jewish writers to this purpose, wherein
their use of the expression of binding and loosing does most ordinarily refer
to things and to things lawful or unlawful as they were so held out by the
law and by their doctors: And particularly the binding and loosing of
Firslings, and the binding and loosing of vows, were of singular note and
notice among them, Iuchasin fol 50.
And the loosing of Firstlings (says Abraham Zaccuth) was a matter of more
difficulty then loosing of vows: where, by loosing of vows, he means not
that any one had power to absolve and acquit from lawful vows once made, but
that there were some appointed to judge of vows, and to determine concerning
them whether they were lawful or not lawful, and whether they bound or bound
not.

No Firstling must be killed or offered till it had been first viewed by the
Mumcheh: Talm. in Becoroth per. 4.
And he that was not a Mumcheb (appointed by the Sanhedrin) and yet would take
on him to view a Firstling, and so it was killed upon his approvall, he was to
make it good: and he that received a reward or was hired to view a Firstling,
it was not current, unless he were authorized by the Sanhedrin so to do, as
Ailah a wise man of Jabneh, to whom the wise men per mitted to take 4 (...)
Assarii for viewing a lean Firstling, and 6 for viewing a fat, etc.

A Firstling lamb or call, approved by the Mumcheh as fit for sacrifice and
brought to the Temple for that purpose, was slain on the south side of the
Altar, or at the least on the south side of the Court. The Talmudick tract
Zevachin in the fifth chapter does purposely discuss what sacrifices were to
be slain on the North side of the Altar, and what other where: And having
nominated particularly what on the North side; it says Id. in Zevachin per. 5.
That a sacrifice of thanksgiving, the Nazarites ram, the ordinary
peace offerings, the Firstlings, tithe, and Passover were slain in any part
of the Court: where by any part of the Court, it means the South side, in
opposition to the North of which it had spoken before, and it means the South
side in such a latitude, as not only just over against the Altar, but in a
larger extent, as we shall show more fully when we come to survey the sides of
the Court it self.

The Firstlings then being to be slain on this South side of the Court, on
which we are surveying the gates and buildings, they were brought in at this
gate which we are upon, and from thence it took the name of the gate of the
Firstlings. The watergate indeed was nearer the Altar, and a more direct way to
it, but to have killed the beasts thereabout would have hindered the passage to
the Altar, from the Draw-well, Watergate and wood-roome, unto which places
there was very frequent recourse from the Altar, and therefore the Firstlings
and other Sacrifices that were to be slain on the South side of the Court,
were brought in at the gate above, as more out of the way, and slain
thereabout as in a place of less interruption. Now whereas the tradition
mentioned, does allot the South side of the Court for the proper place of
slaying those particular sacrifices that it names, yet does it speak it in
this latitude (...) That their killing might be in any part of the Court:
because that though ordinarily and regularly they were to be slain on the
South side of the Court, yet if they were numerous and could not conveniently
be slaughtered in that place, they might be slain on the other side, as the
Passover were killed on both the sides, because of their number: whereas the
sacrifices that were to be slain on the North side must be slain there, and
there was no dispensation to remove them thence.

The presenting of the Firstlings at the gate that we are about, may put us in
remembrance of presenting the first borne; All the males of Israel were to
appear before the Lord thrice every year, Exodus 23.17. now this command did
not take in children (as their tradition did interpret it) Id. in Hagiga per. 1.
till they were able to walk up out of Jerusalem to the Temple in their
fathers hand: and the presenting of the first borne to the Lord, was not
enforced by that command, but by that, Exodus 13.12. and 22.29. where both the
Targums of Jonathan and Onkelos, do expound the setting apart of the first
borne to be before the Lord, or at the Temple: and so does the text of
Scripture it self in Number. 18.15. Luke 2.23. The place where they were
presented, was in the gate of Nicanor, for that was both the most peculiar
place of appearing before the Lord, and there women that had borne children did
stand to have their atonement made for them: And there it was where the virgin
Mary presented our Savior Luke 2. and there she paid five shekels for his
redemption, Number. 18. And Hanah did the like at Shilob: 1 Samuel 1.34. only she
had kept her son longer then ordinary because when she did present him at the
Sanctuary she meant to leave him there for ever, and for that reason, she
relieved him not neither, but gave him to the Lord.

CHAP. XXVII. The gate (...) Hadlak, or of Kindling, or of the burning fire.
IT is easy to justify and assert the translation of (...) by kindling, but
is not so easy to give a reason why this gate which stood most west on the
South side did bear this name. The common opinion of glossaries upon it is
plausible enough, but only for one objection that may be made against it
Bartenor. and C. Lemp. in Mid. and gloss. in Shekalim per. 6.
They hold that it was called the gate of kindling or Burning, because through
it wood was brought to the Altar to keep the fire continually burning
according to the law Lev. 6.12. But why this way? since they might have gone a
nearer way to the Altar by far, either through the watergate or the gate of
the Firstlings, seeing the Wood-roome was between them two, as hatg been
showed: and it is probable enough that the wood out of the wood-roome was not
brought through any of the Court gates at all to the Altar, but out at a door
which went out of the room it self in to the Court.

To find out therefore a reason of the name, I cannot but look over to the
other side of the Court, from this gate that we are about, to that gate there,
that was over against it, and there I observe the gate to be called Beth
Mokadh, or the Gate of the burning fire, as well as this is called the Gate of
kindling. And the reason of that name was, because a fire was kept there
continually for the senior priests, as shall be showed anon, and so it may be
well conjectured, a fire was kept here for the Levites: And though I find not
mention either in the Talmud or Josephus of any building that joined to this
gate, yet since there is mention in the treatise Middoth of the Levites keeping
a guard, (...) Mid. per. 1.
In the chamber of the veil, I find not where to allot that place better then
to this gate we are about: For when it speaks of the chamber of the veil, it
means not either any chamber joining to the body of the Temple it self, nor
any chamber in the Court (for the Levites kept not their guards within the
Court but without) but some chamber without the Court, which was over against
the place of the veil, which divided betwixt the holy and most holy place. And
as there was a long building that ran along from that opposite north gate up
toward the west to the very corner of the wall of the Court that way: so from
this gate westward there ran a long building to the corner of the Court on this
side, in which large piece of building having partitions within, there were two
guards of Levites almost joining together: So there were three of those guards
very near together: one joining to the gate on the East side, Ibid.
(for at five of the gates of the Court the Levites guarded, and this was one
of the five) another joining to the gate on the West side, which was called the
guard over against the veil, and the third at the corner of the Court: Now as
there was a common fire kept for the Priests on the other side of the Court, in
a large building opposite to this, from whence the gate joining to it took the
name: so is it very likely, there was a common fire kept for the Levites which
gave this gate the denomination of the gate of kindling.

Thus have we surveyed the gates and buildings on the south side of the Court,
their orderthus, coming up from the East toward the West: First the room
Gazith at the Southwest corner: then the room of the Draw-well: joining to
that the Watergate, and over that the room Abhtines: Joining to that gate on
the other side, the Wood-roome, and over that the Council chamber: then the
Gate of the Firstlings, with a Levites ward joining to it on one side: then the
Gate of kindling and a Levites ward on either side it, and that building on the
West side of it running up to the West corner of the Court. Now Aha Jose a
spokes man in the Talmud, names yet one gate more, and more West then these
that we have named, on this same side which he calls the upper gate, and over
against it on the North side he names a gate more then the common account and
calls it the gate of Jechoniah: But he goes alone in his opinion as to the
number of the Gates of the Court: yet thus far do other of his nation go
with him, that they say there were three gates on the North side of the Court,
and that there was besides them, a passage through Beth Mokadh large building
out of the chel into the Court, which I suppose is that which he calls the
gate of Jechoniah: and the reason of the name is given, because Jechoniah went
out at that gate into his captivity: And so it may be that in this large
building on this side which ran between the Gate of kindling and the West
corner, there was a passage thorough, which he styles with the title of the
upper gate.

But howsoever it was in his account in the second Temple, the very title of
the upper gate may not undeservedly call upon us, to look after that which is
called the upper gate of Benjamits in the house of the Lord, in the times of
the first Temple Jer. 20. 2. It is said there that Pashur smote Jeremy and put
him in the stocks that were in the high gate or upper gate of Benjamin, which
was in the house of the Lord. Our English has made it shie to render is in the
house of the Lord, it may be because they thought it improper to have a pair
of stocks in the Temple: and therefore they have translated it which was by the
house of the Lord, as reputing it not a gate of the Temple but some other: but
the words in the originallare so plain, and the consent of translaters so
unanimous that it means in the house of the Lord, that to swarve from it were
but to strain a plain and a facile text, and to obscure a place which is not
obscure of it self. The mountain of the Temple lay in the lot of the tribes
of Judah and Benjamin as has been observed before, and the line that divided
between the lots came along at the Southeast corner of the Altar as we shall
observe anon, so that the Temple and Altar were in the tribe of Benjamin
according to Moses prophecy that God should dwell between Benjamins shoulders,
and so was the South wall of the Court till you came down over against that
point of the Altar, and then came in the lot of Judah. It appears therefore
that there were but two gates on this side of the Court in the times of the
first Temple, and they were called the upper and the lower gate of Benjamin,
because they stood in his lot: And there were two gates on the North side of
the Court, and they were called, The gate of the Altar, which was Northward,
and the gate of the Lords house which was Northward, as we shall show by and by.

And for this place or engine of correction (were it a dungeon as the ^xx.
seems to hold it, or a pillory as David Kimchies father, or a pair of stocks
as our English) it is no soloecisme to hold that it was in the house of the
Lord (namely in that part of this gate that stood out of the Court in the Chel)
since there was judging, scourging, mawling, and stoning, even in the Temple it
self, as has been touched before.

And now to be going over from the South side to the North, along the wall of
the Court at the West end, there was no gate upon that quarter at all, but the
wall was plain without any gates or openings in it. And so Josephus makes it
clear when he says (...) Jo^. de bell. ^. 5. cap. 14.
That part that was on the West had no gate at all, but the wall that way was
an entire continued building: which relation is also agreeable to the general
consent of the Hebrew auhors, Aba Jose only excepted whom we mentioned even
now, who speaks of two gates here, but neither names them, nor tells for
what use they served: and indeed what needed any gate here at all, so far
from the service, and behind the Temple? There was indeed at the back of the
Court wall in the middle betwixt the North and South corners of it, a building
standing in the (...) Chel, where the Levites kept a guard, which was called
(...) The guard behind the mercy seat: but there is no evidence that there was
any door out of it into the Court, and if there had been it was but a door
and not a gate. Of the guards of the Priests and Levites about the Temple the
record is thus Mid. per. 1.
In three places the Priests kept guards in the Temple, in the chamber of
Abhtines, in Beth Nitsots and in Beth Mokadh. And the Levites in one and twenty
places: five at five gates of the mountain of the house: Four at the four
corners of it within: Five at five gates of the Court, and four at the four
corners of it without: One in the chamber of Corban: One in the chamber over
against the Veil, and one behind the place of the Mercy seat.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Gates and buildings in the Court wall on the North side.
WE are now come to the North side of the Court, where before we fall to
surveying of the gates and buildings, that were there, in the times of the
second Temple, it will not be amiss to look what we find there in the times
of the first in that passage of Ezekiel chap. 8. ver. 3.5.14. He brought me in
the visions of God to Jerusalem to the door of the inner Court gate that
looks toward the North, where was the seat of the image of jealonsie which
provokes to jealousy. And he said unto me, Son of man lift up now thine
eyes the way toward the North: so I lift up mine eyes the way toward the
North, and behold Northward of the gate of the Altar this image of jealousy in
the entry. And he brought me to the door of the gate of the Lords house which
was toward the North, and behold, there sat women weeping for Tammuz: Here
are two gates specified on the North side of the Court and they are called the
gate of the Altar and the gate of the Lords house toward the North: because
the one was over against the Altar, and the other over against the body of the
Temple. To that over against the Altar is the prophet first brought in his
vision, and there he sees the image of jealousy: not in this gate of the
Altar, but in the mountain of the house Northward of this gate, and of the
prophet as he stood in it. For the prophet is not brought within the Court at
this gate, but is set without it, and there he is bidden to look Northward,
and there he sees that image. This was not any picture or image to represent
jealousy by, but it is called the image of jealousy, because it provoked the
jealous God to jealousy, it being set even in his Sanctuary and before his
Altar: what Idol this was is but lost labor to go about to determine: I
should as soon conjecture Molech as any other, because that was the highest
idolatry and most provoking, namely their burning of their children in the
fire, and because they were exceeding taxable and taxed for this Idolatry.
Whether there were this Idol in the Temple at this very instant when Ezekiel
had the vision, which was in the sixth year of Zedekiah, or whether the vision
represent to him the Idolatry that had been in the Temple at any time, is not
much easier to determine neither, but be the Idol what it would, and mean he
the time when he will, it was no small abomination when an Idolatrous chapel
or mansion is erected in the mountain of the Lords house, even facing the very
gate that opened upon the Altar. This gate was the lower Northgate which in the
times of the second Temple was called the Gate Nitsots or of the Song.

Before the prophet is brought to the upper North gate, the text says he was
brought to the door of the Court, ver. 7. that is, to the East gate which was
the commonest way of entrance, and in that gate the Sanhedrin used to sit in
those times, and there he sees their Councell-chamber painted all about with
imagery, and the 70 members of the Sanhedrin themselves offering Idolatrous
incense: Then is he brought to the upper North gate, which opened upon the body
of the Temple, and there he sees women weeping for Tammuz: what Tammuz was, or
what their weeping meant, it is not to our subject to insist upon here: I will
only leave the gloss of David Kimchi upon this matter with the reader, and
trouble him with no more discourse about it. Some interpret it (says he) that
they kept a feast to the Idol in the beginning of the month Tammuz: others
interpret the word Tammuz to signify burnt from (...) Dan. 3.19. meaning that
they wept for him that was burnt, because they burnt their sons and daughters
in the fire. Others, that they had a trick to convey water into the Idols eyes
which was called Tammuz, so that he seemed to weep and to beseech them that
they would serve him. But our great wise man Rabbi Moses bar Maiemon writes
that it is found in the books of the ancient, that there was a man of the
Idolatrous prophets whose name was Tammuz, and he called to a certain King and
commanded him to worship the seven planets and the twelve signs, and the King
slew him: And on the night of his death, all the Idols from all parts of the
earth were gathered into the Temple at Babel, to the golden image which was the
image of the Sun, which image hung between heaven and earth, and it fell into
the midst of the Temple and all the images about it: It told them what has
happened to Tammuz the prophet, and all the Idols wept and lamented all that
night, and when it was morning they flew to their own homes: So this became a
custom to them on the first day of the month Tammuz every year, to bewail
and lament Tammuz. But some interpret Tammuz to be the name of a beast which
they worshipped.

Thus may we suppose upon this text of Ezekiel, that in the Temple before the
captivity there were but two gates on the Northside of the Court, or at least
there is not mention of any more: but in the second Temple there were three:
The names of them going from West to East were these. 1. (...) Mid. per. 2.
The gate of Corban. 2. (...) The gate of the women. And 3. (...) The gate of
the Song. Now every one of these gates is owned by a double name: for the gate
of Corban is also called (...) Beth Mokadh: The gate of the women is also
called (...) The gate Corban: And the gate of the Song is also called (...) The
gate Nitsots: And thus are those Talmudick passages to be understood which
carry difficulty with them, because they seem to carry contradiction: whilst
one reckons the North gates thus Ibid. and Shekalim per. 1.
On the North was the gate of Corban, the gate of the Women and the gate of the
Song: And another thus Mid. per. 1.
On the North was the gate Nitsots, the gate Corban and Beth-Mokadh: The
former, reckoning their order from West to East, and the latter from East to
west: the reason of these doubled and differing names we shall look after as we
go along.

There were also other buildings on this side the Court besides the gates as
well as there were on the South side which we have surveyed already. And those
were (...) Ib. per. 6.
The room for Salt, the room for Parvah, and the washing room, besides other
rooms, which weshall find out in our progress.

CHAP. XXIX. Beth Mokadh. (...)
OUr Survey is to begin at the Northwest corner of the Court wall, and there we
meet with the building called Beth Mokadh, a place of remarkablenesse for
several particulars.

1. It was a building so large that Tamid per. 3.
it raught from the Northwest angle of the wall to the gate below, of the same
name, and so it took up a fourth part of the length of that side of the Court:
Mod. per. 1. Maym. in beth habbechir. per. 5.
and it contained four several rooms in the four corners of it; that room
which was properly called the room Mokadh being in the midst of them as the
Center: And this the treatise Middoth utterreth in these expressions Mid. per.
1.
There were four rooms in Beth Mokadh (...) Like bed chambers opening into a
dining-roome: Two of which chambers stood within the Court and two without, and
marks were set within to show where the two grounds parted.

2. The four rooms in the four corners of it, were these.

Mid. ibid.
The Southwest room was called (...) The lamb room, R. Sol. in. 1 Chronicles.
23.25.
because there they lodged the lambs that were appointed for the daily
sacrifice Maym. in Tamid. per. 1.
And the room was never without six lambs in it a day together. For no lamb
was offered but which had been taken up four days before: and so this
necessitated, that if two of the six were taken out to day for the morning and
evening sacrifice, other two must be brought in before night: And by this means
it was never without six in it a whole day together.

2. Mid. ubi supra. and Tamid. ubi supr.
The Southwest room was the room of those that prepared the Shewbread, which
God had appointed to be set before him on the golden table every Sabbath. (...)
The Family of Garmu was for this work. Shekalim. per. 6.
These two rooms mentioned stood either wholly or some part of them within the
Court.

3. Mid. ubi supr.
The Northwest room (...) was the place where the Maccabean family laid up the
stones of the Altar, which the Grecian Kings had defiled Jos. Ant. lib. 12 cap.
7. 1 Mac. 1 etc.
For when Antiochus Epiphanes had made such miserable havoc at Jerusalem, as
that he had laid Religion, Laws, Liberties, Altar, Sacrifice, and all wast, and
had defiled the Altar with abominable sacrifices, Judas Maccabeus and his
brethren getting a little ground of their enemies and of their miseries, began
to purify and restore the Temple: and consulting what to do with the Altar
stones which were profaned, and which Mattathias their father had therefore
pulled down, 1 Mac. 2.25. they laid them up in this room till a prophet should
come that might resolve what to do with them. 1 Mac. 4.44. etc.

4. Mid. ubi supr.
The Northwest room was a room through which they went to a bathing place out
of the middle room which was properly called Beth Mokadh, whosoever had
received any nocturnall pollution in their sleep. Now where this bathing place
was it is controverted, whether under ground, or whether on the out side of the
outmost wall: The treatise Tamid gives account of it in these words: Tamid.
per. 1.
Does a nocturnall pollution by Gonorrhaea happen to any of them? he gets out
and goes along in the gallery that goes under the Temple, and candles burn on
either side, till he came to the bathing place: there was a closet and a stool:
and if he found the door locked he knew there was some one there, but if open
he knew there was no body there: so he goes down and bathes himself, wipes
himself, warmes himself in the closet, and comes again and sits among his
brethren.

3. The room Mokadh which was in the midst of these four, they being as it
were parlors in the four corners of it, is said to be (...) Maym. in beth
habbech. per. 5.
built archwise: not that the surface or upmost part of it was like an arch of
stone without any other roof, but that being raised and roofed like the other
buildings about the Court, it was only in this lower room made arch wise,
because there was a passage through it out of the chel into the Court. And
there were two gates to this room of passage, one toward the Chel, and the
other toward the Court, and that into the Court had a wicket in it, through
which they commonly went in and out, the great gate standing shut: and so it is
like had that also into the Chel. And this passage I suppose is that which Aba
Jose calls the gate of Jechoniah, of which we made mention before.

4. This room was called Beth Mokadh, or the place of the burning fire,
because a fire was kept here continually, all the cold time of the year for
the Priests, both by day and by night: By day to warm themselves at when they
came from the service, for upon that they attended barefooted and very thin
clad: and in the night to keep them warm as they kept their guard: for in
this room was a guard of the Priests as was observed before, and this was the
chiefest guard of all: Tamid. ubi supra.
Beth Mokadh, (says the Talmud) was a great arched room, and it was set about
with stone benches: on which the Elders of the house of their fathers slept,
and the keys of the Court were in their keeping: But the young men of the
Priesthood slept in their garments on the ground: they slept not in the holy
garments, but put those off, folded them up and laid them under their heads,
and lay in their own wearing clothes: So that this room was both a thorough
pass, and a great hall where was kept a common and a constant fire: and the
gates on either side of the arch being shut, it was as a close room, and as if
it had not been a thorough passage at all.

5 In this room there was a box or cabinet as we may call it, in which were
laid up the keys of the Court, and taken out and in, as the doors were locked
or to be unlocked. The Talmud describes it thus: Mid. ubi supra.
There was a flag of Marble and a ring was fastened in it, and a chain, at
which the keys of the Court were hung: when the time of locking the gates came
he took up the flag by the ring, and took the keys off the ring and locked
the gates within, and when he had done he put the keys on the chain, and the
flag in its place again: Now this marble flag, which in Hebrew is called (...)
A table, on the upper or outside of it had a ring by which to take it up, and
on the inner side, a chain so wrought as that the keys might fitly and
readily be hanged on or taken off as there was occasion: And this box appears
to have been in the ground, partly because we have mention of such another flag
with a ring in it and that lay upon the ground, and dust was taken from under
it for the trial of the suspected wife, and partly because the tradition says
(...) That after the Priest had laid up the keys and laid down the flag, he
laid his pillow upon it and there slept.

6. If any in their sleep suffered Gonorrhaea, they were to bath as was said
before, and the way to the bathing place is expressed in these words (...) He
goes down a turning staire case that went under the Temple. The word (...)
does generally signify all the body and buildings of the Temple, as the whole
stood like a sumptuous and goodly Palace (for so the word does properly
signify) and so it is used 1 Chronicles. 29.1.19. Therefore it is hard to tell
which way this passage to the bathing place lay, since the word will enlarge it
to any part of the Temple. It appears that it was some vault under ground
through which they passed; into which vault they went down by a turning pair
of stairs, out of the Northwest room of Beth Mokadh. And from thence whither
they went, whether under the Chel as Rabbi Eliezer conceives, or under some
part of the Court, or mountain of the house, it is but in vain to search: It
seems the Bath was under ground, and a room by it with a fire in it to warm
themselves at when they had done bathing.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Gate Beth Mokadh called the Gate of Corban: And of the other
Gate of Corban, called also the Gate of the Women.
WE need not inquire why the upper of these two gates was called Beth Mokadh;
the considering that it joined to the East end of that piece of building that
was so called, which we have newly surveyed, will resolve that question: but
why the lower was called The gate of the Women, and why both of them the Gates
of Corban, will cost more labor to find it out.

I shall tender about the former these two conjectures: 1. Because at this Gate
the women in the former Temple, did weep for Tammuz, as was observed out of
Ezekiel even now: And 2. Because at this gate the women that brought sacrifices
went into the Court to see them offered. For although it was not lawful for
women to go ordinarily into the Court as it was for men, but they were
confined to their own Court, yet as I have observed elsewhere out of Tosaphta,
women when they brought sacrifices might and did go into the Court of Israel
as well as men. It is true indeed that (...) women after childbirth appeared in
the gate of Nicanor for the making of their atonement, and came but up into the
gate and not into the Court at all, because they came thither for their full
purification: but those women that were clean, and came not upon any occasion
of purification, but brought burnt-offerings or sin or trespasse-offerings,
they presented them and themselves with them at this gate. There was a gate was
nearer to the Altar then this, namely the Gate Nitsots, which we are to survey
by and by, but the place of the rings or slaughter place being between it and
the Altar, it was not a place of that clea^ and uninterrupted access that this
was of, and therefore the sacrifices both of men and women were presented here.
Yet did the gate bear the name of the women rather then of the men, as from
the rarer matter of the women's going into the Court, which was more commonly
done by men.

And this helps us to one reason why this gate was called the Gate of Corban,
or of the offering, namely because the sacrifices to be offered up were brought
up in this way. And this very reason Bartenora gives saying (...) Bart. in Mid.
Here they brought in the most holy Sacrifices, which were to be slain on the
North side of the Altar. Over against this Gate on the other side of the Court
there was a gate that bare two names as well as this. It was called (...) The
gate of offering, because the sacrifices that were to be slain on the South
side of the Altar were brought in at that gate and it was called also the gate
of Firstlings, because those were the chiefest of those offerings. So also this
gate where we are: it was called the gate of Corban or of offering, because the
Sacrifices to be slain on the North side of the Altar were brought in by it:
and it was called also the gate of the women, because their passage through it
with their sacrifices was more rare and remarkable then men's. Zevachin per. 5.
Now these were the sacrifices that were slain on this North side of the
Altar: The most holy sacrifices, the hullock and goat of the day of Expiation,
the hullocks and goats that were burnt, all sin offerings,
whole-burnt-offerings and trespasse-offerings.

Only the lambs of the daily sacrifice, though they were slain on the North
side of the Altar, yet is it like they were not brought into the Court at this
gate, but at that that joined to Beth Mokadh, for in that piece of building the
Lamb-room was where they were kept as has been showed. And so we have one
reason why these two gates bare the name of Corban. The upper was so called
because the daily sacrifice or Corban was brought through it, and the lower,
because other sacrifices were brought through that.

But there was something more in the name besides: As there were several
treasure chests in the Temple, which have been named, and several treasuries
in the gate-houses of the mountain of the Temple, and in the chambers that
joined to the Temple it self: of vessels, vestments, tithes, firstfruits,
etc. So on this side of the Court was the treasury of the poll money, and for
the poor, and for the repair of the Temple; which more especially was called
Corban: The word as at the first and most properly it signified an offering
(and so is it frequently used in Deviticus, and that is the sense that we have
newly parted with) so in the Jews common language it came also to signify the
Treasury of the Temple, as Mat. 27.6. The Priests took the money and said it
is not lawful to cast it (...) Into the Corban. And so Josephus says that
Pilate occasioned a tumult among the Jews (...) Jos. de bell. lib. 2. cap. 14.
By consuming the sacred treasury which was called Corban upon making an
Aquaeduct. And so the treatise Middoth reckoning the guards that were in the
Temple, names Mid. per. 1.
one at the chamber of Corban: one at the chamber of the Veil, and one behind
the Mercy seat: From which last passage, laid to this consideration that we are
about, namely that there were two gates on the North side of the Court which
were called Corban, there is some ground and probability to place the Corban or
chiefest treasury of cash or money there where we do. It appears by the
distribution of the guards in the tradition cited that the guard at the chamber
over against the Veil, and at the chamber of Corban were on the several sides
of the Court, or else there were no proportion or conformity in their stations.
All the seven gates of the Court were guarded, two with Priests, and five with
Levites: all the four Corners of the Court were also guarded, and there was
besides (says the tradition) a guard at the chamber of the Veil, and another
at the chamber of Corban, and another behind the Mercy seat, that is, one on
the one side of the Court over against the body of the Temple, and another on
the other side, and another just behind, which was called the guard behind the
Mercy seat. Now where can we so properly look for the chamber Corban, as
between those two gates that both bare that name? And the matter here seems
somewhat nearly parallel to the case that we observed about the gates and house
of Asuppim upon the West quarter of the mountain of the house, for as there
was a piece of building that ran between two gates which it self was called
the house of Asuppim, and gave occasion to the gates on either end of it, to be
called the gates of Asuppim; so here was a piece of building that ran between
two gates, which it self was called Corban, and gave occasion to the gates on
either end it, to be called the gates of Corban likewise.

To come down therefore from the gate of Beth Mokadh, toward the East, there
was first a piece of building joined to that gate, which was a treasury and
was called Corban, and then was there a room where the Levites kept their
guard, and joining to that there was another treasury or Corban, and joining
to the East end of that, a gate called by the same name Corban but called also
the gate of the women.

Now to distinguish these treasuries, whether the one of them was the treasury
for the half Shekel poll-money, and the other for money and vessels offered
for the use and repair of the house, or whether one of them was the treasury
for the Temple and the other for the poor, which distinction we observed
before, it is but in vain to inquire after, since it is not possible to
resolve when we have done all we can: only this I suppose may not
unpertinently be observed, that the treasuries wherein they put money, (whether
chambers or chests) were those that most properly were called Corban, rather
then the treasuries where they laid up other things: And according to the
several places where these chambers and these chests stood, the place was
called the Treasury, and the House of the Treasury.

And here let us look after a place of Scripture, which speaks something in
relation to the treasury, and may not unproperly be taken into consideration
before we part with this subject.

The place is in 2 King. 12.9. and 2 Chronicles. 24.8. about the treasure or
collection chest that was made by Jehoiada, for the gathering of money for the
repair of the Temple, which had been decayed and defaced in the days of
Athaliah. And because there appears a visible contrariety between the two
texts that handle that matter, it may not be amiss to lay them together, and
then to see how they may be reconciled.

2 King. 12.9. Jehoiada the Priest took a chest and bored a hole in the lid of
it, and set it beside the Altar, on the right side as one comes into the house
of the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 24.8. And at the Kings commandment they made a chest and
set it without, at the gate of the house of the Lord. Ver. 13. Howbeit there
were not made for the house of the Lord, Bowls of silver, Snuffers, Basins,
Trumpets, any vessels of gold or vessels of silver of the money that was
brought into the house of the Lord. Ver. 14. And when they had finished, they
brought the rest of the money before the King and Jehoiada, whereof were made
vessels for the house of the Lord, even vessels to minister with, and to offer
withal, even vessels of gold and silver, etc.

To heal the contrariety that seems to be in these texts, the one saying the
chest was set beside Altar, and the other, that it was set without the gate:
the one that there were no vessels made of the money that was offered, and the
other that there were vessels made: it is to be observed that though the chest
might be the same, yet the stories concerning it and concerning the money
coming to it are to be understood not of the same time. The zeal of Joash the
King and the dullness of the priests toward the repair of the house of the
Lord are here compared and laid together (though good Jehoiada did always the
utmost in him toward it) Joash had urged the repair of the Temple, and that
the Priests should get up all the money accrewing to it for the use of it and
bestow it to that purpose: namely the half shekel poll-money of every one that
passes the account: the money that any one was set at to redeem him from any
singular vow Lev. 27. and all the money that any offered of his own free will:
every one of the Priests to take it of his acquaintance: yet in the three and
twentieth of the Kings reign, there was nothing done toward repairing:
Thereupon the King seeing either the slacknesse, or falsehood, or both, of the
Priests, requires them to meddle no more with receiving money, nor with
repairing, since the business under their hands went on no better: which they
irreligiously and surlily are content to do, not caring whether the Temple be
repaired or no. But good Jehoiada slacketh not, but sets a chest with a hole in
it besides the Altar, that what money might be had, might be put in there for
the use appointed: But when that did not avail to do the work, nor to buy any
vessels for the house and service of the Lord, for the money went still
through the Priests fingers the chest being in their Court, Joash the King
either removes that chest, or makes another and sets it without the Court at
the coming in, whither every one might have access to it, and proclaims
through all the Country that they should bring in the money appointed by Moses;
the Princes and people come readily and joyfully and bring it in, so that there
was enough to perfect repaires, and withal to make those vessels for the
Temple that were wanting.

CHAP. XXXI. The Room of Salt: of Parvah, and of the washing.
AS there were three rooms between the middle gate Corban, which was also
called the gate of the women, and the more westward gate Corban, which was also
called the gate Beth Mokadh, namely two treasuries and a Levites ward between
the two: So were there three rooms also between the fame middle gate Corban,
and the gate more Eastward which was called the gate Nitsots, and those were
Mid. per. 5.
The room of the Salt: the room of Parvah, and the room of the Washers: The
room of the Salt was the most Westward of the three, and joined to the gate of
the women, and it was so called, because they there laid up the Salt for the
use of the Temple. For howsoever Salt and Wine and Oil and such things were
sold in the Tabernae, for the use of particular persons offerings, yet for the
public offerings and service, these things were stocked up at the public
charge in several rooms appointed for them.

The use of Salt at the Temple was exceeding much, Maym. in Issure mizbeah per.
5.
for nothing was laid on the Altar unsalted, but only the wood, the blood and
the Wine of the drink offering: and how much Salt might be spent upon all their
sacrifices, let any one imagine, for this was the Law, with all thine offerings
thou shall offer Salt, Lev. 2.13. And they had not this way only for the
spending of Salt, but they also salted the skins of all the sacrifices when
they had flayed them off. For the skins belonged to the Priests as their Fee:
the course therefore of the Priests that was in serving, did still salt the
skins of what sacrifices they offered, that they might not be offensive, and
kept them till the end of the week of their service: and on the Eve of the
Sabbath, toward night they divided them to every one his share.

The place where they salted and laid up the skins till that time, was in the
room of Parvah which joined to this room of the Salt, on the East; and which
is the next piece of building that we are to survey: The reason of the name is
somewhat doubtful: the Gemarites in the treatise Joma debating it, conclude in
this tradition: (...) Joma per. 3. halacah. 6.
what is meant by Parvah? Rab Joseph says, Parvah was a Magician; Aruch in
(...)
the meaning of (...) (says Rabbi Nathan) is to this purpose: Parvah is the
name of a man who was a Magician: And there are some of the wise men that say
that he dug a vault under ground, till he could come to see what the
High Priest did on the day of Expiation. And the wise men were aware of this
vault that he had made, and they found him in it, and they called this chamber
by his name. The short gloss upon the Mishnaioth in octavo goes yet further. A
Conjurer (says he) whose name was Parvah built this room by Magic: And some
say that he dug through the wall to see the service of the High Priest, and
there he was slain Magic was a matter more in use at the Temple among some of
the Grandees there, then one could have possibly thought that it could have
been: for the Talm. Jerus. in Joma per. 3.
Jerusalem Talmud relates that some of the Highpriests used to destroy one
another with it. R. Shemaiah in Mid.
But others deduce the reason of the name Parvah from Parim which signifies
Bullocks, because of the many hides or skins of bullocks that were laid up
there: About which matter we shall not be curious to sway the balance one way
or other: but shall leave the reason of the name to be disputed by them that
have a mind to such a business, it is enough to our survey to take notice of
the place, and name and use of it without more circumstances.

At the East end of this building of Parvah, there was another piece of
building which was called (...) The room of the Washers: And the reason of the
name was (...) Mid. ubi supra.
Because in this room they washed the inwards of the sacrifices according to
the law, Lev. 1.9. It has been a very general conceit, of washing the beasts
that were to be offered in the poole of Bethesda, of which there is mention,
Joh. 5. If that opinion mean, the washing of the beast whilst he was alive, I
know not where the least footstep of any such custom is to be found, either in
Scripture or in Jewish monuments of antiquity. And if it mean the washing of
the inwards after the beast was slain, the room that we are about was the
place where that was done, and they went no further: and when they had first
washed them here, they did it again upon the marble tables, of which we shall
speak ere it belong.

Ibid.
Out of this room of washing, there was a pair of winding stairs, to the top
of the room Parvah, Joma per. 3.
and on the top of that room there was a bath, where the High Priest did bath
himself on the day of expiation, the several bathings that he was to bath on
that day, but only the first which was in the bath on the top of the room
Abhtines, as has been observed before. It appears that here was a great
issue or running cock of water, in this washing room, which served for the
washing of so many intrailes as there was occasion to wash continually: and
that there was a conveyance of water to the roof of the adjoining room, where
also a cock ran to supply the bath.

CHAP. XXIX. The Gate, and House Nitsots (...). The house of Stone vessels.
WE are now come to the gate that was most East of all the three on this North
side, and it bare the double name of Mid. per. 1.
the Gate Nitsots and Ibid. per. 2.
the Gate of the Song. The word Nitsots (...) betokens properly sparkling, as
Esai. 1.31. Ezekiel. 1.7, etc. and so it signifies the beams of the Sun, which as
it were sparkle at his rising or going forth. But sometimes it is used by the
Rabbis to signify Drops, which are as it were the sparks of water: And
sometime as Baal Aruch observes, Froth or Foame: Now to what sense of all these
to apply the name of this gate, and to give the reason of its denomination in
that sense, will prove more labor then profit, though the pains be put to the
best improvement. I shall leave it upon these two conjectures in the sense of
Sparkling: That it was called the Sparkling gate, either because the fire or
flaming of the Altar shone upon it, it standing in most opposition to the Altar
of all the gates on this North side: or because the South sun did give a great
dazzling light upon the gilding of this gate, which it did by neither of the
other on this North side, the height of the Temple interposing betwixt the Sun
and them: But this gate lay clearly open to the South Sun and so the leaves of
the gate being gilt, they gave a sparkling and dazzling reflection into the Court.

But why it is called the gate of the Song, for ought I can find, is left also
only to conjecture: And I shall only offer this; Because they that came in at
this gate came in the very face of the Levites as they stood in their deskes
singing, or playing on their instruments and making the Temple music.

Joining to the East side of this gate there was a building was called from the
gate, Mid. per. 1.
The house Nitsots, in which the Priest a kept a guard in the upper room, and
the Levites in the lower: and between this building and the gate there was as
it were a cloister passage, by which passage there was a way out of the very
gate into the room below where the Levites kept, and there was also a passage
out of the cloister into the chel (...): And so is that clause in the Talmuds
survey of the Temple to be under stood when it says (...): Ibid.
That this gate was like a cloister, and a chamber was built over it, where ^he
Priests kept ward above, and the Levites below, and it had a door into the
(...) Chel. The meaning of which passage may be conceived to be this: That as
you went through this gate Nitsots out of the Court into the (...) Chel upon
your right hand there was not a plain wall for the side of the gate, as the
other gates had, but that side was open with pillars (as the cloister sides
were of which we have spoken) and within those pillars there was a little
cloister or walk which was almost as long as the passage through the gate was
broad: So that when you were in the hollow of the gate you might step in
between the pillars into this cloister, and so into the room where the Levites
kept their guard, and over this cloister and that room and over the gate, was
there a place where the Priests kept their ward, and this was one of the three
places where they warded: Out of the Levites room there was a door into the
Chel.

These buildings ran thus from this gate of Nitsots Eastward a pretty way, and
then there joined to them another building which raught to the very corner of
the Court wall. And it was called (...) The house of stone: Not as if it were
built of stone and the other buildings of wood, for the rest were of stone
also; nor as if this differed in manner of building from the rest; but because
all the vessels that were used in it were of earth or stone; And so the Gemara
upon the treatise Joma explaineth it (...) Joma per. 1. in Gemara.
Before the Temple, at the North-east corner was the chamber of the house of
stone, and thither they put the Priest apart, that was to burn the red cow
seven days before. And it is called the house of stone, because the work of
it was in vessels of dung, earth, or stone. In which passage they do not only
give the reason of the name, but they also give an evidence of the situation of
this place, when they say it was (...) Before the Temple at the North-west
corner. And as for the putting of the priest apart into this room that we are
about, who was to burn the red cow, there is the like record in the treatise
Parah, in these words Parah per. 3. in Mishn.
Seven days before the burning of the cow, they put apart the priest that was
to burn her out of his house, into the chamber which was before the Temple in
the Northeast, which was called the house of stone, and they besprinkled him
all the Seven days, etc.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Court of Israel, and of the Priests: And the Levites desks
where they sung.
THus having passed round about the wall that enclosed the Court, and observed
every particular gate and building in it, we are now to enter into the Court it
self and to survey that, and there we shall find much variety.

Mid. per. 1.
The whole length of the Court from East to West was 187 cubits, and the
breadth from North to South 135. Ibid. per. 8.
The parcells of the total sum of the length were these, from East to West.

The breadth of the Court of Israel eleven cubits.
The breadth of the Court of the Priests eleven cubits.
The breadth of the Altar two and thirty cubits.
Between the Altar and the Temple, two and twenty cubits.
The length of the Temple it self, an hundred cubits.
Behind the Westend of the Temple to the Court-wall; eleven cubits.
The parcells of the breadth were these, going from North to South.
From the wall of the Court to the pillars, eight cubits.
From the Pillars to the Marble tables four cubits.
From the Tables to the place of the Rings, four cubits.
The space of the Ringe it self, four and twenty cubits.
From the Rings to the Altar, eight cubits.
The Altar and the rise to it, sixty two cubits.
From the foot of the rise to the South-wall of the Court, five and twenty
cubits.
Of all these particulars we shall give account as we go along: And first it
will be needful to clear the terms, of the Court of Israel and the Court of
the Priests: Now these are to be understood in a stricter acception or in a
larger: In the strictest sense they were taken for the first ground you passed
over as you went up from the East wall of the Court, or where the gate of
Nicanor was, unto the Altar, and they are said to be eleven cubits broad a
piece. But in the larger acceptance, the Court of Israel, was a space of
ground upon which the lay men of Israel, for so let me call them, might stand,
along within the wall that enclosed the Court, on the North, South, and West
quarters of the Court as well as on the East.

The Court was cloistered along the enclosing wall of it within, even as we
have observed of the mountain of the house, and the Court of the women
already: And so not only reason it self does evince unto us, which will tell
that if the inferior places, and of less veneration, were so beautified, much
more was this which was of the chiefest honor and highest worship, but both
Josephus and the Talmudists, do also give testimony to such a purpose: For
Josephus in those words that we had occasion to cite a good while ago, (...)
etc. Joseph, de bell. lib. 5 c. 14.
Cloisters ^an along the wall within from gate to gate, born up with fair and
great pillars etc. does intimate no less: for though he does particularly in
that sentence speak of the cloisters before the Gazophylacia, or
treasure-chosts which we placed in the Court of the women, yet does the scope
of this discourse in that place, refer to both the Courts. The Talmudick
treatise Tamid likewise speaking of the Priests first coming every morning into
the Court, it says Tamid. per. 1.
They came out through a wicket out of Beth Mokadh, and being come into the
Court they parted into two companies, and one went one way and another another,
(...) Perexedram, along the cloister, round about the Court to see whether all
was well and safe there. And you had mention even now of pillars 8 cubits
distant from the North wall of the Court, which though indeed in their very
name they speak that they were low pillars and not such as bare up the roof of
the cloisters, as we shall observe when we come to speak of them, yet were
there higher pillars by them that were such Supporters.

On the North and South side therefore, and at the West end of the Court, there
was a cloister like unto those that we have spoken of already borne up with
pillars and roofed over head, that people might stand under unannoied of rain
and weather, and this was the Court of Israel, that went round about the Court:
for in this might laymen stand, and so they did, when there were great
multitudes at the Temple, as there was at the three festivalls when they were
enjoined to appear before the Lord. In the rubric of the Passover which is
given by the Talmud in the treatise Pesachin: It is said, Pesachin per. 5.
The Passover was killed in three companies: And the first company went in,
and the Court was filled, etc. Now by the filling of the Court with people is
not meant all the parts of the Court within the wall that did enclose it, but
this Court of Israel or cloister where the laity might stand, round about: And
all inward, or what was enclosed by this cloister, was in the large acceptance
the Court of the Priests: This cloister did not retain the same space of
liberty of standing or walking, in every part of it, for here and there there
were buildings that stood out something into it, as part of Beth Mokadh did at
the North-west corner, and part of the building Gazith at the Southeast, etc.
yet was there such passage by them made more or less, that the buildings did
not thrust him that would pass, into the Court of the Priests, but that there
was a space to pass, sometimes larger, and sometimes narrower even all the
Court round about.

Now at the East part or quarter of it as you came up out of the gate of
Nicanor, you entered upon that which was called in the stricter sense, the Court
of Israel, which was eleven cubits over as you went up toward the Altar, and
then was that which also in the stricter sense was called the Court of the
Priests, and that was eleven cubits over likewise: These two spaces were double
cloistered, being roofed over, and the roof supported with a double row of
pillars: the one row standing out to the opening of the open Court, and the
other row standing where the two spaces parted the one from the other. These
were more peculiarly called the Court of Israel and the Court of the Priests
upon these two or three reasons. 1. Because hither was the most ordinary
access of Israelites and Priests in their most solemn worship, it being just
in the face both of Temple and Altar. 2. Because in that which was called the
Court of Israel, the Stationary men did constantly stand, in their attendance
on the service in representation of all the people, as we have showed them such
representatives, Temple-Service chap. 7. Sect. 3.
in another place: And in that which was called the Court of Priests, did those
Priests stand that had not employment in the present service (as all of them
had not always) and waited upon the worship and service, which their brethren
now in employment were about. 3. That part of the room Gazith which stood
within the Court, opened into both these Courts; and as that was the room,
where the Priests cast lots for the dividing of the service amongst them, so it
was the chapel (as it were) where they said a good part of their daily
liturgy, and so the people and Priests in these Courts were ready to hear it.
The one Court was distinguished from the other by some grates or bars or such
like things which the Jews call (...): which stood between pillar and pillar
in that middle row of pillars that bare up the roof of the cloister. Into the
Court of the Priests, whether largely or strictly taken, the Israelites or lay
people might not come but upon special occasion, and that occasion was
threefold; namely, either to lay his hand upon the beast that he offered, or to
kill him, or to wave some part of him, and then his coming into the Court
either of Israel or of the Priests or both, was ordinarily at the North or
South side of the Court, according as his offering was to be slain on the
North or South side of the Altar, as we have observed before.

Maim. in Beth habbechirah per. 6.
The Court of the people was level with the floor of the East gate or the
gate Nicanor, but the floor of the Court of the Priests was two cubits and an
half higher, and the rifing thus. Imagine you came up from the gate of
Nicanor: or rather imagine the Levites coming up from it with their musical
instruments in their hands (which we observed before they laid up in rooms
just under the Court of Israel, but the doors of those rooms opening into the
Court of the women) when they were risen the many steps into the gate of
Nicanor and were come thorough it, they had on either hand a fair passage into
the cloister or Court of the people, (such another as he has that comes upon
the Royal Exchange either out of Cornhill or Bartlemew-lane, he may step into
the cloister walk on whether hand he will) they walked upon even ground till
they came over the breadth of the Court of the people or to the pillars which
were on the further side of that Court which bare up the cloister, and
distinguished the Court of the people and the Court of the Priests one from
another: Then was there a rising of two cubits and an half, but stepped up
thus. Id. ibid. and Mid. per. 2. Sect. 6.
First there was a step of a cubit high, and then three steps of half a cubit
high a piece, thus it was as you went directly up from the gate of Nicanor
forwards. But if you would turn on either hand, there were the desks or
standings of the Levites, where they stood to sing and to make their music,
made with steps, as even as that middle rising just now mentioned; first a
rising of a oubit height, and that ran along at that height all along before
the railes and pillars that parted twixt the Court of the Priests and Court of
people: and then were there three steps up of half a cubit high a piece, and
on the highest step stood the Levites with their instruments and their song:
their feet even with the floor of the Court of the Priests: and a desk before
them.

Elias Levita it seems observed not this rising both into the Court and in the
Levites station, when he says Elias in Tishbi. in (...)
that their (...) Dukan (which was the name of their desks, and which the
learned render, Suggestus or Pulpitum) was nothing else but a bench or form
whereon they stood; for their feet stood even with the floor of the Court, and
were not raised above it at all. His words are these, I wonder at this Targum
(on Psalm 134.) Lift up your hands O ye Priests upon the holy (...) For behold
(...) was (...) the bench on which the Levites stood when they sung, and it is
called (...) Ducan in the Arabic: but in the Dutch and vulgar Banea: In this
construction of it by (...) a bench, and owning it for an Arabic word he
follows Aruch in (...)
Aruch, verbatim, but I confess I do not very well understand the cause of
his wonder, especially considering what he says before the words cited, namely
this: We call the place where the Priests lifted up their hands when they
blessed the people (...) Dukan, and so is the Targum, Lift up your hands O ye
Priests on the holy (...) and at this I wonder. Now if he wonder, that the
Targum has brought in the Priest blessing the people from the (...) Desk or
Pulpit, in that Psalm: he might have found the like in other places. For the
Chaldee of Jonathan upon the law does thus render the 23 verse of the sixth of
Numbers Targ. Jonath. in legem. in Number. 6.
Speak to Aaron and his sons saying, Thus shall ye bless the children of
Israel spreading their hands upon the (...) Dukana, and they shall speak to
them in this manner; where the Hebrew gloss in the margin interprets it Glossa
marg. ibid.
by spreading their hands in the place called (...) Dukana; and a little after,
(...) The benched place called (...) Dukan. And so the large Chaldee Paraphrase
upon the Canticles, glosseth the seventh verse of the third chapter (Behold his
bed which is Solomon's: threescore valiant men are about it) thus Targ. in Cant.
3.
when Solomon the King of Israel built the house of the Sanctuary of the Lord
in Jerusalem, the Lord said by his word, How beautiful is this house of the
Sanctuary which is built to me by King Solomon the son of David, and how
beautiful are the Priests when they spread forth their hands, and stand upon
their (...) Dukan and bless the People the House of Israel by the threescore
wonders that were delivered to Moses their master!

But it seems his wonder is at this, that the Jews so generally, and the
Chaldee Paraphrase particularly should hold that the Priests when they blessed
the people stood upon the (...) Dukan, whereas the Dukan or these Deskes were
for the Levites and not for the Priests: And if I did conceive that they meant
these very deskes of the Levites, when they say the Priests stood in the (...)
Ducan and blessed the people, I should wonder with him also, but I suppose they
meant some other deskes appropriate to the Priests for this purpose or the
place of the priests standing when they blessed the people, and as by a name
best known they call it Dukan.

The words of the Talmud in description of these deskes where the Levites stood
to sing and to make their music are these. Mid. per. 2.
Fahbi Eliezer the son of Jacob says, there was a rising ( viz. out of the
Court of the people into the Court of the Priests) and it was a cubit high, and
the (...) Ducan was set above it, and in that there were three steps of half a
cubit high a piece: So that the Court of the Priests is found to be higher then
the Court of Israel by two cubits and an half. So that it appears indeed that
the Levites stood upon raised steps in their deskes, but it is plain withal,
that the highest step was no higher then the floor of the Court before them
and that that step whereon they stood, was not called the Dukan, but the whole
place of the three steps rising.

And thus were the eleven cubits of the Court of the Priests at this East
quarter of the Court taken up and divided: Namely two cubits and an half taken
up by the deskes of the singers (for as was the height of the steps, so was
their breadth) and eight cubits and an half for the Priests standing. The
Court of Israel parted from the Levites desks, by pillars and railes: The
Levites standing parted from the Priests by a wainscot deske or some such
thing. The Court of the Priests open to the Altar, but only that the pillars
that supported the cloister, stood in a row before it.

And so we have the dimensions and platform of the Court, and of the buildings
and the cloisters that stood about it: But before we proceed to observe the
particulars that were within it, I cannot but think of a piece of structure,
that in its story looks something like to some of the cloisters that we have
described either in the mountain of the house, or in one of the Courts, though
I believe it was none of them, and that is. The Covert of the Sabbath, of which
there is speech and mention, 2 King. 16.18. where it is said of Abaz, The
Covert of the Sabbath, that they had built in the House, and the Kings entry
without, etc. How to frame the verb to this sentence is somewhat doubtful:
whether to say he turned it from the house of the Lord, and so does our
English, or he turned is to the house of the Lord, and so does the Chaldee
Paraphrast and some others with him for the word in the original does not
determine it: were that the question before us, I should adhere to the sense of
our English (for the Kings entry without was turned to the house of the Lord
from its first making) but our question is what this Covert of the Sabbath was:
The Lxx. have rendered it (...) The foundation of the chair or seat, upon what
mistake in their unprickt bible, a mean Hebrician will easily discover, namely
that they read Musadh for Musach ( Daleph and Caph final being like) and for
Shabbath they read Shebeth. Vid. Kime. and Leu Gersom in loc. and Nehil. in
Lxx. Ibid.
The most received opinion about this matter is, that this was some special
piece of building, that was purposely made for the course of Priests that went
out every Sabbath to repose themselves in, till the Sabbath was out, or till
they might go home. And the reason of this conception is because of the word
Sabbath, which they suppose to refer rather to the change of the Priests
courses, who came in and went out on the Sabbath, then to the service, or the
peoples attending, whose concourse was greater at the festivalls then on the
Sabbath; I should rather take it to mean some Court of guard that was made on
the Top of the causey Shallecheth up toward the gate Coponius, where the Kings
guard stood on the Sabbaths having attended the King into the Temple, till he
came out again, there to receive him again and to guard him home: and I
should understand and construe the word The Kings in conjunction with both
particulars named, namely that it means the Kings covert of the Sabbath as
well as the Kings entry without: and my reason for this opinion I should fetch
partly from the mention of these gates that we had in speech before, namely,
The gate of the foundation, and the gate behind the guard, 2. King. 11.6. And
partly from the passage in Jerem. 38.14. where it is said that King Zedekiab
sent and took Jeremy the Prophet unto him into the third entry that was in the
house of the Lord, where Solomon Jarchi does ingenuously confess that he
knows not what this third entry in the house of the Lord was: but perhaps
says he it means the Court of Israel; the Court of the women and the Chel
being the two other. Kimchi does well conceive that this entry was as they came
from the Kings house into the Temple, but more of it he has not determined. I
should say it means the gate Coponius: and conceive the King coming to the
Temple, through these entrances or passages. First at the bottom of the
stairs or descent of Sion, much about his turning to come upon the causey
there was the gate of the foundation, then being come up the causey toward the
Temple, he passed through the gate behind the guard and walked through the
Court of Guard which I suppose was called the Kings covert for the Sabbath, and
so through the gate Coponius which was his third entrance or gate he passed
through. These gates we said before, were gates of Sion, meaning that they were
in the way from the Temple thither, and not gates of the Temple it self.

According therefore to this supposall, I apprehend that Ahaz becoming a
Renegado to religion, did deface and defile the Temple within, and did clean
cut off the way of the Kings access thither without, as if he and his should
never have more to do there: And according to this supposall also I apprehend,
that Zedekiah having garisoned himself in the Temple, while the Chaldeans were
now lying in siege about the city, he sends for Jeremy from his prison in Zion,
and he comes up to the gate Coponius or Shallecheth, and there the King and He
confer together. And now let us turn our eyes and observation upon what is
to be found in the Court from which we have thus far digressed: and first we
will begin with the Altar: which is not only the most remarkable thing to be
observed there, but which must also serve us as a standing mark, from whence
to measure the place and sight of other things.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of the Altar of Burnt-offering.
THe Altar that Moses made in the wilderness, because it was to be carried up
and down, was of light materials and of small dimensions: for Exodus 27.1.
it was of Shittim-wood, and but five cubits square, and three cubits high,
with a grate of brass hanging within it for the fire and Sacrifice to lie
upon. And therefore when it is called the brazen Altar, 2 Chronicles. 1.5. it is
because it was plated over with brass, Exodus 38.1. But when Solomon came to
build the Temple, and there was to be no more removing of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation as there had been before, 2 Chronicles. 4.1.
he made the Altar far larger and weightier then that of Moses: namely of
brass and of twenty cubite square and ten cubits high.

I shall not be curious to inquire whether Solomon's Altar were of brass indeed
or no, or whether it is said to be of brass, though it were of stone, because
it succeeded in stead of Moses his brazen one as Vid. Kimc. in 1 King. 8.64.
some Jews conceive, Vid. Lev. Gers. ibid.
or as others, because though it were of stone, yet it was overlaid with
brass: I see no reason why it should not be properly and literally understood
that it was of massy brass indeed: for why may we not well conclude by the
plating of Moses his Altar over with brass, that it was made of wood only for
lightness, and had it not been for that, it had been all of brass as well as
the outside: And that that outside plating, might be a warrant to Solomon to
make his Altar of Massy brass: It is true indeed that there is a command of
making an Altar of Earth or stone, Exodus 20. but it may very well be
questioned, whether these altars meant not such as were made upon special and
emergent occasions, namely upon the Lords singular appearing to particular
persons, as to Gedeon, Manoah and others, who upon such appearances built
Altars and sacrificed. Judge. 6.26. and 13.19. 1 Kin. 18.30, 31.

There is but little to be discovered about the exact fashion and fabric, of
Solomon's Altar, because the Scripture speaks very concisely of it: For it
says only thus, He made an Altar of Brass, twenty cubits the length thereof,
and twenty cubits the breadth thereof, and ten cubits the height thereof. 2 Chronicles. 4.1. So that it was four times as big in it square, as was the Altar
made by Moses, and three times as high, and a cubit over: but whether it were
exactly of the fashion of that of Moses, as whether the middle space within its
square were hollow like his, or made up with stone, and whether it had a grated
hearth like his or a solid, and what was the manner of the ascending and going
up to it, may be rather apprehended by supposall, then certainly known by any
scripturall description or demonstration.

The sacrifices that are recorded to have been offered sometimes at once, both
upon the Altar of Moses and that of Solomom, are exceeding wonderful, and may
cause a man to marvel, how so vast numbers should be laid and burnt in so
little a space as even the larger of them was of, though a very large time
should be allowed for it: as Solomon's 1000. sacrifices upon Moses his Altar, 1
King. 3.4. and the peoples 700. oxen and 7000. sheep upon Solomon's, 2 Chronicles.
15.11, etc. Moses his Altar was but five cubits square, and how long a time
might be required for 1000. beasts whole-burnt-offerings, for so they are
called, to be burnt in so small a compass? David Kimchi upon that place and
story glosseth thus. He offered not all these sacrifices in one day, but before
he returned again from Gibeon to Jerusalem: yet it seems by our Rabbines
that they took it to be done at one time. The greatest solemnities that ever
were at Jerusalem lasted ordinarily but seven days; or at the utmost but
fourteen, when they would double their festivity, as at the dedication of the
Temple, 1 King. 8.65. now grant Solomon fourteen, nay twice fourteen days
stay at Gibeon, yet will it seem difficult that he should dispatch so many
sacrifices even in that time. And at his own Altar at Jerusalem, how vast is
the number of sacrifices that is mentioned, 1 King. 8.63. And Solomon offered a
sacrifice of peace offerings, which he offered to the Lord, two and twenty
thousand oxen and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep: so the King and all
the children of Israel dedicated the house of the Lord. The same day did the
King hallow the middle of the Court, etc.

Allow the whole fourteen days that are spoken of in ver. 65. unto this
business, and yet the text seems to limit it to a shorter time, and for all
that, a man may rather stand amazed at such a thing as this doing, then find
out any satisfactory apprehension how it should be done. Sure the divine fire
upon the Altar, was of a more singular quickness of dispatch then ordinary
fires: or else I know not what can be said to these things. The Jews do reckon
several wonders that were continually acted at the Temple, as that no flies
infested that place, though there were so much slaughtering of beasts there,
and that the smoke of the Altar always went straight up and was never blown
aside by the wind, etc. which though it may be they are the less believed for
the relators sakes, yet certainly well weighed in themselves they carry very
good sense and reason in them. For who would have been able in the summer to
have stood in the Court near the Altar where there was so much blood shed, and
flesh stirring, if the slaughter place there had been troubled with stink,
flies and waspes, as our common slaughter houses are? And how reeky and smokie
a place would the Temple and all the places about it have been, and how would
those that attended the service, have been choked and stifled, and no man able
to have endured in the Court, if the smoke from off the Altar had been blown
up and down with every puff of wind, as we ordinarily see smoke to be? So
that for the prevention of such unconveniences as these which would have made
the service intolerable and unaccessible, we cannot but acknowledge a
continual miraculous providence and dispensation. And so in this particular
that we have in hand: that multitudes of sacrifices, such as were especially at
the three festivalls, should be dispatched by the fire within the time allotted
for the offering of such sacrifices, is rather to be ascribed to miracle then
to any thing else. The Altar is called Ariel, the Lords lion, as we shall
observe by and by, and it was a lion of a very quick devouring.

Now whereas it is said that Solomon did hallow the middle of the Court that
was before the house of the Lord, for there he offered burnt-offerings and
meat offerings and the fat of the peace offerings because the brazen Altar that
was before the Lord was too little to receive them: lay this also in too, and
yet it will be difficult enough to apprehend the dispatch of so many thousand
sacrifices in so short a time, if this consideration be not also laid in
therewithal. But the question that is most ordinarily raised out of these
words is, in what sense to understand this hallowing of the middle of the
Court: whether he burnt the sacrifices upon the very pavement, as is the
opinion of Rabbi Judah, or whether he set up Moses Altar by his own Altar and
offered on it, or whether he built an Altar of stone by his brazen one, for
these opinions are also held, but me thinks the greater question is about the
place, and what is meant by the middle of the Court? Upon which quaere, these
two things, may first be taken into observation. 1. That fire from heaven in
the time of David, had apponted out the exact place of offering sacrifice or of
the Altar, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. and to go about that piece of service in any other
place of the Court, required either a prophetical warrant, or a dispensation
through mere necessity, both which dispensers were concurred here. 2. That
this place which Solomon hallowed in the Court, was hallowed by the very
service performed upon it; The Altar of Moses was hallowed at its first setting
up, by being anointed, and so do the Jews, not without good ground, assert
that Solomon's Altar was hallowed likewise: but this necessitated place, for so
let me call it, which Solomon was constrained to set apart for that service,
was not so served, but his very sacrificing there did hallow the place: namely
for such a present employment, but not for future. And so the current of the
text may be interpreted, he hallowed the middle of the Court, for there he
offered burnt-offerings: so that whereas the other altar, being anointed
sanctified the gift, this extraordinary Altar did not so much sanctify the
offering at the first, as was sanctified by it: And so the Temple after the
return out of the Babylonian captivity and all the utensills belonging to it,
were sanctified by the very service, for there was neither divine fire, nor any
cloud of glory, nor any anointing oil to sanctify them.

The middle of the Court which Solomon hallowed, I suppose is to be expounded
in the largest acceptance of either of the words, both the middle, and the
Court: for the word the middle of a thing in the Scripture language, is not
always taken for the very Center of the thing mentioned, but for any part
within that thing, be it in it whatsoever it will, as in the middle of the land
and in the middle of the Congregation, means but within the land, and in the
Congregation: So is the phrase to be understood here, that Solomon hallowed the
Court in any part of it for the burning of the Sacrifices, though the precise
compass of the Altar, was fixedly pointed out as the only place for such a
purpose, by fire from heaven: And as for the word the Court, the present
occasion does seem to extend the sense of it to the whole compass of the holy
ground: for if we look upon the vast and infinite number of sacrifices that
were to be slain and offered, we can do no less, and all little enough too,
then allow the whole compass of the holy ground for it: And the word the
Court, stands not in opposition to the mountain of the house, but both the
mountain of the house, and the Court it self, are both called by that
general name the Court in contradiction to the very body of the Temple.

Ezekiels Altar is said to be twelve cubits long, and twelve cubits broad,
square in the four squares thereof. Ezekiel. 43.16. which Zevathin per. 5. R.
Sol. in Ezekiel. 43. and ^id. per. 3.
the Talmudicks do reckon up to four and twenty cubits upon every side of the
square: for they suppose that the account is not as measuring from corner to
corner on every side, but measuring from the very midst or center of the Altar
to any of the sides, and thither was twelve cubits: And the reason of this
their construction is, because it is said (...) Toward the four squares of
it. It might seem (say they) that the whole Altar was but twelve cubits square
in all: but when it is said (...) Toward the four squares thereof, it
shows, that he measures from the middle, twelve cubits every way: And of
this square, namely of four and twenty cubits on every side, they hold the
Altar to have been after the captivity, and so they describe it. R. Jose says,
At the first the Altar was but 28. cubits on every side: And according to this
measure it narrowed in its rising till the fire place was but twenty cubits
square: But when the children of the captivity came up, they added thereunto
four cubits on the North, and four cubits on the West like the fashion of the
letter (...) Gamma.

As Solomon's Altar was ten cubits high, 2 Chronicles. 4.1. so also was the Altar at
the second Temple, and so the Jerusalem Talmud does witness saying (...) Talm.
Jerus. in Erubin. per. 7.
The height of the Altan was ten cubits: And of that height is Ezekiels Altar,
whose copy the children of the captivity did very much follow: Now as it was
impossible for the Priests when the Altar was so high, to stand on the ground
and to serve upon it, so had they an expesse prohibition against going up to
the Altar by steps, lest their nakedness under their loose coats should be
discovered, Exodus 20.26. Therefore as a temper between these two exigents,
there was a gentle rising made from the ground to the top of the Altar whereon
the Priests might go up to the Altar to serve upon it, and this rising was
called (...) Kebesh which may well be englished the rise of the Altar.

The gloss upon the Mishneb in the treatise Zabim, and R. Nathan from thence
has taught us to understand the manner of this rising, by that instance and
description that they give of the word (...). Zabi. per. 3. Aruch in (...)
That it is a great planke that mariners have, that when they will come down
out of the Ship, they descend, or come down upon it, to save their feet from
touching of the water: and this planke is called (...) Kebesh; And so in the
treatise of the Sabbath they have a case, about a (...) Keb^sh or such a planke
Shabbath. ^er. 16. Sect. 8.
Does an Idolater make a (...) Descent for himself, to go down by? an
Israelite may go down after him. But does he make it for the Israelite? it is
not lawful for him to go upon it: There is an example of Rubban Gamaliel and
the Elders, they were to come out of a ship: and an Idolater had made (...) a
descent for himself, Rabban Gamaliel and the Elders came down by it. So that
by this parallel we may observe the manner and nature of this (...) Kebesh or
rise to the Altar that it was a sloping gentle rising, but made of stone
whereby the Priests might go up to the Altar, without danger of discovering
their nakedness: we might call it a rising causey to the top of the Altar; for
so does Maymon. in Shekalim. per.
Maimony call the Arched causey over the valley of Kidron to mount Olivet by
which the red cow was brought to her burning (...) by this very name Kebesh.

Now as for the manner and form of the Altar and of this rising up to it, and
for the right understanding of all, which is not very facil, diverse things are
to be observed. As,

1. There are reckoned these several parts of the Altar. First, the
foundation, (...) which also in Ezekiel is call (...) The bosom or bottom
upon the ground. Ezekiel. 43.13, 14. This was one cubit high from the ground, and
one cubit broad: and the length of this foundation upon every side of the
square was 32 cubits. And therefore whereas it was said before, that the
breadth of the Altar and its rise was 62 cubits from North to South, it is to
be so taken, as that the rise is to be accounted a thing different from the
Altar it self, and lying a great space further out then the compass of the
Altar did, as we shall see anon: Now this foundation which is said to be 32
cubits square every way, did not hold the complete measure of a cubit broad in
every part of it, but in the Southeast corner of it, it wanted somewhat to make
the corner a perfect angle answerable to the other corners. And this is that
which the Talmud means when it says (...) Mid. ubi supr.
The foundation was a perfect walk, all along on the North side, and all along
on the South: but on the South it wanted one cubit, and on the East one cubit.
That is, were a man upon the foundation, he might walk upon all the length of
the North side, and might turn at the North west corner, and so walk on the
West quarter: but would he do so, to go off from the South quarter to the
East he could not, for when he was to turn at the Southeast Angle, there was
no such Angle there, as there was at the other corners, for it was broken off,
and wanted a cubit on the South side, and a cubit on the East, which two cubits
should have met to have brought the corner into a sharp point like the others.
Now the reason of the defect is given by them else where, to be because, that
very corner only of all the Altar was not in the tribe of Benjamin, but in the
tribe of Judah. For they held it necessary that all the Altars should be in the
lot of Benjamin, because of those words of Jacob Genesis 49.27.
Benjamin shall raven as a wolf, in the morning he shall devour the pray, and
in the Evening he shall divide the spoil: which how they understood of the
Sanctuary and Altar being built within Benjamins lot, appears by the glosses
that the Jerusalem Targum and Jonathan put upon it. Benjamin, say they, is
likened to a devouring wolf, because be was a strong tribe: In his Country the
divine Majesty of the Lord of all the world was to dwell, and in his possession
was the house of the Sanctuary to be built; In the morning the Priests shall
offer the daily lamb, till it be the fourth hour of the day, and between the
Evenings they shall offer the other lamb and at Even they shall divide what
remains of the rest of the sacrifices, and every one shall eat his portion.
But more copiously in the treatise Zevachin or concerning sacrifices, where
this very point about the want of this corner of the Altar is copiously
discussed. The fifth chapter of that book, sets it self purposely to
describe the several places where the several sacrifices were flaine besides
the Altar: and after other things it falls upon the question that is before us
about this deficient angle of the Altar, and it handles and determins it thus
Talm. Bak. in Z^vachin per. ^. in Gemara.
The Southeast corner had no foundation: what was the reason? Rabbi Eliezer
says because it was not in the portion of the Ravener: As Rah: Samuel the
son of Rabbi Isaac says (...) The Altar took up one cubit in the portion of
Judah: Rab. Levi bar Chama says, R. Chama bar Chaninah says there went a line
out of the portion of Judah, and entered upon the portion of Benjamin. And
righteous Benjamin was troubled at it as it is said (...) (The glossary renders
it, he was careful for it every day) Yet righteous Benjamin obtained to become
(...) Host to the holy blessed God as it is said; And he shall dwell between
his shoulders: The meaning of which passage is to this purpose: that the line
that parted the lots or portions of the two tribes Judah and Benjamin, came
just over at this point of the Altar, that if this angle of the foundation had
been made like the other, a cubit of the Altar would have been in the lot of
Judah, which they had no scripture warrant for, for the Altar was to be in the
lot of the Ravenor, that is of Benjamin that should raven as a wolf, therefore
they chose rather to make no angle at all at this point of the foundation, then
to make it, since it would fall in the portion of Judah.

As this Southeast point of the foundation was remarkable for this, that it had
no corner, so was the Southwest corner of it remarkable for another thing, and
that was, for two holes that were in it near to the Angles point, one upon the
West foundation, and the other upon the South, into which the blood that was
poured upon the foundation did run, and so into a sink or common-shore under
ground, which emptied it self into the valley of Kidron.

2 The base or foundation having thus risen one cubit from the ground and
carried a cubit breadth round about, but only in the Angle that has been
mentioned, the square of the body of the Altar, was grown then, a cubit
narrower on every side, and so it was but 30 cubits upon every side of the
square; and thus it held for five cubits high, and then it narrowed one cubit
more, and this narrowing was called (...) the Circuit of the Altar: And there
the square was but eight and twenty cubits on every side: But here the Talmuds
measure differs from the measure of Ezekiel, which though Rabbi Solomon
observes, yet he concludes that the measure in the Talmud was the true
measure in the second Temple. Ezekiel says that from the bottoms upon the
ground, to the lower settle were two cubits, whereas the Talmud says but one,
and from the lower settle to the higher, Ezekiel reckons four cubits, but
the Talmud five: In which difference in the particulars yet there is agreement
in the main sum, and both of them do raise the Circuit of the Altar 6 cubits
high, and therefore we shall not spend time to reconcile them here, but leave
them to be taken up by and by; only we cannot pass over the word that Ezekiel
uses, for both the Foundation and the Circuit, and that is (...) Azarah which
is the common word that is used for the Court: Because that as the people did
tread in the Court at the time of the service, so did the Priests upon these
ledges or sides of the Altar: especially upon the higher, which was called the
circuit of the Altar, when they went about it to besprinkle the horns of it
with the blood of the sacrifices: The manner of which action the Talmudick
chapter lately cited, gives us the relation of, in the Mishneh, in these words
Zebachin ubi supr. Sect. 3.
The sin-offering of the congregation, or of a private person, and the goats,
offered at the beginnings of the months, or at the solemn times, their
slaughter was on the North side of the Altar, and the taking of their blood in
some of the vessels of the service was on the Northside and it required a
fourefold putting on the four horns. How was this done? He went up the (...)
Rise of the Altar, and turned off to the (...) circuit of it: He went to the
Southeast horn, and then to the Northeast, so to the Northwest, and lastly to
the Southwest, and the blood that was left be powered upon the foundation on the
South side: Either of these ledges the Rabbines sometimes call (...) Vid. R.
Sol. in Ezekiel. 43
Malhen, either because they were as floores whereon the Priests trod, for so
the word is sometimes taken, or because they were often rubd to keep them
white, vid. Aruch. in voce.
since there was so much blood sprinkled on them: Mid. per. 3.
For the whole Altar was whited over twice a year, namely at the passover and
at the feast of Tabernacles. Rabbisaith, that it was rubbed with a map on the
eve of every Sabbath.

3. A cubit height above this upper ledge which was called the Circuit, there
was a narrowing again, a cubit breadth, and there began the horns of the
Altar, and now the square was but six and twenty cubits upon every side. The
horns were at every corner a cubit square being hollow, and rising a cubit
upward; for it is a usual saying among the Jews that (...) Maym. in Beth
habbechir. per. ^.
The height of every horn was five hands breadth, or a common cubit, which is
to be taken so as that the horns rose but one cubit straight up from their
foundation or first beginning, abating by degrees from a cubit square in the
bottom, into a pyramidicall sharp, but so as that for one cubit height it rose
straight, and then pointed outward like the tip of a horn: The lowest part of
these horns, was seven cubits from the ground, and therefore these words,
bind the sacrifice with coards to the horns of the Altar, Psalm. 118. can
hardly be taken in propriety, as if the sacrifice stood tied to the Altar till
it was offered; but as the Chaldee paraphraseth it, it means, Tie the lamb
that is to be offered, with coards till ye come to offer him, and sprinkle his
blood upon the horns of the Altar Joab in fear of his life is said to have
fled to the Altar and to lay hold upon the horns of it. 1 King. 2.29. in which
passage the Hebrew doctors say he was doubly deceived, first in that he thought
to have refuge and escaping, for wilful murder, and secondly in that he looked
for safety by taking hold of it, whereas the refuge of the Altar, was on the
top of it (...) Kimch. in 1 King. 2.
Our Rabbines say, says David Kimchi, the Altar was no refuge but for
manslaughter committed unawares and but on the top of it. But whether Joab or
they were the likelier to be deceived in this thing, I leave to them to
discuss between them: But this certainly cannot go unobserved, that God in
giving of the pattern of the Altar, was so punctual for the making of horns
to it in the corners of it, as that that is a special charge, both about the
Altar of burnt-offering Exodus 27.2. Thou shall make the horns of it upon the
four corners thereof. And also about the Altar of incense Exodus 30.2. The
horns thereof shall be of the same. Now what the Lord intended to signify by
this so exact a prescription, it is not good to be too bold to go about to
determine, yet we not unprofitably look upon them as a lesson for instruction:
reading to us that as the Altar signifies Christ, who offered himself upon
himself, the manhood upon the Altar of the Godhead, and as the double Altar,
of sacrifice and incense typified the offering up of Christ at his death, and
the continual incense of his mediation, so the horns of both Altars may well
be conceived to signify, the dignity vigor and merit of his death and
mediation: upon which whosoever slays hold by assured faith shall escape
condemnation: and unto which (as the Priests to these horns at every sacrifice
mentioned) a sinner in every service is to make his address and application.

It is not an improper conception of Rabbi Solomon, about the law concerning
the cities of refuge Exodus 21.13. R. Solain, Exodus 21.
that as God enjoined them when they should come into the (and of Canaan to
appoint a place for the manslayer that had killed a man at unawares to flee
unto, so that while they were in the wilderness God appointed them a place for
refuge, upon such occasion, and that was the camp of the Levites: Now the
addition that follows in the next verse that they should take a wilful
murderer from his Altar, to put to death, does not only confirm that his
supposall, but it does give some intimation, that even in the Land of Canaan,
and when their refuge cities were ser out, yet the Altar was then a Sanctuary
for those that fled to it in such or such cases: A very eminent figure of
deliverance from condemnation by laying hold upon Christ's merits,

Vid. Kimchi. Ibid.
The Jews dispute why Joab, whom they hold to have been president of the
Sanbedrin, and knew the law well enough that a wilful murderer should not
escape by the Altar, why he should flee thither: And they answer, that it was
either to fave his estate, which had he been slain elsewhere had been forfeit:
or to obtain his burial, which had he been Judged and condemned judicially,
he had lost and been cast away unburied: But it seems rather that the
occurrence which is mentioned immediately before, and which occurred
immediately before, namely about Abiathar, did give him occasion to do what he
did: For though Abiathar were in the same fault with Joab, in the matter of
Adonijah, yet had he escaped death (being only put from his office) upon these
two reasons, because he had borne the Arc and was High Priest, and because he
had been afflicted and partner with David in his afflictions; Under this latter
predicament Joab fell as well as he, and might hope for favor in that respect
equally with him: And as for the former, Ioab indeed was not, nor could not be
a Priest, yet, thought he, I will do as much toward that as I can, that is,
lay hold on the horns of the Altar, and there devote my self to God and his
service by that solemn Ceremony, and it may be for these two considerations,
Solomon will spare me, as he did Abiathar (For that the laying hold of the
Altar in this kind had a vow in it for the future, as well as a present
safety, might be argued from the nature of the Altar, which made holy what
touched it, and from the very circumstance of laying hold upon it.) But Ioab to
the wilful murder of Ab^er and Amasa, had added contempt and opposall of the
King upon David's throne, which figured him that was to reign over the house of
Israel for ever, and therefore unfit to escape, and incapable to be any such
vo^ary.

4. Mid. ubi sup. Maym. ubi supr.
A cubit above the first rising of the horns of the Altar, the square narrowed
a cubit again and so was now but 24 cubits every way, and so held on to that
flat of it on the top where the fire lay: The cubits-ledge, that the abatement
made to be as a bench round about, was (...) the place whereupon the Priests
went, and stood about the Altar to lay on the pieces of the sacrifice, or to
stir them as they lay in the fire: And this helps us to judge concerning
the manner and fashion of the horns spoken of last: namely, that they did not
rise directly upright higher then the Altar it self, for then it had been
impossible for the Priest to go about the Altar upon this ledge, for the
horns would have hindered if they had risen a full cubit square up hither: but
their form is to be conceived as was said before, namely, that they rose
indeed up even with this ledge, but they so sharpened and bended outward when
they came level with it, that the Priests had passage betwixt them and the
Altar.

From the (...) Circuit of the Altar upward, which was four cubits, was that
part which more peculiarly was called Harel, and Ariel, Ezekiel. 43.15. And Harel
was four cubits, and from Ariel upwards were the four horns. He had described
the graduall risings of the Altar hitherto in the verses before, in these
characters and descriptions.

Verse 13. The bottom shall be a cubit, and the breadth a cubit, This was the
Foundation of which we have spoken, a cubit high and a cubit broad.

And the border thereof by the edge thereof round about a span: The edge of
this foundation was not sharp as are the edges of stone steps, but it was
wrought as are the stone borders of our chimney hearths, with a border of a
span over: and so the blood that was poured upon this foundation could not
run off to the pavement, but was kept up that it might run down at the holes
forementioned, into the common-shore.

(...) And thus was the top of the Altar: The top of the Altar was also
finished with such another bordering.

Verse. 14. And from the bottom upon the ground even to the lower settle, two
cubits. Not that the foundation called here the lower settle, was 2 cubits
thick in the flatnesse of it, as it lay upon the ground, for the verse before
says that the bottom was but a cubit, but that from this foundation, there
arose a slope rising a cubit height, which was somewhat thicker then the body
of the Altar presently above it, and so from the ground to the top of this
rising, where the square narrowed were two cubits: and from the top of this
sloping where the square narrowed, to the circuit, was properly but four
cubits, but from the foundation five. And so though the Talmud speaks
differently from the Prophet (when it says the foundation or lower settle was
but one cubit high, and he, two: and when it says the height from the lower to
the higher settle, or from the foundation to the circuit was five cubits, and
the Prophet says but four,) yet do they both mean but one and the same
thing, but understood as has been spoken: namely, the one takes the
foundation or lower settle, barely as it lay flat upon the ground, and the
other takes it with this cubitall slope rising from it, made leaning a cubit
height to the body of the Altar: and this interpretation helps to understand
that which David Kimchi professes he cannot tell what to make of; and that is,
why the upper settle which was narrower by two cubits in the square, is called
the greater, and the lower, which was larger in the square, is called the
lesser: The reason whereof is this, because the upper, though it were less in
compass, yet was larger in breadth, because this leaning slope rising that we
speak of, took up a good part of the breadth of the lower, and so the walk
upon it was not so clear and large as it was upon the other.

And then the Prophet tells us, that when the body of the Altar was thus risen
six cubits high to the upper settle, which the Talmudicks call the circuit,
That thence Harel was to be four cubits, and from Ariel and upward, the four
horns.

Kimch. in Ioc. Constable. Lemp. in Mid. P. 97.
There are some that conceive that Harel and Ariel are indeed but one and the
same word, though so diversely written, from whom I cannot much differ, as to
point of Grammar, because the Letters (...) do admit of such alternancy in the
language, yet me thinks the difference of the words should hold out some
difference of the sense: and Harel to signify the Lords Mountain, and Ariel
the Lords Lion upon that Mountain; the lower part at the horns more properly
Harel, and the upper more properly Ariel. But since the text gives the Vid. R.
Sol. ibid.
name Ariel to all that part that was from the Root of the horns upward, we
shall not much stick upon it. The word Harel, if you will construe it the
Mountain of the Lord, David Kimchi tells you that it is as much as to say The
house of the Lord, and because they served other Gods in every place upon high
hills, this which was the Hill of the Lord was but four cubits high: And if you
will take the word Ariel, our Rabbis of happy memory, says he, say the Altar
was called Ariel (or the Lords Lion) because the holy fire that came down from
heaven couched on it like a Lion.

The word Ariel does also signify one exceeding strong, 2 Samuel 23.20. and so
does Arel, Esaias 337. But take it whether way you will here, either for a strong
thing or for the Lords Lion, the Altar was very properly so called, either
because of the devouring of many sacrifices Lion-like, or because of the great
strength and prevalency the people had by sacrifice, the Lord owning them
wonderfully in that service, whilst gone about according to his will: or
because of the strong Lion Christ, whom the Altar and Sacrifices did represent.
Jerusalem, and especially Zion the City where David dwelt, is also called
Ariel, the strong one, or the Lion of the Lord, because of its prevalency
against all enemi^s whatsoever, whilst it continued to be the Lords, through
the strength of those promises that were made unto it: but when it forsook the
Lord, and became profane, it is threatened that it shall become as the other
Ariel, or the Altar, where was continually abundance of shedding of blood and
slaughter, Esaias 29.1, 2.

The very top of the Altar was four and twenty cubits square, and this was
called (...) Maaracab, or the Hearth, where, as we observe elsewhere, there
were three fires continually burning, but especially one very great one for the
sacrifices. And thus was the bulk and platform of the Altar; It was a large
pile of 10 cubits high rising by degrees, so as that at the foot it was 32
cubits on every side of the square, but at the top came to be but four and
twenty.

The rising thus, 1 The base one cubit rising, and then the square lessened a
cubit. 2 The body of the Altar rising plain 5 cubits, and then lessening one
cubit in the square. 3 A cubit rising again, and the square lessening a cubit,
and at the bench where it narrowed there stood the four horns out at the four
corners. 4 A rising again one cubit, and a narrowing one cubit, and there was
the bench where the Priests stood to serve. 5 And then a rising two cubits, and
there was the Hearth.

Thus stood the Altar, and thus stood the Priests upon the highest bench to
serve, but how came they up thither? If they could have gone up the steps that
we have mentioned, namely, where the square still descended, yet was it
unlawful, because of that command Exodus 20.26. But they could not go up that
way neither, for we have seen that between the first bench and the second
there was five cubits rising, which is a measure far beyond any man's stepping
up: the way therefore for them to go both to the top of the Altar, to their
bench two cubits below the top, and to the other benches, as there was
occasion, was thus provided.

Mid. per. 3.
There was a gentle rising causey (for so let us call it, they called it (...)
Chebbesh) on the South side of the Altar 16 cubits broad, that began 32
cubits from the Altar foot and rose easily to the head of it in a gentle
ascent, made of the same materials that the Altar was, of which hereafter, so
that this causey lay out from the Altar two and thirty cubits on the South
side, leaving on either side it four cubits breadth, which it wanted of the
breadth of the Altar.

Gloss. in Tamid. per. ult. Maym. in beth habbech. per. 2.
On the West side of it there stood two tables, one of silver, on which they
set and laid the vessels of the service: the other of marble which was called
the Table of the fat, on which they laid the pieces of the Sacrifice when they
were to be brought up to the Altar. And there was also on Middoth ubi supra.
the same side of it, and (as C. Lemp. in Mid. page 112.
it is probably conjectured) made in the very side of the causey or rise it
self, a place into which those birds that being presented to be offered, did
prove unfit, were cast, till some convenient time to convey them away, this was
called (...) Rebubah, for so we may conclude upon Aruch in (...)
R. Nathans credit who so reads, though others differ: (...) Maym. in beth
habbech. per. 2.
And there (says the general consent) they laid up the birds unmeet for
offering. Tamid. per. 1.
On the East side of it, was the place where they laid the guts and garbidge of
the birds that were offered, and where he that cleansed the incense Altar
poured down the ashes he brought forth, and he that brought the first ashes
from off the burnt offering Altar, did the like: But these things continued not
long there after they were laid down, but were speedily by some or other
conveyed away: Tamid per. 7.
By the marble Table, which was called the Table of the fat, the Priests stood
when they sounded their trumpets at the time of divine service.

Talm. in Zevach. per. 6.
The ordinary way of going up this rise or causey, or bridge, or call it what
ye will, was on the right side of it, that is, on the East, and to come down
on the West, (only upon three occasions mentioned in the place cited in the
margin, he came down the same way he went up, but backward,) and this helps
us somewhat to understand a story (which we shall have occasion to look after
elsewhere,) related in Joma, Joma. per. 2.
of two Priests going a strife who should first get up to cleanse the Altar of
its ashes, (which was the first work done in the morning) the one of them
thrust the other off the bridge and broke his leg, because they went so near
the sides though they had room enough to have gone up in the middle without
danger, but the manner was not to go up that way.

Maym. ubi supr.
As a man went up, first there was a little causey on the East side, that
brought him from the first beginning of this great causey to the foundation of
the Altar if he had occasion to go thither: And as he went up higher, when he
was come as high as the circuit, there was another to carry him off thither, if
he had occasion to sprinkle blood upon the horns of the Altar: But above that
I read not of any such come off, not that the Priests had not constant occasion
to step off to the uppermost ledge or bench, for there they used to stand
continually when they were turning the pieces in the fire, or the like; but
because by the time that the rise was come up thither, the step off was so
easy, that a less matter then what deserved the name of (...) a bridge would
serve the turn.

Thus was the form of the Altar and the ascent to it: but I must mention here
before I have done with the form of it, somewhat that was visible upon it,
that had some reference also to the form of it, and that was, Middoth, per. 3.
A red line that went round about it in the just middle between the bottom
and the top, to be a direction to the Priests that they might sprinkle the
blood above or beneath (for sometime they did the one and sometime the other,
as we shall show when we treat concerning Sacrifice) as the occasion called
upon them to do, and not mistake. For whereas some blood was to be poured or
sprinkled at the bottom of the Altar, and some upon the horns of it, some
below, some above, to make sure that either of these should keep its right
place and not transgress, they set this line to be a bound between them.

The materials and manner of working up this renowned pile, let the Reader take
in the Talmuds and in Maymonide his own words and expressions Maym. ubi supr.
Talm. in Zevach. fol. 54.
When they built the Altar (say they) they built it solid like a pillar and
they made no hollow in it: but one brought whole great stones and little (for
an iron tool might not be used upon them) and he brought mortar and pitch and
lead, and mixed all and poured all into the great base that he had laid
according to his measure, and so he built on upwards: and he put in the midst
of the building a piece of wood or of stone at the South east horn according
to the measure of the foundation, and so he put in the midst of every one of
the horns till he had finished the building; then he took away those pieces
that were in the midst of the building, and so the South east horn was left
without a foundation and the rest of the horns were left hollow.

Midd. per. 3.
These stones that made the Altar and the rise to it are recorded to have been
gotten in the valley of B^bbaccerem, a place mentioned in Neh. 3.14. and Jer.
6.1. and the same record tells us, That twice a year the Altar was whited,
namely at the Passover and at the Feast of Tabernaeles: and the Temple whited
once a year, namely, at the Passover: Rabbi says, on the Eve of every
Sabbath they rubbed the Altar with a map because of the blood; they might not
plaster it with an iron Trowell, lest that touching should defile it; for iron
was made to shorten man's days, and the Altar was made for the prolonging man's
life, and it is not fit that that which would shorten should be lifted up upon
that that would lengthen.

Thus was the fashion and proportion of the Altar the Lords Table, Mal. 1.7.
the holiness of it was such that it sanctified the gift. Mat. 23.19. that is,
whatsoever came upon it, being fit to be offered (...) The Altar sanctified
whatsoever was fit for it. It is a Talmudicke maxim in the Treatise Zevachin,
the very beginning of the ninth chapter: And at the seventh Hala^^h of the same
chapter, they say, That as the Altar sanctified what was fit for it, so also
did the rise of the Altar: and there they discourse at large what things if
they were once brought to the top of the Altar might come down and what might
not, which we shall not insist upon.

Before we part from the Altar, we have yet one thing more to take into
observation about it, and that is the base and wretched affront that ungodly
Ahaz put upon it, in not only setting up another Altar by it, but also in
removing the Lords Altar out of its place, and out of its honorable employment
to give place to his. The story is 2 King. 16. He sends the pattern of an
Idolatrous Altar from Damascus, and Vriah the Priest makes one according to
that pattern: and when the King came home and saw the Altar, he offered upon
it his burnt-offering, meat offering, drinke-offering, etc. And he brought
also the brazen Altar which was before the Lord from the forefront of the
house, from between the Altar and the house of the Lord, and put it on the
North side of the Altar, verse. 14. Rabbi Solomon expounding this place,
conceives that by the Altar of the Lord is not meant the Altar properly and
indeed, but some appurtenances that related and belonged to the service of the
Altar, and this conclusion he produces from two or three traditionall
Premises: his words are these, This Altar that he removed cannot be the brazen
Altar that Moses made, for that was laid up; and it cannot be the Altar of
stone which Solomon made, which indeed is called the brazen Altar in the Book
of Chronicles, for that could not be removed from place to place, but by
pulling down: and behold we have a Tradition, that the fire that came down
from heaven in the days of Solomon, went not off the Altar till Manass^h came
and caused it to go off, for he pulled the Altar down: So that I cannot
interpret the Altar here but of the lavers and bases of brass which served for
the Altar, and stood beside it, them Ahaz removed, etc.

You need not marvel if he go alone in his opinion when you look upon it,
and how it is strained, and especially from this pinch, because though the
Altar of Solomon is called brazen, yet he holds it to have been of stone, and
overlaid: were it of brass or were it of stone, Ahaz his modesty was not so
much but that he would pull it down to serve his turn as well as remove it.
It appears by the Text alleged that Vriahs modesty was a little more then
Ahaz had; for he had set his Altar behind the Altar of the Lord, betwixt it
and the East gate, so that the Lords Altar was betwixt that newfound one and
the Temple (it seems the space at the entering in from the East gate, was more
open in the times of the first Temple then it was in the second.) But when Ahaz
comes, he removes Solomon's Altar toward the North, and brings up his own and
sets it in the place of it, and so does as it were supplant the Lord of his
possession and usurp upon it, putting the Lords Altar out of use as well as
out of its place, and giving his own the greatness because it was the
greater, in the employment for all the Sacrifices that were to be offered, both
ordinary and extraordinary, both of the King and People: while the Altar of the
Lord must stand by as a cipher, only with this dignity, which was less then
none at all, The brazen Altar shall be for me to seek to when I think good.
As for the departure of the divine fire from off the Altar, which had come
down in the days of Solomon, of which our Rabbin speaks, it is not unworthy
some of the Readers thoughts: For the Temple was so often profaned, yea and
sometimes shut up, before the captivity into Babel, as 2 Chronicles. 24.7. and
28.24. etc. that it is hardly to be imagined, but that the fire which had been
continued from the descent of that divine fire, was at some of these times or
other extinguished. And then quaere how Hezekiah and Josiah in their
reformation did for fire again upon the Altar.

CHAP. XXXV. The Contents of the Court betwixt the Altar and the North side of
it; and betwixt the Altar and the South side.
THe most ordinary and universal slaughter of the Sacrifices was on the North
side of the Altar, and so is it declared at large in the Treatise Talm. in
Zevach. per. 5.
Zevachin through the fifth chapter, of which we have had occasion to speak
before; The most holy offerings (say they) are slain on the North side, the
bullock and the goat of the day of Exptation, their slaughter was on the
North, and the taking of their blood in a vessel of the service, was an thy
North: The bullockes that were to be burnt, and the goats that were to be
burnt, were slain on the North, and their blood to be taken on the North: The
goats of the beginning of the months and of the solemn Feasts were slain on
the North, and their blood taken on the North: The whole-burnt-offering most
holy was slain on the North, the peace offerings of the Congregation and
trespasse-offerings, were slain on the North, etc. and generally the greatest
number of Sacrifices were slain on that side the Altar: On that side of the
Altar therefore were necessaries and accommodations for that purpose and
convenience, and those were especially these three, the place of the rings, the
tables, and the books in the pillars.

(...) Mid. per. 5.
Eight cubits from the Altar Northward was the place of the rings, and that
place was four and twenty cubits over toward the North still. (...) Ibid. per.
3.
Now th^^ings were in six rows, four in a row: but some say they were four
rows, and six in a row, and there they slew the Sacrifices. These rings or
staples rather, were fixed down in the stones of the pavement, and either a
bending hook was fastened to these staples, that they might bring the neck of
the beast under and hold him fast, or they drew down the necks of the beasts to
be slain with cords to these staples and there fastened them, and so they had
them at command to slay them with facility, It is not much to be controverted
whether there were six rows of these rings, four in a row, or four rows
with six rings in a row; this does not much break the square, since the same
number of rings and the same compass of ground remains still.

Here was the place where they tied the sacrifices till they were killed and
where they killed them: and this place is commonly called (...) The place of
the slaughter: and to these rings they lied the sacrifice with cords, till
they were to offer him, and to sprinkle his blood on the bornes of the Altar as
the Chaldee Paraphrast renders the 27. verse of the hundred and eighteenth
Psalm.

Now although the command was strict and express that such and such sacrifices
should be slain on the North side of the Altar, Lev. 1.10, 11, etc. that is in
propriety, just between the Altar and North wall of the Court: yet where there
were many such sacrifices to be slain at once, so that this place of the rings
was not able to contain them, then they killed them higher up in the Court,
namely in that space that was between the Altar and the porch, but on the North
side of it, as near as might be in the place parallel to this place of the
rings. This matter is handled and decided in Tosaphta on the treatise Corbonoth
in these words Tosaphta. in Corbanoth per. 6.
Which is the North side of the Altar, where it was fit to kill the most boly
sacrifices? It was from the North side of the Altar, to the North side of the
Court even just over against the Altar which was 30 cubits breadth. The words
of Rabbi Meir: Rabbi Eliezer from Rabbi Simeon adds the space from the Altar
to the porch, even to over against the closets of the Butchering knives, which
was 22 cubits. But Ribbi adds the place where the feet of the Israelites
trod, which was eleven cubits broad, and 187 cubits long: and the place where
the feet of the Priests trod which was eleven cubits broad, and 187 cubits
long: (...) From the side of the North wall, to the East wall of the Court:
That is, along the North wall, from the West end of the Court to the East, for
so both the measure of 187 cubits which was the just length of the Court
confirms, and the same author in the next following chapter does also
illustrate in these words Ibie. per. 7.
Rabbi Josi says, all the Altar may be understood for Northward: As it is
said, and he shall kill it on the side of the Altar, Northward before the Lord.
Rabbi Josi from Rabbi Judah says, From the midst of the Altar Northward was as
the North, and from the midst of the Altar the other way was as the South: And
so Rabbi lost from Rabbi Ludah says also: There were two wickets in the house
of the but chering knives opening toward the West, and eight cubits from the
ground, so that the Court might be sit for eating of the most holy things, and
for the killing of the lesser holy sacrifices, even behind the oracle. From
both which allegations taken up together, we may observe, 1. That the
Israelites had a standing on the North side of the Court as well as on the
East, which though it was not nor indeed could be exactly eleven cubits broad
as was their station at the East end, yet was it a station for them as well as
that: And our author when he speaks of the place where the feate of the
Israelites trod, of eleven cubits broad, and of the place where the feet of
the Priests trod of eleven cubits broad: he means not that there was such a
space for the Israelites and the Priests to stand in all along the North side
of the Court as there was in the East, but his meaning is this, that when the
sacrifices to be slain on the North side of the Altar were exceeding many
indeed, that rather then want room to kill them, they should not only slay
them in the place of the rings, but even in the standing of the Priests and
Israelites at the East end, namely so far on that ground, as lay even with
that space that was on the North side of the Altar: and so might they use the
like space all along the North side of the Court for the same purpose even to
beyond the West end of the Temple. 2. That the house of the butchering knives,
called (...) was in that end of the porch that pointed Northward, and that the
doors thereof were behind the porch Westward, even where the wing of the porch
stood out more Northerly then the breadth of the Temple and extended: and there
the going up to these doors was by steps even eight cubits high: and the
reason why the doors were there, rather then in the front or the end of the
Porch, was because the passage to them there, took up the least room, and was
the least hindrance in the Court.

(...) Midd. per. 5.
Four cubits from the North side of this place of the rings there stood marble
tables upon which they washed the inwards of the sacrifice, and cut it up into
pieces: and four cubits further North, there were the pillars on which they
hung up the sacrifice upon hooks that so they might flea it: These pillars the
Jews call (...) which Aruch in (...)
Aruch interprets (...) pillars low or shorty (it may seem the word is taken
from the latin Nanus, Parah. per. 2.
and so the treatise Parah, speaks of a red cow (...) low and small, Nana and
minuta:) Now these pillars were not those that supported the cloister on this
North side of the Court, but low pillars set by these or joining to them, Mid.
per. 3. Tamid. per. 3. Pesachin per. 5.
eight in number, over the heads of which were said transome beams of cedar,
and hooks of iron fastened both in these beams and in the pillars, on which
hooks they hanged up the beast slain for sacrifice, that they might the
better come at him to flea him; The pillars had every one of them three hooks
in them, one above another, that they might be fit for beasts of several
hignesses and cizes. And before these pillars, or rather, before the space that
was between the pillars (so that one might easily pass between) stood the
marble tables, on which, after that they had given the entrails of the beasts
their first washing in the washing room mentioned before, they washed and dressed
them a second time and made them fit and fair for the Altar, and on which
after they had fleaed the beast as he hanged upon the hooks, they cut him in
pieces according as he was to be cut and divided for his laying on the Altar to
be offered up.

From these low pillars to the North wall of the Court were eight cubits, and
this was the place and space for Isreal's standing on this side the Court: for
though these pillars spoken of did not bear up the cloister under which the
people stood, yet did they stand so even or close to those pillars that did,
that from these pillars we may, and the Jews do count and measure the space
of the Israelits station on this side, and it was three cubits narrower then,
their standing at the East end. Thus was the space taken up that was between
the Altar and the North side of the Court, now let us come to view the space on
the other side of the Altar toward the South: Where first the (...) Causey or
Rise that went up to the Altar took up two and thirty cubits: even just as much
space on this side, as there was betwixt the Altar and the further side of the
place of the rings on the other. But here a question may not improperly be
moved out of the Arithmetic of the Talmudicks about the measure of the Altar,
and the rise of it, which they hold out: for they say expressly that Mid. per.
3.
the Altar was two and thirty cubits square, and that Ibid.
the rise on the South side was two and thirty cubits long, and yet summing up
both together, they say that Ibid. per. 5.
the Altar and the rise were but sixty two cubits: whereas according to the two
particulars named they should be sixty four: But the reason of the account is
from this, either because they reckon the length of the causey or rise, not
from the outside of the foundation of the Altar, but from the narrowing of the
Altar above the Circuit; for thither did the Causey bring them and land them
there, as the ordinary place of their service, when they went to besprinkle the
horns of the Altar with the blood of the sacrifices: or else because they
reckon not the two first cubits of the rise or the very entrance upon it, it
being so flat and near to the ground, as that there was so much of the rise
gone, before there was any stepping off to the bridge that went to the
foundation of the Altar: And yet though they do sometime account thus of the
Altar and the rise that they took up but 62 cubits, yet in distributing the
137 cubits of the Courts breadth into particular spaces they then allow, as
they cannot do otherwise, 32 cubits to the Altar, and as many to the rise: for
the particulars are thus: (that we may sum them again.)

Front the North wall to the pillars 8 cubits. The place of the marble tables,
4 cubits. From these tables to the space of the rings; 4 cubits. The space of
the rings it self, 24 cubits. From the rings to the Altar, 8 cubits. The Altar
it self, 32 cubits. The rise or causey, 32 cubits. From the rise to the
South-wall 25 cubits. In all 137 cubits.

Now these five and twenty cubits which were between the foot of the rise and
the South-wall, is given account of by the treatise Middoth in these words:
(...) And the residue of space which was between the rise and the wall, was
also a place of low pillars.

These were some sacrifices slain on the South side of the Altar as well as
these that have been mentioned were on the North: There were sacrifices which
were called (...) The holy of holies or the most holy sacrifices, and those
were the burnt-offering, sin-offering and trespasse-offering and others
reckoned before, and these were undispensably tied to be slain on the North
side of the Altar, or at least on the North side of the Court as has been
spoken: And there were offerings which were called (...) The lesser holy
things, and these might be slain in any part of the Court and were not bound
to that side: as (...) Zevachin. per. 5.
Thanksgiving-offerings and the Nazarites ram which were lesser holy
offerings, were slain in any place of the Court: Peace Offerings which were of
the lesser holy things, were also slain in any part of the Court, and so were
the firstlings, the tenthes and the Passover, which were also reckoned as
lesser holy things. Now although they speak of any part of the Court, as
permitted to slay the sacrifices in, yet most especially have they reference to
the South side of the Altar in opposition to the North, and the South side
understood in that latitude, as the North side was when extremity and multitude
of sacrifices put them to it: For when the sacrifices were no more then what
could be killed within the very compass between the North side of the Altar
and the North wall of the Court, they were slain there, but when numerousnesse
of sacrifices urged Ibid. per. 6.
all the North side of the Court from East to West ends, and as far South as to
the middle of the Altar, was used to slay the beasts in, and all that, was
accounted as the North: So on the South side of the Altar, there were marble
tables and low pillars for the very same use that there were on the other side
of the Altar, namely for the fleaing and cutting up and washing the intrulls of
the sacrifices, but when greater store came then that very space just between
the Altar and the South wall would contain, then all the South side of the
Court was permitted for that use, even as far as the middle of the Altar
betwixt North and South.

The five and twenty cubits space therefore that we are to give account of
between the South wall of the Court, and the foot of the rise of the Altar,
were thus parcelled. 1. There were eight cubits from the Court wall to the
pillars, as there were on the North side, and this was the breadth of the
Cloister, and the standing of Israel on that side the Court. 2. The disposal
of the Tables as on the other side before the pillars took up four cubits. 3.
And then the thirteen cubits between these and the foot of the Altar rise,
was partly (as is probable) taken up with some rings as on the North side
though not so many (for they needed not) and partly with some plain pavement
next to the rise, that the Priests might have access to it the better.

CHAP. XXXVI. The space betwixt the Altar and the Porch.
THe Altar stood before the gate or entrance of the Porch, that gave access
into the Temple, and the space between the foundation of the Altar and the
foundation of the Porch Mid. per. 3.
was two and twenty cubits: But there was not so much clear ground or plain
pavement and passage between them, for the stairs of the Porch being in
number twelve and every step a cubit broad besides the half pace or enlarging
at every third step, caused that these steps lay down a great way in the Court
toward the Altar: and took up a good space of these two and twenty cubits.
Every one of these steps was half a cubit high, and thereupon the whole rise
arises to be six cubits from the ground to the landing in the porch, so that
he that stood in the Porch gate, his feet stood even and level, with his feet
that stood upon the Circuit of the Altar: Tamid. per. 7.
Upon these steps of the Porch the Priests stood when they came out from
burning incense and blessed the people.

As concerning the space betwixt the Porch and Altar, these things are
remarkable about it.

1. Kelim. per. 1.
That no man might come upon this space that had any blemish upon him, nor any
man might come here bare headed. the reason of the former restraint is easy to
be apprehended, because of the holiness of the place, being so near both to
the Altar and the Temple: and the reason of the latter is, because in their
greatest devotions they used to cover their head, and therefore none might come
bare headed into so dovout a place.

2. That no man might stand upon this space, or stay within it, while the
Priest was burning incense in the holy place. Maym. in Tamid. in per. 3.
For whilst they burned incense in the Temple every day, all the people
departed from the Temple, so that between the Temple and the Altar there was
not a man till he that burned incense came forth. And so at the time that the
High Priest went in with the blood of the sin-offering, which was to be
sprinkled within, all the people withdrew from between the Altar and the
Temple, till he came forth again: And because they might know the time when to
withdraw from this space at the daily incense, the Sagan or President of the
service called to the Priest that was within the holy place with a loud voice
and gave him notice when he should begin with the incense, saying to him, Offer
the intense, and as he spoke thus, the people withdrew: The reason of this
custom I shall not be curious to look after, but whether the Cerimony did not
fitly resemble, how far distant all men are from having any share with Christ
in his intercession, which the offering of the incense resembled, be it left to
the reader to consider.

3. In this space between the Temple and the Altar, was the murder committed
upon Zacharias the son of Barachias, as our Savior mentions, Mat. 23, ^5.

Now there are various conjectures who this Zachary should be: some think of
Zachary the prophet whose book of prophecy we have in the old Testament. Some
suppose it might be John Baptists father, and some conceive that Christ
speaks there predictively, foretelling that they should slay Zachary the son
of Baru^h in the Temple, the story of which Josephus gives in lib. 4. de bell.
cap. 19. But the Talmudists do help us to understand it of Zachary the son of
Jehoiada, who was stoned by the people in this place in the days of King
Joash, 2 Chronicles. 24. Why he is called the son of Barachias and not the son of
Jehoiada is not a place here to dispute: the Jerusalem Talmud has this story
concerning his slaughter, which may give us cause to think, that our Savior
spoke according to the common received opinion: and was understood to mean
Zachary the son of Jehoiada, though for special reason he calls him the son
of Barachias Talm. Jerus. in Taanith. fol. 69.
Rab. Jorhanan says, eighty thousand young Priests were slain for Zacharies
blood. R. Jodan asked R. Aha, where slew they Zacharias? In the Court of the
women, or in the Court of Israel? He says to him, not in the Court of Israel,
nor in the Court of the women, but in the Court of the Priests, etc. And seven
transgressions did Israel transgress that day: They slew a Priest, a Prophet,
a Judge, shed innocent blood and defiled the Court, and the Sabbath, which was
also the day of expiation. And when Nebuzaradan came thither he saw the blood
bubling. He says to them, what means this? They said to him, it is the blood
of bullocks and rams and lambs which we have offered upon the Altar. Presently
he brought bullocks and rams and lambs and killed them, and as yet the blood
bubled or reeked above theirs. And when they confessed not, he hanged them up.
They said, the Lord is pleased to require his blood at our hands. They say to
him, it is the blood of a Priest and Prophet and Judge, who prophesied to us
concerning all that thou have done to us, and we stood up against him and slew
him. Presently he brought eighty thousand young Priests and slew them: And
still the blood bubled: Then he was angry at it: and said to it, what would
thou have? that all the people should perish for thee? Presently the holy
blessed God was filled with compassion and said: what? is this m^n that is but
flesh and blood, filled with pity toward my children, and shall not I be much
more? of whom it is written For the Lord thy God is a merciful God, he will
not forsake thee nor destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers:
Presently he gave a sign to the blood and it was swallowed up in the place. R.
Jochanan says the 80000. young Priests fled to the midst of the chambers of
the Sanctuary, and they were at burnt, and of all them, none was left but
Joshua the son of Jozedeck, as it is written, It not this a brand plucked out of
the fire? Zech. 3.2.

In this space between the Altar and the Porch, there stood the Laver, but not
directly before the Altar, but removed toward the South, so that it stood
betwixt the rise of the Altar and the porch, as we shall observe in the viewing
of it by and by. But the Talmud speaks of a Vessel, which by its relation
appears to have layn directly betwixt Porch and Altar, which it calls
Migrephah, but what to english it, is not very ready.

The Treatise Tamid speaks thus of it, Tamid. per. 5.
They (that were to go into the Temple to burn incense, and to dress the
lamps) came between the Porch and the Altar, one of them takes the Migrephah
and rings it between the Porch and the Altar; one man could not hear another
speak in Jerusalem, because of the sound of the Migrephah. It served for three
things: The Priest that heard the sound of it knew that his brethren the
Priests were gone in to worship, and he ran and came. A Levite that heard the
sound of it, knew that his brethren the Levites were gone in to sing, and he
ran and came. And the chief of the stationary men brought them that had been
unclean and set them in the gate of Nicanor. Now what kind of thing this
Migrephah was, I find but little light toward an exact resolution. Gloss. in
Mishnaioth ibi.
Some say it was a great vessel which they rung to make a sound, but of what
fashion, and whether for any other use also, they leave uncertain.

The Chaldee renders (...) by (...) in Exodus 38.3. etc. which seems to be the
same word with this that we are about, and so he understands it to mean some
of the fire-shovels that belonged to the Altar, which being either rung upon,
or shoved upon the pavement, would make a loud noise being of brass, and very
big.

The Jews upon the sound of this and diverse other things at the Temple do
hyperbolize thus, Tamid. per. 3.
Even from Jericho they heard the noise of the great gate of the Temple when it
opened. From Jericho they heard the ringing of the Migrephab. From Jericho they
heard the noise of the Engine that Been K^ttin made for the Laver. From Jericho
they heard the voice of the crier that called them to their services. From
Jericho they heard the sound of the pipe. From Jericho they heard the sound of
the Cymbal. From Jericho they heard the sound of the song. From Jericho they
heard the sound of the Trumpets. And some say also, the voice of the High
priest when he uttered the name Jehovah on the day of expiation, etc. The truth
of which things is not to be pleaded, seeing it is apparent that they are
uttered by way of hyperbole, only it may not be improper to observe how common
the phrase was, From Jerusalem to Jericho, which is also used in Luke 10.30.

CHAP. XXXVII. Concerning the Vessels and Utensills of the Temple.
SECT. 1. The Laver. (...)
THe first command of making the Laver, and the end of it being made, is
related in Exodus 30.18, 19, 20. etc. in these words, Thou shall make a Laver of
brass and his foot of brass, to wash withal, and thou shall put it between
the Tabernacle of the Congregation and the Altar, and thou shall put water
therein, For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat,
when they go into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, they shall wash with
water that they dye not, or when they come near the Altar to minister, etc.

And the making of it is related in Exodus 38.8. He made the Laver of brass,
and the foot of it of brass of the looking glasses of the women assembling,
which assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation. The
measures and the receipt of it is not at all described: The Holy Ghost has
left it undetermined what was the form or the cize of it, but has given
notice only of the materials of it and the end: It was made of the brazen
Looking-glasses of the women that assembled at the door of the Tabernacle: The
Septuagint expresses it, of the Fasting women which fasted at the door of the
Tabernacle, reading (...) for (...): The Jerusalem Targum, with which also
Jonathans agrees, reads it, of the Looking-glasses of the modest women, which
were modest at the door of the Tabernacle: which Aben Ezra's gloss upon the
place helps us to understand thus, It is the custom of all women (says he) to
look their faces in Looking-glasses every morning, either of brass or glass,
that they may see to dress their heads; but behold there were women in Israel
that served the Lord, that departed from this worldly delight, and gave away
their glasses as a free-will-offering, for they had no more use of them, but
they came every day to the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation to pray
and to hear the words of the commandment: The end of it was to wash the hands
and feet of the Priests, but the most ultimate end was to signify the washing
and purifying by the spirit of grace, which is so often called water in the
Scripture; and so the sprinkling of the blood of the Sacrifice, and the washing
in the water of the Laver, did read the two great Divinity Lectures, of washing
by the blood of Christ from guilt, and by the grace of God from filthiness and
pollution.

The cize and measure of the Laver, at the second Temple, is not described
neither, only we have these things recorded of it in the Antiquities of the
Hebrew writers.

1. That it stood between the Altar and the Porch, as the Primitive appointment
was, Exodus 30.18. but not just and directly between them, but (...) Mid. per.
3. Sect. 6.
a little aside toward the South. And the reason given for the placing of it
there, is this; R. Sol. in Exodus 30. ex Zevachin.
Because it is said, And the Altar of burnt-offering at the door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation: meaning that the Altar was to be before the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, and the Laver not to be before the Tabernacle
of the Congregation, but it was set a little aside toward the South.

2. That at the first it had but two spouts or cocks out of which the water
ran, at which they washed, but that in aftertimes Ioma per. 3.
Ben Kattin made 12 spouts or cocks to it, (...) as the Mishneh records in
the Treatise Joma: It calls the cocks (...) paps, Aruch in (...)
because (says Aruch) they were as the paps of a woman, and water ran out of
them, at which they washed their hands: and so Rabbi Solomon charactering the
Laver, says, R. Sol. ubi supra.
It was like a great Cauldren, and it had paps (or cocks) that voided water out
of their mouths: Now the Gemara of the Babylon Talmud upon the Mishneh cited,
disputing the case why Ben Kattin should make 12 spouts to it, they resolve it
thus, That the Tradition was, that he made so many that the 12 Priests his
brethren which had to do with the daily sacrifice might wash themselves at it
all together: we observe in its due place, that there were so many Priests
employed about the offering up of the daily sacrifice, some for one part of the
service, and some for another: Therefore this Ben Kattin being a Priest
himself, did so provide that these many Priests that were to be employed
together, might also stand and wash together: and by this that so many might
wash together at the several cocks of it, it appears to be a vessel of
great reception and capacity.

3. There is frequent mention among the Talmudicks of an appurtenance to the
Laver, which they call (...) which before we can english, will cost some
inquiry. The Mishneh even now cited, records that as Ben Kattin made the
cocks for the Laver, so also that he made (...) the Mukene to the Laver, that
the water of it might not be unclean by standing all night. And so in the
Treatise Tamid Tamid. per. 1. Sect. 4.
where it is discoursing of the Priest that should cleanse the Altar, going to
wash his hands and feet at the Laver, it says, That his fellows heard the
sound of the wood which Ben Kattin made, the Mukene for the Laver: The Gemara
upon the former place disputes (...) Joma fol. 37.
(...) what is the Mukene? Robba says it is a wheel: And so says Aruch (...)
Aruch in (...)
The meaning of Mukene is a wheel: Now in what place and to what use this
wheel was, is now all the question: Gloss. in Mishnaioth in Tamid. vid. Maym.
in Biath Mikd. per. 5.
some say it was to let down the Laver into the Well, to fill it with water, or
to let it lie in the Well all night: and so there is speech in the Treatise
Zevachin of Zevach. per. 2. fol. 18.
drawing and fetching up the Laver out of the molten sea which. Solomon made,
for it was let down into that all night, lest the water of it should be
polluted by standing all night in it.

But when we observe the greatness of this Laver that we are speaking of under
the second Temple, at which, as has been related, 12 men might stand round and
wash together; and when we consider that there was no Well near to the place
where the Laver stood, by diverse paces, it will appear a thing unimaginable,
that one Priest should let down the Laver into the Well and fetch it up again
full of water, for the Treatise Tamid makes, the dealing with the Mukene of the
Laver (be it what it will) to be but one Priests work. I do not remember that
I have read of what matter the Laver of the second Temple was made, whether of
brass, or stone Conduit-like: for to hold it of wood is very unsuitable to the
exceeding great stateliness of the Temple in other things: yet were it of
wood, it would have been a very hard task for any one man to manage it in that
manner as they do a bucket in a Well, be the Engine of Ben Kattins making
never so active, and cunningly contrived; Maym. ubi supr.
and therefore Maimonides leaves it as a thing of doubtfulnesse, about letting
it down into the Well, for, says he, they let it down into a gathering of
waters, or into the Well, and on the morrow drew it up, or they filled it every
day in the morning.

Therefore by the Mukene of the Laver, I see not what else can be understood,
then some contrivall either found out, or at least the cost of it discharged by
Ben Kattin the Priest, whereby water was drawn up and forced by the wheel in
the Wel-roome in some singular conveyance to fill the Laver when there was
occasion: Not that the Laver was stirred out of its place or needed any such
removal, but (as it is known by common experience,) water by the working of a
wheel was carried in pipes into it at pleasure. So that whereas the standing
of the water in it all night, did make that water useless and unlawful for
that end that the water of the Laver was to serve unto, it either was evacuated
over night, when the work of the day was done, or if it stood all night it was
let out in the morning by the Priest that was to do the first work of the day,
(namely who was to cleanse the burnt-offering Altar of its ashes,) and he had
no more to do to fill the Laver again, but only to go into the wel-roome, and
there to draw at the wheel a while, and that brought up water by conveyances
into it: So that now to give an English translation to the word (...) Mukene,
we may very well call it the Engine of the Laver, and so does Aruch ubi supr.
Rabbi Nathan give us some encouragement to do, when he tells us that it is a
Greek word, and I suppose he means the Greek word (...) Machina, an Engine.

4. There was never to be so little water in the Laver, but that it might be
sufficient to wash four Priests a row: and the reason of this Tradition Baal
Turim would derive from this, Baal hatturim in Exodus 30.
because the word (...) which is used for this washing, Exodus 30.18. is
observed by the Masoreth to be used in all four times: But a reason something
more rational is given by others, and that is this, Maym. ubi supr.
Because it is said, And Aaron and his sons shall wash thereat, now these were
four, Aaron, Eleazer, Ithamar, and Phinehas.

5. Their manner of washing at the Laver, was thus, Id. ibid. R. Sol. in Ex. 30.
He laid his right hand upon his right foot, and his left hand upon his left
foot, and the cock or spout running upon them, he thus stood stooping and
washed hands and feet together: And he that went about the service with
unwashen hands and feet in the morning, was liable to death by the hand of
heaven: And none might enter into the Court to do the service there till he
has bathed, yea though he were clean: And in the service he must stand upon
the bare pavement, so that here was exceeding hard and bitter service all the
winter when he must bath his body in cold water before he enter, and wash hands
and feet in cold water being entered, and stand in thin linen and on the
cold stones all the while he was there.

Sect. 2. Solomon's ten Lavers, 1 King. 7.
IT is not much important to question and search whether the Laver made by
Moses in the Wilderness escaped the fate of time and survived to be set up in
Solomon's Temple, Vid. D. Kimch. in 2 Chronicles. 4.
as some Jews assert; but it is pertinent to observe, that were it, or were it
not, Solomon made exceeding great provision in that case, and to that end, for
which the Laver was ordained, and as in all other particulars of the Temple he
showed and provided for magnificence as well as he did for necessary use and
for conveniences: so in this provision for water for the occasions of the
Temple, he did not only take care for abundance, but he did it with that cost
and sumptuousness, that only himself in the other things he did can show a
parallel. I believe neither any story, nor any Founders Art, did or will ever
show such, masterpieces of Workmanship in that skill and in that mettle, as
were his Lavers and his molten Sea: and the Holy Ghost has been as copious and
precise in the description of these two, but especially of the former, as in
any piece of Art or Workmanship, especially of that bigness in all the
Scripture.

The great addition that Solomon made to the first pattern, in the number of
Candlestickes, Shewbread tables, and Lavers, was not only in state neither,
but something in figure seems to have gone along with it; namely, that there
might be signified the abundance of light, bread of life, and Purifying, that
was to be exhibited in and by him whom the Temple did represent: And as Moses
his single parcels did hold out a signification of these things themselves; so
his decuplated number did hold out the happy abundance of them to be found in
him that is all light, life, and holiness.

The Lavers, ten in number, and all of one mold, cize, and fashion, were for
the washing of the parts of the Sacrifices that were to be washed, as the Sea
was for the bathing of the Priests. Their situation was five on either side the
Court, over against the Altar and place of slaughtering, as evenly and
conveniently as they could be set: For howsoever Id. ibid.
some of the Hebrew Doctors have been of a mind, that all the ten Tables of
shewbread that Solomon made stood on one side of the house, and the Table that
Moses made just in the midst of them, and the like by the ten Candlesticks
and the ten Lavers; yet is the Text so plain about the Lavers that they were
placed five on the one side of the house and five on the other, 1 King. 7.39.
that it do not only put the matter out of all doubt for them, but it does
confirm the like for the two other sufficiently, if there were no other
confirmation.

The fashion of every one of the Lavers (for by any one of them you may view
all the rest) is described by the Holy Ghost to this purpose.

First, there was a flat piece of brass, of a very great cize for length,
breadth, and thickness, borne upon four wheels: such pieces are not to be seen
in these our days, and it is great odds that no days have showed such but
only these; for every piece is said to be four cubits long, and four cubits
broad, and three cubits high: and since in the world we cannot find a piece of
brass to parallel them withal, we must compare them to something of another
material, and so let us liken them for proportion to a stone or marble Table
of those dimensions. The Septuagint (by what misprision, it is hard to tell)
have made the length of every one of them five cubits and the height six, and
so Jos. Antiq. l. 8. cap. 2.
Josephus who constantly follows them has followed their error, upon which
mistake we shall not spend time: that that R. Sol. in 1 Kings 7.
Rabbi Solomon gives occasion to scruple at, is better worth looking after,
and that is, whether when the Text says that the height of every piece was
three cubits, it mean that it was so thick, or that the upper side of it was so
far from the ground as it lay upon the wheels. Of these two things the
latter seems to be the more probable upon these two considerations.

1 Because it is not said, the thickness, but the height of it was three
cubits, as showing that it means not the massy thickness of the piece, but
that as it stood supporting the Laver, the surface of it was so high from the
ground.

2. There was no need of so vast a thickness, either for the weight that it
was to carry, or for the sumptuousness that it was to bear, but half such a
thickness would more then abundantly discharge both the one and the other. And
therefore the conception of our Rabbin is very probable, and not unfit to be
entertained, and that is, that whereas the wheels are said to be a cubit and
an half high, verse. 32. it is not to be understood of the full height of the
ring of the wheel, but of the height from the ground to the axletree or laying
on of this massy piece of brass, and that this piece was a cubit and a half
thick it self, and so the surface of it lay three cubits high from the ground.

These huge pieces of brass are called by the Original (...) (which word the
Lxx and Josephus reserve in the Greek, and write it (...)) which our English
has well rendered A Base, and so has the Chaldee (...) by the very Greek word
(...): For as when Moses was commanded to make the Laver, he was also commanded
to make (...) his Base Exodus 30.8. (which our English has translated his foot:
not to be conceived a long leg or shanke whereon the Laver stood, but some flat
massy piece of brass whereupon it was to sit) so for the setting and settling
of these Lavers, this base of this cize and description was (...) as R. Levi
Gerson and D. Kimch. in 1 King. 7.
the Rabbines style it a seat or settle for the Laver to rest upon.

Now whereas it is said, that every base had four brazen wheels, verse. 30. it
is not to be so taken as to apprehend that they stood two and two on a side, as
our Coach wheels or Wagon wheels do, but as the base was square, so there
was a wheel on every side the square. And this appears at verse. 32. where it
is related, that the wheels were under the borders, and we shall observe by
and by, that the borders were on every side. The wheels that Ezekiel saw in
his vision, chap. 1. were placed in the like posture, namely, standing square
and not one edging before another.

Thus lay the base upon his wheels: And now for the working of it up unto its
compleatnesse; we are first to observe two rows of brazen staves or bars (but
not very long) molten of the same piece with the base, standing up, tone row
upon the very edge of it round about, and the other standing a little more
inward, (and that but a very little) upon it. These are those that the Text
calls (...), and which word almost all the learned in the language both Jews
and Christians, do say does signify (...) staves or bars set in rows like the
staves of a Ladder, and which, if I may make so homely a comparison, I may
resemble to the staves of a Cart standing on either side it, save that this had
staves all about, and these too in a double row, whereas a Cart has but
single.

Between this double row of stays, there was a border or board of brass, if I
may so term it, put between and stood up between them all about upon every side
of the square, upon which border were engraven the representation of Oxen,
Lions, and Palm trees. This border in the Original is called (...) and that
in the plural number, not because the row of the bordering was doubled as the
row of staves, but because the one border went about upon every side of the
square; and under the border on every side stood a wheel.

At the foot of the staves and border, namely, upon the very edge of the base
outward, there were large shelves of brass laid round about, not level as our
shelves that we set any thing upon, stand against a wall, but sloping and
descending much after the manner as weather-boards are laid over windows to
put off the raines. The Hebrew Text calls these (...) Appendices made in a
descending manner, rendered by the Italian, our English and some of the Rabbis,
additions made of thin work: The use of these shelves or additions, was, that
upon them the Priests might wash what they had to wash, and the filth by reason
of the slopenesse of the shelves or benches might still run off: For the
washing of the parts of the Sacrifice, was not in the Laver it self, but in
water running out of the Laver in cocks and spouts, which ran upon these
benches or shelves, and they cast the water, both from off the edges of the
base, and from off the wheels which stood under them as under a covert.

At the head of the rows of the staves, there was (...) a Base above, v. 29.
that is, some rest or settle edging inward, upon which the sides of the Laver
did rest as it sat down into its base. David Kimchi conceives that it may
mean a bench, or rest (...) whereon to set a tankard, or some lesser vessel
by which they took water out of the Laver: but if it be considered how high it
was to the top of the Laver, this will be found a very improbable way for
getting of water out of it, and necessity it self will enforce us to conclude
that the water they had out of it, they had at cocks: This upper rest or base
was gathered into a circle or coronet, which is called a chapter in our
English and (...) in the Original, of a cubit and a half over, and about this
circular edge as near as it would bear a square, a square bordering was set,
engraven as those below, and so the Laver bottom being set in this coronet, it
stood raised two degrees or ascents of borderings above the base: This
bordering above the Coronet was a cubit high, and the Laver bottom for that
height was but of the breadth of a cubit and an half over, but then it flowred
over and dilated it self so, as that it lay over the upper bordering, and that
it sat upon and over the lower bordering and the staves, and came out even
with the edges of the base, and this spreading of it out is called its mouth,
ver. 31. and so we may observe that the Laver was round in the bottom and
square in the top; (we shall observe the just contrary in the molten Sea) and
at the four corners of the base, with which the four corners of the Laver
pointed and flowred even, there were square brazen pillars, molten with the
base it self, and of one piece with it, the feet of which stood upon the
ground and their heads stood under the points of the Laver to bear it up, and
to keep it steady: These pillars are called (...) shoulders in the Text, and
they are said to be (...) at the side of every one of the sloping shelves,
because at their joining to the base these shelves joined to it also, and at
every corner of it these shelves were jointed to these pillars and their ends
rested upon them: Now the feet of these Pillars stood not upon the very ground,
but there was a square of brazen planks cast also with the rest, which lay on
the ground upon which these pillars and the wheels stood, and these the Hebrew
calls (...), which the Chaldee and the Rabbis do explain by another word of
the very same letters, but transposed (...) Boards or Planks.

And now let us take up the Text that contains this story about the Lavers,
in a Paraphrase verse by verse along with it, and as near the words of it as
we can for the better understanding of the description, which is as copious as
the description of any so little a piece in all the Bible, and as abstruse as
the description of any piece whatsoever, great or little.

1 Kings chap. 7. verse. 27. And he made ten bases of brass, four cubits was the
length of every base, and four cubits the breadth, and three cubits the height
of the surface of it from the ground.

Verse 28. And this in the work of every base: they had borders, and the
borders were within rows of staves.

Verse 29. And upon the borders that were within the rows of staves, there were
Lions, and Oxen, and Cherubins: and upon the head of the rows of staves there
was another base or settle: and at the foot of the staves, or below the Lions
and Oxen, there were additionall boards set in a slope and descending fashion.

Verse 30. And every base had four wheels of brass, and planks of brass;
and the four corners of it had shouldring pillars; the pillars were cast to be
under the Laver, at the side of every one of the additionall boards.

Verse 31. And the mouth of the Laver, that is, the spreading and dilating of
it self into its full square, was from within the circular coronet that the
upper base made, even from a cubit above it: and the mouth of that coronet was
round like a base a cubit and an half over: and also about the mouth of it
ingravings and borderings stood up a cubit high, but set about it in a square,
and not in a circle.

Verse 32. And the four wheels were on the four sides under the borders: and
the axle trees of the wheels were joined to the base, and the height of a
wheel to the base, was a cubit and an half.

Verse 33. And the work of the wheels was like the work of a Charet wheel:
their axle trees and their naves and their felloes and their spokes all molten.

Verse 34. And there were four shouldring pillars at the four corners of every
base, these shouldring pillars were of the base it elfe.

Verse 35. And on the top of the base, even at half a cubit height above the
surface of it (so high were the rows of staves) there was the round compass of
the coronet of the upper settle: and on the top of the base, the staves and the
borders that were there, were of one piece with it self.

Verse 36. And he graved upon the plates of the staves and upon the borders
thereof Cherubins, Oxen, and Palm trees according to the proportion of every
one: and there were so on the sloping shelves round about.

Verse 36. And he made ten Lavers of brass: one Laver contained forty bathes,
and every laver was four cubits square: and upon every of the ten bases was
one laver.

SECT. III. The Molten Sea.
IT was an equal wonder of Art, that so great and vast a vessel as the molten
Sea should be cast, and that when it was cast it should be got up from the
plain of Jordan where it was cast, to the Temple: Being brought thither, it
was set upon twelve brazen oxen, at the East end of the Court of the Priests
toward the North-east corner.

The dimensions and contents of it are thus accounted by the book of Kings, It
was ten cubits from the one brim to the other, it was round all about, and his
height was five cuhits, and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round
about: And it contained two thousand haths, 1 King. 7.23.26. with which account
the book of Chronicles does agree exactly in every point but only in the
last, and there it differs exceedingly, for it says it contained three
thousand haths, 2 Chronicles. 4.5. Now that difference breeds no small difficulty
how to reconcile it, and that is not all the difficulty in this story of the
molten Sea neither, for it is not easy to cast, how so small a compass
(though it was indeed a huge compass for one vessel) should contain so great
a quantity of water. The Bath of the Hebrews which was the greatest liquid
measure that they had in use, was within a very little (a pint or such a thing)
even and equal with the receipt of our English bushel, or 8 gallons: now how a
vessel of but 5 cubits deep and often cubits from side to side, should
contain 3000 baths, or near upon 24000 gallons of water, is of some
difficulty to imagine: The cubit in this vessel is to be taken parallel to its
measure in other vessels and parts of the Temple, and so that particular will
help nothing to a resolution. The Jews have deservedly taken this scruple
into their consideration and dispute; and the conclusion that they have made
upon the doubt and debate is this, Talm. in Erubhin per. in Gemar. and R. Sol.
and Kimch. in 1 King. 7.
that this Sea was square in the bottom for three cubits high, and every side
of the square was 10 cubits broad, and so the whole was forty cubits about: and
this squarenesse they go about to prove from the oxens standing in a square
facing under it (in which opinion they are far different from their
Countryman Josephus, for he says that the Sea was (...) Joseph. Ant. lib 8.
cap. 2.
fashioned in form of an Haemisphere, or half a globe, which if I understand
a right, does augment the scruple that we are upon. And they say withal that
the upper part of it, namely for the height of the two upper cubits it was
round, and they contracting into the round and circular form did so much take
in the compass which lay out in the four corners of the quadrangle below,
that now it was but thirty cubits about, according as the text says, that a
line of thirty cubits did compass it round about. In which assertion although
they speak that; which is uncouth, and not ordinarily apprehended upon this
matter, yet is their dispute so rational if it should particularly be given at
length, that if it be not found on the sudden worth the believing, yet
certainly is the matter very well worth the considering, and so be it left to
consideration.

Now as for the difference which is between the book of Kings and the book of
Chronicles about the contents of this vessel (which is a doubt more obvious
and conspicuous to the eye) whilst one says it contained two thousand baths,
and the other, three thousand, the answer that is given generally by the Hebrew
writers, may be some satisfaction (which is, that of liquid it contained but
two thousand baths, but of dry things that would lie heaped above the brim, it
would hold three) though I believe there is more in it. The molten Sea was for
the Priests washing themselves in it against they went about the service, 2 Chronicles. 4.6. Now their washing being twofold, either of their hands and feet, or
of their whole bodies, this vessel served for both, but in diverse manner:
Their hands and feet they washed in the water that ran out by some cocks and
spouts out of it, but for the washing or bathing of their bodies they went
down into the vessel it self: Now had it been always full of water to the
brim, it had been too deep for them to stand in, and would hazard their
drowning; therefore there was such a gage set by cocks or pipes running out
continually, that the water was kept at such a height, as should serve for
their purpose abundantly, and yet should not at all endanger their persons: And
so may we very well reconcile the difference in question by supposing, that the
text that says that it contained two thousand bathes means, the common and
constant quantitity of water that was in it, that was fit and served for their
washing, and the other that says it contained three thousand haths, means
that it would hold so much being filled up to the brim.

About the body of this huge vessel, there were two borders of ingravings, the
work of which the book of Kings calls (...) which the Chaldee and the Jews
interpret Ovals, but the book of Chronicles calls them Oxen: not in their
full proportion but the heads only, and the rest in an ovall, in stead of the
body, and it is conceived by some that out of these heads, or out of some of
them the water issued forth, they being made as cocks or conveyances for that
purpose.

The supply of water to these huge vessels (and that so abundantly that they
were not only always full, but continually ran out and yet were full still)
was from the well Etam of which we have spoken before: And the Jerusalem Talmud
in the treatise Joma, speaking particularly of this molten Sea, and how it was
for the Priests to bath their bodies in against they came to the service, it
proposes this question Talm. Jerus. in Ioma. per. 3. Aruch. in (...) Maym. in
Beth Mikd. per. 5.
But is it not a vessel? Yes, but Rabbi Jehoshua the son of Levi says (...)
A pipe of water comes into it out of the well Etam: The meaning of the
dispute is this; It was not lawful to bath for purification in a vessel, but
in a gathering of waters upon the ground, and how then might the Priests bath
in the molten Sea which was a vessel? To this Rabbi Joshua gives this
satisfaction, that the Sea was as it were a spring of water, for water ran into
it continually out of the well Etam, and accordingly water ran continually out
of it.

SECT. IV. Basins, Chargers, Dishes, etc. King Ptolemies and Queen Helens
tables.
IT is not to be imagined that either the numbers, or the names, or the
several fashions, or the several uses of all the vessels in the Sanctuary
should be given: it is ods there were but a very few Priests though they waited
there, that were able to give a precise distinct account about these things:
therefore our going about to speak of them, it is rather because we would not
say nothing, then from any hope or possibility we have, to give an estimate or
description of them any whit near unto the full.

Their number was so great that they were reckoned to 5400 in Ezr. 1.11. and
ninety and three are averred by the Tamid. per. 3.
Talmud to be used every day about the daily sacrifice: and in the treatise
Ioma it appears that Ioma per. 3.
there were special vessels for the service of the day of expiation, and that
King Monobazes made golden handles to them; and so other peculiar services had
their peculiar vessels, in so much that partly because of the multitude of
imploiments of vessels at some certain times, and partly because of the change
of vessels at special times, the number could not but be very great, nor is it
to be supposed certain: the piety of one or other still offering one vessel
or other in devotion.

The several fashions and cizes of them are rather to be guessed at then
determined, and the uses to which they were put must help us better toward
such a conjecture, then either their names do or any description we can find
of them.

1. There were basins in which the blood was taken when the beast for the
Sacrifice was slain, as Exodus 24.6. and these the Jerusalem Talmud thinks to
be those that are called (...) Agartalin Ezr. 1.9. Talm. Ierusan Ioma per. 3.
Thirty Argatalin of gold. R. Samuel bar Nachman says (...) In it they
gathered the blood of lambs. A thousand Agartalin of Silver: R. Simeon ben
Lachish says, it was that wherein they took the blood of bullocks.

2. There were dishes out of which the blood was sprinkled on the Altar; and
these are held to be called (...) Kephorim, in the place alleged out of Ezra:
and to be the same with (...) Mizrakim, of which word there is frequent mention
in the Scripture: R Sol. in Ezr. 1.
Kephorim (says Solomon Jarchi) are Mizrakim and they are called Kephorim,
which betokens cleansing, because he that took the blood in this vessel
wiped off the drops and blood that sluek on his hand, on the side of the dish:
which action we have taken notice of in handling the manner of sprinkling the
blood on the horns of the Altar: So that, in these Jews construction, Ezra
reckons by name but the two sorts of vessels that were first and most
certainly used in the service, namely the great Chargers or Basins in which
they took the blood and the lesser dishes out of which they sprinkled it: And
it may be the (...) and the (...) that every one of the 12 Princes offered at
the dedication of the Tabernacle Number. 7. were these two sorts of vessels: The
Mizrakim are said to be before the Altar, Zechar. 14.21.

3. There were great voiders or trayes, as I may call them, of gold or silver,
in which the inwards of the beasts were taken and brought to washing, and
brought when they were washed to the Altar: And dishes in which Salt was
brought for the salting of all the sacrifices. And dishes in which the
meat offering was mingled, and other dishes in which it was offered. And it may
be these that brought the inwards or the meat offering, were those that (...)
means, if that word means any vessel at all, as it is thought it does, in
2 Chronicles. 24.14. Some think it means pessels (says Kimehi) wherewith they
pounded the spices for the incense: But in mine opinion it was a little vessel,
wherewithal they took wine out of the Hin for the drink offerings: And so it
is used in the words of the Rabbis, The maids of the house of Rabbi at he was
teaching them in the language of wisdom, said, (...) does the (...) go into
the tankard: that is, the little vessel wherewith all they drew wine out of
the tankard, etc. I shall not trouble my self nor the reader about this word
nor about his opinion; the translation that our English has made of it is not
only very facil, but also very warrantable.

4. There were vessels out of which they powered the drink offering, it may be
those are they that Josephus calls Phialas, Vialls Ios. Ant. lib. 11. cap. 1.
as he reckons the holy vessels upon the place of Ezra before alleged, but
names more kinds then he does: let the reader draw among all the names he
uses (...), which may be the title of these drinke-offering vessels that we
are about; I should choose between the two last, and take Phialae the rather of
the two: and the pouring out of the vialls in the Revelation may chance receive
some illustration, by the readers reflecting upon the pouring out of the vial
of the drink offering.

5. There were chafing-dishes to take coals from the Altar for the burning of
the incense, and dishes wherein to take ashes from the Altar, and from the
Altar of incense, and dishea for frankincense and the dishes Teni and Coz,
which they used about the candles and incense Altar: and Censer or perfuming
pans for the incense, Dishes about the shewbread, and such variety of dishes,
basins, vialls, cruses, tankards and such like vessels, that it were an
endless labor to speak of them or seek after them particularly. To which
may be added, the axes, knives, flesh-hookes, forkes, fire-pans, tongs,
snuffers, pots, chaldrons, the vessel Pesachtar (a word used by the Chaldee
Paraphrast Exodus 27.3, etc.) and the instruments of music, of which we have
spoken elsewhere, the mortars for making the incense; and when we have reckoned
all we can, we are sure we cannot reckon all, and therefore must leave them to
supposall and conjecture. And to the discourse of them which I must leave thus
imperfect, let me add two utensills more, which indeed were not of the like
nature with these that have been spoken of, yet may well come in mention with
them, because they were all furniture of the same house, and those were two
golden tables, but of several natures and uses, bestowed by Ptolemy
Philadelphus King of Egypt, and Helena, mother to Monobazes.

Arist. in hist. Lxx. Jos. Ant. l. 12. cap. 2.
Aristeas and Josephus after him, relating the story of Ptolemies sending for
the Septuagint to come to him to translate the Bible, they tell what sumptuous
bounty and gifts he bestowed upon the Temple and presented thither; and among
other things that they spoke of (as a great sum of money, certain golden and
silver goblets, and certain golden vialls, (...)) they mention and describe a
golden table, of that richness, cost and curious workmanship, as the like
hardly to fellow it in any story, as the reader may peruse them in the places
cited in the margin, for I shall not spend time upon their description.

There is relation also in the Talmudick treatise Joma, of a golden table of
Queen Helens bestowing and devoting, but it was not of the fashion and nature
of any tables that we have mentioned hitherto, but it was of a form and
quality far differing from them. It was not (...) Mensa, but (...) Tabula, and
the tradition concerning it is thus: Ioma per. 3.
Queen Helena mother to King Monobazes made the golden candlestick that was
over the Temple door; And she also made the golden table on which was written
the Section of the law concerning the suspected wife. Number. 5. So that this was
a written table hanged upon a wall, and not a table with feet standing upon the
ground, as those were of which we have spoken. The Gemara of the Jerusalem
Talmud informs us about it in these words: Talm. Jerus. jbi. fol. 41.
She made the table of gold on which was written the Section of the suspected
wife, and when the sun rose, the beams sparkled on it, and so they knew that
the sun was risen. And what was written on it? R. Simeon ben Lachish in the
name of R. Ianuai says, Aleph Beth was written on it. But behold the tradition
it: As was the writing on the one side, so was the writing on the other: It was
not thick nor thin, but a mean between both. As was the (...) that was on the
one side so was the (...) that was on the other. As (...) on the one side, so
(...) on the other. R. Hosaiah says, All the Section of the suspected wife was
written on it, and out of it be read and interpreted the whole Section. It
seems this table hung upon the wall of the gate of Nicanor, for in that the
trial of the suspected wife was made, the manner of which we have observed
elsewhere.

As there were tables and candlesticks of gold 2 Chronicles. 4.7, 8. in the holy
place, so there were tables and candlesticks of silver which were used in other
places, 1 Chronicles. 28.15. as in the Courts and in the Priests chambers.

SECT. V. The Priests Garments.
IT will not be much necessary to spend large discourse upon this subject about
the garments of the ordinary Priests which they wore in the service, since we
have described the vestments of the High Priest at large in another place, who
wore all the same garments that the other priests did, but he wore other also,
we shall therefore but briefly touch these particulars concerning them.

1. That the garments wherewithal the Priests were arraied when they were
about divine service, were peculiar for that place and occasion, and differing
from the garments that they used in their ordinary wearing. Some Jews think
there were such Priestly garments before the law, and they speak of such,
bequeathed from father to son in the holy line even from Adam to Isaac, and
they think the vesture in which Jacob obtained the blessing was of this nature:
but about this we shall not be inquisitive.

2. The Priests when they were come up in their courses to the service, put off
their ordinary wearing clothes, washed themselves in water, and put on the holy
garments: See Lev. 1.6. Tamid. per. 1.
Yea whilst they were at the Temple and attending there on the service, any of
them that would sleep by night, he slept not in the holy garments, but in his
own wearing clothes, and in the morning when he was to go to his service, he
put off his own clothes, bathed himself in water, and put on the garments of
the Priesthood. These expressions in Scripture, Put off the old man, and be
renewed and put on the new, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. Put on the Lord Jesus Christ,
Romans 13.14. Baptized into Christ, and putting on Christ, Gal. 3.27. Washed from
our sins and made Priests, Rev. 1.5, 6. Not unclothed but clothed upon, 2
Cor. 5.4. seem to allude to this custom.

2. The holy garments of the Priests were of white linen, Rab. Sol. in Exodus
28.
and they consisted of four parcels whereas the Highpriests garments were of
eight parcels, and they were of other colors as well as white: And, as has
been observed elsewhere, every Priest was first tried by the Sanbedrin, whether
he were right and fit, and being so found he had his white garments put upon
him, all which garments were found at the public charge. The man clothed with
linen with a writers inkborne by his side, Ezekiel. 9.3. Walking with Christ in
white, Rev. 3.4. Araying in white robes, Rev. 7.9, etc. do seem to refer to
this holy garb and color of the Priests.

3. Upon their feet they wore nothing at all whilst they served, but stood in
the Court barefooted, were it never so cold; nay though they were barefooted,
yet might they not stand upon any thing to keep their feet from the cold
pavement, but must stand barely upon that, were the service never so long and
the season never so sharp: The reason of their barefootednesse was because of
the holiness of the ground, as Exodus 3.5. Josh. 5.15. and the reason of their
standing only on the bare stones, was to show their fervor and zeal to the
service.

4. Upon their thighs and loins they wore linen breeches to prevent the
discovery of their nakedness, Exodus 28.42. either when they stood upright
aloft upon the Altar, or when they stooped down to any work of the service
either there or in any other place. And here I cannot but think of that
ridiculous passage in Martial. lib. 3. epig. 24.
Martial. in lib. 3. epig. 24. which such a provision as this might have
prevented: And of that passage in the treatise Tamid Tamid. per. 5.
where some of the Priests are said to be delivered to the Chazanim or
overseers, and they stripped them of their garments, and left nothing upon them
but their breeches.

5. Upon their bodies they wore a linen coat or surplisse which was called
(...) Exodus 28.4. by the Lxx. (...): upon which Nobilius makes this comment:
Nobil. in Lxx in Ex. 28.
Graecam dictionem retinet S. Hieronymus ad Marcellam. S. August. q. 114. habet
cum cornibus etc. Hierome retains the Greek word (Cosymbotam) Austin in
quest. 114. translates it with horns, and adds that the Latin interpreters
thought it better, to call it the coat with horns, then if they had said, with
tufts. But others interpret it strait and girt: which interpretation seems
not impertinent, seeing that afterward in this same chapter Cosymbi and
Cosymboti do signify knots. But others translate it out of the Hebrew,
Ocellatam, or checkered. And so it might be showed from the original of the
Hebrew word used, that it so signifies, and this linen was wrought
diaper-like, with checker or diced work or some such kind of workmanship,
which set it out with neatness as well as it was white.

6. This coat was girt to them with a long scarf, which went diverse times
about them like a swaddle, which was called (...), and which both helped to
keep them warm in their thin clothing, and to strengthen their backs in their
hard service, which sometime they met withal, tugging with the beasts that
they were to slay, and lifting at them whem they were killed.

7. Upon their heads they had a bonnet or a miter, which was also a linen
scarf often wrapped and wrapped about their heads, after the manner of the
Turkish Tullibants, as is more fully described in the Temple-Service cap. 4.

In these four parcels of vesture, the Highpriests and the other Priests were
alike, for the High Priest wore these as well as they, but he had four other
parcels over and above which they might not wear, and by which he was
singularly distinguished from them; and these were 1. (...) The coat of the
Ephod: this the Lxx call (...): 2. (...) The Ephod it self, which he put upon
that coat, and clasped it together over his paps with a curious girdle. This
helps to understand that in Rev. 1.13. (...). 3. (...) The Breast Plate: in
which were put the Urim and Thummim Exodus 28.30. which in the Apostles
application seem to signify faith and love, 1. These. 5.8.4. (...) The golden
plate upon his forehead in which was written (...) The holy one of the Lord
(compare Luke 4.34.) which have been particularly spoken to in the tract and
place cited a little above.

As the Priests garments were provided at the public charge, so when they were
overworne they returned to the public again, for their coats and breeches
etc. were ravelled to make varne for the lampo^, and for the lights at the
solemn nightly festivity in the feast of Tabernacles, and it is like, for the
Priests candles in their chambers.

SECT. VI. The anointing oil.
THe appointment and composition of anointing oil is laid down in Exodus
30.23, etc. where the Lord commands thus. Thou shall take unto thee
principal spices, of pure myrrh 500 shekels, and of sweet Cinnamon half so
much, even 250 shekels: and of sweet calamus 250 shekels: and of Cassia 500
shekels after the shekel of the Sanctuary, and of oil olive an hin: And thou
shall make it a holy anointing oil, etc. The simples need not to be disputed
of, only I cannot but observe and wonder at the conception of Rambam about one
of them, who holds (...) Mor which our English has very properly translated
Myrrh to be Maim. in kele Mikdash. per. 1.
the congealed blood of an Indian beast: whereupon one of his glossaries takes
him up thus. Gloss. ibid.
It cannot enter into my head, that they would put the blood of a beast into
any holy composition, much less, of a beast unclean. But (...) Mor is that
that is spoken of in the Canticles, I am come into my garden my sister, my
spouse, I have gathered my myrrh.

For the making up of these simples into the compound of the anointing oil,
the way and manner is recorded to have been thus: Ibid.
They were bruised every one apart, and by themselves, and then were they
mingled and boiled in clean water, till all their strength was come out into
that decoction: which decoction strained and having oil put to it, was again
boiled to the height of an ointment and so reserved.

This anointing oil was only in use in the times of the Tabernacle and first
Temple, and with it were their vessels sanctified, according as was appointed
in the place of Exodus even now cited, and described Levit. 8. but there was no
such ointment under the second Temple, for there the vessels were sanctified by
their very use and serving in them: and so indeed was the Temple it self: For
there was neither cloud of glory to sanctfie the house, nor divine fire to
sanctify the Altar, nor holy oil to sanctify the vessels, nor Vrim and
Thummim to honor the Priests, and yet was the place and service then as holy as
it was before. God by this abatement of those external advantages and
excellencies, and yet by the continuance of the honor of his worship and
service, making way to the dignifying of the spiritual worship under the
Gospel, when such external and visible appearances of his presence were not
to be looked for, and when all ceremoniousnesse in holy things should be
abolished and laid aside.

With the holy oil whilst it was in use and employment, was the High Priest
anointed, as well as other things, and when the use of the oil ceased, then
was he consecrated by the arraying of him in the garments appointed for the
Highpriests wearing, and he was said to be (...) consecrated by the vestments,
as we have observed in another place. The manner of his anointing whiles that
was used, is described by the Talmudists to have been (...) Ibid.
after the form of a Greek Chi: They anointed the Kings (say they) after the
form of a crown, but the Priests after the form of a Chi. what means, after
the form of a Chi? Talm. in Kerithuth per. 1.
R. Menasses the son of Gada says, after the form of a Greek Chi. But what
means this? R. Sol. in Lev. 8.
R. Solomon says it was first powered on his head, and then put between his
eyebrowes, and drawn this way and that way with the finger of him that put it
there: which others express thus Aruch in (...)
one powered the oil upon his head, and it ran down this way and that way,
like two pearling droppings upon his beard, as Ps. 133.2.

The oil and anointing wherewith the Priests and the vessels of the Lords
house were sanctified did denote the Word and the Spirit of God, whereby he
sanctifies the vessels of his election, even persons of his choice, to his
service, and acceptance: Oil and anointing do signify the Word as well as
the Spirit, And in that sense should I interpret the anointing in 1 Ioh.
2.20.27. Ye have an unction, that is the word, from the holy One, and ye know
all things by it. And the anointing, that is, the word, which ye have received
of him abides in you: and ye are not to seek for teaching from any man, for
the same word has taught you abundantly of all things, etc.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Emblem of the Divine Glory at Temple. Ezekiel. 1. Esaias 6.
Rev. 4. etc. Explained.
THe Prophet Ezekiel saw the visionary Glory that he has described, chap. 1.
and chap. 10. four times over. 1 At the River Chebar among the captives of his
own captivity, chap. 1.1. that is, that captivity which was carried away with
Jechoniah, for then was he himself captived. 2 In a plain among the captives
of the other captivity, that is, Jehoiakims, Dan. 1. who dwelt indeed upon the
coasts of the same River, but at some distance from the other, chap. 3.15, 20,
23. 3 In the Temple, chap. 8.4. And 4 at the renewed Temple again, chap. 43.2,
3.

The vision and glory that he saw, was thus;

Ezekiel. 1. verse. 4. Behold a whirle-winde out of the North, etc.) Out of the
North appeared a stormy cloud, with fire wrapped in it, which flamed into a
brightness all about, and in the middle of all was as a glowing fire. For out
of the North, namely, from Babel, was a storm to rise and fire to come, that
was to destroy both City and Temple, and that should cause the glory of the
Lord which dwelt there, to come out thence as out of burning, as this glory
that he saw which represented that, came out of this fire.

Verse 5. Four living creatures, and this was their appearance, they had the
likeness of a man.) That is, in stature and proportion of body, thighs, and
legs, they had the likeness and erect shape of a man; only their head and feet
and some particulars else were different, of which he gives account in the
following verses.

Verse 6. But every one had four faces, etc.) I render the conjunction (...)
But; because (the Particle bearing it) it being so translated, gives the
clearer and the readier sense. They had the likeness of a man, But every one
had four faces.

And in verse 7. The same particle (...) in (...) being translated
exegetically, For, does also clear the sense, Their feet were straight feet,
for the sole of their feet was as the sole of a calfes feet.

And they sparkled, etc.) that is, their feet sparkled like burnished brass,
for the brightness of their bodies is described at verse 13.

Verse 8. And the hands of a man were under their wings on their four sides; so
had they four their faces and their wings.) That is, they had their faces and
their wings on their four sides: namely, a wing on their breast and a face that
way, a wing on the back and a face that way, and a wing on either shoulder and
faces likewise, and under their wings every way was a man's hand and arm.

Verse 9. Their wings were joining one to another.) This is explained at verse.
11.

They turned not about when they went, they went every one straight before his
face) Which way soever they were to go, they needed not to turn their bodies,
to set their face that way as men and other creatures do; who when they are to
go this way or that way, they turn their bodies till their faces stand the
way they are to go: but these did not, nor needed they to do so; for go
which way they would, they had a face that led them that way.

Verse 10. As for the likeness of their faces etc.) Every one had the face of
a Man before, and the face of an Eagle behind, the face of a Lion toward the
right hand, and the face of a Bullock toward the left.

It is not much important to dispute, whether they had four heads as well as
faces, or only one head faced on every side; I should rather hold for the
former, and could give some reasons that sway me to that opinion, but I shall
not insist upon them here.

Some there have been that have conceived that the quarters of their faces are
named in reference to their standing toward Ezekiel, as that the face toward
Ezekiel was a man's, the face which was upon Ezekiels right hand (which was the
left hand of the Cherub) was a Lions; the face on Ezekiels left hand (which was
the Cherubs right) the face of a Bullock; and the face of an Eagle behind: but
they that have been of that opinion have not observed, that the four living
creatures stood not in a straight line all facing Ezekiel, but in a square
posture, as shall be showed by and by.

These living Creatures are called Cherubins by this Prophet very often, chap.
10. and by that name, laid to this description, he teaches us how to conceive
of the form of the Cherubins that we read of so often in Scripture, as the
Cherubins upon the Mercy seat, and the Cherubins that overshadowed the Arc in
Solomon's Temple, and the Cherubins wrought in the Tabernacle Curtains, and
carved upon the Temple walls, etc. namely, of this fourfold feature or having
so many faces; saving that in the imbroidery of the Curtains and sculpture
upon the walls, only two of the four faces could be made to appear. And so it
is evident in Ezekiel. 41.19. where he says there were Cherubins and Palm trees
carved upon the walls, so that a Palm tree was between a Cherub and a Cherub,
and every Cherub bad two faces: so that the face of a man was toward the Palm
tree on the one side, and the face of a young lion was toward the Palm tree
on the other side. Their other two faces were to be conceived obscured in the
wall as if they were looking into it. But it may not pass unobserved that
these two faces of a man and a lion, were not the cherubs opposite faces, that
is, that before and that behind, but they were his face before and his face on
the right side: and hence I have one reason to conjecture that they had four
heads as well as four faces, because it will otherwise be very harsh to
imagine how his fore-face and right side-face should be set to look before and
behind. Now these two faces of a Man and a Lion were the faces that the Cherub
that stood upon the right hand of the Arc as it stood facing the people,
looked upon the Arc and the people withal, his humane face toward the Arc,
his Lions toward the people: And we shall observe afterward how those whom the
Cherubins represented, had in office to look mutually toward God and his
people, and were Mediators between them.

The Prophet in chap. 10. verse. 14. reckoning the four faces of these Cherubins
again, begins with the face of a bullock first, which was a left hand face,
and instead of the face of a bullock, he calls it the face of a Cherub: was not
the face of a Lion or Eagle the face of a Cherub, as well as the face of a
Bullock? It seems strange therefore that he should call the Bullocks face,
the face of a Cherub rather then any other: But the reason seems to be taken
from this consideration: The High Priest when he went into the most holy place
up to the Arc, the Cherub that stood by the Arc upon his right hand, whither
he was more ready to look then on his left, stood facing him with the face of
a Bullock. Now the Prophet in this place is speaking of Gods glory flitting
from the Temple, where it dwelt especially on the Arc between the Cherubins,
and as if he looked at that right hand Cherub, which was now flitting from his
station and removing, so he names that face that looked upon him: and he
calls the face of a bullock, the face of a Cherub, because that was the face
of the Cherub that was most looked on and observed by him that went into the
most holy place.

Verse 11. Thus were their faces^ and their wings were parted upward,) Though
their wings joined one to another at the setting on, yet they opened and parted
upward, as also do the wings of other flying fowls: who though they grow near
together at the roots, yet they spread and part wider and wider toward the
points: And the like in some parity may be conceived concerning the parting of
their faces, that they grew upon one root as if were but parted upward, into so
many heads: and so the construction of the verse seems to carry it (...),
where the Particle in the beginning of the verse is not ordinary, and requires
observation: It may very well be rendered, Bvth their faces and their wings were
parted upward.

Two wings of every one were joined one to another, and two covered their
bodies, etc.) The description of the living creatures in Esaias 6. and the
parallel to them and these in Rev. 4. must help us to interpret this eleventh
verse, about their wings. The Apocalyptick calls them living Creatures, and
numbreth them four, and names their four faces punctually as this Prophet
does, but reckons their wings to be six ape^ce, Rev. 4.8. Esaias names indeed
the living Creatures that he saw by another name then either John or Ezekiel
do, yet he means the very same, both for number and form, for he saw the
very same glory of God that these describe, that is, Gods glory at the Temple,
as the very first verse of that chapter does explain it: And in this sense is
the word His glory to be understood, Job. 12.41. He saw four living
Creatures, with four faces, and in all things like to these described here, as
to their form and proportion, and he says every one of them had six wings,
Esaias 6.2.

The Prophet Ezekiel says no less as to that matter, although he speak it not
so very plainly out: for laying verse 11. and verse 23. together, we shall
find the account of their wings to be to this purpose, and the same number.
They had wings that were parted above: these were the two wherewithal they
flew: And they had other two which joined one to another, over their heads,
these are parallel to those wherewithal Esaias says they covered their faces:
and they had two wherewithal they covered their bodies: those are they that he
says covered their feet: Thus is the eleventh verse to be understood: which
the 24 speaks parallel to, and something explaineth. It is said there, that
under the firmament (which was over their heads) their wings were straight one
toward another: and they had two wings which covered on this side, and two
wings which covered on that side: and the meaning thereof is this, that they
always carried two of their wings straight upright, joining together over
their heads, and when they stood still they covered their bodies with four
wings, two on back and belly, and two on either side: Whereas it is said in
verse 24. that when they stood they let down their wings, it is to be
understood only of those two wings wherewithal they flew, for they had every
one of them two wings that they never let down, and they were those
wherewithal they covered their faces; and they had two other which they never
lift up, and they were those wherewithal they covered their back and belly, or
secret parts before and behind. For that expression of Esaias, They covered
their feet, means, they covered their secret parts: for in that sense is feet
sometime taken in Scripture, as The baire of the feet, Esaias 7.20.

And thus are we to reconcile those two verses in this first chapter of
Ezekiel, which seem to be dissonant, the one whereof, namely, verse 11. says
that with two of their wings they covered their bodies; and the other, which is
verse 23. speaks of four that covered their bodies; which mean distinctly
thus, that two of their wings continually covered their secret parts before and
behind, and they never lifted them up; and when they stood still, they let
down their wings wherewith they flew, and with them covered their sides. And
so it appears that their two flying wings grew out at their shoulders, and
the wings wherewith they covered their faces, grew out at their breast and
back, and those grew out below them that covered their secret parts.

Verse 12. And they went every one before his face whithersoever their mind
was to go, etc.) Went they backward, forward, side-way, any way, they had
every one a face to go that way, and needed no turning about to set their
faces that way they would go.

Verse 13. Their appearance was like burning coals of fire, etc.) Hence Esaias
calls them Seraphim, or burning ones; and that the rather, because fire is
there threatened to the Temple.

It went between the living Creatures, etc.) It, that is, fire: Every one of
the living Creatures was of a glowing and flaming brightness, glowing like
coals of burning fire, and flaming like Lamps, and yet besides this firinesse
that they carried every one with them, there was fire also in the midst of
them, of a great brightness and flashing as lightning: So in Rev 4.5. Out of
the Throne went lightnings and thunders and voices.

Thus was the appearance of these Cherubims, one thing more being added out of
Ezekiel. 10.12. That their whole body and their backs and their hands and their
wings were full of eyes: The like is said Rev. 4.6. Now their posture or manner
of standing was such, that standing still or moving, they were in a square
form, as if four men should stand so, as to make a square space or a
quadrangle in the midst between them: Their quadrangular standing, was (as I
may so express it) lozenge-wise, or after the Diamond square, one looking
toward the South with his humane face, and another with his humane face toward
the North, a third with the same face toward the East, and the fourth with the
same toward the West. Thus they stood when they stood, and in this quadrature
they moved when they moved: and to this sense is that passage to be understood
in chap. 10.6, 7. where it is said that fire was between the Cherubims, and one
of them raught fire from between them, that is, out of the square space that
was in the midst of them as they stood. And so is Ezekiel. 1.15. which is the
next verse that comes to be explained, to be understood.

Verse 15. And behold a wheel on the earth by the living Creatures (...) on
his four faces,) That is, on the four sides or faces of the square body as it
stood; namely, a wheel before every one of the living creatures on the
outside of the square: A wheel before him that stood with his humane face
looking East, and a wheel before him that stood with his humane face looking
West, and so before them that stood looking North and South: Or if you will
apprehend this whole body as it stood in its square, in the form of any of the
living Creatures as he was single, do but conceive that one stood looking East
with his face of a Man, and another West with his face of an Eagle, another
looking South with his face of a Lion, and the fourth looking North with his
face of a Bullock; and so you have the four several faces on the outside of
the square, and the four several faces on the inside of it, and the four
wheels standing before the outside staves.

Verse 16. As it were a wheel within a wheel,) The fashion of every wheel
was so, as it were one wheel put cross within another, so that they could
run upon either of these crossing rings as there was occasion: were they to
go Eastward, they ran upon the one ring, but were they suddenly to turn
South, then they ran upon the cross ring: And so as the living Creatures had
faces to lead them any way, so had these wheels rings or rims to go on any way:
And this is meant in verse 17. when it said, they went upon their four sides,
and turned not when they went: Not but that they turned about as wheels do
when they go, but when they were to change their way, as to go from East to
South or North, or from West to either of these quarters, they needed not to
fetch a compass and wind about to set themselves to go that way, but they
readily turned upon the crossing ring and needed no more ado.

And thus did the living Creatures stand in one square, and the wheels in
another square about them: And let us take a pattern of their motion,
supposing the living Creatures to stand with their humane faces looking
severally to the four quarters of heaven. Were they to move East, he that
stood East his humane face led him, and his wheel ran before him; He that
stood West, his Eagles face led him, and his wheel followed him; He that stood
South, his face of a Bullock led him; and he that stood North, his Lions face
led him, and their wheels ran beside them: Were they to turn suddenly South?
he that stood South, his humane face led him, he that stood North, his Eagles,
he on the East his Lions, and he on the North his Bullocks, and now the wheels
ran upon the other ring.

Verse 18. Thus were their rings,) That is, one cross within another: And they
were high, and they were reverent,) (...) It were an easy sense, if the clause
were translated, And they were dreadful, that is, wheels had their
dreadfulnesse as well as the living Creatures: But since the word (...) does
most properly and most generally signify, the inward affection of fear or
reverence, it seems in this place to mean the reverentiall and attendent
posture in which the wheels stood, ready to move or stand according to the
motion or standing of the living Creatures, and both they and the living
Creatures observant of that presence and glory, upon which they waited: Had it
been (...) it might very well have carried it into that construction, but being
(...) it may the better countenance this that is produced, and R. Solomon
speaks of some that did so interpret it.

Such was the fashion of this divine chariot, of living creatures and wheels,
the creatures drawing as it were and acting the wheels, whithersoever they
moved, and the wheels moving or standing together with them in all
voluntarinesse and compliance: Now the Lords riding upon this glorious
carriage, is described in the verses following; An azure sky just over their
heads, borne up as it were with the points of their wings which they held
upright over their heads covering their faces with them: Above that sky a
Throne, on which sat the resemblance of a man all fiery; from his loins
upward like fire glowing, and from his loins downward like fire flaming: and a
brightness in the form of a rainbow round about him Compare Rev. 4.2.3.

And now to take up the moral or signification of this Emblem, we will first
begin with the consideration of the general intention of it, and then descend
to the application of particulars.

That it intends in general to signify and character out unto us, the Lords
glory and presence dwelling at his Temple, and among his people, these
observations will make it past doubting or peradventure.

1 The Temple is very commonly in Scripture styled by the name of Gods Throne,
as Jer. 17.12. A glorious high Throne from the beginning is the place of our
Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 43.7. The place of my Throne, and the place of the soles of my
feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel, etc. Which the
Lord proclaims when his glory was returned to the renewed Temple, as is
apparent in the verses immediately preceding. And so the Prophet Esaias says, I
saw the Lord sitting upon a Throne high, and lifted up, and his Train filled
the Temple, etc. And the house was filled with smoke, etc. Esaias 6.1, 4. Where
he charactereth the Lords sitting parallel to his dwelling in the cloud of
glory upon the Arc, and from thence filling the whole house with the train of
his glory. And so in the book of the Revelation, where the Lord is inthroned,
with such living Creatures attending him as are described here, there are so
plain intimations, that it means his glory at his Temple, that nothing can
be plainer: for when there is mention of a Sea of Glass before the Throne, and
of seven Lamps, Rev. 4. v. 5, 6. and of a golden Altar of incense, chap. 8.3.
and of a voice from that Altar, chap. 9.13. etc. the allusion is so clear to
the molten Sea, seven Lamps of the golden Candlestick, the Altar of incense,
and the Oracle given from beyond it, which all were before the Arc where the
Lords glory dwelt in the cloud, that the matter needs no more proof then
only to observe this: And that the throne and glory of God throughout all that
description means in this sense, there is evidence enough in that one clause
in chap. 16. v. 17. a voice came out of the Temple of heaven from the Throne.

2 Ezekiel himself shows that this glory referred to the Temple, because he
has showed it pitched there, flitting thence and returning thither again. 1
He says, that the glory of the God of Israel was at the Temple, namely, that
that he had seen and described in the first chapter, chap. 8.4. though he be
there in numbering up the abominations that were committed in the Temple, which
were great and many, yet does he relate that this glory was there still,
because the Lord had not yet withdrawn his presence thence. But 2 At the last
the provocations in that place do cause it to depart; and that departure he
describes in the tenth chapter, and there he sets forth the very same
glory, and almost in the very same terms that he does in the first chapter. He
tells that this glory of the Lord departed from off the Cherub, that is, from
off the Mercy seat, where it had always dwelt between the Cherubims, and went
out, first to the threshold, verse. 4. then to the East gate, verse. 19. then to
the City and to the Mount Olivet and so departs, chap. 11.23. But 3 When he
speaks of and describes a new Temple, then he shows his glory returned
thither again, chap. 43.2, 3, 4. And upon these three particulars of its
pitching at the Temple, flitting thence and returning thither again, we may
take up these observations for the further clearing of this signification.

1 That the Prophet makes some distinction betwixt the glory of the Lord
dwelling upon the Cherub, that is, on the Mercy seat, over the Arc, and the
glory of the Lord upon these Cherubims: for he says the glory of the Lord went
up from the Cherub, and stood ever the threshold of the house, these Cherubims
then standing on the right side of the house, chap. 10.3, 4. and then that the
glory of the Lord departed from off the threshold of the house, and stood over
the Cherubims, verse. 18. The glory of the Lord in the representation that the
Prophet describes in the first chapter was upon the Cherubims already, for he
says the glory of the God of Israel was there according to the vision that I
saw in the plain, chap. 8.4. and yet he mentions another glory now added to
it: namely, the cloud of glory that dwelt upon the Mercy seat, for he says
that upon the flitting of that glory from off the Cherub to the threshold, the
house was filled with the cloud; the meaning of this we shall look at
afterward.

2 As to the flitting of this glory from the Temple, the Prophet says he saw
it when he came to destroy the City, chap. 43.3. that is, when he came to
foretell that the City should be destroyed. And he dated the time of his first
seeing of this glory, in the fifth year of the captivity of Jehoiakim, chap.
1.2. which was the fifth year of the reign of Zedekiah, 2 Kings 24.8, 17, 18.
in which very year Zedekiah did rebel against the King of Babel, which action
was the very beginning of Jerusalems ruin.

3 As to the returning of this flitted glory again to the new built Temple,
chap. 43. it is observable that the cloud of glory which had descended and
filled the Tabernacle, and had done the like at Solomon's Temple, did never so
at the second Temple, or that built after the Captivity, as the Jews
themselves confess, and that not without, good reason: Yet does the Prophet as
clearly bring that glory into his new Temple, as ever it had come into them:
but only that this was in a vision, and so it showed visionarily, the Lords
dwelling in his Ordinances and presence among his people under the second
Temple, unto which the People returned out of Babel, and in the spiritual
Temple or Church under the Gospel (for Ezekiels new Temple promised a bodily
Temple to the returned, and promised, and typified a spiritual Temple under
the Gospel) even as he had done visibly in his cloud of glory, in the
Tabernacle and first Temple. And 2 he adds further, that when that glory was
entered, the East gate at which it came in, was shut and never opened after,
chap. 44.2. to denote the Everlasting dwelling of the Lord in the Church of the
Gospel among his people, and never departing as he had done from Jerusalem
Temple.

This then being the signification of this appearance and glory, in general,
we are next to look upon the particulars of it, which will more fully also
confirm and clear this matter, and first we will begin with the living
Creatures, or Cherubims.

For the better discovery of them what they were, and what they meant, these
things do deservedly challenge special considering and observation.

1 That they are plainly distinguished from Angels: For in Rev. 5.11. there is
mention of many Angels round about the Throne and about the living Creatures,
and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of
thousands: And in Rev. 7.11. All the Angels stood round about the Throne, and
about the Elders, and the four living Creatures: So that here is apparent
difference between Angels and living Creatures both in their names and in their
placing: For the living Creatures were about the Throne, the 24 Elders about
the living Creatures, and the innumerable multitude of Angels about all.

2 That they were such as Christ redeemed from the earth; For observe in Rev.
5.8, 9. The four living Creatures as well as the four and twenty Elders fall
down before the Lamb, etc. saying, Thou wast slain and have redeemed us to
God by thy blood, out of every kindred and tongue, and people and Nation, and
have made us unto our God Kings and Priests etc. So that the living Creatures
were redeemed, and were of people and Nations, and were made Kings and Priests
as well as the 24 Elders, which cannot be applied to Angels.

3 That these living Creatures or Cherubims are never mentioned but in vision
or Hicroglyphick; In vision, as in these places that have been cited of Esaias,
Ezekiel, and the Revelation, and in Hieroglyphicke, as the Cherubims covering
the Arc, and wrought in the Tabernacle Curtains, and on the Temple wais. It
is true indeed that it is said in Genesis 3. God placed Cherubims at the gate of
Eden, which is only for the fuller and more feeling apprehension of the thing,
the Cherubims being such forms as with which the people were best acquainted
seeing them in the Tabernacle curtains.

4 They therefore being thus constantly held out in a doctrinall and
significative tenor, as visions and Hieroglyphics are, they are to be
expounded to such a doctrinall and figurative sense, and so is the whole body
of glory, as I may so call it, the whole visionary theater or spectacle that is
before us to be taken.

And first to begin with the quadrature or apiece posture of the whole
appearance, which was touched before, and now a little more to be considered
on. There is intimation enough in Ezekiel, that the four living Creatures stood
square, with a fire in the midst of them, and the wheels in a square on the
outside of the square of the living Creatures: but in the Revelation it is yet
more plain, for there it is said the four living Creatures stood round about
the Throne, which could not be but in a quadrature, one before, another
behind, and one of either side; for how else could four stand round about it?
The Throne then meaning the Temple as was showed before, this double quadrature
about it, does call us to remember the double camp that pitched about the
Tabernacle upon the four sides of it, East, West, North, and South: When the
Lord did first platform and order the incamping of Israel in the Wilderness.

1 He pitched his own Tabernacle in the middle, as that being the very Center,
heart, and life of the Congregation, and they being all to attend upon it, and
God thereby declaring himself to be in the midst of them, Lev. 26.11, 12.

2 He pitched the Tribe of Levi in four squadrons on the four sides of the
Tabernacle next unto it: for they being the Ministers that attended upon the
public service, and that drew near unto the Lord, and were Mediators 'twixt
God and his people, the Lord caused them to incampe next unto his Sanctuary,
and betwixt the Camp of the people and himself.

3 The outmost of all, in four main bodies on the four sides of the
Tabernacle, and of the Levites Camp, did the whole Congregation pitch, and so
there were two quadratures, the Levi^es about the Sanctuary and the
Congregation about the Levites. See Numb. 2.

Answerable is the platform here, and the quadrangular posture is in reference
and allusion to that, and from thence must we explain it. In the midst was a
quadrangle of fire: and upon every side of that quadrangle a Cherub, and on the
outside of the Cherubims even before every one of them was a wheel. And in the
Revelation, A Throne in the middle, four living Creatures next about it, and
the 24 Elders about them.

So that by this parallel to Isreal's Camp from whence the platform both in the
Prophet and the Apocalyptick is taken, the four living Creatures did signify
the Priests and Ministers of the Lord, and the wheels in the one, and the 24
Elders in the other did represent the people or the Congregation: And this will
arise clearer and clearer still to our observation, as wegoe along to consider
their place, actions and descriptions.

1 I know it is conceived by some that the 24 Elders in the Revol^tion were
nearer the throne then the Cherubims (and that opinion must needs conclude the
like in Ezekiel) but the contrary is apparent by these observations. 1 That
(besides what has been said upon v. 15.) in Ezekiel. 10.6. a man clothed in
linen, being bidden to take fire from between the wheels, from between the
Cherubims, he first goes in within the compass of the wheels, and then a
Cherub takes fire from the midst of the Cherubims and reaches it to him. 2 It
is said there again at v. 9. that the four wheels were by the Cherubims,
whereas if the wheels had been inmost it had been proper to have said, the
Cherubims were by the wheels. 3 And at v. 18. It is said the glory of the Lord
stood over the Cherubims, and chap. 1.22, 26. etc. It is said the Throne of God
was just over their heads, and there is no mention of being over the wheels,
which shows it very unlikely that the wheels were in the middle of the
Cherubims. 4 In Rev. 5.6. the platform is named thus, In the midst of the
Throne, and of the four living Creatures, and in the midst of the Elders; the
Throne in the midst, the living Creatures next, and the Elders outmost: and so
again in v. 11. etc. 5 In chap. 4.4. It is said that about the Throne were
four and twenty seats, and on them four and twenty Elders sitting; and at verse
6. (...): which is a hard piece of Greek to construe, because there is an
ellipsis of a particle, which not observed, has produced but harsh
interpretations of the place. The Syriack has rendered it In the midst of the
Throne, and about it and before it; the most translations, In the midst of the
Throne, and about the Throne, which how to make a smooth exposition of, is hard
to find. The particle (...) seems to be understood, which expressed, the
sentence would run thus, (...), that is, between the Throne and the
incompassing that was about it (of 24 seats and Elders on them) there were four
living Creatures.

Thus then was the place of the living Creatures, next the Throne; and that
being the place of the Levites next the Sanctuary, it shows that these
Cherubims or Creatures, did represent the Ministers and the wheels, and 24
Elders did represent the Congregation.

And this will yet appear the clearer by observing that the living Creatures
were the first agents and movers continually in any expedition or imploiment,
as the Ministers were in the public service. In Ezekiel. 1. and 10. the wheels
moved or stood, according as the living Creatures did first. And in the
Apocalypse the living Creatures first praise and worship, and then the Elders,
chap. 5.14. The four living Creatures said Amen, and the 24 Elders fell down
and worshipped, etc. chap. 4.9, 10. When the living Creatures give glory and
honor, etc. the 24 Elders fell down, etc.

2 And now to come to the consideration of their figure and resemblance, and
first to begin with their four faces; the Jews acknowledge that these four
faces were severally pictured in the four Standards of the squadrons of Isreal's
Camp, as they pitched in the quadrangular form that has already been spoken
of. There were figures (says Aben Ezra in Number. 22.
Aben Ezra) in every Standard and Standard: And our Ancients do say that in the
Standard of Reuben, there was the picture of a man, and in the Standard of
Judab the picture of a Lion, in the Standard of Ephraim the picture of a
Bullock, and in the Standard of Dan the picture of an Eagle, so that they were
like the Cherubims which Ezekiel saw: With which assertion Ramban also agrees,
and Targum Jonathan does not much dissent, and this opinion was entertained as
an ancient Tradition of the Nation: upon what ground, and upon what references
of these Pictures to the Tribe and Standard to which they belonged, it is not
much material to insist upon, to debate here.

Upon the observation that these representations were severally in the
standards of Isreal's camp, some have concluded, that therefore the four
living creatures which bare these representations did signify the Congregation
or people, and not the Levites or Ministers: which is unproper to conceive,
because such a construction allotteth all the four figures to every standard,
whereas all the four standards did but make up and carry these four figures
amongst them all. But it is not improper to allot all these four figures to
every one of the squadrons of the Levites, for every one of them, nay every
particular one of the Priests and Levites had interest in and relation to the
whole Congregation, as being Ministers in their behalf: And as Aaron carried
all the tribes upon his shoulders and breast, so are the Ministers in these
emblemes of the living creatures, decyphered as carrying the faces of all the
standards of the whole Congregation: because of their reference to the whole
Congregation, they serving at the Temple for it. What allegorical
interpretations are made of these four faces, I shall not trouble the reader
to produce, every one may find one such application of them or other as his
conception upon them shall lead him to it.

As for the rest of the proportion of these living Creatures, they are
especially remarkable for their wings and feet, for the rest of their bodies
was like the body of a man: Two of their wings were always erect over their
heads covering their faces, from under which they spied as it were at their way
they were to go, and at the glory they attended on: which pertinently denotes
the reverentiall respect that the Ministers of the Lord have to his glory and
to the mysteries of his counsel; compare 1 Pet. 1.12. With two other wings
they covered their secrets, in sign of humble sensiblenesse of their own
deformity, and with two they flew, in signification of ready activity and
attendance for and upon the Lords service; their feet were in fashion like to
the feet of a bullock, and in color like to burnished brass: according to
which latter character the feet of our Savior are described Rev. 1.15. His
feet like unto fine brass as if they burned in a furnace. Every one will be
ready to frame an allegorical application of these circumstances, according to
his own conception: It may be some (if they take those living creatures to
represent the Ministers as I suppose they do) will when they read of their feet
like to the feet of bullocks, apprehend that it is, because they trod out the
corn of the word for the people; and as that was also done with a wheel, so
there are wheels here in the like manner: It may be they will think they are
described thus footed for the fitter setting them forth as the drawers of this
divine charret. It may be they will suppose the beauty and shining brightness
of their feet, may signify the holiness of their ways shining in sanctity
and burning in zeal: It may be they may think of the Priests feet red for
cold as they stood upon the bare stones in their service, and they seeming
unsensible of it as are the feet of bullocks, and such variety of apprehensions
will be ready to be taken up upon these things, that a man may speak his own
thoughts and opinion in this matter, but not readily bring another to be of his
mind,

The likeness of these living creatures all over their bodies, was as burning
coals of fire, and like the appearance of lamps Ezekiel. 1. v. 13. for the
faithful ministers of the Lord are as a flame of fire, as Psalm. 104.4 shining
in life and doctrine like lamps and lights, Job. 5.35. Mat. 5.14, 15, 16. and
by the word of the Lord even devouring the disobedient, as Ier. 5.14. I will
make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood and it shall devour them.

The fire that was in the midst of these Creatures, which went up and down
among them, and out of which proceeded thundrings and lightnings, Ezek^ 1.14.
Rev. 4.5. may draw our thoughts to the Altar and fire there, and to observe the
Priests standing on the 4 sides of it in their attendance on it (and so Esaias
says, one of the Seraphims took a fiery coal from the Altar and touched his
lips with it, Esai. 6.6, 7.) as these living Creatures stood on the four sides
of a quadrangle of fire which was in the midst of them, or rather it so plainly
denotes the word of God among his ministers, and the thundrings and lightnings
and voices do so clearly relate to the giving of the word at Sina^, that so to
allegorize it, is without any straining at all, especially considering how
commonly the word of God is compared to fire in the scripture, as Deuteronomy. 33.2.
Ier. 3.14. and, 23.29. and 20.9. 1 Cor. 3.13.

Those were these living creatures which did resemble and emblem the Lord
Ministers: the emblem of the people or the Congregation was two fold; in
Ezekiel, wheels; in the Revelatron, four and twenty Elders, and these latter
help to understand the meaning of the former. As the Arc and Cherubims upon
it and by it are called the charet of the Cherubims 1 Chronicles. 28.18. the Lord
there riding as it were in his glory and presence, in the cloud that dwelt upon
it, even such another composture does Ezekiel describe here, the divine charet
of the Lord, of his glorious and triumphant riding and sitting among his people
in his word ordinances and his presence in them: And it is remarkable what is
spoken by Ezekiel in chap. 10.4.18. of which mention was made before when he
says, That the glory of the Lord went up from the cherub and stood ovber the
Cherubims: which means but this, that that glory which had dwelt upon the
Arc in the most holy place, did now depart and came to dwell upon this other
charet which he had described, of living creatures and wheels donoting this,
that though the visible presence of the Lord which had appeared in the cloud of
glory upon the Arc were now departed, yet was his presence still among his
people in that manner which he emblemed in that Scheme, namely his ministers
and people attending him in his word and ordinances, and acting and moving
according thereunto. And in the description of this divine charet, you may
observe, that the living creatures or ministers, are charactered out. as both
the body of the charet and they also that acted the wheels: for the Lord
rides upon their ministry (as it were) and his name is thereby carried where
he pleases: and they are those whom he uses by that ministry to draw and
move the people to obedience, and conforming to his word: and there the Lord
does ride triumphantly among a people, as Psalm. 45.4. where ministers and
people in joint and sweet harmony and consent, do agree and concur to carry
up the word, name, and glory of the Lord, and both do act in the power of the
word and ordinances: the ministers ministering, and the people moving or
standing according to the direction and influence of that word.

What the Apocalyptick means by the four and twenty elders, he himself
gives some explanation of in chap 21.12.14. where he speaks of the gates and
foundations of the new Jerusalem, parallel to the twelve tribes of Israel, and
the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. And as these twelve and twelve, were the
beginnings as we may call them, the one number of the Church under the law, and
the other number of the Church under the Gospel, so under the sum and number
of both these united together, or under the notion of these four and twenty
elders he intends the whole Church or Congregation both of Jews and
Gentiles. Both wheels and living Creatures are described full of eyes, in
Ezekiel. 1.18. Rev. 4.8. because of the great measure of knowledge the Lord
vouchsafed to his people, and to denote the heedfulnesse of the Saints in their
walking before him. The Lord himself is described dwelling upon them and among
them, in bright glorious and majestic representations, but withal, incircled
with the likeness of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain Ezekiel.
1.28. Rev. 4.3. which was the emblem of the Lords Covenant with his people: as
Genesis 9.13, 14, 15.

CHAP. XXXIX.
The motions and stations of the Arc and Tabernacle.
THe Tabernacle (which in its time was as a moving Temple) being brought into
the Land of Canaan by Joshua, Maym. in Beth habbech. per. 1 and Ral. bag. in
Josh 4.
was first pitched and set up at Gilgal, the famous place of their first
incamping, Josh. 4.19. but the Arc and it were parted asunder, immediately
after the pitching of it: For that was carried into the field and marched with
them in the wars of Canaan: Josh. 6.12. and 8.33, etc. while the Tabernacle
stood without it at Gilgal, and there the Sanbedrin sat near unto it, with a
strong camp as a guard for defense of both: Josh. 9.6.15. and 20.43.

The time of the Tabernacles standing there, was till the land was conquered,
and Judah and the sons of Joseph were seated, Josh. 18.1. which was seven
years: though Maym. ubi supr. and Seder Olam.
some of the Jews do allot it fourteen: in which time, as they also assert,
high places were lawful, and it was permitted to offer sacrifices elsewhere
then at the Tabernacle: because in that time they were abroad in the wars,
and their condition was unsettled. Before the Tabernacle was first set up Talm.
in Zevachin. per. 14.
(say they) high places were permitted, and the service was done by the first
borne: But after the Tabernacle was erected, high places were prohibited, and
the service was performed by the Priesthood. The most holy things were eaten
within the curtains, and the less holy in any part of the camp of Israel.
When they came to Gilgall, high places were permitted again: and the most holy
things were eaten within the curtains, and the less holy in any place.

The memorable monuments that had been at Gilgal, did leave it as a place of
honor and renown, and did prove occasion in after times of exceeding much
superstition, will worship and Idolatry there: for there they sacrificed
bullocks, Hos. 12. 11. and all their wickedness was there, and there the Lord
hated them Hos. 9.15. Kimch. in Hos. 9.
either because they renewed the Kingdom in Gilgal 1 Samuel 11.12. and refused
the Lord to reign over them, or because the Tabernacle had been first set up
at Gilgal, and that was a choice place, thereupon the Prophet of Baul persuaded
them there to worship Baal.

When the Land was conquered and now at peace, they removed the Tabernacle from
Gilgol to a town of Ephraim, for his birth^ights sake, and set it up there and
called the place Shiloh or Peaceable, because the Lord had given them rest from
their wars and from their enemies round about. Here was built house of stone,
for the Tabernacle Talm. and Maym. ubi supr.
as the Jews suppose, but only it was not roofed over with any thing, save
with the curtains with which it had been covered from its first making: and
this they ground from 1 Samuel 1.9. because it is called a Temple, and 1 Samuel
3.15. because it is said to have doors.

The time of the abode of the Tabernacle at Shiloh ( Ephrata or in the tribe of
Ephraim, Psalm. 132.6.) was from the seventh year of the rule of Ioshus to the
death of Eli 349 years, in which time occurred all the story of the book of
Judges, and the translation of the High-priest-hood from the line of Eleazar to
the line of Ithamar, which is not there mentioned, and the cause of which
alteration is not recorded.

Zevachin ubi supr.
In this time high places were prohibited: and at Shiloh, there was no roose
but a house of stone below and curtains above: and it was a place of rest: the
most holy things were eaten within the curtains, and the less holy and second
tithe without etc. In these times there is mention of a Sanctuary at Shechem:
Josh. 24.1.25.26. which means only the house where the Arc was lodged for
that present time: for all the tribes meeting at Sb. chim, and being to make a
Covenant with the Lord, they fetch the Arc of the Covenant thither, that the
presence and dread of the Lord might be more visible among them, and the place
where the Arc was set for that time was called the Sanctuary: as Moses tent
was called the Tabernacle of the Congregation, because the glory of the Lord
rested upon it before the Tabernacle of the Congregation it self was built.
Exodus 33.7.

From Shiloh, upon that fatal blow that Israel received by the Philistines, 1 Samuel 4. the Arc was captived, into the land of these uncircumcised, and the
Tabernacle removed into another tribe, and they so parted that they never met
again, till they met together at Solomon's Temple.

The Tabernacle was removed to Nob, a city of Priests 1 Samuel 22.19, in the
tribe of Benjamin, Neh. 11.31, 32. and by the Jews Choregraphy, with in the
sight or prospect of Jerusalem. The Chaldee Paraphrast glosseth Esaias 10.32.
where there is mention of this town, thus: Chald par. in Esai. 10.
He came and stood in Nob a city of Priests before the Wall of Jerusalem: He
answered and said unto his army, Is not this the city of Jerusalem for which I
have mustered all my Army, and for which levied all my province! behold it is
less and weaker then any of the cities that I have subdued. He stood and
nodded his head and waved his hand against the mountain of the house of the
Sanctuary. For (says Kimchi) from Nob he might see Jerusalem, and when he saw
it from thence he shook his hand at it as one despising it.

I shall not be curious to inquire whether Nob were any of the four cities
that were allotted at the first division, to the Priests, out of the tribe of
Benjamin, Josh. 21.17, 18. or whether it were of a latter possession (as Ramah
was to the Levites of the stock of Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.1.) or if Nob were one of
those four first cities (and the same with Almon, for the other three are
clearly distinguished from it, Esai. 10.29, 30.2 Chron. 1.30) whether it were
Baburim, which the Chaldee paraphrast constantly renders Alemeth, the same
with Almon 1 Chronicles. 6.60. I shall only observe this, that when the Tabernacle
had left the tribe of Joseph one of the sons of Rahel, it be takes it to
Benjamin another son of the same mother.

The warrant of its conveyance hither I doubt not was divine, by some
prophetical direction, though it be not expressed: I dare aver that the
removal of it from hence to Gibeon was so, though that be not expressed
neither, and I judge of the one by the other: and my reason is this; because
when David brings up the Arc to his own city and there settles the Priests
and Levites in their attendance upon it, he also settles Priests and Levites in
their attendance on the Tabernacle at Gibeen ^ Chron. 16.39, 40, 41, etc. Now
what reason can be given why David should not rather have fetched up the
Tabernacle to his own city as he did the Arc, then thus divide the service of
the Priests and Levites, but because he knew the Tabernacle was placed in
Gibeon by divine warrant and direction and he would not alter it?

If the Tabernacle removed to Nob presently upon the captiving of the Arc from
Shiloh, it resided there about 37 years, all which time Samuel is alive, and
sees both the fall of Shiloh and the fall of Nob, and it may very well be, he
was the directour of the Tabernacle from Shiloh to Nob, and from Nob to Gibeon:
In the time of its residence in both these places high places were permitted
(as the Talmud conceives in the place cited even now) and the most holy things
were eaten within the curtains and the less holy things in any city of Israel.

At Gibeon another place of the tribe of Benjamin, did the Tabernacle stay from
its first pitching there, till Solomon brought it up to the Temple when it was
built: and whilst it stood here, a memorable plece of Divine justice against
Saul cannot but be observed (to omit all other particulars) for as he had
slain the Priests of the Lord, and had ruined the Tabernacle at Nob, so his
sons are hanged up before the Tabernacle in Gibeon, 2 Samuel 21.9. And now let us
trace the Arc as we have done the Tabernacle till we bring them together.

The Arc being captived by the Philistines in the battle at Aphek, was
detained in their Land seven months, rather because they knew not what to do
with it, then for any comfort or happiness they found in it, for it was a
plague to their gods, people and Country: At last it was restored: and first
to Bethshemesh, a city of Priests, Josh. 21.16. but there it proved also the
destruction of the people: The Hebrew Commentators do scruple both at the
cause of the slaughter, and at the number slain: The cause is not so very
abstruse, for the text says it was because they looked into the Arc (though
their various construction of the words has bred their doubting) but it is
something strange that Bethshemesh a town of no great note should lose fifty
thousand and seventy inhabitants at one time (besides what escaped) a number of
people answerable to the greatest cities. The Commentators spoken of, having
observed this improbability will heal the matter with as improbable a gloss:
Seventy men (say they) which were valuable, every one to fifty thousand; and
others retaining the scruple still, do raise it higher by their
interpretation, for the fifty thousand men (say they) were every one of them
valuable to the seventy men in the Sanhedrin. The text does plainly distinguish
of the persons, for it says, that he smote of the men of Bethshemesh because
they looked into the Arc, and he smote of the people: For the return of the
Arc had occasioned no doubt the concourse of the people all about, besides the
inhabitants of Bethshemesh (it was now upon the time of the feast of
Tabernacles when the Arc came up to them, and it may be that might cause the
more conflux to the Arc when it was come) and the Lord for the boldness of
Priests and people that would be looking into the Arc, breaks out upon them
with the plague, and destroys so many thousands of them.

The Priests of Bethshemesh that had escaped, sent to the men of Kiriathjearim
to fetch up the Arc to them, and so they do. It is equally questionable, why
they that were Priests should send about such a matter as this to the men of
Kiriathjearim which were not, and that the men of Kiriathjearim should venture
to fetch up the Arc, when they had seen the speeding of Bethshemesh by it: But
the Lord had now forsaken the tribe of Ephraine, in which tribe Shiloh stood,
and had made choice of the tribe of Judah Psalm. 78.67, 68. of which
Kiriathjearim was a chief city: and whether he used the counsel of Samuel to
the the people for a means to accomplish his determination, or what other way,
is not determinable, but it is brought to pass, and the Arc now seated in the
tribe of Judah, out of which it never unsettled again whilst it was in being.

A long time whilst it stayed in Kiriathjearim it was under the curb of,
Philistine garrison which was in that city 1 Samuel 10.5. which might much dampe
the peoples seeking and resorting to it, especially in this looseness and
lukewarmenesse, or rather utter coldness of religion that was amongst them.
However, at the end of twenty years a general reformation does begin amongst
them, and they begin to hearken after God, the Arc and religion, and put away
the strange gods that were among them, and God at that very instant does grant
them a miraculous victory against the Philistines. 1 Samuel 7.

We read once of the Arkes being within the compass of the tribe of Benjamin
before David fetched it up to Jerusalem, and that was with Saul at Gibeah 1 Samuel 14.18. but it was restored from thence to Kiriathjearim as the place
appointed for it as yet, by divine direction, for otherwise it might as easily
have been set up in Nob where the Tabernacle was now standing.

David about the second year of his reign in Jerusalem, fetches it up from
Kiriathjearim thither, and there pitched an habitation for it in Sion, where it
resided till it was translated into Solomon's Temple, save only that once it
was taken out to have flitted with David in his flight from his son Absalom,
but soon restored to its place again. 2 Samuel 15. At this Tabernacle in which
the Arc was lodged in Sion David sets up an Altar, 1 Chronicles. 16.2. for the
offerings at that present time of the Arkes bringing up thither, but not for
continual sacrificing: And there he appointed a constant music to attend, of
the Levites, but the Priests waited at Gibeon, where the Tabernacle was and the
daily sacrifice.

CHAP. XL. The state and fate of the first Temple.
AT Naioth in Ramah where Samuel and David spent some time together, they
platfsormed the buildings of the Temple and the manner of the service: It was
an unlikely time for David to think and contrive for such a thing at that
time, when he knew not where to hide his own head from the fury of Saul, yet so
sure was the promise to him, and so assured was his faith in it, that even from
that time he laid the foundation of his thoughts toward the building of a
Temple, settling of a service, and even all his time after was preparing toward
it. In all his wars and victories he still remembered to dedicate something of
his spoils for that purpose, 2 Samuel 8.10, 11. 1 Chronicles. 18.8, etc. so that at
his death he left the greatest sums of silver and gold, and stock of brass and
iron and such materials that is recorded in any story: And as he had his first
instructions from Samuel, so did he ripen then by the propheticke directions of
Gad and Nathan the Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 29.25. and so settled the Priests and
Levites in their courses, and carpenters and masons to work, and had described
the platform of all thingsso exactly, that he lest to Solomon in a manner but
the care to see the work done, for he had prepared all things before.

About eleven or twelve years space was the work of the Temple in hand, before
it was finished, namely four years in hewing stone and framing timber, and
seven years and an half in bringing up the building: For David in the last year
of his reign has gathered all the proselytes in the land to the number of
153000 and had set them to work, and so they continued framing and preparing
materials till the fourth year of the reign of Solomon, in the second month
of which year the foundation of the house was laid, and in the eight month of
his eleventh year the work was finished, 1 King. 6.38. and so it was seven
years and an half in building, which the text for roundnesse of number does
count but seven.

It was a year within a month after that it was finished before the
dedication of it, in which time it is likely, they were getting away the
rubbish, and preparing for its consecration, it lying useless all the while,
for the providence of the Lord disposed that it should be dedicated at such a
time, as that the time should carry a mystery and type with it, as well as the
Temple it self. In the eleventh year of Solomon's reign in the month Bull
which is the eight month it was finished. 1 King. 6.38. and in his twelfth
year in the month Ethanim which is the seventh month it was consecrated:
even at the time of the feast of Tabernacles, 1 King. 8.20, 2 Chronicles. 5.3. or
the fifteenth day of that month: Concerning the title Ethanim, by which this
month was named, the Jews have these glosset: The Chaldes renders that verse
in the book of Kings thus, And all the men of Israel were gathered to the King
in the old month, which they called the first month, but now the seventh. Aru.
^ in vece (...)
Some of the Rabbines say it was called Ethanim (which signifies strength, or
strong ones) because the fathers were borne in it which were the mighty ones of
the world: And others Levi Gersh. in 1 King. 8.
because in it were the greatest seasts: or Kimch. ibi.
as others, because in it the fruits were gathered, which are the strength of
man's life, etc. But whatsoever was the notation of the name, certainly the
remarkablenesse of that month was singular, in regard of many eminent
occurrences that befell in it, of which we have spoken elsewhere, the most
renowned of all which was, that our Savior in that month was borne into the
world (and what if on that very day that the Temple was consecrated, namely the
15 day of the month) of whose incarnation and birth how lively a type, the
Temple and its dedication were. I need not to illustrate: Thus was the Temple
dedicate and the service of it began anno mundi 3001.

At the dedication of it, both the books of Kings and Chronicles inform us,
that the Tabernacle of the Congregation and all the holy vessels that had been
in the Tabernacle were brought up thither, 1 King. 8.4. 2 Chronicles. 5.5. But the
question is, What became of them there, were they used on were they laid up?
There are that assert either way: and the latter seems the more probable,
namely that these things of Moses, upon the rising of a greater and more
eminent glory, did decay and were laid aside, as all his Ceremonies were to do
upon the rising of the Gospel.

The Temple though it were of a heavenly resemblance, use and concernment, as
figuring Christ's body, Joh. 2.19. enjoying Gods presence, 2 Chronicles. 7.16. and
Isreal's worship, Psalm. 122.4. etc. yet being but an earthly building it was
subject to the universal condition of earthly things, casualty and changing:
Nay there is hardly any state or place in any story, of which may be found more
vicissitudes and alterations of condition then of this: and there is hardly any
Kings time of all those that reigned in the time of the Temple, in which it
received not some remarkable alteration of estate or other. In the time of
Solomon that built it, it received that vile affront of an Idol Temple built by
him in the face of it, and what became of the service of the Temple in these
times may be shrewdly suspected: In his son Rehoboams time, it was first
forsaken by the ten tribes, and afterward by Judah it self, who fell to
Idolatry, and then it was plundered by Shishak. How often the Treasuries of it
were plundered sometimes by forainers, sometimes by their own Kings, how often it
self profaned, as by Athaliah, Abaz, Manasseh, how the service of it either
totally slighted, or slightly performed, how Idols set up in it, and Altars to
strange gods: how the blood of the High Priest shed, and the manners of the
Priests corrupt, and the house of prayer made a den of thieves, as also how
sometimes again it was repaired, the service restored, the Priests reformed,
and matters amended with it, is so plainly and copiously described in the
books of Scripture, that it were but transcription of the text to recite them
in particular. At last it had run out its date, and it self fired and all its
precious vessels were captived by the Babylonian: what became of the Arc the
Scripture does not mention, the Jews conceive that it was hid, in some vault
that they say Solomon had purposely made against such a time, where it escaped
the conquerors fury: but this we leave to their own credit.

The time of the standing of this first Temple from its finishing in the
eleventh year of Solomon, to its firing by Nebuzaradan, was 420 years.

SECT. II. The state of the second Temple under the Persian Monarchy.
ALthough between the return out of the Babylonian captivity, and the final
desolation of Jerusalem, there might seem to be strictly and literally two
Temples, that of Zorobabel, and that of Herod, (for Herod began his Temple from
the very foundation) yet do the Scriptures, and all Jewish writers so
unanimously and generally own them but for one Temple, calling it the second
Temple all the time there was a Temple after its first building under Cyrus,
that it would be but needless labor and unwarrantable curiosity to take up any
other notion or distinction of it. For though the Temple built by Zorobabel
were pulled down to the very ground by Herod, when he built that fabric that
stood to the last fate of Jerusalem, yet since that demolition was not by
destruction and ruin, but for reparation and for its bettering, there is no
reason to reckon these as two several Temples, but as one Temple first built
and then repaired to a more excellent and glorious condition.

From the first year of Cyrus (in which he proclaimed redemption to the
Captives, and gave commandment to restore and build Jerusalem) to the death of
Christ were 490 years, as they be summed by an Angel, Dan. 9. and from the
death of Christ to the fatal and final destruction of Jerusalem were 40
years more, 530 years in all. In all which time it were endless to show
every particular occurrence, and change of condition that befell the Temple,
and it would require a large story and volume: I shall therefore only touch
upon the chiefest, distributing the times into those several and remarkable
periods that they fell into, and applying the stories to the times accordingly.

The first parcel of this time was taken up by the Persian Monarchy, which how
long it continued, and for how many Kings Succession, is a thing of as
disputable and controverted a nature, as any one thing in Chronology: I will
keep to the number and names of the Kings of that Throne that we find in
Scripture.

In Dan. 11.2. there are these words: Behold there shall stand up yet three
Kings in Persia, and the fourth shall be far richer then they all: and by his
strength through his riches he shall stir up all against the Re In of Grecia.
And a mighty King shall stand up, etc. And when he shall stand up his Kingdom
shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four winds of Heaven, and not
to his posterity, etc. It is observable concerning this prophecy and account
about the Persian Monarchy.

1 That this was told Daniel in the third year of Cyrus chap. 10.1. and so
when he says, There shall stand up yet three Kings, and the fourth, etc. he
means four besides Cyrus, the first beginner of the Kingdom; and therefore
some of the Jews do make but a cross reckoning upon this place, who will have
Cyrus which was the first, to be meant by this that is called the fourth.

2 The Prophecy speaks of the length of the Persian Monarchy, till it brings
it up to Alexander the great, the destroyer of that Monarchy, of whom it
speaks plainly, ver. 3, 4. and of his Successors afterward, ver. 5, etc.

3 There were therefore, by the account of the Angel here, but five Kings of
Persia, namely, Cyrus, and four more.

4 These four are thus named in the Scripture, 1 Ahashuerosh, Ezra 4.6. 2
Darius, Ezra 4.24. and 6.1. etc. 3 Artaxerxes, Ezra 6.14. 4 Darius, Neh. 12.22.
To which may be added for the confirmation of this account,

5 That Nehemiah lived quite through the whole length of the Persian Monarchy,
being at man's estate the first year of it, Ezr. 2.2. and seeing Darius its
last King, and probably his last times, Nehem. 12.12. Nay Ezra who was borne
either before or in the first year of the Babylonion Monarchy, yet lives
near the expiration of the Persian: by which it is easy to conclude how far
the Heathen histories are out, who reckon 14 Kings successively in the Persian
Throne, and 200 years of their ule, before its fall.

In the first year of Cyrus, the returned Captires out of Babel only built an
Altar, and sacrificed thereon for seven months together having yet no Temple:
but in this seeond year, the second month of that year they lay the
foundation of the house, Ezra 3.8, etc. the progress of which work is soon
opposed, and endeavored to be made frustrate by the Samaritanes all the time
of Cyrus, Ezra 4.5. but in his time they prevailed not.

In his third year Artaxerxes comes to the kingdom, who is also called
Ahashuerosh, Ezra 4.6, 7. he is persuaded by evil Counselors to interdict and
prohibit the Temple building, and so it lay intermitted all his time, Dan.
10.1, 2, 3. Ezra 4.23.24.

Darius succeeded him, called also Artaxerxes, Ezr. 6.1. and 7.1. etc. In his
second year the building goes on again, and is finished in his sixth, Hag. 1.
Ezra 6.14. And thus had the Temple lien waste and desolate just seventy years,
from the nineteenth of Nebuchadnezzar, in which year it was fired, to the
second of Darius, when it began to be wrought upon so as that it came to
perfection, Zech. 1.12. and 4.3, 5.

In the seventh year of this Darius, which was the year after the Temple was
finished, Ezra comes up, Ezra 7.8. and thirteen years after, namely, in the
twentieth year of this Darius (called also Artaxerxes) Nehemiah comes up to
Jerusalem, Neh. 1.1. and both help to repair, settle and rectify, Temple,
City, and people, as their story is at large in their own books.

In the two and thirtieth year of this Darius, Nehemiah having finished what he
had to do, about the building, beautifying, and settling of City, Temple and
people, he returns again unto the King, Neh. 13.6. and here ends Daniels
first parcel of his seventy weeks, namely, seven weeks in which street and
wall should be built, and that in troublous times, Dan. 9.25. By seven weeks he
means seven times seven years which amounts to nine and forty: and so there
were hitherto; namely, 3 of Cyrus, 14 of Ahashuerosh, and 32 of Darius.

After Darius there reigned Artaxerxes, commonly known in heathen stories by
the name of Xerxes, the invader of Greece with his huge army, etc. He was a
favourer of the Jews at the lest for a while, as it appears by that passage
in Ezra 6.14. They builded and finished according to the commandment of the
Lord, and according to the commandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes:
where this Artaxerxes is set in parallel equipage with Cyrus and Darius for
favoring the Temple: It is true indeed the work was finished in the time of
Darius, as to the very building of the house, yet were the buildings about it
still coming on and increasing, and this Xerxes did favor the work as well as
those Princes had done before him.

Yet did there an unhappy occurrence befall in this Kings time in the Temple it
self, which if it did not alienate and change his affection from well-willing
to it, yet did it prejudice the Temple in the affection of him that was chief
Commander under this King in those parts, whose name was Bagoses: The occasion
was this; Joseph. Ant. lib. 11. cap. 7.
Iochanan who was then High Priest upon some displeasure against his own
brother Jesus, did fall upon him and slay him in the very Temple: Bagoses
favored this Jesus, and intended to have made him High Priest, and it is like
that Iochanan smelt the design, and out of jealousy of such a thing, thought
to prevent it by his brothers dispatch: whatsoever was the cause of this his
murder, the fruit of it was this: that Bagoses violently presses into the
Temple, which he might not have done, and lays a mulct upon the people,
namely, 40 drachmes upon every Lamb that was to be sacrificed: Ezra and
Nehemiah were both now alive, and do but imagine how their piety would digest a
thing so impious.

The next in the Throne after this Artaxerxes mentioned in Scripture, was
Darius, Neh. 12.22. the man with whom the Empire fell under the victorious
sword of Alexander the great. In his time another occasion from another brother
of an High Priest occurreth, which accrewed not a little to the prejudice of
the Temple and the Nation; and that was this, Ibid. cap. 8 Neh: 13.28.
Manasseh one of the sons of Ioiada the son of Eliashib the High Priest, had
married Nicasso the daughter of Sanballat, for which being driven from the
Altar and Priesthood, he betaketh himself to his father-in-law to Samaria; and
they betwixt them obtain a Commission from Darius, and get it confirmed also
by Alexander the great, to build a Temple upon Mout Geri^im, John 4.20. which
being built in affront to the Temple of Jerusalem, it proved no small
disadvantage to it, and the service there: for it not only caused a faction
and defection in the Nation, but also it became the common refuge and shelter
of all lawless and irregular despisers of discipline and government.

In this Darius was the end of the Persian state and Kingdom; having continue
for the succession of these Kings, but whether any more, and how many precise
years is not easily determinable, what times went over the Temple in their
reigns besides what is mentioned here, may be observed in the books of
Nehemiah, Ezra, Haggai, Zachary, and Malachi.

SECT. II. The occurrences of the Temple under Alexander.
Joseph. ubi supra.
ALexander the great the Conqueror of Darius and overthrower of the Persian
Kingdom, did in his own person visit Jerusalem and the Temple, coming toward
it like a Lion, but he came into it like a Lamb. He had taken indignation at
Iaddua the High Priest, Neh. 12.22. because he denied him assistance at the
siege of Tyrus (for Jaddua had sworn fealty to Darius.) Hereupon he comes up
toward Jerusalem breathing fire and fury against it, till he came within the
sight of the City: There he was met by Jaddua in the Highpriests garments, and
by all the Priests in their vestments and the people in white: whom when he
came near, in stead of offering them violence, he showed reverence to the
High Priest and courteously saluted all the people.

When his Commanders wondered at such a change, he told them that in a dream in
Macedon, he saw one in the very same attire that the High Priest was in, who
encouraged him to invade the Persian empire and promised to lead his Army and
to make him victorious. So he goes with them into the City, offers at the
Temple, is showed Daniels prophecy concerning himself, grants favorable
privileges to the Jews about their religion, and so departs.

Vid. Juch. fol. 15.
It is held by some of the Jews, that in the very year that Alexander came to
Jerusalem, Ezra, Haggai, Zechary and Malachi died, and the spirit of Prophecy
departed from Israel; which if we follow the computation of Heathen stories is
a thing of utter improbability, they prolong the Persian Monarchy to so large a
time; but if we follow the account of Scripture it makes the improbability a
great deal less, as might be showed if we were following the pursuit of
Chronology: And if it be questioned how it should be possible, that all Heathen
stories that handle the succession of the Persian Kings, should be so far
wide as to double, nay, almost to treble the number of the Kings more then they
were, these three things may be produced as those that either severally, or
rather jointly might be the reasons of such a mistake.

1 Because every one of the Persian Kings had a double, nay, some a treble
name, and this multiplicity of names might deceive the heedlesse Historian into
an assertion of numerousness of persons.

2 The Persian Kingdom was a double Kingdom, Media and Persia, the two arms
and shoulders in Dan. 2. now the King of Persia and the Viceroy of Media might
be likewise misconceived in aftertimes for two differing Persian Monarchs.

3 It was the manner of the Persian Kings when they went into the wars, to
create a King to rule at home while they were absent, and this might cause the
accounting of so many Kings and of so long a time. And so Herodotus bears
witness that Herod. Polymn. vel lib. 7.
(...); when the King went to war, it was the Law of the Persians that he
should appoint a King and so go his way on his expedition. And this custom
was that that made Cyrus his third year to be accounted for Artaxerxes his
first, though Cyrus was yet alive, because he left him King at home whilst he
himself went to wars abroad.

Alexander dying in the flower of his age and victories, his large Dominions
obtained so suddenly by the sword, were divided as suddenly again, in a
manner by the sword, amongst four of his chief Commanders, according as was
prophesied Dan. 8.8. and 11.4. Two of them were Seleucus Nicanor, who obtained
Syria, and Ptolomy Lagus, who obtained Egypt, whose families ( the house of
the North and the house of the South, Dan. 11.) being ill Neighbors one to
another, did both of them prove ill Neighbors to Judea, and through and under
them the people and Temple did undergo diverse varieties of fortune, but most
commonly the worst.

The Kings of these Countries are reckoned these.

Vid. Eusebius. in Chron. Strab. Geog.l. 17.
Kings of Syria. 1 Seleucus Nicaner 32. y. 2 Antiochus Soter 19. 3 Antiochus
Theos 15 4 Seleucus Gallinicus 20 5 Seleucus Ceraunos 3 6 Antiochus Magnus 31 7
Seleucus Philopater 12 8 Antiochus Epiphanes 11 9 Antiochus Eupator 2 10
Demetrius Soter 22 11 Alexander 11 12 Demetrius 3 13 Antiochus Sedetes 9 14
Demetrius iterum 4 15 Antiochus Grippus 12 16 Antiochus Cyzicenus 18 17
Philippus 2
Vid. Eusebius. in Chron. Strab. Geog.l. 17.
Kings of Egypt. 1 Ptolomy Lagus 40. y. 2 Ptol. Philadelphus 18 3 Ptol.
Euergetes 26 4 Ptol. Philopator 17 5 Ptol. Epiphanes 24 6 Ptol. Philometor 36 7
Ptol. Euergetes 29 8 Ptol. Physcon 17 9 Ptol. Alexander 10 10 Ptol. Lathurus 8
11 Ptol. Dionysius 30 12 Cleopatra 22



SECT. III. A Brief of the state of the Temple in the times of these Kings.
IF we were to write a story of the City and people, as we are of the Temple,
here were a very large field before us, for exceeding much of the story of
Jerusalem and Judea has to do with the story of these Kings: but since our
confinement is to the Temple only, we shall make a shorter cut, because the
peculiar relations that we find about that, are but few in comparison of the
general story of the City and Nation.

Ios. Ant. lib. 12. c. 3.
Seleucus Nicanor, (or Nicator as some do call him) the first of these Kings of
Syria, was a great favourer of the Jewish Nation, for he infranchised them in
his Syrian Cities, yea even in Antioch the Metropolis it self: and Id. in lib.
Maccab. cap. 3.2 Mac. 3.3.
he bestowed benevolences upon the Temple, to an exceeding liberal and
magnificent value.

But Ptolomy Lagus King of Egypt his contemporary, was as bitter to the Nation
as he was favorable: He having his army in the Country, took advantage one
Sabbath day of the Jews strict resting on that day, and pretending to come
into the City to Sacrifice, he surprised the City, and it is like the Temple
sped but indifferently with him, and he carried exceeding many thousands away
captive.

Aristeas and Jos.ubi ante.
His son and successor Ptolomy Philadelphus was again as favorable to the
Nation, as he had been mischievous: He sent for the Lxx Elders to translate the
Bible, and sent exceeding great munificence to the Temple, which we have had
some cause to speak of before.

In the time of Ptolomy Euergetes the successor of Philadelphus, the covetize
of Onias the High Priest, had provoked the displeasure of that King, and was
like to have brought mischief upon the place and people, but that it was
wisely appeased by Joseph Onias his sisters son.

From the time that Ptolomy Lagus had so basely surprised Jerusalem it was
under homage to the Crown of Egypt, till Antiochus the great released it, or
changed it rather into subjection to Syria; whether it were of his goodness
and devotion, or whether rather out of his policy to make sure the Jews to him
Appian. in Syrinc.
in the great wars that he had, especially with the Romans he bestowed many
favors upon the people, and liberal donations and privileges upon the
Temple: And particularly this edict in its behalf, That no stranger should
come into the virge of the Temple prohibited; which it may be first occasioned
those inscriptions upon the pillars at the entrance into the Chel that we have
spoken of, that no stranger should come there upon pain of death.

After him succeeded Antiochus Epiphanes (save only that Seleucus Philopater
reigned 12 years between) a man or a monster shall I call him? of whom and of
whose cursed actings are those prophesies in Dan. 7.21, 25. and 8.10, 11, 12,
24, 25. and 11.28, etc. and 12.1. etc. and Ezekiel. 38. and 39. and who performed
according to those predictions to the utmost of wickedness.

He began his reign by the account of the book of the Maccabees in the 137
year of the reign of the Seleucian family, 1 Mac. 1.10. And in the 143 year,
as both that book and Jos. Ant. l. 12. c. 6. 1 Mac. 1.21. etc.
Josephus reckon, he came up to Jerusalem, being invited thither by a wretched
faction of Onias, who was also called Menelaus the High Priest, and he takes
the City by their means, and slew many of the contrary party, and took away
many of the holy things and much spoil, and so returned to Antioch. This was
the beginning of those 2300 days mentioned in Dan. 8.13, 14. or the days of
desolation, when the Host and the Sanctuary were both trodden under foot. Two
years and some months after, namely, in the year 145 he comes up again, and
under color of peaceablenesse obtaining entrance, he sacketh Jerusalem,
plundereth the Temple, fireth the fairest buildings of the City, pulls down the
walls, slays even some of those that had invited him, takes many thousands
prisoners, and sets a Syrian Garrison for a curb to the City and Temple.
Here was the beginning of those 1290 days mentioned Dan. 12.11. the time that
the daily Sacrifice was taken away, and the abomination of desolation was set
up; which space is called a time times and half a time: which was three years
and an half, and some twelve or thirteen days.

The mischiese that this tyrant and persecutor wrought to the Temple, nation
and religion is not expressible: how he forbad circumcision, abolished
religion, burnt the books of the Law, persrcuted the truth, murdered those that
professed it, and defiled the Sanctuary with all manner of abomination,
insomuch that the Holy Ghost has set this character upon those sad times, that
that was a time of trouble, such as was not since they were a nation even to
that same time. Dan. 12.1. And here began the story and glory of Mattathias the
father of the Maccabean family, who withstood this outrage and villainy 1 Mac. 2
70.
but died in the next year, namely 146 of the Selencian kingdom.

Judas Maccabeus succeeds him in his zeal and command, and prevails so
gallantly against the commanders appointed by the tyrant, Apollonius Seron
Gorgias and Lysias, that in the year 148 he and his people return and purify
the Temple, erect a new Altar, restore the service, and keep the feast of
dedication for eight days, and ordain it for an annual solemnity, And from
thence even till now (says Josephus) we keep that feast and call it (...)
(Candlemas, if I may so English it) naming the feast as I think from this,
because such a restoration shone upon us unexpected. There is mention of this
feast, and it was honored with Christ's presence Ioh. 10.22. and what was the
manner of its solemnity, especially by lighting abundance of Candles at it, I
have showed in another place.

Both Josephus and the book of Maccabeus make it but exactly three years
between the time of Antiochus his defiling of the Altar, with abomination, and
Maccabeus his restoring and purifying it again: 1 Mac. 1.54. Jos. ubi supr.
Only the one of them says its defiling began on the fisteenth day of the
month Cisleu in the 145 year of the Seleucian Kingdom; and the other says it
began on the five and twentieth day of the same month in the same year, but
both agree that it was purified on the five and twentieth day of the same month
in the year 148. which teaches us how to distinguish upon that passage of
Daniel forementioned, in chap. 12.11. namely that the time the daily sacrifice
was taken away was 1290 days or three years and an half and some few days
over, but the time that the abomination that makes desolate was set up, that
is, idols in the Temple, and an idol altar upon the Lords Altar, was but three
years.

Antiochus died in Persia, within 45 days after the restoring of the Temple,
as Dan. 12.12. seems to intimate, when it pronounces him blessed that comes
to 1335 days, for then he should see the tyrants death. Id. ibid. cap. 15.
His son Antiochus Eupator who succeeded him, was invited into Judea by some
Apostate Jews to come to curb Judas Maccabeus, who was besieging the Syrian
garrison that was in Jerusalem: He comes with a mighty power, forces Judas
into the Temple, and there besieges him: But being straightened for provisions,
and hearing of stirrings in his own Kingdom, he offers the besieged
honorable conditions, upon which they surrender. But he entering and seeing the
strength of the place, and suspecting it might be troublesome to him again, he
breaks his articles and his oath, and puts down the wall that encompassed
the holy ground down to the ground. And thus poor Judas and the Temple are in
a worse condition then before, for the Antiochian garrison in Jerusalem that
was ready upon all occasions to annoy it, is not only not removed, but now is
the Temple laid naked to their will and fury.

Ibid.
This Antiochus put Menelaus the High Priest to death (and he rewarded him but
justly for calling the tyrant this man's father in) and he made Alcimus
High Priest in his stead, one that was not of the Highpriests line at all:
which made Onias who was next to the High Priesthood indeed, to flee into
Egypt, and there by the favor of Ptolomy Philometor, he built a Temple
parallel to that at Jerusalem: And thus has Jerusalem Temple two corrivalls, a
Temple on mount Gerizim in Samaria on the North, and a Temple in Egypt on the
South. Of this Temple built by Onias in Egypt the Talmudicall writers do make
frequent and renowned mention. They speak in the treatise Succah, Succah. per.
5.
of a great Synagogue or Sanbedrin here in the time of Alexander the great, in
which they say there were 70 golden chaires, and a Congregation belonging to it
of double the number of Israelites that came out of Egypt: And that Alexander
destroyed them, to bring upon them the curse denounced by Jeremy against their
going down into Egypt Jer. 44 and the curse due to them for the violation of
the command, Ye shall return thither (to Egypt) no more.

Jos. Ant. lib. 13. cap. 6. Juchas. fol. 14.
Yet would Onias venture to build a Temple here again, and that the rather,
building upon that prophecy Esaias 19.19. There shall be an Altar to the Lord in
the Land of Egypt, etc. Upon which passage take the gloss of R. Solomon: R.
Sol. in Esai. 19.
We learn in Sedat Olam, that after the fall of Sennacherib, Ezekiah stood up,
and let go all the multitudes that he had brought with him from Egypt and
Cush, and they took upon them the Kingdom of Heaven, and they returned to
their own place, as it is said, In that day there shall be five cities in the
land of Egypt etc. They went and built an Altar to the Lord in the land of
Egypt, and offered upon it an offering to God to fulfill what was spoken, In
that day there shall be an altar to the Lord in the land of Egypt etc. But some
of our Doctors in the treatise Menachoth, do understand it of the Altar of the
Temple of Onias the son of Simeon the just, who fled to Egypt and built there
an Altar.

In the last chapter of the treatise Menachoth, the tract which our Rabbin
cites, the Talmudists have speech concerning this Temple of Onias, and
particularly these passages Menachoth per. 13.
A man says, Behold I undertake to offer a burnt-offering, he must offer it at
the Sanctuary, and if he offer it at the Temple of Onias he is not discharged.
If he say, I undertake for an offering in the Temple of Onias, he is to offer
it at the Sanctuary, but if he offer it at the Temple of Onias he is
discharged. If he say, I undertake to be a Nazarite, he is to poll his head at
the Sanctuary, and if he poll it at the Temple of Onias he is not discharged:
but if he say, I will poll at the Temple of Onias, let him poll at the
Sanctuary, yet if he do poll at the Temple of Onias he is quit: The priests
that serve at the Temple of Onias, shall not serve at the Sanctuary at
Jerusalem: So that it appears that there were sacrifices offered and other
Temple-rites used in this Temple in Egypt as were in the Temple at Jerusalem,
Juchas. ubi supra.
and it so stood in great glory 200 years according to the opinion of Rambam:
But it seems (they are the words of Iuchasin) that it stood all the time of
the Sanctuary: for Ioshuah the son of Perahiab fled thither and so in the
time of Hillel: and they were obedient to the wise men of Jerusalem and brought
offerings, and so they brought their wives espousall writings to Hillel (for
they said they were bastards) and he allowed them: And there was there a great
Congregation double to the number that came out of Egypt, till after the
destruction of the second Temple, when Adrian the Emperor came up against them
and slew them all at the time of the destruction of Bitter: Think of this
great plantation of Jews in Egypt when ye read Mat. 2.13, 14.

But let us return from this Temple in Egypt to the Temple at Jerusalem where
our business lies. Aleimus the Highpri st (whose illegal induction to that
office, had occasioned this Act of Onias) as he was the Creature of the
Antiochian family, so was he serviceable to it to his utmost, even to the
mischief of that religion and people in and among which he took on him the
High Priesthood: He assists Demetrius (though he had slain Antiochus who had
so favored him) in the invasion of Judea, and attempteth to pull down the
wall of the inner Court of the Sanctuary: but is suddenly struck with a
divine stroke from heaven, and so dies. 1 Mac. 9.54. Jos. Ant. lib. 12. cap.
17.


Nicanor a commander of this Demetrius forced Judas Maccabeus to betake
himself to a garrison in Jerusalem: and he himself going up into the Temple,
and there entertained fawningly by the Priests, who clawed him by showing him
the sacrifices which they said they offered for his Lord the King, he taunted
them, and threatened mischief to the place if Judas were not delivered to him:
but ere long the proud boaster and threatner was overthrown and slain.

Jonathan the brother, and successor of Judas Maccabeus in his command, proved
to be so in favor with Alexander the successor of Demetrius, and Demetrius
again the successor of Alexander, and Antiochus that succeeded him, that
though there were now and then some stirrings among them, yet the Temple, which
is our scene that we are upon, did suffer little alteration or prejudice all
his time; no more did it in the times of Simon his brother and successor: nay
he in his first year, obtaines the peoples liberties, dismantles the
Antiochian garrison in Jerusalem, purifies the place, and appoints that day for
a yearly rejoicing, and restores the land to entire peace and prosperity.

Hyrcanus the son and successor of Simon being straightly besieged in Jerusalem
by Antiochus; at the feast of Tabernacles desires a cessation for the time and
solemnity of the feast: which he not only obtains but many and costly
sacrifices also from Antiochus: which noblenes causes Hyrcanus to seek for an
agreement, and so the siege is raised: He is reported to have heard a voice in
the Temple whilst he was offering incense there, which told of the victory of
his sons who were then in battle with Antiochus Cyzicenus, and when he came
out he told so much to the people. Josephus sticks not to style him a King,
Priest and Prophet: or at least he speaks but little short of so much when he
says Id. ib. lib. 13. cap. 18.
that God vouchsafed him the three greatest honors, the rule of the nation,
the honor of the High Priesthood, and prophecy. He cast off the Syrian yoke
and homage.

Alexander his son proves an unhappy scourge to his own nation, so much
scorned and despised by them, that at the feast of Tabernacles they pelted him
with their pomecitrons, whereupon he slayes 6000 of them and troubles the land
with a six years civil war. He railed in the Court of the Priests, that
none but the Priests might come in there for fear of the peoples disturbance.

Aristobulus and Hyrcanus the sons of this Alexander quarrel about the rule,
and call in foreign aid, as first Aretas King of Arabia, who besieges
Aristobulus in the Temple: and then Pompey who comes in, takes the city, and
temple, brings the nation under the Roman yoke, from under which it never
delivered its neck, till city and Temple by that power was raked up in ashes.

SECT. III The state of the Temple under the Romans.
SO sad were the beginnings of the Temple under the Roman power, that an omen
might have been taken from them, what would become of it, ere this nation had
done with it. Pompey coming up to Jerusalem had the gates shut against him, so
that he presently begirt it with a siege: Dion. Cass. lib. 36.
But the taking of the City cost him not much labor (says Dion Cassius) for
he was let in by the party of Hyrcanus: But the Temple which Aristobulus party
had possessed cost him some work. It was seated on a high pitch, and fenced
with a wall of its o^en. And if the defendants had guarded it all days alike,
it had not been taken: but they intermitting to stand upon their defense on
Saturdayes (being their Sabbath) on which days they do no work, the Romans
had opportunity on that day to batter the wall. And when they had discovered
this custom of the besieged, they did no great matter all the week long, till
Saturday came again, and then they set upon them again; and so at the last
the Jews not resisting were surprised and subdued. Great slaughter was made
upon the Romans entrance, of to the number of 12000 Jews as Jos. Ant. l. 14.
c. 8.
Josephus reckons; and yet even whilst the Conqueror was killing as fast as
he could, the Priests at the Altar went on in the service as insensibly and
fearlesly, by the same Authors relation, as if there had been no such danger
and destruction at all, till the sword came to their own sides: Pompey being
thus victor, he and diverse other with him, went into the Temple even into the
most holy place, and saw all its glory and riches, and yet was sparing of
offering any violence to it, but caused the place to be purged and the service
to be set afoot again.

But what Pompey had spared, Crassus ere long seized upon, plundering the
Temple of exceeding much wealth, as he went on his expedition into Parthia. Id.
ibid. cap. 12.
That Parthian war was undertaken by him, as Dion tells us, more upon his
covetousness then upon any other warrantable or honorable ground, and he sped
accordingly, coming to a miserable end answerable to such principles and
beginnings.

In the beginning of the reign of Herod (which was not very long after) the
City and Temple was again besieged and taken by him and Sosius, and the Temple
in danger again to be rifled, but prevented by Herod as much as he could: and
now Antigonus the son of Aristobulus the last of Asmonean Rulers is cut off
by Antony.

Herod in the eighteenth year of his Reign, begins to repair the Temple,
taking it down to the very foundations, and raising it again in larger
dimensions then it had been of before, and in that form and structure that
has been observed and surveyed in the foregoing discourse.

About some nine or ten years after the finishing of it, the Lord came to his
own Temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant whom they desired, Mal. 3.1.
being presented there by his Mother at forty days old, and owned by Simeon and
Anna, Luke 2. Twelve years after that, he is at the Temple again, set among
the Doctors of one of the Sanhedrins, either in one of their Consistories or
in their Midrash, and shows his divine wisdom to admiration: It is needless
to speak of the occurrences that befell in the Temple, about Christ and his
Apostles, as his being on a Pinnacle of it in his temptations, his whipping out
buyers and sellers at his first and last Passover, his constant frequenting
the place whenever he was at Jerusalem, and his foretelling the destruction
of it as he sat upon Mount Olivet in the face of it, a little before his
death: The Apostles resorting thither to the public service, and to take
opportunity of preaching in the concourse there, their healing a Creeple there,
and converting thousands: Paul's apprehension there upon misprision of his
defiling it by bringing in of Gentiles, and other particulars which are at
large related by the Evangelists, that it is but unnecessary labor to insist
upon them, since any Reader may fetch them thence.

As for the passages there, that are not mentioned in the Scripture, but by
Josephus and others, as Pilates imbeedlling the holy Treasures of the Temple
upon an aquaeduct, Petronius his going about to bring in Caligulaes Image
thither, a tumult caused there by the base irreverence of a Roman soldier,
Agrippa's Sacrifices there, and Anathemata, Vitellius his favor to it and the
people, a base affront and abuse put upon the place by the Samaritanes, the
horrid confusions there in the time of the seditious, the slaughter of one
Zacharias in it, and at the last the firing of it by the Romans, and the utter
ruin of it and the City, they would require a larger discourse, then one
chapter or paragraph will afford, it may be they will come to be prosecuted to
the full in another Treatise, and therefore I shall but only name them here.

FINIS.

