To the Honble. the House of Commons now Assembled in the high Court of
Parliament The humble Petition of John Lilburne, Leif. Colonel.
In all humility

Showing, That your Petitioner having suffered abundance of inhumaine
barbarous cruelty, by virtue of an illegal decree made against your
Petitioner in the Starr-Chamber, 1627. (As by the coppie of his Petition
formerly presented to this Honorable House here unto anexed, and by your own
Votes made the 4. of May. 1641. upon the examination of that Petition) will
appear, which are as follows, First, that the sentence of the Star Chamber
given against him is illegal and against the Liberty of the Subject, and also
bloody, wicked, cruel, barbarous and tyrannical. Secondly, that reparations
ought to be given to him, for his imprisonment, sufferings, and losses
sustained by that illegal sentence; and then also ordered that care should be
taken to draw up his case and transmit it to the Lords. But by reason of
multitude of business in this Honorable House there has been no further
proceeding in it since, and these distractions coming on; your Petitioner
took Command under the Right Honorable Robert Lord Brook, with whose
Regiment he adventured his life freely, and resolutely both at Kenton field and
Brainford, where he was taken Prisoner and carried away to Oxford: where within
a short time after his coming, the King sent to the Castle to your Petitioner,
the now Earl of Kingston, the Lord Dunsmore, the Lord Maitrevers, and the Lord
Andevour to woo your Petitioner with the large profers of of the Honor and
glory of Court preferment, to forsake the Parliaments party; and to engage on
his party; upon the slighting and contemning of which your Petitioner was
within few days after laid in Irons and kept an exceeding close Prisoner, and
forced several times to march into Oxford in Irons to Judge Heath, before whom
he was araigned for high Treason, for drawing his sword in the cause of the
Commonwealth, and suffered multitudes of other miseries in his almost twelve
months cruel Captivity there. In which time he lost above 600. l. in his
estate that he left behind him at London (as he is clearly able to make
appear) and immediately after his coming from thence he took Command in the
Earl of Manchesters Army, his Commission as Major of Foot, bearing date the 7.
of October 1643, which lasted till the 16. of May, 1644 At which time he was
authorized by Commission as Leiftenent Collonell to command a Regiment of
Dragooners. In which service having been in many engagements, he hopes it will
easily appear that he has not only behaved himself honestly and faithfully,
but also valiently and stoutly in the midst or many discouragements, (God
crowning some of his endeavors with success, especially at the taking in Sir
Francis Wertle^s Garrison and Tickel Castle,

The premises considered,

He humbly beseeches this Honorable Assembly to perfect that justice which
you happily began for your Petitioner, and to give him Reparation for his long
and tedious Imprisonment and heavy sufferings by the Starr-Chamber decree
(having waited 4^ years with patience for that end) though he lost by his
Imprisonment all that he had, and was deprived of a profitable calling being
then in the way of a Factor in the low Countries) and also to take of the Kings
fine. And to consider his service with the Earl of Manchester, his pay
amounting to about 800. l. of which he has not received, 2^0. l. though he
has faithfully adventured his life, and spent a great deal of his own money,
and lost at Newarke when Prince Rupert raised the seige almost a 100. l. being
stripped from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, beside^ his former
losses at Kenton battle and Bra^nford. Wherefore he humbly prays that his
accoumpts may be audited and his arreares (according to the Tennor of your own
Ordinance) paid unto him.

And he shall ever pra, etc. John Lilburne.

To the Honorable House of Commons, now Assembled in the high Court of
Parliament. The humble Petition of John Lilburne, Prisoner in the Fleet:
In all humility shows,

THat in December next will be three years, your Petitioner upon supposall of
sending over certain Books of Doct Bastwickes from Holland into England, was
by Doct. Lambs warrant without any examination at all sent to the Gate house
Prison, and from thence within three days removed to the Fleet where he
abiding Prisoner, In Candlemas Term following was proceeded against in the
honorable Court of Starr-chamber, where your Petitioner appearing and entering
of his name, for want of money his name was struck out again, and he refusing
to take an Oath, to answer to all things that should be demanded of him, for
that your Petitionor conceived the said Oath to be dangerous and illegal,
without any Interogatorys tendered him, for his refusing the said Oath, he was
prosecuted and censured in the said Court most heavily, being fined 500. l. to
the King, and sent prisoner to the Fleet. And in Easter Term following was
whipped from the Fleet to Westminster, with a 3. fold knotted Cord receiving at
least 200 stripes, and then at Westminster he was set on the Pilla^ry the space
of 2. hours (and over and above the censure of the Court at the Warden of the
Fleets command was gagged about an hour and half) after which most cruel
sufferings was again returned into the Fleet close Prisoner, when through his
said sufferings the next morning he being sick of an extreme Fever could not
have admittance for his Surgeon to let him blood, or dress his sores till
the after noone of the said day though the Surgeon himself in pity to the
Prisoner went to Westminster to the Warden himself, and your Petitioner has
been a close Pisoner in the Fleet ever since, where in a most cruel manner he
has been put into Iron Fetters both hands and legs, which caused a most
dangerous sickness that continued 6. months, and after some small recoverie
was again laid in Irons: which caused at least 5. months sickness more
dangerous then the former. During which time of sickness, they have most
unhumanely denied his friends to come to see him, nntill they would give them
money for admittance; and they have denied many to come at all, and have
beaten, and kicked, and otherwise most shamefully abused such his friends as
came to see him in his great distress, and to bring him food and necessaries
to sustain his life, and also have kept his servant from him, and his food: so
that if he had not been releived by stelth of his fellow Prisoners he had been
kept from any food at all for above the space of 10. days together, and the
Prisoners that out of pity have releived him, have been most cruelly punished,
and the Keepers have not forborne to confess themselves that they had starved
him long ago, had not the Prisoners releived him: and besides all this they
have most cruelly beaten and wounded him, to the hazard of his limbs, and
danger of his life, had he not been rescued and saved from them by the
Prisoners of the same house, in which most miserable condition your poor
Petitioner has continued a Prisoner for the space of above 2 years and a
half, and is like still to continue in the same under the merciles hands of
the Warden of the Fleet, who has denied lawful liberty to his Prisoners: For
that he has said, he must observe the Man that has so great a sway in the
Kingdom, intimating the Arch Bishop.

All which his deplored condition and Lamentable miseries he most humbly
presents to this honorable Assembly beseeching them to be pleased to cast an
eye of compassion toward him, and to afford him such releife from his censure
and hard imprisonment as may seem good to your wisdoms, who otherwise is like
to perishunder the hands of merciless men.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray as in duty he is bound to the Lord to
bless and prosper this honorable Assembly. John Lilburne.

MAy it please this Honorable House to take Notice, that I have indeavored by
all the ways and means I possible could, for these diverse weeks together, to
get my Petition presented and, read in this honorable Assembly: but by reason
of multitudes of Public business, I have not been able to get my desire
effected: Therefore in regard of my necessities arising from my often suffering
shipwreck in my estate, in reference to my eyeing the Welfare of the Public,
and having spent above threescore pounds since I begun to wait, upon this house
to get this Petition read, and having a wife and family to maintain, merely
out of my own industerie which are likely to suffer very much by my continued
attendance here, I am therefore necessitated to assume the boldness to present
my Pertition in print to the honorable Members of this house, hoping I shall
not therefore be esteemed a transgressor; especially when it is seriously
considered that for above 7. years together, I have suffered all kind of
miseries, hazards and dangers, and labored studiously and cordially to
preserve and defend my birth right and priveledges, which is the inheritance of
all the Freeborne people of England, amongst which I humbly conceive the
liberty of making known my greviances to this heigh and honorable Court (the
trustes of the whole Commonwealth of England) is not the least: for whose just
authority I have so often in the field ^entered my life.

And whereas in the conclusion of my Petition, I pray that my accounts may be
audited, I humbly crave leave to declare unto you one reason for that, which is
this. I was Major to Collonell King for diverse months, with whom I served in
Lincolnsheire faithfully, my pay amounting to betwixt 2. and 300. l of which he
paid me about one forth, and detaines the rest in his own hands, (which I am
confidently persuaded he received punctually) of the Countery, with other large
sumes of other Officers which likewise he unjustly detaines, as particularly
292. l, 6. s. of my eldest brothers, who never had a weeks pay from him. And
^ewise 316. l. 12. 3. 6. d. of my youngest brother, with other great sums and
though we had the Earl of Manchesters warrant to him and the Auditer General
of the Army to audit our accounts, yet he contemnd them both, and would not
give us a Debenter for our money though we honestly paid our quarters both for
Horse and Man and though he received about Twenty thousand pounds of the County
to pay his Officers and Soldiers as diverse of the Committee of Lincoln do
affirm in their printed Articles which were exhibited to this honorable House
in August last, and if they had said 30000. l. I believe it might easily be
proved true, if you would command him, to give up his accounts and authorize
men of integrity and fidelity in the Country to inquire after his receipts,
the which if you please to do I do humbly conceive you will get some
thousands of pounds by it, which he unjustly detaines in his hands from you and
those that have done you faithful service.

FINIs.

