AS YOU WERE OR The Lord General CROMWELL and the Grand Officers of the Army
their REMEMBRANCER. Wherein, as in a glass they may see the faces of their
Souls spotted with Apostasy, Ambitious breach of promise, and hocus-pocus-
juggleing with the honest Soldiers, and the rest of the Free-people of England.
to the end that, having seen their deformed and fearful visage, they may by
returning to do their first pretended works, wipe of their spots, mend their
deformities and regaine their lost Credit; in a word, save themselves and the
gaspeing Libertyes of the surprised and enslaved English Nation: least
enlargement and deliverance arise to the English from another place, but they
and their Fathers house shall be destroyed. Ester 4. and 14.

All which is contained in a Letter directed to the Lord General Cromwell, to
be communicated to the Grandees of his Army, written by L. Colonel JOHN
LILBVRNE May 1652 from his Lodging in the pleasant City of REFUGE seated upon
the banks of the renowned River Rhine, and commonly called by name VIANEN.

Exodus 9:34, 35. And when Pharaoh saw that the rain, and the hail, and the
thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his
servants. Neither would he let the children of Israel go, as the Lord had
spoken by Moses. Ezekiel 16:48:51:52. As I live, says the Lord God, (to
Jerusalem) Sodom thy Sister has not done, the nor her Daughters, as thou have
done, thou and thy Daughters. Neither has Samaria committed half of thy sin,
but thou have multiplied thine abominations more then they, and have Justified
thy Sisters in all thine abominations which thou have done. Thou also which
have Judged thy Sisters, bear thine own shame for thy sins, that thou have
committed more abominable then they: they are more righteous then thou: yea be
thou confounded also, and bear they shame, in that thou have Justified thy
Sisters. Matthew 21:19. And when Jesus saw a fig tree in the way, he came to
it, and found nothing thereon but leaves only, and said unto it, let no fruit
grow on thee hence forward for ever, And presently the figtree withered away.
Proverbs 27:6. Faithful are the wounds of a Friend: but the kises of an Enemy
are deceitful. Printed May 1652.

For his EXCELLENCY the Lord GENERAL CROMWELL these present in England.
MY LORD,
IT is said in Job the 35 and the 9 and 10 that by reason of the multitude of
oppressions, they make the oppressed to cry: they cry out, by reason of the
arm of the mighty, but none says, where is God my maker, who gives songs in
the night. And if this be my case in the highest, I know no man that can
rationally blame me: If I cry out with all the shrillnes and loudnes I can. And
that it is my case; my Lord, is evident, 1 In that I am banished for ever out
of my Native Country and upon pain of death must be gone by such a day, as
appears by your votes of the 15 of January last, recorded in my late Printed
Apology to the people of the Netherlands, page 48, 49, 50. 2ly You have made
it death and loss of Estate for any man whatever to afford me in England or its
territories, for love or money, a nights lodgeing after that day, as appears
by your printed Act of the 30 of January last, recorded in the said Apology
page 62, 63. 3ly All your ports were at that time with strictnes stopped to
prevent people from goeing out of England, without passes under the hand or
hands of some in Authority; and yet. 4ly When according to your votes, I was
willing to be gone and came to your speaker for a pass to enable me to go, it
was positively denied me by him, as I have truly related in the said Apology
page 59. and the want of such a pass, in the eye of reason, had cost me my
life, had I not found favor at Dover, in the eyes of those, whose faces before
to my knowledge, I had never seen in my days. And yet this is not all; for,
besides, I am fined seven-thousand pound, which was more then visibly I was
worth. and, if it had bin immediately executed or leavyed, according to the
severity in your said votes and Act, it had not left me a penny to hire an
horse to carry me to the seaside, no nor there to hire a boat to carry me on
shipboard, nor there to give any recompense to the Master of the ship to carry
me away to save my life; nay nor there to buy me a bit of victuals to sustain
life as I go; nay nor when I am set ashore in a land of strangers, to pay for
one nights lodgeing for my refreshment. Nay, that which is more then all this
is, that there is not in any of your foresaid votes or Act of Parliament,
sixpence provision made to buy bread to support the lives of my poor wise and
tender babes, although by Magna Charta chapter the 14 and the statute of the 3
of Edward the 1 chap. 6, both which are laws to this day unrepealed, and they
expressly and positively say, a freeman shall not be amerced for a small fault,
but after the manner of the fault and for a great fault after the greatness
thereof, saveing to him his continement that is is to say his freehold,
countenance or livelihood, and a merchant likewise saveing to him his
merchandise, and a vilane, farmer, or husbandman saveing to him his waynage, or
plough. And none of the said amercements or sines shall be assessed save by the
oath of honest and lawful men of the vicinage that is to say JURIES. Nay and
yet notwithstanding all this, I have by your directions (for any thing I know
to the contrary) given to your endeared and bosom agent MR. THOMAS SCOT, a
spy clapped upon me at Dover, as I came over, called Captain WENDY OXFORD, who
must stand upon the pillory at Westminster and the exchange of London, and
semingly be bannished from England the better to enable him undiscerned to
contrive my murder, ruin and destruction. whose roguery with Mr. Scots against
me I have infallibly found out from step to step, and by the assistance of God,
as soon as I can have a little leisure shall print it to public view. of
which villainy of his, when I gave him a hint of it, at my own chamber, at or
upon the 2 of April last old Style, and by my letter to him dated the next
day: with in 2 or 3 days after that he left Amsterdam, and departed with his
two Gentil-women, called by him his wife and maid, although some do with
confidence give very strong reasons to demonstrate, they neither of them are
such, but a couple of arrant common whores. but averball hue and cry I then
sent after him, which I suppose with this, etc. Will for ever spoil him of
being a spy here after (as well as something else has already spoiled Mr.
Cheshire his brother knave, to be a spy at Middelborow who now is forced to fly
to Westminster for Shelter) and render him incapable to receive any more bills
of exchange from Mr. Thomas Scot, for the paying him his sallery, to enable him
to drink drunk night and day, to feast, whore it, swear, rant it and domineer
rather like a bedlam then a man; or to send one of his sluts over to give Mr.
Scot if he want it a taste of her (which kind of flesh is notoriously at
Westminster known he loves as well as Oxford does) as well as to convey his
intelligence over and to solicet him, if he ly not in, sick of the French Pox
to procure him a pass to come over, and to meet him, at Graves-end or Dover,
etc. and to discourse with him for settling all his affairs.

And yet my Lord this is not all, but that which is the highest, of
aggrevations is, that all this that is done unto me, (and principally by your
self) is inflicted upon me, without (I do avow it and upon my life dare
engage to make it good) all shadow of ground, cause, provocation or color of
law or Justice; For, alas my Lord, I was at most upon your own principles, but
an accessarie and not principal; And to inflict a higher and greater punishment
upon me then upon Mr. Primat the principal, and now to set him at liberty from
his imprisonment, and to keep me still in my banishment, and under the lash of
my foresaid extraordinary great fine: where is in England either the Law,
equity or justice, to avow and warrant it? And my LORD, admit Mr. Primates
Petition about which I am banished, had bin all false, and not proved, (which
yet I avow to the contrary) and admit, it conteines in it so high things
against Sr. ARTHVR HASELRIGE, as if proved, would have occasioned as great a
sentence to him, as you have given to me; and therefore per legem talionis you
have done by me, as you have done. Truly MY LORD I will join issue with you
there, if that be your ground, as by some of your members while I was in
England, I understood, it was one of your principallest. Yet remember, you say
in your Declarations, that the Law of England is the Inheritance and
birthright of the MEANEST MAN thereof as well as of the GREATEST, and that you
are bound in duty and conscience both to God and Man to dispense it EQUALLY to
all, WITHOUT FAVOR OR AFFECTION: and therefore be but just to me my Lord and I
have done with you. For your Attorney General PRIDEAUX ( that unbrac't Drum,
that makes a great sound and noise, without any tune or harmony) accused and
INDICTED me of high treason, and had (...) tried before about 40 judges at
Guildhall London in October 1649 for my life therefore: and if he had proved it
against me, I must have died therefore as a traitor, and have forfeited all my
estate. And therefore by your own rule and your own Law of proceedings with me
in my present case; because he accused me, and could not prove it, "he ought to
be hanged therefore, and to forfeit 4 parts of 7 of his estate to me." which
when I was at London by common repute, he was judged by his Land,
Postmaster-Generall-ship, attorney- Generall-ship and the most vast fees, that
he [being a Parliament man OF AN UNACCOUNTABLE PARLIAMENT, and thereby so
great) takes to plead all manner of base Causes, to the threatening, OUT
FACEING and overaweing both JUDGES, Jurors and Lawyers, to have incomeing
thereby annually about twenty thousand pounds. Although a few years ago,
since this eternal Parliaments first sitting, I could never hear he was
judged to be worth two hundred Pounds per annum.

Now, I say my Lord, perform this to me, and I will pay you my
seven-thousand-pound fine, without any more to do. But besides, remember also,
were not you (My Lord) at Darby-house in Cheynel-row with the Council of State,
upon the 28 of March 1649, the chief man to manage an accusation of
high treason against me, and got me committed therefore. The Narrative of which
in breife, is contained in the 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, pages of the second edition of
the Picture of the Council of State, printed at London 1649. and yet when it
came to the issue, there could never one word of it be proved, all though I lay
prisoner in the Tower, almost a year there upon, and therefore by your own
rule and law of proceedings with me, ought not you your self [my Lord] to be
HANGED therefore? and to forfeit 4 parts of seven of your great estate to me
therefore? For shame my LORD, once in your life, learn to be just and remember
what you said against Mr. Herbert, the Kings attorney General, in the Case of
the LORD KIMBOLTON and the 5 MEMBERS 1 part of the book of the Parliaments
Declarations page 52, 53, 101, 123, 201, 203, 208, 210, 278, 459, 660: and give
me not too much cause to picture-draw you so, that all the artificial or
pensil-limners in the world, SHALL NOT BE ABLE TO COMPARE WITH IT. You know, I
have a quick and sharp pen (My Lord) and therefore give me not cause to
challenge you, or any of your Champions, to draw into a short Epitomy, or into
a larger charge, all that evil that in your own thoughts you can colourably
imagine the Buyshops, Starr-chamber, Counsell-table, High Commission, or any
persons therein were guilty of; nay or any persons since their downe-fall by
you executed for the highest of treasons, tyrannyes and oppressions were guilty
of: and yet, comparatis comparandis, for me to aver that you outstrip them all,
and in particulars to undertake upon my life to make it good: and that those
sayings of God, by the Prophet Ezekiel, chap: 16, 48, 51, 52, [mentioned on the
Title Page) may as truly and as justly be verified of you, as they were of
Judah or Jerusalem and that you have outstrip't (comparatis comparandis) all
those whom you your self count the most wicked men, that you have pulled
down, "and thereby have done in actions as much as in you lies, to justify
all their wickedness" that in words you have condemned. And besides, my Lord,
what faith, what truth, what honesty? can be imagined to be in that man, or
that generation of men? that by a constant series of his or their actions,
visiby and apparently declare, he or they hold it lawful to commit any manner
of wickedness and baseness whatsoever that can be named under the sunn, for the
accomplishment of his or their proposed end whether in it self, it be wicked
or righteous: yea to cheat, break faith with, and murder the nighest
relations a man can converse with, when they cross his ends.

Yea and for that end only, to raise wars upon wars, to the devastation of
Kingdoms and Nations; The gulled, cheated and abused peoples lives, really and
truly being of no more value with him or them, then so many dead dogs, serving
him or them for no other end, but to be his foote-steps to climb up to the top
of absolute and arbitrary Power and pretended Authority, or unlimited and
unbounded Kingship. And, that you (my Lord) particularly are the man, that is
guilty of all this, in my judgment and apprehension, your own quondam
darling, "and heart-indeared and heart secret-knowing Friend, the Major of your
own Regiment of Horse, Robert Huntington" in his printed impeachment of you,
delivered to both house of Parliament against you, the 2 of August 1648, has
punctually declared it, which impeachment, is reprinted in the 53, 54, 55, 56,
57, 58, 59, 60 and 61 pages of that Book for making of which I was arraigned
for a Traitor at Guildhall October 1649, being entitled An Impeachment of
High Treason against Oliver Cromwell, etc. and for which Impeachment of his, I
could never hear, that you endeavored so much as publicly to question, him
therefore, or to put forth a vindication against it. Which may well get belief
in un-biased men, that you acknowledge all that he has there said against you,
to be true. And as much as I have said of him, and his Impeachment, may be said
of the Authors of those three notable books and of the books themselves called
PUTNEY-PROIECTS; The LEVELLERS vindicated, being the stated case, of the late
TREACHEROUSLY defeated BVRFORD- troops; and the HVE-AND-CRIE of the young men
and apprentises of London after the lost fundamental laws and liberties of
England. Unto which three books, a great many men's names are set, as the
avowers and justifiers of them, and to my knowledge, the most of their names
are true: for I particularly know the most of the men my self, and yet I could
never hear that any one of them, was so much as questioned for decyfering you
there, as they have done. Although to my knowledge, you know some of the men as
well as I do, and might several times since those books were writ and
published, as easily have laid your hands upon them, to have called them to an
account therefore, as I can take up the pen and ink that I write here with.

I say, laying the forementioned Books or discourses together, with what
follows in this discourse page 13, 14, 15, to 24 and compareing them with your
practice, I think they sufficiently prove you to be the man above mentioned,
that walks by the Principles of ATHEISM and MACHIAVELLSME, and holds it lawful
to do any thing in the world that comes in your way, that will most serve your
turn, for the accomplishment of your own ends, be they never so bloody,
wicked, or tyrannical.

But MY LORD you have forced me when I was quiet, to come upon the stage again
much against my will and studious endeavors. And yet, when I did, I fairly
sought peace with you, and sent you in writeing my propositions for peace,
grounded only upon your own promises, neglecting to insist upon any thing of
concernement to my self. and gave you, or your true Friend Mr. William Kiffen,
to whom I sent it, twenty one days, to return me an answer, at least of his
receipt thereof; all which appears in the following discourse page 29, 30, 31.
But heareing nothing at all from him and feareing that it is intecepted, I am
forced to print it. The Copy whereof, with some small additions, thus
follows.

For my loveing Friend Mr. WILLIAM KIFFIN, merchant at his House in Dukes-place
London, these with have, post have, to be communicated to his Excellency the
Lord General Cromwell, etc.
Mr. KIFFIN.
YOu and I have bin long acquainted and have had much converse together and
although you were in my late troubles before my trial at GVILD-HALL my
adversary in print; yet not lookeing upon you by your opposition, as a man that
out of malice designedly labored to take away my life, but rather at a man
surprised in your understanding, and thereby induced to believe the plausible
arguments of my (pretended Religious) adversaries, as though by my contest with
them, an undeniable gap was opened, to let in them that are commonly called the
public adversaries to devour all: and so were against the then season as unfit
and dangerous in your apprehension, but not against the things themselves held
forth by me and my Camerades, which you judged just and righteous and sit to be
established in due time, when that fear was over. In which regard that
opposition of yours to me, I judged most fit to be buried in the grave, and not
with any disgust of mind to be remembered. And therefore it is that of late, some
part of that former familiarity that was betwixt us, has bin renewed and since
my banishment I find by several Letters from my wife, that you have bin very
civil and respectfull to her, for which I return you many (AND MY HE ARTIEST)
thanks. ONE OF HER LETTERS dated the 2. of Feb: last I have answered in print,
and caused that answer to be published here as well in DVTCH as ENGLISH; which
I hope before the date hereof is reprinted at London again, since which I have
received two Letters more from her, the maine substance of both of which are,
to presume, with all the mournful arguments that possibly thee can use, to be
quiet and to abstain from printing, and Withal she tells me, it is the advice
of all my Freindes in general who come continually to her, to gather to write
to me about it. But having in my aforesaid printed Epistle, given her
undeniable reasons WHY I AM COMPELLED TO PRINT, which I hope with my former
Letters to her, will so qualify and season her Spirit, that I may presume now,
that both my fears are over, which were first, that I was afraid through
sorrow about me and her own distressed condition [as she calls it) the should
either miscarry of her child, or else secondly that she should be overwhelmed
with grief and so her burden should become too heavy for her to bear. But
hopeing that both of these dangers are over, I must now confess unto you, that
that little trouble which used formerly to accompany me, thorough the hopes
hereof is as good as at an end. And therefore to you shall I judge it convenient
for me, [ and 1 hope no way mischevous to your selfe] to answer freindly and
resolutely some other clauses in her latter Letters, and some clauses in other
Letters of some of my Freindes, which I have lately received, and then
positively to tell you without deceit or flattery my future resolutions, [by
the assistance of God] on purpose because I know you are great with the
GENERAL and I think with the NOW LORD-DEPVTY OF YRELAND LAMBERT, but I am
sure of it, with LENTENANT-GENERALL FLEETWOOD and MAIOR-GENERALL HARRISON that
you may show this Letter unto them all, being the great sword men of England,
that so they may lay their heads together obout it, (if they please) and then
let God work his pleasure

In a large Letter to my wise of the 13 of February last, I told her, and now
with comfort and rejoiceing tell you, that I bless God, that I have this
testimony in mine own Conscience; that the Cause for mannageing of which I am
bannished, did at the first and all along to this very hour does appear to my
understanding and judgment, upon the strictest scrutinie betwixt God and mine
own soul, that I am able to make, to be as righteous and as just a cause, as
ever was in the World, and all so however Mr. HILL THE CHAIRMAN reported it to
the house, yet Mr. PRIMATES PETITION was as fully proved, before him and the
Committee of Parliament in every circumstance of it, so far as its capable of
proof, [saveing that single clause of SIR ARTHVR HASILRIGS holding private
correspondence, with some of the Commissioners,] as any puition in the world
need to be proved, but it was no wonder it went as it did, when SIR ARTHVR
HASILRIG WITH Mr. HILL THE CHAIRMAN, WITHOUT A THIRD MAN, DREW UP THE GREATEST
PART OF THE REPORT, IN THE SPEAKERS CHAMBER, WHILE THE HOUSE WAS SITTING, as
one that took them at it told we with his own tongue. Which report we were
never permitted to see, nor none for us, nor to hear red, although we
earnestly entreated for it, and by importunity endeavored it. And besides I am
confident of it there was not three men, that judged the cause in the House,
that ever at the Committee, were constant hearers of it from the beginning to
the end. And by what I have heard from Parliament men, that were at the
Committee several days, Mr. HILL NEVER REPORTED TO THE HOUSE, ONE TENTH PART
OF OUR EVIDENCES AS WE LAID THEM DOWN BEFORE THE COMMITTEE, AND THE SAID Mr.
HILL WAS OPENLY IN THE HOUSE TAXED WITH SEVERAL MATERIAL OMISSIONS, BY A
PERSON OR PERSONS THAT HEARD NOT ONE HALF OF IT AT THE COMMITTEE. And besides,
when the GENERAL HIMSELF set his shoulders to the work, with all the might
he had in the World, to have the sentence so pass and go on, it is
unimaginable it could go otherwise then it did, for one THAT IS FAMILIAR WITH
HIM AND THAT WISHES ME WELL, TOLD ME, IT WAS IN THE GENERALS HOUSE BY HIM AND
A CABAL OF PARLIAMENT MEN AGREED OF, TWO OR THREE DAYS, BEFORE IT WAS VOTED OR
DECLARED IN THE PARLIAMENT. And some days after it was passed, the GENERAL
HIMSELF IN THE OPEN HOUSE (as one that heard him told me) IN ASPEECH OF HIS
DID AVERR AND DECLARE UPON HIS CONSCIENCE, THAT THE SENTENCE IT SELF PASSED
AGAINST ME, WAS AS HONEST AND AS JUST A SENTENCE, AS WAS EVER PASSED BY THAT
HOUSE. But I doubt not (through the assistance of God) in a short time, to make
it clearly and evidently to appear in every circumstance, that it is the MOST
VNJVST, ILLEGAL AND VNRIGHTEOVS SENTENCE, THAT EVER WAS passed by any authority
or power in the World, that ever professed to govern by Law, As in abundance
of their declarations, they have professed before God and the World, they ought
and would do. But at the present, I shall only trouble you with one instance
and that in a short Declaration of theirs entitled, a Declaration of the
Parliament of England for maintainning the fundamental Laws of this Nation,
dated Feb. 9. 1648. made by them since they took of the Kings head declaredly
for Tyranny, Oppression and and exerciseing an Arbitrary power in which they
positively declare, that they are fully resolved to maintain and shall and
will uphold, preserve and keep, the fundamentale Laws of this Nation, for and
concerning the preservation of the lives, properties and Liberties of the
people, with all things incident thereunto, with the alterations touching Kings
and House of Lords, already resolved in this present Parliament for the good
of the People. Which short declaration of theirs, is fully backed by them with
a larger delaration, made the 17 of March after. And although, there be an
absolute necessity that lies upon me, as speedily as I can to go to the press
with such a thing; yet in what I write or print by the assistance of God all
mighty, I shall keep within the bounds of a Christian, THAT VALVES HIS PEACE
WITH GOD ABOVE ALL EARTHLY TREASVRES IN THE WORLD, and of a rational man, THAT
HAS PRINCIPLES OF FREEDOM AND JUSTICE INGRAFTED IN HIM, THAT HE WILL NOT
BALKE OR CHANGE FOR ALL THE FEARS OF ALL THE DEATHS IN THE EARTH; and of an
Englishman, THAT LOVES HIS NATIVE COVNTRIE ABOVE ALL OTHER COUNTRIES IN THE
WORLD, and in a great measure, has the sense of his duty in acting toward its
Freedom and welfare, ENGRAVEN UPON HIS VERY HEART; and as a discreet man,
THAT WILL NOT MEDDLE WITH THE NATIONS AFFAIRS OR GOVERNMENT WHERE HE
SOIOURNES, OR DO ANY THING TO THE UTMOST OF HIS POWER, THAT MAY GIVE THE LEAST
DISCONTENT, TO THOSE MAGISTRATES UNDER WHOSE PROTECTION IN HIS BANNISHMENT HE
LIVES. And besides, I bless God, I have both publicly and privately walked, in
all peace quietues and uprigtnes toward the General and Parliament since I
owned their authority, and neither directly nor indirestly meddled with them, to
give them the least offense, or to occasion in them the least cause of jealousy
of me for undermineing or endeavoring to undermine their power and authority,
and therefore can I the more glory and rejoice under their harsh and cruel
dealeing with me. BUT THE LORD IS RIGHTOUS, AND I AM CONFIDENT WILL SPEEDILY
RETURN IT SEVENFOLD INTO THE BOSOMS of those who were the principal causers
of it Judges: 1:6:7: and 2 Samuel: 21, 1:2:5, 6:14: and 2 Samuel: 12:31: compared
with the 11: of Judges 17:18:19:20:23:27: Ester 7:9:10: and 8:11. and
9:2:3:4:5:15. Isaiah: 10:12:13:18. Mat: 7:2. Mark: 4:24. Luke 6:37:38. Rom:
2:3. James: 2:12. Revelations: 18:6:7:8.

But to return back; by my wives Letters I perceive, the LORD GENERAL gives a
very unworthy and strange kind of character of me, which seems to work
belief upon the Spirits of some of my Friends; and further says, that I may
think my sentence greater then my offense, if they did not fear other things
by me, of which also it seems some of my Friends are satisfied.

In Answer to all which; I say, its true upon the 28 of March 1649 the present
Lord General caused me to be fetched out of my bed by a multitude of armed
horse and foot and got me sent to the tower for a traitor, yet when I came to
my trial for my life, there was never any thing of that laid unto my charge
for which at first I was imprisoned, but only actions pretended to be done by
me many months after my imprisonment, when I lay under so many barbarous
provocations, put upon me by the General and his confederates, AS HAD BIN
SVFFICIENT (according to Solomon's saying) TO MAKE A WISE MAN MAD. But how just
it was to go about to take away my life, upon that score, I leave you to judge.

Its also true. I am now banished by the GENERAL HIS MEANS and the public
pretended grounds and reasons thereof are contained in the Parliaments printed
Narrative and Act passed against me recorded in the 49: 50: 51: 62: 63 pages:
of my late Apoligy to the people of the netherlands and I am sure of it in both
of them they lay no crime at all in Law unto my charge; as I have already
fully proved in my said printed Apology to the people of the Netherlands page:
65: 66: 67. But if the GENERAL OR ANY OTHER FOR HIM have any thing in
imagination fear or supposition to lay to my charge, let him or them stand up
and say their utmost, I crave no favor at their hands; but yet I appeal to
your Conscience, how just it is, to disfranchise a man of all his birthrights
and bannish him forever out of his native Contrie, for things they fear he
will act against them. Its confessed, the GENERAL must now needs have something
to say for himself against me, as well as his or HASILRIGGS AGENTS in times
bypast had: who a little before my trial at GUILDHALL October. 1649, in their
printed Books against me, clothed me in bears and Wolves skins, that so the
people as their dogs might worry me without compassion or consideration. And
therefore it was that they printed me to be an Atheist, a denier of God and the
Scripture and given up to all licentiousnes and an absolute confederate with
Prince Charles, to set up his absolute will and prerogative in the English
Nation. All or any of which things they them selves knew to be as true, as the
sea burnt. But read my Answer thereto Printed at the Latter end of the first
part of my trial at Guildhall, page 158, 159.

Its also true, my old Friend Mr. CORNELIUS HOLLAND a little before my second
trial averred to my wife, that at the Counsel of State they had Letters of
mine under mine own hand written to the Prince; and the LORD BRADSHAW did the
same, to some eminent Friends of mine. but when I bid defiance to them, and
challenged them to produce them they were not albe to do it, and it proved no
more then some of Mr. THOMAS SCOTS ROTTEN AND POCKIE LIES.

Its also true, that when I was tried for my life at GVILDHALL, and confidently
and justly alleged for my self that by the two statutes of the first of
Edward the sixth Chapter the 12 and the 5 and 6 of Edward the 6 Chapter the 11
still in force, there ought to be two direct and plain evidences or witnesses
to prove every fact of treason alleged against me: Yet those two worthles and
bloody fellows ATTORNEY GENERAL PRIDEAUX and the LORD KEEBLE, could and did
falsely and lieingly (not having the least grain of the fear of God or
common-honesty or shame before their eyes) aver, that there was a statute
made after them in the 1 and 2 of Q. Mary that overthrew and abolished those
two forementioned statutes of Edward the 6: and that now, one witness to prove
the treason alleged against me, was sufficient to take away my life. and this
they averred again and again unto the jurie upon their reputations to be
true, after that I had often before the Jury, and all the populous auditory
that then was present, to their faces told them, it was false and untrue, and
that there was no such law made in Queen Mary's time, and holding the statute
book in mine hand, I challenged them again and again to name the Chapter
that it might be read, the which they could not do and yet like most bloody
and false men, they would have taken away my life by their lies, if I had not
understood the Law as well as themselves and had not had CONFIDENCE ENOUGH TO
HAVE TOLD THEM THEY LIED TO THEIR FACES, before the jury and all that great
auditorie of People, all which you may fully read at large in the first part of
the book of my trial page 124, 125, 141, 142, 143, 147.

Now I say, laying all these things together, and considering that these three
base unworthy men, are still as great with the General as ever they were; I
do not wonder, if he have relations enough at his fingers end to make me
odious. But upon what foundation or bottom, they should be grounded, (seeing
mine own Conscience is clare and innocent) I cannot imagine; unless it be
something in relation to that averment, of Mr. REYNOLDS the solicitor
General, who lately at a Committee of Parliament (as by a Letter from London I
am informed) openly averred, I held correspondency with the Scottish King; but
whether he charged it upon me as done by me before my banishment, or since, the
letter does not declare. And therefore at present I can answer it but by Guess;
and say,

I believe my adversaries have some pangs of Conscience in them ( For I am
confident the wickedest and most seared Atheist or machiavel, or doer of
despite unto the Spirit of grace in the World is not totally without them)
that now and them pricks them, as it did profane Esau, who for one morsel of
meat sold his birthright, and afterward when he would have inherited the
blessing was rejected and found no place of repentance though he sought it
carefully with tears Heb: 12, 17. the same may be said of wicked Cain and
cursed Judas) for that injustice which they have done unto me in banishing me
without a Cause, and thereby, as much as in them lies; not only destroying of
me, but also of my poor wife and harmeles babes. Which cruelty of theirs, it
may be, either flies in their faces, [for if we sin wilfully after we have
received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin,
but a certain fearful lookeing for of judgment and fiery indignation, which
shall devour the adversaries and it is a fearful and dreadful thing to fall
(in wrath) into the hands of the liveing God Heb. 10.26, 27, 31. Or they fear
may be much resented and laid to heart, (as I know it is) by the People of
England of all sorts, who in time it may be may make some of them smart for
their unjust and barbarous dealeing with me. For says the present Lord chief
Justice St. John, in his Argument of late against the Earl of Strafford
printed and published by the special order of the house of Commons in the year
1641: page 43, he that would not have others to have law, why should he have
any himself, why should not that be done to him, that his self would have
done to others? It Is true (says he) we give law to hares, and deers, because
they be beasts of chase, it was never accounted either cruelty or foul play to
knock foxes and wolves on the head, as they can be found, because these be
beasts of pray: And it is a righteous and just thing both in the sight of God
and man, to measure unto them as they have measured unto others, Judges 1:6:7.
Matthew: 7:2 Mark 4:24. Luke 6:37:38. Rom: 2:1. and therefore upon the Principles
of Machiavel, they count it necessary to bespatter me and load me with that,
which though in it self never so false, yet they believe and hope may make me
loose mine Interest in England, which I have in the affections of thousands of
mine honest and indeared Friends there. Who I know do look upon me, as a
single-hearted, honest, just, plaine-spoken Englishman, that has bin valiant
and courageous for the regaining and preserveing their Freedoms and liberties,
though accompanied with frailties and infirmities, which all, yea the best of
the sonns of men are subject to. And if they could make me loose mine Interest
with mine honest Friends; I were then but single John Lilburne nothing at all
considerable either to be loved or feared. in hopes and confidence to preserve
which, I further say; If Mr. REYNOLDS by my corresponding with the Prince,
mean that I did it at any time in the least before I was banished; I bid
defiance to him, and challenge him, to instance if he can, averring that his
accusation is most false.

Or secondly, if he mean, that I have corresponded with him since I was
bannished, then I desire him to explain what he calls corresponding, or else I
know not fully how to answer him. But this at present I shall say, and that in
truth and faithfullnes as before the Lord allmighty, that knows my heart and
bears witness to me that I lie not, that since the day the Parliament voted my
bannishment, I have neither writ Letter line or sillabe to the Prince or any
about him, nor received Letter, line or sillabe from him or any about him.
Neither have I dicttated any Letter or any part of a Letter to him or any about
him, or appertaineing to him. Neither have I heard any Letter red to this very
hour, that has bin writ, or pretended to be writ to him or any about him.

Its true, since I came to Amsterdam, I have bin very much threatened by some
of the rudest sort of the Cavaliers; first by three of them, that came to the
lodgeing where I lay the first night, where they were very uncivil and
debaucht, as I am informed, and very probably might have done me a mischief had
I then bin there. and secondly, since that, one more of them, has to some
English people whom I have cause to trust, threatened to ruin and destroy me,
and others of them, and they of some port and quality, in the presence of some
that are no mean ones, and that I know love me entirely, have sworn within
these few days most bitterly, that I am a spy from CROMWELL and a rogue that
deserve to be knocked on the head. Laying all which together and those many and
strong invitations, that I have had to come into some of their companies, I
have judged the hand and finger of MR. THOMAS SCOT, that fellow all most stark
rotten with the French-po^e, and some of his agents or spies, have absolutely
bin at the bottom of this, which to me appears thus. I know my walkings, as to
man, are and have bin so upright and just (as to man) that all my adversaries
in England are not able to blemish them, and I believe my adversaries know as
much, being I know they have already searched as with a candle into the
bottom and secretest of my actions and ways; and therefore know, that unless
they can in the thoughts of my Friends blemish me, in reference to the Prince,
whom they have declared a traitor and therefore would be glad they had the least
ground in the world to aver me to my Friends to be apostatised from my
principles, by corresponding with him or his party, knowing they can have no
plausible way in their own thoughts to keep my darts of from them, and to
disenable me to work out mine own restoration to the full enjoyment of my
native English birth rights, but this. For if they could but colourably hold
out this, they would casily by virtue of several of their acts, declare all
those traitors that write but a Letter to me, or receive but a Letter from me.

And therefore I believe MR. SCOT has by special instructions from HIS MASTER
THE GENERAL, ordered some of his spies, that lie in the bosom of the
Cavaliers, to provoke them to speak big words against me, yea and it may be to
endeavor to take away my life, on purpose to necessitate me through fear to
keep company with them, and to grow familiar with them, that so they might
have some ground to write over to him thereof, and thereby erne their promised
salary from him, and write their secrets to him betwixt their inkie lines
eather with SACK or the JUICE OF A LIMON (according to his common instructions)
which by holding betwixt him and the FIRE, he can easily read, although a
stranger that should intercept his Letters (AS PERADVENTURE I OR SOME FOR ME
HAVE ALREADY DONE) that knows not his devices, could not do it.

But Sir, not to put a cloak upon things, I Will deal plainly and freely with
you. I judgeing there was and is such a design upon me as is before expressed,
and having many invitations to talk with some of the Kings party; least a
constant denial so to do, should give cause to them to conclude and judge me
infallibly to be a spy indeed, or to be as base and vile as some of them do
imagine me to be, therefore in order to mine own preservation and that I might
not be intrapped nor destroid, before I did that in reference to my
bannishment, that my brain has already modellised unto my self, I have
been of late in several of their companies and talked my mind rationally and
freely to them, in justification of MINE OWN PRINCIPLES; and I am consident of
it, have made as much advantage to my self of their discourses with me, as any
of them can do of mine. And I must consess unto you, had I bin formerley
addicted to set up the present Scottish Kings Interest, yet by my discourseing
with them, I did find so much ground and reason, as quite to discourage me for
the future, so much as to think of any such thing, in their way.

First, because I find the KING by their discourse, although a man judged by
them of parts, yet is he not of that Depth of judgment and soliditie, as that
he dare trust his own judgment and understanding, in the mannagement of any
great design. And I am confident that if he trust to the multitude of his
Councillors, there are some of them men that will talk their minds freely,
(especially to company in a Tavern,) by means of which it is impossible but
the Parliaments gold and silver, with the help of MR. THOMAS SCOTS agents or
spies, which he has in all Nations of Europe (BUT ESPECIALLY NEAR UNTO THE
PRINCE) by their intelligence will be to hard for them all, and thereby know the
bottom of their greatest designs, before they be a quarter ripe for execution.

Secondly, because, by my discourse with some of them I find, that not only the
Prince himself, but his cheisest Councillors, are for his comeing in by force
and conquest; which is a principle I as much hate as any man in the World does:
and have given as clear testimony against such a Principle and practice in
any person what soever as any man upon the face of the earth ever did or durst
do, I am confident of it. But besides; I have professed to be a man of
Conscience and one that could die for his principles and never could be
threatened from them, nor courted out of them, by any persons in the World what
soever. And it has bin one of my maine principles, and so declared by the
constant series of my practice, that evil must not be done by any, that good
may come thereby. The Apostle by the Spirit of God, having concluded the
damnation of sach practisers to be just, Romans 3, 8. but if I should out of
Machiavel or any other Politic Author learn such Principles, as to join with
the Prince or any other Interest whatsoever, out of a design of being revenged
of my adversaries, to conquer the People of England, that thereby he or any else
might rule over them by his will and pleasure: I should not only account my
self, one of the greatest murderers in the World but also one of the basest
fellows that ever breathed upon the face of the earth. Knowing very well: that
none is to rule over the sonns of men by will and pleasure but God only and
alone. But truly, I am afraid my LORD GENERAL CROMWELL HIMSELF has really
that latitude in his Principles, that will easily lead him out and permit him
to act such a practice, as I dare pawn my head, by his actions for many years
together, clearly to evince and Manifest. And it may without a speedy
reconciliation in short time prove the subject of my pen. And therefore he
having such Principles within himself, may judge thereby that I have the
like, and thereby may be left to as large an elbow-roome as himself takes.

But for disputacions sake, at present, admit that I am so. Yet truly I must
tell you, I have red Machiavil and the History of the Kings of Israel and of
Judah contained in the Scripture, and many other Histories and also within this
15 years have seen abundance of experince even in England it self; out of
all which I cannot see the least ground to draw any manner of inference, to
induce me to side with a man or Interest of men, that are beaten out of all,
and totally to forsake mine own Interest among those, that live under those,
that are in possesion of all manner of power and strength; or to think that
ever by a foreign Arm or power of force, he can ever probably overturne them.
Especially considering experience teaches me, assuredly to know that his bare
attempting and endeavoring of it, joines them in England all together in one
against him; although in many other things they are much divided amongst
themselves. I am sure of it in Scripture I read, that when Absalom had a mind
to be King of Israel, he did not presently go about to raise force to obtain
it, although he nor none of his interest were ever beaten before, but he
courted the People and stole away their hearts, by observeing to them his
Fathers negligence to do the people right, when they came to complain, and
handsomely reproveing of it in him, by telling the People there was no man
deputed by the King to hear them: and therefore before the People he wished O
THAT HE WERE MADE A JUDGE IN THE LAND, that every man that had a suit or cause
might come unto him, and he would do them justice; and when any man came nigh
to do him obeisance, he complemented to the purpose with them, and put forth
his hand and took them and kissed them: by means of which he rivetted
himself in the Peoples hearts and affections: and in process of time thereby he
made his Father King David to fly before him, 2 Samuel: 15:1, 2, 3, 4, etc. So
likewise JEHV for his own ends, could cry out, come with me and see my zeal
for the Lord 2 Kings 10, 16.

And as I have red the Scripture, so I have seen much experience in England,
and first, I have observed the Parliament by their curious oily and sweet
declarations in reference to the People out-courted and out bid the King (who
in his, stood upon the punctillioes of his prerogative) and thereby won the
hearts of the people from him, which proved his ruin. And afterward, in
process of time, the independent party (or the great men of the Army) served
the Presbyter or the Parliament the same trick. and therefore (Sir) had I
nothing of God in me, but only a grain or two of reason left me, I should
never side with any party in the World, in endeavoring the overturning the
men that rule in England, unles it were a party that in boones and privileges
did in reference to the People outbid all parties that ever went before them in
Just and rational things and so to ty their hands, that if they would, they
should not without the appare^t running the hazard of there own ruin do any
mischeef and therefore it is that by all the honest and industrious means that
a laborious or studious man can invent or take, will I by the assistance of God
preserve my Interest in their own bowels, amongst those honest and gallant
men that live amongst them, which have held forth that in worth and exellency,
that in it self is good and profitable for all sorts of reasonable men that
are not sotts and brute beasts in their understandings, that never any held out
before them, videlicet: THE AGREEMENT OF the people DATED MAY THE 1. 1649. And
this Interest, I shall Increase, widen, and strenghten as much as possible I
can with all persons what soever that will embrace it, not doubting but that in
the conclusion it will prove like Aarons rod that devoured the rods of all the
Egiptian conjurers Exodus the 7 and the 20 "Swallowing up all Interests into it
self." And you may remember when I was indicted for my life at Guildhall
October 1649, that it was laid unto my charge in the said Indictment as an act
of treason that I had held out in print the same thing to the Prince by name:
the words of which as they were contained in the indictment, you may read, in
the first part of the history of my said trial page 58, 59, 60. And I must
now acknowledge unto you, that a learned, (and I am sure of it as honest a)
judge as ever I knew in England, videlicet: BARON RIGBY upon a serious
discourse with him: told me, in these verse words, that if God should suffer
the Prince to follow the advice contained in the three foresaid pages; that in
one three or 4 months after, he would not give SIX PENCE for all the
Parliaments Interest in England. And least I should fail of my purpose, in
maintaineing the peace of mine own Conscience, and my Interest among my
foresaid honest Friends in England, I have for many years together and still
do give unto my self this mot to, "that honesty is the best Policy" as being
the truest, most lasting and successful in the world, all things being truly
and duly weighed, and confidered from first to last. In the maintaining of
which I have for many years walked, and do resolve by the assistance of God
allmighty, so to do to my dieing day, all though all the sorrows of the world
should be my portion therefore.

And therefore it is, that I have fixed my resolution "to be irrevocably" one of
those, that do and shall hold forth such a thing to the people of England, as
is truly able to take of all their jealousies and fears from them, that if I
should get up with my Interest, I intend by my self or by my Interest, to do
that with them, which the forementioned persons did when they had obtained
their ends to get uppermost, which was to ride the people and abuse them rather
worse then those that were before them, whom they had pulld down: and walk in
larger way ies of wickedness then their predecessors, as may be clearly seen in
ABSALOM and JEHU. for which, God cut them short as is verified by 2 Samuel: 15,
10, 11, 12, 14, 23. and Chap. 16, 20, 21. and Chap. 17. 1, 2, 18, 23, 26. and 2
Kings 10, 29, 30, 31, 32. and "who ever shall read but the Parliaments first
Remonstrance" dated December 1641 "printed in the first part of the book of
their declarations" page 3, 4, 5, etc. "and their declaration of the 19 of May
1642 page 207, 214. and their declaration of the 26 of May 1642 page 263, 264,
267, 270. and their declaration of August 1642 page 491, 492, 494, 496 and
their Reply to the Kings answer of theirs of the 26 of May 1642 page 693. and
read also their said book page 36, 342, 656, 660, 690, and their declarations
of the 6 of May 1643 and of the 17 of April 1646 in the 2 de part of the book
of their declarations" fol: 95, 879, and you shall clearly find they held forth
most glorious expressions to the People; of regaining their "lost Laws
liberties and freedoms" as that which was not only their principal aim, but
also as that which was their obliged duty, and (say they) "woe be to us" if we
discharge not our duty. in order to which, they adjure and call out upon all
those that have any sense of piety, honor or compassion to come in and help a
distressed state. But they walkeing in too nigh an affinity "to Absaloms and
Iehues" latter steps, the Army lays seige unto them, and tells them soundly
and particularly of it: and holds forth in effect the same things which they
had done before them, but with a great deal of more luster and glory then
they had done. As appears, by the Book of the Armies declarations page 23,
25, 26, 35, 37, 39, 42, 43, 44.

Which pages being red with seriousnes, will make it clearly appear, that
their words were smoother then oil, nay dropped like the honey comb, into the
mouths of the hungry oppressed People. How were their words seemingly bedewed
with tears of pity and compassion to the distressed people? how did they
represent their hearts divided and rent in sunder with heareing the doleful
cries and beholding the bloody tears of the oppressed? what professed gallant
resolutions did the seeming deep impressions that the peoples miseries had
made upon their hearts, beget in them? how did they appearingly slight their
estates and the enjoyment of their nearest relations? yea and of their dearest
blood in comparison of the Peoples liberties? what gallant principles of
freedom and righteousness, did they then profess? how loud were their cries
against all arbitrary powers whatsoever, and all seekers of private and
particular Interests? how positive and absolute were they in their resolutions,
to have all the Liberties of the Nation cleared and secured? how did they seem
impatient of any delays or protraction of time?

What Valiant Champions did these men appear to be for Englands Freedom? how
did old English valor and undaunted courage to oppose the stoutest enemies of
the Public Interest and advantage, sparkle forth in them upon June 4, 5, 1647.
When they boldly engaged in opposition to the Parliament and their special
orders, not to disband nor to divide, nor suffer themselves to be disbanded or
divided, until they had security that the free borne people of England should
not be subject to the like injury, oppression and abuse as had bin lately
attempted to be exercised upon them? Did ever the most faithful patriots to
the most noble Nation of England pass a larger engagement to their Country
then this? who could have forborne to conclude, that these would have bin our
worthy Ehuds (of whose valor and bravery for his Country you may read in
Judges the 3.12, 13, 14, etc.) that would have peirced the bowels of every
oppressor and destroyer of England? who could upon the sight of this
engagement but imagine, that these would never have given themselves rest,
until they had seen the top-stone laid in the beautyous Fabric of Englands
native Freedom? did they not oblige themselves in this engagement, to bid
defiance to every oppressor and abuser of the People in Parliament, Committees,
amongst Judges or Lawyers and all others whatsoever? were they not hereby bound
to stand like the Jews with good Nehemiah, with their swords in their hands,
not only until Englands breaches were repaired, but also until the strongest
possible iron gates were composed and set up to defend the Conscientious
Persons, Liberties and Estates of all English men from oppressors? indeed could
any engage to procure more perfect Freedom for the People, then they did in
this engagement? can more be said then this, that they would have security,
that the People should not be subjest to the like injuries or abuses, as had
bin attempted? All men know there had bin attempts to offer all kinds and
degrees of wrong and abuse to the people, and therefore they promised and
engaged to secure them for the future from them all.

Secondly; how were the purest, and most exact principles of Freedom and of
righteousness, professed by these, to be the only grounds upon which they thus
engaged, even against the Parliament? The undefiled Law of Nature, was declared
to be the rule of their proceedings. In their Declaration of June 14, 1647. the
establishment of common and equal right and Freedom to the whole Nation, was
promised should be their Study, all purposes and designs to advance any
private Interest, were most solemnly dis-avowed and disclaimed. Yea when the
Parliament unvoted and expunged at their desire from their journal Book, those
votes whereby the Soldiers were declared enemies for petitioning in order to
their satisfaction; yet these men professed such principles of Freedom and
common good, that they slighted that particular reparation given them, in that
great case of common concernement And in their Remonstrance of the 23 of June
1647 declared, that they did not value or regard their own injuries or
reparations in comparison to the consequence of the one or prejudice of the
other videlicet, "the future security of common right and Freedom in the
Nation.

Nay; how did these pretended heroic patriots seem to disdeigne selfish
private Interests or advantages? they seemed to think it too base, sordid and
unworthy for their pure Spirits to be a mercenary Army, to serve the Arbitrary
power of a state for money or gold, and therefore they disavowed their standing
as such an Army and declared; that they took up Arms in judgment and
conscience, as called forth by the Parliaments Declarations to the defense of
their own and the Peoples rights Freedoms and Liberties? and were not their
avowed Principles as purely free, as thus truly public? for they declared, the
equitable sense of the Law to be supreme to the Letter, and to dispense with
it, when the Safety of the People is concerned. And likewise. That all
authority is fundamentally seated in the Office and but ministerially in the
persons. Were ever clearer principle, of Freedom planted in any heroic hearts
then proceeded from these men's mouths; and they penned even by Ireton himself
the present General his son in Law, and apeece of his heart and soul? die
not every discerning eye, see the tendency of these gallant pure principles to
be perfect Freedom and common justice? Were not the hearts of the oppressed
people by the sight of these declared principles and engagements upon them,
Filled with liveing hopes of perfect Freedom from all Kinds of tyranny and
oppression, though sheltred under never so visible and specious forms of
Parliamentary power, etc.? did not every unprejudiced and truly English heart,
expect that the crooked wills of men should no more have bin the measure of
Englands Freedom, But only the streightest rule of Nature?

Thirdly; what fiery zeal and burning Indignation, did these our seeming
saviors breath forth against those they judged the invaders of our native
Freedoms and obstructers of their speedy settlement? Were not their words
spears and swords and hot burning coals, against Sir Philip Stapleton and the
rest of that faction? Did not these our hopeful and seeming Patriots, teach
the tongues of the whole Soldiery to cry aloud at New Market and Triploe heaths
justice, justice, justice! against those invaders of Englands Freedoms? Was it
not the first borne of their desires? yea were they not so transported with
zeal for the removal of those members whom they called apostates; that in
their said remonstrance of June 23, 1646 dated at St. Albans, they prfixed a
certain day to the Parliament for their suspension from the house, menaceing
and threatening them to take an extraordinary way, unless that by the prefixed
day they were suspended? And appearingly so sollicitous were they of purgeing
the house from all obstructers of justice, common good and Freedom; that when
the Parliaments commissioners on July the 7, 1647 incited them to hasten the
treaty between the Army and Parliament for a settlement; they answered that
no comfortable effect of a trealy could be expected, so long as the Parliament
was constituted of some persons, whose Interests were contrary to common good
book of their Declarations page 78 thus they presented themselven even jealous
for the peoples sake, and industrious even to emulation for "freedom and
justice.

Fourthly; how tedious irksome to these our seeming deliverers were the
delays in clearing and secureing the peoples liberties, when the hopes of the
People deferred made their very hearts sick: page 77? How did they profess the
nearest and dearest sympathy with the peoples oppressions in their said
Declaration of June 14? And did they not upon July 23 declare, that their
respect to the peoples safety enforced them to admit of no longer delays, and
that they could allow the house not above four or 5 days wherein they might
give assurance and security to them and to the People of a safe and speedy
proceeding to settle the Armies and Nations Rights and Freedoms?

Thus the speedy settleing of common right and Freedom was visibly and
declaredly the choycest object of all their actions and intentions, that was
seemingly the golden ball of all their contention,. "the fruit that their
souls so exceedingly seemed to lust" after, and the ultimate pretended end of
all their painful and hazardous race? Whatsoever they desired for themselves,
was professed to be insisted upon only, in relation to the public ends asore
said. Did not their Hearts seem so far inflamed with desire of the settlement
of the peoples right and Freedoms, that no quiet, rest, content, or
satisfaction of mind could possess them so long as the People groaned under
tyranie and oppression? yea they seemed so far to prefer the peoples good
before their own advantage, that they declared they would never have entered
into so hot a contest with the Parliament for reparations for their private
wrongs and abuses suffered from them, or their encroachments upon their
particular Freedoms, had not their suffering those particular wrongs, bin
prejudicial to common and universal right and Freedom.

Now Sir; Behold these your great commanders and seemingly Religious Friends
thus clothed with the glorious garment of their own Declarations, of such a
curious texture; thus adorned with variety of the fairest promises as so many
"bright oriental pearls" and do they not appear like "Absalom, without spot
or blemith from head to foot" 2 Samuel 14, 25, "are they not like to Saul
higher by the head then all the people 1 Samuel: 9, 2. "can you forbear to cry,
there is none in the world like unto them?" Did ever more hopeful sonns spring
from Englands fruitful womb? Did ever more lightsome stars arise in this
Horizon? Did not their hearts seem to be the thrones of righteousness, and
their breasts the habitation of goodness and compassion to the oppressed and
afflicted? was not justice as a robe to them, and mercy as a diadem? did they
not appear to go forth in the strength of the Lord, To break the Jaws of
the wicked and oppressors, to pluck the spoil out of their teeth? Did they not
then give such hopes of deliverance to those who were bound in chains of
tyrranie, and of releife to the poor afflicted, who had none to help them,
that the cares that heard their words rejoiced? and the blessing of many which
were ready to perish, came upon them?

And what Egle-eye could at first discern, "that this glorious clothing, was
but painted paper?" what jealous heart could have imagined, "that these
promiseing Patriots, were only sweet mouthed dissemblers?" Who could have
harbored the leasts suspicion that these seeming visible stars of heaven,
"were but blazing Comets?" that would quickly turn their backs as they have
perfectly done upon all these glorious promises and declarations, and prove the
vilest apostates that ever the earth bore? and have made it their work, "to
imprison, arreigne, condemn, shoot and murder men that have but put them in
mind of their own serious promises and engagements, in which the present
General himself has bin the chief ringleader. And I wish that you and many of
those that "outwardly profess godlynes and honesty in England" were free from a
zealous countenanceing of him in it. Although both they and he cannot out
know, that the righteous god of Heaven and earth, brought a desperate famine
upon Israel for three years together, because Saul had broke and violated that
solemn contract, and engagement, that the Israelites had made with the heathen
Gibeonites although it was not voluntary, but obtained by fraud and deceit. Yet
nothing would appease the wrath of God, and satisfy the Gibeonites, but the
hanging up of seven of the sonns of Saul before the Lord, who was the man that
had broken and violated the contract with them. At the doing of which, "the
anger of God was turned away from Israel." All which appears by Joshua 9, 3,
4, 5, 16, 17. and 2 Samuel: 21:1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 14. And though it were that god
prospered IEHV while he was doing his work in cutting of the "wicked house of
Ahabs" and made him prosperous and victorious in all his encountres, whereby his
heart was so elevated and lifted up that he cried out Come see my zeal for the
Lord, yet when he turned his back upon God and the ways of Justice and
righteousness, "god then cut him and Israel short, and gave them up with a
mighty slaughter to their Enemies" the 2 Kings. Chap. 10. Therefore as a man
that entirely loves my native Country I shall request you to commend unto the
serious and hearty consideration of the LORD GENERAL and his Confederates the
Advice of their valiant and learned Champion MR. MILTON, who having much spent
his eloquence to rout the forces of SALMASIVS, in the Epilogue of his Latin
book, "called a Defense of the People of England" turns his speech to his
Masters that had set him on work, whom he with much faithfullnes and Freedom
bespeaks on this manner. One thing is remaineing and that happily of the
greatest moment, that you o my Countrymen and Fellow-Cityzens should your own
selves undertake the refutation of this your adversary; which I do not see how
you can otherwise possibly effect, save by endeavoring with tooth and nail to
make your gallant actings the eternal confutation of all your Enemies
raileings. God did graciously give care to your Vows and most ardent
petitions, when being oppressed with more then a single bondage you fled to him
for succor. You in the first place among all Nations has he gloriously
delivered from Tyranny and Superstition, the greatest plagues, donbtles, of
humane life, and most prejudicial to all virtue and true Gallantry. Into you
it is that he has insused that height of courage, as that you have not doubted
to be the first of Mankind, that have by a famous judgment tried a King and
punnished him being condemned, after that you had by your Arms procured his
Conquest and surrender. After which so glorious a transaction, you ought not
now to think, much less to act any thing that is Mean and Low. Which that it
may be your commendation, you have no more to do, but to take this course;
namely, to make it appear to all the World, that you are as well able in the
midst of peace and disarmed, most valiantly to conquer Ambition, Avarice,
Mammon and those corruptions of manners that attend prosperity; which are wont
to conquer other Nations and generations of men; as you have bin to vaquish
your Enemies in a time of War; and to show forth as much Justice, Temperance
and Moderation in the preservation of your Liberties, as ever you have
manifested courage in casting the yoke of bondage from of your necks. By these
arguments and these alone, by such testimonies as these alone, you will be able
to evince, that you are none of those public Enemies, Traitors, Theives,
Murderers, Parricides, Fantastic Enthusiasts whom this man railes upon; that
you have not, moved with ambition or a desire to invade another right, nor
pricked and spurred on with sedition, any base lusts, madness or sury, murdered
a King: but that you have, being inflamed with the love of liberty, religion,
justice, common honesty and your native Country, punished a tyrant. But if
(which I beseech thee o good God may never come to pass) your minds shall be
otherwise inclined, if having bin valiant in war, you shall in time of peace
prove base and unworthy; you who have had manifest experience of Gods fighting
in such a manner for you and against your enemies; if casting behind your backs
so ^are and never to be for gotten an example of divine Presence you shall
forget to sear God and execute Righteousness; for my part I shall certainly
grant and consess, (for it will be past all denial,] that all those things are
true which malignant liers and railers have at any time most ignonimiously
thought or said of you; and that you shall in a short time find God more
incensed with wrath against you, then ever yet your enemies have found him
averse or you have felt him benign, favorable "and fatherly-affected unto
you, more then to all the Nations at this time inhabiting the face of the whole
earth and so far for Mr. Miltons excellent and faithful advice to them. And
therefore now to go on.

Is it not true Sir, that successive or new Parliaments equally chosen by the
People of England are confessed on all hands, to be the very soul and life of
all their Freedoms? and do not the Law-bookes of England show, that a
Parliament (which in its own constitution is excellent good physic but never
was intended nor ever safely can be used for constant diet, because it has
allwaies bin pretended by the members thereof to be unlimited and arbitrary)
was called and held fresh and fresh some times twice a year and that even
before the Conquest as is declared by Lambert in his collection of Laws before
the conquest, amongst the Laws of King Edgar chapter the 5, and by Sir Edward
Cook in his margent in the 9 page of his 4 part of Institutes, in the Chapter
of High-Court of Parliament which with other of the liberties of England, being
by force of arms subdued by the Norman Conqueror, although the people of
England forced him three several times to take his oath, after his being owned
for King, to maintain the English peoples Laws and liberties, as being not
able nor judgeing his conquest so good, just and secure a plea, to hold his
new-gat crown by, "as an after mutual compact or Agreement with the People,
or their representatives" over whom he was to rule. And therefore, as the Lord
Cook, in the foresaid Chapter page the 12 declares "a Parliament or a kind of
one was held even in the Conquerors time." See also to this purpoose, the
Lawbooke of the 21 of Edward the 3 solio the 60 and "the first part of the Lord
Cooks Institutes" lib: 2. Chap. 10. Section 164. fol: 110. a. and came to be
more Frequently used in his Successors time, "yea even to be once in two years
in Edward the 1 or 2 his time". at which notwithstanding the people then
grumbled as being an absolute abridgement of their ancient and undoubted
liberty, to meet more frequently in their national and public assemblies" to
treat and conclude of things for their weal and better being. The want of
which in ancient time, lost the Island of Brittanie to the Romans" as the said
Lord Cook declares in the said 4 part of his Institutes folio 9, out of
Tacitus in the life of Agricola page 306. whereupon it was enacted in full
Parliament in Edward the third his time, that the King (who was the Peoples
Officer of trust) "should assemble and call the People together in Parliament
once every year or oftener if need required;" as appears by the statute of the
4 of Edward the 3 Chapter the 14. But because this was not constantly used by
that King, but that sometimes he made intervalls of three or sower years
betwixt Parliament and Parliament, which was still a diminution of the very
Soul and Life of all the Peoples liberties vide ^icet Frequent and Often new
Parliaments: therefore in the 36 year of his reign, annual Parliaments are
provided. In these very words; Item for maintenance of the said articles and
statutes and redress of diverse mischeifs and greivances whieh daily happen, a
Parliament shall be holden every year; as another time was ordained by a
statute of the fourth of Edward the third Chapter the 14. and though in after
ages it has many times bin otherwise practiced, yet the statutes being still
in force, the parliaments answer to the King in the book of Declarations, page:
709 holds good, that the practice is noe argument against the right. But the
late King Charles exceedingly faileing to put these Laws in execution, in the
Frequent calling of Parliaments; and also when he had called them dissolved
them at his pleasure and so made them useles to the Nation; Both which the
Parliament most notably declared was against his trust, in their Declaration of
November the 2, 1642. first part of the book of their Declarations, page 70,
and 702, 709, etc. of which the Parliament most bitterly complained in their
first Remonstrance Book of Declarations Part 1 page 5, 6, 11 and in page 10,
11, ibidem, they positively declare, that his destroying of those two grand
Freedoms of the People videlicet, frequent, new, and successive Parliaments
and free debates therein; had corrupted and distempered the whole frame and
government of the Nation and brought in nothing but destruction and ways of
tyranny. For the preventing of which for the future, the Parliament got an Act
to pass in the 16 year of the late King, which was the first year of this
long-lived Parliament, to confirm every tittle of the two fore mentioned acts
for annual Parliaments; and further, in that act they say thus, that whereas
it is by experience found, that the not holding of Parliaments according to the
two forementioned acts, has produced sundry and great mischeifes and
inconveniencyes to the Kings Majesty, the Church and comment weal, for the
prevention of the like mischeifs and inconveniencyes for the time to come; be
it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty with the consent of the Lords
Spiritual and temporal and the Commons in this present. Parliament assembled,
that the said [last Forementioned) Laws and statutes be from henceforth duly
keps and observed. And most excellent and worthy to be written in Letters of
gold, were and are those arguments that the Lord George Digby (though since a
Cavalier) used in his public speech in the house of Commons January 19, 1640 at
and for the passing of the last forementioned Law; which speech of his is
recorded in a printed book called speeches and passages of Parliament, page
12, 13 and to page 21.

And has not the PRESENT GENERAL in his verbal expressions confirmed all
these things as most righteous and just? for, was it not he or his son in law
IRETON (lately deceased) that drew that excellent declaration of the Army dated
June the 14, 1647 printed and published in the book of their Declarations page
41, 42, 43 where they positively declare, that they were so far from
designeing, or complying to have an arbitary power fixed or settled for
continuance in any persons whatsoever, as that (say they) if we might be sure
to obtain it, we cannot wish to have it so in the persons of any whom we could
most confide in, or who should appear most of our own opinions and
principles, or whom we might have most personal assurance of or Interest in.
but we do and shall much rather wish that the authority of this Nation in
Parliaments (rightly constituted, that is, "freely, equally and successively
chosen" according to their original intention) may ever stand and have its
course and therefore we shall apply our selves chiefly to such things, as (by
having Parliaments settled in such a right constitution) may give most hopes
of justice and righteousness to flow down equally to all, in that its ancient
channel, without any overtures, tending either to overthrow, that foundation of
order and government in this Kingdom, or to engross that power for perpetuity
into the hands of any particular persons, or party whatsoever. And for that
purpose, though (as we have found it doubted by many men, minding sincerely the
public good, but not weighing so sully all consequences of things) it may and
is not unlike to prove, that, upon the ending of this Parliament, and the
election of a new, the Constitution of succeeding Parliaments as to the persons
elected may prove for the worse many ways; yet, since neither in the present
purgeing of this Parliament, nor in the Election of new, we cannot promise to
our selves, or the Kingdom, an assurance of justice, or other positive good
from the hands of men, but those who for the present appear most righteous and
most for common good ("having an unlimited power fixed in them for life or
pleasure") in time, may become corrupt, or settle into parties, or factions;
"or, on the other side, in case of new Elections, those that should so succeed,
may prove as bad or worse then the former." We therefore humbly conceive that
("of two inconveniencyes the less being to be chosen") the maine thing to be
intended in this case ("and beyond which humane providence cannot reach, as to
any assurance of positive good") seems to be this, viz. To provide, that how
ever unjust or corrupt the persons of Parliament Men, in present or suture may
prove; or what ever ill they may do to particular Parties (or to the whole in
particular things) during their respective terms, or periods yet they shall
not have the temptation or advantage of an unlimited power fixed in them during
their own pleasures, whereby to perpetuate injustice and oppression upon any
(without end or remedy) or to advance and uphold any one particular party,
faction, or interest whatsoever, to the oppression or prejudice of the
community, and the enslaveing of the Kingdom to all posterity; but that the
people may have an equal hope or possibility, if they have made an ill choice
at one time, to mend it in another: and the members of the House themselves may
be in a capacity, to taste of subjection as well as rule, and may so be inclined
to consider of other men's cases, as what may come to be their own. And
speakeing a little after of the Parliament whose power they say is so arbitrary
and in a manner unlimitted; in which regard, "it is most unfitt and dangerous"
(as to the Peoples interest] "to be fixed in the persons of the same men
dureing life or their own pleasures;" they add, that "Neither by the Original
constitution of this state, was it, or ought it to continue so, nor does" it
(where ever it is and continues so) render that state any better then a mere
Tyranny, or the People subject to it, any biter then Vassals: But in all
states where there is any face of common Freedom, and particularly in this
state of England (as is evident, both by many positive Laws, and ancient
constant custom) the people have a right to new and successive elections unto
that great and supreme trust, at certain periods of time, which is so
essential and fundamental to their Freedom, as it cannot, or ought not to be
denied them, or withheld from them, and without which the house of Commons, is
of very little concernment to the interest of the Commons of England. And
therefore a little below they positively defire, that some determinate period of
time may be set for the continuance of this and future Parliaments, beyond
which none shall continue and upon which the writts may of course issue out and
new Elections successively take place accordingly. And thus (say they) a firm
foundation being laid in the Authority and constitution of Parliaments for the
hopes, at least, of common and equal right and Freedom to our selves and all
the Freeborn people of this Land, we shall for our parts freely and
cheerfully committ our stock or share of interest in this Kingdom into this
common bottom of Parliaments and though it may (for our particulars) go ill
with us in one Voyage, yes we shall thus hope (if right be with us) to fare
better in another. And did not the present General in his proposalls of the 1
of August 1647 published to the view of the whole Nation, press that a certain
period may by act of Parliament be set for the ending of this present
Parliament, and that such period be within a year at most? See the book of
the Armies Declarations page 112. And did not the present General in his
Remonstrance of the 8 of August 1647 declare, that it was his ernest endeavor
and the endeavor of the Army, to settle a sound and lasting peace on good
terms for the Interest of the Nation? but in stead of the hoped for fruit of
their labors and hazards and of the Nations vast expense (in the dispenceing
of justice and righteousness and the settleing and upholding of common right and
Freedom to the people of England) we found (says the General etc.)
immediately the cross workings of a strong and prevalent party in the
parliament and Kingdom, who [walkeing under the mask of the Parliaments
Friends but being in truth men of corrupt and private ends and Interests,
different from and destructive to the real and common Interest of the Kingdom)
made use of their power to obstruct and pervert justice, to injure, oppress and
crush the peaceable and well-affected people of the Kingdom; to abridge and
overthrow all just Freedom and liberty, and drive on designs to set up a
party and faction in the Parliament and Kingdom, and (by the advantage of a
PERPETV AL PARLIAMENT] to dominere over and enslave the Kingdom to posterity,
and for that end to make such a peace with the King (if any] as without any
just provision, for the common and true Interest of the People and the security
thereof for future; which [saith the General etc.) we were called out to
vindicate and defend and had so long fought for. those being (says he etc.)
those just and public ends for which so much blood and treasure has bin spilt
and spent in the late wars. See the book of the Armies Declarations page 129,
132, 134. Did not the Army in their grand Remonstrance, of 16 of November 1648
presented by them to the Parliament by the hands of COLL. EWERS (once my Major]
and other Officers, and tendered by them to the consideration of the whole
Kingdom, say as much for the necessity and utility of constant, equal, and
successive Parliaments, as it is all most impossible for any men in the world
with tongues or penns to say more. Read their expressions in page 15, 45, 46,
52, 56, 66, 67, 69. and are not these part of their words, where speaking to
the Parliament, do they not earnestly desire them; First, that they would set
some reasonable and certain period to their own power, by which time (say
they) that great and supreme trust reposed in you shall be returned into the
hands of the people for and from whom you received it, that so you may give
them satisfaction and assurance, that what you have contended for against the
King (for which they have bin put to so much trouble, cost and loss of blood)
has bin only for their Liberties and Common Interest and not for your own
personal Interest or power. Secondly, that there may be a sound settlement of
the peace and future Government of the Kingdom upon grounds of common Right
Freedom and Safety, to the effect here following.

First, that from the end of this, there may be a certain succession of future
Parliaments) ANNV ALL OR BIENNIALL with secure provision. 1 For the certainty
of their meeting, sitting and ending. 2 For the equal distribution of
Elections thereunto, to render the House of commons as near as may be an
equal representative of the whole people electing. 3 For the certainty of the
peoples meeting (according to such distributions) to elect, and for their full
Freedom in elections. Provided that none who have engaged or shall engage in
war against the right of Parliament and Interest of the Kingdom therein, or
have adhered to the Enemies thereof, may be capable of electing or being
elected (at least during a competent number of years) nor any other, who shall
oppose or not join in agreement to this settlement. 4 That it be declared,
that (as to the whole Interest of the people of England) such representatives
have and shall have the SVPREME POWER and trust, as to the making of Laws,
Constitutions and Offices, for the ordering, preservation, and government of
the whole, and that in the NEGATIVE they may not render up or give or take away
any of the foundations of common-right, liberty or safety contained in this
settlement and agreement: AND THIS TO BE ESTABLISHED BY A GENERAL CONTRACT OR
AGREEMENT OF THE PEOPLE, WHICH THEY THERE REQUIRE MAY HAVE THEIR SUBSCRIPTIONS
THEREUNTO, and that withal it may be provided, that none may be capable of any
benefit by the agreement who shall not consent and subscribe thereunto, nor any
King be admitted to the Crown, or other person to any Office or place of
public trust without express accord and subscription to the same: and also they
press the Parliament to consider such sperial overtures as have bin tendered to
them, in the petitions of well wishers to public good and especially and
particularly That large petition from many in and about London dated the 11th
of September 1648: that so they may when they lay down their trust (which they
press may be speedily) leave a good favor behind them, both to the name of
Parliaments and also of men professing Godlynes and therein chiefly to the
honor of Allmighty God, who has (in his rich grace and mercy) done such
wonders for them.

And did not the present General and the rest of the Officers of the Army
draw up and cause to be presented unto the House upon the 20 of January 1649 or
rather 1648 by Lieutenant General Hammond, Coll: Okey and other Officers of
the Army, a petition and a draught of such an Agreement, which was afterwords
by their order printed at London by John Partridge, Rich: Harford, Giles
Calvert and George Whittington all Bookesellers in London? In which said
petition they use these very words. Now as nothing did in our own hearts more
justify our late undertakeings toward many members in this Parliament, then
the necessity thereof in order to a sound settlement in the Kingdom and the
integrity of our intentions to make use of it only to that end; So we hold our
selves obliged to give the people all assurance possible, that our opposeing
the corrupt closure endeavored with the King, was not in design to hinder
peace or settlement, (thereby to render our employments, as Soldiers, necessary
to be continued) and that neither that extraordinary course we have taken, nor
any other proceedings of ours, have bin intended for the setting up of any
particular Party or Interest, by or with which to uphold our selves in power
and dominion over the Nation, but that it was and is the desire of our hearts
in all we have done (with the hindering of that imminent evil and destructive
conjunction with the King) to make way for the settlement of a peace and
government of the Kingdom, upon grounds of common Freedom and safety.

And the introduction of the said agreement is in these very words; An
agreement of the people of England and the places therewith incorporated, for a
secure and present peace upon grounds of common right Freedom and safety.

Having by our late labors and hazards made it appear to the world, at how
high a rate we value our just Freedom, and God having so far owned our
cause, as to deliver the Enemies thereof into our hands; we do now hold our
selves bound in mutual duty to each other, to take the best care we can for
the future, TO AVOID BOTH THE DANGER of returning into a slaveish condition and
the chargeable remedy OF ANOTHER WAR. For as it cannot be imagined, that so
many of our Country men would have opposed us in this quarrel, if they had
understood their own good, so may we hopefully promise to our selves, that
WHEN OUR COMMON RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES SHALL BE CLEARED, their endeavors will be
disappointed, that seek to make them selves our Masters. Since therefore our
former oppressions, and not yet ended troubles; have been occasioned, either by
want of frequent national meetings in council, or by the undue or unequal
constitution thereof, or by rendering those meetings uneffectuall. We are fully
resolved and agreed (God willing) to provide, that hereafter our
Representatives be neither left to an uncertainty for time nor be unequally
constituted, nor made useles to the ends for which they are intended In order
whereunto we declare and agree;

(1) THAT, TO PREVENT THE MANY INCONVENIENCYES, APPARENTLY ARISEING FROM THE
LONG CONTINV ANCE OF THE SAME PERSONS IN SVPREME AVTHORITY, this present
Parliament end and disolve upon or before the last day of April, in the year
of our Lord 1649.

And for the excellency common utility and safety of settleing the distressed
Nation of England upon such an agreement, after the shakeing the foundations of
the government thereof, by so many bloody wars, in their printed Declaration
annexed to the said agreement whereby they recommend it to the serious
consideration of the people of England, they have these very words; We shall
not otherwise commend it (that is the said agreement) then to say it conteines,
THE BEST AND MOST HOPEFVLL FOUNDATIONS FOR THE PEACE AND FVTVRE WELL GOVERNMENT
OF THIS NATION, THAT WE CAN DEVISE OR THINK ON WITHIN THE LINE OF HVMANE
POWER, and such wherein all the people interessed in this Land [that have not
particular Interests of advantage and power over others, divided from that
which is common and public) are indifferently and equally provided for, save
where any have justy forfeited their share in that common Interest by opposeing
it, and so rendered themselves incapable thereof (at least) for some time. And
we call the Consciences of all that read or hear it to wittnes, whether we
have therein provided or propounded any thing of advantage to our selves in any
capacity above others, OR OUGHT, BUT WHAT IS AS GOOD FOR ONE AS FOR ANOTHER.
And a little further in the said Declaration, they aver and say.

And we for our parts, being far from any desire or thought to assume or
exercise a law-giveing, or judicial power over the Kingdom, or to meddle in
any thing save the fundamental settleing of that power in the most EQV, ALL
and hopeful way for COMMON RIGHT, FREEDOM AND SAFETY (as in this Agreement)
and having not means nor time for, nor the necessity of some present general
settlement, admitting the delay of such a consideration, as seems requisite in
relation to such numerous particulars, we have purposely declined the inserting
of such things into THIS AGREEMENT.

And did not the present GENERAL and the rest of his Officers publish a
Declaration dated in December 1648: which expresses the reasons of their then
advance with their Army to London, to purge (OR RATHER PLVCK UP BY THE ROOTS)
the Parliament? and do they not in that Declaration positively declare, that
the Parliaments treating with the King and rejecting all better and wholsomer
counsels given them IS NO LESS THEN A TREACHEROVS OR CORRVPT NEGLECT OR AN
APOST ATIZING FROM THE PVBLIC TRUST REPOSED IN THEM. Yet not ASSVMING to
themselves [as there in words they say] a standing power of judgment (AS OF
RIGHT OR TRUST) to conclude others thereby, acknowledging that to lie most
properly in those whom the people DVLY CHOOSE AND TRUST TO IVDGE FOR THEM. But
considering that such power, where ever it is, IS COMMITTED BUT IN TRUST, and
that neither this Nation, nor any other people DID EVER GIVE UP THEIR NATVRALL
CAPACITIES OF COMMON SENSE OR REASON, as to the ends and fundamentalls of that
trust. And as for the Parliaments breach of trust, there being no formal power
of man in being to appeal to, in the present case, they positively declare,
They cannot but exercise that common judgment which in their NATVRALL CAPACITY
is left to them, and therefore considering that the Parliaments then BREACH OF
TRUST, was so transcendently great, as that it was an hazard of total
destruction to that Interest, and to those people, for which especially (they
say) the trust was reposed. And seeing there is no orderly and open way left
for a just succession of another formal and proper judicature to be appealed
unto in due time, therefore they there renounced the then Parliament, AS NO
PARLIAMENT AT ALL, and with confidence APPEALED TO THE COMMON IVDGEMENTS OF
INDIFFERENT AND VNCORRVPTED MEN, exciteing all those that yet were faithful to
their trust in the Parliament to COME OVT and join with them, and in such a
case of extremity they promise to look upon them [not as a Parliament, but) as
persons materially having the chief trust of the Kingdom remaining in them,
THOUGH NOT A FORM ALL STANDING POWER, to be continued in them or drawn into
ordinary president; yet the best and most rightful that can be had, as the
present State and exigency of affairs then stood; and we shall (say they)
accordingly own them, adhere to them and be guided by them, in their FAITHFVLL
PROSECVTION OF THEIR TRUST, which they there declare, to be only in order unto
(MARK IT WELL) and UNTIL THE INTRODVCEING OF A MORE FVLL AND FORMAL POWER IN
A JUST REPRESENTATIVE TO BE SPEEDILY INDEAVOVRED AND RATIFIED BY AN AGREEMENT
AND SVBSCRIPTION OF THE PEOPLE THEREUNTO.

And did not the present General (for upon him I principally look, and judge
him in a manner to be all in all, and not only one man but; his word in
England, to be more then ten thousand) lay it as an act of treason, to the late
King Charles, charge his in his (for so I may truly call it) late impeachment
of him, dated the 20 of January 1648: that he had KEPT OF FREQVENT AND
SVCCESSIVE PARLIAMENTS OR NATIONAL MEETINGS IN COUNCEL, which (as before is
averred) ought to be once every year or oftener if need require? And did not
the Generals then two principal agents, to wit, the LORD PRESIDENT BRADSHAW
and Mr. JOHN COOK now Lord chief justice in Ireland, notably with all their
Eloquence and Rhetoric aggravate that against the King, as a most transcendent
crime? see the 11 page of the Lord Bradshawes last speech against the King,
being upon the 27 of January 1648, and Mr. John Cook his State of the Kings
Case page 7, 11, 14, 17, 18, 20. in the last of which, Mr. JOHN COOK averrs,
THAT THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND NOT ONLY BY SEVERAL STATVTE LAWS OUGHT TO HAVE A
PARLIAMENT ONCE A YEAR OR OFTENER IF NEED REQVIRE, BUT ALSO OF COMMON RIGHT
THEY OUGHT TO HAVE IT; and that the Kings making of Parliaments when he called
them, VSELES to the END for which they were instituted, was a crime in him
EQVALL to his not calling them, for nine or ten years together. And I wish the
present General, were not much more guilty then ever the King was, of all
those tamperings, juggleings and machiavilian devices, that he speaks of in
his 17, 18 and 20 pages, to make a Parliament useles in any thing, BUT TO SERVE
HIS OWN LVSTS AND OPPRESS THE PEOPLE THEREBY. So that then by Mr. John Cooks
conclusion, to speak in his own words, the General may throw the gauntles
and challenge all the MACHIAVELS IN the world to invent such an EXQVISITE
PLATFORM of tyrannical domination and such a PERFECT TYRANNY without MAIME
or BLEMMISH as he is Prince or Emperor of, and that by a Law, which says Mr.
JOHN COOK is worst of all.

And did not the present General before the late battle at Worcester, engage
and promise before God and several Officers of his Army, and of the good
people of England; that if God blessed him with that victory, he would
immediately be the effectual instrument to procure unto the people of England
their natural common, legal and undoubted birthright, TO ELECT AND CHOOSE A
NEW PARLIAMENT? and did he not after the battle, engage the same? and did he
not come up to London and in the Parliament House immediately after his comeing
up express himself full of zeal for the immediate calling a new-Parliament,
"As that which they were bound in Conscience and duty both to God and Man
forthwith to call"? And were not the Spirits and Hearts of thousands and ten
thousands of the honest people of England refreshed thereby, and cried him up
as their earthly Savior and Redeemer therefore? yet was his carriage therein
any other then A PERFECT CHEAT AND DECEIT, on purpose in peace and quietness to
get disbanded and scatterd all those forces that in their hearts longed for it,
and in their words expressed so much, and it may be he feared were at Worcestor
twice so many, as he, and all those that durst then join with him against it.
which necessitated him to give them good words, and fair promises; till he
got all the "new-raised forces (who were full of Life for a new Parliament)
disbanded" and all his own Regiments that he was jealous of dispersed and
scattered into small companies abroad in the Nation and under the pretense of
case of the Peoples taxes, ordered he not his Officers to disband a certain
number our of their troops and companies of the most choycest men that he was
afraid were Possessed with such principles? and did he not to the saddening of
the Universality of honest men's hearts in England, when he imagined he had
done his work to his hearts desire, vote and declare the Parliament should
(after they had sat almost twelve years) sit three years longer if they
pleased, and at three years end they may sit as long as they or he lives, if
he please. So that the people shall never have a New Parliament.

And upon this, did not you and diverse other honest men, Leaders or Preachers
to several of the most CONSCIENTIOVS CONGREGATIONS OF INDEPENDENTS AND
ANABAPTISTS in and about the City of London, repair to him, and with grief
of heart freely and fully to his face lay open his wickedness in this very
thing, as the most gross hypocrisy and baseness that could be acted by a man?
against which, did you not tell him, you judged your selves bound in duty and
conscience before God and the world to bear wittnes; and against this his
practice to endeavor as of duty and of right, to the hazard of your lives and
all that in this world you could call yours, "immediately to procure a new
Parliament? and when by your discourses with him, he grew choleric and hot, and
would not well endure freely to be spoke to, did not some of the "chiefest
Independents amongst your company" tell him to his face, that seeing he was so
altered and changed from what he used to be, that now he would not endure
plainly to be told his own, you would leave him in his declined condition and
go home to your closets, and by prayer cry aloud to God against him? and have
not some of the chiefest of the same company (I mean Independents] since
declared to some of their acquaintance, that they absolutely found and judged
the General (now by clear experience) to be as false and as juggleing a man
as the worst or highest of his adversaries had ever reported him to be? and
that his juggleing and deceit would be quickly the apparent hazard of the ruin
of all the honest men in England? And did not you all lay your heads together
and abstract the very quint-essence of your brains into reasons deducted both
from the Right, Profit and Necessity of having a NEW PARLIAMENT out of hand,
and the duty that lies upon your Consciences particularly, to stickle
vigorously for the procureing of it? and did you not deliever the said reasons
in writeing to the Generals own hands and upon his continuing obstinate
against your just desires, have you not since kept SEVERAL FASTS AT GREAT
ALL-HALLOWES IN THAMES STREET LONDON, from morning till night, twelve 14, or
16, of you praying in one day? and have not your hearts bin lifted up to God,
earnestly to beg assistance from him, to enable you to go on courageously and
actively with faithfullnes and success, not withstanding all opposition to the
contrary to accomplish fully that great good for the people of England "to wit:
the procureing a new-elected Parliamen for them? And has not the General
himself with his Sycophantizeing agents and Chaplains MR. or Dr. OWEN the new
Deane of Christ-church, Mr. LOCKYER, Mr. SYDRACH SIMPSON, AND Mr. PHILIP NIGH
bin extremely curaged and mad with you therefore, and used to several of you
not only threats, but also sugared persuasions to cause you to desist there
from; and have you not nevertheless persevered and gone on; and sent your
Letters and agents to all (or the most part of] your Friends, in all the
Counties of England or Wales: to excite them to join with you therein? and can
you now without horror of Conscience upon any pretenses whatsoever, and an
apprehension of the Wrath, Vengeance, and curse both of God and man to seize
immediately upon you and your Families, go back, sit still, or grow cold or
lukewarm? especially if you but seriously read, ponder and meditate upon, what
I have here writ unto you, which is all the Inference that at present I shall
draw from the premises.

Only I shall now take the Liberty, to give you the reasons why I write these
lines to you and the

First is, Because I know no man of mine ancient acquaintance, that professes
Religion, Zeal, Conscience or Common-good, as your self does, that is so
familiarly acquainted with all the four forementioned great Swordmen, or the
major-part of them, as your self is: and so well heard by them as you are: and
because I hate to grapple in good earnest with the greatest adversary I have in
the world, but I will (if it be possible,) tell him before hand what weapons I
will be at with him, that so he may if he please choose a Composure, if not
let him do his pleasure, and I shall do the best I can for my self.

Secondly, because I understand since I saw you, you have bin very civil and
respective, to my poor distressed and disconsolate wife. and least by any
after actions of mine you should repent of any civilitie you have already done
her, or be unwilling to do her any more hereafter, and because I would give as
much satisfaction to her (whom my soul has loved and still does love) (if I
know any thing of mine own heart (as entirely as ever husband loved a wife) as
far as with a good conscience and mine own Sasetie I possibly can; and that I
am a rational man and willing to stoop, for her Satisfaction, so Far as with
the maintaineing of mine own peace it may be.

The General having meddled with me, without the least shadow of ground or
cause, or the least provocation given him by me, I am confident of it; and
thereby picked a quarrel with me as Benhadad the King of Assyria did with the
King of Israel, who would not be contented with any thing that the King of
Israel could profer to him, unless he would give him every thing that was
pleasant in his eyes, as appears the 1 Kings 20 who paid dear enough for his
Insolency as in that Chapter you may read. And I for my part, challenge the
General to instance if he can, any one seemeing provocation that I have of
late given him, for I am sure of it, since our last outwardly solemn
reconcilement, I never in the least Disserved him, but waited upon him, since
his comeing from Worcester at his own House, and had an hour or two's private
discourse with him in his Gallerie, and gave him all the engagements from me
that are fit, either for a man of Honor, Conscience, or Integrity to give to
a great man, whose absolute vassal he cannot be. And he assured me he would
receive no Information against me behind my back, but he would send for me and
speak with me, before it should stick or find belief with him, protesting he
had absolutely buried in the grave of forgetfullnes the remembrance of all
bypast things betwixt us, and now should be as ready to serve me, as any
Friend I had in England, commending my Ingenuitie and proffers to him in the
difference betwixt SIR ARTHVR HASILRIG and my Friends, which was in the first
place; I proffered the General that so he might see, [as I told him] that I
had no desire to ruffle with any that I knew he was intimate with and that I
had a very high apprehension of his Integrity and of the Justice of the cause,
which for my Friends I managed against SIR ARTHVR HASILRIG and therefore First,
that if his Honor with deliberation would vouchsafe to hear the buysines
fully, I would engage if SIR ARTHVR would do the like, THAT MY FRIENDS SHOULD
ENGAGE THEMSELVES IN A BOND OF 20 THOUSAND POUND FINALLY TO STAND TO HIS
JUDGMENT AND THEREIN TO ACQUIESCE WITHOUT FURTHER STRUGGLEING. But he told me
his occasions were great and many and would not permit him time fully to hear
so large a busynes, as he was afraid it was. Unto which I replied My Lord;

Then in the 2d place if your Lordship please to propound this unto Sir Arthur,
that if he please to choose any two Officers in your Army, of those that he
leaves we will choose two more.

Or 3dly; if he like better to choose two Members of Parliament, we will
choose two more; and I will engage my Friends shall bind themselves in the
foresaid bonds, to stand to their final judgment, provided that wherein they
cannot agree, that so we may have an end, your Lordship shall decide it. Unto
which he replied, it was so fair, as fairer could not be offered by any man in
the world, and most solemnly engaged himself unto me (to use his own words)
to speak effectually to Arthur about it, and at that time took of me my
printed Book, against SIR ARTHVR and the "four unjust commissioners at
Haberdashers Hall: And promised me seriously to peruse it. But although I was
often in his way on purpose to wait upon him to receive his commands about it;
yet I never heard more of it from him, although this discourse betwixt him and
me, was many weeks before Mr. Primates appeal to the Parliament. Therefore, I
say, considering all these things, I must have a care how I trust a twice
reconciled Enemy, especially one that has made so many and so glorious
transcendent promises to the Nation of England, and all sorts of honest Men
contained in it, as he has already done several times over, (as is before
truly repeated) AND MAKES NO CONSCIENCE AT ALL TO PERFORM ANY ONE OF THEM. Yet
for peace sake and for affections sake to my endeared and poor wise, I will
the third time now go as low in my propositions, as possible with any safety
or imaginable security I can; upon the granting of which, I will engage to sit
still and write no more against him, unless he break the engagement first. And
therefore in order to a third reconcilement, I propose in the first place, that
seeing by Common right, several ancient and modern statute Laws yet in
force, the Parliaments and Armies forecited Declarations, and the Unanimous
confession of all Interests and parties whatsoever, a new and successive
Parliament once a year, is the undoubted birthright of the people of England
and seeing by the GENERALS own forementioned Declarations, this Parliament,
THAT NOW IS, IS NO PARLIAMENT AT ALL, nor upon, "his own principles, never was
since he declared and avowed they were traitors to their trust" which in the
year 1648 he did, as has bin truly before recited; and seeing by his and his
Armies own confession (as is before truly mentioned) there is no other Safe,
Secure, Honest or Just way to provide for the calling of future parliaments in
England, but by a" Popular Agreement signed amongst and by the people; that
therefore he would immediately declare, and give good Cautionary security, that
within three, sour or 5 Months time, the people of England shall choose and
have sitting a new Parliament, either upon the principles of our Agreement
dated at the Tower of London May 1, 1649: or upon the principles of their own
forementioned Agreement, delivered by them to the House of Commons. and upon
these conditions I will wave all things concerning my self, or the Collierie
of Harraton, or my Friends related thereunto. And further; to manifest to all
the world, that my present necessitated and compelled struggleing, is not to
appropriate to my self either Government, Rule, Domination, Riches or
Greatness; I will be willing to give my full consent unto it under my hand and
seal, that an act shall be passed, by this present Parliament, to make me by
name incapable of being chosen of the next Parliament, or bearing any Office in
the Commonwealth of England, dureing its sitting, or comeing into England,
till it be sat.

Now, Sir, it may be the General may be full of Indignation and scorn, that
such a nothing as my self should dare to make such a proposition to him, of
whom it may truly by reason of his greatness be said, as it is said in the 41 of
Job of the LEVIATHAN, that when he raises up himself, the mighty are afraid,
the sword of him that lays at him cannot hold: the spear, the dart, nor the
habergeon. He esteems iron as straw and brass as rotten wood. the arrow
cannot make him flee: sling stones are turned with him into stubble, darts are
counted as stubble, he laugheth at the shakeing of a spear; upon earth there
is not his like, who is made without fear. But if the General do rage and
scorn at what I say; In calmnes I answer him.

In the first-place with the words of himself and his Army, as they are
written in the 70 and last page of their grand Remonstrance from St. Albans 16
November: 1648 which thus sollowes. We hope (say they) that in Age of so much
light, mere will or resolution will not be held forth or pursued against what
has bin said. But that, what reason or righteousness, there is in the things
which we have said will be considered and followed, nor let it find prejudice
with you (meaneing the Parliament) from any disdaigne toward those from whom
it comes [being in the condition of an Army looked upon as servants under you]
since servants may speak to their Masters and ought to be heard and regarded
even when they speak for their own right only, and rather when they speak
for the good and safety of them they serve, but much more, when they speak of
that wherein they have some joint Interest with them; and yet more, when (those
their immediate Masters being themselves also servants and trustees for the
benefit of others) they speak for the Interest of those for whom they are
employed.

But if the General shall hold forth nothing but mere will and resolution
against what I have here said, then in the

Second place, Let me tell both you and him, I am confident of it, very
speedily in one Kind or another, he will meet with one way or another, as bad a
portion as he or they did, against whom that Remonstrance was made.

But thirdly, I answeer him in the words of the Scripture Samuel 2. 22, 26, 27,
28 and Chapter 23, 2, 3. where David speaking of God says, With the merciful
thou will show they self merciful and with the upright man thou will show thy
self upright; with the pure thou will show thy self pure, and "with the
froward thou will show thy self unsavory" and the afflicted people thou will
save, "but thine eyes are upon the haughty" that thou may bring them down.
And David further goeing on says, the Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his
word was in my tongue, the God of Israel said, the rock of Israel spoke to me:
"He that rules over men must be just, ruleing in the fear of God." And also I
further answer with those sayings of the Spirit of God, in the 2d of Isay the
11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and the 3d of Isay the 11, 13, 14, 15, where it is said, The
lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtynes of man shall be lowed
down" and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. For the day of the Lord
of Hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, upon every one that
is lifted up and he shall be brought low, and upon all the Cedars of Lebanon,
that are high, and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan, and upon all
the high mountains, and upon all the Hills that are lifted up and upon every
high-tower and upon every fenced wall. Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill
with him; for the reward of his hands shall be given him, for the Lord stands
up to plead and stands to judge the people, the Lord will enter into
judgment with the Ancients of his people and the Princes thereof, for ye have
eaten up the vineyard, the Spoil of the poor is in your houses. What mean
you that you beat my people to pieces and grind the faces of the poor says
the Lord God of Hosts? and chap: 5, 15, 16 And the mighty man shall be
humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled but the Lord of Hosts shall
be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy shall be Sanctified in
righteousness. And chap: 13, 6, 11. Houle ye for the day of the Lord is at
hand, it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty, and I will says God
punnish the World for their evil and the wicked for their iniquity and I will
cause the arrogance of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtynes of
the terrible, and chap: 23: 9. The Lord of Hosts has purposed it, to stain
the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honorable of the
Earth, and chapter 24, 5, 6, 20, 21. the Earth also is defiled under the
inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the Laws, changed the
ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. therefore has the carse devoured
the Earth and they that dwell therein are desolate. the Earth shall reele to
and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage, and the
transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it, and it shall sall and not arise
again. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall punnish the
Hosts of the high ones that are on high, and the Kings of the Earth upon the
Earth, and Chap: 26. 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11. trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in
the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, for he brings down them that dwell
on high, the lofty City he lays it low, he lays it low even to the
ground, he brings it even to the dust. the foot shall tread it down, even
the feet of the poor and the stepps of the needy. the way of the just is
uprightnes; thou most upright, do weigh the paths of the just. But let favor
be showed to the wicked yet will he not learn righteousness. In the Land of
uprightnes will he deal unjustly and will not behold the Majesty of the Lord.
and chap 28, 2, 3. Behold the Lord has a mighty and strong one, which as a
tempest of hail and a destroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters
overflowing, shall cast down to the earth with the hand the Crown of pride.
And Chap: 29, 20, 21. For the the terrible one is brought to naught, and the
scorner is consumed and all that watch for iniquity are cut of: that make a man
an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate.
that turn aside the just for a thing of naught. And Chap. 40, 23, 29, 30, 31.
Where it is said of God, that the brings Princes to nothing and makes the
judges of the earth as vanity, and gives power to the faint, and to them that
have no might he increases strength. Even the youths shall faint and be
weary, and the young men shall utterly fall, but they that wait upon the Lord
shall renew their strength: they shall mount up with wings as Aegles; they
shall run, and not be weary; they shall walk, and not faint.

Fourthly, I answer, when God will have athing brought to pass, the sounding of
Rammshornes shall be sufficient to blow down the walls of Jericho Joshua the
6. For when God will work who shall let him? Isay 33.13. And when the
Allmighty will have a man to act, in desperate and visibly improbable designs
for him, he will compass him about, with such necessityes to go on with his
work, that there is no evadeing it, and put him into Jeremies condition (as
many times I my self have bin) when he forced him to cry out. O Lord, thou
have deceived me, and I was deceived, thou art stronger then I, thou have
prevailed: I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me. For since I spoke, I
cried out, I cried, Violence and spoil; because the word of the Lord was made
a reproach unto me, and derision daily. then said I, I will not make mention of
him, nor speak any more in his name. BUT HIS WORD WAS WITHIN ME, AS A BURNING
FIRE SHUT UP IN MY BONES, AND I WAS WEARY WITH FORBEAREING, AND I COULD NOT
STAY. For I heard the defameing of many, ^eare on every side. Report, say they,
and we will report it: all my familiars watched for my halting, saying,
peradventure he will be intised and we shall prevail against him, and we
shall take our revenge on him. But the Lord is with me, as a MIGHTY TERRIBLE
ONE, therefore my persecutors shall stumble and they shall not prevail: they
shall be greatly ashamed, for they shall not prosper, their everlasting
confusion shall never be forgotten. But O Lord of Hosts that tryest the
righteous and see the reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them
for unto thee have I opened my cause, be not a terror unto me, thou art my
hope in the day of evil. LET THEM BE CONFOUNDED THAT PERSECUTE ME, but let not
me be confounded, let them be dismayed, but let not me be dismayed; BRING UPON
THEM THE DAY OF EVIL, AND DESTROY THEM WITH DOUBLE DESTRUCTION Jeremy 20, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and chap. 17. 17, 18. And give me leave without offense to
say to my Lord General Cromwell, as God in something the like case said in the
22 Jeremy 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Woe unto him that builds his house by
unrighteousnes, and his chambers by wrong, that uses his neighbors service
without wages, and gives him not for his work: that ^aith, I will build me a
wide house and large chambers, and cutteth him out windores, and it is seeled
with cedar, and painted with vermilion. Shall thou reign, because thou
clothest thy self in Cedar? did not thy Father eat and drink and do judgment
and justice and then it was well with him? he judged the cause of the poor and
the needy, then it was well with him, was not this to know me, says THE LORD?
But thine eyes and thine heart, are not but for thy Coveteousnes and FOR TO
SHED INNOCENT BLOOD, and for oppression and for violence to do it. therefore,
says the Lord, thou shall be buried with the buryal of an Ass, without
lamentation, saying AH MY BROTER! or AH LORD! or AH HIS GLORY! Therefore let not
the General for all his greatness despise the day of small things. For who
would have believed or immagined 10 years ago, that Oliver Cromwell a mean
private inconsiderable man in comparison, should by this day have had 3 Nations
at his beck and command [for I am sure of it when he and I about 10 years
ago by the Parliaments authority were first made captains, my particular
Interest in England, was so far beyond his, that I could then have easily
raised a hundred volenteers to have followed my banner for his one,] and enjoy
really a greater power in them, then ever any of there most Absolute Kings this
500 years had.

Fifthly, I answer that I have heard from travelers that the ELEPHANT (which
of all the beasts in the world is the most warlike one, carrying a Castle able
to secure many men upon it is back and being in many places in the East Indies
so expert in war, that if an Iron chain be tied to its trunk, it will with
it mow down whole rows of men, and yet for all this) of all the creatures in
the world is the most afraid of the little silly contemptible pismire, the
which if it Creep up it is trunk and git into it is brains (as some tyms they
do) the little creature will more mad, that great, furious, strong beast, then
the shakings of multitudes of spears, and the pouring of shewers of warlike
darts and arrows upon it.

I wish my LORD GENERAL for his own sake having done so great things in
England as he has done, may seriously consider what he will git at my hands
when he has done the worst he can to me, for if I fall I can (as I have often
through the goodness of God) rise again, but so can not he, for his fall if it
come will be so great, it will break his neck; and I look upon him as my
grand adversary, and against great nor small must I now not fight, nor contest
with to the purpos, saveing only himself; And truly I am apt to think (how
contemptable soever he may Judge me to be) that if he force me to it to the
utmost nesessitie; I shall be able (through the strength of almighty God) to
trouble him as bad, as the greatest Army of Cavileers that ever he fought with
in his life did, and to make his very hartstrings to ache for skin for skin yea
all that a man has will he give for his life; But peace with him, (not only
for my own good, but the good and benifit of the whole Nation) is the thing I
desire from my heart and soul.

Therefore, I will here presume to advice him as Joab advises David, when he
had like to have taken in the City of Rabbath, and therefore advised him, to
gather his people together and take it in himself, least he took it, and it
should be called by his name. even so, say I, a New Parliament is the people
of Englands right, and the obtaineing of one for them, is even at the very
door, I am sure of it; therefore let my Lord General arise, and gather his
Army about him, and effectually, and in good earnest revive his or our
Agreement and speedily procure thereby a New Parliament for the people, which I
dare avow, infalliby to demonstrate, he may as easily, freely and safely do
it, if he will but say the word, as kiss his own hand, and I will maintain it
he has no real dureable safety in the world, but in the doing of it. but I
think Politicus in his notable preambles to his thursday newes-bookes, has
already sufficiently cleared that point. I say therefore, if he will in the
hearts of the honest and understanding people of England be esteemed and be
really their darling, let him arise and do it with all his might quickly,
least I or some other contemptible or unthought of instrument or instruments,
do it for the people in despite of him, and so run away with the honor of
it, and have it called by our name. For let him remember, when the Scots first
invaded England in the year 1639 by their declareing they came in for to
procure the English people their liberties and that they might enjoy a
Parliament, which they had bin without ten or eleven years together, they tied
the Kings hands behind his back thereby, and won the Zealous stout English
peoples hearts away from him, and thereby procured for the English People a
Parliament in spite of the teeth of all that opposed it. Nay and thereby made
the Kings own Soldiers knock their commanders on the head, that were leading
them against the said Scots. I say no more at present, but bid himself make
the farther application, only adding, that I am consident of it, that he will
be the highlyest esteemed man to the people of England, that is in the world,
that can or shall be an Instrument upon the principles aforesaid, to procure a
New Parliament for them, thereby rationally and probably to free and deliver
them from their unsupportable and un-imaginable oppression, bondage and slavery
which they are under, worse and greater by a thousand degrees then ever it was
in the worst of the late Kings times. For now, I will maintain it, there is no
man in England, that can rationally or upon any probable grounds call either
his land, his trade, his Estate, his life, his wife or his children his own,
or be sure to enjoy them free from violence one single day to an end. And in
the multitude of instances, I need to give you no more then mine own which is
now upon me.

For, have I done the General, or the Nation or any particular man in it any
wrong, oppression or injustice? if it be said I have, I challenge the sight of
my whole charge and a particular declaration, that I shall enjoy the benefit of
the Petition of right, and the Parliaments and Generals pass freely to come
into England" and there to stay for a time and return back again, without let
or molestation, and I do hereby engage with speed to meet (by Gods assistance)
the greatest and stoutest adversary that I have in England there at the bar of
justice. And I am sure, if they can legally prove me guilty of any wickedness or
oppression acted upon but the meanest man in England, my reputation is gone,
and then all my Interest in that nation is not worth a groat. So that afterward
the General need not in the least to be afraid of any thing that I can say or
do against him. For then it would signify no more then the wind that blows.

Sir, to draw toward a Conclusion. As the General used to give his earthly
Lords, Masiers and Creators the Parliament, a few and set number of days viz:
4 or 5 at most, to answer his demands in: so from the date hereof, I give you
three weeks, or one and twenty days exclusive, to return me what answer you
please about this Letter, promissing till they be past, not to print and
publish it; provided, by the very first post after this, you write me word you
have received it, or else I shall judge Mr. Thomas Scot has caught it" as I am
informed from London, he has already done some other of my Letters. for
which, and for setting his spies upon me in these Countries, which I have very
visibly found out, and for all his old roguery exercised toward me, and
plotted against me, I must be forced when I am a little at leisure in print to
pay him: and particularly for all his notorious codpeice Simony that I know of,
in attempting to lie with two of my female Friends at one time and in one bed
in the same chamber, at the sugar-loafe near the Muse by Charing Cross, being
one of those many Lecherous houses he haunts and has the command of. Which
COLONEL THOMAS PRIDE now a Member of the Army, many months ago at the
Parliament door TOLD Mr. SCOT partly of to his face, but he the said Scot
durst never question him therefore, nor the two women that (as I remember the
Story from Colonel Prides mouth) were then mentioned to him to be the parties;
and for his strong attempting to hire one of my quondam Friends with the gift
of two hundred pound land a year, firmly to be settled upon him and his heirs
for ever, to swear against me at Guildhall, at my late trial to take away my
life. I say, if it come into his hands, I believe the General shall never see
this Letter, till he see it in print, which I desire to avoid if it be possible.

It may be, at the sight of this, the General will be mad, and revenge
himself on my Estate, and my Wife and poor Children. But let him take heed
what he does, for it is the Judgment of Christ, that the same measure a man
meats should be measured to him again. And the truth of it is, if my sentence,
to morrow, WERE TAKEN OF, 1500 POVND would not, all things considered, in my
worldly busynes, set me in so good a condition as I was in, the day before it
passed against me. For being in many intanglements in the world, having scarce
recovered to stand upright upon mine own legs, it has already as good as
broke my back, with reference to the world. And in my absence, I hear every
unworthy man, that can but pretend any thing against me, to reach me or my
poor wife, takes his advantage of my absence to abuse her, and trample upon
her. And SIR ARTHUR HASILRIG, I hear, must be doing again, with his gross
Knave William Huntington of Billingham in the County of Durham, against both of
whose base and lying dealeings with me, preferred to the Parliament in November
last against me, I made my particular and clear defense, to the then
silenceing of them both, in a sheet and an half of paper, and presented it in
print to the Parliament the 28 of November 1651 being incitled, to every
individual Member of the supreme Authority the Parliament of the Commonwealth
of England The humble Address of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, by way of
answer to a most false and scandalous printed Petition delivered at the House
door against him, by one William Huntington upon Weddensday the 26 of November
1651. In which I am confident I have made as clear, rational and just a
defense for my self, as any man in the World, can make to any accusation laid
unto his charge, unto which to this very day I never saw any thing by way of
reply, neither do I believe its possible rationally and justly to reply any
thing yet unto it. And I hereby bid defiance to him and all my adversaryes I
have in England, to lay a farthing tokens-worth of baseness justly to my charge
for 15 years together.

And I wish with all my soul, you would seriously read my said defense, my
wife being able to furnish you therewith. But further, if I have wronged the
man, which I absolutely deny in the lea^^, that I have done it, to the value of
a single pin: I proffered him many times fair enough, as in the said defense
you may read, but he would never accept thereof, and besides, the Law was open
for him when I was in England and still is, and is his inheritance as well as
mine, and though I be here beyond the seas, so that he cannot arrest me; yet
let him put in his Declaration in a legal Court in England, as its commonly
there reputed, and send me a Copy thereof and I will give Authority to a
Friend to answer it legally. for the Law is yet my inheritance, and the heart
of the greatest and stoutest man in England, I will make to ache if possibly I
can, that shall endeavor to deprive me of the benefit thereof, allthough I die
at his feet therefore. But let not Sr. ARTHUR HASILRIG take upon him arbitrarily
to arbitrate my estate, as I hear he is about to do, when I give him no power
and authority so to do. If he persevere in it, it will but ad unto that great
guilt of his, that I am persuaded in time will justly carry him to the Scaffold
at Tower Hill or else where, which I believe I shall live to see with mine own
eyes.

Sir; if toward peace I receive not a satisfactory answer to this Epistle, I
must deal truly with you, my condition already is such, that it will force me
with all the Eloquence and Rethoric that I have, to cry out aloud, as the
Parliament in the day of their distrese did when they required and desired, all
those that had any sense of piety, honor or compassion, to come forth and
help a distressed state, part 1 of the Book of their Declarations page 498.
so, must and shall I by Gods assistance, with the mournfullest dittyes and
bleeding tears of oppression cry out for help and supply, that my soul is
able to power out, either to God, to Men, or Women, of all Nations, relations
and conditions (and publish it as farras English, Dutch, French or Latin will
carry them, especially to all truehearted Englishmen, that have fought for
their Liberties and Freedoms, or stood by the stuff whiles others did it, who
ought to have as good a share in the liberties contended for, as those sonns of
wickedness and Belial as David calls them 1 Samuel: 30.22. that would now ingross
all to themselves. Who though Christians in name, may yet infinitely be
condemned and reproved by the Righteousness and justice OF NEHEMIAH, though a
jew, in the like case. Who although he 12 years together was Governor over
his Countrymen in martial and civil affairs in the days of their distress,
yet neither he nor his Brethren all that time did eat the bread of the
Government, nor bought any land, but provided for strangers at his own cost,
and at his own table: because of the reproach of the heathen their Enemies and
because of the fear of God. Nehem: 5.9, 14, 15, 16., Nay he would not suffer
the rich men in that day to exact usury of the poor men. and righteous Abraham
(though not so full of religious pretenses as the Lord General Cromwell) when
he had redeemed from Captivity by force of Arms the People of the wicked City
Sodom, whose King would have given him for his pains all the goods he had
redeemed with them; yet he scorned it, and would not take any thing that was
his or theirs, noe not to the value of a show-latchet, least the heathen should
say he had made Abraham rich, Genesis 14, 15, 22, 23. I say I must be forced to
all sorts of people to cry out bitterly for help and assistance, to enable me
to print thousands and ten thousands of my mournful ditties and lamentations,
and to bear the charges of my messengers and agents, by whom I must send them
gratis, into all the parts and coasts of England, Scotland and Ireland; and all
the Isles thereunto belonging; that possibly I can get them conveyed unto.
and I doubt not; but allthough the Magistrates of Amsterdam, have already
seized upon some of my Apologies and thereby stopped the public sale of them,
being almost ten-sheets of paper in ENGEISH AND DUTCH, yet that I shall either
beg or borrow money enough, to enable me within a little time, to give them, and
ten thousands of other printed papers away gratis. For I doubt not, but the
Spirit of magnanimity, zeal and conscience will work so powerfully in some of
my rich Countrymen etc. (that now have no assurance by reason of that
arbitrary and tyrannical power they are under of keepeing what they possess
and enjoy, nor of their lives, nor of their Liberties, wives nor children, to
find out ways and means to send me a supply of money, to enable me like a man
of mettle, courage and industry; to struggle for the obtaineing of a New
Parliament for them and my self: to bind up, heal and cure; all the breaches
of our greatly distressed and distempered Nation: and thereby to secure unto
them and my self the Free enjoyment of our ancient and undoubted birthright
liberties, that so in peace and quietness with rejoyceing and praising of God,
for all his Fatherly goodness and loveing kindness manifested to poor England,
we may sit down in security, peace, and tranquillity of mind, under our own
vines. So committing you, as my own soul, to the sweet and gracious
protection of the Lord God allmighty, the rock and Re^uge, of all those that
truly have a portion in him, I rest

From my Study at Mrs. BEZARS HOUSE in Sheepes-alley in the Holy-way-street, IN
AMSTERDAM this present Fry^^^ being the 2 April 1652. old Style. Yours and
Englands true and through-pac 't Friend JO: LILBURNE, SEMPER IDEM.

MY LORD,
I Do assure you I took all the care that possibly I could, that this
foregoeing Letter, written to your fast and real Friend Mr. William Kiffen
might be delivered to your Lordship, but seeing I have staid the outrunning of
the time I did prefix in the 30 page foregoeing, and have not heard one word as
yet from any body in the world, what is become of it. Although I writ diverse
Letters to several persons, signifieing that I had sent such an Epistle over,
yea and also gave a hint of it to your Lordship in my Letter to your self sent
by the Post, the Copy of which thus follows.

For his Excellency the LORD GENERAL CROMWELL these persent.
MY LORD,
AT my discourse with you in your Gallery about 4 or 5 Months ago, I had
thought I had given your Lordship so full satisfaction in every thing, that
might remove all jealousies from you, of my disserveing you in any Kind; that
of all men in the Parliament, I little imagined to have found your honor to be
the principal man to bannish me into a strange Country, where for the Safety
of my Life I am forced to print an Apology. And because you are named in it, I
judge it but manlike to send you a Copy of it. And, if I had not bin
travailing last post day, I had sent it to you then. And I have also by this
post sent to a Friend three sheeres of Paper in writing to communicate to your
Lordship. the which, if you please to read them, you will find that you are
deeply concerned in them.

I have no more to say to your honor, but to desire God for you (if it be his
pleasure) to make you speedily as righteous in actions, as you were some years
ago in Declarations, and to take leave to say, I am yet as much honest

Amsterdam April 2 1652 Old style. JOHN LILBURNE as ever I was in my life, that
neither loves Flattery, nor fears Greatness or Threatening.


ANd now my Lord, besides that Apology which I sent your Honor, I have also
here in Dutch and English printed the reasons wherefore I was necessitated to
print that Apology, and they are dated they 4 of March last old style. and in
the said Apology to the People of the Netherlands page: 71 I promised them
speedily to print in Dutch the manifestation and Agreement of the 1 of May 1649
therein named. which, being two sheets, I have accordingly prepared for them,
with about as much more additions by way of appendix to my Apology. But seeing
that upon the Magistrates stopping the public selling my said Apology and by
the "chief Scout or high-Sherif of Amsterdam" giveing me some reasons
therefore, which begot from me this Replication: that I was a man commonly
reputed to have some stock of reason in me, but being but a private individual
man, and also a stranger of another Nation and banished from thence, and come
here to take up sanctuary, and therefore in mine own understanding I should
judge my self totally void of reason or judgment, if I should press to enjoy
that at their hands, which they themselves judged prjudicial to their whole
nation, or any part of it, they themselves alone (and not I in the least),
being the only and proper Judges of their own good and well fare; and therefore
with all respect to them must acquiesce in their pleasure. In this regard I say
(my Lord] to avoid offense, I judge it not fit to publish the said Appendix
till such time as one where or an other, I can freely obtain license, to print
avowedly, what in that kind I have to say.

Now (my Lord) it may be, several of my Friends in England, may wonder why all
this time, I have not published the full state of the case betwixt Sr. Arthur
Hasilrig, Mr. Primate and my self. But, I must Apologize for my self, that to
secure my person and reputation has taken me up much time, as also the
Magistrates stopping my Apologetical Narration, has forced me to spend much
money and time to travel and look out for my self, where Safely to abide and
print without offense Besides, that busynes is a long work, and although I
brought over with me above 150 sheets of written paper of that busynes, as it
was taken at the said committee in shorthand; yet for a long time, I have
wanted some part of the beginning and latter end of it, as also copies of
several orders and of depositions, and I could not for want thereof go on
with it, but now by Gods assistance I shall apply my self unto it, with all
the vigor that possibly I can.

And this, before I conclude, give me leave further to aver unto your Lordship.
I am an Englishman borne and bred, and to breath in the air of England, is as
much my right as yours; and I have contested and fought with my sword in my
hand for the enjoyment of my share in the Laws and Liberties thereof, and
never was convicted of doing any action that forseited my portion therein. And
therefore, by the assistance of God, I will turn all the stones in the world,
that it is possible for a resolute man and an industrious man and a man of
brains to turn, to make way for my comeing to England again and for my
liveing there, in a rational security, although in the endeavoring thereof, I
run the hazard of being exposed to all the miseryes and deaths, that it is
possible for a man to be exposed to. And yet I hope, through the strength of
God, I shall undertake nothing, but righteous and honest ways for the
procureing thereof. But this I assure you my Lord, I groundedly think, that I
or any man else that will not be your absolute slave, can never live in a
rational and probable Safety in England, so long as your will is an absolute
Law there. Therefore, My Lord, sit as fast as you can: In the strength of the
Lord God almighty, have at you; and if I perish I perish. But if you will let
us have in England new and annual Parliaments, upon the terms before
premised, I have done, and in your doing thereof shall rest.

Yours to serve you therein, JOHN LILBVRNE.
From my lodgeing at that pleasant City of much refuge, that little Zoar,
commonly called VIANEN May 1652. POSTSCRIPT, My Lord, if you set any of your
Champions to write against me, be sure they set their Names to their
discourses, or else truly my Lord I shall take you your self for the Author of
every paper that comes out against me, and so nominally reply upon you.



FINIS.

