THE Lama-sabachthani, OR, CRY OF THE Son of GOD; Useful at all Times,
especially For PASSION Week.

AND At all other Times for a Devout and Pious Soul, in its nearest Approaches
and Addresses to its Savior, before and after it comes to be an Actual
Partaker of the Body and Blood of its Redeemer.

The Second Edition,

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones, for Samuel Lowndes, against Exeter-Change in
the Strand, 1691.

To Her most Pious and Sacred MAJESTY Queen MARY, The Author most Humbly Offers
and Dedicates the ensuing Enchiridion of a Crucified Savior.
Madam,
WHen I consider the unexpressible Honor I lately had of being frequently a
partaker with You at the Throne of Grace, in Your Chappel-Devotion at the
Hague; Where, observing Your great Strength and Zeal of true Piety, accompanied
with a perfect Stability of Humility, Meekness, and Lowliness of Spirit, as a
complete Follower, and Imitator of our Dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
whilst on Earth; it struck such a Dint upon me, As St. Austin says, melted down
his Soul into Divine Affections.
and enforced such a Love of Religion in me, that made me inspired to that
height and Ecstacy of Devotion, and Intention of Thought, that did not only, as
it were, withdraw my Soul from all Commerce with the Senses, but in a manner
separate it a while from the Body: And made it, with the Apostle Paul, to have
Antipasts of Heaven, and a fruition of Celestial Enjoyments.

Such Raptures, Elevations, and Influences of Anticipated Glory, as the Apostle
had, had the Disciples of our Savior, whilst their Great Lord and Master was
Predicting and Communicating his Passion to be an abiding Commemoration of
himself amongst them, after his Ascension into Glory, as it is largely set
forth by our Savior himself throughout the 6th Chapter of John.

And as it was observed of Peter, and the rest of his Brethren, in the
Transfiguration of our Savior on the Mount, that when he Prayed earnestly to
his Father, the Fashion of his Countenance was altered, which did beget
immediately in them, such a Participation of Raptures, and Ejaculations, that
made them very unwilling to relinquish the Place, where they had enjoyed such a
Beatifical Presence.

The like have I perceived in Your Majesty's Countenance, as if it spoke aloud
the very Language of Your Divine Soul, that made mine always wish, in its
Public Devotion, to live in the Presence of so Great and so Glorious an
Exemplar.

No less perfect are all these Celestial Qualifications in Your ever Adored
and Dearly beloved Sister; to enumerate them again were but Tautology; they are
all so essentially compact in You both, that modestly and justly You are the
Glory of the Universe. The Hypostatick Council of Heaven having decreed it from
all Eternity, that You Two should be Leaders and Patterns to all Sincere and
Devout Subjects and Christians, in all Virtue, Piety, and Holiness, and that
they be close Imitators and Followers of You, as You are of Christ.

This makes it transcendently the Felicity of all Humble, Pious Souls, to have
Two such Matchless Guardian Angels walk before us, and to be eminent for God in
Your Generations, as the aforesaid Mary and Anna, the Mother of Jesus, and
Prophetess of our Lord.

How much more Glorious must the Protestant Religion necessarily appear in You,
Madam, now You are, by the All-wise Providence of the Great God, most happily
arrived at the Zenith of Sovereignty, whose Sovereign Beams have already
dispersed all those Clouds and Mists, (nay, Storms and Hurricans) of Popery,
that of late had like to have subverted and overwhelmed these Nations into a
Bloody Deluge by Massacre and Murder, had not God reserved Your Majesty for
such a day as This, and brought You safe through the dangers of the Seas, and
placed Your Royal Person with King William on the Imperial Throne of Your
Ancestors, whose undaunted Magnanimity and Resolution, by the Omnipotent Power
of the Almighty, has procured this re-establishment for us again; That when
all our hopes were sinking in the Autumn of Despair, God was pleased through
him, by a stupendous Miracle, to restore us again, without the tedious and
cruel Sieges of War or Blood, to a Protestant Settlement and Blessing.

This is the only cause, that emboldens me to present to You the following
Meditations and Contemplations of the Agony and Crucifixion of our Blessed Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, Entitled, The Lamasa-bachthani, or, Cry of the Son
of God, wherein I have endeavored, as succinctly, and as perspicuously, as
possibly I could, to set forth every Action and Transaction of the Chief
Priests, Scribes, Elders, and Soldiers, toward their accomplishing of their
wicked Design in perfecting of the so much hunger'd for Crucifixion of our Dear
Lord and Savior.

How he was hurried and carried from one Place, Court, and Council, to another,
Spit on and Buffeted in one, Arrayed and Robbed in another, Scourged and Crowned
with Thorns in another, mocked and derided in all, but acquitted and discharged
by none, and yet not found guilty of Death in any.

I have followed the Evangelists as close as I could, and have ranked them as
well as I am able, in so small a thing, and have made the rough Draught as like
the Original, as I can possible, in suitable Expressions, and earnestly beg of
God it may please all, and displease none, being all Divine Truths.

I most humbly present it to Your Majesty, hoping it may receive a Candid and
free Acceptance from You. It will lie in a little Room in Your Closet, and at
the Table of the Lord, being more fitted for the Heart of a Devout and Pious
Soul, than Voluminous, therefore may be as the Viand of the Soul in its nearest
Addresses to its Savior, before, and after it comes to be an actual partaker
of the Body and Blood of a Redeemer, whom I have end avour'd to Delineate as
well as I am able, in so small a Tract, in the utmost extremity of his
Crucifixion; in his Agony and Bloody Sweat, on his Cross and Passion; in his
Death and Burial, and there left his most precious Body in the Grave, with Holy
Angels, to attend his Call: I may hereafter presume to write of his Glorious
Resurrection and Ascension also, if I can find my weak Endeavors are in any
degree useful, according to the Pious and Honest Intention of,

MADAM, Your Majesty's most Obedient, and for ever most Devoted Humble Servant,
Anonymus.

THE Lama-sabachthani: OR, THE CRY OF THE Son of GOD.
HEAR, O Heavens, and give Ear, O Earth, for the Lord has spoken it. O, what
is this I hear? The Voice of the Son of God in the grievous Agony of his Soul,
just breathing out his last, and crying to his God; nay, his Father to sustain
and comfort him; either, O Holy Father, take from me this bitter Cup of Vinegar
and Gaul of thy high Displeasure, or else forsake me not in the time of my
drinking this bitter Portion.

Where is the Cry of the Son of God, the Savior of the World? O where? Where?
My distracted Soul, Where? Where shall I run? Where shall I fly, to find my
Savior? Whom shall I enquire of? Where shall I go? Whom shall I find to direct
my perplexed Soul? Flesh.
It Is dark, stormy, and tempestuous. If it were never so dark and dismal, I
will go. I cannot longer stay. Thou art warm and safe in Bed, and within doors,
why should thou disturb thy self? Peace, lie still, and take thy rest: I may
lie still, and slumber a little, but I cannot rest. I sleep, but my Heart
waketh. Hark I Hark again! It is the Voice of my Beloved, that cries out, and
he knocks as he passes by, Christ pass^th by to the Garden of Gethsemane.
to see whether I will receive him, and let him in: I hear him speak: Open to
me, my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled, for my Head is filled with Dew,
and my Locks with the Drops of the Night. Lord! What Is the matter? What makes
him abroad now? What Is the matter? I am sure, more than ordinary; I will rise
and let him in. Thou have put off thy Clothes; how can thou put them on in
the dark? Moreover, thou have washed thy Feet; why should thou defile them
again? I stand not upon these Curiosities of my sinful Flesh, that must e're
long crumble in the Dust. My Beloved has put in his band by the bole of the
Door, and my Bowels are troubled for him; I cannot rest; I must and will rise.

I have opened the Door to my Beloved, but he is withdrawn, and is gone: My
Soul even fails within me. The Rude Multitude persuing our Savior.
I hear a confused Noise at a distance. I called after the Noise, but he gave
me no answer; and I have sought for him about the door, but cannot find him;
well, I will after him. I stand not upon the exactness of Dress, nor the danger
of the Night. I will along the Street, and, as near as I can, follow. A truly
gracious Soul, touched once with the love of God, will follow him at his Call,
and no hazard or difficulty can obstruct or hinder its eager pursuit after its
dear Jesu, the good Shepherd of its Soul. My Sheep hear my Voice, and they
follow me, John 10.3, 4.

Pardon me, if I here make a little digression, Christ commits the care of his
scattered Flock to Peter.
and anticipate the words of our Savior to Peter. Happy art thou, O Peter,
that the Savior of Souls deems thee worthy to be his deputed Shepherd, and
commits his Flock to thy vigilant Care, before he left the World; they were
near and dear to him, they were the purchased of his Soul; He carries his
Lambs (his tender Lambs) in his Arms, and gently leads those that are with
Young; therefore, Peter, you very well know the value I have for them, and the
belief I have in you: Take care, I say, to feed my little Flocks beside, or
near, the Shepherd's Tents. Peter, be not angry that I ask you again and again.
Do you love me? Do you love me more than all? Yea, Lord, thou know that I
love thee. Then feed my Sheep, feed my Lambs, and see that none of them be
lost: I know all their Names, and I bear them all in my Heart, as the
High Priest did the Tribes in his Breast, and I carry them all to Heaven with
me, whither I am now preparing with all speed, after I have eaten with you.
Where I am, there they shall be also.

And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, be said unto
his Disciples, Ye know, that after two days is the Feast of the Passover,
Christ foretells his being apprehended.
and the Son of Man is betrayed to be crucified. Then assembled together all
the Chief Priests, and the Scribes, and the Elders of the People, unto the
Palace of the Highpriests, which is called Caiphas, and consulted, that they
might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him, but not on the Feast day, lest
there be an uproar among the People, Matthew. 26. For Annas the High Priest had,
at that time, agreed with Judas to betray his Master, and had given him thirty
pieces of Silver out of the Treasury, and Judas with them craftily concluded,
it should be in the Night, for better security, and freer from disturbance.

Now the first day of the Feast of unleavened Bread being come, the Disciples
came to Jesus, and asked him, Where he pleased they eat the Passover? Jesus
says unto them, Go, two of you into the City to such a Man's House, and tell
him, The Master says, My time is at hand: I will keep the Passover at thy
House this night. Accordingly they went, and made ready the Passover, and when
Even was come, he sat down with the Twelve, and as they did eat, he said,
Verily I say unto you, that one of you will betray me; and they were exceeding
sorrowful, and began every one of them to say into him, Lord, Is it I? And he
answered and said, The same that dippeth his hand with me in the Dish, shall
betray me.

The Son of Man goes, as it is written of him, but woe unto that Man, by whom
the Son of Man is betrayed. It had been good for that man, if he had never been
born; Judas, being near unto our Lord, and hearing this sharp precaution, and
the foreknowledge that his Master had of his design, would seem, before the
rest of the Disciples, to be as innocent of the thing, as any of them that were
so exceedingly troubled, and therefore asked his Master, Is it I? Not thinking
that Jesus could, or, if he could, that he would, point blank charge him with
it; yet notwithstanding, his Master said, Thou have said: Now Judas was
startled at all this, yet, for covetousness, and lucre of the Money, having
already received it, would not go back.

And as they were eating, Jesus rook Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and
gave it to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken
for you, this do in remembrance of me; and he took the Cup in like manner, and
gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it, for this is the
Blood of the New Testament, shed for many for the remission of Sins. But I say
unto you, Luke 22.20.
I will not henceforth drink of the fruit of the Vine, till I drink it new with
you in my Fathers Kingdom. And when they had sung an Hymn, they went out. Jesus
says unto them, Ye shall all be offended because of me this night; For it is
written, I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered. Peter
says, Though all be offended, yet will not I. Jesus says unto him, Before the
Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice. Peter says unto him, I will be
with thee, my Lord, both in Life and Death.

And as Ittai said to David, As the Lord lives, and as my Lord the King
lives, surely in what place the Lord my King shall be, whether in Death or
Life, even there also will thy Servant be, 2 Samuel 15.19, 20, 21.

And as Ruth said to her Mother-in-Law Naomi, Entreat me not to leave thee, nor
to return from following after thee, for where thou go, I will go, where
thou lodgest, I will lodge, they People shall be my People, and thy God, my
God; where thou dyest, I will dye, and there will I be buried. The Lord do so
to me, Ruth 1.16, 17.
and much more also, if ought but Death part thee and me. Says Peter, So is my
Heart knit to thee, dear Master. Peter, I know that thou love me, and
therefore Satan has a desire to sift thee, and try thee, as he did Job; but I
have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail thee not, Job chapter 1.

Then Jesus goes to Gethsemane, for his hour being now come, and takes with
him only three of his Disciples, Peter, James, and John, they being the three
appointed by their Lord and Master to see the said Tragedy. Peter, because his
chief Disciple, to whom he should commend the Care of his Church, which e're
long was to suffer great Persecution. James, the last of the Disciples, yet the
first that was to suffer for the Gospel's sake, and therefore most fit to see
his Master betrayed, that his Master's meekness and patience in suffering might
be a pattern and example to him, who e're long must follow. And John, the most
beloved Disciple of Jesus, whom Peter asked his Master; But of this Disciple
that leaned on thy Breast at Supper-time, and first said, Whom it is, Lord,
that shall betray thee? What shall this man do? Says Jesus to him, If I will
that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me. Yet, most Holy
Jesus, thou, that know all things, probably for suchlike Reasons took these
only along with thee, and said unto them, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even
unto Death: Tarry ye here, and watch with me.

And be went a little farther, and fell on his face to the ground; and prayed,
O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me, nevertheless, not as
I will, but as thou will; For though Jesus, as Man, feared the approaching danger
that was coming upon him, and just now ready to seize him, and therefore was,
in this great Agony, sweating drops of Blood falling to the ground; yet, as
God, it was mutually agreed upon already in the great Court of Heaven, between
his Father and Himself, that this was the only way could be found out for the
Redemption of fallen Man.

For God so loved the World, that he have bis only begotten Son to death for
it, that whosoever believes in him, might not perish, but have everlasting
life; therefore, as God, God-Man was resolved to fulfill his Father's Will.
Father, all things are possible to thee, but if this Cup shall not pass, Thy
Will be done, O Holy Father.

And he comes to his Disciples again a second time, but, finding them asleep,
says to Peter, Simon, Why sleep thou? Could not you watch with me one hour?
You know what I have Prayed for already. Watch and Pray, now, lest you enter
into Temptation. The Spirit indeed, Peter, I know, is willing, but the Flesh it
weak.

O Holy Jesu, what Sweetness and Love is this of thine, that even at the very
minute that thou were to be betrayed, thou should pity the Infirmities of
thy Servants, that even now thou had commanded to Watch and Pray, and yet,
even in this very last minute, found them sleeping; one would rather have
thought, thou should have been extremely angry with them, but, instead of
that, thou excusest their fault. This sweetness, and this behavior of thine,
and compassion of Humane Infirmities, will draw all Men to thee.

Christ knew at this time, that shortly he was to suffer for the Sins of the
whole World, in what nature and kind soever, as to the aggravation and
heinousness of them; and might he not then very well pass by the Infirmities of
his beloved Disciples, when he knew, that their Sleep proceeded partly from
their Trouble and Sorrow.

Jesus leaves them again, and goes a Third time, and prays more earnestly,
and cries louder, and sweateth much greater drops of Blood than before. O
Righteous Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me, but yet, Holy
Father thy Will be done.

O my Soul! where am I? The devout Soul hearing the Cry, seeks after our
Savior.
Where? O Watchmen! Where am I? Where is my Beloved? Where is he gone aside? My
Soul melts away. I hear his Cry, but I know not where to find him. I am sure,
it is his Voice, but I know not which way to go; the dark Night has concealed
him from my Sight, but not from my Heart: His Cry pierces my Soul. O good
Watchmen! Dear Watchmen! Where shall I find him, whom my Soul loves, and
longs for? Hark! Hark! He cries louder and louder. Help! Help! What Is the
matter, dear Savior? I cannot find thee; I know not where thou art; sometimes
thy Voice seems near, and sometime farther off; sometimes on this side os me,
and sometimes on that; sometimes before me, and sometimes behinds whether from
the Walls and Vaults of Jerusalem, or whether from the Brook Cedron or from the
Trees in the Garden, or from all these places together, these uncertain Sounds
and Eccho's come, I know not; they perplex me, and confound me. I cannot find
thee. I know not where thou art. Direct me, Lord, the way. I know, thou art the
Way, the Truth, and the Light; but I know not where to find thee, thus at a
distance, this dark Night. Direct me, Lord, the way. Speak, Dear Lord, and thy
Servant hears. My Soul is attentive to thy Call, but I am not able to bear
longer thy Cry. O quickly! Dear Savior, quickly! Tell me but where I shall
find thee. What No Directions yet, Dear Jesu! O! dear Watchmen, for the Lord's
sake, for my dear Savior's sake! for my! poor Soul's sake! tell me, tell me,
for why should I be as one that turns aside from the Flocks of thy Companions.

Says the Watchmen, we cannot longer endure to hear thee cry, and make such
moan. We suppose you may find him in or about the Garden of Gethsemane. We
believe the Cry comes that way. We can hear it easily, but it is beyond our
Bounds; we must not, nor dare not, go beyond our own Precincts, especially
without the Gates of the City, and more especially when there is so great a
Noise and Tumult abroad; we know not, how soon there may be an uproar here, and
therefore we must keep our Posts upon Life and Death, let what will come of it;
otherwise some of us would go along with you, to direct you, and light you
along; but that is the way. I, but are you sure the Cry and Noise comes from
thence? That we are not sure; but this we are sure of, That a great Company and
Multitude of Soldiers ran that way, and said nothing, but ran apace, whispering
amongst themselves: Some carried with them Swords, others carried Staves and
Halbards, and Candles and Lanthorns in their hands. We believe it is some great
matter they are gone about, they carry it with so much secrecy, as they go
along; but we cannot think it is for Jesus of Nazareth, because we did see
Judas, one of the Lord's Disciples, amongst them. Hark! the Cry is louder
indeed now. I don't know what to think of it, but there is the ready way.

O, my dear Lord, have I found thee! What, in Blood, Soul.
in the depth of thine Agony, with violent Sweats, and drops of Blood running
down thy Face, and crying to thy thy Father too? What Is the matter, dear Lord?
Speak quickly to my Soul, or else I sink and dye; I cannot longer forbear,
having run my self quite out of breath with thy grievous Cry. Grievous indeed
it must needs be, that makes the Son of God sweat, and cry, and bleed thus.

I am striving and struggling, praying, Christ.
sweating, and bleeding for thy Salvation, with my Father's Wrath and
Indignation; but thy Sins are so great, so heinous, and grievous, that nothing
will satisfy him but thy Eternal Death, which thou, alas, art never able to
endure, the Wrath and Indignation of an incensed and enraged God against thee.
I have been pleading and interceding with my Heavenly Father, offering up
strong Prayers and Tears for thy Atonement; but all will not do: A Life must be
given, and I have offered my own, if nothing else will satisfy. Not my Will,
but thy Will be done. It must be so, and the unalterable and uncontrouled
Decree of the Almighty must be fulfilled, and I come willingly, as in the
Volume of the Book it is written of me, to do thy Will, O God; And behold, here
they are, to whom I am betrayed. Whom is it you seek for, Soldiers, with your
Lanthorns and Torches? Whom is it you look for? Jesus of Nazareth? I am he.
What gaze you for? I tell you, I am he.

The Signal was before agreed upon, That whomsoever Judas kissed, him they must
seize; therefore the strict Order before concluded of, and delivered to them,
must punctually be observed, lest a discovery should be made, and they seize
the wrong, and the King of the Jews make his escape. The Plot being laid thus
cunningly and warily beforehand, they must not too rashly nor unadvisedly
proceed, but stood looking earnestly till the Signal should be given. Judas,
tho the dark Night conceal me from thy Sight, yet here I am: The hour is now
come, that the Son of Man must be betrayed into the hands of Sinners.

Then Judas came and cried, Hail Master! Judas betrays him.
and kissed him, and straight way (or forthwith) they laid violent hands on
him. What makes you come thus, with Swords and with Staves, Judas, as if I were
a Thief and a Robber? And they began immediately to spit in his Face; and one
of the Soldiers smote him on the Cheek with the Palm of his hand, and asked
him, who struck him. But Jesus said to Judas, take me, and lead me away, and
thy own Salvation too. I have a Baptism to be Baptized with, and O, how I long
till it is accomplished.

Peter endeavors his Master's Rescue.
But Peter, as soon as he saw what inhumane rudeness they offered to his Lord
and Master, hastily drew his Sword, and cut off one of the Ears of the High
Priest's Servants. Then Jesus rebuked Peter, and said, put thy Sword up into
the Sheath; He that uses the Sword, let him perish by the Sword: The Cup that
my Father gives me, shall I not drink it? John 18. v. 8. 11.

Think thou not, Peter, that if I would resist, I would pray to my Father,
and he would presently give me more than twelve Legions of Angels to rescue me;
but how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled? And it pleased the Lord to
bruise him, and put him to Grief, when his Soul shall make and Offering for
Sin, he shall see his Seed: he shall see of the Travel of his Soul, and be
satisfied: By his knowledge shall my Righteous Servant justify many, for he
shall bear their Iniquities, Isa. chapter 53. v. 10, 11.

But stay, O Malchus! what, Malchus's Ear healed.
will thou still persist in this bloody Deed and wicked Proceedings? Will thou
not hear the Voice of thy God in this Fray? Thou shedd'st but a drop of Blood
from thy Ear, and thy Savior Sweats, not only drops of Blood in his Agony,
praying for thy Soul, but also his Heart bleeds for thee, and he takes
immediately Compassion of thee, and stretched forth his hand and cured thy Ear?
And could not this Miracle of the Lord of Life toward thee work perfectly upon
thee to endeavor thy Physicians Rescue? but still will thou go on to drag and
hale him before the Judge? Will not the immediate Touch of the Hand of God cure
thy wounded Soul, as readily as thy wounded Body? Will not this Miracle of
Christ, and Love of his to thee, persuade thee, That he is Christ the Son of
the Living God? Will thou remain ignorant still of thy Savior and Salvation?
How many of the Multitude that followed Christ would have thought themselves
happy to have been blessed with such a Touch? yea, that it might be but the Hem
of his Garment. Well, if thou will still proceed in persecuting him, he will
proceed in praying for thee, with the rest of thy Confederates.

Peter! Was this the effect of thy Passion, Christ reproved Peter.
just roused from sleep, and begin to fight? When saw thou such Weapons used
in my School? Was ever any thing but Prayers and Tears my Defense? Have thou
overslept, and neglected thy God, and now fall immediately to fighting? Could
not thou and thy Brethren have watched and prayed with thy Savior for one
hour? especially when waked and stirred up by thy Master, and when he had so
lately told you the time was at hand in which he must be betrayed, and by one
of thy Brother Disciples. Should not thou rather have endeavored to have
watched the time of his coming, and dissuaded him from his intended Wickedness?
especially when thou had seen thy Savior exceeding sorrowful, even to Death.
Was he earnestly praying, and in his Agony sweating drops of Blood, dropping
upon the Ground for thee? And could not thou be watching for him? but sit
sleeping upon the Ground with the rest of thy Companions. Or if you had been so
extremely sleepy, could you not have took your turns one after another? This,
Peter, is great neglect of so good a Master. Was he striving, and struggling,
sweating, and praying to his Heavenly Father, for thy Soul, and could not
thou be watching of his Body? But he, being upon the Work of Salvation, excuses
thy Infirmity, from the Consideration of thy frail human Nature, that was not
able to undergo one single hours watch. I know, Peter, thy Spirit is willing,
but thy Flesh is weak.

How ready and willing is the Savior of the World to accept of any drowsy
inclinations, or endeavors of his Servants, in his Service, if their Hearts be
but sincere. The Disciples slumber, yet Christ trims their Lamps. O infinite
Love of the Son of God! to excuse and save poor drowsy Sinners: For this Cause
was he touched with our infirmities, and took upon him our human Nature. This
was the Cause of our Saviors interceding for us with his Father for our Lives.
O infinite Love of the Son of God! that whilst we were yet Sinners, Christ died
for us.

Now let us follow him to the Judgment-Hall, Carried to the Judgment-Hall to be
arraigned, but first to Anna's House.
and not, like Peter, stand at a distance from him, and at last deny him, but
rather be a sharer with him in his Death, and pray, with the Thief upon the
Cross, for Eternal Life.

They carry him first before Annas the High Priest, Caiphas's Uncle, and in the
way to his House, to see what he could find against him. This was one of the
Great Council, that consulted how they might take Jesus of Nazareth King of the
Jews, and put him to Death. This was he, that delivered to Judas the thirty
pieces of Silver out of the Treasury, after they had all agreed upon it; but
when he was brought before him, and he saw the Witnesses could not agree
together upon their Examination, that they might have longer time to lay their
Heads together, and more readily agree in their Accusation, sends them to his
Nephew Caiphas, they being both Highpriests that year.

When he comes before Caiphas, he Examines him, and finding they could not yet
agree in their accusing him, rather than he should want full Witnesses against
him, and for that let him go; he with the rest of them that were assembled
together for the very purpose, all the Highpriests and Elders, and the
Scribes, for many there were that did bear false Witness against him, but their
Witnesses agreed not yet together.

Now the Great Assembly being all met, as I said before, to this very end and
purpose, and consulted and agreed thus farther of him: He has of late raised
Lazarus out of the Grave, after he had been sour days dead, and began to stink,
and many of the Jews believe on him already, from the Miracles that he daily
shows amongst them, and more especially for this Miracle that he wrought even
now, of raising Lazarus from the Dead; and it is not barely a Report, to make a
noise for a while, but it is, as to Matter of Fact, a very great Truth and a
Miracle, for some of us both heard him say at the Graves Mouth, Lazarus come
forth, and he immediately, as soon as this Man had called thus to him, he that
was dead came forth; bound hands and feet, with Grave-Cloaths about him, and a
Napkin upon his Head; And this Man Jesus commanded some that stood by to loose
him and let him go; and many of the Jews that were there believed on him and
went away with Mary and Jesus; but we came to acquaint you, what we have both
seen and heard, John 11.43.

Then the Chief Priests and Elders, John 11.47.
with the Scribes and Pharisees further consulted, and said, What do we? for
this Man does many Miracles, and if we let him thus alone, all Men will believe
on him and the Romans will come and take away from us, both our Place and
Nation. Caiphas said unto them, ye know nothing at all, nor consider that it is
expedient for us, Caiphas prophesies against himself.
that one Man should dye for the People, and that the Nation perish not; and
this he spoke not of himself, but God ordered it so, that the Prophecy should
come out of his own Mouth, and this being Recorded as his Opinion, does still
remain, that out of his own Mouth himself should be condemned at last; And so
from that day forward they took Counsel together to put him to Death. John
11.53.

And when they saw that all their Machinations and Contrivances prevailed
nothing to the purpose, at last they hired two Soldiers, and gave them Money to
come and swear against him in the High Priests Hall; And they with a loud and
clamarous Voice exalted above the rest, with open Mouth say, This Fellow said,
I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to raise it again in three days.
And so he were, this being all Truth; but he spoke of his Body, as the Apostle
Paul says, Our Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost. That in three days
time he should raise it from the Grave; But these two Fellows nor his Judges
had not yet known the Scriptures, nor the power of God. Then said the High
Priest, Is it true what these two witness against thee? But Jesus held his
peace. Then said the High Priest, I adjure thee by the Living God, to tell us
whether thou art Christ the Son of the Living God? And Jesus when it was put
thus home to him, in these three great Truths, Art thou Christ, the Son of the
Living God? Answered, I am. Then the High Priest rent his Clothes, and said,
What need we any further witness against him? Ye have all heard now how he has
Blasphemed; What think ye? And they all with one consenting Voice condemned him
to be guilty of Death. Matthew. 26.60, 6, 62, 63, 64. Mark 14.58. to the 64.

Then they began to spit upon him, and to buffet him, and strike him with the
Palms of their hands, and to revile him as a Pestilent Fellow, and one that
sowed Sedition and Rebellion amongst them, and they blind-folded him, and smote
him on the Face, and said unto him, Prophecy now unto us (Christ!) who it was
that struck thee; And at last, finding they could not agree together as to the
putting of him to death, and to pass Sentence upon him, for they all acquiesc'd
in the just Merits of his Condemnation; yet he must be first sent to Pontius
Pilate their Chief Governor: But before we come to that, we must observe the
Words of our Blessed Jesus verified concerning Peter, one of the beloved
Disciples, who followed after his Master to the High Priest's Hall, to hear
what they said of him, and did with him.

And happy are they, O Peter, that have once denied their Savior that bought
them, with Cursing and Swearing and bitter Execrations, to find a door of Mercy
ready open upon their Repentance, to receive them again, and immediately
embrace them.

And now Peter, what do I observe here? But thou that wast the greatest Votary
to thy Master, and the forwardest to follow him to his dismal Trial, where were
all kind of the most wicked Profligate Wretches, that could be picked out
amongst the Jews, Scribes, and Pharisees, that were best and most notoriously
qualified with Cursing and Swearing, with Reviling, Blasphemy, and Perjury,
such that they had culled out on purpose, that were qualified and abounded with
all manner of Cruelty and Filthiness; amongst these do I find thee, Peter.

And had thy Soul, like Righteous Lot's been troubled with the filthiness of
the Sodomites, as his was from day to day, thou had not so soon, so falsely,
and so frequently denied thy Master: From hence we may observe, what sorce and
power evil Company has quickly upon a Righteous Person. Good Joseph being but
a while in Pharaoh's Court, came presently to that Mode of Honor to swear by
the Life of Pharaoh. Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, and friend of God,
twice denied Sarah to be his Wife: The Famine being grievous in the Land,
Abraham takes his Wife Sarah, and travels into Egypt, and it came to pass, when
he came near to enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarah his Wife, behold now,
I know that thou art a fair Woman to look upon, therefore it shall come to
pass, that when the Egyptians shall see thee, they shall say, this is his Wife,
and they shall kill me, and they shall save thee alive; say, I pray thee, thou
art my Sister. Genesis 12.10, 11, 13.

Again Abimelech said unto Abraham, What saw thou in me, that thou have done
this thing? And Abraham said, because I thought surely the fear of God is not
in this Place, and they will slay me for my Wifes sake; and yet indeed she is
my Sister, the Daughter of my Father, though not of my Mother, and she became
my Wife: And here Abraham, though he did deny his Wife at this time out of
fear, and did wander from Place to Place, and Country to Country, yet he did
not deny his God, neither could Abimelech tax him with that: For God had now
made a Covenant with Abraham, and the chiefest Article in this Covenant, was,
That Sarah should conceive and bear him a Son in his old Age, and should call
his Name Isaac; And, said God, I will continue my Covenant to him, so that in
thy Seed, by Sarah thy Wife, shall all the Nations of the World be blessed: And
it shall be for number as the Stars of the Heaven, and as the Sands on the
Sea-shoar; yea, Kings and Princes shall come out of thy Loins, and I will give
thee the Land of Canaan for an Everlasting Possession to dwell in: And I will
be thy God, and the God of thy Seed for ever. Neither did Abraham deny his Son
Isaac to God, when he called for him as a trial of his Faith: But all these
Promises and Covenants concentrating together, and terminating in Sarah's Womb,
made Abraham take such care of her; for it was not in Ishmael, but in Isaac
shall thy Seed be called, Genesis 17. and that Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews
should proceed out of his Loins.

But now, Peter, this is no excuse for thee; for Abraham, in saying, she was
his Sister, did not deny her to be his Wife; moreover in all Ages, and all
times, especially in the times and places of Plague, Famine, or Sword, it has
been allowed to some to fly, and either to equivocate or excuse the Question,
when proposed by implacable Enemies; Our Savior himself before his Disciples
were fully prepared for Persecution, and found in themselves they were not able
to stand the hard and severe, or Fiery, Trials they might be put upon, and so
his Name, or his great Cause, might suffer by it; therefore to avoid such, bid
them, If they persecuted them in one City, for my Namesake, and the Gospel's
sake, to fly into another; but this was no denying him, and the Church has
always allowed it, in two Cases especially, to fly and avoid Persecution; The
one, if the Church was in its infancy, and not come to full strength, For this
reason fled Greg. Bishop of Neocaesaria, when he saw the Decian Persecution
grow very hot. Pr. Chr. Chapter 7. part 2. N. 17.
then it might be lawful for the Ministers or Disciples of Christ to flee
Persecution, to the intent the Gospel might be preserved, lest smiting the
Shepherd the Sheep should be scattered; And the other is, in Case, as I
mentioned before, they find themselves not yet strong enough, or courageous
enough for Persecution, and so the Glory of God, and the Name of our great
Master, and the Honor of the Church of Christ, might come to be dishonored:
This as to the first.

St. Paul to avoid Persecution, was let down the Wall in a Basket, when the
Governor of Damascus sought his Life; and thus we find the Apostles themselves
shunned the Storm, because they were the Instruments immediately deputed by
Christ to propagate and convey the Gospel to the World: And thus did Primitive
Saints and Martyrs who wondered about in Deserts and Mountains, and in Dens and
Caves of the Earth, and so have equally avoided Rashness and Cowardliness.

The second only gained a little respit for the present, that they might suffer
with the greater advantage afterward, thus did Joseph and Mary, from the
Command of God by an Angel, flee with their Child, the Ever-Blessed Jesu into
Egypt for fear of Herod.

But, Peter, 'twas quite contrary with you, you was not called to suffer,
neither to the Highpriests Hall; yet thou voluntarily deny'dst thy Master, thy
Savior, and thy Redeemer, who often had told you what you must expect, and that
the time would come, that he must be betrayed into the hands of Sinners; and
but the very night before told you, that you all would be offended because of
him, and that the time would come, and was now at hand, that you all would
forsake him, in the time of his Dereliction, and he be left alone: And did
not thou thy self say? This was a hard saying, and who could bear it? and
said, thou would not be offended because of him, and if all forsook him,
yet would not thou; True, thou did not so much forsake him, as deny him,
which was worse.

And, indeed, Peter, I must follow thee, as thou did thy Master, the
Ever-Blessed and Eternal Jesu, the Savior of the World, to the Highpriests
Hall; And Pardon me, Peter, if I exactly observe every behavior of thine
there. It is not out of any ill to thee, Peter, for I very well know the love
and value thy Master has for thee, but that I may delineate thee to the Life,
as fully and as well as I am able, in this little Enchiridion, what Sorrows,
what Sufferings, what Stripes, what Indignities, what Reproaches, what
Revilings, what Dereliction, what Abnegations, what Wounds, what Agony, and
what Unexpressable Torments, what Extensive, Convulsive, Distorsive, Lingering,
and Cruciating Death, thy Lord and Master, but our Christ, our Savior, our
Redeemer, our Messiah, and our blessed Jesu, our Advocate not only now in
Heaven, where he is exalted above all Principalities and Powers, Thrones and
Dominions; but while he was here on Earth, the Immaculate Lamb, the most
beloved Son of God, beloved of the Father from all Eternity, before ever the
World was, and Lamb of God which takes away the Sins of the whole World; he
suffered and endured here on Earth for us, which made him bitterly complain,
and cry out; Behold, and see, all ye that pass by, if there were ever any
Sorrow like to my Sorrow, any Wounds and Torments like mine, which I have
received in the House of my friends.

Can thou receive, suffer, and endure, all this for our Sins, and still call
us friends? Can thou, O Holy Jesu, still cry, call, suffer, bleed, and dye
for us, and yet pray for us, and still be an Advocate for us, and a complete
Redeemer. O infinite! O unlimited! O unbounded! O inconceiveable! O
inexpressible! O incomprehensible Love of God to us, that so loved the World,
than he gave his only begotten Son to Death for us, for us Sinners, wicked
Sinners, apostatizing Sinners, even dead in Trespasses and Sins; and all this,
Peter, thou art not ignorant of.

Now, Peter, more particularly to thy self. The First Denial of Peter.
And, as Peter was beneath in the Palace, there comes one of the Maids of the
High Priest, and when she saw Peter, warming of himself amongst the Crowd, she
looked steadfastly upon him, and said in derision, Thou also wast with Jesus of
Nazareth, but he denied, saying, I know not, neither do I understand what thou
say: And he went out into the Porch, as fearing they might seize on him,
though but the Night before he had said, Though all forsake thee, yet will not I:
But he still lingers and stays, not that he intended to suffer and dye with his
Master, as he had promised, but only had a mind to see what would become of his
Master, and to hear what they did say to him, for now was the time that our
Savior told him, The Devil will tempt you, Peter; Satan has a mind to winnow
thee as Wheat* but I have prayed for thee; and well were it for thee, (Peter)
that whatever thy Master endured for thee in his Sacred Body, yet he had
secured thy Soul: I have prayed for thee, thy Faith fail thee not: And as he
was standing in the Porch, the Cock crew the first time; but as yet, neither
the Time, nor the Scripture, was fulfilled, nor did Peter take any notice of
it, Mark 14.68.

And while he was yet in the Porch, The Second.
another Maid saw him, and said unto them that were likewise with her, This
very fellow (pointing to him) was also with Jesus of Galilee; and when he had
heard what she said, he flatly denied with an Oath, I know not the man, Matthew.
26.71, 72.

How now, Peter, now I see the Devil is tempting thee, indeed: Have thou so
much forgot thy self, and thy Duty to so good and so great a Master? Are all
his Miracles forgot by thee? Are all his Lessons, Instructions, and Sermons or
Sayings, forgot by thee? Are his very last and dying Words too forgot by thee?
And are thy own Promises and Engagements to thy departing and dying Savior,
forgot by thee? This is a great Crime indeed, Peter, and in all Ages and Times
has been accounted most abominable, and unworthy, not to fulfill the Request of
our dying Friends and Relations; and also, not to perform our Promises to their
dying Person, and last Gasp; and especially for thee, Peter, who had so dear
and tender a Lord and Master that had took such pains with thee, and care of
thee, whose Words one would have thought could never have been forgot by thee,
more especially not so soon, and at this very instant, when thou wast so near,
as to hear how thy Heavenly Master, was confronted and abused, and most wrong
fully impeached, and most falsely accused, yet not to reminiscentiate the words
of thy Master, but when thou wast so peremptorily charged, thou so flatly
denied. Well, Peter, thou will pay for this at last: It Is well thou have a
friend in Court.

Then came one of the Servants of the High Priest, The Third.
being his Kinsman, and whose Ear Peter had out off, charges him home, and
says, Did not I see thee in the Garden with him? And do not thou very well
know, I have a just Quarrel against thee? And this is a fit place for it, for
cutting off my Ear, when I laid hands of your Master in the Garden. Look here,
and behold the mark I still bear of my Ear for thee, and if it were not that my
Kinsman was so busy with thy Master, and I do not know how soon I may be
called, and therefore am unwilling to create another Fray and Disturbance,
otherwise I would make thee an Example, and make you know, you was thee, I have
no so quickly forgot you, nor your Ear-mark neither, John 18.26. And moreover,
if you should deny, and lie never so much, if there were no more in it but your
Speech, your very Speech it self is enough to betray you.

Then began Peter, when he had heard all this, to Curse and to Swear with all
the Execrations imaginable, and positive Denials. I never saw before this time
the Man, neither do I know him, and immediately the Cock crew, Matthew. 26.74.
And the Lord turned back, and looked steadfastly on Peter; and Peter seeing
that, remembered the Words of his Master, how he had said unto him, Before the
Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice, and he went out, and wept bitterly,
Luk 22.61, 62.

Now, Peter, art thou in the Gaul of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity;
now thou know not where to hide thy head, now the very Arrows of the
Almighty, pierce the very Soul of thee, now thou see thou art fallen; Let him
that stands take precaution by thy Example, lest he fall in the same manner
thou have done.

What! deny thy Master, Peter? thy Savior, and thy Redeemer? And what! with
such abominable Oaths, and positive Denials? This would make the very dumb Ass
to open his Mouth, and upbraid thy unparalleled unkindness. Thou, alone, Peter,
to be the Man to deny thy Lord and Master, who had the most reason of any of
the Disciples to have owned him, because present with him, and hearing the
Ignominy and notorious Slanders that they impudently spoke against him, thy own
Conscience bearing thee Witness.

O, how, with Cain, Peter complaining and praying for himself.
am I branded with my Infamy! My Sins are greater than I am able to bear. O,
that some one would even slay me. What! deny my Master! My Lord and Master! my
God! my Savior and my Redeemer! and my ever blessed Jesus! What! and three
times! and with Cursing and Swearing too, that I did not know thee! O, sweet
Jesu! not thee! what, not know thee! O, heavenly Jesu! that brought me up from
the beginning! that converted me to the Faith! that made me one of thy
Disciples, and not the least neither! one that thou more remarkably took'dst
notice of, and care for, and foretold me of this very present hour, of Satan's
Tempting me, and prayed earnestly for me to be delivered from this fatal hour.

O blessed Jesu! well was it, that thou did pray for me, or else I had been
eternally lost. How can I but weep, and weep bitterly for this heinous and
never-to-be-forgotten Sin? O, wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me? Was
not my first Sin great enough in the Garden? to sleep when thou were in thy
Agony, and bid me watch; but must I commit a greater now? A Sin none ever did
commit, nor ever can again, as to the Circumstance, Time, and Place: Lord, help
me to weep, and to weep more abundantly. O, Lord! that I could wash away my
Sins, with my Tears, that are, of so deep a dye.

O, blessed Jesu! to make my Laver the stronger, I will back again to the
Garden of Gethsemane, to bewail my first Sin; that was the place I was first
neglective of my God: And there also I will bewail the second too. Surely, that
is the fittest place, O my Soul! There was the place my dear Lord and Savior,
in his great Conflict, prayed and wept, and made strong Supplications to his
God, with Sighs and Groans that were unutterable; there he fell with his Face
to the Ground, and humbled himself even unto Death, there is the place, he
sweat drops of Blood in, mixed with his Tears, for me; thither will I run, and
there will I prostrate my self on the Ground in the very same place, and as I
said before, to make my Laver stronger, to wash my polluted Crimson-dyed Soul,
I will mix the Blood and Tears of my dear Lord and Savior, that are upon the
Ground, with my own Hearts blood and Tears.

O, sweet Jesu! I remember now very well thy last Words and thy last Prayers;
and with these unparalleled Ingredients I find here my poor sinking Soul begins
to revive, The Tears and Drops of Sweat and Blood that fell upon the Ground
from our Savior in his Agony.
and my Faith in thee, dear Jesu, springs again amain; and I see the Door of
Mercy open to me, as well as to Mary Magdalen, to us that have sinned much;
thou have heard our Prayers, and have seen and botled up our Tears, and have
forgiven much. But I have prayed for thee, Peter, thy Faith fail thee not.

O, happy was it for thee, Peter, when thou wast so desperately wounded, to
have thy Physician so near with the Balm of Gilead, like the good Samaritan, to
pour Oil and Wine into thy Wounds, to supple and cleanse them, and carefully
bind them up for healing. If thy Savior had passed by thee, and had not looked
upon thee, thy Wounds had putrifi'd and gangrean'd, and thou had been lost
for ever. If Christ himself had not took notice of thee, and healed thy wounds,
all others had passed by thee, Scribe and Pharisee, Jew and Gentile, some on
the Right hand, and some on the Left, and no Man had taken Pity of thee. Happy
are they that lie in the way Christ does walk, yea, even at the Pool of
Bethesda, they are sure to be heard by Christ, the Physician of Souls; they
shall either be sure of his immediate help, or else of his Angels, that are
ministering Spirits sent from him.

O! that I might as effectually find the Prayers of my dear Jesu for me, Peter,
in the full Pardon of my Sins, now enthroned in Heaven, as thou found'st him
for thine on Earth. To open blind Eyes, and to take off Scales of Ignorance
with St. Paul: Are not the Waters of Siloam to wash in better than Abana and
Pharpar, and all the Rivers of Damascus?

But now to return back to Caiphas and his Confederates and Council, they being
made up of the Chief-Priests, Elders, Scribes, and Pharisees, they unanimously
agree, according to their Arbitrary Law, to condemn Jesus of Nazareth; but they
had no Power to put him to Death, but after they had used all the Villainy to
him they could, as spitting upon him, buffetting him, striking of him on the
Face with the Palms of their Hands, and blindfolding of him, and asking, who it
was that smote him, and with all the Reviling ill Language they were capable
of, they very early the next Morning sent him bound to Pilate.

But now, when Judas found, that Caiphas had condemned him, and sent him to
Pilate, he begins to repent of what he had done, and carries back the Thirty
Pieces of Silver to the Highpriests, Annas and Caiphas: But more of that in
the conclusion of his notorious Wickedness in betraying his Master. But now, as
to the manner and behavior of Judas, and the Report abroad.

What! What! What news is this I hear? A devout Soul amazed at the report of
Judas's betraying his Master.
My blessed Lord and Redeemer betrayed! Betrayed by a kiss! and by one of his own
Disciples, at the time of his Prayers, and in the place of his greatest
Retirements, in the dark Night, where none could hear him or see him, but his
God, his Heavenly Father; and betrayed at this time by Judas, while he was
praying. O, Wonder and Amazement! While he was praying for his Disciples! O,
how happy would my Soul have been, to have heard but on Whisper from thy Mouth,
dear Savior, to thy God, in my behalf, for my poor Soul. Thus was it with thee
at this time; Praying and Pleading with thy Heavenly Father for the Salvation
of Mankind, and more especially for his Disciples, to whom he was to commit the
care of his poor scattered and distressed Flock, and for thee, Judas, he was
praying with strong Prayers, Cries and Tears, and the more earnestly at this
time of thy coming was he laboring and interceding with his Father, with Sighs
and Groans, and in a very great Agony of Soul and Body, even to the extorting
and drawing out great drops of Blood, the fell to the Ground. And how could
thou come thus, Judas, with Tapers and Lights, as if thou were (with the
blessed Spouse in the Canticles) Sick of Love, as if no time or place could
retain thee, or keep thee longer from thy beloved, nor no danger could affright
thee from the Terrors of the dark and gloomy Night, but find him thou art
resolved of, and no sooner had thou found him, but how passionately, one
would think, thou runn'st to him, and hang'st about his Neck, and kissest him,
as if it expressed the greatest Passion and Fervency of thy Soul, with the most
earnest Compleatment of thy Longings and Desires, to find out thy most endeared
Friend; as if thou had come to him with the greatest Embassy or News, that
God or Angels could reveal to thee, or employ thee in; or, as if thou had
privately overheard the dreadful Conspiracy of the Highpriests and Elders,
Governor, Soldiers, and Herod, against thy Lord and Master's precious Life;
and as if this had been the only Minute and Time, in this dark and dismal
Night, to make his Escape in; and thou thy self, with thy Followers and Lights,
Dark Lanthorns.
had come secretly to conduct him securely through Byways and untrodden
Paths, that he might go concealed from these notorious Conspirators; which, if
this very Minute was not improved to this Advantage, thy Lord was unavoidably
taken, to the Loss of his most precious Life, by these most accursed Miscreants
and Bloodhounds of Hell.

This, Judas, had been Love indeed, and could Men or Angels, that had no
foreknowledge of any design, have judged it otherwise? And greater Love than
this could not possibly have been shown, thus privately and resolvedly to have
ventured thy own Life for thy Master's. Or, Judas, it is a wonder, that, before
thy foul and polluted Mouth came to his sacred Lips, thou could not discern
the Tears and Drops of Blood upon his Heavenly Face; or when thou had once
kissed him, through sudden eagerness, without discerning, yet the moisture of
an unusual Kiss should have made thee immediately have looked upon his
distorted Agonious Face, and there presently have seen written in Characters of
Blood, Jesus often kissed his Disciples.
the intent of thy abominable approach, and wicked design, and that it was not
unknown or unlooked for, and expected by thy Lord and Master, who the very
Evening before had said, at the very time of eating the Passover together with
his Disciples, I shall be betrayed this nigh^ into the hands of the most wicked
Jews, and it shall be done too by the hands of one of my own Disciples, and he
that dippeth his hand with me in the Dish, the same is he that shall betray me.
And have thou quite forgot, Judas, thou answered and said, Is it I? Or, had
thou quite forgot thy Master had already told thee, He knew the very thoughts
of thy Heart, and of the rest of thy Brethren, and had prayed for you, that the
very thoughts of your Hearts, if possible, might be forgiven you.

Thou, Judas, had often seen many Miracles done by thy Master, The Earth opened
and swallowed them up.
and wast not thou afraid at this time, he might have wrought one, more upon
thee, as upon Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, for offering strange Fire unto the
Lord, and thou at this time offering strange Friendship; but will nothing of
all this do, nor work upon thee to deter thee from thy Impious Enterprise, and
to alter thy wicked Intention?

But art thou resolved to give this betraying Kiss, and to go on with thy
former Mercenary unparalleled Resolutions, and to stifle all Reflects, Retorts,
or Reminiscenciated Acts of Conscience, and to cry, All Hail, Master, and give
the Kiss; And after this Kiss of thine, Judas, can thou be looking upon, and
be abetting, aiding, and assisting these Vile Wretches, Officers, and Soldiers,
in all their rage and violency, with their rude Hands, thus to drag thy
Savior, and pull him along, and with their Swords and Staves in their Hands,
to force him, and hale him on, and with their Lanthorns and Torches, the better
to direct their blows upon thy Master. I say, Judas, could thou see all this,
and still persist in unrelenting and obdurate Impiety and Impudence?

Says our Dear Savior; Judas, are you come out, as against a Thief and a
Robber, with Swords and with Staves to take me? I was daily with you in the
Temple teaching, and you took me not, but the Scriptures must be fulfilled,
they all forsook him and fled, Mark 14.48, 49, 50.

But thou, Judas, hear, thou deef, and look, thou blind, as Isaiah says; Will
nothing of all this bring any thing to thy remembrance, nor to behold any thing
in my innocent Face? Who is blind but my Servant, or deaf as the Messenger I
sent? Who is blind as he that is perfect in all this wickedness, and blind as
the Lord's Servant? Seeing many things, but thou observest not: Opening the
Ear, but thou hear not. The Lord is well pleased for his Righteousness sake;
It becomes thus to be done, that all Scriptures might be fulfilled. And can
thou, Judas, be ignorant of them? Or, have thou blinded thy Eyes thus? And
hardened thy Heart? And wholly sold thy self to the Devil, to work out and
accomplish this wickedness and cruelty, to thy Master, with thy Kiss?
Whomsoever I shall kiss, the same is he, hold him fast, Matthew. 26.48.

Now when Caiphas, and his Crew, had Examined Jesus, and had all with one
consent unanimously voted his Death, yet it was beyond the Verge of their power
to put into execution their determined Sentence, but bound him, and sent him
away Malefactor-like to Pilate.

When morning was come, all the Chief-Priests and Elders of the People take
Counsel against Jesus to put him to death, and when they had bound him, they
led him away to Pontius Pilate, their Chief Governor. Then Judas which had
betrayed him, when he saw how they had used him, and that he, that he had
privately agreed with the betray him to, had proceeded further in his Malice
and Rage to his Master, than was agreed upon at first, and had Condemned him to
Death, and was now carrying him from one Court and Council to another, and at
this present time was going with him to Pilate, and saw now it would be made a
public Business, of which he had a promise, it should be only private, and
that he must inevitably be known to be the Man, and Vengeance then would not
suffer him to live, nor yet should he know where to hide his Head, when it was
once come to be known amongst all the rest of the Disciples, therefore he began
to repent him, (as he thought, in time) and resolved upon this course, to carry
the Money back again to the Highpriests, and let them know, he had alleged
false things against his Master, which were in no manner true, and therefore
had brought them their Money again in full tale, and in the very same Bag, and
threw it down upon the Treasury-Table in the Temple, where before he had
received it, and told them plainly, he repented, and had sinned in betraying
Innocent Blood, concluding in himself, this was the only Politic way left to
save himself, and bring his Master off again, that he had so falsely betrayed.

But they took no notice of any thing that he said to them, they had already
made use of him as a Property to betray Jesus of Nazareth to them, that they
had of along time-past endeavored to apprehend; and as for Judas in what he
had done, whether well or ill to himself, what cared they, he had done well for
them, let him go and be hanged, if he will, what do we care, say they, we will
proceed with our sport.

And when he saw, that all that was said and done, would prevail nothing upon
the Jews, he goes out and lays violent hands upon himself.

Then Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that they had condemned him,
repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of Silver to the
Highpriests and Elders, saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the
Innocent Blood, and they said, What is that to us? see thou to that, and he
cast down the pieces of Silver in the Temple, and went out and hanged himself.
Matthew. 25.5.

AND now, O most Holy Jesu, let this Blessed Spirit further assist me in this
great Work, to present thee, Dear Lord, to the Life, to my Devout Soul, that it
may the more perfectly see thee in all thy Agony Passion, Death, Burial,
Resurrection, and Ascension; and to admire thee, and adore thee, most Blessed
Lord and Savior, in the greatest humiliation, and adoration, a poor Creature
is able to do, as thou art daily interceding for me at the Throne of Heaven:
And this I beg upon the bended Knees of my Soul, in thy own Name, and for thy
own sake, who art my Lord and Savior, and Ever-Blessed Redeemer and Advocate.
Amen.

But now to proceed on with this wicked Tragedy of the Jews. After Judas had
Hanged himself, the Chief-Priests took the Silver-pieces, and said, It is not
lawful to put them into the Treasury because it is the price of Blood; And they
consulted together, and bought the Potters Field to bury Strangers in,
wherefore that Field is called the Field of Blood to this day. Then was
fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the Prophet, saying, And they took
the Thirty pieces of Silver, the price of him that was valued, whom they of the
Children of Israel did value, and gave them for the Potters Field, as the Lord
appointed.

Jesus carried before Pilate.
But the High Priests took Jesus, and bound him, and sent him away very early
(it being a work of darkness,) to Pilate, and they themselves came after to
accuse him. Pilate, entering the Tribunal Seat, asked them, What Accusations
they did bring against this Man, they answer and say in in general, If he were
not a Malefactor, we would not have delivered him up to you; Pilate being
unwilling to meddle in this Affair, perceiving it was for envy they accused
him, and not any thing of a just Offense; Pilate asked them, Why they did not
proceed against him, and judge him according to their Law, and not to trouble
him? The Jews said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any Man to death,
that the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which be spoke, signifying what
Death he should dye, as he himself had prophesi'd of himself; And they shall
deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify.

Then Pilate entered the Judgment-Hall, and when he saw no body come against
him, calls to Jesus, and said unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews? Thinking
happily he might trap Jesus in his words, but Jesus as cautiously asked him
another Question; Have thou said this thing of thy self, or did others tell it
thee of my? Pilate answered him, Am I a Jew? Thy own Nation, and the Chief
Priests, have delivered thee to me, What have thou done? For as yet none can
testify any thing against him, for they had not as yet their pretended Fact
ready, whereby to accuse him; moreover, they found Pilate to be very strict in
his Examination, and very unwilling to be both Accuser and Judge, and made them
not willing to answer to any particulars, till they had drawn up full Proof
against him, seeing a General Charge had no Influence upon Pilate: Jesus said
unto Pilate, my Kingdom is not of the World: Pilate therefore said unto him,
Art thou a King then? Jesus answered, Thou say that I am a King: For this
Cause was I born, and for this Cause came I into the World, that I should bear
witness to the Truth: What is the Truth? says Pilate: Jesus answered, Every
one that is of the Truth, hears my Voice. Pilate then goes out to the Jews,
and tells them, If they had nothing else to say against Jesus of Nazareth, he
must, and will, discharge him; for be, for his part, found no fault in him at
all, John 18.29. to 38.

Then when they heard this, rather than he should be discharged, the whole
Multitude ran in with open Mouth, and began to accuse him, saying, If we must
come to Particulars, we are prepared. We found this Fellow teaching Sedition
and Rebellion, and endeavoring to pervert the Nation from paying Tribute to
Caesar, and saying, That himself is Christ, a King; says Pilate, I have heard
of this already, and I will hear no more of it: I must discharge him, if this
is all you have to say; for I tell you, I can find no fault in the Man: Then
they were the more fierce against him, but all to no purpose, saying, He
stirs up the People, Teaching throughout Jury, beginning from Galilee, to
this place. Pilate being now quite wearied out with this Nonsense, and hearing
he was a Galilean, knew that he belonged to Herod's Jurisdiction, and turns him
over to him, Luke 23.8 whom he knew to be at Jerusalem at that time, Jesus
carried before Herod
and therefore sends Jesus to him, who had been desirous of a long season to
see him, because he had heard many things of him; and hoped to see some of his
Miracles done by him.

Then Herod begins to Interrogate Jesus, and finding he could get nothing from
him, nor no Miracles to be done by him, and being most vehemently accused by
the Chief Priests and Elders, saying all manner of Evil against him, that the
subtilty of Men or Devils could invent, for they distrusted to have any good
done by Pilate, and therefore concluded, this was the last Stake they had to
play, and thereupon resolved to make the best of it. They said that He
pretended to be a King, and had forbid them to pay Tribute to any Earthly
Monarch, and that he did frequently sow Sedition amongst the People; and
moreover said, He could destroy the Temple and build it again in three days:
But he answered nothing to all this. Moreover, Herod was informed, they had
been before Annas and Caiphas, and that their Witnesses could not agree
together, and that Pilate could find no just Accusation of Death against him,
and, upon that account, had sent him to him, which he took very kindly from
Pilate, and upon this occasion, they Two were made friends, which before had
been at Variance and Enmity for a great while.

Notwithstanding, Herod calls a Council of his Mighty Men, and they debate the
Matter amongst themselves, but yet could find no cause of Death in him, more
than the violency of the People, so that Herod was neither willing to release
him, nor yet to condemn him; but He and his Nobles make sport with him awhile,
set him at naught, mocked him, and arrayed him in a Purple Robe, (others, a
White Robe) out of derision to his Regal Power, and on purpose to render him
more the peoples Scorn, and the more to inflame their merciless Cruelty, and
thus return him back again to Pilate with Thanks, and a great Compliment for
the grand favor he had done him, in sending this Malefactor the King of the
Jews to him. I have Robbed him, and given him what Ignominy and Despite I
thought convenient, but as for his Death, or to condemn him, belongs not to my
Province, but more immediately to you, under Tiberius Caesar's Government.

And thus our Dear Lord and Savior, the Lord of Life and Glory, is carried
first to Annas, then to Caiphas, then to Pilate, afterward to Herod, and now
back to Pilate again, tossed and tumbled up and down, and permitted no where to
rest, but posted and hurried from one Court, Council, and Judgment Seat, to
another, and none could yet determine the Matter, but blind-folded, spit upon,
and struck in one Court, bound, mocked, set at naught, and arrayed in another;
thump'd and reviled in another; and scourged and buffeted almost in all, but
yet not acquitted or discharged in any. Well might he bitterly complain; Foxes,
have holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man has not
where to lay his Head.

Now a second time is our dear Jesus brought before Pilate from Herod's Court;
Jesus carried before Pilate a second time.
Pilate being now much concerned at the Clamor abroad, that was made against
Jesus of Nazareth, by the most rude and common people, that run more by Tumult
and Cry, than Reason and Judgment, and it appearing all along to be perfect,
unheady, inconsiderate malice, Pilate resolves to trouble himself no more with
this sort of Cattle, but now he was minded to hear, what the Chief Priests, and
Rulers had to say of themselves, Luke 23.13.

You have brought this Man before me again, What have you to say against him?
And finding they had no more to say, than what they had said to Herod before,
That he was a Receiver, and one that perverted the People from their Duty and
Allegiance to the King, and calls himself a King: Says Pilate, I have been
credibly informed, that in one of his Speeches he made to the People, he
exhorted them quite contrary, to give Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to
whom Custom is due. And moreover, to give to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods: And we have all read the
Scriptures, and we know that they are all full, and abound every where almost
with Predictions of a Savior, and of a Messiah, and of a Christ, and of a King
of the Jews, and this may be the Man, as far I know. This we are all sure of,
that he has given shrewd Demonstrations of his Godhead and Power, and why may
he not be your King?

Forthwith they all cried out with one Acclamation, We will have no King, but
Caesar: But hold, says Pilate, If I must be his Judge, I must ground my
Reasons upon good, clear, full, and agreeable Evidence, before I can condemn
him: I am not yet free to condemn, I profess plainly, I have great Anxities of
Mind; and there is one thing that continually disturbs my Mind of late, that I
meet with in my Thoughts at every turn, and that is, That strange Miracle that
was wrought by him of late, which none of you can be ignorant of, and that is,
the raising of Lazarus from the Dead, after he had been in the Grave four days,
and began to stink: This is a very great thing, and a wonderful Miracle, let us
rather permit him a while to go on farther with his Miracles, and if he be the
Son of God, more and greater Wonders than these will appear, but if he be a
Pseudo-Christus, a false Christ, or a false Prophet, we will immediately
condemn him.

But, say the Jews, if we let him go on thus, and he should do more Miracles,
the Romans will come in upon us, and take away from us both our Nation and
Synagogues.

Now when Pilate saw, they still persisted in this envious and malicious
Impeachment, says he, Ye have brought this Man here before me, as one that
seduceth the people. Behold, Gentlemen! Silence in the Court, Crier! I must
speak plainly, behold, there he stands, I have examined him according to the
strictness of the Law, and with as great Subtilty as I am capable of; and I
have cross-examin'd him, to see if I could trap him in his words; but I profess
before you all, I find no fault at all in this man, touching those things
whereof you accuse him. Nay, Silence, Gentlemen, I pray, and hear me a little
farther: You your selves very well know, I was willing to give you all the
satisfaction, that possibly I could. I did not clear him, nor acquit him, the
time before, though I might justly have done it; for there was nothing from your
Accusations, that was worthy of Bonds or Imprisonment, much less of Death; yet,
to please you, seeing you were so eager of his Death, and withal, to satisfy
my self of Herod's Opinion, I sent you your selves with him bound before Herod,
and I know you have no mean thoughts of Herod's Judgment, and you know, I
suppose, that his opinion was, That he found nothing worthy of Death in him,
but has returned him back again to me, Luke 23, 11, 15.

I will therefore chastise him, and let him go. Moreover, you know, that you
have a Custom, that I should release unto you one at the Passover, I will
therefore release unto you the King of the Jews; then they came all in,
crowding at the Door, and crying at once with a land voice, Away with this Man,
and release unto us Barabbas.

Now Barabbas was one, that for Robbery and Murder in the City, was cast into
Prison. Pilate, being willing to release Jesus, spoke again to them. But they
cried, saying, Crucify him, Crucify him, Matthew. 23.19, 20, 21. Pilate
resolved then to see, if the following Severity, to the ever blessed Jesu,
would satisfy them.

Pilate then took Jesus, and scourged him, and the Soldiers platted a Crown of
Thorns, and put it upon his Head. Well might Isaiah say of the Sin of the Jews,
Your Hands are defiled with Blood, for now were our blessed Savior's Back and
Sides all in a Gore-Blood; The Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and by
bit Stripes we are boaled. Surely be bath born our Griefs, and carried our
Sorrow, yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

He is despised and rejected of Men, a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with
Grief, which made the Cry break out of his Sacred Mouth, Behold! If any Sorrow
be like unto my Sorrow. And Isaiah further tells, how his Disciples would leave
him at this time, And we hid (as it were) our Faces from him.

And the Soldiers platted a Crown of Thorns, and put it upon his Head, and they
put on him again the Purple Robe that Herod had arrayed him in, and said, Hail,
King of the Jews, and smote him with their hands, and, bowing he Knee,
worshipped him in Scorn and Derision to his Kingly Attire, with his Sacred
Temples pouring down Blood, from the Crown of Thorns fastened into them, which
made him say, The Arrows of the Almighty stick fast in me!

Lord! who is able to behold thee in this miserable, scourged, and bleeding
condition? Thy Face besmeared and daubed with the precious Blood of thy Sacred
Temples, mixed together with the filthy Excrements of the most nasty and
polluted Wretches Spittle.

How, O Lord, are thy Tender and Holy Back and Sides buffetted and bleeding
with their Jewish Stripes, and thy Cheeks smitten with their filthy and brawny
Hands. Who, Lord, is able to behold all this, and their Hearts not bleed, and
even faint away, to see, how he is thus brought out, by Filate's Command,
before all the Jews, who lead him up and down by the Hair of his Head; Speaking
of its Excellency and Beauty in the Canticles, where all his Graces are set
forih, And his Hair, as black, and as bushy as a Raven, now serves only as an
Halter to lead him and drag him along.

Then says Pilate, Though I bring him forth to you thus mangled and torn, yet it
is only to please and appease you, but I find no fault in him, John 19.4. Then
came Jesus forth, wearing the Crown of Thorns and the Purple Robe, and Pilate
says unto them, Behold the Man, ver. 5. And this could not be acted, without a
Prophecy to the Jews.

Your Hands are defiled with Blood, and your Fingers with Iniquity-Your Lips
have spoken Lies, and your Tongues have uttered perverse Things. None calls
for Justice, nor any pleads for Truth. Their Feet run to Evil, and they make
have to shed innocent Blood. Their Thoughts are Thoughts of Iniquity, Wasting
and Destruction are in their Paths. Judgment is far from them, neither to do
Justice does it overtake them.

Again, Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off, for
Truth is fallen in the Street, and Equity cannot enter, Isa. 59.

And again, Isaiah says more to the same purpose, Yea, Truth fails, and he
that departs from Evil (alluding to our Savior) makes himself a Prey. And
the Lord saw it, and it displease him, that there was no Judgment.

And be saw there was no Man, and wondered that there was no Intercessor,
therefore his Arm brought Salvation unto him, and his Righteousness sustained
him, for he put on Righteousness as a Breastplate, and as an Helmet of
Salvation upon his Head, and be put on Garments of Vengeance for Clothing, and
was clad with Zeal as a Cloak. According to their Deeds, accordingly, be will
repay Fury to his Adversaries, and Recompense to his Enemies.

Thus we may see how the Spirit of God leads out the good Prophet, and not only
him, but all the Patriarchs and Prophets; they are all full, and abound, with
the Predictions and Prefigurations of Holy Jesu; of the Messiah; but more
especially this Prophet Isaiah. Herod before, and the Highpriests and Soldiers
now at this very time, cannot open their Mouths, and make Sport with our dear
and ever-blessed Savior, but it shall be foretold.

Against whom do you sport your selves? Against whom do you make a wide Mouth,
and draw out the Tongue? Are you not Children of Transgression, and a Seed of
Falsehood? Yea, for Judas betraying him: For the Iniquity of his Covetousness
was I wrath, and smote him: I hid me, and was wrath, and he went on frowardly
in his Heart, Isa. 57.4, 17.

Now notwithstanding all this, that Pilate had permitted them to do to innocent
Jesus, thinking, that this Indignity and Suffering of our Savior, might have
been full satisfaction to them all. When Pilate said unto them, Behold the Man,
in his Kingly Robes, thus affronted and abused in all this Contempt, Scorn and
Sufferings. Yet was there inverate malice and envy, against innocent and
harmless Jesus, such, that all this Blood had not yet satisfied their
Blood-thirstiness: But when the Chief Priests and Officers saw him, they cried
out, all, This will not do, we must have him Crucified, nothing less than that
will satisfy us. Pilate says unto them, If nothing else will satisfy you,
nor appease this Tumult and Uproar, Take ye him and Crucify him your selves,
for I find no fault at all in him. This would not yet appease them; for we have
a Law, and according to our Law, we can put no Man to Death: Moreover, we have
a strict Law against Blasphemy, not boring through the Tongue, but Death, and
by our Law be ought to dye, because be has made himself the Son of God.

When Pilate heard that Saying, he was the more afraid, and went into their
Judgment-Hall a Third time, Jesus carried before Pilate a Third time.
Luke 23.22. John 19.9 and said unto Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him
him no Answer. Then Pilate said unto him, Speak thou not unto me? Know
thou not, that I have power to Crucify thee, and have power to Release thee?
How Pilate! is thy Power so great? And will thou not do it? Out of thy own
Mouth shall thou be condemned, John 19 10. Jesus answered, and said unto him,
Eusebius, speaking of Christ's Divinity, gloses upon it. Christ's Divinity
here, stoopt not to Pilate's Humanity.
Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from
above. From thenceforth Pilate sought to Release him, but the Jews cried out,
saying, If thou let this Mango, thou art not Caesar 's Friend. Whosoever makes
himself a King, speaks against Caefar. When Pilate therefore heard that
Saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the Judgment Seat, in a place
that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew Gabatha: And it was the
preparation for the Passover, and about the sixth hour, and he says unto them,
Behold your King! But they cry out, Away with him, Crucify him. Pilate says,
Shall I Crucify your King? The Chief Priests answered, We have no King but
Caesar, John 19.5.

Now Pilate when he saw that after all ways, and means, and courses, that he
had taken with Jesus, to satisfy the Jews, nothing would do, less than to
Crucify him; He was now ready to pass Sentence, and had entered the
Judgment-Hall, and sat down in the Judgment Seat, in order to it; his Wife
sends a Letter to him, with words to this effect. saying,

I beseech you, Husband, if you have any Love for me, and any Bowels of Pity
and compassion for this poor innocent Man, Pro^ula, his Wife, whom the Greek
Church Honor as a Convert of our Lord's, sends a Letter to him to this effect.
Jesus, (that now is arraigned and stands before you just ready to be
Condemned, and Sentence to be passed upon him, on purpose to gratify the
inordinate impetuous desires of a rash Multitude, and blood-thirsty Jews,)
forbear, I say, I humbly beg of you, and do not Condemn him, and have nothing
to do with this just Man, for I have suffered many things for him this day in a
Dream, which I shall communicate to you, as soon as I see you.

When Pilate saw this, and that he could prevail nothing, but rather that a
Tumult was made, He called for Water and washed his Hands before the Multitude,
saying, I am innocent of the Blood of this just Person, see you to it, Matthew.
27.19, 24. Then answered all the People, and said, Let his Blood be upon us and
our Children for ever, if it will, we will have him Crucified. And the Voices
of them and the Chief Priests prevailed, Luke 23.23.

Then Pilate released Barabbas unto them, and delivor'd Jesus to be Crucified,
and they took him and lead him away, John 19.16. Then they called together the
whole Band of Soldiers, and with the Scarlet Robe, and the Crown of Thorns on
his Head, they put a Reed in his right band, in stead of a Scepter, and they
bowed the Knee before him, and said, Hail, King of the Jews! And then they spit
upon him, and took away the Reed from him, and smote him on the Head with it:
And after they had done that, they mocked him, and then they took off the Robe,
that was upon him, by Herod's Appointment; for to Crucify him in that
King-like Robe, would be a great dishonor both to their King and Country.

And the Savior of the World now being left to the Barbarous Multitude to be
Crucified, The Jews and Gentiles consent and assist in the Crucifying of him,
Mat. 20.18, 19.
and to do what they would with him. You may imagine, with what Undecency and
Rudeness they twist and turn about the Sacred Body of our Dear Jesus, that is
already most grievously sore and stiff with Blood, from their late Inhuman
Stripes, and with what force and cruelty they pull off his Robes, and put on
his own Garments for his Crucifixion, is enough to make a Devout Soul quake and
tremble.

Thus they took the ever-blessed Jesus, and led him away, bearing His own
Cross, toward Mount Calvary, or Golgotha, the place of a Skull, with all the
Joy their Rage and Malice could invent.

Stay now, my Soul, and take a serious view of thy Lord and Savior, thus far
afflicted, The Devout Soul standing to see its Savior pass by toward the
Mount, the place of his Execution.
tormented, and forsaken. I say, now if thy Heart does not break to fast, and
the Sluices of thy Eyes do not pour down Pears too violently, take a view of
him, and make a stand: It Is the way to his Cross, and he will come dragged by
presently. O my Soul! be like the true. Zacheus, make the best of thy Ground to
view, and of thy Time to consider, for now the Agony of our Blessed Redeemer
begins.

Ah cruel and miserable Pilate What have thou now done? And whom have thou
Condemned? And whom have thou delivered up to be Crucified? The Lord of Glory.
The Son of God! The Redeemer and Savior of the World! A just Person! As thou
thy self has testified of him. Thou found'st no Guile nor Evil in his Mouth.
What can thou expect from him then for thy own Salvation! See but yonder, how
he is haled and dragged away from thee, with his Head crowned with Thorns, his
Temples bleeding, his Face besmeared with Blood and Spittle, from the basest
and vilest of the poor ignorant Jews, and his Back stooping under the Burden
of his own Cross, and his poor Legs trembling, by reason of its weight, which,
with the Dust, Dirt, Crowd, Sweat, Blood, and want of Sustenance to revive his
poor drooping Spirits, His sacred Lips having received no nourishment from the
time of the Passover till the time of his thirsting up on the Cross, which was
the third day, and exactly forerun the time of his Body lying in the Grave.
is ready to sink, Can thou look after him, Pilate, and see all this, and thy
Heart and Soul not faint and bleed?

What would thou give, Pilate, now, to recall thy wicked and abominable
Sentence of a just Person, thus spitefully used and dealt with? Like a Lamb to
the Slaughter, or a Sheep before the Shearers is dumb, so opens he not his
Mouth,

But now, not for Pity to his tender Back, Simon the Cyrenian compelled to bear
our Saviors Cross.
but for fear he tire before he come to the Place of suffering, and that they
may give him some ease to lengthen out his Torments, and that they may be able
to inflict more Stripes upon him, and that he may more become the public view,
and that he may be the better come at to receive his Stripes, and to be spit
upon, and thrown at, let us seize and compel the Traveller, Simon of Cyrenia to
bear his Cross.

O, happy art thou, Simon, to bear thy Lord's Cross! Let there be no
unwillingness in thee. Thou had no hand in Condemning him, nor Crowning him
with Thorns, nor spitting upon him, nor bussetting him; let it not grieve thee,
thou may be amply rewarded for thy pains, if thou believe in him; He, in
requital, will bear thy Soul to Heaven for thee. How many poor Souls, now a
days, would have been glad to have suffered for him, or with him, that have
already found part of the Virtue of his Death and Resurrection?

But how can I blame thee, poor Simon, when all his Disciples had left him, and
one of them was he that betrayed him to this, but all hid their Faces from him,
as he himself had foretold them. And ye shall leave me alone, but I am not
alone, because the Father is with me. O, dear Lord Jesu, joyful is this News to
me, that I now here thee speak, That thou have the Presence, Comforts, and
Assistance of thy Father, of thy God, with thee in this hour, in this great
Agony and Suffering.

And having thus far mournfully accompanied our Lord and Savior up the Hill,
laden with Afflictions and Sorrows, to the top of Mount Calvary, where the
Cross of our dear Savior is to be fixed, for the separating of his most
Glorious Soul and most Precious Body. Who can but consider, and be amazed, to
think, what stupendous Sorrows and Sufferings our dear Lord, at this moment,
feels and apprehends?

All Malefactors that we have at any time beheld with our Christian
compassionate Eyes; there are three Times especially, that conflict and operate
most upon sympathizing Beholders; and according as the Sentence for the
extinguishing part of Life is, so are we more or less affected, and afflicted
with Sorrow.

First, at the time of their Condemnation and dreadful Sentence, Thou shall
return to the Place from whence thou came, and from thence to the Place of
Execution, and there be hanged by the Neck till thou art dead, or Quartered
alive, or burnt to Death, and the Lord have Mercy upon thy Soul.

Secondly, at the present time of their going up the Ladder, or being fastened
to the Rack, Cross, Stake or Block. What Eyes can behold this, but their Face
shall gather Paleness and Sorrow, A simpathizing thinking Christian.
and their Knees even knock together with fear and trembling, to think what is
at hand, and they now going immediately to suffer.

Thirdly, at the time of their being in the very present Agony of Death, where,
not only the present Torment of Body they endure, but the dreadful Terrors of
an affrighted Conscience at the immediate sight of a revengeful God, and
irreconcilable Judge, that is now ready to cast both Soul and Body into
Hellfire, do produce Compassion. And this is the present and perfect state and
condition of all Men, by reason of Sin. For this, and this alone, is our dear
Lord and Savior conflicted in the Garden, even to the extracting great drops
of Blood trickling down his most sacred Hands and Face.

And when he saw, his most Righteous Father would not reverse this eternal
Decree and Punishment to Mankind for Sin, without his own ever blessed Son's
undergoing and suffering Death and Hell for us. Says he, If this bitter Cup
shall not pass from me without drinking of it, Thy Will be done. A Body have
thou prepared, that is mounting the Cross, and ready and willing to suffer all
the Misery and Torment, that the most cruel Rage and Malice of Men and Devils,
and an enraged God, will permit to inflict, rather than poor Man shall suffer
the deep Pressures of Thy Eternal Wrath and Indignation, in that Luke that
burns with Fire and Brimstone for evermore.

O, blessed Father! Thou art my Father from all Eternity; and am not I thy Son?
Prove. 8.23. I was from everlasting, before ever the Earth was. While as yet he
bad not made the Earth or the Fields, nor the highest part of the Dust of the
World. When be prepared the Heavens, I was there. When he set a Compass upon
the face of the Deep. When be established the Clouds above. When he
strengthened the Fountains of the Deep. When he gave to the Sea his Decree,
That the Waters should not pass his Commandment. When he appointed the
Foundations of the Earth: Then was I by him, as one brought up with him, and I
was daily his Delight, rejoicing always before him. Rejoicing in the habitable
parts of his Earth; And my Delights were with the Sons of Men; when thou
createdst them in a state of Innocence and Perfection. And, O, Heavenly Father,
shall I now forsake them, in a state of Sin and Misery and Eternal Destruction?
No, O Holy Father, for this very end did I come into the World; I, that
immaculate Lamb, slain from the beginning, conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of
the Virgin Mary, as to human Nature, am touched with their Infirmities, and
therefore came to succor poor tempted Souls. I know the Devil's Wrath and
Power, and continual Attempts to all Mankind. For this cause was I carried into
the Wilderness, endured Hunger and Cold, Fasting and Temptations, and I cannot
but succor and relieve, and at last deliver, those that are tempted.

As Man, I my self, O Righteous Father, had fell by his Temptation; but, as
God, I overcame him, and can I let them suffer, when I know Man is not
sufficient of himself to overcome the Devil nor Sin, nor the Power of Death and
Hell, nor thy Eternal Wrath and Displeasure. This was the Eternal Decree of the
great Council of Heaven from everlasting, That seeing Man was not able to
recover his lost state, That Man born of a Virgin, conceived from his God-like
Power by the Holy Ghost overshadowing her, in the fullness of time should be
born, the Son of God, fully qualified God-Man, to make complete Satisfaction
and Atonement for lapsed Man, to the unsatisfi'd Justice, and incensed Wrath
and Indignation of God.

And for this Cause was I Born here on Earth, and left the Bosom of my Heavenly
Father, and all Thrones and Dominions, Principalities and Powers of Glorified
Saints and Angels, and took upon me Human Nature, and came cheerfully leaping
over the Hills, and skipping over the Mountains, as a Roe, or young Heart upon
the Mountains of Spices. For this Cause came I, as in the Volume of the Book it
is written of me, to do thy Will, O God, That poor Man might not be Eternally
lost, but thy incensed Wrath might be appeased, full satisfaction might be
made, the power of Hell might be broke, and Devils themselves reserved in Hell,
bound in Chains of Darkness, until the great Day, and poor fallen Man acquitted
and discharged, and his Soul Eternally Saved.

This is Love indeed! unbounded, unlimited, Love! infinite, inexhaustible,
incomprehensible Love of the Son of God, the ever blessed Redeemer of the
World. O, the Height, Length, Breadth and Depth of the Goodness of God to
Mankind! This is transcendent Love, Love without comparison! Now, what must all
this extort from us? To see our dear Lord and Savior just now mounting the
Cross, giving of himself up to the utmost Cruelty, that the wickedness of Men
and Devils can inflict upon him, from the vehemence and Poison of their most
barbarous Rage, and all this for our Sins, and to set us free.

Here is the Sentence of Pilate; Take him, scourged already, accord-to your
Custom, and bound, Take him and Crucify him, with this Inscription over his
Head, That every one that passes by might understand it.
written in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, This is Jesus of Nazareth King of the
Jews.

The Death of the Cross was the ancient Punishment of the Jews for their most
notorious Malefactors, Dr. Cave 's Primitive Christianity.
before Christ's time, and therefore esteemed by the accursed Jews, most fit
for our Savior to dye by. Omitting all the various Forms and different kinds,
which were all used toward the Primitive Christians, there were two things in
this way of suffering rendered it very severe, viz. the Pain and Ignominy of it.
Painful it must needs be, because the Party suffering was fastened to it with
Nails drove through his Hands and Feet, the most sensible parts of Man, from
such a vast quantity of Nerves and Sinews uniting and terminating in those
places: And they were pierced only in those extreme Parts, so far distant from
the Heart, on purpose that the exquisiteness of their Torments and Death, might
be the more lingering and tedious. Insomuch that some, out of tender Compassion,
have caused some to be strangled before they were Crucified, as Julius Caesar
did the Pirates he had sworn to execute on the Cross; Sueton. in Vit. Caesar.
Cap. 47. p. 76. But no such Favor was shown to Christians; they were suffered
to remain, during all these cruciating Pangs, till mere Hunger starved them, or
the Mercy of wild Beasts, or Birds of Prey, dispatched them. Thus St. Andrew
endured two whole days upon the Cross. Martyrol. Romans p, 736.

Timotheus and his Wife Maura, after many other Torments, hung upon the Cross
nine days together, before they completed their Martyrdom. Nor was the Shame
of this way of Suffering less than the Pain of it; Crucifixion being the
punishment of Slaves, Traitors, and the vilest of Malefactors: Insomuch, that
for a Free man to dye thus, was accounted amongst them, the highest Degree of
Ignominy and Reproach imaginable. Therefore the Roman Historians called it
Servile Supplicium, a punishment only proper for Slaves. But this punishment of
the Cross Constantine took away, out of Reverence to our Savior, not being
willing, that that should be the punishment of the vilest Malefactors, which
had been the Instrument whereon the Son of God had purchased Salvation for
Mankind. Sozom. Lib. 1. Cap. 8. p. 418.

But now, O holy Jesu, must thou be lifted up to suffer and dye upon the Cross,
as it was Prophesi'd of thee. Christ's nailing to the Cross.
As the Serpent was lifted up in the Wilderness, so shall the Son of Man be
lifted up. Now, O blessed Jesu, who is able to see thee, and behold thee, how
with rude hands and seared Hearts they force and twist, pull, hale, and extend
thy Sacred Hands, that were always doing of good, and healing Diseases, now
nailing to the Cross? Who can but mourn and lament bitterly, as not being able
to behold thee, the Lord of Life. Our Souls within us must be pierced, and even
our Hearts break in pieces, to see thy ever blessed Feet thus extended and
rackt, and nailed to the Cross, and to think what Agony and Torment they now
endure, that always kept the steady Paths of thy God in the ready way to Man's
Salvation.

Now, to see thee tread the Wine Press alone, and of all the People there was
none with thee. And as thou thy self said, I looked, and there was none to
help; and I wondered, and there was none to uphold; therefore my own Arm brought
Salvation to me, and my fury uphold me. In all their Afflictions, I was
afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them. In his Love, and in his
Pity he Redeemed them, and be bore them and carried them all the days of old.
Thus the tender care and Pity of Christ was toward his Children and People
from the beginning, it bore Date in the Records of Heaven.

And now, dear Jesu, to see how with uncontroli'd Severity they pierce thy very
Hands and Feet, and penetrate into thy very Nerves and Sinews, not only forcing
thy sacred Blood out of thy tender and del^cate Veins, but squeezing it out
upon the very Cross; And all this for me, O Lord, and for my great and grievous
Sins, that are numberless, do thou endure this grievous torment, and shed
infinite drops of Blood, crying out in the bitterness of thy Soul, Behold, and
see, if there be any Sorrows lie my Sorrows. O Lord, who is able to see thee,
bleeding, and groaning, and crying, and dying for me, and not Weep and mourn,
and dissolve into Tears and Sorrow? Or, rather than my spent Eyes should want
Tears, help my Heart, O Lord, to weep Tears of Blood. Who can forbear, O Lord,
when I consider every Sigh, every Groan, every Cry, every Tear, every drop of
Blood, every Pang, every Pain, every Twitch, every Convulsion, and every
Distortion that thou endurest, are the products and effects of my Sin. O Lord,
let never a Minute be lost, nor never a Thought be spent in vain, now my
Savior is dying, and bleeding on the Cross.

And thus should every devout Soul endeavor to do, when they come to the Table
and Supper of the Lord, that being the chiefest time to give the strongest and
liveliest strokes in our Hearts and Souls, of the compleatest Resemblance and
Commemoration of our dear Lord and Savior's Suffering and dying on the Cross
for us; to consider how his Body was broken, and his Blood gushing out for us,
for our Sins and for our Salvation. This do, (as our dear Savior's Words are)
as often as you do it, in remembrance of me, knowing that thus Christ died for
thee.

And now, O holy Jesu, help my poor crippl'd Soul through the Crowd, The
earnest Petition of a truly sympathizing gracious Soul.
to lay it self down at the foot of thy Cross, to receive the drops of Blood,
as they come trickling down from thy Wounds, into my Polluted Soul, that not
one drop of thy most precious Blood be spilt on the ground, or the sacred
Liquor of Eternal Life be wasted or lost. O Lord! Who is able to behold thee
longer? O that I could bleed, die, and pour out my Soul with thee!

Happy art thou, wretched Thief, The Thief upon the Cross rebuking his
Companion, and timely praying for himself.
that was reserved till this time, to have the Lord of Life to suffer with
thee, to have his Jewish ignominy thy poor Souls advantage, to hear now thy
Prayers, and save thy Soul from Eternal Death. Let thy cursed Companion and
Malefactor persist in his obstinacy and incredulity, with the rest of the
wicked Jews, cursing and reviling his Savior, and going headlong to Hell. If
thou be Christ, come down from the Cross, and save thy self and us. Well as it
done, O Thief, that thou so timely rebuked him. Why do thou not now fear God,
seeing thou art in the same condemnation, and same suffering? We, thou know,
suffer justly for our Offenses, but this Man has done nothing amiss.

I cannot admonish nor persuade thee longer; my Soul is just ready to expire,
and I am just fainting away. A moment lost now is lost for ever. My time is but
short to pray for my own Soul, that am loaded and crowded with an infinite
number of Iniquities and Sins. If thou will die obstinately; Lord, help me to
die penitently; If thou will continue in Contempt; help me, Lord, to continue
in Faith and Patience. If thou look upon him as a Deceiver I look upon him
as my Savior. If thou abound'st in reviling, and scorning, (the opportunity
now offered) I will abound to my last breath with strong Prayers and Tears, to
the very last gasp, crying and calling to my Savior, and ever-Blessed
Redeemer, and King, Lord have mercy upon me quickly, quickly, O Holy Jesu, or I
perish for ever; and remember me when thou come into the Kingdom.

O Blessed Jesu, that art so ready to give out Pardons and Remissions to poor
Penitent Sinners, that call and cry to thee at the very last gasp: As soon as
they ask, it is thy own Gracious Promise, Ask, and ye shall receive. Heaven and
Earth shall pass away, but not one jot or tittle of thy Sacred Word, or
Promise, shall pass away. Verily, Verily, thou shall be with me this day in
Paradise.

This is the time of Repentance; this is the time of effectual Prayers; this is
the time of weeping and mourning for Sin; this is the time of drenching and
bathing thy Soul in the precious Heart-blood and Life of thy Savior. It Is no
matter, what the accursed Jews say, in reviling and mocking of the Son of God,
their King, their Savior, and Redeemer. They that passed by, railed, and
wagg'd their beads, saying, Ah! Thou that destroy'st the Temple, and in three
days build it up again, come down from the Cross, and save thy self, it thou
can. Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the Cross, that we may
see and believe. If thou be the King of the Jews, savethy self.

O Lord! Let the wicked Jews be now making up the number of their Sins through
Infidelity, till the time of Repentance is past, and the Door is shut. I will
be still calling and crying to my God. Let them in scorn and derision be
Crucifying my Savior between two Malefactors, as the chiefest of them. I, in
the greatest bitterness of my Soul, will be pouring out the most ardent of my
Prayers with Sighs, Groans, and Tears, that are unutterable, to remember me,
both now whilst thou art on the Cross, and as soon as thou art exalted in thy
Kingdom of Glory.

O God! the Son, Redeemer of the World, have mercy upon me, miserable Sinner.
By the mystery of thy Holy Incarnation; By thy Nativity and Circumcision; By
thy Fasting, Baptism, and Temptation, Good Lord, deliver me. By thy Agony, and
Bloody Sweat; By the Cross and Passion; By thy precious Death and Burial; By
thy Glorions Resurrection and Ascension; And by the coming of the Holy Ghost,
Good Lord, deliver me. O Son of God! I beseech thee to hear me! O Lamb of God!
that take away the Sins of the World, Grant me thy Peace! O Christ! hear me!
O Lord, hear me! O Lamb of God that take away the Sins of the World, have
Mercy upon me! Lord, have mercy upon me! Christ, have mercy upon me! O Lord,
hear me, and remember me, now, now, thou art giving up thy most precious Life,
and pouring out thy innocent, harmless, and compassionate Soul. Remember me,
when thou come into thy Kingdom. What can a poor Soul beg more, and desire
more of its Redeemer at the point of Death? Or what can be given, or done more,
by an ever-blessed Savior and Holy Jesu, to save us from the Jaws of Death,
Power of Hell, and Eternal Torments? Than to be pouring out his own Soul by
Prayers and Tears to his Heavenly Father, at the very last minute of his
precious Life for us?

But stay, O blessed Jesu! What is it I perceive and see still in this black
and dismal hour? O Lord! Is it thee still in thy Agony, and bloody Sweat? It is
so dark, I can but just perceive thee. Is it not finished yet? What say thou,
Lord, now to my poor, fainting, dying, Soul? Speak, Lord, one word of comfort
to me, notwithstanding all thy Adversaries and implacable Enemies about thee.
Speak, Lord, and thy Servant hears. Speak, Lord, and my Soul shall live. If
thou art so faint, thou can not speak in this grievous Conflict, let thy
good Prophet speak for thee.

Wherefore, when I came, was there no man to help? When I called, was there
none to answer? Do you think, I am past Saving of you, or Delivering of you, in
this time of my Dereliction? Tho you all forsake me in this hour of my
Crucifixion, I do not forsake you, my Children, my Flock, and my poor Lambs, my
Redeemed, and the purchased of my Soul. Is my Hand shortened at all? though
nailed to the Cross? that I cannot Save, or that I cannot Redeem? Or, have I no
power to deliver? Behold, at my Rebuke, I dry up the Sea. I make the Rivers a
Wilderness. The Fish stinketh and dies for Thirst, because there is no Water.
I cloth the Heavens with blackness, and I make Sack loath their covering. I
make the Earth to quake and tremble, and it would tumble down to the Eternal
Abiss, but that I bear up the Pillars of it, at this very moment, that I am
bleeding and dying upon the Cross. Let the Jews have as vile and mean thoughts
of me as they please, and cast all their scorn and malice, mixed with their
cruel rage and poison, at me: It Is I, that make the Rocks to rent, the Sun to
gather paleness, and the Moon to be turned into Blood: Notwithstanding, that
all the Scriptures might be fulfilled, and my Redeemed Ones, the Purchased of
my Soul, set at liberty, I give my Back to the smiters, and my Cheeks to them
that plucked off my Hair. I hid not my face from shame and spitting; for the
Lord G^d does and will help my Soul, and sustain it, Whatever my Body does, or
shall cry out, and say; therefore I shall not be confounded; therefore I have
set my Face like a Flint, and know that I shall not be ashamed. He is near,
that justifies me: Who will contend with me? Let us stand together. Who is my
Adversary? Let him come near. Behold, the Lord will help me, Who is he, that
will condemn me? Lo! they shall all wax old as a Garment, and the Moth shall
eat them up. Who is it amongst you that fears the Lord? Who obeys the Voice
of hit Servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? Let him trust in
the Name of the Lord, and stay himself upod his God. Behold all ye that kindle
a Five, that compass your selves about with sparks, walk in the light of your
Fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled, this shall ye have of my hand, ye
shall lie down in sorrow. Isa. 50.

But, my Soul, draw near, or else thou will lose the sight of thy Savior.
Darkness hastens on a-pace. O Holy Jesu, is it not thee? Let me wipe, and
drain, my dim, and almost spent, and blind Eyes, and look again. Lord! it is
thee. I still perceive thy Tears distilling down thy sacred Face; Thy Temples
boiling out of Spirituous Blood; Thy Sacred Hands and Feet blubbering up, and
venting out from behind the Nails, great Bladders of Blood and Froth, from the
expulsive force of thy most exquisite Torments. O Lord! even now my Soul
faints and dies within me. My Spirits fail me. My poor Mortal Eyes, and
tender, fainting, Heart, is not able to behold thee longer. Nor yet, while my
Life and Strength remains, can I forbear (when an interval of Tears will permit
my sight,) looking after thee still, and pouring forth my fervent, and
frequent, requests to thee; and falling into these most strict Examinations
within my self.

What! From the Sixth, till almost the Ninth Hour, is my dear Savior in the
height of this vehement Agony, and not over, yet? But still laboring and
groaning under the burden of my Sins? What great and heinous Sin of mine is
it, that I am guilty of, that is not atoned yet? That God is so extremely
incensed at, and that he will not yet pardon? That my poor Savior is yet
struggling for, till the last drop of his most Precious Blood is exhausted? Let
me look immediately into my Soul, into every corner and crany of it, all must
out, and be discovered, of what nature or quality soever it be, whether Lying,
Cursing, Swearing and Forswearing, Theft, Murder, Fornication, Adultery,
Incest, Pollution with the Dead, or Copulation with Beasts, Blasphemy, Spite
and Contempt against thy Holy Word and Sacraments.

O quickly, quickly, quickly, help me, O my God, to find it out, and to bring
all to remembrance, that thou may no longer be extorted and convulsed in
these grievous Torments. Look upon me, dear Savior, and cast quickly thy dying
Eye toward me, Christ cast his dying Eyes to a Supplicant Sinner.
as thou did upon Peter, in the High-Priest's Hall, denying thee, that I may
immediately remember it, seeing thy Righteous Father is so exact and severe,
that there is no Redemption of thy most precious Soul, and Sacred Body, from
the Cross, till thou have paid the very utmost Farthing, and have made full and
complete Satisfaction for me.

O, dear Lord! That Cast of thy languishing, distracted, dying Eye, toward me,
has brought all to remembrance. And there, dear Savior, in the speedy
conveyance of a most ardent Ejaculation, is it most humbly and devoutly
presented unto thee, that thou may instantly be delivered from the Torments
and Bondage of Death, in making ample Atonement for it, and my poor Soul may be
recorded, as soon as thou art exalted in thy Kingdom of Glory.

Stay, O my Soul! a small space longer, for now Darkness hastens on amain, that
I can scarce see thee: But what is it I hear? Does this abominable Sin of mine
stick so fast still in the strict Court of Heaven, that it makes thee cry out
thus? Will it not yet be discharged? What dreadful Cry is it? I Am sure, it must
be my Sin. Thou, O blessed Jesu! art Spotless, and without Sin. Guile was not
found in thy Mouth: It must be mine; O miserable and wretched Creature as I am!
How impossible was I, and unable, to have under went this Suffering and Agony
for my Sin; as a poor Worm, Dust and Ashes, and sinful polluted Man, when it
makes the Son of God thus complain, and cry out Hark! Hark! O my Soul, what is
it that sounds thus in my Ears? It Is no usual Cry; it must come from my
Tortured Redeemer. Hark! Harst! Silence! Hark! What is it? Eloi, Eloi, Lama
sabachthani! My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? O my Soul, what is it?
What is it I hear? Eloi, Eloi, Lama-sabachthani? My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? O Lord! O God! O Savior! O everblessed Redeemer! O my Christ! Son
of God! Lamb of God! Dearly beloved of the Father! Where shall I go? Where
shall I hide my self from the Wrath and dreadful Displeasure of thy Father, if
thou cry'st out so, that art his Son, his only begotten Son, in whom always he
was so well pleased? What then can I do, or where shall I appear, if Wrath
break out never so little toward me, when thou, that art a God, complains so
bitterly? What then must a poor, vile, wretched, miserable, undone Creature,
and grievous polluted Sinner, do?

But stay, my Soul! Endeavor still to be looking up toward thy Savior. Let my
tremblng, fainting Heart, still endure the Crowd. If thou dyest here, thou
may still be remembered with the Penitent Thief. It Is the only time and place
under Heaven, to give up a departing Soul; but if otherwise thou art called for
a longer time on Earth, have patience, and see the last of thy erer-blessed
Savior. If the Mother of our ever-blessed Lord stand to see the last Gasp of
her dearly beloved Son, and if Mary Magdalen, and others, stand weeping, and
crying, and praying, to see the last Gasp, and dismal End, of this unparalleled
Tragedy, thou have as much need. I say, if, amongst these, Mary the Mother of
our ever-blessed Jesu, can stand to behold her Nine Months Labor in her
precious Womb, and to see the Travail of her Soul thus tormented to Death,
can not thou do the same? More especially, thy Sins, O my Soul, are great,
which thou have committed; have patience a while, and much shall be forgiven
thee.

Let us now see, what further the Jews have to do, till their Wrath is quite
spent.

And when the Sixth Hour was come, there was Darkness over the whole Earth,
until the Ninth Hour; and at the Ninth Hour, Jesus cried out with a loud Voice,
saying, Eloi, Eloi, Lama sabachthani! Which, being interpreted, is, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? And some of them which stood by, said, He
calls for Elias, let him come down and save him, if he can. Then presently he
cried, I Thirst; immediately one runs, and fills a Sponge full of Vinegar and
Gaul, and gives it him to drink, Psalm. 69.21. Mark 15.23.

All this Suffering hitherto of our Blessed Lord and Savior, had wrought
nothing upon these Cruel, Incredulous, Jewish, Stony Hearts, but they squeeze
this bitter Potion into his most Sacred Mouth with bitter Revilings, which at
all times is counted most base and inhuman, to insult over the most vilest
Malefactors, at the time of their suffering the satisfaction and penalty of the
Law; yet such is the Cruelty of these barbarous Infidels; Let us see, say they,
if Elias will come and take him down from the Cross, and save him.

But our Blessed Jesu, as he had lived Christ the Son of the ever living God,
so he would dye Christ and Savior of the World, p^aying for his most bitter
and inhuman Enemies, at the very last minute of his most precious Life. Father,
forgive them, they know not what they do.

But when they saw, that all their Rage, Malice, and Barbarous Cruelty, ended
in a Prayer for them, their Hearts began to smite them, and they stood gazing
one upon another; and when they began to see such thick Darkness fall upon
them, and the Earth quaking and trembling under their Feet, they began to be
convinced in their Consciences, some of them, and to say one to another,
Surely, this is the Son of God, and cried, What shall we do. And looking up to
Jesus again, they saw him bowing his Head, and saying, Consummatum est, Now it
is finished: Father, into thy hands I commit my Spirit, and bowed his Head, and
gave up the Ghost.

And, as one devoutly observes, the posture of this Death carries in it a
lively Representation of his great Love to Mankind, his Arms stretched out, as
it were, to embrace all those that would come to him, and his Head bowing down
to kiss them.

And at the Ninth Hour there was Darkness over the whole Earth, for the Sun
began to hide his Head, as not able to behold it: The Vail of the Temple was
torn from the top to the bottom, the Earth quaked, and the Rocks rent, which
made the Centurion that stood by as a Sheriff, by Pilate's Command, to see our
Savior executed, begin to be grievously afraid, and to say, Of a certain, this
was the Son of God, Luke 23.30. Matthew. 27.54.

And no sooner had our dear Savior let fly his Blessed Spirit, and ascended to
his Heavenly Throne, and glorified Saints and Angels, but they, rejoicing at
his glorious Presence, immediately brake forth into singing of Praises and
Hallelujahs, with the Penitent Thief. And having now overcome the Power of
Death and Hell, forthwith the Graves opened, and many Bodies of the Saints,
which slept, arose, Matthew. 27.52. and began to glorify God, Like 23.47. But
the Jews, when they saw all this, began to call to the Mountains, to hide them
from the Wrath to come; Luke 23.48.
And all the People that came together to that Sight, beheld the things that
were done, and were amazed, and smote their Breasts, and returned, that the
Scriptures might be fulfilled; They shall look upon me whom they have pierced,
and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his Son, and shall be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his Firstborn, Zech.
12.10.

This made Dionysius of Athens to say, (being in Egypt at the same time of our
Savior's suffering,) when he saw this great Eclipse of the Sun, contrary as at
other times, cry out, and say, Aut Deus naturae patitur, vel Mundi Machina
dissolvetur; Either the World was at an end, or the Maker of it suffered great
Agony.

And now, O my Soul, what have thou more to do, but to attend till thy Savior
is took down from the Cross, and, with the remainder of thy feeble Strength,
and almost-spent Eyes, accompany his precious Body to his Funeral, which will
be solemnized this Evening?

The Jews therefore, because it was the Preparation for the Sabbath, and Even
was come, and they had a Custom among themselves, That Bodies should not remain
upon the Cross on the Sabbath Day, especially at this time, it being a great
and high Day, the Day of the Great Passover; the Soldiers therefore came to
Pilate, and besought him, that the Bodies of the Malefactors might be taken
down from the Cros^, John, the Beloved Disciple, to whose Care Christ
bequeathed his Mother, saw this, and bore Record of it, that we might believe,
John 19.35.
and their Legs broken; which no sooner was granted, but one of the Soldiers
abounding still with his inveterate Malice more than the rest, notwithstanding
the wonderful Miracles he had so lately seen from the Glorious Sun of the
Firmament, vailing its Head, the Earth trembling, the very Rocks breaking in
pieces, and the Vail of the Temple (the most Sacred* Place of their Worship,)
rent from the top to the bottom; yet he takes no notice of all this, but
forthwith runs with his Spear in his hand, and violently pierces the tender
Side of our dear Lord and Savior, and immediately gushed out Water and Blood,
the Emblems of the Two abiding Sacraments, that our Lord left with us, in
commemoration of His Blessed Humanity and Divinity, Baptism, and the Lord^s
Supper. And this could not be done without a Prophecy, In that Day, there shall
be a Fountain open for the House of David, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, to
wash in, for Sin and for Uncleanness, Zach. 13.1.

And when they took down the Bodies of the other Two Malefactors, found they
were not dead, and brake their Legs. The Jews having a Custom amongst them, to
break the Legs of the Crucified Persons, when they took them down from the
Cross, if they sound they had any Life in them. But when they came to Jesus,
and found that he was already dead, probably from the vast expension of
Spirits, so much exhausted and wasted, from his former* Sufferings, and for
want of Respit, and fresh recruit of Sustenance, (for which we do not read,
from the time of his Betraying, to the time of his Passion, of Care or Supply
from any.) Or perhaps from the wound of the Spear in his precious Side, that
might the sooner expire his Life; or, rather, from all together. Yet finding
him already dead, they broke not his Legs: Or chiefly to fulfill the
fore-determinate Will of the Almighty predicted and prophesied of him, That a
Bone of him should not be broken.

For as we see all along from the foreknowledge, and all-wise Counsel of
Heaven* and from the unalterable Decrees of Omnisciency, nothing could from his
Conception to his Crucifixion, happen to him, but what was unavoidably
necessary and foretold, that it might be of Belief to persuade one, of the True
Messiah; and of Infidelity, to obdurate the other: For so says the Great
Apostle, I preach Christ Crucified, to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and unto us
Gentiles, the Life and Power of God unto Salvation, for they neither did, nor
yet will, believe the Emanuality of the Son of God in this World; but still are
vainly in expectation of him.

Now Joseph being a just man, and although one of the Jews, yet had no hand in
consenting to the Death of the Son of God, went in privately, in respect of the
Jews, because he was of Arimathea, a City of the Jews, but went boldly unto
Pilate, and begged the Body of Jesus.

And when Even was come, because it was the Preparation Even before the
Sabbath, Joseph of Arimathea, an honorable Counselor, who also himself waited
for the Kingdom of God, came and went in boldly to Pilate, and craved the Body
of Jesus. But Pilate filled with Incredulity, marvell'd if he should be already
dead: And, to be fully satisfied, sends for the Centurion, whom he had
appointed to stand by, and see the Execution done, and asked, If Jesus of
Nazareth was dead, and whether he had been any time dead, and when the
Centurion told him, that he was dead, for his Body the Soldiers had already
(with his leave,) taken down from the Cross, and they had broke the Legs of the
other two: But when they came to Jesus of Nazareth, he they found already dead,
and therefore his Legs were not broken. When Pilate heard all this, he
commanded the Body of Jesus to be given to Joseph, Mark 15.42, 46* Matthew. 27.58.

And Joseph took him away, and wrapped his Body in Sindon, or new fine Linen
Cloth; and also Nicodemus, which, at the first, came to Jesus by night, and
brought a mixture of Myrrh, Aloes, and other Spices, as the Custom of the Jews
was, and wrapped him up in fine Linen, ready for his Funeral, which was to be
solemnized this Evening in the Garden of Joseph, a place without the Gates of
Jerusalem, and near to the place where our Savior was Crucified, and in a new
Tomb hewed out of a Rock, that Joseph had made for himself, and where never Man
lay before.

And now, O my Soul, prepare thy self, with all Humility and Devotion, to
attend thy Lord and Savior to his Funeral. This is the last Office of Love
thou have to perform to the dear Body of thy departed Jesus, who had done and
suffered so much for thee.

O my Soul! what an honor it is to thee to be esteemed worthy by thy Lord to
be bid a Mourner at his Funeral?

And happy and blessed art thou, O Joseph, that thou wast waiting impatiently
patient for the Body of Jesus, and for the Kingdom of God. O happy art thou,
that, in this black and dismal night of sorrow, thy Faith failed thee not, and
that thy transcendent Love to thy Jesu carried thee through all fears and
difficulties of the Jews, to crave the Body of Jesus.

This was love indeed, that at such a time as this was, while the rage and
malice of the Jews was still boiling hot in them, and seeing all his Disciples
had left him before this Day of Trial, thou might reasonably have expected,
that their remaining rage might have spent it self upon them, that should have
shown any manner of kindness to the Remaining Body of a Crucified Jesus. Yet
true Faith carried thee beyond fear; come Life, come Death, nothing can or
shall separate a true Joseph, a truly devout Soul, from the Love of Christ
Jesus.

Yet, withal, we may from hence observe the Prudence and Care a Christian ought
to have: He went privately, in respect of the Jews, whose precipitate rage had
so lately embru'd their hands in the Blood of an Innocent, harmless, Jesus, and
was still reeking hot with that Cruelty; but yet boldly, in respect of Pilate,
he went in, and begged the Body of Jesus.

His Love and Faith to Jesus made him bold, but his Wisdom and Discretion made
him cautions; If he must sacrifice his Life for his Love to his Savior, it
should be by the hands of a Legislative Power, and not by the merciless
barbarity of the Mobile; but, if it must be so, ready and resolved he was
immediately to follow, and be second to so good a Savior, for whose Salvation
he had so long time waited.

O Blessed Joseph! Had not thou took care of the Son of God, of Jesus of
Nazareth, the King of the Jews, of the ever-blessed Jesu, Redeemer, and Savior
of the World, to have given him decent Burial, his Sacred Body might have laid
all mangled, torn, distorted, and extended upon the cold Earth to the merciless
Cruelty and savage Nature of Wild Beasts, and Birds of Prey. But this was
designed from all Eternity, that thou should be the Man appointed by the
Hypostatick Counsel of Heaven; I say, to be the Man to embalm and entomb the
Body of the ever-blessed Jesus; and for this art thou sure, to have thy Soul
embraced and enthroned in Heaven in the Bosom of thy Savior. He that is not
ashamed to confess and own me before Men, in the most dangerous of times, him
will I not be ashamed to confess and own before my Father which is in Heaven.

And now Even is come, and the time of Solemnity and Entombing of our Savior
is at hand; away now, my Soul, with all the heavy weight and burden of thy
Sins, to the Grave of thy Savior.

The Body born by Angels, vailing their Faces, The Solemnity of our Saviors
Funeral.
who, in the time of his Humanity, were always appointed by God to attend upon
him, and minister unto him, and also, while in the Grave, to perform the same
Heavenly Office. And there appeared two Angels sitting. the one at the head,
and the other at the feet: And can we think, they should be spared or wanted at
this time? Luke 24.4. John 20.12.

First, followed by Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus, John 16.39.40. Then
Mary the Mother of the ever-blessed Jesus, Mary Magdalen, and Mary the Mother
of James and Joses, and the Mother of Zebedee's Children. And the Women that
followed after, as Mourners, b^held the Body where if was laid, Luke 23.55. And
all the rest of the Mourners came following after, ordered by the great Herald
of Heaven. And I will in that day pour upon the house of David and Inhabitants
of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and they shall look upon
me, whom they have perceived, and they shall mourn for him, as one that
mourns for his only begotten Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one
that is in bitterness for his first-horn.

In that day there shall be a very great mourning in Jerusalem, Typically spoke
of good Josiah a^^ding to our Savior at this time, Rev. 1.7.
as the mourning of Haddadrimon in the Valley of Megiddon: And the Land shall
mourn, every Family apart. The Family of the House of David apart, and their
Wives apart. The Family of the House of Nathan apart, and their Wives apart.
The Family of the House of Live apart, and their Wives apart. The Family of
Shimei, and their Wives apart. And all the Families that remain; every Family
apart, and their Wives apart, Zech. 12.10, 11, 12.

Come now, O my Soul, do thee follow after; gather up, I say, all thy Sins from
the soot of the Cross, and bring them with thee to the Grave of thy Savior.
Bury them there in a Flood of Tears, with the rest of those Afflicted Mourners,
that they may never rise up in this World more to affright thee, nor in the
World to come to condemn thee. Leave them all there, that they may all be laid
upon the head of the Scapegoat, and carried into the Wilderness, the Land of
forgetfulness.

And now strengthen your Heads, you weak Hearts, and gather strength, ye feeble
Knees, for now is your Redemption near at hand. And they rolled a great stone
to the door of the Sepulcher, and departed.

Thus having as succinctly, as possibly I could, run over the Passion of our
Dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in that method and order the Holy
Scriptures have most perspicuously testified of him, both by the Prophets, and
also the Apostles, I shall conclude all with that of the most Holy Apostle,
and, for the present, leave his precious Body in the Grave, with Angles to
attend his Call to his Glorious Resurrection, which the blessed Apostle, in
these few words, proclaims.

Ye Men of Israel! Hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth, a Man approved of God
among you by Miracles, Wonders, and Signs, which God did by him in the midst of
ye, as ye your selves also know. Him, being delivered by the determinate
Counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have
crucified and slain. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the Pains of Death,
because it was not possible that he should be holden of it. But David speaks
concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my Face, for he is on my Right
hand that I should not be moved.

Therefore did my Heart rejoice, and my Tongue was glad, moreover also my Flesh
shall rest in hope, because thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thy Holy One to see Corruption.

Thou have made known to me the way of Life, and thou shall make me full of Joy
with thy Countenance.

Now, Glory to God on High, Peace on Earth, Good Will toward Men.

Meditations and Ejaculations to be used in thy Closet, before, or immediately
at, the Table of the Lord, or after thou art returned into thy Closet again;
Made and composed by the Author, from the Considerations of Christ's Merits, by
his Body, Blood, and Intercession.
O Lord! help the Sluices of my Soul to pour out Tears abundantly, for my many
Sins, heinous Sins, great and grievous Sins. O Lord, help me! O Christ, help
me! O Savior of the World, help me. O Lamb of God, help me! O Redeemer of the
World, help me! O dear, and ever blessed, Jesu, Christ, and Savior, help me! I
fear, I shall be drein'd dry too soon: I fear, I shall slacken too fast. Help
me, Lord, to a River of Tears, that I may pour out more, more, O pensive Heart
and Soul; more abundantly my Heart and Soul, to my God. This is Pleasure
indeed; This is Joy unexpressible, thus to be thoroughly, perfectly, and fully,
employed in the Service of my God, for my poor Souls sake.

This is the only Viand for my Soul to feed upon: This is the Bread, my Soul (O
Heavenly Father!) eats, that the World knows not of. This is the only Wine,
that cheers and makes glad the Heart of Man. This is the only Cordial for my
fainting and drooping Soul. This is the true Water and Laver of Life to my
Soul. This fetches out all Spots and Stains, all Pollutions and Crimes, of
never so deep a Die, of never so long a Time, of never so large an Extension,
never so remote in the World, never so secret and closely committed.

These thy Closet-Tears, and Sacramental-Tears, mixed with the Blood of thy
dying Crucified Savior, The composition of this Heavenly Laver.
will wash and fetch all out. This is the only Elixir of Life. This masters the
strongest Lusts, the greatest Temptations. This is of such Power and Force. O
Lord, that all the Devils in Hell, compact and conjoined together, must give
way to. This unties all Charms and Witchcrafts, Powers and Compacts, of
Infernal Spirits. This dissolves and breaks in pieces all that a wicked Heart,
murtherous Hand, an incensed Enemy, and an enraged Devil can do. This Cordial,
this Laver alone, transports the Soul, and makes it live, even in Death it
self: Whether of the most exquisit Pain of the Cross, or the Rack, or Fleaing
alive, or Boiling in Oil, or Roasting alive, Breaking on the Wheel, or tearing
in sunder with Wild Beasts; let it be of what Nature, Degree, or Quality
soever. This Cordial bears the Soul up above the Cruelty, Rage and Malice, that
the worst of Men, or Devils, can invent. Nay further, if this be rightly taken,
and made use of, it appeases the Wrath of an incensed, enraged, and, otherwise
irreconcilable, God.

O Heavenly Father! this thou can not withstand, so great Force and Power
have Closet-Prayers; and Sacramental-Prayers, One hour, spent thus closely in
Communion with God, is worth Ten thousand elsewhere These Prayers and Tears
force open the very Doors of Heaven it self: And an enraged God cannot, nay,
will not, longer, hold out. A Savior, a Redeemer, an Advocate, so dear and so
near a Friend in Heaven, will prevall for us. And from this time our Names
shall be Recorded in Heaven, and written in the Book of Life in Red Characters
of our Savior's Blood, over every one of our Mansions he has already prepared
for us.

This is certainly the Security of our Souls, against all Accidents of the
Body, against Battles and Murders, and against sudden Death; against Fits of
the Stone, Distortions, Convulsions, Twisting of the Guts, and the most
exquisite Torment of the Bowels; against Palsies, Lethargies, Apoplexies, and
all Deprivings of the natural Senses.

The countinued course of these Duties, A Soul thus prepared and guarded, is
defended against all these Accidents and Distempers of the Body, that may
suddenly deprive us of our Sense and Reason, before, or when Death comes.
is the only Antidote against scorching and burning Fevers. This preserves
thee against, and in, decrepit Old Age, and decay, and loss of Senses and
natural Reason. This preserves thee from, and in, Bonds and Imprisonment,
Storms, Tempests, and Shipwracks; against all Casualties and Afflictions,
Anguish and Tortures of the Body; and (being effectually applied) against all
Wounds of Conscience.

This Temper of Soul, and Interest in a Crucified Savior, makes one to grow (O
Lord!) quickly weary of the World, and to slight and contemn all Earthly
Delights. This makes thee earnestly long to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. This will make thee insult upon, and trample under, all Principatities
and Powers, all Thrones and Dominions, and desire no longer to live: than thou
can be thus disposed, qualified and employed. This will make thee (O my
Soul!) to do no Evil, nor think any Evil with Allowance of Consent.

The Soul, O Lord! may, and will be imposed upon by the Body daily, in one
degree or other; but what I do, I allow not. My Eyes, my Ears, my Nose, my
Tongue, my Smell, my Taste, my Hands, and my Feet, they all assault daily my
yoor Soul, in one way or manner or other, and let in a Caterva of Sins and
Temptations, and are Cause, O Lord, of this Psycomachia, War between Soul and
Body, which the Apostle Paul too well knew, and made his complain of, saying, I
have a Will in my Members, that Wars against the Will of my Mind, and leads me
Captivate unto Sin and Death. O wretched Man that I am! One look from they
Heavenly Eye, dear Savior, or one Glimpse of thee, one hour of
Closet-Devotion, or Sacramental-Devotion, will make me more than Conqueror over
all, and say again, with the Apostle, Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

This is all that a poor Soul can do, or that God does require of thee, strong
Prayers and Tears, mixed with the Body and Blood of thy Savior, is all thou art
able to give for Heaven it self.

He that calls, cries, weepeth, mourns, and comes thus to me, I will in
no wise cast out. This is all that God does require of thee, To do Justice,
love Mercy, and walk humbly before thy God. This shall seal the Bonds of the
everlasting Covenant between God and my Soul, written in my precious Savior's
Blood; and he himself shall be a standing and an abiding Witness to each
Covenant; ( and I will make with thee an everlasting Covenant, the sure Mercies
of David,) and himself shall be my Advocate, to plead my Title to an
Inheritance incorruptible, that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for me, O
my Soul. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, daily making intercession for us.

When thou art Meditating, Praying, or Reading thus, my Soul! take not thy Eye,
nor thy Heart, off, but go on with it; thy God is at the end of it, Heaven is
at the end of it, and thy Redeemer is at the end of it. This is thy Viaticum.
This is Jacob's Ladder thou art ascending. It Is the sure and certain way to
Heaven and Eternal Life.

This is my Savior's Advice; and I dare, and will, put thee, my Soul, upon the
Dependence and Assurance of it. Ten thousand to one for thy Security. Enter
into thy Closet, shut the Door about thee, and Pray (in this manner already
proposed,) strongly and earnestly, to thy Father in private, and he will reward
thee openly; That is, give thee, my Soul, all things necessary for thee in this
World, and in the World to come everlasting Life.

O my Soul, when once thou art come to taste this Heavenly Food, and relish it
aright, this Cordial of Life, what Sweetness, what pleasures, and what Delights
does it bing! O Heavenly Father, and ever blessed Redeemer, this Laver alone,
to wash and rince my polluted Soul in, will make it fit to be presented to the
Lamb upon the Throne, without Spot, or Wrinkle, or any such thing; And this I
beg with all Humility and Devotion, that I am able to do, upon the Account, and
for the Sake of my ever Blessed Redeemer and Advocate, concluding in that
Heavenly Prayer He Himself has taught me, saying, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for the Author or Reader.
O Lord! assist me so with Thy Blessed Spirit, that all that I have now Written
or Read in this foregoing Work, may always be fresh upon my Heart and Soul; and
grant me, O God, that at this time, I may pour out my Soul unto Thee upon my
bended Knees, in such like Prayers and Supplications that may be prevalent with
Thee, my Heavenly Father* to guard and defend me this Day from all manner of
Sins and power of Temptations whatsoever. More especially against all those
Sins that do so easy beset me, and meet me at every turn; those Sins thou
know, O Heavenly Father, are my familiar and prevailing Sins, that now by
the special Concurrence of thy Blessed Spirit, I may be able to strike at the
very root of them all, and, like David, kill the Goliath. Give me, O Lord, a
true rectified Spirit, Sanctified throughout to overcome all Infirmities and
Corruptions of Human Nature. And that I may betake my self sincerely to the
great Business of the Salvation of my Soul. And that, with the Blessed Apostle,
I may run the Race that is set before me, looking unto Christ Jesus the Author
and Finisher of my Faith, who, for the Joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despised the shame, and now is set at the Right Hand of God, daily to
make Intercession for me. For him, O Heavenly Father, have thou highly exalted,
and given him a Name above all other Names, that at the Name of Jesus every
Knee should how, both of things in Heaven, and of things on Earth. O sweet
Jesu, O blessed Jesu, who can but bow to Thee, and supplicate to Thee, and pour
out their Prayers and Tears to Thee, that left the bosom of Thy Father, and all
the Adorations and Chorus's of Saints and Angels, and came down from Heaven to
suffer the cursed and ignominious Death of the Cross for my Sins; to have thy
tender Hands, that were always doing of Good, and healing Diseases; and thy
blessed Feet that always kept the steady Paths of Eternal Life, now to be
turned, twisted, extended, distorted, disjointed, and Nailed to the Cross, to
drink the Vinegar and Gaul of Thy Father's high Displeasure, for my great and
grievous Sins, to have Thy most sacred Sides pierced, and to gush out with
Water and Blood. To see Thee all over sweating, and pouring down Streams of
Blood from the Crown of Thy Head to the Foot of the Cross, and to suffer all
this for my great, grievous, heinous, Sins, and abominable Iniquities.

Nay further, O Dear Jesu, to see Thee endure, and to lie under Thy Father's
Wrath, and the pressure of all these Agonies and Torments, which made Thee
bitterly to cry out, My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken ^e?

O Lord! What shall I do? Who is able to behold Thee longer? Who can but love
Thee, and in loving Thee, adore Thee, with infinite, unbounded, and
unmeasurable Love, and desire earnestly to be Dissolved, and to be with Thee?
But if it is Thy good Pleasure to spare me longer, let the true Love and
perfect sense of all this Love and Suffering of Thine, my Dear Lord and
Savior, help me to live up to that exact Pattern thou have left me here of
Meekness, Lowliness, Humility, Charity, Forgiveness, Bowels of Pity, and
Compassion, and that a perfect sense of Thy Crucifixion, may always be fresh in
my Heart and Soul, that so it may beget in me a complete hatred and dread of
all Sins; that, in the whole Course of my remaining Life, I may be preserved
and defended from the like Sins, that I run not the danger of Eternal
Damnation* And that the inexhaustible Bowels of Thy Mercy may take pity of me,
so that I Crucify Thee not again, but, being delivered from all Iniquities, by
thy most mighty Power, may, with finishing my Course here, be received into the
open Arms of Thy Eternal Salvation. And this I most heartily beg upon the
bended Knees of my Soul, for Thy sake only, and upon the alone account of Thee,
my Dear Lord and Savior, and ever-blessed Redeemer and Advocate. Amen, and
Amen.

A Death Bed Meditation.
I Owe to God a Death, as his Son did for me. Ever since I have been born I
have been sailing to this Haven, and gathering Patience to comfort me in this
Hour; therefore should I be one of those Guests, that would not come to the
Banquet, when they were invited? What hurt is there is going to Sleep? In going
to Paradise? I shall lose nothing but the Sense of Evils, and anon I shall have
greater Joys than I feel Pains, for my Head is in Heaven already, to assure me,
my Soul and Body shall follow after. O Death! Where is thy Sting? Why should I
fear that, which I would not escape, because my chief Happiness is gone before,
and I cannot have it, unless I go to it? I would even go through Hell it self
for Heaven: and therefore, if I march but through Death, I suffer less than I
would for God.

My Pains do not dismay me, because I Travel to bring forth Eternal Life. My
Sins do not fright me, because I have Christ my Redeemer there. The Judge does
not astonish me, because I have the Judges Son my Advocate. The Devil amazes me
not, because the Angels pitch their Tents about me. The Grave grieves me not,
because I know it was my Lord's Bed. O, that God's Mercy to me might move
others to love him: For the less I can express of it, the more it is.

The Prophets, and the Apostles, are my Forerunners; every Man will go before,
or follow after. If it please God to receive me into Heaven, before them that
served him better, what Thankfulness do I owe him, and because I have deferred
my Repentance till this Hour, whereby my Salvation had been cut off, had I died
suddenly?

How does my God, in his Infinite Mercy, to prevent my Destruction, call me by
this lingering Sickness, and prepares me for my End, and makes me, by wholesome
Pains, weary of this beloved World; lest I should depart unwillingly, like to
those, whose Death is their Damnation.

Thus he loves me while he beats me, and his Stripes are Plasters to cure my
Sores; therefore, who shall love him, if I displease him? This is my whole
Business now, to strengthen my Body with my Heart, and to be contented as God
has appointed, until I can Glorify him, or He me. If I live, I live to
Sacrifice; If I dye, I dye to my Savior; for Christ my Savior is Sacrificed
for me, and therefore should I fear Death, I have not that Faith and Hope I
have professed, but I doubted of God's Truth in his Promises: Whether or no he
will forgive Penitent Sinners, (which I sear not,) Come, Lord Jesus, for now
thy Servant comes into thy Everlasting Arms of Mercy. I commit my Soul into
thy Hands, O Heavenly Father; Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

A Letter written to his Friend in his Sickness.
Beloved,
I Marvelled not, that you have Pain, for you are Sick; but I marvel that you
cover it not, for Offenses; because the Wisdom of Man is to bite in his Gpief,
and always to show more Comfort in God, than Pain in Suffering. Now God calls
to Repetitious, to see whether you have learned more Patience, and Constancy
than others. If Sickness be sharp, make it not more sharp by frowardness: But
know, this is a great Favor to us, when we dye by Sickness, that makes us
ready for God when he calls us.

Now you have nothing to think upon but God, and you cannot think upon him
without Joy: Your Grief passes away, but your Joy will never. Tell me, Friend,
or Patient, How many Stripes is Heaven worth? Is my Friend only Sick in the
World, or his Faith weaker than others? You have always Prayed, Thy Will be
done, and are you now offended, that God's Will is done? How has the Faithful
Man forgot, that all things, (even Death if self) turn to the best, to them
that love God?

Teach the Happy, O Lord, to see his Happiness through Troubles. Every Pain is
the prevention of the Pain of Hell: Every Ease, in Pain, is a fore-tast of the
Ease, and Peace, and Joys, in Heaven. Remember therefore your own Comforts to
others before, and be not impatient, when there is most need of Patience; but,
as you have ever Taught us to Live, so now give us an Example to Dye, and
deceive Satan, as Job did.

FINIS.

