Plain Truth without FEAR OR FLATTERY: OR A TRVE DISCOVERY OF THE
Unlawfulness of the Presbyterian Government, it being inconsistent with
Monarchy, and the Peoples Liberties; and contrary both to the Protestation and
Covenant. The end of establishing the Militia of London in such hands as it is
now put into by the new Ordidinance. The betraying Votes, and destructive
practices of a Traitorous Party in the House of Commons concerning certain
Petitions for Liberty and Justice.

ALSO, A. Vindication of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, concerning certain
scurrulous words uttered by some of the said Faction.

WITH The means and ways that must be used to obtain relief against the
said tyrannous Usurpers; and for reducing the Parliament to its due Rights,
Power and Privileges, in the preservation of the Kingdoms Laws and Liberties.

Written by I. L.

Isaiah 3.12, 13, 14. Children are extortioners of my People, and women have
rule over them: O my People, they that lead thee, cause thee to err, and
destroy the way of thy paths.

The Lord shall enter into judgment with the Ancients of his People, and the
Princes thereof: for ye have eaten up the Vineyard, the spoil of the poor is
in your Houses.

What have ye to do that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of
the poor, says the Lord, even the Lord of Hosts?

Woe be to the wicked, it shall be evil with him, for the reward of his hands
shall be given him.

Printed and Published for the information, advice, and benefit of the poor,
oppressed, betrayed, and almost destroyed Commons of England. 1647.

PLAIN TRVTH Without Fear, or Flattery.
IN the 28 Psalm, Verse 6. The Spirit of God speaking there of Judges and
Rulers, says, they are Gods, and all of them children of the most high; but he
tells them they shall die like men, and fall as one of the Princes. We
unhappy men of England, have at this time a generation of ambitious imperious
men, some of both Houses of Parliament, whose Names ye may elsewhere find; who
by their power and subtle practices do frame and assume to themselves a
supreme power over us, and would feign be taken for Gods, and Sons of the most
High by us; yet they neither rule us like Gods, nor demean themselves amongst
us as children of the most High: but rule us like Tyrants (a degenerate kind
which God never made nor owned) and demean themselves more like children of
disobedience (serving their own base lusts and pleasures) then children of the
most high: for were they such, they would seek the will of their Father in
heaven and good of his People. But the Spirit says they shall die like men;
the which it may be doubted these men believe not; but rather with the
Atheistical Epicure think they shall dye like Beasts, and that the soul, as
well as the body returns to the (primam materiam,) and so, if they can but
escape the hand of justice here, they dream not of hearing of their wicked
deeds hereafter; and therefore they have resolved (it appears) for the
accomplishment of their own unrighteous ends, after the manner of all
Atheistical Statesmen, who cast the fear of God, and consideration of death
and judgment behind them) to assay all ways and means of wickedness, as to
vow and not pay, to promise and not perform, swear and forswear, covenant and
break, to feign, flatter, and play the hypocrite, (I had almost said the
devil) to betray, destroy, rob, spoil oppress, and violate all law and rule
of government, infringe all rights, and liberties, imprison, persecute, deceive
their trust, requite evil for good, and do all manner of mischief and
injustice, even whatsoever Satan, and their wicked hearts shall prompt them
unto; insomuch that whatsoever they say or make show of, their evil doings
declare that they believe not an immortallity and judgment: they profess
themselves Christians, but if ye observe and consider their actions, you must
say (and if you were a stranger you would swear) they were heathens: yea they
do worse then heathens; for did ever heathens take the name of their
insensible Gods of wood and stone, so frequently and solemnly into their
mouths, by way of oath and covenant, as these men have done, and had it so
little in reverence, and so little respect to what they have sworn; as these
men have had the name of the great and terrible God of heaven, and of their
oaths made unto him? read all Stories, and search all Centuries of Ages, and
if there be any such example of perjury, and swearing falsely by their God,
equivalent to the example of these men of this generation, I will freely offer
my self for a sacrifice, to explate my offense against their holiness: and yet
they are ready with Agurs Harlot, Pro. 30.20. to wipe their mouths, and say we
have done no wickedness. But that the truth may be made apparent, and expiated,
let us hear their promises, vows and speeches, and compare their deeds and
promises.

First they do in the Protestation promise, vow, and protest, in the presence
of Almighty God (whom sure they think is like the God of Baals Priests, that
could neither hear nor see) to maintain and defend with their lives, powers,
and estates, the true reformed Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of
the Church of England, against all Popery, and Popish Innovations within this
Realm, contrary to the same doctrine, etc.

Yet they are now setting up, and have set up so far as in them lies, a
Religion never before heard of within this Realm, and quite contrary to the
professed doctrine of the Church of England, it being wholly opposite unto
Christ, and a mere Popish innovation, brought out of Scotland, and violently
imposed upon us: And thus it comes to pass, by the confederacy of a haughty
traiterous Party in the house of Parliament, of which are the Earls of
Manchester and Stamford, Sir Phillip Stapleton, Mr. Hollis, and others with the
proud covetous Priests, for the advancement of their design of usurpation and
Lordlines, both over his Majesty and us, vow and protest in like manner, to
maintain and defend the Kings Royal Person, honor and estate, and the
lawful rights and liberties of the Subject, and every one that should make the
said Protestation, in pursuance of the same; and that they will not for hope,
fear, or other respect, relinquish this promise, vow, and protestation. And do
they not accordingly maintain and defend the Kings Royal Person, Honor, and
Estate? His Person with a company of Commissioners of their own stamp and
temper, and with a Guard of able Horsemen and Soldiers (debauched Gr^^^^ his
Regiment) as if they were afraid to entrust any of the honest Commanders about
him) as if he were rather a Prince of Thieves, then a Prince of three Kingdoms
or of a free people? and his honor and estate they defend with all the power
and might they can; taking the Supreme power upon themselves to grant Pardons,
sell the Lands purchased with the lives and money of the People, without the
Peoples consent; make Judges, create Lord Keepers or Chancellours, (and yet the
King in presence, for they cannot now pretend a necessity by his absence) and
making use of his name to violate all Law; oppress the People; and to commit
all injustices in a word, to destroy our Liberties, and to execute their own
Arbitrary wills. They speak of having the Kings power with them virtually; but
we can neither see nor find any of its proper virtue either among them, or from
them; for his Majestres Regal power is just and merciful, regulated by Law,
preservative and corrective; and not unjust, cruel, irregular, and illegal,
desacing and destructive; as the effects have been of the power which the
Parliament has exercised. And concerning the Kings estate and revenues; no
question but it is accumulated and that they have it in bank, for they have
been very parcimonious Stewards; they can hardly spare either the master money
for his necessities, or his servants any for wages: He, like a Ward, or Pupil,
is at their set allowance, and content with the pittance his late tutors and
guardians will allow him; I doubt not but it will prove that some of them have
made better allowance to themselves both out of his estate, and the Republiques
also.

Second, how by reason of the predominancy and power of this tyrannous Party,
in both Houses, whose malignant pernicious influence has been, and still is
diffusive throughout all the Parliaments actions; all these which have taken
this View and Protestation, are and have been defended in pursuance of the same,
it is sufficiently manifest: For who but they that endeavor to maintain the
true reformed Protestant Religion, according to the doctrine professed in the
Church of England, in the power and purity of it, are hated, illegally
prosecuted, and persecuted, vilifyed, and reviled, and he is most favored, and
soonest preferred, that can show himself most virulent, and violent against
them? And if you do but sken, or look (like a Hare) on the one side, at the
Kings Crown and Dignity; you presently incur (through the powerful Votes of
this Party) the Parliaments high dislike and displeasure, and it is a
sufficient badge, that you are an enemy, because you are so to Traitors to the
State) witness the high diss^^e of the Armies wise, and just demand, of his
Majesty's royal assent to an Act of indemnity, and truly if they take a bare
Parliament ordinance without the Royal assent, I will not give them one
farthing for their security; and it will be found that their Judges,
Chancellours, Excise men, and Sequestrators, are in the same case as the
Soldiers; And to endeavor or petition for liberty, according to the
Protestation, is as much as to ^eg a Prison, to sue for justice, is to be
accounted seditious; in a word, to be sincere and honest, is to be adjudged
worthy of no trust, employment, or preferment.

But to make the truth, and the wicked practices and purposes of this
destroying Party in both Houses, yet more plain and open, these cunning
contrivers, of our intended Vassalage and thraldom, frame a combination and
confederacy by covenant with the Scots, and by power and subtilty surprise and
ensnare therein the whole Parliament and Kingdom: (the which I pray read, and
observe) In their feigned profession of sorrow they acknowledge, that their not
prizing the Gospel, nor laboring to receive Christ into their hearts, (and
they say truly) has been the cause of all other sins amongst us: And
therefore with their hands listed up to the most high God, they do solemnly
swear sincerely to endeavor a reformation of religion in the three Kingdoms,
in doctrine, worship, discipline, and government, according to the word of God,
and the example of the best reformed Churches: now what means this juggle, and
to the example of the best reformed Churches? above they swear^ and endeavor a
reformation, and what sincerity is here, to make men's impure inventions
equivalent to the infallible rule of Gods word? to make (dogma Presbyteri) the
opinion of the Priest, adaequate to the unalterable last Will and Testament of
Jesus Christ? only here by this F^yst, these deceitful Spirits endeavor to
bring in something of their own, that with their claw-back Priests they may
seem to have something to do with Christ in his Church government, and to sit
check by joule with him in his throne: and thus they do still dis-esteem the
inestimable benefit of the Gospel, and oppose it in the power and purity of
it; even as their Fathers did, so do they, harden their hearts against the
Lord. If the word of God be a sufficient rule to reform and govern the Church
by; what need then of any other pattern or platform? The best reformed
Churches which are this day in Europe need reformation, yea the pure Church of
Scotland, notwithstanding all their pretense.

For if you observe our Brethrens various double dealings, turnings and
windings, self seeking, and advantage-making in every business they transact
or negotiate with us, far unbeseeming men pretending so great conscientiousnes
in all things, and so highly professing the power of Religion, in pureness of
life and conversation. At first they were against the King; then while he was
with them, they spek and write highly for him, and now they have made the most
they can of him, The Scots have made more of the King, then Judas did of the
King of heaven.
they are again become adversaries to him; one while they press one part of
their deceitful Covenant; as at first they did that part, for bringing evil
instruments unto condign punishment, whilst that Delinquents troubled them:
Afterward, where by craft they had gotten the King among them, hoping thereby
to have had him established their Presbyterian Church Government within this
Kingdom, they were very zealous for that part of the Covenant which concerns
the preservation and defense of his Majesty's person and authority: Now both
the former are forgotten and they are at this instant extreme urgent, and
importune for that part of the Covenant which concerns the reformation of
Religion in the three Kingdoms: in dextrine, worship, discipline and
government, according to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed
Churches: by which words, (the example of etc.) they would have it granted that
their Kirk of Scotland is the best reformed in all the world^ and therefore we
are bound by this clause of the Covenant (they conceive) to reform by their
pattern; and to make their government our example; as if they (blind Beetles)
had obtained the very S^^mum grad^m of the government of the Church of Christ
comprehended in the Gospel: thus using the Covenant as a Waterman does his
Sail, to turn every way, and hereby they justify the Scripture which says, a
double minded manty unstable in all his ways, Iam. 1. 8. but not one Word do
they speak for justice, or liberty of the Subject, though they see all
oppression and violence rage and reign amongst us, this part of the Covenant
they lifted up their hands as high to God, and swore as solemnly to perform,
as any other, but because they have no use for it, they regard it not: the
truth is, they profess they know God, but in works they deny him, being
abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate.

But to speak more particularly of our own Presbyterian Reformers, the Scotists
of our Kindome M. Hollis, Stapleton, and the rest of the zealous hypocrites,
(with their Antichristian Priests) Covenanters, they swear you see my Friends
to endeavor a reformation in Religion according to the word of God, and the
Parliament as seeming to adhere only to this sure and alone necessary and
sufficient rule for reformation, and not t^ take the bare opinions of men for
granted truths, without justification from the word of God, to which end they
long since propounded queries concerning the said government, for the Assembly
to prove by the word of God, for the justification of it: the which queries I
have here inserted, for every man's better information, and consideration, to
wit:

First whether the Parochial, and Congregationall Elderships, appointed by
Ordinance of Parliament are jure divino, by the will and appointment of Jesus
Christ?

Secondly, Whether all the members of the said Eldership, are members thereof,
or which of them are, jure divino, and by the will and appointment of Jesus
Christ?

Thirdly, Whether the supreme Assemblies, or Elderships viz. the Classical,
Provinciciall and national, whether all, or any of them, or which of them, are
jure divino, and by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ?

Fourthly, Whether appeals from congregationall Elderships, to the Classical
Provincial, and National Assemblies, or to any of them, are jure divino, and
by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ?

Fifthly, Whether Oecumenicall Assemblies, are jure divino, and whether there
be appeals from any of the former Assemblies to the said Oecumenicall
Assemblies, jure divino, by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ?

Sixthly, Whether by the word of God, the power of judging and declaring what
are notorious and scandalous offenses, and of conventing before them, trial,
and actual suspending from the Sacrament such offenders accordingly, either in
the congregationall Eldership, or Presbytery, or in any other Eldership, or
Presbytery presented to the Houses, as the advice of the assembly, and whether
such powers are in them only, or any of them, and in which of them jure divino,
and by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ?

Seventhly, Whether there be any certain and particular rules expressed in the
word of God, to direct the said Elderships or Presbyteries, or any of them in
the exercise and execution of the powers aforesaid, and which are those rules?

Eighthly, is there any thing contained in the word of God, that the Supreme
Magistrate in a Christian State may not judge and determine what are the
aforesaid notorious and scandalous offenses, and the manner of suspension from
the same, and in what particulars concerning the premises, are the said Supreme
Magistracy in the word of God excluded?

In answer of which particulars, the House of Commons desired of the Assembly
of divines (falsely so callen) their proofs from Scripture, and to set down the
several texts of Scripture in the express words of the same. And it was also
ordered that every particular Minister of the said Assembly, that was, or
should be present at the debate of any of these Questions, should upon every
resolution that was to be presented to the House concerning the same, subscribe
his respective name, either with the affirmative or negative, as he should
give his vote, and that they which should dissent from the major part, should
set down their positive opinions, with the express texts of Scriptures upon
which their opinions were grounded.

Here you see an excellent way for the proof of this Scottish creature
prescribed, and a great deal of seeming care in the Parliament to set up a
Religion according to the word of God, and not according to the Church of
Scotland: and yet though these several queries or questions were by the
fallacious Assembly never answered unto this day, nor are they able to answer
them satisfactorily, for they can neither immediate, or mediate, directly, or
by consequence, prove by the word of God, and Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
their so much pres'd Presbyterian government to be jure divino, by divine Law
or right, as they most presumptuously, and audaciously have alleged: yet
nevertheless although these queries were never resolved, nor the Parliament
ever satisfied by sufficient proof out of the word of God, of the lawfulness
of this government, whether it be the government of Jesus Christ or not, has
this evil party (where of Mr Hollis a man ever factious, is reputed chief) by
their heady presumptuous courses, to raise to themselves a faction from London
and the Scots, for their own security, and to drive on their own premeditated
design of dominion and soveraignity, prevailed to have it established by
Ordinance, enjoining it in all places, and upon all persons, with as much
rigor and severity as ever the Bishops did their conformity, all which (ye
see) is directly against their Covenant, and no other then plain perjury: but
unless they can establish this Scottish Presbyterian government, they can never
absolutely establish tyranny, for the expedients of this Presbyterian
government conduce directly unto tyranny, even to abolish all rules of Law and
civil liberty, it is an antipathy to Monarchy, and the legal power of civil
Magistracy and brings under a yoke (where it is predominant) both King and
People (as shall God willing be demonstrated fully in due time) and by this
means these aspirers hope through the help of the Priests to order King
Charles (as the Presbyterians in Scotland did King James) whom they did
restrain, affront, disobey, and raise tumults against) if he prove refractory
to any of their arbitrary Councels; and so suppress and curb us the free
Commoners that we shall not be able either to help him, or remedy our selves.

Yet questionless, if ye ask any of these our master Reformers, if when they
made and took the Covenant, they did not intend to make Gods word their direct
rule of reformation? They will answer, yes: otherwise they must confess
themselves most hateful hypocrites; denying the truth and sufficiency of the
holy Scriptures, men that intend no Religion, but a treasonable design against
King and People under that notion, and I wish it do not prove so in the end by
some men. If they did intend (as they will not deny) to make Gods word their
Rule, to reform by: why do they make the Church of Scotland, the rule of
their Reformation, and cast the word of God behind them? Why do they enforce
upon us the reformation (or rather deformation) of another Kingdom, no ways
justified or approved by the holy Scriptures, and not endeavor (as they have
sworn) sincerely, to seek out what the good will of the Lord is, concerning
his Church, and worship, what order and rule he has prescribed and left us by
his own Son in the Gospel? Does not God the Father say, This is my beloved Son
hear ^hin, Mark. 9.7. And is it not written, And Moses truly said unto the
Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you like unto me, him
shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you, not the Scots,
nor the Priests.
and it shall come to pass, that every soul which shall not hear that Prophet
shall be destroyed from among the people, mark and tremble all ye Priests and
Presbyterians.
Act. 22, 23. And doubtless, Christ, who was a Son, was not less faithful in
Gods house then Moses, who was a servant. And again ye have a sure word (says
the Apostle) unto which ye do well to take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19. Yet do these
presumptuous men despise this command of God, and neglect this sure word;
hearken to their own corrupt humors, take heed to their own ambitious
covetons desires, and so proceed in despite of God and his Christ, to erect a
government after their own inventions: But they will tell you that the
Assembly have fearched the Scriptures, and had respect to the word, in framing
this government, I believe they have, but as the Devil did, to make use of
them for his own ends, against Christ; for they did not search to find what
government it was the Gospel did hold out and warrant, and propound and
promote that: But they first resolve upon and propound such a government as
will serve their purpose, and then they apply themselves to make it good by
Scriptures, or to enforce the Scriptures for a warrant: thus have they made
their form of Church government the rule of Gods word, and not Gods word a
rule to their form of government, having done no otherwise then many Attu^nies
and Clerks do, who often draw Declarations and writings by another man's
president or pattern, without examining or consulting the Law, in the case;
which is just as if a Tailor should first make a suit, and then make use of his
measure. And grant that this Presbyteriall government be according to the word
of God, it is so (in toto) Is it so absolute that there is no degree of
Reformation above it? if so, then the Scots have exceeded that grand planter of
Churches, Saint Paul; for he told the Corinthians, That he would yet show them
a more excellent way, Cor. 12, 31. And that we know but in part, and prophecy
but in part, but when that which is perfect is come, that which is imperfect
shall be abolisht, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10. And Saint Peter and the Prophets spoke of a
new heaven and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. Of such a
beautiful and perfect Reformation and change, as if it was a new world, 2 Pet.
3.13. and Esaias 64.17. I hope no proud Priest or Presbyterian, dare affirm that
there is yet any such Reformation or change in Scotland; righteousness dwells
not there I am sure: and I would it was not almost banished out of England. For
as much then as there is a reformation more true and excellent than theirs (or
else theirs is none at all) why may not the Independents (so called) or some
others, approach nearer to it then they? with-waies then does in the ways of
the Presbyterians: unless the Presbyterians will affirm themselves the only
wise, and that the spirit of the most high God, dwells only in them: but then
they must give me leave to ask them Saint Paul's question, 1 Cor. 14.36. Came
the word of God out from you? Or came it unto you only? Or did the Bishop
seal unto the Presbyterian Priests the holy Spirit, when they sealed unto them
their Ordination, and so they have kept it ever since close up in a box, to be
brought forth in these times? Truly (my friends) as learned Rabbis as they
are, They err, not knowing the Scriptures: To the Law (therefore) and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them: Isa. 8.20. The Devil preached truer doctrine, when he said,
that Jesus was the Son of God, M^t. 8.29. then these Priests when they say
that the Presbyterian government is jus divinum, the law and government of
Jesus Christ; but this is as true as that the Church of Rome is a true Church;
the which they do now Mr. Seymour one of the Assembly affirms it in a dispute.
affirm, to prove their Antichristian standing true. And now here by the way I
will occasionally put a few Queries.

First whether in case a form of Church Government and worship, contrary to
the word of God, be by force put upon us, against our consciences, by the
Parliament and Presbyterian Assembly: it be not by the same reason, as lawful
for us to refuse and resist it (vi et armis) by force And the rather because it
is enforced by another Nation and without the Kings approbation.
as it was for the ^cots in like manner, to reject and resist the form of
Church Government, and worship put violently upon them against their
consciences by the King and Bishops?

Secondly, whether the Scots ought, or have any more authority or right to
prescribe or endeavor an imposition of Church Government, and worship upon the
people of England, then the people of England have to prescribe and endeavor
the imposition of the like upon the People of Scotland?

Thirdly, If not: Whether the Scott go not beyond their Last? Do not move out
of their sphere, and intermeddle with what they ought not?

And now seeing, there is, (as cannot be denied) a more high pitch of
Reformation in Religion, and holy worship, then is yet attained, or discovered;
I hope it is no offense nor transgression against the State, for any true
Christian, or servant of Jesus Christ, to press hard after it, and not to
conform himself to fixed forms, bounds and limits, thereby to confine Gods
holy Spirit: Ye stiff-necked and rebellious (Priests) of uncircumcised hearts
and ears, ye have always resisted the Holy Ghost; as your Fathers (the
Bishops) did, so do ye. Act. 7.51. I have insisted the more upon this
particular that the truth herein might be clear; because of the great delusion
put upon the People by many of our pretending Reformers, through their grand
Oaths and pretexts, of expelling all Popery and Popish innovations, even
whatsoever should be contrary to sound doctrine (for so I understand those
words in the Protestation, contrary to the same doctrine) and to reform
Religion according to the Word of God, and to establish it in the power and
purity of it, and yet notwithstanding apply all their interest and power to
support an If the standing of the Bishops were antichristian, what is theirs
who stand by their ordination and power?
antichristian Ministry, and to establish Church Government, whose fruits and
effects are nothing but impiety, and hypocrisy, a Reli on which consists more
in outward forms and rites, after the manner of Moses; then in power and piety
according to the Gospel: which conduces (as appears) more to tyranny, then
Christianity.

And so I will pretermit their Vows and Oaths, and come to some of their
speeches and sayings: and here I will show you another truth, by the discovery
of another falsehood, and treacherous vanting act, of the same traitorous party
or faction, which serves as a pattern, representation, or image, of the form
of the yoke of bondage, which (it may be suspected) they study, and intond to
put upon all the Counties and Corporations in the Kingdom, and by which, with
the help of their determined new Army of Horse (it is probable) they purpose
if they can, to subjugate the whole Land, and to consorme the People to their
arbitrary wills, even to pay, and bease, do, and suffer, whatsoever they shall
think sit to enjoyne them, or exact upon them, as well in respect of things
spiritual as civil. In the Parliaments Remonstrance of the 2 of November,
1642. Book Decl. page 700. they tell us, That all Rights or Interest of
public trust, are only for the public good, and not for private advantages,
nor to the prejudice of any man's particular interest, much lefle of the
public. And in May 1642. Book Decla. 172. They call God to witness, that the
safety of the Kingdom, and peace of the people, is their only aim; and
because the King would not believe them therein (and well had it been for us if
we bad never so done) nor trust them wholly therewith, great grew the
contestation (as ye may well remember) between the King and the Parliament,
about the settling of the Militia of the Kingdom, and indeed it was one unhappy
cause of the quarrel between them: The Parliament then pretending that the
King ought not to lettle it without them, that it behoved them to have the
nomination of such persons as were to be entrusted therewith, in whom they
might conside: the King affirms (and they afterward grant) That the whole
power thereof was entrusted by Law in him, for the preservation and defense of
the Kingdom; yet because the King would not pass the Ordinance in Febu. 1641.
for the settling it in such form as they desired, though the persons they
nominated were not refused; they presently protest (I with they were as quick
to do justice, as they are to take exceptions) to dispose of it without him,
and accordingly resolve. (Rebus sit stantibus, and nolenti Regi) that is, they
express, in extreme distraction, when sorreigne forces are probably invited
and a malignant Pepish paritie offended, etc. the ordering it to be in them for
the (observe) preservation of the Republicke, and to prevent the turning the
Arms of the Kingdom upon it self, see the Parliaments answer to their own
question, page 150. of the Book of Decla. But I hope the case is now altered,
for although our distractions be still continued by the destructive Council,
of a pernicious sactions party in both Houses (the heads of which were, and
are the cause both of those distractions and these, who like katchers of Eeles,
love to fish in the troubled waters) here is now no sear of invited foreign
forces, and as for that malignant Popish party then so much condemned, it is
utterly subdued and suppressed, and therefore in all reason (Rebus nunc sic
stantibus) that is) the so much feared public adversary being long since
conquered, all visible danger removed, and the King recovered out of the hands
of evil Counselors, and at present with themselves, and not legally divested
of his Regal power and right of trust; in a word, all just pretext, and color
of extremity being taken away, they take too much upon them, and abuse both
King and People, who in this opportunity, (...) Royal Assent may be had, do
dispose of the Militia without him, neither requiting his consent therein, nor
admitting the People according to the Law, to the Election of (a thing the King
allowed them) the persons who are to be entrusted, with the dispose and command
of their strength and arms, and so by consequence of (...) estates, liberties
and lives: I am certain, in case (as God ^o^bid) the Royal Throne should by
^xige^t be^ome vold, the Parliaments are not their own Mesters, nor can by the
fundamental Law and constitution of this Kingdom, dispose of us the Commons
of England, and out power, arms, or interest, without our consents, how much
less at this instans: All the Commons of England have more just ground of
jealous^e from them in now so doing, and of complaint and accusation against
that malevolent ill-affected party among them, by whose power and influence it
has been effected, considering the persons unto whom the Militia and strength
of the Kingdom, is in diverse places of late (...), then the Parliament ever
had from and against the King, for refusing only to (...) in their way and
manner: for they chose the persons, and he approved them; but the Parliament
are herein both choosers and approvers (as in many things, many of them are
both Judge and Witness) though we neither approve, nor assent; and thus we,
as (...) the King, are in this particular debarred from them, of our right and
privilege: but this is not the greatest detriment we sustain, and are likely
without prevention to suffer, and which this predominant malicious party
intends, hereby: for do but cast your eye, and see and consider what persons
are put out of the Militia; and what persons are continued, admitted, and
entrusted; and ye will presently judge by a little what the whole means. For
example, first for for an introduction, the pretended Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Comon-Councell, must petition in the name of the City, though the City never
propounded it to them, to have the Militia settled in their own hands, (as they
had formerly) and why not then to have it by their Charter, but by Ordinance
for a certain time? and this by the power and prevalency of the malevolent
party is forthwith obtained, because it tends to their predominant, tyrannous
ends: approved Alderman Pennington, who stood in the breach when they all were
afraid, whose sidelitie and ability was thoroughly experimented, at such time
when as the winds blew highest, and the storms grew strongest; a man adjudged
by the City worthy to be their Parliament Man, and by the Parliament worthy to
be Lieutenant of the Tower of London, is now no longer worthy to be entrusted
with the Militia, but turned out as a man suspected; so are the Aldermen, K.
Foulk, Weaver, and (...) Col. Wilson, though a Member of the House, also Col.
Player, Tichburn, and others: And why? they are not absolute for the Faction;
they were opposite to Bunce, and Bellamy, the Court of Aldermen and
Common Council, in the prosecution of the last indirect, illegal, and
factious Remonstrance of Presbytery, and therefore they are not any longer to
be consided in, or sit to have the command of any power ^ho^soever they had a
parcel of dry thanks from the House for their former fidelity and pains: it
is better I confess then a Prison (as Lilburn, Tuleday, Robinson, Nichols, and
multitudes more have had) for their good service. Yet I must tell them, it is
but after the old manner of the Court, who used to put a man off with an
hypocritical complement, when they had no further occasion to use him, or were
desirous to be quit of him: and it is observed, that empty thanks is a
sufficient reward from the House, for any honest man, though his service has
been never so good, and superlative, unless they have some other design or
engagement upon him: but to Knaves and Fools they have been very forward and
free, (witness the 10 l. given to the two Officers that brought up Ensign
Nichols; and the arrears lately ordered to be paid two great ones, for
discovering two great lies: by which you may see, they can pay whom they list,
and whom they list they will not:) I could instance you some examples of late,
and their own nests are generally so well feathered, that many, or most of
them are almost smothered, they can neither see, hear nor speak. Alas poor
Commons of England, your backs in the mean time are left bare and naked! But
to proceed; mark what honest men are continued, put in, and entrusted with the
Militia, for the honest men that are put out and distrusted: Aldermen, Bunce,
Adams, Langham, (every man of knowledge can read them) Colonels, West, and
Bellamy, the one an oppressive Jailer, the other an arrogant Mag-pye, and
Bromfield that ran away at Newberry: the Lord Mayor Sir John Geere, who was
plundered for his 20th. and 5th. part, who maliciously cercumvents men, that he
may like the devil take them in a snare, and then imprisons them, contrary to
law, (as he did Master Tew, and then sent his Marshall to apprehend him without
a Warrant) a hopeful Magistrate, and sit to be entrusted with the public
Sword, for the execution of the Laws, and defense of the Subjects just Rights
and Liberties: and that Sir John Woolaston, who by the Law is more worthy to be
arraigned before a Bench of Assize for buying stolen It is truth, and when time
serves will be proved.
Plate of the Kings, then to sit upon the Bench of judgment to oppress and
do justice, as his common practice is, or to be entrusted with the Militia;
for it is contrary to all principles of reason, that a Magistrate, or public
Minister, who is unjust to the People in his place or practice, will ever be
faithful to them in time of trouble or distress, or defend either them or
their liberties, whenever they are aslayled; the Hawke will as soon defend
the Dove, and the Kite the Chickens: this is that Sir John Woolaston, who right
or wrong commits all to Newgate that come before him, for the benefit of his
brother the head Jailer there; who is as diligent to starve and destroy them
when he has them under custody, (as he he did one Sparks lately, and has done
many more) as the other is to commit them. As for Alderman Gibs of the Militia,
he has a good stock of money in the name of his Son, beyond the Seas, he
need not care which way the world goes; good Sir John Woolaston and he, had
their fingers both in one Pie; I hope they licked them clean, and themselves
(like Bullocks) sat, though they have lick't others lean; their silver tongues
acquit them well in Rylees business, and they have you know been esteemed
honest and trusty ever since: I could read you a Character of most of them, but
to avoid prolixitie I will now forbear till a more convenient time: and will
only tell you what I apprehend to be the end of this sudden, and so happy
settlement of the Militia of London; the effect, and what you may expect by it.

1. By this means, the Earl of Manchester, M. Hollis, Stapleton, Earl Senior,
and the rest of this traiterous faction, who have occasioned the violation of
all our Laws and Liberties, betrayed their trust; and are the chief
obstructers of the course of Justice, and redress of grievances, promoters of
all evil councels, and the cause of the continuance of all our troubles and
distractions; who among other things drive a design to save their own Stakes,
and secure their own lives; for that they know they are for these things liable
to question, and abnoxious to Justice, do conceive they have well secured
themselves from all invasion, by Petition or cry for justice against them, from
any party within the City.

2. That they shall by this means the more easily erect their new formed
Monster of Presbytery; for what they cannot persuade, they will enforce, and
who (think they) now dare, or can resist it?

3. They conceive they shall easily suppress the Independent party (as they
term them) and div^rt them from petitioning for Law and Liberty, to both
which these vile men are altogether averse; and that if they do
notwithstanding, continue such their petitioning, yet may they the more
securely deny and distaste their petitions, and punish their persons: for is
not the Militia in their hands? And if they will not submit like slaves, but
begin to stir and struggle; then the Militia is ready to oppose them as
Rebels and Traitors, although they challenge but right and justice of their
servants, who are many of them become Traitors: and this is apparent by their
late declaring their high displeasure against that just petition, and the
Petitioners, for diverse points of liberty and justice, which was preferred by a
multitude of well-affected Citizens: first, it was intercepted and anticipated,
contrary to the course of Parliaments, and the liberty of the Subject, by the
means of Recorder Glin, (who has showed more favor to Captain E^a^s
wilfully killed a man, and being brought before the Recorder, he basely reviled
the poor widow, and freed the murderer.
Thomas Evans, a notorious murderer, then ever he did to poor Orphans, for
whom he should have been a just Advocate) witness the Orphans of M. Bury,
against whom he took Fees (if not bribes) by which means (notwithstanding
many petitions, and as many fair promises from the then temporzing Lord Major
Adams, and others of that Orphan devouring Faction) the said Orphans to this
day can obtain no justice, nor part of their fathers personal estate, unless
they will take fourscore for four hundred pounds, and thus are the poote
Orphans miserably ^uin'd having spent the greatest part of their annual
revenue for five years together, to obtain justice, but by the corruption of
Brigandine (who squares his actions by his Masters Rule) and power of the
Recorder who is the Executers friend, nothing can be done; all passages are
block't up; honest men dare not speak, and knaves will not, and so the poor
Orphans are left altogether remediless:) but to proceed, the aforesaid
Petition being referred to a Commmittee, and the Citizens put off with fair
words, till this grand Ordinance for the Militia was passed, and then presently
they thundered, as if the Petition had tended to the prejudice of ^^urch and
State.

4. If they want money, or a new Army to secure themselves, that old Ass the
City must raise men, or sund out their Trained Bands for them; (...) of London
must pay and bear, or else be plundered, and what remedy (...) wh^^^^ever the
Parliament will exact, and the Military men execute, the Commons of London must
obey and submit to, though never so unjust a tax, or imposition: But you will
say, the Trained Bands will not be all of a mind, but this Party having
prevailed to New-Modelling of the Commissioners, you shall see them New-Model
the Train Bands also, and here is the first piece of the frame of Englands
slavery; and must serve (if they can carry it) for a leading case unto the
whole Kingdom

The effects (ye Commons of London) which ye may expect hence, are the utter
abolition of your free Elections of your Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs,
Common-Councell-men, and other public Officers, of your body and Corporation,
so that now you may bid all your privileges adue, and the free, borne
Apprentices after seven years hard servitude, Mark ye Apprentices.
expect a Perpetual vassalage; by this means the hopes ye had of the recovery
of ancient Rights and immunitie are frustrate, and ye (after all your costs
and adventures for your liberties) become the first absolute slaves in England,
if God do not otherwise prevent, or raise up some Othniel, Ehud, Shamger,
Barak, or Gideon to deliver you. And in such hands as these, this desperate
domineering faction, by symptoms and signs, purpose to settle the Militia, in
all the Counties and Corporations of the Kingdom, and have already in Durham,
Cumberland, and other places Northward, put it principally into their hands,
who are declared Traitors and Enemies to the State, Malignant and Delinquents,
some of which have been actually in war against the Parliament and their
Country, as Sir George Vane, old Sir Henry's Son, who was in arms with the
King, and is now made one of the Deputy Lieutenants of the Militia for Durham,
a Justice of Peace, and a Committee-man, and yet scarce good commodity for the
Hangman, S. Wilfrid Lawson of Cumberland such another, yet by the prevalency
of this party, entrusted with the posse-Commitatus, whereby he may raise the
County, and cut all honest men's throats, if he imagine cause: To tell you of
the commands and power wherewith Lieutenant Col. Offcere, Cap. Musgrave, Story,
Stoddert, and diverse others are invested and entrusted in those parts, who have
been in arms against the Parliament and their Country, to the great trouble,
hazard, and affliction of all the faithful and well-affected there, besides
many others in other places of the Land, would be too tedious; let these for
present sufflice for example: and all, rather then to trust the honest and
approved in the Land, because they are contrary to their treasonable designs
and practices, and will not suffer themselves not the Country to become their
vassalls and pack-horses. I wish those Northern Countries had no just cause of
complaint against that deceitful double-dealing Lord Wharton, I will for
special cause (not that I fear or regard him, or any man, farther then he is
sincere and virtuously honorable) space spare him; but it it is good for him
and others to repent, and do their first works, lest a worse thing befall
them; there is nothing hid, but it may be made manifest: to run away from a
fight for fear, is tolle^able, and is contingent to the greatest Witness
General Leshley.
General, but for a professed Soldier of Jesus Christ to turn his back and
flce from the truth, is to be abhorred. Has not Christ said, He wll be ashamed
of such, when he shall come in his Fathers glory with the holy Angels? Mark.
8.38. And did Jehisaphat prosper, that took part with Ahab? Or ever any escape
by iniquity? And if Meroz was cursed, yea, bitterly cursed, because they would
not help, what are they that do hurt? And are not they also cursed (though
they be doing) that do Gods work negligently? Consider these things seriously
all ye that are sunk and settled upon the lees, all the Neuters and
indifferent ones, that plead moderation, non-season, and prudence, for your
baseness of spirit, negligence, and cowardice, in the great Choose of God, and
this distressed Kingdom, and ye (Timedi) ye searfull ones, who are more
afraid of the face and displeasure of man, whose breath is in his nostrels, and
whose councels perish, then of the power and wrath of God, Who is a consuming
fire, and whose councels abide for ever: That fear more the losing of your
places and profits, then the losing of Gods favor and countenance, and the
peace of a good conscience. Read that 21. Rev. and tremble, remember your
selves, rouse up your spirits, and show your selves courageous for truth and
justice, and zealous for the glory of the Lord of Hosts; if ye will not, know
that deliverance will come to Gods People some other way, and ye shall not
escape. As for M. Hollis and others, whose counsels and practices tend
principally to treason and tyranny, injustice and violence (I know what I say,
and doubt not yet but in time to see it proved so) who live without Law, and
act contrary to Law, like Traitors and Rebels: Let such men know, that God will
render unto them according to their works; and I am confident, that they shall
never be able to acomplish their wicked enterprise, and that the pit they have
dug for others, they shall fall into themselves. God will take them by their
own counsels, as he did in old time, A^hitophell and Haman; and as he did
Strafford and Canterbury, in these days: yea, in those two presidents, they
have prepared a halter for their own necks, and their own words shall be
their Judges: Strafford and Canterbury were condemned for reasoanble counsels
and speeches. endeavors, and intentions of subverting the fundamental laws,
and frame of government, and of setting up an arbitrary power, and rule of
government: And whether Hollis and others, his presumptuous accomplices, have not
been, (not only the intenders and indeavourers, but) the real authors and
actours of these things, I do appeal to all intelligent men, who have taken
any cognizance of their councels and actions? So that if the King (as it is a
question) did want just matter of occasion in his charge of treason against M.
Hollis, and others in 1641. both he and the whole Kingdom may without much
search, find enough doubt esse at this time; yes, have not M. Hollis and
others, his accomplices and confederates, not only verified many or most of
those Read and consider them, and compare them with their actions, B. Decla.
page 34.
articles of Treason and misdeameanors: but also argumented and exceeded them
in many things? I could (but at present for special reasons will not)
particularize: in the mean time, (my friends) make use of your own
observations, call your memories to account, and compare things with things,
advise well, make your selves strong, and fear not. Why should the old English
proverb (for our love and faithfulness) be made true upon us? Save a traitor
or thief from the gallows, and he shall be the first that shall hang you:
indeed we are near it, if we do not bestir our selves and prevent it: But it
is better that a few presumptuous men; whose Lucifer like pride and ambition
has lifted them up to Heaven, should be cast down into oblivion and darkness,
then the whole Nation perish.

And therefore ye free Commoners of England up quickly, and look about you;
consider seriously the snare prepared for you, and compare the vehement
endeavors of these traiterous persons to disband the Army, (which has tought
and is resolved to stand for your liberties) with this their pattern, and
first piece of thraldom, in settling the Militia thus at this time in such men's
hands in London, and their putting power into the hands of such as are enemies
to the public in the Country, and see if these men intend any thing to you
and yours but bondage and slavery, and this is part of that ye are told in the
Both worth your notice.
books called the Warnings for all the Counties of England, and the New found
Stratagem upon the Petition of Essex. Be vigilant therefore and assistant to
keep the Army on foot, for your own defense, and preservation of your selves,
your estates and liberties, Country and posterities, from inextricable
vassalage, and irrecoverable ruin; for that once down, this ambitious party,
who aim at Sovereignty, to make the King their scorn, and us their slaves,
will presently not only turn the Militia in every place upon the Country, (as
they have already designed in the City) but raise horse also after the manner
of Germany, in all Counties of the Kingdom for the better securing themselves,
and this their form of tyranny, and if such be no traitors, who be? Where
shall we find any and if this be to employ their public trust, for the Book
Decla. page 700.
public good, and whether their Page 172.
only aim, be herein the Kingdoms safety and the peoples peace, as they
have declared and spoken, let all England judge? And thus ye see they falsify
their words and Declarations, as well as break their Oaths and Protestations:
but in their Book of Declarations page 207. they say, That in case of extreme
danger, and his Majesty's refusal to settle the Militia of the Kingdom, the
Ordinance (that is the Ordinance which was then made in that time of such
extreme danger) agreed upon by both Houses for the Militia, does oblige the
people, and ought to be obeyed by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, but
now, (blessed be God) here is no such case of extreme danger, neither has the
King been so much as petitioned, or sought unto for this Ordinance of the
Militia of London, and therefore it does not bind the People, nor can they by
the fundamental Laws of the Land, be compelled to obey it, besides they
ordering the Militia to the public hurt, and not to the public good,
contrary to the intent and equity of the Law, and the end o^ their trust, the
people are ipso facto) discharged of their obedience to their Ordinance, for we
are not bound to obey to our own damage and destruction; see this proved by
their own destruction and argument, in Book of Decl. page 150. But to make a
farther discovery of the truth, by discovering more of this evil parties
falsehood, breach of trust, and traitorous practices against us: take notice,
that in the Book of Declarations pa. 720. the Parliament declare, That it is
the liberty and privilege of the people, to petition unto them, for the ease
and redres^e of their grievances and oppressions, and that they are (mark)
bound in duty to receive their Petition: here is a fair acknowledgement; but I
pray you mark their actions: many tho^sand honest and really affected to the
public liberty, in the City, had prepared a petition to have been presented to
the House of Commons, for redress of some grievances and oppressions, and
restoration of some liberties and privileges, comprehending nothing but things
legal and just, what they ought to grant this Petition, contrary to all course
of Parliament and the liberty of the Subject, was by the power and subtilty of
the aforesaid faction or party, (who have their setting dogs and ^^agles to
discry and h^nt for them) intercepted (as thus they anticipated the Armies
Petition) before it was perfected, and made ready to be presented, the copy of
it was read in the House, and re^erred to a Committee (whereof fierce-siery M.
Lee was Chairman) to examine and report it (they did not so by the factions
Petition and Remonstrance framed by the pretended Lord Mayor and
Common-Coucnell-men) against which they then not finding any just cause of
exception, held the vowchers thereof with fair words in hopes of an answer,
until they had mounted their late new Ordinance of the militia for London, and
then they declared their distaste and displeasure against it; the which in j^st
dealing and violation of our native liberty and privilege, the petitioners not
brooking, presented a Petition to the House of Commons for justice and redress,
and desire that their former Petition might not be censured before it was in
due order presented; hereupon, Hollis, Stapleton, and the rest of that faction
(traitors to their Country) according to their usual course through their
malignant influence prevalency, procured this latter Petition to be voted
seditious, and that both it and the former should be burnt by the hands of the
hangman, (was there ever such a thing done before by a Parliament in England,
sure not) and that to question any act done in the House, was a breach of the
privileges of Parliament: but by cunning to intercept the former Petition, and
tyrannically to suppress and reject it, and illegally to imprison some of the
Petitioners for it (as they have done M. Tue, and M. Brown) was no breach of
the privilege of the subject (No, dear friends and fellow Commoners, unless
ye have (like fools) resolved with your selves, after so sharp and Hoody a
contestation for your Law, and your liberties, to relinquish your claim by
Magna Charta, and the good old Law; and to hold your lives and liberties, and
all you have, by the Arbitrary Votes of the House of Commons, and to become
Tenants at will, unto a company of Traitors, and Tyrants: up in Gods name, up,
demand redress, and vindicate your selves, and native rights, against Votes
and Votesr, (hodie mihi, cras (...)) what these men do, to this or that part,
or place of the Kingdom, and people to day, thy may and will do to another
part or place to morrow. And they have injustly refused more then a few (as
that of the Counties of Buckingham and Hereford, and diverse others from all
parts) petitioners for redress of grievances, and granting of libetties
already, and in this late particular president, is the very effence and end of
a Parliament perverted; the rights of Parliament, and the ancient course of
Parliamentary proceedings subverted, and our native rights and privileges, so
much as lies in this destructive party, wholly vacated and destroyed. And
whether this strainge Vote and fact, do not justify the fi^th article exhited
by the King against Hollis and others 1641. (Book Decl. page 35.) by which he
charge them, To have traitorously endeavored, to subvert the very rights and
beings of Parliaments^ I beseech you all ye lovers of Englands liberties,
consider, and judge: And also part of that first seventh Article exhibited by
the House against the Earl of Strafford. Yea, consider I beseech you, compare
and see, if the words, ways, councels and practices of the Earl of
Manchester, Hollis, Stapleton and others, their accomplices and confederates, do
not fully answer the 1, 2. 5. and part of the 6. Article exhibited in 1641. by
the King: and to the first, and part of the 2, 3, 4, 6, and 7. Articles, and
some others (only ^utati^ mutan lis) which were exhibited by the House of
Commons against Strafford, and also to some which were exhibited against
Canterbury, even as face answers to face, in water? Truly we are no longer
free, but absolute slave already: if we may not petition for our libertyt,
what? unless we will first ask them what we shall petition, we must not it
seems at all Petition? Away with such Traitors from the Earth.

This Act and Vote, answers those traitorous speeches of Harvy and Solloway,
two corrupt men of the House of Commons, who impudently said, (note) That the
Parliament might do what they would, and were not to be questioned for it. One
of the Articles of high treason charged upon the Earl of Strafford, was, as
appears in the fourth article of his second impeachment or accusation that he
should declare and say, That Ireland was a conquered Nation, and that the King
might do with them what he pleased; and is not here as much spoken, and more
by these two traitorous spirits, Harvy and Solloway? For Ireland was indeed a
Nation by us conquered, and his speech related to the King, who was their head,
and had a power over them: but these men's words are spoken of us a free People,
who though formerly conquered, yet have not long since redeemed our liberties
with our swords, and relate to a company of men, who are but subjects, and the
Kingdoms servants, only called and chosen to coancell and advise; not to reign
and tyrannize. But let u argue it, all other Courts in the Land whatsoever,
have rules of jurisdiction and limmits, and has the supreme Court of
Parliament none? It is very unseasonable even against all rule of reason, that
that Court which preseribes rules to all other Courts, should be without all
rule it self. The Lord chief Justice Cook, in his treatise of the jurisdiction
of the high Court of Parliament declares, and proves otherwise: and I am
certain that it is against the very constitution and being of it, for there is
both See Cooks Instituts, Rotu. Parli.
(Lex and consuetudo Parliamenti) both a Law and a custom, or usage of
Parliament, Besides there is a fundamental Law of the Land, against which the
Parliament cannot (that is lawfully a Parliament) act, for whatsoever act is
made or done in Parliament that is contrary to Magna Charta, is void, no Law,
and not to be See 42. Ed. 3. chap. 1.
obeyed (and what force then if well examined are most of our present
Parliament Votes. Orders and Ordinances But new Lords new laws.
) by which it is evident that the Parliament is not without a law and rule, nor
may do what they will, nor any thing (only in case of extremity, and then
also for good of the public, and not unto example) contrary to the
fundamental Laws and constitutions of the Kingdom. And was not one Wentworth
of the House of Commons questioned, yea, and committed in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, for his words and deeds in the House? And can they themselves deny
but that for Treason, sellony, and breach of the Peace, they are questionable
By all which it is clear, that the proudest of them may be questioned, and is
accountnable for any misdemeanour, or illegal unjust act done by them within
the House. They say to question them for any thing out of the House, is a
breach of their privilege: and must we question them neither in the House?
What is a Parliament man lawless? Neither without nor within? there is a new
privilege (as their Ordinances are a new manner of Laws) it was not so of
old. The King who is the Supreme head, is not without the Law, he may not de
what he list: Sure then much less may they, who are but subjects and only
coucnellers not Commanders, Servants not Masters. But is not this strange
doctrine, my friends, that a Parliament man must not be questioned for
whatsoever he does in the House? Lo here is a new Hidra-headed prerogative for
you to suppress, which ye nevner expected. Lop it betimes: for this position,
tends directly to the subversion of all our Laws and liberties, and the
exaction of an arbitrary rule over us. And if this Vote be not treasonable what
is? For by this rule they may within the House, consult, contrive and act high
Treason against King and Kingdom, commit murder, pick pockets, and break the
peace, devise and conspire to destroy and massacre us, to rob and spoil us,
and not to be questioned: because it was resolved, and done within the House.
Brave Parliamentary principles!

Is it not more then high ^^me f^llow Commoners to rouse up our Spirits, and
bestirre us, to bring such as are the authors and promoters of these and such
like destructive councels and actions to condign punishment? shall not the
Judge of all the world (says Abraham) do right? and shall not the Court of
Courts, the supreme Court of all the Kingdom (we may say) do right? Woe is to
us, for lamentable is our case; our stream m^st needs be puddle and dirt, when
our very fountain is ^ilthy and corrupt: (Corruption optima est passima) that
which is best, being corrupted is the worst: that which was formerly Englands
Balsum and Antidote, is now become Englands greatest Corasive and poison: yet
not in it self, but by accident, through the boundles of ambition, and
insatiable avarice of a company of traitorous persons in both Houses of
Parliament; the chief of which are Manchester and Stamford, Stapleton and
Hollis, Merrick and some others, who have run themselves by their wicked deeds
against the King and Commonwealth, into a desperate condition; and therefore
endeavor by all means to bring the Land into a confusion, and so to make our
latter end worse then our beginning: This Stapletoas Speech veresies, who
lately said, (I^^s now come to this, that either we must sink them, (meaning
the Army) and their friends, or they sink us;) unto this end it seems they have
so highly provoked the Army: For prevention of which calamity, and to procure
our selves ^ase and remedy, we must take them away, charge them home and demand
their persons to be delivered up to justice: why fear we? what power has any
Parliament man, that he has not received from them that chose him? And it a
King so soon as he cease to rule by the known Law, does degenerate into a
Tyrant, and is worthy to be ejected; what are those Parliament men, Manchester,
Hollis, Stapleton and others of this Faction, who have so probably, contrary to
their Oaths, Trusts and Duties, left all rule of Law and Justice, and by their
power and prevalency have dealt with us, and disposed of our estates and
liberties, after their own wicked, crooked wills? and what are these men worthy
of according to law and reason? expulsion is too little, and beheading is too
honorable: But happily some of them may say by me, because I declare that
which they no ways color, that I am mad; I am sure they are, and their
madness does appear to all men, otherwise some of them would not have so
basely reproached his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax (who came to London only
because of his disease, and staid there a while for his infirmity and weakness)
in saying it was fitter for him to be with his Army, which is in a distemper,
then to be in Hide Park courting of Ladies. If the Army be distempered, has
not Manchester, Stapleton, Hollis and that turbulent faction distempered them,
by their im-parliamentary Declaration against them, and ungrateful abuse of
them? Nay, do they not distemper and trouble the Parliament, and whole Kingdom?
are not they the only obstructers of our settlement in England, and of the
relief of distressed Ireland? are not these I say the cause of all our
distraction and disturbance? I wish they were not; and as for Sir Thomas his
courting of Ladies, I would Sir Peter Temple, Sir John M^r^^ck, Sir John
Hipsly, M. M^y^e, Moore, Bell, Brwyer, and too many more among them, did not
more court Harlots, visit Whores, and exercise drunkenness, Foth what a stink
is here. Oh sweet Reformers.
and other baseness, then honorable Sir Thomas, worthy man does delight in
courting (...) Ladies? I do remember when the Earl of Essex, and his chie^e
Commanders, M^rrick, (one of the traiterous crew) and the rest, came to London,
to laze, smoke Tobacco and drink sa^k, court. complement, vaunt and vapor of
that they never did, and a potent enemy at hand in the field, who came up to
Brainford, to the hazard of the whole Army and City before they were
discovered, and no Chief Officer there, either to command, or deliver forth
Thanks false Merrick, thou did the like and worse at Edgehill.
Ammunition: and when not only the General but all the chief Officers, while
there was a destroying enemy in power abroad, came and staid their own time in
London, to revell, ramble, and rore, drink, domineer and whore, while the
soldier was left without restriction or order, to range, raven and plunder,
spoil and make waste, at St. Albans, and in the Country thereabouts, and no
complaint made of distemper, or disorder, either by the House or any of their
Members: but the Proverb is, that some may better steal a Horse, then others
look over the hedge. If Sir Thomas his Officers or soldiers were like wicked
Col. Graves, then this evil Faction might say they were distempered indeed:
yet this lewd shameless man is Stapletons only Minion, and the principal
Instrument, (as truly most fit for their wicked purpose) in the Army, for this
malicious, malevolent party: but these men like Toads are so big swollen with
pride and despite, that they are ready to burst; and their poison will never be
purged out, nor we freed from the diffused venom of it, till some of them be
highly exalted, and made an example. Take away the wicked from the King (says
Solomon) and his Throne shall be established in righteousness: take away the
wicked and traiterous out of both Houses of Parliament, and the Parliament
shall be upright, and prosper, and we poor Commons be soon established in
peace and happiness.

In the Book of Declarations, page 207. they seem to clear themselves of a
charge laid upon them by the King, saying: That there was no color, that they
went about to introduce a new Law, much less to exercise Mark.
an arbitrary power, but to prevent it. How true this tax or charge has since
proved, let the whole Land judge, and their own actions witness: for if they
have not brought in a new Law, I am sure they have made no use of the old,
unless it has been for evil. And whether they have exercised an Arbitrary
power, I need not ask the question, for it is past doubt or scruple. But they
say in the same Declaration, That this Law is as old as the Kingdom, to wit,
That the Kingdom must not be without a means to preserve it self. It is well
(yet truly granted.) By their own principle you see, the natural or real
body politic, in case the Representative, or virtuall fail, and deceive
their trust, Mark and make u^e of it.
has power to preserve it self: Mark ye free Commons of England, here is a
sure ground for ye to stand on, ye are not yet past hope, nor destitute of
means of help: therefore cheer up your spirits, and quit your selves like
men: employ and improve your just powers, for the preservation of your selves
against all those selfe-seeking, ambitious, traiterous, tyrannical spirits in
both Houses; who have forsworn themselves, betrayed their trust, and employed
all their power and interest, wherewith ye entrusted them, for your good and
safety, to your woe and misery: And ye faithful in the House of Commons,
whose hearts have ever been upright, (although ye have been awed and
overpowered) to God, your King, and Country; beware of these seducers, who
would involve you in the same treasonable works with them, that so they like
Pick-pockets, may the better escape in a crowd unseen: rather protest against
them, and their proceedings; and declare them to the Kingdom, serve them as
they have served others: thus ye will acquit your selves of jealousies, and
guilt, discharge your trust and duties, and endeare your selves to your
Countries: otherwise you must expect to suffer as partakers, and to undergo
the consure of confederates, and compactours: Sure and stable is this
principle, (Salus populi est suprema L^x, The welfare and safety of the People
is the supreme Law: and therefore where this end is by Trustees perverted or
neglected, the People by the Law of Nature have power to preserve and secure
themselves: and as certain is that Rule, that (Major qui facit, quam quod fit:
He which makes is greater then that which is made, and therefore is to be
preferred: and in case that which is made prove useless, hurtful, or
unprofitable, he which makes has power to modifie, restrain, remove, or
nullify, even as seems good unto him, and may most conduce to his good and
benefit: And therefore in case we cannot receive justice from the Parliament,
let us force our powers, and apply our selves, my friends and fellow Commoners,
to have justice upon the Authors of our injustice and oppressions? and no
longer stand still like People without life and spirit, and suffer our just and
reasonable demands and requests to be distasted and despised, as dung or dirt;
our Petitions for liberty and justice, to be illegally censured and sentenced
to be burnt, as some horrid, treasonable and blasphemous opinions, or papers,
and our neighbors, friends, and fellow Commoners, to be tyrannically
imprisoned, and barbarously used before our eyes, for standing up in the
behalf of the Kingdom, and petitioning for our native and lawful rights and
liberties; by a desperate wicked party of false perfidious men in both Houses,
Machiavilians and Traitors: whose Votes and Counsels, ways and workings, tend
only to secure their guilty carcases from justice, and to enslave and destroy
us, and our rights and freedoms, who have no fear of the Lord before them,
nor any compassion or tender respect to their native Country this destressed
Nation.

And now ye grave and wealthy Citizens of the Presbyterian faction, whose eyes
are swollen with fatness, and whose hearts with pride and ambition: who happily
according to the general fortune of the great men of London, are endued with a
greater portion of riches, state and presumption, then of prudence, integrity
or wisdom: Give me leave to tell you an Itinerant story, or a parabolicall
tale of two Travelers: There were two Travelers met upon the road, and passed
friendly a long time in silence together; at length they discover to each other
whither they are going, and the end and intention of their travel, and the way
they would walk, and they agreed both in one mind, and upon one thing, and so
they ratify their association and friendship; but the one was not only weary,
but ore-weakned (at least he so appeared) both in strength and purse, by reason
of his long journey, and the many difficulties and dangers he had already
incountered, and overcome, and very knowing was he of the way that was yet to
be traveled, and of the dangers and difficulties which would oppose them
therein, before they should come to their journies end: the other albeit he had
come as far, yet by reason he was thoroughly well furnished and provided of
moneys and all needful supplies at his first setting forth, did retain the
more ability and strength, and had the most moneys for his support throughout:
but alas he was not so knowing in the way, nor skillful as the other, to avoid
the dangers therein: whereupon he promises the other assistance with his
purse, and strength, to carry him through all straits, till they come to their
journies end, so that he would be aiding and assisting to him with his counsel
and advice, for the suppressing and passing of those oppositions and perils,
which were in the way yet unpassed; both agreed rejoiced, and on they journied,
with all reciprocal officiousness, and respect each to other (the weak man
he wanted not supply or support, the other he wanted no comfortable words,
counsel, or politic advice) until after many extremities and straights past,
they came to the last and greatest; and that was a steep craggie mountain;
full of straight passages, slippery by ways, and dubious windings, with
desperate precipices on each side; the fair and safe way which led to a better
end, lying direct in the middle. Here these two Travelers were put to a stand,
the weak wearied man was not able of himself to ascend, the other
notwithstanding his strength, durst not adventure alone, lest he should slip
and fall, or lose his way, and become a prey at length; the weak man lends the
other his staff to stay him up, and defend him, and the strong man by his
strength takes up the weak, and so they both with much hazard and trouble gat
up to the top of this inaccessible Mountain; and now they might see the long
desired end of their journey, and themselves past all danger, which made them
both glad, and to congratulate: Observe.
But the weary weak man, having now been brought at the charge and by the
strength and support of the other, through all straites and difficulties, and
knowing himself to be much in arreare to his friendly fellow Traveller, and
that he would expect satisfaction and recompense, and like beneficence from
him, when they were at rest, and all things were accomplished: He took his
staff from him, (which he had lent him for a stay and defense unto him until
he had carried him up the hill) and taking an occasion to quarrel with him,
about some slip, denial of some moneys, or neglect of his advice, fell upon
him and beat him, bound him, and robbed him of his money and treasure, and so
left him in the midst of a thicket, destitute and so destroyed and undone.
The weak weary man ye may suppose to be the Parliament: The stronger and
better provided, to be the wise Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common-councel-men,
with the rest of the Presbyteriall faction in London: The Mountain to be the
Presbyters design: and the Staff to be the Militia, which is now put into the
hands of the Presbyterian party in London. The application I leave to the
apprehension of them, and of all judicious Citizens, and Commoners of England.
And will conclude with wise Solomon, There is no new thing under the Sun:
that which has been is now: And what is there that has been, which may not be
again? Praemoniti praemuniti, forewarned half armed, and (praevisa minus
laedunt) things foreseen do less hurt. I wish you really well, ye grave
Citizens of London, both for your own and Englands sake; and God make you
discerning and wise, that ye may not by the dissembling epistles and speeches
of a deceitful hypocritical Nation, and the subtle sophistry of an ambitious
aspiring party in both Houses of Parliament, such as Stapleton, Hollis, etc.
and of the proud, covetous Clergy, be made the instruments (after you have
served their turns) of your own ruin and the Lands.

I could here take occasion (as there is good reason, howsoever what is for
present pretermitted, is not forgot) to show you (dear friends and fellow
Commoners) how ye have been abused and betrayed, by this very party and
faction in both Houses, their Agents and instruments from the beginning at
Sherborne, Northampton, Worcester, Edgehill, Kingston, Brainford, Newarke,
Exeter, Reading, Them, (O Them) the Devizes, Chalgrove field, (where S.
Philip Stapleton was there also, and beheld afar off; 'twas he that would not
suffer the queens Regiment to be charged at Salisbury or Blandford.
noble Hambden, it is conceived, and who knows but it may in time be proved,
was delivered to death?) Lincoln, Boston, Crowland, Cornwall,
Denington-Castle, (where Manchester acted Treason) Newarke again, and Oxford:
Durham, Cumberland, Westmerland, even in every place, and all along, until the
Lord raised up Sir Thomas Fairfax to be a Savior to the People, and that he is
so these wicked men are offended. But me thinks I already see this serpentine
brood (like the old Serpent) casting a stood out after me to destroy me, and
their defiled consciences being like the Sea troubled: they send forth mire and
dirt; wrath, and revenge, reproaches, curses, beagles, and blood hounds, Votes,
Orders and Messengers, like the Popes execrations, with bell, book, and candle.
Alas, been latet qui been vivit. I wish these miscreants (for their souls
sakes) had no more cause to be afraid then I. The righteous is as bold as a
Lion, but the wicked slees when none pursues. The these thinks every bush, and
every bulk a Constable, and a gaulled horse has no patience when his sore is
rubbed: this Sir Philip Stapleton knows, for he has good skill in
horseflesh. But seeing these vile men will dare to sin openly, and to deal
falsely before the World, why should we be afraid to reprove them openly, and to
declare it to the World? They declare their sins as Sodom, they hide them not.
Isai. 3.9. they have (as the Scripture speaks) a brazen face, and a Whores
forehead; and why should we be silent, and connive at that which all
Christendom sees, or turn our backs, and be pymps and panders to our own
ruins? Why should we be more afraid (whom it concerns) to publish their
robbery, oppression, injustice, and Treason, then they are to act and execute
it contrary to their Oaths and duties?

Our Law condemns no man for saying the Cole is black, or calling a Spade a
Spade, although of late many have been Mark.
imprisoned and punished for no more, nor other thing in effect: yet the looser
will speak, and the oppressed will cry out: nor by the power of heaven shall
my tongue be silent, or my Pen be slack, for the cause of God and this
miserable Land; until they do set themselves in a way that is right, and
execute justice and judgment.

Is it not more then high time to speak and stir, when our just and lawful
Petitions are not only rejected, but infamously burned as seditious our
inveterate Enemies armed, our persons for presenting our grievances, illegally
imprisoned: when we are voted out of our Rights and Privileges contrary to all
Law and custom of Parliament. All men may now see, and plainly understand,
that it is altogether vain, any longer to use Petitioning, for that due right
and liberty is denied and debarred. We must, I say we must, if we will
recover our selves and our Privileges, use action. Necessity has no law, and
extreme danger drives to extreme means.

And now know for certain, ye Traiterous party, ye false deceiptfull men,
whose hearts are set upon wickedness, and whose heads devise mischief, and
violence, that it is not you: Such works, such ways, and means.
breaking open of houses, taking away men's goods by force, spoiling of Printing
Presses, and imprisoning of the Printers, without proof or cause, and
punishing poor souls, who carry Books to sell, will or can hide your shame,
the day of your judgment is coming: your wickedness is manifest as the Sun,
and your actions both public and private are so abominable, that they stink
in every reasonable man's nostrills: ye are become odious, and have made your
selves a reproach and a hissing, and the very abjects of disdain and scorn,
yea, insomuch that the name of a Parliament man, is as contemptible in the
thoughts of most, as the name is generally of a Committee-man. And thus do the
good and virtuous of the House, suffer in their repute and esteem, by your
vitiousnesse* yea, your beloved friends and favorites cannot justify you, nor
open their mouths clearly for ye, and what will ye do? what can ye do when
God shall stir up the People to revenge? Remember Strafford and Canterbury,
Finch, and Windebanke: Ye have deceived the People, and falsified your trust
to them: ye have broken oaths, promises, and all manner of assurances with
them, under a pretense of redeeming their liberties, and making them free, ye
involved them in an unnatural and blood War against each other, and now ye
your selves exercise more abundant tyranny, and keep them in most strict and
intolerable slavery, under the pretense of paying the Soldiers, ye have by
your Committees, and instruments, oppressed and robbed the Countries; and
notwithstanding there is no Army paid, no reparations made, no debts satisfied,
and thousands of Widows and fatherless and maimed soldiers unprovided for:
under pretense of preserving the people, ye have destroyed them, and under the
color of establishing Law and justice, ye have taken away both: and although
ye raised Arms to redeem the King from his wicked Council, and have solemnly
sworn to maintain his Crown and dignity, and declared Book Dec. page 94. that
what you did was for his honor and greatness, and the weal of his Kingdoms.
Yet though he be redeemed, he is not restored, not is his Crown and dignity
maintained: Nay ye your selves exercise the Kingly office; ye, I say it
again, ye your selves exercise the Kingly office: For ye make Lord Keepers,
Without the King mere treason, and without his assent worse then nothing.
Judges and Barons, grant Pardons, and give Commissions of Oyer and Terminer: I
have known a mean man dye as a traitor for doing less: nor are the Acts or
Process passed under the broad Seal of any value: In all which ye are but
usurpers (I should not mistake if I said Traitors) I say usurpers, and take too
much upon you; for by Law there is no such power or right belonging to you, or
invested in ye: You keep the King under restraint, and withold him from the
execution of it, and do not satisfy the World wherefore ye do it: you are
like the Dog in the manger, which will neither let the horse eat the hay, nor
eat it himself: ye will neither admit the King to do justice, and redress our
grievances, nor will ye your selves: ye have made no other use of the Kings
power and name, then to deceive, oppress, and abuse the People.

Is this to do for his honor and greatness, and the good of his Kingdoms?
contrarium vero est verum, the contrary is true, by true.

I speak not in favor of his Majesty further then conscience and Do unto all
men as ye would be done unto.
equity, the Lord my Maker knows I am sincerely for truth and justice, without
partiality, and against the contrary, wheresoever, or in whomsoever I find it:
but a traitor or felon by the Law loses not any of his franchizes,
possessions and estate, before he be convict: let Caesar have his due, and us
the free Commons ours: if not, I doubt not, but you will in due time have
yours: If the King be King let him reign: if he have otherwise deserved, why
proceed ye not legally against him, that the World may see and judge, and ye be
cleared of all calumny and aspersion? But as you dee, and deal with us, so ye
deal with him: Us ye do unjustly imprison and oppress, rob, and spoil,
destroy our Liberties, take away our estates, and undo our Families, and show
us no Law, Cause or Reason, but a tyrannical, unjust, illegal, or treasonable
Vote, Order, or Ordinance: (Sic vultis, sic jubet's, stat pro ratione
voluntas:) Your Arbitrary wills are become Englands Laws.

And would ye know, ye Commons of England, why the King is not in all this
time b ought home, nor any thing resolved nor determined of him? I will tell
you (dear friends) what I conceive I see: The Earl of Manchester, M. Hollis,
Stapleton, and others, who are absolutely the chief isntrumental causes of
all the evils, we have lately suffered, and do still sustain, and some of
which have received vast sums of moneys, whereof they know themselves unable
to give any good account, are in danger to be punished as traitors and
deceivers, and be sacrificed to justice: and therefore through their power,
prevalency, and policy, a settlement between King and Parliament is deferred:
because by reason of the Army, whose integrity and zeal for justice they fear
(and therefore only would disband them) they cannot impose such particular,
peculiar conditions upon the King, as will fully secure them, and conduce to
their Presbyterian design: this I do believe, is the sum of all. But must
the King and his People be st^ll divided, the breach lie open, and the
difference uncomposed, the Kingdom unsettled, the peoples p^ace and happ^nesse
still delayed, and our miseries still prolonged and continued, to satisfy the
unjust desires of a company of matchless Machiavilian traitors, who to save
themselves, have endeavored by all means to destroy us? Must we languish in
our sufferings and sorrows to wait their opportunities? It is neither meet
nor right it should be so, nor prudence nor wisdom to permit it so, let us
therefore have an end of our troubles and distractions, or else apply our
selves to put an end to their tyranny, treason, and Lordlinesse, that they may
no^ wholly and utterly lay us waste and ruin us. And if in case of the Kings
failing of his trust, and denial to settle the Militia or strength of the
Kingdom in such hands, and in such a way, as the people may be thereby safe
and secured, the Parliament (the representative body) may for the safety of his
Majesty, and Kingdoms, take the dispose and ordering of it into their hands:
then by the same rule, for so much as the Parliament have failed of their trust,
and put the Militia and strength of the Kingdom into such hands, and in such a
way, as we cannot confide or be safe in: We the free Commons of England, the
real and essential body politic, or any part of us, may order and dispose
of our own Arms and strength, for our own preservation and safety; and the
Army in particular (without question) may lawfully retain, order and dispose
of their arms and strength, to and for the preservation and safety of the King
and Kingdom, the principal end for which they were raised. This is the
Parliaments own doctrine, as you may read in Book Declarations page 93. and
150. and therefore I hope neither heresy nor schism, blasphemy nor treason. I
have done, and a rush for him that is angry, and as much for him who is
fearful in a just cause: Let such weigh well that saying of the holy Spirit,
Prove. 29.25. and then happily they may look up and take courage: The fear of
man brings a snare, but whosoever trusts in the Lord shall be safe. (Timida
probl^as nunquam Reipublicae est utilis.) Cowardly honesty is never profitable
to the Commonwealth.

FINIS.

