The Royal Presence, OR, GODS Tabernacle with MEN: IN A FAREWELL SERMON
Preached the 17. of August 1662. at Beer Regis in the County of Dorset; By
that painful and faithful Minister of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST.

Mr. PHILIP LAMB.

And committed to public view, for the Instruction, Support, and comfort of
others.

Isa. 30.20. Though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of
affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a corner any more, but
thine eyes shall see thy Teachers.

John 10.27. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.

2 Epist. John ver. 9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine
of Christ, has not God: he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has
both the Father and the Son.

1 John 2.5. Whosoever keeps his word, in him verily is the Love of God perfected.

LONDON Printed in the Year 1662.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
We the Inhabitants of Beer and Kingstone in the County of Dorset, who have
lived under the Rich Droppings, Plentiful Soul-searching, Enlivening and
Refreshing Dews of Heaven, which HE who promised to be as the Dew unto Israel,
Hos. 14.5.
has conveyed to us, by one of his Eminent and Faithful Messengers of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, the for many years amongst us has endeavored (as the
Apostle speaks of himself) to be pure from the blood of all men, and to declare
All, and Only the Counsels of God: Acts 20.26,27.
And was instant in Season, and out of Season, diligent in the work of the
Lord, according as the same Apostle does strictly exhort unto, taking heed to
himself, and to the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost made him Overseer; See
2 Timothy 4.1,2.
And of whom we can truly say, (and to which many can bear witness) that he
was, and is, an example of the Believers, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity,
in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity. 1 Timothy 4.12.
His Life and Conversation adorns his Profession, and Doctrine; And having
received much Benefit and Comfort by his Ministry, have endeavored to
Communicate to thee, some of those Spiritual advantages, and Consolations, we
have enjoyed, through the Blessing of God, upon his diligent and faithful
Labors, in his last public Exercise, which he deliverod amongst us; Wishing
the like Benefit and Comfort to thee, and more also, than we have had. Because
of our Non-improvement of such choice Mercies, and rich Privileges, which we
have sufficient cause to be Humbled for; And continually to lament that we are
now deprived of them, by his removal from us.

And had this following discourse been set sorth to public view by the Author
himself (whose Modesty would conceal his worthy Labors) It would have been
more large and perfect, and so rendered more acceptable. We must therefore
desire thee (Christian Reader) with a charitable Censure, to cover over verbal
or literal mistakes, and in Love to Correct with thy pen, what may be found
amiss by thee, in this following Treatise, wherein are contained, Things of
the most weighty concernment, and which are Exceeding useful at all time, for
Edification and Instruction to All; and will Administer matter of sufficient
Comfort under any Condition to them that have the Special Abode of God and
Christ with them.

The Lord Jesus Christ by his Spirit; lead thee into all Truth.

So Prays Thine in Christ.

VINCENTI DABITUR.
The Royal Presence, OR Gods Tabernacle with Men.
JOHN XIV. XXIII. Jesus answered, and said unto him; If a man love me, he will
keep my words; and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make
our Abode with him.


THE Departure of Jesus Christ unto his Father, from whose bosom he came into
the World, was very sadly resented by his Disciples; whose mixed passions
produce a very great disturbance, and trouble upon their Spirits.

The inward Anxiety, and unconcealed grief of the Disciples, move the Bowels of
their more affectionate Lord, to pity their case, and provide for their
relief, and gives them instructions how to express their love unto him in his
absence, not so much in carrying bluber'd eyes, and heavy hearts, as by
remembering, and observing the Councels, and Instructions that he had give to
them, while he was present with them; So that this whole Chapter is filled up
with Counsels, and Comforts, Directions, and Consolations.

First, Directions and Counsels, especially in the 1, 13, 15. verses.

1 Faith.
First, To the exercise of Faith, verse 1. Ye believe in God, believe also in
me. And this is the life, even a life of Faith, which we must live, till we
come to enjoyment of Christ, by which we fetch comforts in all troubles, and
strength against all tentations from Jesus Christ.

2. Prayer.
Secondly, To the duty of Prayer, verse. 13. which is the proper duty of an
afflicted State, as Jam. 5.13. Is any afflicted? let hi^ pray. By prayer the
Soul empties his complaints into Gods bosom, and finds ease, by telling him of
all the trouble and grief that attends his state; Prayer has that Divine
excellency, that like a Heavenly Charm, it speaks away trouble, and speaks in
comfort; as it is said of Hannah 1 Samuel 1.18. She prayed, and went away, and did
eat, and her Countenance was no more sad; And thus our prayers always speed,
when they be made by the help of the Spirit, and offered up to God in the name
of Christ, 13, 14. verses. Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name, that
you shall receive.

3. Obedience.
Thirdly, To Obedience, in the 15 verse. to do the work committed to them; If
ye love me, keep my Commandments. You cannot better express your love to me,
then in keeping my words; Nor is there a more certain way for men to find
comfort, than this; 3 Pr^. 17.
by keeping his Commands, for then, though they cannot enjoy his person, yet
they shall not miss his promise.

Secondly, The Consolations which he gives them in the 2 verse. etc. the 16
verse. etc. and 23 verse. etc.

1. The place to which he goes.
First, In the 2, 3, 4, verses, etc. From the place whether he was going, To
his Father, and their Father, his Home, and their Home; whence he did intend to
come again to them. So that his going from them, was but a Recesse, or
withdrawing for a time, until he came, for in the 3 verse. I will come again,
and receive you to my self, rendered in the Greek. Gr. (...) in the presentense.
I come again, in the presentense, to intimate the certainty of his coming to
them again, as if he were already come; which in the 28 verse. of this Chapter,
Christ tells them, should be matter of great Joy to them. If ye loved me, ye
would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father.

The promise of his Spirit the Comforter.
Secondly, From the 16 v. The promise of the Spirit, which shall supply his
absence, such a Spirit, as shall teach them, comfort them, and be ^ead of all
to them, give them such Joy, Courage, and (...), as the world can neither give,
nor take away, 27 verse. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, etc.

The abode of God and Christ with them.
Thirdly, In the 23. verse, in the Text, We will come, and makeour abode with
him, while you keep my words; which is the great promise here.

If a man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

The words of the Text are an answer to the question of Judas, (not Iscariot)
Lord how is it, that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the
world? Jesus Christ gives the answer. If a man love me, he will keep my words,
etc. To him the promise is made, That the Father will love him, They love him
that keep his words, and to these he has said, he will manifest his love to
them, and make his abode with them; In which words there are three parts
considerable.

Parts of the Text. 3.
First, A Supposition. If a man love me, he etc.

Secondly, A Position. Which is the effect of that love. He will keep my words.

Thirdly, A Promise. Which is twofold.

First, Of the Fathers love. My Father will love him.

Secondly, The Co-habitation of the Father and Son with such a person. We will
come unto him, and make our abode with him.

The Observations that I intend to insist upon, are two;

That it is the duty and special property of them that love Jesus Christ in
sincerity, to keep the words of Christ.

Secondly, That God and Christ will make their abode with them that keep his
words.

First, Of the first of these, That it is the duty and special property of them
that love Jesus Christ in sincerity, to keep the words of Christ.

If any man love me, he will keep my words, he will do my will, walk in my
ways, treasure up my truths and Counsels.

This Doctrine requires three things to be spoken to in their order.

First, That Jesus Christ must be truly loved.

Secondly, What it is to keep his words.

Thirdly, Why it is both the duty and property of them that love him, to keep
his words.

First, That Jesus Christ must be truly loved; there is such an indispensible
necessity of this, that the Apostle says 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the
Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema Maranatha, let him be cursed.

But because every one pretends highly to love Jesus Christ, and but few that
love him indeed, I shall show two things more briefly;

First, Who he is that truly loves him.

Secondly, Why we should all truly love him.

First, Who he is that truly loves Christ.

First, He truly loves Jesus Christ, who upon the discovery, and tender of
Jesus Christ in the Gospel, as King, Priest, and Prophet, can willingly deny
all for him; as the Merchant, Mat. 13.45.46. sold all that he had for the
goodly Pearl. And so Paul, Phil. 3.8. accounts all Dung, his parts, his
righteousness by the Law, his greatest excellencies; He loves Christ in Deed,
and not in Show only, who can leave the world, his dearest lusts, his best
righteousness for Christ.

This is a true conjugal love, Psalm. 45.10. Hearken O daughter, and confider,
and incline thine ear, forget also thine own people, etc. When Christ sees that
we have such a love to him, that we will part with all for him, then he sees a
beauty in us that delights him.

Secondly, He truly loves Jesus Christ, who having received him, will rather
lose all, than part with him again; who accounts Jesus Christ better than his
best things, as he says in Mat. 10.37. He that loves Father or Mother more
than me, is not worthy of me, etc. therefore says the Spouse, Cant. 8.6. Set
me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm: let me be so united to
thee, that I may never be severed from thee. It is a very hard lesson, and an
irksom duty for the best of men, to part with friends, liberty, peace, life;
all these, or either of these sweet mercies; but to part with Christ, nothing
can persuade, or enforce the Soul that truly loves him; that is a thought more
cruel than the Grave, witness the holy Martyrs, a whole cloud of witnesses;
that notable and eminent Galeacius, Marquess of V^, etc.

Thirdly, He that truly loves Jesus Christ, takes abundance of delight in
Communion with him. No pleasure like the kisses of his mouth, no sweetness like
that of his bosom, all his ways are peace, and his paths pleasantness; Christ
makes every condition Comfortable, there is no comfort of life, but in that
little enjoyment of Christ, that the Soul has in his life, it is Communion with
Christ, converse with him, that is all my comfort and pleasure in the world. O
how does the Spouse take care that he be not disturbed, in Cant. 2.7. I charge
you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hinds of the field,
that ye stir not up, nor awake my Love, till he please. The words are an
allusion, to one that would not have her Friend disturbed, and speaks to her
Companions, and charges them by all that is dear and pleasant to them, not to
break the rest of her best Beloved, and shows the wonderful delight the Soul
takes in Communion with Jesus Christ; and the special care that it always
has, that no Tentation break in, nor corruption break out, to interrupt that
sweet Communion, or occasion Christ's departure, who will not for any profit,
commit any sin, or cause Jesus Christ to depart from him.

Fourthly, He that truly loves Jesus Christ, having lost the sight of him, is
never satisfied, till he come to the reenjoyment of him, is always at loss,
and is never quiet, till he enters into a fresh acquaintance and communion with
him, as in that of Joseph and Mary, they having lost their Son, went seeking
till they found him; So Cant. 3.1,2,3. etc. By night on my Bed, I sought him
whom my Soul loves, I sought him, but I found him not, I will rise now and go
about the City, in the Streets, and in the broad ways, etc. I said to the
Watchmen, Saw ye him whom my Soul loves? etc. By all which, is expressed the
sedulous care and industry of a living Soul seeking after Christ.

First, By night in her bed. Jesus Christ has her bed thoughts, (i.) in her
Closet and private duties, of Prayer, serious Meditations, Spiritual
Ejaculations, and secret self Examinations; in all these the Soul enquires. As
one that loves the World, by night his Meditation is of the World; so the man
of pleasures, and honors, is pursuing his lusts in the night season; The
wicked man is contriving mischief upon his bed. So the Soul that loves Christ,
his thoughts are still at work after Christ.

Secondly, I will rise now and go about the City, etc. (i.) I will betake my
self to all public Ordinances, and show more zeal and life in my duties, and
in these will I make enquiry.

Thirdly, I asked the watchmen, (i.) the Ministers of the Gospel, which are or
should be as faithful watchmen, that watch for our Souls, and be able to speak
a word in season, etc. So nothing will satisfy the Soul that truly loves
Christ without him; and no means shall be neglected till she enjoy Him.

Secondly, Why must he be thus beloved?

First, Because he is lovely, altogether lovely.

First, Lovely in his life, observing all the will of God; there was a
wonderful beauty upon him, if we behold, and can understand, that hidden glory
of an untainted Holiness, and exact conformity to the will of God.

Secondly, Lovely in his death, never more lovely and amiable to the believing
Sinner, then when he was most despicable in the eyes of Rebellious Sinners. O
then, he appears most beautiful and desirable, when he hangs on the Cross,
there making our Peace, procuring our Pardon, obtaining Life and Glory for us,
by that shameful death.

Thirdly, Lovely in all his Graces, each Grace a matchless Jewel. Rocks of
Diamonds, Mountains of Pearl, not worthy to be mentioned with the least of his
Excellencies; If he put but a little of this Grace upon any Soul, though he be
never so vile, clothed with corruption; as in Ezekiel. 16. from the 9. to the 16
verse. yet may be made beautiful by his Comeliness.

Fourthly, Lovely in all his Ordinances, in which the more immediate sight the
Soul has of him, the more he is taken with his Beauty; No wonder he is called
in Hag. 2.7. the desire of all Nations.

Secondly, Because of his deserving love; we loved him, because he first loved
us.

Consider in his love, these four particulars.

First, He laid down his life for us, such a Love, will deserve love, and life
too; Joh. 15.13. Greater Love, has no man, then this, that a man lay down his
life for his friend.

Secondly, He lives now in Heaven for us, 7 Heb. 25. He ever lives, to make
intercession for them. He is there minding our necessities, agitating our
affairs; by his sitting there, we have Liberty of coming thither; by his
sitting there in glory, we have our standing here in Grace.

Thirdly, He accounts that as done to himself, that is done to them, that are
his, Zach. 2.8. He that touches you, touches the Apple of his eye, and Mat.
10.40,41,42. etc. He that receives you, receives me, and so he said to Saul,
Acts 9.4. why persecutest thou me? when he was with Commission from the High
Priest, dragging the poor Professors of Jesus Christ to the Prison.

Fourthly, He longs to have us with him. Joh. 17.24. Father I will that where I
am, there they may be also, to behold my Glory. He is not (q. d.) satisfied
without their company; and is always imparting his most secret Counsels to
them, Joh. 15.16. Henceforth I call you not Servants, for the Servant knows
not what his Lord does, but I have called you Friends, for all things that I
have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you.

Thirdly, Because otherwise we shall not regard his words; which is intimated
in the Text, If we love him, we shall keep his Words, but if we love him not,
we will not keep his Words; It is want of love to Christ, that is the cause of
the abounding of every sin, for if we did love him, we should keep his
Commands, which is the second particular.

Secondly, What is it to keep the words of Christ?

First, There is a Natural and Mental keeping of the words of Christ; and so we
must keep them, that is, Remember his Words, his promises, Counsels, and
Appointments.

The Memory is man's Storehouse, or Cabinet, that should be kept Sacred for the
Truths of Christ; So the Disciples kept the word of Christ, when they remembered
his sayings; and David Psalm. 119.93. J will never forget thy Precepts, for by
them thou have quickened me, (i.) I will keep thy Precepts; for what we forget,
we lose, and what we remember, we keep; And thus, as Friends take pleasure to
look sometimes on the Love Tokens of their absent Friends. So may we have
singular comfort and refreshment, to see the Heart of Christ in the Counsels,
Promises, and Appointments left with us.

Secondly, There is an Evangelical and Practical keeping of the words of
Christ. When we do believe promises, and obey commands; Promises not believed,
and Precepts not obeyed, are as water spilt on the earth, besides the vessel
that should receive it, Heb. 4.2. but when they are believed, they be as liquor
put into the vessel for its proper use. Hence says Christ, Luke 11.28. Blessed
are they that hear the word of God and keep it. Then we keep the words of
Christ, when we believe his promises, observe his precepts in all our
conversation, and walk by his appointments and institutions in all our duties.

Thirdly, Why it is their property and duty that love Jesus Christ to keep his
words.

First, Because true love is comprehensive; He that love Christ truly loves all
that is his; He that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten: The
nearer any thing is to Christ, the better it is beloved; and then we love the
word when we keep it, as a special pledge of his love; To have his word, and a
heart to keep it, is a double blessing; and indeed, such a gift as the word of
Christ is, is worthy to be loved for it self, and kept for the givers sake.

Secondly, Because true love is Operative, it is the principle of Gospel
obedience, 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ constrains us. Where there is the
disposition of a Son, there will be obedience to the Fathers commands; so where
there is a spiritual love to Christ, it will set the soul on work, and quicken
it to keep the words of Christ, as is said of Faith, Show me thy Faith by thy
works. So show thy love to Christ by thy works; as Faith without works is dead,
so is love without obedience.

Thirdly, Because keeping the words of Christ gives the clearest and surest
testimony of the truth of our love to Jesus Christ. Probatio delectationis est
exhibitio operis; Greg. Hom.
Obedience is the most lively testification of love, as Christ said to Peter,
Love thou me? etc. show it in this, in doing thy duty; Feed my sheep. So
Christ tells us in the Text, Where the fire of love is in the breast, there the
flame of duty and service is in the hands. Joh, 15.14. Ye are my friends, if ye
do whatsoever I command you. In the 1 John 5.3. In this is the love of God,
that we keep his Commandments.

Use 1. For Exhortation.

First, To a mental keeping of the words of Christ, according to that word,
Heb. 2.1. We ought therefore to give the more diligent heed, to the things
which we have received, lest at any time we let them slip. And that we may not
forget, but keep in our memories the words of Christ.

First consider, That all the promises and counsels, which Jesus Christ has
made known to us, are not only for present, but for future use, Isa. 42.23.
Hearken and hear for the time to come. We should hear as if we were to hear no
more. The Cordial which has some time revived us, must not be laid aside, lest
for want of it another time, we faint quite away. The reason why they were
ready to faint under afflictions, Heb. 13.5. was, because they had forgotten
the exhortation, which speaks to them as to Sons. For this cause Jesus Christ
often bids his Disciples remember the word he had spoken to them, and knowing
their frailty, promises his spirit, Joh. 14.26. and that (says he) (...),
shall bring to your remembrance.

Secondly consider, Not to remember the words of Christ, is a sad sign of our
dis-esteem of Jesus Christ. We usually remember Precepts, Counsels, and
Sayings, according to the authority which the person has with us, from whence
they come. It is a very great dishonor to Jesus Christ, when we shall cast his
words behind our backs. Did we honor Jesus Christ as our King, Lord, and
Lawgiver, we should be more careful to remember what he has spoken to us. We
often blame our heads, as if the fault lay only there, that we do not remember
the words of Christ, when indeed the fault lies most in the hearts, that we
have not more love and esteem of Christ there.

Thirdly, The time will come, when we shall dearly repent every truth
forgotten, that we did not endeavor to seal instruction upon our hearts.

First, When God shall withold instruction from us, because we have refused
it; the time may come, when as Amos 8.12. Men shall run to and fro, and seek
the word of the Lord, and shall not find it; and then we shall see the worth of
the word, that now we prize not.

Secondly, When God shall call us to an account for all the Sermons, and
Instructions we have received, as he will certainly do; though we forget, yet
he will remember, and he will ask how we have kept, and improved the Word he
has spoken to us.

To help us in keeping, or remembering the words of Christ.

First, Let your hearts be affected with the worth and excellency of the word,
that it is more precious than Gold or Silver: and then we shall keep it as
choice treasure. That which a man prizeth, he will keep in safe custody, and
have often in his eyes, as David says of the word, Psalm. 119.97. O how I love
thy Law, it is my meditation all the day long. It a man account the word as his
treasure, he will not forget it, as Jerem. 2.32. Can a Maid forget her
Ornaments, or a Bride her Attires? This they forget not; Yet because we account
not the word as excellent and necessary as these, therefore it follows, Yet my
people have forgotten me days without number.

Secondly. Apply every word of Christ to your own souls, though men will not
keep what is another, yet usually they keep what is their own; while men carve
away the word to others, as if it concerned them not, it is no marvel if they
keep it not, but if we accounted every word as spoken to us, and our portion,
we should hear and keep it. Men remember the news which concerns themselves. We
should hear Christ speaking, as Job 5.27. Hear thou this, know it for thy good.

Thirdly, Meditate often upon what you have received, as Mary pondered the
sayings which she heard, in her heart The way to keep any thing safe, is to
have a constant eye upon it. Meditation is the Souls serious retiring into it
self, to take a view of all that of God, that is laid up within it self.

Fourthly, Hasten to do all that you have heard and learned, Psalm. 119.60. It
is said by David, I made have and prolonged not the time to keep his
Commandments. A man will not easily forget his Trade; so if we daily obey
commands, and believe promises, we cannot easily forget the commands and
promises given to us: which last direction leads to the second exhortation.

Secondly, It may exhort us to keep the words of Christ with an Evangelical and
Practical keeping. Keep the word as a man keeps his Rule or the Soldier keeps
his Weapon; let not the word depart from thee, and do not thou depart from it,
by forsaking the appointments and commands of Christ.

First, consider, That if we do not keep the words of Christ, by obeying, and a
suitable walking, we do but in vain pretend love to Jesus Christ, as they that
had no more of Christ, but to call him Lord, ( Mat. 7.21.) Not every one that
says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. So, not
every one that says he loves me, but he that does my word, he is my friend.

Secondly, consider what a sin it is to pretend love to Christ, and not so
truly to love him, as to keep his words; it is Hypocrisy; they be Christ's
false friends, an open enemy is less dangerous than they, Ezekiel. 33.31. They
hear thy words, but they will not do them, their heart goes after their
covetousness; They be false to themselves, and delude their own souls with a
bare profession and hearing, Jam. 1.22. Be doers of the word, and not hearers
only, deceiving your own souls.

Secondly, consider what judgment they incur, and who can tell how great it
is? it is called a beating with more stripes, when the least stripe from that
hand can break the loins, Luke 12.47. He that knows his Masters will, and
does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.

Secondly consider, This is the clearest evidence of our interest in Christ, of
his love to us, that we keep his Commandments. By this we know that we have him
as our Christ, when we do not only love him as a Jesus, a Savior, but obey him
as a Lord, and follow his Law. When God shall write his Law in our hearts, Is
not this an evidence that Christ is ours?

Thirdly, Great and many are the encouragements which he has promised to them
that keep his words. There be many blessings in the word, but they only have
the blessings for theirs, who keep his word, Jam. 1.15. Whosoever looks into the
perfect Law of Liberty, and continues therein, he being not a forgetful
hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed; he shall
ask what he will, and have it, Joh. 15.7. If you abide in me, and my words
abide in you, ask what you will, and it shall be done unto you.

Christ.

First, Let it be the aim and intentions of our souls, when we come to hear, to
turn hearing into doing. Say as Paul did, Acts 9.6. Lord what will thou have me
to do? and Cornelius, Acts 10.33. Now therefore are we all here present before
God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God.

Secondly, Beg of God to give you such a heart, that you may not only say, as
the people in a good humor, once to Moses; All that thou shall speak unto us,
that will we observe and do; but find your hearts such as in Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that
there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my
Commandments always, etc. It is he by whom the word is made (as James has it)
^ Jam. ^ 1. (...). engraffed.
(...), A fruit-bearing word. Begin all your hearing with prayers, and conclude
them with prayers, because it is of the greatest concernment.

Lastly, A use of comfort.

First, If we keep this word, the word will keep us. It will keep us in the
worst of times, yea at all times, Pro. 6.22. When thou go, it shall lead
thee; when thou sleep it shall keep thee; and when thou awakest, it shall
talk with thee. If you keep his Commands, his Commands will keep you; If you
keep his Promises, his Promises will bring you to Glory.

Secondly, If we keep his word, we shall not want present comforts. The present
gratuities which we have from Christ, should be enough to encourage us, if
there were no future reward, Psalm. 19. In keeping of them there is great
reward. 1 Timothy 4. ^. verse.


Thirdly, Jesus Christ has promised a blessedness to such persons; they be a
blessed people, Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the
words of this Prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein; and so
in Luke 11.28. Blessed are they, etc. and with the best of blessings does be
crown them in the Text, My Father will love him, and we will come to him, and
will make our abode with him; which is the second observation.

God and Christ will make their abode with them that keep his word.

In which Observation, we shall take notice of these three particulars.

First, How God and Christ do make their abode with them that keep his word.

Secondly, Why God and Christ will make their abode with such.

Thirdly, What an excellent blessing it is to have God and Christ abiding with
us.

First, How God and Christ do make their abode with them that keep his word; in
which these three particulars must be shown.

1. How God abides with his People. 2. How Jesus Christ abides with them. 3.
How both God and Christ will make their abode with them that keep his word.
First, How God, the first Person in the Trinity, is said to make his abode
with them that keep his word.

And this will be two ways seen.

First, It is not here to be understood of his common or general presence, as
he is the infinite God, and being Omnipresent, fills Heaven and Earth: for so
he abides with all the works of his hands; yea, so he is with them that fear
him not.

Secondly, It is here properly understood of Gods abode by way of special
presence, as he is a gracious Father; there fore Jesus Christ does first
express the Fathers love, and then his abode, as the product and fruit of his
love, My Father will love him, and we will come unto him, etc. He will come and
abide with his, as a God in Covenant with them, therefore has he put it into a
promise, in the 2. Cor. 6.16. I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people.

Secondly, How Jesus Christ will make his abode with them that keep his word?
which will be shown also, First, Negatively. Secondly, Affirmatively.

First Negatively, It is not to be understood of a carnal or corporeal presence
of Christ (as the Papist imagine) as if the flesh of Christ could be in all
places, whom the Heavens must contain till the time of restitution of all
things: for says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 5.16. acknowledging, If he had known
Christ after the flesh, yet so, he knows him no more.

Secondly, Affirmatively, He makes abode with his people after a spiritual
manner, God the Father makes his abode with his Servants, as a Father to them;
Jesus Christ abides with them, as the Head of his Church, as it is in Ephe.
5.23. He is the Head of his Church, and the Savior of his Body. God abides
with us in Christ, Jesus Christ abides with us by his Spirit.

Corn ^ lap.
A learned Author shows four ways of Christ's abode with Believers.

1. Politice ut Rex in Regno, As a King in his Kingdom; and so he gives Laws as
the only Head, and King of his Church: protects them, and order all their
affairs. 2. Oeconomice, ut Puter in Dome, As a Father in his House; and so he
takes care, and makes provision for his people, as a Father does for his
Family. 3. Ethice, ut ratio in homine, As reason in a man, which is the light
that directs man in all his actions; so Jesus Christ directs and leads his
people. 4. Phisice, us Anima in Corpore, As the Soul in the Body, which
animates and acts the whole man, without which the Body is a dead, and liveless
Trunck; so Jesus Christ does quicken our souls, by whom we have spiritual
life.
And that he is the Head of his Church, and thus abides with them,

First consider, He has all grace and life in him; John 5.26. As the Father
has life in himself, so has he given to the Son, to have life in himself;
therefore the Psalmist says, Psalm. 36.9. With thee is the Well of life, and in
thy light, shall we see light.

Secondly, From him is all grace and life conveyed out unto us, John 1.16. of
his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace. Yea, whatsoever we
receive from the Spirit of God, we have from him originally, as in John 16.15.
For he shall take of mine and show it unto you.

Thirdly, How God and Christ are both said to make their abode with them that
keep his word. And this I shall show to be three ways.

First, by their special Providence and Inspection with them, and so we may see
them in several Scriptures, abiding with them, as in Zach. 1.8,9,10. verses,
there is Jesus Christ among the (...), which represent the Church, and in Revel.
1.13. He is there in the midst of his Golden Candlesticks, and David tells us
of his experience of Gods presence with him, Psalm. 73.23. I am continually with
thee, thou upholdest me with thy right hand, and the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 4.17.
The Lord stood by me; indeed the eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous, and
he has said, he will not leave them.

Secondly, They make their abode with them in the Gospel, and Gospel
Ordinances, where these be continued in their power and purity, there the
Tabernacle of God is among men, and when these are taken away, I-chabod, the
Glory is departed; We may say God has forsaken us. As the Ark was a Tipe, and
Token of God; special presence with the Jews, so the Gospel, and Gospel
Ordinances, are a signal, Token of Gods abode with us, for in these we may see
him, in these, we may enjoy him, by these, we may be made like to him, as in
the 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open face, behold as in a Glass the Glory of
God, and are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord.

Thirdly, They make their abode with them in the Spirit, which proceeds from
the Father, and the Son; So they may both be said truly to abide with us, while
we have the Spirit, the Comforter, which proceeds from the Father, and the Son,
as a pledge of their Love, Joh. 15.20. When the Comforter is come, whom I will
send unto you, from the Father, I will send him says Christ, even the Spirit
of truth, which (...), which proceeds from the Father, there is an (...), a
Procession of the Holy Ghost, from the Father, and the Son, to the People that
keep his word; and thus Believers are said to hold fellowship with the Father,
and the Son, in the 1 Epist. of John 13. It is by the Spirit we are drawn;
being drawn, we come; being come we are enabled to walk with God and Christ: It
is this Spirit that does all for us. As in the Ecche, The Air being moved by
the voice, returns the same sound by its own motion; So in all our Communion
with God and Christ; the Soul being moved by the Spirit, returns answer, by
virtue of the Spirits motion in us; Come, says the Spirit, I come says the
Soul, being taught by the same Spirit.

All the works wrought on the Souls of men, in order to Salvation, are wrought
of God and Christ in us, but by the Spirit; As in these three special
particulars.

First, By the Spirit they instruct and teach; The Spirit is an enlightening
Spirit, a Spirit of Judgment, and of burning. The Spirit reveals the Counsels
of God, the great Mysteries of the Kingdom; Leads into all truth, makes men
wise to Salvation.

Secondly, By this Spirit they quicken and comfort the Souls of men, Romans 5.5.
It is by the Spirit that the Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts. Our cold
and frozen Spirits are warmed and made fit for action, and by this Spirit, we
are awakened; Hence the Church prays, for the breathings of this Spirit, Cant.
4.16. Awake, O North Wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the
Spices thereof may flow out.

Thirdly, By this Spirit they do strengthen, and establish the hearts of men in
the ways of Holiness, thus they are made strong in the Lord, and in the power
of his might; strong to resist tentations, strong to suppesse corruptions;
strong to perform duties, by this Spirit they are carried through all
difficulties; by this Spirit their Infirmities are healed; Romans 8.26.
they are made to persevere, and kept steadfast, and unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord; and Sealed up to the day of Redemption.

Thus God and Christ do make their abode with them that keep the words of
Christ, till they come to make an everlasting abode with them in Heaven.

And according to the workings of this Spirit more or less in the hearts of
men, God is said to be present, or absent from his people.

The Reasons why God and Christ will make their abode with them that keep his
words.

First, Because of their special Love to, and Care of them that keep his words.
Indeed all the Care of God, in concerning his people, that he has in the
World, therefore in the Second Commandment, he is said to show mercy to
thousands of them that fear him, and keep his Commandments, that do not cast
his word behind their backs, and forsaking his Appointments, follow their own
Inventions; So that if we faithfully keep his word, he will abide with us in
our work; And this is the Great Reason in the Text, My Father will Love him;
Not but that he Loves his Elect from Eternity, but he will manifest his Love to
them, and therefore he will make his abode with them, as the People of his
Love; for in Deuteronomy. 32.9. The Lords Portion is his People, and Jacob is the Lot
of his Inheritance, and in Mal. 3.17. they are called his Jewels, and men will
abide with their Treasure.

Secondly, Because of the near Relation that is between God and Christ, and
them that keep his word. That is a very full place of Scripture for this
purpose, Mat. 12.50. Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in
Heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother. What nearer Relation
can there be than this? So near are they to Jesus Christ, that keep his word,
observe his will, and be true and faithful to his Appointments; and sure such
near Relations will desire Cohabitation on both sides.

First, God and Christ are said to stand Related in a Paternal Relation.

Secondly, They are said to stand Related in a Conjugal Relation.

First, God and Christ stand in a Paternal Relation to his People.

First, God is their Father, and they are his Sons and Daughters; And this the
Church does acknowledge in Isai. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though
Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not, thou O Lord art our
Father, etc. And with this the Lord comforted mourning Zion, Isai. 49.14,15.
But Zion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. But
God says, Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have
Compassion on the Son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet I will not forget
thee. Behold I have graven thee on the palms of my Hands, etc. My abode is with
thee.

Secondly, Jesus Christ is their Father, Isai. 9.6. The everlasting Father.
Therefore he promises his Disciples in this, 14. Joh. 18. I will not leave
you, (...), Orphans, or Fatherless Children. He is the most affectionate
tender hearted Father, Tam Pater nemo, tam pius nemo: None so good, none such a
Father as he, ((...) Tertul.)

Secondly, God and Christ stand related to them that keep his word, in a
Conjugal relation; and God has said a special command of co-habitation upon
persons in this relation, The man must dwell with his own Wife.

First, God is related as a Husband, And will not God dwell with his People,
whom he has espoused to himself? I have betrothed thee unto me for ever,
(Hosea 2.19.) Yea I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in
judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies; I will even betroth thee
unto me in faithfulness. And in Isai. 54.5,6. For thy Maker is thy Husband,
etc. For the Lord has called thee as a Woman forsaken, etc.

Secondly, Jesus Christ is the Husband of his People, as we see in the whole
Book of Canticles. And so in Ephe. 5. from the 29. Verse to the end of the
Chapter. Now where shall God and Christ make their abode, but with their
espoused Ones? Does Jesus Christ delight to lodge any where more than with the
Wife of his bosom?

Thirdly, Because of Gods faithful Covenant, he will make his abode with them
that keep his word. If we keep the word of his Patience, he will keep the word
of his Promise, Revel. 3.10. Because thou have kept the word of my Patience, I
also will keep thee, from the hour of temptation, which shall come on all the
world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. It is called a word of Patience,
because it teaches patience, and especially because it requires it in all them
that will observe it. And this is Gods's Covenant. Now, what is the Covenant?
Jerem. 32.40. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will
not turn away from them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me; and such a sure and infallible
promise of abode, can never be violated by a God-keeping Covenant; God may hide
for a moment, turn away in a little wrath from his people (Isa. 54.8.9.10.11.)
but with great mercy will he gather them, and show them everlasting kindness;
Yea, his Promise shall be as the waters of Noah, that as the waters of the
great Deluge shall never cover the world any more, so he will never forsake his
people utterly. It shall be more possible for the Mountains to depart, and the
Hills to be removed, than that he should finally depart from His. The frame of
the world may be disordered, but the frame of Gods heart toward his People,
can never be changed. When the men of the world think God has forsaken them,
he is near to them, and cannot cast off his people; He may sometimes give them
up for their sins into the enemies hands, but cannot give them away: this
gave the Church that confidence, in Micah 7.8. Rejoice not against me, O mine
Enemy; when I fall, I shall arise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a
light unto me. And this did bear the head of the New-Testament-Saints above
water, 2 Cor. 4.8.9. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are
perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not
destroyed. And whence is it, that Distress does not follow Troubles? Despair
our Perplexities? Desertion our Persecutions? Destruction our sad Dejections?
sure it is, because God is faithful, always with us, and will not suffer us to
be tempted above what we are able to bear, etc. 1 Cor. 10.13.


Thirdly, What a special blessing it is, to a person, or people, to have God
and Christ to make their abode with them.

The excellency and desirableness of this abode of God and Christ with
Believers, may be seen in these three particulars.

First, It is better than all outward mercies, and earthly blessings.

Secondly, This will more than supply the want or absence of all other comforts.

Thirdly, All our happiness does lie in this, Gods presence with us.

First, The abode of God and Christ with a soul, is better than all outward
mercies, or earthly blessings whatsoever. God was wont to tell his people
heretofore, as in Deuteronomy. 28. That if they would keep his Commandments, they
should be blessed in their basket, and in their store; that he would give them
peace, the fat heritage of Jacob, and to ride upon the high places; all goodly
mercies: But now he does encourage them by a blessing of far greater worth, I
will love you, I will make mine abode with you. It is so high and transcendent
a favor, That Moses preferred it, before that goodly Land of promise, Canaan,
the Land flowing with Milk and Honey, as appears by that passage in Exodus 33.15.
If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence. Though Canaan be never
so desirable a good Land, Yet rather let me abide in this vast-howling
Wilderness with God, then go without thy presence thither. A Wilderness
Condition with God in the Tent, is better then all Pleasures and Honors
without God in the Palace. Hence David in the midst of all his Royal Pomp, and
Greatness, desired this, as the Complement and Perfection of all, Psalm.
101.1.2. O when will thou come unto me.

Consider these two particulars.

First, That there is not beauty, nor desirablenesse in the fairest outward
prosperity, if God and Christ do not make their abode with us. If we have all
the world, and cannot see the abode of God and Christ on our Tabernacle, in
their special Providence, in Soul refreshing Ordinances, or by the Comforting
Spirit; We may look on all, and say as Hiram did of the Cities Solomon gave
him, they be Cabul, Dirty things. 1 Kings 9.13.
If we cannot find God and Christ thus with us, in the midst of our Glory, The
Glory is departed.

Secondly, Consider, There is no misery, nor unhappiness in the worst
afflictions, if God and Christ be there; in the Furnace there is no Death; in
Captivity, no Darkness; in Prison, no Sadness; in Death, no Hell. Jesus
Christ tells us, he will not leave us Comfortless; he never told us we should
not meet with Tribulations, but says, In the world we shall have Tribulation,
and as surely, that in him, we shall have Consolation. His people may be in the
world Friendlesse, Harbourlesse, Pennylesse, but he assures them, they shall
never be Comfortless.

Secondly, This abode of God and Christ with his people, will more then supply
the want or absence of all other things. Jesus Christ, when he would thoroughly
encourage his Disciples against all the hardships, and discouraging fears, they
might meet withal after his departure, gives them this one precious Cordial,
or Catholicon, in Mat. 28.20. Lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the
World, when you are cast out of the Synagogues, had before Magistrates and
Rulers for my name sake, Scourged, Hated, Imprisoned; for all these things
shall they do unto you, Let this comfort you; Lo, I am with you always, to the
end of the World.

Indeed, This abode of God and Christ with his people, is every thing to the
Soul, which we may see in these three particulars.

First, Their presence is a Sanctuary, and sure Hide-ing place.

Secondly, It is a sure Light and Guide to them.

Thirdly, It is a Storehouse and Treasury of all Provisions.

First, The abode or presence of God and Christ, is instead of a Sanctuary, or
sure hideing place; as Psalm. 84.11. For the Lord God is a Sun and Shield, etc.
and in Isai. 8.13. says the Prophet, Sanctify the Lord God of Hosts, and let
him be your fear, and let him be your dread, and he shall be for a Sanctuary:
Do you set God before you, and he will set himself by you; and where the great
God goes, there goes a Guard of Angels, Psalm. 34.7. His Wings be a Covert, and
his hand a Canopy, with which he hides from the Storm, and from Rain.

And that he is a mighty Savior.

First, Consider his Omnipotency; He can do whatever pleases him; He can make
the worm Jacob to thresh Mountains, and the Mountains to become a plague before
Jerubbabel; Zach. 4.7. All the Nations of the Earth are but as a drop of the
Bucket, or dust of the Balance, compared with him; and all hearts are in his
hands; Therefore says the Prophet, in Isai. 26.4. Trust in the Lord for ever,
for in the Lord Jehovah, is everlasting strength, or the Rock of ages. He is no
broken Reed, but that strength in which we may Confide; As David says, Psalm.
46.1,2,3. Si fractus illabitur Orbis, If the World be dissolved, God is our
refuge and strength, etc. therefore we will not fear, though the Earth be
removed, and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, etc.

Secon^ly, Consider his imme^tability; We have standing Comfort in the
unchangeablenesse of this God, Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not; therefore
ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed. And for this we have the experience of
David, Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy name, will put their trust in thee, for
thou (Lord) have not forsaken them that seek thee, and the Churches experience,
Isai. 63.9. he bear them, and he carried them all the days of old. This great
and unchangeable Savior, saves his people, these four ways.

First, He will save and preserve from Evils, and will be a Chamber of safety
when the Indignation is abroad, to hide from the storm; Ezekiel. 11.6. Yet will I
be to them as a little Sanctuary in the Countries where they shall come, I will
be with thee; is Gods great Promise, and his Peoples Security; it was Joshua's
Guard, and Jeremiah's Brasen-Wall.

Secondly, He will save his people in afflictions; as he did the three Children
in the burning Furnace, thus he delivers in six troubles, and also in seven; as
it is promised in Isai. 43.2,3. When thou passest thorough the waters I will be
with thee and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee; When thou
walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee, For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy one of Israel, thy
Savior. Job's experience is an everlasting proof of this, that when the Lead
is Consumed, the Gold is preserved in the Furnace.

Thirdly, He will save or deliver out of afflictions, 1 Cor. 10, 13. In the
midst of all temptations, he will make a way for us to escape them, Many are
the troubles of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all. He is
Emmanuel, God with us; Our Redeemer from Hell, and from Trouble.

Fourthly, He will save by afflictions, and by the evils they meet withal;
Prove. 29.15. The Rod and Reproof give wisdom; and as David says, It was good
for me that I was afflicted. All things shall work for good, 2 Cor. 4.7. These
afflictions work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. The
Vessel is usually covered with Dirt by the Clensers hand, that it may shine
with the more brightness; So by afflictions God makes us partakers of his
Holiness.

Afflictions and outward evils, come alike to all, but with much different
effect; All men fall into afflictions, Good and Bad, but as the Israelites, and
the Egyptians went both into the Red Sea, and the one was drowned, and the
other passed throrough to Canaan: So the Righteous and the Wicked fall under
Calamity, the one sinks through unbelief, and the other passes thorough safety,
and by Faith and Patience comes to inherit the promise.

Secondly, The Abode or Presence of God and Christ with Believers, is instead
of a sure Guide and Light unto them; They can never want a Guide, who have God
with them. As the Pillar of a Cloud by day, and of Fire by night, was unto
Israel in all their March, The same and more is God to his People, in all their
Pilgrimage.

Consider three things.

First, Consider, that Man cannot be without this Guide; The best of men have
very great need of the presence of God to lead them; that they be not misled,
and that they don't faint in the way, What can the Sheep do without a
Shepherd? Such is God to his, Psalm. 23.1. without Gods abode with us, it is as
Children without a Father, and none to direct them, and so left to run
themselves into mischief; What is the World without a Sun? Jer. 10.23. The way
of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his steps.

Secondly, Consider, that it is our great wisdom to commit our way to the
guidance of this God and Christ; Every wise man will commit his way to God, and
not move a step without him; as Moses in the Conduct of Israel, would not move
a foot without God. That was a good Petition, or rather Resolution of David, in
Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and afterward receive me to
Glory. I am resolved to be guided by Gods Counsel, and an excellent and
imitable practice of Isaac, in Genesis 26.24,25. that where he had met God at
Beer-sheba, and where God had blessed him, There he pitched his Tent; So we
should move as God leads.

Thirdly, Consider, That if God undertake to Guide us, we shall not miscarry,
he will certainly bring us sa^e to Heaven. Our feet may be almost gone, but
shall not be altogether gone, Psalm. 73.2. My feet were almost gone, my steps
had well nigh slipped. So it may be with the choicest of Gods Servants; but in
the 23 verse, Nevertheless I am continually with thee; thou have holden me by
my right hand.

The more dark and dangerous the times be, the more we should desire Gods abode
with us; the nearer a night of trouble or of death is to us, the more earnestly
beg his stay, as the two Disciples, Luke 24.29. They constrained Christ,
saying, abide with us, for it is toward Evening, and the day is far spent.

Thirdly, The abode or presence of God and Christ with his people, is instead
of a Treasury and Storehouse of all Provisions. Where Jesus Christ is, and
where God makes his abode, there is a Spring head of comforts, that cannot be
drawn dry, Isa. 33.16. Bread shall be given them, and their waters shall be
sure, who have God with them; So was God to Israel, Deuteronomy. 29.5.6. He fed Israel
in the wilderness forty years, their clothes did not wax old. You have not
eaten bread, neither have you drunk wine, or strong drink, that ye might know
that I am the Lord your God.

Consider three particulars here.

First, Consider God is such a store, that he is always full; He has an
Antarchy in himself, and says to his creatures, as in Psalm. 81.10. Open thy
mouth wide, and I will fill it, ask what you will, and there it is to be had.
There be full Treasures, of temporal and spiritual good things with them, with
whom God and Christ do make their abode. As the Ark of God brought all kind of
blessings to the house of Obed-edom, so when God comes, he brings all things;
Deus meus, and omnia; My God, and all things. When Jesus Christ came to
Zacheus, he tells him, This day is Salvation come to thine house; that is, both
temporal and spiritual preservations and deliverances; Salvation does consist
in the total absence of all evil, and in the presence and possession of all
good.

Secondly, God and Christ have left with us the promises of the Covenant to
live upon, till we come to the inheritance of the purchased Possession: These
be like the Widows Cruse, that never fails; this like the Manna, will not be
withheld while we be in the wilderness, till we come into Canaan, to feed on
the fruits of that Land, Heb. 13.5. That Is a sure Promise, in which we may by
faith see present supplies, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; and in
Phil. 4.19. we may possess in that Promise whatever we want; My God shall
supply all your need, according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus.

Thirdly, God has given us his Son, and Jesus Christ has given us himself, as
an ensuing pledge of all mercies contained in the promises, Romans 8.32. He that
spared not his own Son, but gave him for us, how shall he not with him also
freely give us all things; He that has not spared his Son, will not withold
any mercies; he that has given us the best of blessings, will not withold
smaller mercies: He does always tell his people, as in 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is
sufficient for you.

Thirdly, The abode of God and Christ with Believers, is their Heaven upon
Earth. All our happiness is in the abode of God and Christ with us.

First, Consider it is a wonderful mercy of the great God, that by his common
Providence, he is with the works of his hands, which is man's safety; and David
admires at this, Psalm. 8.4. Lord what is man, that thou art mindful of him? and
the Son of man, that thou visitest him?

Secondly, Consider it is a mercy of the greatest worth, and to be for ever
admired, that God and Christ do not only visit us by common Providence and
Inspection, as his creatures, but make their abode with us, as with children
and friends; O this is our glory; God does not come with a short visit, for a
day, for a few days, but makes an everlasting abode. The Church complained when
she thought God was departed, because he had been with them, and made so short
a stay, Jer. 14.8. Why should thou be as a stranger in the Land, and as a
wayfaring man, that turns aside to tarry for a night, etc. but when she
remembered the Covenant of eternal abode, she comforts her self, in the 9.
verse. Yet thou O Lord art in the midst of us. To be ever with the Lord, is all
we can hope for, and it is man's contemplative happiness, to converse in his
thoughts with that Glory.

First, Consider Jesus Christ has promised this, as our great Glory, and full
reward; I will take you to my self, they shall behold my glory. 17. Joh. verse
24.
1 Epist. Joh. 3.2. We shall be like him, (...) we shall see him as he is.

Secondly, This abode with God and Christ, is the highest option, and aim of
all the people of God. This was Paul's pressings, in Phil. 3. That he might
attain to the resurrection of the dead, (i.) the state of them that are risen,
and with God and Christ; Therefore resolves after a long debate with himself,
Phil. 1.21. To be with Christ, is best of all, and David in Psalm. 73. at the
latter end, professes, He had none in Heaven but God, and there was none upon
earth that he desired in comparison of him.

First, of Lamentation, and laments three sorts of persons.

First, Let us lament such as be without God and Christ in the world, all
ignorant and ungodly persons; yea, this is the sad case of all the Sons of
Adam, ever since he sinned, and lost communion with his God; They be brought
forth into the world, with their backs upon God, and with Gods face against
them: What was Cain's grief? how was his heart hurried into a world of
inconceivable distempers, and distracting thoughts? when he must be turned out
of Gods presence, from the enjoyment of God in his Ordinances, Genesis 4.14.
Behold, thou have driven me out this day, (says poor Cain,) from the face of
the earth, (but this is as nothing) and from thy face shall I be hid, (and now
where is my comfort and safety?) it shall come to pass, that every one that
finds me, shall slay me. Such persons be as Lambs in a large place, Hos.
4.16. Without a Keeper in their most plentiful state; What hope have such to
escape Hell and Destruction?

Consider these two particulars.

First, Consider it is a very sad case, when God and Christ withdraw, or depart
but for a moment; it is a sad, and intolerable moment, as we see in the
complaint of Christ, when God withdrew himself from him; My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? and in the example of David, Asaph and Heman, in Psalm.
77. and Psalm. 88. and the whole Church laments in Jer. 14.8.

Secondly, Consider if God and Christ do never come to make their abode with us
here, we are never like to make our abode with them hereafter; and then it were
better we had never been born, Psalm. 73.27. They that are far from thee, shall
perish. And this is Hell, to be separated from God and Christ, 2 These. 1.8.9.
They, (i.) the wicked shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. It is Heaven wherever
God is in his special abode, and that is Hell where He is not present in his
mercy and grace.

Secondly, Use of Lamentation.

Let us lament over a worse sort of men, and they be such as in Job. 21.14.
That say to God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways;
That refuse the word of Christ, and be weary of God and his Ordinances, and so
reject God. as if one house could not hold them both; as the peoin Isa.
30.10.11. Who say to the Seers, see not; and to the Prophets, prophecy not,
etc. Cause the Holy one to cease from before us. They that stop the mouths of
them that speak the word of Christ, or turn away their ears from harkening to
that which is spoken, say in effect, Let God be gone, let Christ depart from us.

First, Consider what an evil frame of spirit it is, for men to refuse the
presence of God. Was there ever wickedness like this? that the great God should
be as an unbidden guest with his own creatures, and have no better
entertainment than Christ with the Gaderens, who besought him to depart out of
their Coast, yea, which is far worse, rejected, as Christ was by the possessed
in the Gospel, Mat. 8.29. What have we to do with thee? art thou come to
torment us before the time?

Secondly, Consider it will be a very terrible day, when God and Christ depart
from such persons. God threatens it as a sore judgment upon Jerusalem, Jer.
6.8. Be thou instructed O Jerusalem, lest my Soul depart from thee; When God
departs, in comes all Judgments, for it follows in the Text, Lest I make thee
desolate; Desolation comes as soon as God is gone, yea, says the Lord, Hos.
9.12. Woe to them, when I depart from them. And though he depart from such by
removing his Counsels, Gospel, and Ordinances: He will still be with them in
judgment; when he is far from their Affections, he will be nigh to their
Consciences, then he will show his terror, and his wrath; and then they shall
find, that as there is not a sweeter promise than this, I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee; so not a more terrible judgment than this, I will not love
thee, nor abide with thee.

Use of Lamentation.

Let us lament our selves, who have had God and Christ making their abode with
us for many years in their special Providence, Gospel Ordinances, etc. Yet we
have not improved so glorious a Presence, so rich a mercy: especially we have
cause to lament this fourfold neglect.

First, That we have so little acquainted our selves with God and Christ, so
little prized and observed their Presence with us, that we have learned no more
of God and Christ, but are yet strangers to them; so that Jesus Christ may say
to us, as in Joh. 14.9. Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou
not known me, Philip; so he may say to us, Have I been so long time with you in
my Providence, Ordinances, and by my Spirit, and yet have you not known my
Goodness, my Faithfulness, my Name, my Laws and Ordinances? Sure it is with
most of us, as with Jacob, Genesis 28.15.16. The Lord was with him, and he was in
his Dream, and when he awaked, he said, Surely the Lord is in this place, and I
knew it not. So God has been with us, but we have been in a dream, or in a
sleep all this while; but when God shall awaken us, we shall say with him, God
was in this place, and we knew it not.

Secondly, We may lament our selves that we have so little conformed to God and
Christ. God has been with us, but we have refused his company, as Ephe. 2.12.
And had our conversation as without God, and without Christ in the world; O
when God and Christ shall depart from us, it will be a heartbreaking to us,
and we shall dearly repent the least miscarriages.

Thirdly, We may lament, that we have not lived more upon God and Christ, to
trust in them, and depend upon them for life and Salvation, and made him our
Counselor, Guide, and Strength, and lived upon his All Sufficiency; we have
not made them our Sanctuary, our Treasury, our Happiness, though they have been
with us, in whom are all things. Yet have we lived at so poor a rate (as to our
spiritual comforts) as if we had been under the Hypocrit's Curse, Job 20.22. In
the fullness of his sufficiency he is in straits, Or guilty of that vanity
mentioned in Eccle. 6.2. To have Riches and Honors. etc. and not a heart to
use them. To have a God and Christ, in whom are all Riches and Honors, and
have had no Faith to use them for our comfort, we have even starved our selves
at the fullest Table, and Springhead of plenty.

Fourthly, We may lament our selves, that we have not taken more pleasure in
the enjoyment of God and Christ in the Gospel, and Gospel Ordinances;
accounting all Company and delights, solitariness, in comparison of the joy
and comfort that is in the abode of God and Christ; especially, when God
expects we should rejoice in him, and has promised to abode with such, Isai.
64.5. Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works Righteousness, and
remembers thee in thy ways.

Two Uses of Exhortation.

1. To get the Presence of God and Christ with us. 2. To endeavor to keep God
and Christ abiding with us.
The first Use of Exhortation.

Let us be Exhorted above all desires, to desire Gods presence; and above all
getting, Get God and Christ to make their abode with you. O with what Ardency
and heat of desire, does David express himself; Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I
desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of
the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to
enquire in his Temple; and so in Psalm. 42.1,2. As the Heart pants after the
water brooks, so pants my Soul after thee O God, My Soul thirsts for God,
when shall I come and appear before God? O when will thou come unto me? and in
a multitude of such like Pathetick breathings after God.

And that we may the more earnestly desire this mercy, the abode of God and
Christ with us; Consider three particulars.

First, Consider, the presence of God and Christ, is the special favor and
honor that God bestows only upon his own people. By this was Israel
distinguished from all the world, Exodus 33.16. My presence shall go with thee,
and in the last verse of the last Chapter of Ezekiel. It is the Church only
that is called Jehovah Shammah. The Lord is there her Founder, Preserver, and
Governor.

Secondly, Consider, that they that have God and Christ with them, dwell
continually at the Fountain Head of Consolations, as David says, Psalm. 23. I
shall want nothing, The Lord is my shepherd, My Cup runs over. Surely
Goodness and Mercy shall follow me all the days of my life. This Fountain
keeps our Cisternes full; our Channels run shallow sometimes, but never are
they dried up; Hos. 14.5. I will be as the Dew unto Israel; He shall grow as
the Lilly, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon, they shall grow up as the
Lilly, beautiful and fair, and as the Cedar, well rooted and established; He
that has the Sun, has Light, He that has the Well, must needs have Water;
Ille possidet omnia, qui possidet possidentem omnia; He has all things, who
has him from whom all things come.

Thirdly, Consider, that when all Comforts leave us, God will not; when Friends
forsake, and Riches profit not, in the evil day, God is a present help in time
of trouble, and loves to show himself in Dubiis and Arduis, in the greatest
difficulties, and on the Mount of straits. Jesus Christ says truly to us, what
Peter said rashly to him; Though all forsake thee, yet will not I.

Object. I have found God and Christ, gone from me, says the Soul, when I have
had need of him.

Answer, First, That God and Christ may and do sometimes hide their faces from
their dearest Friends.

Secondly, Though God and Christ do sometimes withdraw from us, yet every
interruption of Communion, is not a separation; The Sun does not cease to be,
when it cease to shine. Grace may suspend its acting, but does not loose its
being, God will not finally forsake his People.

Thirdly, God has very many Gracious ends, why he sometimes withdraws; And
they are always in mercy to his people, sad providence, producing sweet effects.

Directions and helps, how to get the presence of God and Christ with us.

First, Repent and humble your selves, because of all your sins, that you have
at any time rejected the Counsels of God, and refused Grace and Mercy, and
neglected Opportunities, of doing you Souls good, and drawing near to God;
Repentance and Resolution against Sin, come like John Baptist, to prepare a
way, and a place, for God and Christ to come to, and make their abode in. Of
the Hearts and Houses of Impenitent Sinners, we may well say God is not there.
The way to have God to turn in unto us; is to turn away from sin, as Ephraim,
Jer. 31.18,19,20. He bemoaned himself, and repented, and God came to him as to
his dear Son, and to his pleasant Child.

Secondly, Believe in Jesus Christ, and by faith get an interest in him; It is
by faith only that we give entertainment to Jesus Christ; It is by Jesus Christ
alone, that God and Man come together. No man has seen the Father at any time,
but the Son, and he to whom he does reveal him, and he that has the Son, has
the Father, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God.

Thirdly, Own Jesus Christ in all his Offices, as your King, Priest, and
Prophet.

First, As your King, Let him have the Sovereignty of your Souls, that he may
rule over you. If Christ be your King, God will be your Father; God loves to
come, where Christ has his Throne.

Secondly, As your Priest, That his Righteousness may give you the advantage
of Communion with God; without which we cannot come near to him, and he will
not come near to us.

Thirdly, As your Prophet, That he may show you the way; If his Spirit be your
Guide, and his Word your Rule, you may be sure his Promises shall be your
Portion, even this Promise in the Text, They will come to you, and make their
abode with you, even God and Christ.

Fourthly, Seek earnestly after God and Christ, in the use of all appointed
means, till you come to see, and enjoy their presence with you.

Here shall be shown these two particulars.

1. Where we may seek God and Christ. 2. How, or after what manner we must seek
them.
First, Where we may seek after God and Christ?

First, We may find them in the works of Creation; these will represent God and
Christ unto us, the Power and Wisdom of God and Christ, by whom the World was
made; In omnire aspectabili quaedam extant vestigia Dei; In all the visible
creatures, there be some prints of the invisible God; so that he which lives
altogether without God, must needs be (...), without excuse, having God so near
to him.

Secondly, We may find them in the Word, 2 Cor. 4.6. The glory of God shines
there in the face of Jesus Christ, and to them that are conversant in the Word,
God has promised to reveal himself, Isa. 66.2. To this man will I look, even
to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. And
the Apostle gives this direction, Romans 10.6.7. Say not in thine heart, who
shall ascend into Heaven? that is to bring Christ down from above; or, who
shall descend into the deep? that is to bring up Christ again from the dead.
But what says it? The word is night thee, even in the mouth, and in thy heart;
that is, the word of faith which we preach.

Thirdly, We may find them in Prayer, Jam. 4.8. Draw night to God, and he will
draw nigh to you. If you will be strangers to the duty of Prayer, to the Throne
of Grace, God will be a stranger to you; he has promised to draw nigh to them,
that draw nigh to him; and so in Exodus 20.24. In all places where I record my
Name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.

Fourthly, We may find them in our Communion with the People of God. Where two
or three are met together in my Name, there will I be (says Christ) in the
midst of them. Therefore Jesus Christ directs us to go up by the footsteps of
the Flock; and they enquire wisely, Cant. 6.1. that say to the Church of
Christ, Whither is thy beloved gone, that we may seek him with thee? and when
the two Disciples went to Emmaus, communing of Christ, He came and joined
himself with them.

Secondly, How, or after what manner we must seek God and Christ.

Take these four following Directions.

First, Affect your selves with the worth and excellency of this presence of
God and Christ; carry a high esteem of them in your hearts; think with your
selves, how safely they are Immured; how Encastled and Provided for, who have
God and Christ with them; as the Prophet said to his servant, There is more for
them, than can be against them, Isai. 33.16. their place of defense, is the
Munition of Rocks, etc. O what sweetness and satisfaction have they within,
with whom God and Christ abides^ as the Spouse does express it, Cant. 1.3.
Because of the savor of thy good Ointments, thy Name is as Ointment poured
forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee. Thy Name of Mercy, Wisdom, and
Faithfulness; how does this refresh their hearts, that have the presence of
God and Christ? O sweetness and satisfaction beyond expression! and then
conclude, Sitantus; quarentibus (...) quantus possidentibus; If he be so good
to them that seek him, how good is he to them that enjoy him.

Secondly, Labor to affect your souls with the great want and need that you
have of the presence of God and Christ; while men think in their hearts, they
can be well enough without God and Christ, they will never seek after them, but
say, as in Jer. 2.31. We are Lords, we will come no more unto thee, (i.) We
have strength enough of our own, we need no more of thy support; and thus David
brings in the wicked, priding themselves, in Psalm. 10.4. The wicked through the
pride of his countenance (as in the original, through the pride of his Nose)
will not seek after God. God is not in all his thoughts, when these proud
Laodician Spirits will not sock, the poor, hungry, desolate soul, that sees a
need of God and Christ, find them.

Thirdly, Quicken your selves to much diligence in seeking: The Prophet
complains, No man stirs up himself to seek the Lord. It is a business of
the greatest concernment, and most not be attended with a cold indifferency,
but as one set on by a true love, and where that is, Non quie^ (...), sed quer^
(...), Love will he restless in the pur^ of the thing, or person beloved. See
with what heat men seek the world, with much more heat seek God and Christ. We
must do as the woman that had lost her Groat; she lights a Candle, sweeps the
House, seeks diligently; so we must set up the light of the Word, and to work
with the (...) of a serious repentance, and thorough ^ation, and diligently
enquir^ Thus David with a very vigilant eye, seeks him whom his soul loved,
Psalm. 130.4.5. I will not give rest to mine eyes, nor slumber to my eye lids,
till I have found out a pl^ for God, etc.

Lastly, Resolve with your selves never to give over, till you come to the
perfect and full enjoyment of them; As Job said, I (...) all the days of my
appointed time. So do you seek all the days of your appointed time. If we would
find God and Christ, we must seek all the days of our lives. They that will
find what they seek, must seek till they find; As God in the Creation, did not
rest till he had made Man, so Man should not rest till he has found God; And
as in the Redemption, Jesus Christ did never cease seeking, till he had found
all the lost sheep of the House of Israel; so we should never give over, till
we have made God and Christ our own.

This should be the work of our lives, and upon this work I must leave you.

For now I must tell you, That (perhaps) you may not see my face, or bear my
voice any more in this place; yet not out of any peevish humor, or
disaffection to the present Authority of the Kingdom (I call God and Man to
witness this day) it being my own Practice and Counsel to you all, To Fear GOD,
and Honor the KING; but rather a real disatisfaction in some particulars
imposed, to which, (notwithstanding all endeavors to that purpose) my
conscience cannot yet be espoused. Wherefore, I hope, in this, and in all my
abode with you, I may say (without ostentation) with the Apostle in the 2 Cor.
1.12. Our rejoicing is this, The testimony of a good Conscience, that in
simplicity, and godly sincerity, we have had our conversation in the world,
especially to you words; And as he said in Acts 20.26.27. So, I take you to
record this day, that I have endeavored to be pure from the blood of all men;
for I have not shunned to declare to you, the whole counsel of God, both by my
Life and Doctrine; because I knew this very well, that (as one says,) S^
loqu^is vita, non oratia; that the Preachers life, is the most lively preaching.

I shall only add this (my Friends) That though my lips be sealed up, that I
may not speak from God to you, yet I shall not cease to speak to God for you,
as ever I have done; And though I cannot have you in my eye, yet I shall lodge
you in my heart; And asking nothing of you, but your Prayers, shall hope to
meet you daily at the Throne of Grace, and that at last we may enjoy one
another in Heaven.

And because they say, The word of a Dying man wake the deepest impression,
before I am altogether Civilly dead, I shall give you one Exhortation more.

Secondly, Let it be your endeavor to keep God and Christ with you, that they
may make their abode with your hearts and houses, that whatever you lose, you
may not be undone.



First, Take heed you do not slight or abuse his Providence.

Secondly, Do not Despise or neglect his Ordinances.

Thirdly, Be sure you do not grieve his Spirit.

Observe more particularly these ten directions, which I would leave with you.

That God and Christ may make their constant abode with you.

First, Endeavor to please God and Christ, and to walk as the Gospel commands,
In all well-pleasing. And for this purpose, Observe these three Rules.

First, Entertain God and Christ like themselves. Now they are come to you, say
as Solomon did of his Temple, which he had prepared for his God; The Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain thee, much less, this poor Tent; so, with the most
humble frame of spirit, admire his greatness, and infinite condescension, for
he is the King of Glory; as in Psalm. 24. And so give him suitable
entertainment, for he will dwell with the humble and contrite spirit. If
Elizabeth wondered at the visit which Mary gave her, with a whence is it that
the Mother of my Lord is come unto me? then admire that the Lord himself should
come, not only to visit your hearts, but to make such a gracious abode with
you; And as the Centurion said to Christ in the Gospel, I am not worthy that
thou should come under my Roof. So acknowledge your unworthiness of so rich
and unparalleld a grace, that God and Christ should come in unto you, to abide
with you!

Secondly, Wait upon God and Christ with all readiness of mind, to observe
every intimation of the Will of God; to you. Stand always ready, as Servants
wait upon the hand of their Master, saying in your hearts, Lord, what will thou
have me to do? or, what will thou have me to suffer? It is the frame and
posture which Christ commends to his Disciples, Luke 12.35. Let your loins be
girded about, and your lights burning, to do his will, as it is done in Heaven.

Thirdly, Take pleasure and delight in the company and society of God and
Christ, above all the pleasures in the world. Do nothing, without first calling
God and Christ into the action. Remember this in These four cases especially.

First, Pray God and Christ along with you into all your spiritual duties, that
you may be sure to perform them all according to the mind of God. None knows
better what will please God, than himself; don't enquire so much what others
say, but what God appoints; it is not what this or that man says, how we must
serve God, but what God says himself; as Agustine said to the Manichee, in
another case, Nec egote, nec tu me, sed ambo audiamus Apostolum; So hear what
God and Christ say to us, as to the performance of all our duties: If we will
entertain God and Christ, and have their company, we must set before them such
savoury meat as they like, lest we be like them ( Mat 15.9.) of whom Christ
says, In vain do they worship me, etc. and our service be like theirs, of
which the Lord said, Who has required these things at your hands? O what was
that great evil the people were guilty of, for which there comes that heavy
judgment, Psalm. 78.60. He forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the Tent which he
placed among them. Sure it was some great guilt, in the former verses we find
it to be their Hypocrisy, Apostasy, and Idolatry, any taint of this kind, will
make the jealous God forsake our solemn meetings.

Secondly, Pray God and Christ into all your Civil affairs The Greeks (...)
with God in their entrance upon every work, was a commendable practice. It is
reported of Publius Scipio the Roman, that he would always go first to the
Capitol, and then to the Senate; So we should begin our Civil Employments with
Spiritual duties; And do as Abraham's Servant, when he was to take a wife for
his Masters Son, he took God along with him; and thus to abide with God, is to
have God to abide with us. Therefore says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.20 Let every
man abide in the same calling, wherein he was called, and in the 24 verse,
Brethren let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with God, And God
will abide with him.

Thirdly, Pray God and Christ to your Tables at your eating and drinking, For
man does not live by bread only. If these be Guests at your Tables, you must
needs have Cheer enough; there is more sweetness in a morsel with them, then in
all dainties without them; And then you may be sure also, your Tables shall not
become a Snare unto you. Theophrastus reports of the Heathens, that they did
first (...), and then (...), they did first Sacrifice and then Kill, lay on
their meat, entertain and eat. And it is the Apostles rule, seeing all things
come of God through Christ, That God and Christ should not be Unbidden Guests;
but as in 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all
to the Glory of God.

Fourthly, Pray. God and Christ along with you in Morning when you rise, and at
Evening when you lie down; visit him Morning by Morning and Evening by Evening;
this is the way to have a Prosperous day, and a Safe night; David took this
course, Psalm 4.8. I will both lay me down, and take my rest, for thou Lord,
only make me dwell in safety; and this gave Jacob such a pleasant Dream, Genesis
28. that having God with him, he was an night within view of Heaven.

Secondly, Love God and Christ above all, and then God and Christ will not
depart from you; For He shows mercy to Thousands of them that love him, and
has made over Himself, and Heaven, and All, to them that love him. It is
reported of Ignatius, that his Love was such to God and Christ, that he had the
name of Christ, Cordi ej^s insc^iptum; Graven upon his heart. It is such a
Heart-love that He requires; for He is a jealous God, and will have all our
Love.

If we Love any thing better;

First, It will steal away our Hearts from God; And

Secondly, It will take off the Heart of God from us; so that God and Christ
will set themselves against us.

Thirdly, If we would have God and Christ to make their constant abode with us,
Delight in the Society and Fellowship of the People of God, with whom they
dwell; Never be ashamed to converse with them, whom God and Christ do own for
theirs. The Apostles argument why we should entertain Strangers, in Heb. 13.2.
(because thereby some have entertained Angels unawares) is but mean and
inconsiderable to this Reason, why we should entertain and own the Saints of
God; for thereby we are sure to entertain Christ; as in Mat. 25.40. For this
cause the Gibeonites made a League with Israel; For we have heard that God is
with you. And there is a promise in Zech. 8.23. That Ten men out of all
Languages shall take hold of the skirt of a Jew, saying, we will go with you,
for we have heard that God is with you, Mal. 3.16. They that feared the Lord,
spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, etc. He was
with them, and indeed, God dwells in the Tabernacles of the Righteous.

Fourthly, If we would have the constant abode of God and Christ with us, Let
us keep our selves clean from Sin, our Hearts pure, Consciences undefiled, and
as the Apostle says, void of Offense toward God, and toward Men, very
careful not to Sin against God; and very circumspect not to Sin against Man;
that this may be our Comfort, that the world must needs say of us, as they did
of Daniel, that they could find nothing against him; save in the Law of his
God, as in Daniel 6.5. Whatever others do, beware of Sin. Say as Joshuah, I
and my House will serve the Lord. Watch against Sin; Choose any Suffering,
rather then the least Sin.

Consider in that choice two particulars.

First, Consider in all your sufferings, God will be with you, but in any of
your Sins, he will not abode with you; as in the example of Israel, Exodus
32.23. When the Calf was got into the Camp, God forsakes the Host of Israel;
When Saul forsook the Lord, the Spirit of the Lord forsook him. That was an
excellent Saying of Azariah the Son of Obed, in the 2 Chronicles. 15.2. and Oh that
all England could hear it! Hear thou me Asa, and all Judah, The Lord is with
you, while you be with him; If you seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye
forsake him, he will forsake you.

Secondly, Consider, It Is an Act of high presumption, reflecting much upon the
Purity and Holiness of God, for (...) to imagine that God will own, and
prosper them with his Presence, while they go on to do wickedly, in their
Whoredoms, Drunkenesse, Blasphemy, and all manner of Profaneness; which God
can no more own, then disown himself. So they foolishly promised themselves
Peace, Deuteronomy. 29.19. though they walk in the imagination of their Hearts, and
add Drunkenness to Thirst; But the Lord will not spare, but his Anger and
Jealousy shall sm^ak against them, till he has brought them down from their
high Mount of a Sinful and Carnal Confidence. Therefore the Prophet reproves
that wicked people, Mich. 3.11. where the Judges, the Priests, and the Prophets
were corrupted. Yet they say, Is not the Lord among us, none evil can come upon
us, Therefore shall Zion be plowed as a Field, etc. as Abner said to Joab, This
will prove an evil thing, and a bitter in the latter end; as Galen says of
Meats, Quae dulcia sunt facile in bilem and amaritudinem convertuntur; Sweet
meats generate Choler and Corrupt matter; So Sin that is a sweet morsel now,
will be Shame, Death, and Hell at last.

Fifthly, With an humble acknowledgment of former Barrenness, under Gods
gracious presence with you, resolve and endeavor to be more fruitful. God
never left his Vineyard, and pulled up the Hedge, and commanded the Rain not to
fall upon it, in Isai. 5. till it became Barren, or did bear corrupt fruit. The
exiled Confessors in Queen Mary's days, confessed that (as Ursin says in the
Preface to his Catechism) the cause of their present suffering, was their
former Barrenness and Unprofitablenesse under the Gospel; and a sad example of
this is Jerusalem, over whom Christ laments. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou, etc.
if thou had known in this thy day, etc. but now they are hid from thine eyes;
and when once a people grow up to this height to reject the Gospel, then
expect some fearful Judgment. Read the last Chapter of Chronicles, the Second
Book, and at the 16 verse, and then you will see, when the wrath of God is like
to break out upon a People without a remedy.

Sixthly, If you would have the continual abode of God and Christ with you; Let
God have all your Thoughts, let Him be your meditation; this is the way to have
the best Company when you be alone; David would meditate of him day and night,
and professed the meditation of him, should be sweet to him.

Here consider two particulars.

First, Consider, that no Place, State, or Condition, can hinder the Soul of
this way of secret Communion with God and Christ; This privilege could not be
denied to a benighted Jacob, to an Imprisoned Jeremiah, to an Exil^d John in
Patmos; by this (says Jerome) Solitudo fit Paradisas, a man may turn a
Wilderness into a Paradise; and therefore we read in Cant. 11.12. how the
Spouse invites Christ to go with her, as Isaac did into the Fields to meditate,
Come let us go into the Fields, and lodge in the Villages.

Secondly, Consider, In these secret silent visits of the Soul, God and Christ
do take abundance of delight; Our Night thoughts, our Field thoughts, our
Closet thoughts. are very welcome to Them; yea, when we can do no more but think
of God, our very thoughts shall be an accepted service, Cant. 2.13. He loves
the Fig Tree, that puts forth her green Figs. The ripe fruit is in the ^d;
so holy endeavors in pure breathings and desires, God accepts, when our
Infirmity, or the Iniquity of the Times may be such, that we can do no more.

Seventhly, If we will have God and Christ to make their constant abode with
us, then let us walk humbly with God. He that beholds the proud afar off, will
be nigh to them that humble their souls under his mighty hand, Isa. 57.15. Thus
says the high and lofty one, that inhabits Eternity, whose Name is Holy; I
dwell in the High and Holy place, with him also, that is of an humble and
contrite spirit.

God has two Heavens in which he dwells.

First, His Glory dwells in the high and holy place, in Heaven above.

Secondly, His Grace dwells in the humble and lowly spirit. Here will I dwell,
says God.

Eighthly, If you would have the constant abode of God and Christ with you, be
sure to look to your hearts, that you walk in your uprightness; be true to the
Word of God, be true to your profession. There is not in the world a more
lively representation and Image of God, than the heart of the upright;
therefore God loves so much, when he has drawn his likeness upon them to walk
with them; therefore David resolves, Psalm 101.2. I will walk in the midst of
mine house with a perfect heart; O when will thou come unto me? This was the
comfort of the Apostle, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, he had his
conversation in the world; God will be with such, and such shall be with God,
Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, behold the upright, the end of that man is
peace; And thus God appointed Abraham to walk, that he might be with him a God
in Covenant, Gen 17. Walk before me, be thou perfect; and gives him this
encouragement, I am God All-sufficient: Gods All sufficiency being sufficient
to keep the Soul upright, being rightly improved.

There be two things which usually Bias the Soul away from God, and makes it
warp from its holy principles, 1. The Frowns. 2. The Flatteries of the world.

Against both which, there is a sufficient remedy in the All-sufficient God.

First, That which often perverts the Soul from the truth, is the fear of
troubles and wants; If I keep my integrity, (says the Soul) I shall be Undone,
I shall Lose my estate, Embroyl my self in many Troubles; perhaps a Prison,
Exile, or Death comes next. But what force is there in this Tentation? If we
hear on the other hand, God saying, if thou will be upright, fear no troubles,
no wants, I am a God All-sufficient, as in Job 22.25. to the end of the
Chapter, The Almighty shall be thy defense (then fear no force) thou shall have
plenty of Silver, thou shall gather Gold as dust, and the Gold of Ophir, as the
stones of the Brooks, Then fear no wants.

Secondly, There is another thing in the world that has a very great influence
upon the spirit of a man, to pervert him, and turn him from his integrity; and
that is The hopes of preferment, and greatness of the world; But this is but a
poor bait, if we look upon the All Sufficiency of God: Does the World promise
thee Riches? God will out-bid the world, and gives Eternal Riches. Will the
World give Pleasures? God will give better; with him is fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore. Will the World give Gold? God will give Diamonds. Will
the World give all its Glory? God will give thee the Glory of a better World,
rather than that shall be a snare unto thee.

Ninthly, Pray much, pray continually; God will be in the hearts and houses of
his Praying people, when he has a Curse in store for Prayerless Families, in
Jerem. 10. the last verse.

First, That God will abide with you, and the Kingdom in his Gospel, and pure
Ordinances; that you may dwell in Beth-el, and not in Berl-aven, a house of
vanity and grief. Pray that God will not remove his Candlestick from you, nor
utterly extinguish the light of the Kingdom.

Secondly, Pray, and I shall pray with you, that God will give you a faithful
Pastor after his own heart, not according to your hearts, that he may teach
you by his Doctrine and his Life too; A faithful Teacher, to go in, and out
before you; to show you the Word of the Lord; One that may be among you, as it
was said of Athanasius, that he was Magnes and Adamas.

1. Magnes, As a Lodestone, to draw your Souls with a gentle hand, and melting
heart, from your sins Heavenward. 2. Adamas, As an Adamant, of an invincible
courage and zeal against all sin and profaneness; one that will not spare Sin.
That he may save your Souls.
Pray that God would give you a Star, a Star out of his right hand, not a
Churlish Orion, that brings a Cold, Barren, and Cloudy Winter. but a Benevolent
and Friendly Pleiades, that there may be many Sons brought into God, and your
Souls may find a continual Spring, and that you may be as Trees of Gods own
planting, and may flourish in the Courts of the house of our God, and may bring
forth more fruit in old age.

Tenthly, and Lastly, If you would have the constant abode of God and Christ
with you, Conform, Conform universally, and fully to the Gospel of Christ,
Consent and Assent Unfeignedly, to all the Truths and Doctrines thereof, that
you may walk worthy of God, and all that Grace which has been revealed to you:
for Christ has said, If a man keep his Word, the Father will love him, and
both Father and Son, will come to him, and make their abode with him. Wherefore
I shall conclude this Exhortation with that of the Apostle, in Philippians
1.2.7. Only Let your conversation be such as becomes the Gospel of Christ,
that whether I come and see you, or else be absent from you, I may hear of your
affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for
the faith of the Gospel.

And so shut up all with that in Acts 20.32.

And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them which are
Sanctified.

FINIS.

