TWO LETTERS: THE ONE FROM LIEUTENANT COLONEL John Lilbourne TO COLONEL HENRY
MARTIN, a Member of the House of COMMONS. WITH HIS ANSWER.
SIR;
I Received yours of the 21. instant, even now in answer to mine of the 20th
instant, and I must be necessitated to tell you, that no man so well knows
where the shoe pi^cheth him, as he that wears it; and my ten years
experience of afflictions, (without to this day ever obtaining one pennyworth
of Justice,) being a younger Brother, and having not one foot of land in all
the world to support me, has run me now at last in many straights, having wife
and children to sustain and provide for, as well as my self, so that I must
ingenuously confess unto you, if I had not a little credit now and then to
borrow a sum of money, we must have been forced ere now to have eat one
another: and I must tell you, that I can not always live upon that score, and
debts must either be paid in some time, or else lenders will grow weary,
especially when they have no other securitis but the bare word of a man in
misery, and present poverty, and guilty of my own death, I dare not be, but
must do the utmost that the best reason GOD has given unto me, will dictate
unto me to preserve my self, and truly and before God I speak it, I have
left no means I could think of unassayed to prevail with you, to make my
report, or at least vigorously to endeavor it; for feign I would have been at
the House to have paid them according to their deserts, but I could not come at
them so fully as I would, but I must furiously smite you, (which I protest with
ingenuitie I was exceeding loath to do.) In regard you never by your self, or
under your hand, or by any other way, that I could build upon for an avouched
evidence, did ever give me, before now, to understand that you had faithfully
endeavored to discharge vour duty, whereunto you were often preft by me. Now
you tell me you have offered my report twenty times, but could not be heard by
your House. I am glad to hear from your self, you have so done, and shall
give credit to it, and wish I had had the same information from you the sooner,
that so I might not have fallen so foul upon your self, who had not a small
proportion of my affection; and to your framing an answer to my printed Epistle
to you of the 30th of May last, I desire with all my heart, you may go on, and
not spare me, nor any man else in your way. And I must inform you, that when
your friend and mine, Mr W. W. told me of it, I was very glad and earnestly
entreated him to press you to finish it, telling him what ever was in it
against me, if you could not get it printed, I would get it done for you, and
pay for it my self. Sir, go on I beseech you with vigor and strength without
delay, to discharge your duty about my report, and if upon a hearing before
indifferent men, chosen by us, I have done you any wrong, I will abide the
award, and punctually perform it, what ever it be, if within my power, and I
doubt not but fully to make it evident, that I have been, and am as really your
friend and servant, to the utmost of my power, as you are or have been;

From my most illegal captivity in the Tower of London, July 23. 1647. John
Lilburne.

FOR LIEVT: COLONEL John Lilbourne At his Lodgings in the Tower, PRESENT THESE.
SIR;
BY yours of the 23th (outside and inside) I am earnesily invited to come
abroad in print, for which I have not only your advice and encouragement,
offering to defray the charges thereof your self (notwithstanding your
poverty;) but I have your example too, (the most taking way of persuasion;) for
the same day wherein I received your last by my man, I met your former Letter
printed: All which is but concurrent with my own resolution, so expressed when
I wrote unto you; and if I be not altogether so early at the Press as you
might expect, (because your self would happily have made more haste thither) you
may be pleased to impute it, not to a want of knowing what to say in my own
behalf, nor to a loathnesse of being at the charge to publish it, but partly
to a kind of tenderness as the first setting my foot upon that stage where I
was never yet (otherwise then passively,) and partly to the multitude of other
businesses, which were enough to distract a better brain then mine, and shake
the pen out of a man's hand after he had sworn to write. In so much, as if
every one of those whom I have wronged like you (that is, for whom I have not
procured what they desired) should require the same satisfaction from me that
you do, Martins Pamphlets bound up in a volume would fill a considerable room
in a Booksellers shop, though stuffed with nothing but what is most true for
the matters overred therein, and very civil to the persons mentioned.
Therefore when you shall find your ungentle language answered with mildness,
I do freely disclaim the deserving of any thanks at your hands, as if I spared
you, where in truth I spare my self, thinking it less credit for me to
outrun you in evil speaking, then to go slowly on your arrands. Upon this
very ground I beseech you not to trouble your self, (much less any body else)
about repairing of me, till I feel my self dilapidated; for, besides that,
(in my conscience) you never meant me harm in any thing you said of me, had
your meaning been never so bad toward me: I do not take my self to be within
the reach of a tongue: bitter words are indeed compared to arrows, for so
perhaps he fancies them that utters them, and some wise men, at whom they are
well aimed, but I am such a fool as to conceive they are always shot upright
into the air, and either vanish there, or (if ever you hear any more nowes of
them) they are sure to light upon the head of him that shot them. Whether you
have been mistaken or no in your censures of me, no man shall be Judge but
your self, nor should have been witness, if there had not been more need of
humouring you, then of clearing:

Sir, Your most affectionate friend and servant, H. M.
Westminster 26 Julij 17.

