To the right Honorable the chosen and Representative body of England
Assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of L. C. JOHN LILBURNE A Free man of England.
Shows,
THat your petitioner has and does look upon this Honorable House, as the
chosen and betrusted Commissioners of all the Commons of England, in whom alone
(by right) resides the formal and legal supreme power of England, and unto
whom all the Commons of England have given so much of their Power, as to enable
you alone, to do all things whatsoever for their weal, safety peace and
prosperity, the end of all Government, as is most excellently, by your
Honorable declaration of the 17. of April last declared.

The knowledge and understanding of which, has made your petitioner as a
Commoner (in his Countries straits and necessities) to take up arms as his
duty, to fight against the King (the servant of the Common wealth) and all the
forces raised by his Authority (who sought to destroy the end of Government,
the safety and weal of the people) and to be faithful in your said service,
in the midst of many deaths; contemning and slighting, the large proffers of
the Kings Honors and preferments, sent unto him by four Lords, when he was a
prisoner for you at Oxford, for which he was imediatly laid in Irons night and
day, looked up close in a room, a Centinell set at his door, that so he might
not speak with any whosoever, forced to lie on the floor, kept without one
farthing of allowance although he carried not one penny with him to the prison

And within a few days after was (for his continued resolution) arraigned (in
Irons) as a Traitor for his life before Judge Heath, before whom he pleaded to
his indictment, professing unto him at the open bar (when he pressed your
petitioner to save himself) that he your supplyant was not seduced by any to
take up arms, but did it out of a principle of duty to himself, his country
and the Paliament, and that he was resolved to spend his blood in the defense
of his own and his Countries liberties; also your petitioner upon the same
grounds, has often been in the field since, and done good services, and has
continued faithful in all his engagements, and is resolved (by the strength of
God) so to do to the death.

Now for as much as the liberties and freedoms contained in the 28. and 29.
chap. of the great Charter of England, are the best legal inheritance that
your petitioner has, and for the preservation of which, ye have so often
sworn to spend your lives and fortunes, and enjoined the people that trusted
you to do the same, and for the maintaining of which, your petitioner has run
the hazard of so many deaths and miseries as he has done, amongst which
liberties and privileges this is not one of the least (as your petitioner
humbly conceives) that all Commoners whatsoever in criminal causes shall be
tried by their equals or fellow Commoners; nevertheles the House of Lords
(commonly so called) summoned your petitioner to their Bar to answer a
criminal charge there, contrary to the tenor of the great Charter so often
confirmed, and although your petitioner told their Messenger, and afterward
some of themselves, that by Magna Charta they had nothing to do with your
petitioner in such a case, and that if he were called, he must and would plead
this a^^ their Bar, cost it him what it would, and also entreated one of
themselves, to acquaint the rest of his fellow Lords, that he must and would
protest against them, and appeal to his competent proper and legal tryers and
judges your Honors,

Yet notwithstanding they forced your Petitioner to their Bar, and would have
compelled him, contrary to Law, reason, and Conscience, and to the fundamental
liberty of all the free People of England, (so adjudged in his own case of the
Star Chamber etc. by your honors and themselves) to answer to Interrogatories
concerning himself, without showing him any formal and legal charge in
writing, although he earnestly desired to see it, if they had any, which was
refused, and your Petitioner pressed again and again with much vehemence, by
their Speaker, to answer, verbal questions, which forced your Petitioner to
deliver at their open Bar his Protestation, in writing under his hand and
seal, as also his appeal to your Honors, his competent, proper and legal
Tryers and Judges; a true Copy of which is hereunto annexed, for which alone,
they committed your Petitioner to Newgate prison, (as appears by the Copy of
their commitment hereunto annexed) all which your Petitioner humbly conceives,
tends to the disfranchizing him of his just liberties and freedoms, (and so to
the making him a slave) and to the violation of their own Oaths and Covenants,
and to the utter subversion, and alteration of the fundamental Laws and
government of this Kingdom, for the preservation of which, so much blood and
treasure has already been spent.

Your Petitioner therefore, as a freeman of England, (who to his knowledge
never did any act that deserves the forfeiting of his birthright) humbly
appealleth to your honorable Bar and Justice, as his proper, competent, legal
tryers and Judges, and humbly prays.

For as much as he is a free Commoner of England, and ought not to be proceeded
against, nor his liberties and freedoms to be taken from him, in any arbitrary
or extrajudiciall way. And for that their Lordships have no power, nor
jurisdiction, according to the Law and constitutions of this Kingdom, to try
and adjudge any free Commoner thereof, for any criminal causes whatsoever,
concerning life, limb, liberty, or estate; And for that your Petitioner is
imprisoned, contrary to the form and tenor of the great Charter of England,
and therefore altogether illegal, and merely arbitrary; That your Honors will
be pleased, according to your unparaleld Declaration of the 17th of April last,
whereby is set forth, that you will not exercise, nor suffer to be exercised by
any other, any arbitrary power, but that you will provide for the safety and
weal of the People, (the primitive end of all government) according to the
great trust reposed in you, and committed to you, by your Impowrers, the
Commons of England, you will take your Petitioner into your protection, and not
suffer him any longer to be kept in prison, and spoiled of his Franchizes and
liberties, but according to the said Charter of liberties, your Protestations,
Oaths and Declarations, the laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, he may freely
be enlarged out of prison, and restored to his just liberty, with just
reparations for his damages, for the great wrongs done unto him, by his
reproachful imprisonment in the infamous prison of Newgate, and the
vindication and freeing of the whole Kingdom (according to their long and just
expectation) from the like usurpation, and encroachments of their just rights
and privledges, and your Petitioner shall ever be ready to spend his life for
you, and his Countries just liberties, and in obedience to all just authority,
to answer any Charge, when the same shall be in a legal way brought against
him.

And your Petitioner (as in duty bound) shall ever pray to God, to enable you
to go on, to finish, and perfect the great things expected from you, according
to the trust reposed in you.

Newgate, June 16. 1646. JOHN LILBVRNE.

A Postscript, containing a general Proposition.
GOD, the absolute Sovereign Lord and King, of all things in heaven and earth,
the original fountain, and cause of all causes, who is circumscribed,
governed, and limited by no rules, but does all things merely and only by his
sovereign will, and unlimited good pleasure, who made the world, and all things
therein, for his own glory, and who by his own will and pleasure, gave man (his
mere creature) the sovereignty (undor himself) over all the rest of his
Creatures, Genesis 1.26.28.29. and endued him with a rational soul, or
understanding, and thereby created him after his own image, Genesis 1.26.27. and
9.6. the first of which was Adam, a male, or man, made out of the dust or clay,
out of whose side was taken a Rib, which by the sovereign and absolute mighty
creating power of God, was made a female, or Woman called Eve, which two are the
earthly, original fountain, as begetters and bringers forth of all and every
particular and individual man and woman, that ever breathed in the world
since, who are, and were by nature all equal and alike in power, digniy,
authority, and majesty, none of them having (by nature) any authority dominion
or majesteriall power, one over or above another, neither have they, or can
they exercise any, but merely by institution, or donation, that is to sav, by
mutual agreement or consent, given, derived, or assumed, by mutual consent
and agreement, for the good benefit and comfort each of other, and not for the
mischief, hurt, or damage of any, it being unnatural, irrational, sinful,
wicked and unjust, for any man, or men whatsoever, to part with so much of
their power, as shall enable any of their Parliament men, Commissioners,
Trustees, deputies, Viceroys, Ministers, Officers or servants, to destroy and
undo them therewith: And unnatural, irrational, sinful, wicked, unjust,
divelish, and tyranicall it is, for any man whatsoever, spiritual or
temporal, Cleargy-man or Layman, to appropriate and assume unto himself, a
power, authority and jurisdiction, to rule, govern, or reign over any sort of
men in the world, without their free consent, and whosoever does it, whether
Cleargy-man, of any other whatsoever, do thereby as much as in them lies,
endeavor to appropriate and assume unto themselves the Office and sovereignty
of God, (who alone does, and is to rule by his will and pleasure) and to be
like their Creator, which was the sin of the Devils, who not being content
with their first station, but would be like God, for which sin they were thrown
down into hell, reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day. Jude ver. 6. And Adams sin it was, which brought
the curse upon him and all his posterity, that he was not content with the
station and condition that God created him in, but did aspire unto a better,
and more excellent, (namely to be like his Creator) which proved his ruin, yea,
and indeed had been the everlasting ruin and destruction of him and all his,
had not God been the more merciful unto him in the promised Messiah. Genesis
Chap. 3.

From my Cock-lost in the Press yard Newgate. per me John Lilburne.
June 19. 1646.
Courteous Countrymen to fill up this vacant place I shall desire thee to read
the words of the Declaration of the House of Commons, published 27. Ianu. 1641.
which you shall find in the 41. page of the book of Declarations thus.

And this House does further declare, That all such persons as have given any
Council, or endeavored to set or maintain division or disl^l^e, between the
King and Parliament, or have listed their names, or otherwise entered into any
combination or agreement, to be ayding, or assisting, to any such counsel or
endeavor, or have persuaded any other so to do, or that shall do any the
things above mentioned; And shall not forthwith discover the same to either
House of Parliament: or the Speaker of either of the said Houses respectively,
and disclaim it, are declared Public Enemies of the State and Peace of this
Kingdom, and shall be inquired of, and proceeded against accordingly.

Secondly the three Votes of both Houses May 20. 1642. which you shall find in
the book of Declarations pa. 259.

Resolved upon the Question 1. That it appears, That the King (seduced by
wicked Counsel) Intends to make War against the Parliament, who (in all
their consultations and actions) have proposed no other end unto themselves,
but the care of His Kingdoms, and the performance of all duty and loyalty to
His Person.

Resolved upon the Question. 2. That whenever the King makes War upon the
Parliament, it is a breach of the trust reposed in Him by His people, contrary
to His Oath, and tending to the dissolution of this Government.

Resolved upon the Question. 3. That Whosoever shall serve, or assist Him in
such Wars, are Traitors, by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and have
been so adjudged by two Acts of Parliament, and ought to suffer as Traitors.
11. Rich. 2.1. Hen. 4.


Joh Brown Cler. Parliament.

3. The Declaration of both Houses in pa. 576. in these words, Whereas the King
etc.

4. The words in their Declaration for the vindication of Ferdinando Lord
Fairfax. as you shall find pa. 914. in these words. The said Lords etc.

FINIS.

