The Life of DEVAL.

SHOWING How he came to be a Highway-Man; and how he committed several
Robberies afterward.

Together with his Arraignment and Condemnation. As also his Speech and
Confession, at the place of Execution.

Printed by W. R. and are to be sold in Westsmithfield, next Door to the
Dolphin near Hosier-Lane end, 1669.

modern bookplate

The Life of Deval, etc.
LEwis Deval, alias John Brown, was born of French Parents, by whose care he
was so Educated, that he was made capable of any Employment that might offer it
self, that was either Gentile or profitable; Neither was Fortune more backward
in assisting of him, then his Friends had been indulgent toward him; for no
sooner is he come to be capable of any thing, but he is entered into the Service
of a Person of Quality; where (if he had had as much Grace, as Nature had
bestowed on him Parts) he might in time have acquired a considerable
Preferment; but being wild, and very extravagant, he could not confine himself
in his Expenses and Attendance, within the narrow bounds and limits of a
Servant. He is acquainted with a parcel of lewd people, and he must have some
new way to get money, if he means to be welcome; neither shall he need to go
far for Advice, what Course he should take, those People being as excellent to
persuade and encourage any unlawful ways of Getting, as they are Prodigal in
Spending.

He is not long unresolved what course to take, for being brought acquainted
with a knot of High-way-men, (having before observed their way of living) a
little persuasion now serves his turn; he resolves to make one with them; and
in he falls, with this Resolution, Never to be taken alive.

Now he goes on successfully, taking many rich Prizes, having found out a way
how to be welcome to his Girls, and be as heartily embraced as the best of
their Associates. Now Money comes in so fast, he hardly knows how to spend it,
his Girls shall not have all, he has something to spare for the Game-houses,
whither, with others of his Crew, he often resorts.

This way he concludes to be the best that ever he could have fallen into; yea,
better then an Estate in Land; for he could not have his Rent till it were due,
and many times should have a bad Tenant that would leave him in the lurch;
neither is any Place he could have attained to be equalled with this; For now,
if he wants Money, it is but taking his Horse and riding out, and he is a Poor
Landlord and Tenant too, of whom Deval gets nothing, if he meets with them:
as soon as one Parcel of Money is gone, it is but out and fetch in another; it is
no matter who suffers for it, he resolves never to want so long as there is any
Money in England; but when all is gone here, then he resolves for France, (if
nothing happen that may hinder his Journey.)

Another thing also that might move him to like this Course the better, was his
not caring to dye a natural Death; if a long Disease should afflict him, or the
Gout should get him, and make him cry out, O his Legs, O his Toes, this does
not like him, he had rather be hanged out of the way; but that he does not much
like neither. He therefore resolves to die in the Field, and will think himself
injured, if he be suffered to dye in his Bed.

Now Deval and his Consorts harass the Country to purpose, taking Rent from
many Tenants before it is due, and giving them no Receipts for it: and as little
kindness had they for Landlords, when they fell into their hands, taking all
they could light on, though the Money were intended for some new Purchase; or
for a Son or a Daughters Portion: all is one to them, though the poor Girl loose
a good Husband by it, which makes the poor Maids pray backwards for them; yet
will they be thus kind to them, rather then they shall lead Apes in Hell, They
will Truck with them for their Maidenheads, if they have a convenient
opportunity; for which kindness, the Maids resolve to gratify them with their
Prayers when they go to be hanged, and cry them up for the handsomest men they
ever saw.

But those which complain most, are the Poor Market folks, who are forced to
lie in London all night, or else go home without their Money, which makes the
Grasiers come off by weeping-cross, the Money they should have had of the
Butchers, for their Sheep, Oxen, and Hogs, being seized by Deval and his
Consorts to spend on their Ladies. Now before we leave the Market folks, we
will tell you how they served a Parcel of them. About a dozen or fourteen
Market-Men and Women having been at London at Market, and made an end betimes,
rode merrily homewards with their Money, being very joyful they had done so
soon, that they might escape robbing; but those that reckon without their Host,
must reckon again, For coming up a narrow Lane, they were made to stand, and
had their Money taken away one by one, their Hampers turned off their Horses,
and every one set by their Hampers; so that it seemed to some Passengers that
came by afterward, as if they had been set down there on purpose to make an
end of their Market: More kindness had two Gentlemen that were coming toward
London, and were set upon by Deval and one other, coming up with their Pistols,
and presenting them to their Servants breasts, took such money from them as
they had in their Pockets, came up to one of the Gentlemen and took away his
Sword and Belt, but meddled not with their money. Afterward they restored the
Sword and Belt, declared their names, called the Gentlemen by theirs, told them
they would not have meddled with them, but that they had but four shillings
among twelve of them, that they would pay it them again on any place of the
Road they would appoint. Deval telling one of the Gentlemen how he was armed,
what number of Pistols he had ready charged, and that he was resolved never to
be taken alive; for he knew he should be hanged if he were.

But thus they must not go on always, Sweet Meat will have sour Sauce, else
it will spoil the Proverb. They have used the Trade so long (and there are so
many Outcries after them) that many of their haunts are found out, and they
begin to be taken notice of: some of them are seized about London, Tried,
Condemned, and Executed; which, though it at present broke their haunts; and
made them more careful; yet did it not put an end to that way of living, they
have tasted the sweet of it, and resolve that nothing but death shall part
them; And it is not long ere another Parcel of them are taken, and very kindly
parted at the Gallows.

But though so many are taken about London, and other Places about the
Country, yet Deval scapes still, but it will not be long ere we hear of him:
He goes on in the old Trade still, no warning will serve his Turn, he can but
into France at last, which he means shortly to be (as he told a Gentleman he
met upon the Road) who told him again, he would take his leave of the Gallows
first; and he will now escape very well if he miss it. Little does he think
where he must keep his Christmas, his Game is now almost at an end. He will
still venture to come and spend his money with his old acquaintance, but it
will cost him dear; his haunts are found out, and in one of them he is
apprehended and carried before a Magistrate, by whom he is sent to Newgate. And
because he shall not keep his Christmas alone, he shall have his Wife to keep
him Company, and other his Consorts.

In Newgate he carries it out very cheerfully, seeming to be very little
daunted at what had befallen him, lamenting nothing more, then that he was not
in a condition to dye upon the Place when he was taken.

On Friday, Jan. 14. He was carried down to the Sessions House in the Old
Baily; where he had several Indictments read against him, to which he Pleads,
Not Guilty, and then was convey^^ back again to Newgate.

On Saturday, Jan. 15. He was again carried down to his Trial, where, after
the Examining of Witnesses, and Proving the Indictments, he was found Guilty by
the Jury, and thence conveyed to Newgate again. The concourse of People both
these days being such, as the like has seldom been seen on such an Occasion.

On Monday, Jan. 17. He was again carried down to the Sessions House, where he
received his Sentence to be carried back to the place from whence he came, and
thence to be carried to the place of Execution, there to be hanged till he was
dead, according to Law.

Jan. 21. Monsieur Deval, was carried from Newgate to the Place of Execution,
where being come, he spoke to this purpose; That he had taken many men's money,
and had been a very lewd Liver, and that he had justly deserved this end he was
come to; And that as he hoped for forgiveness from God, so he desired
forgiveness from all whom he had any ways injured: After which he was turned
off, and soon dead.

Licensed

Jan. 22. 1669. Roger L'Estrange.


