JOHN LILBURNE. AETAT: SVAE 23. Ano 1641.
G: Glo: fecit.
portrait of John Lilburne

Gaze not upon this shadow that is vain.
But rather raise thy thoughts a higher strain.
To GOD (I mean) who set this young man free.
And in like straits can eke deliver thee.
THE CHRISTIAN MAN'S TRIAL: OR, A TRVE RELATION of the first apprehension and
several examinations of JOHN LILBVRNE, With his Censure in Star Chamber, and
the manner of his cruel whipping through the Streets: whereunto is annexed his
Speech in the Pillory, and their gagging of him: Also the severe Order of the
Lords made the same day for fettering his hands and feet in yrons, and for
keeping his friends and moneys from him, which was accordingly executed upon
him for a long time together by the Wardens of the Fleet, with a great deal of
barbarous cruelty and inhumanity, etc.

Revel. 2. 10. Behold, the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that you
may be tried, and you shall have tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto
death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. Matthew. 10. 19. But when they
deliver you up, take no thought how, or what you shall speak; for it shall be
given you in that hour what you shall say. The second Edition, with an
addition.

LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM LARNAR, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Sign of the Golden Anchor, near Pauls-Chaine, 1641.

To the READER.
CHristian Reader, here is presented to thy view, a part of these cruel and
grievous sufferings imposed upon this Author, by the malignant malice of the
Prelacy and that faction, wherein thou may likewise see the twonder full
gracious dealings of a good God carrying this Author through them all with
boldness and courage, being not daunted, neither at their frowns nor
whippings, nor pil^ories^ nor closoe prisons no, nor yrons: so that we may see
the faithful ^romises of our God before our eyes made good in this young man
who path promised to be with his people in six troubles, and seven; and to hew
himself strong in the behalf of all those whose hearts are perfect before
him, that so he might out of the mouths of Babes and Suckings perfect his
own praise, to the astonishment of all those who shall lift up heart or hand
against him, or the least of his holy ones; and to the comfort and
encouragement of all the Saints, who, from the consideration of the sweet
supporting power of God, appearing to others in their bonds, are the more
encouraged publicly to hold forth their profession of the truths of the Lord
Jesus with much more boldness and confidence, as knowing that that God which
has appeared to others of the Saints in times of sufferings, even before their
eyes, will also appear to them in the like condition; and therefore we may a
little see and take notice of the follyes of wicked men's wisdoms, who think
by their hellish wits, to raze down Syon and the truth of God to the ground*
and therefore they labor by the imprisonments and tortures of some to dash the
rest out of heart, that they should fear to show any countenance to such a
persecuted way, whereas indeed the Saints have by this means a fairer object
to pitch their faith and confidence upon, namely, the power and wisdom and
grace and mercy of their God appearing in a more fuller vision before their
eyes; for the afflictions and persecution that are imposed by wicked men upon
the Saints, causes them to see a spirit of glory resting upon them, even in
this condition: here 1 Pet. 4. 13. 14, and a (...) weight of glory provided for
them hereafter, 1 Cor. 4. 18. So that we may daily see the God of heaven
fulfilling of his own Word, even in this thing, which is that he will
confound the wisdom of the wise, and bring to naught the understanding of the
prudent, and catch the wicked in their own snares, making the rage of man
turn to his own praise his peoples comforts and their ruins, wherefore let
the servants of God comfort one another with these words: That we may not fear
the fears of men, which, that we may be the more strengthened against them,
let us consider the cloud of witnesses which has gone before (...) a way of
suffering, even in these our times, amongst whom the Author of this book has
had his share with the deepest of them (...) therefore to this end has he
published to the world this Tract, that he might keep alive to all posterities
the goodness, and mercy and love of God manifested to him under those cruel
barbarous and tyrannical dealings of the prelaticall hierarchy, that so all
the Saints of God man hate that wicked calling and power of theirs, and never
give ov^^ crying to God and men, till it be razed down to the ground, that so
the Lord Jesus may be set up as Lord and King, which ought to he the desire and
endeavor of all the chosen ones of God, and is the desire of him who desires
the good of the servants of God, in all things, in (...) for Christ.

WILLIAM KIFFEN.

This is the first Part.
A CHRISTIAN MAN'S TRIAL.
Upon Tuesday last the 11. or 12. of December, 1637. I was treacherously and
Judasly betrayed (by one that I supposed to be my friend) into the hands of the
Pursevant, with four of his assistants, as I was walking in a narrow lane,
called Soper-lane, being walking with one John Chilliburhe, servant to old Mr.
John Wharton, in Bow-lane a Hotpresser And was since advanced by the Bishop of
London to be his (...) Licencer for his pains.
Which John had laid the plot before for my apprehension, as I am able for to
prove and make good, that he shall not be able with truth to deny it. And at my
taking the Pursevants were very violem me and having by force got me into a
shop, they throw me over a Sugar-chest, to take my Sword from me, and cried out
for help, and said he had taken one of the notoriousest dispersers of
seandalous books that was in the Kingdom* for (says he) he has dispersed
them from one end of the Land to the other.

And from thence I was had to the Pole-head Tavern near to the Dr. Commons,
where the Pursevants called freely for wine to make themselves merry, thinking
they had got a great prise; Being not long there with my Pursevant Flamsted,
who apprehended me, in came Bonn^ragge, the great Prelates Pursevant, and he
looking upon me, said, Mr. Lilburne, I am glad with all my heart that we are
met, for you are the man that I have much desired for a long time to see. To
which I replied are you so? And for my own part, I am not much unglad, But you
think, you have got a great purchase in taking me, but it may be you may be
deceived. Come (says he) give us some wine, and with that he swore an Oath, he
would give me a quart of Sack, for joyfulnesse of our meeting, and so he
called for it and drank to me: And I told him, I would drink no wine. To
which he replied, and said in these words: Come (said he) be not sad, you are
but fallen into the Knaves hands. To which I said, I am not sad in the least;
and for my falling into Knaves hands, I verily believe without any questioning,
that which you have said. And then he swore another Oath, and said, it was true
enough.

(So good Christian Reader, take notice of thus much by the way, that the
Prelates and their Creatures are a company of Knaves, by Boniragge his own
confession.)

That night I was kept at Elamstedds house where I bless God, I was merry and
cherefull, and nothing at all danted at that which had befalne me. And about
twelve of the clock the next day, I was committed to the Gatehouse, by Sir
John the Prelate of Canterburies Chancellor with others without any
examination at all, for sending of factious and fcandalous Books out of
Holland into England. And having not been at the foresaid prison above three
days, I was removed, by a Warrant from the Lords of the Counsel to the Fleet,
where I now remain. And after my being there some time, I drew a Petition to
the Lords of the Counsel for my liberty: and their answer to it was, that I
should be examined before Sir John Banks, the Kings Attorney: The Copy of
which examination thus follows.

Upon Tuesday, the 14. of January. 1637. I was had to Sir* John Bank^ the
Attorney Generall's Chamber (now Lord chief Justice of the (...) of Pleas) and
was referred to be examined by Mr. (...) his chi^^^ Clerk; And at our first
coming together, he did kindly entreat me; and made me sit down by him, and
put on my hat, and began with me after this manner: Mr. Lilburne, what is your
Christian name? I said, John, Did you live in London before you went into
Holland? Yes, that I did, Where? Near Londonstone. With whom there? With Mr.
Thomas Hewson, What Trade is he? A dealer in Cloth, I told him. How long did
you serve him? About five years. How came you to part? After this manner: I
But the greatest ground was Canterburies malice, who sent his Pursevants to my
Masters to apprehend me, for my visiting of (and welwishing to) Noble Dr.
Bastwicke, which forced me to fly to save my self from thse cruel
bloodsuckers.
perceiving my Master had an intention to desist his Trade, I often moved him
that I might have my liberty, to provide for my self, and at the last he
condescended unto it; and, so I went into the Country, to have the consent of
my friends; and after that departed into Holland. Where were you there? At
Rotterdam. And from thence you went to Amsterdam? Yes, I was at Amsterdam What
Books did you see in Holland? Great store of Books, for in every Bookesellers
shop as I came in, there were great store of Books. I know that, but I ask
you, if you did see Dr. Bastwicks Answer to my Masters Information, and a Book
called his Letany? yes, I saw them there, and if you please to go thither, you
may buy an hundred of them at the Bookesellers, if you have a mind to them
Have you seen the Vnbishopping of Timothy and Titus, the Lookingglasse, and
Which Book proves them guilty of high trea*
a Breviate of the Bishops late proceedings. Yes, I have, and those also you
may have there, if you please to send for them. Who Printed all those Books? I
do not know. Who was at the charges of Printing of them? Of that I am
ignorant. But did you not send over some of these Books? I sent not any of
them over. Do you know one Hargust there? Yes, I did see such a man. Where did
you see him? I met with him one day accidentally at Amsterdam. How often did you
see him there? Twice upon one day. But did not he send over Books? If he did,
it is nothing to me, for his doings is unknown to me. But he wrote a Letter
over by your directions, did he not? What he writ, I know no more than you. But
did you see him no where else there? Yes, I saw him at Rotterdam. What
conference had you with him? Very little; But why do you ask me all these
questions; These are besides the matter of my imprisonment, I pray come to the
thing for which I am accused, and imprisoned. No, these are not besides the
business, but do belong to the thing for which you are imprisoned. But do
you know of any that sent over any Books? What other men did, does not belong
to me to know or search into, sufficient it is for me to look well to my own
occasions. Well, here is the examination of one Edmond Chilington, do you know
such a one? Ye^ How long have you been acquainted with him? A little before I
went away, but how long I do not certainly know: Do you know one John
Wharton? No, Do you not, he is a Hot-presser: I know him, but I do not well
remember his other name: How long have you been acquainted with him: And how
came you acquainted? I cannot well tell you: How long do you think? I do not
know: What speeches had you with Chillington since you came to Town? I am not
bound to tell you: But Sir (as I said before) why do you ask me all these
questions, these are nothing pertinent to my imprisonment, for I am not
imprisoned for knowing and talking with such and such men: But for sending over
Books: And therefore I am not willing to answer you to any more of these
questions: because I see you go about by this examination to ensnare me, for
seeing the things for which I am imprisoned cannot be proved against me, you
would get other matter out of my examination, and therefore i^ you will not
ask me about the thing laid to my charge, I shall answer no more: but if you
will ask me of that, I shall then answer you, and do answer, that for the
thing for which I am imprisoned: which is for sending over Books, I am clear*
for I sent none: And of any other matter that you have to accuse me of, I know
it is warrantable by the Law of God, and I think by the Law of the Land, that
I may stand upon my just defense, and not answer to your intergatorie; and that
my accusers ought to be brought face to face, to justify what they accuse me
of; And this is all the answer that for the present I am willing to make: And
if you ask me of any more things I shall answer you with silence. At this he
was exceeding angry, and said: There would be course taken with me to make me
answer, I told him I did not way what course they would take with me; only
this I desire you to take notice of that I do not refuse to answer out of any
contempt but only because I am ignorant what belongs to an examination, (for
this is the first time that ever I was examined.) and therefore I am unwilling
to answer to any importinent questions for fear that with my answer I may do
my self hurt. This is not the way to get liberty. I had thought you would have
answered punctually, that so you might have been dispatched as shortly as
might be. So I have answered punctually to the thing for which I am imprisoned
and more I am not bound to answer, and for my liberty I must wait Gods time.
You had better answer, for I have two examinations where in you are accused Of
what am I accused? Chillington has accused you for printing ten or twelve
thousands of Books in Holland, and that they stand you in about eighty pound,
and that you had a Chamber at Mr. John ^oot^s, at Delst, where he thinks the
Books were kept, and that you would have printed the Unmasking of the Mystery
of Iniquity, if you could have got a true Copy of it. I do not believe that
Chillington said any such things and if he did, I know, and am sure, that they
are all of them lies. You received money of Mr. Wharton since you came to
Town, did you not? What if I did? It was for Books? I do not say so. For
what sorts of books was it? I do not say it was for any, and I have already
answered you all, that for the present I have to answer and if that will give
you content, well and good, if not, do what you please. If you will not answer
no more (here I told him if I had thought you would have insisted upon such
impertinent questions, I would not have given him so many answers) we have
power to send you to the place from whence you came. You may do your pleasure,
said I. So he called in anger for my Keeper, and gave him astrict charge to
look well to me. I said they should not fear my running away. And so I was
sent down to Sir John Banks himself. And after that he had read over what his
man had writ, he called me in, and said, I conceive you are unwilling to
confess the Truth. No Sir, I have spoken the Truth This is your Examination,
is it not? What your man has writ I do not know. Come near and see that I
read it right. Sir, I do not own it for my Examination for your man has writ
what it pleased him, and has not writ my answer, for my answer was to him, and
so is to you that for the thing for which I am imprisoned (which is for sending
over books) I am clear, for I did not send any, and for any other matter that
is laid to my charge. I know it is warrantable by the Law of God, and I think
by the Law of the Land, for me to stand upon my just defense, and that my
accusers ought to be brought face to face, to justify what they accuse me of
And this is all that I have to say for the present. You must set your hand to
this your Examination. I beseech you Sir pardon me, I will set my hand to
nothing but what I have now said. So he took the Pen and writ, the examined is
unwilling to answer to any thing but that for which he is imprisoned. Now you
will set your hand to it? I am not willing in regard I do not own that which
your man has writ, but if it please you to lend me the Pen. I will write my
Answer, and set my hand to it. So he gave me the Pen, and I begun to write
thus: The Answer of me John Lilburne is, And here he took the Pen from me,
and said he could not stay, that was sufficient. Then one of my Keepers asked
him if they might have me back again? And he said yea: for he had no Order
for my enlargement, and so I took my leave of him, and desired the Lord to
bless and keep him, and came away.

And then about ten or twelve days after, I was had forth to Grayes Inn
again, but when I went, I did not know what they would do with me there: And
when I came there, I was had to the Star Chamber Office; and being there, as
the Order is, I must enter my appearance, they told me, I said, to what, for I
was never served with any Subpoena; neither was there any Bill preferred
against me No legal proceeding in Star Chamber.
that I did hear of. One of the Clerks told me, I must first be examined, and
then Sir John would make the Bill: it seems they had no grounded matter
against me for to write a Bill, and therefore they went about to make me betray
my own innocence, that so they might ground the Bill upon my own words: but
my God showed his goodness to me, inkeeping me, (a poor weak worm) that
they could not in the least entangle me, though I was altogether ignorant of
the manner of their proceedings: And at the entrance of my appearance, the
Clarke and I had a deal of pretty discourse; the particulars whereof for
brevity sake I now pretermit, but in the conclusion he demanded money of me for
entering of my appearance: and I told him I was but a young man, and a prisoner,
and money was not very plentiful with me, and therefore I would not part with
any money upon such terms. At which answer the man began to wonder that I
should speak so to him, and with that the whole company of the Clerks in the
Office began to look and gaze at me. Well (said he) if you will not pay your
see, I will dash out your name again. Do what you please (said I) I care not
if you do. So he made a complaint to Mr. Goad, the Master of the Office, that
I refused to enter my appearance. And then I was brought before him, and he
demanded of me what my business was? I told him, I had no business with him,
but I was a prisoner in the Fleet, and was sent for but to whom and to what
end I do not know, and therefore if he had nothing to say to me, I had no
business with him. And then one of the Clarks said, I was to be examined. Then
Mr. Goad said, tender him the book. So I looked another way, as though I did
not give ear to what he said; and then he bid me pull off my glove, and lay my
hand upon the book. What to do Sir? said I. You must swear said he. To what?
That you Just in quisition like.
shall make true answer to all things that is asked you, Must I so Sir? But
before I swear, I will know to what I must swear. As soon as you have
sworn, you shall, but not before. To that I answered. Sir, I am but a young
man, and do not well know what belongs to the nature of an Oath, and therefore
before I swear, I will be better advised. Says he, how old are you? About
twenty years old, I told him. You have received the Sacrament, have you not?
Yes that I have. And you have heard the Mininisters deliver Gods Word, have you
not? Yes, I have heard Sermons. Well then, you know the holy Evangelist? Yes
that I do. But Sir though I have received the Sacrament, and have heard
Sermons, yet it does not therefore follow that I am bound to take an Oath,
which I doubt of the lawfulness of. Look you here, said he; and with that he
opened the book, we desire you to swear by no foreign thing, but to swear
by the holy Evangelist. Sir, I do not doubt or question thatonely I question
how lawful it is for me to swear to I do not know what. So some of the
Clarks began to reason with me, and told me every one took that Oath; and
would I be wiser than all other men? I told them, it made no matter to me what
other men do; but before I swear, I will know better grounds and reasons than
other men's practices to convince me of the lawfulness of such an Oath, to
swear I do not know to what. So Mr. Goad bid them hold their peace, he was
not to convince any man's conscience of the lawfulness of it, but only to
offer and tender it; Will you take it or no, says he? Sir, I will be better
advised first; with this there was such looking upon me, and censuring me for
a singular man, for the refusing of that which was never refused before:
whereupon there was a Messenger sent to Sir John Banks, to certify him, that
I would not take the Star Chamber Oath. And also to know of him what should be
done with me. So I looked I should be committed close prisoner or worse. And
about an hour after came Mr. Cockschey, Sir John's chief Clarke; what (said
he) Mr. Lilburne, it seems you will not take your Oath, to make true answer? I
told him, I would be better advised before I took such an Oath. Well then
(says he) you must This is the Divinities of the Prelates and their Creatures.
go from whence you came and then I spoke merrily to my Keepers, and bid them,
let us be gone, we have been long enough here. Thus have I made a true
Relation of that days work.

But before I proceed, I desire to declare unto you, the Lords goodness
manifested unto me in being my counselor and director in my great straights.
The Prelates intendment toward me was carried so close, that I could not
learn what they would do with me, only I supposed they would have me into
the Star Chamber, in regard I was removed by the Lords of the Counsel; and
also tidings was brought unto me by some friends, what cruelty their Creatures
did breath out against me, but I encouraged my self in my God, and did not
fear what man could do unto me. Esaias ^1, 12. 13. for I had the peace of a
good conscience within me, and the assurance of Gods love reconciled unto me in
the precious blood of his Son JESUS CHRIST; which was as good as Shield and
Buckler unto me, to keep off all the assaults of my enemies, and I was, as it
were, in a strong walled Town, nothing dreading but lightly esteeming the
cruelty of my Adversaries, for I knew God was my God, and would be with me, and
enable me to undergo whatsoever, by his permission they could inflict upon me,
and to his praise I desire to speak it: I found his gracious goodness and
loving kindness so exceedingly made known unto me, that he enabled me to
undergo my captivity with contentedness, joyfulnesse, and cherefulnesse: And
also was pleased, according to his promise, to be a mouth unto me, whenever I
was brought before them, and gave me courage and boldness to speak unto them,
his holy and blessed name be praised and magnified for it.

Upon the Friday next, after this, in the morning, one of the Officers of the
Fleet came to my Chamber, and bid me get up and make me ready to go to the
Star-Chamber-barre forth with, I having no time to fit my self, made me ready
in all haste to go; (yet when I came there, the Lord according to his promise
was pleased to be present with me by his special assistance, that I was
enabled without any dantednesse of spirit, to speak unto that great and noble
Assembly, as though they had been but my equals;) And being at the bar, Sir
John Banks laid a verbal accusation But there was never any Bill as there
ought to have been.
against me, which was, that I refused to answer, and also to enter my
appearance, and that I refused to take the Star Chamber Oath: and then was read
the Affidavit of one Edmond Chillington, Buttonseller, made against Mr. John
Warton and my self; Who they forced by cruelty so to do, having almost
starved him in prison, and also removed him into several prisons to torment
him to make him bend to their ^ow.
The sum of which was, that he and I had Printed at Rotterdam in Holland Dr.
Bastwickes answer, and his Letany, and diverse other scandalous Books. And then
after I had obtained leave to speak, I said: My noble Lords, as for that
Affidavit, it is a most false lie, and untruth. Well, said the Lord Keeper, why
will you not answer? My Honorable Lord (said I) I have answered fully, before
Sir John Banks to all things that belongs to me to answer unto, and for other
things, which concern other men, I have nothing to do with them. But why do
you refuse to take the Star Chamber Oath? Most Noble Lord, I refused upon this
ground, because that when I was examined, though I had fully answered all
things that belonged to me to answer unto, and had cleared my self of the
thing for which I am imprisoned, which was for sending books out of Holland,
yet that would not satisfy and give content, but other things was put unto me,
concerning other men, to ensnare me, and get further matter against me, which I
perceiving refused, being not bound to answer to such things as do not belong
unto me; and withal I perceived the Oath to be an Oath of inquiry; and for the
lawfulness of which Oath I have no warrant, and upon these grounds I did, and
do still refuse the Oath: with this some of the Kings Counsel, and some of
the Lords spoke, would I condemn and contradict the Laws of the Land, There
is no Law in this Land for warranting of thu Oath.
and be wiser than all other men, to refuse that, which is the Oath of the
Court, administered unto all that come there? Well, said my Lord Keeper, tender
him the book. I standing against the Prelate of Canterburies back, he looked
over his shoulder at me, and bid me pull off my glove, and lay my hand upon the
book. Unto whom I replied, Sir, I will not swear; and then directing my speech
unto the Lords, I said: Most Honorable and Noble Lords, with all reverence and
submission unto your Honors; submitting my body unto your Lordships pleasure,
and whatsoever you please to inflict upon it yet must I refuse the Oath. My
Lords, said the Arch Prelate (in a deriding manner) do you hear him, he
says, with all reverence and submission he refuses the This Prelate cannot
lie.
Oath. Well, come, come (said my Lord Keeper) submit your self unto the Court.
Most Noble Lords, with all willingness I submit my body unto your Honors
pleasure, but for any other submission, most Honorable Lords, I am conscious
unto my self, that I have done nothing, that does deserve a convention before
this illustrious Assembly; and therefore for me to submit, is to submit I do
not know wherefore. With that up stood the Earl of Dorset, and said: My Lords,
this is one of their private spirits; Do you hear him, how he stands in his
own justification? Well my Lords, said the great Prelate; this fellow (meaning
me) has been one of the notoriousest disperser of Libellous books that is in
the Kingdom, and that is the Father of them all (pointing to old Mr. Wharton.)
Then I replied, and said, Sir, I know you are not able to prove, and to make
that good which you have said. I have testimony of it, said he. Then said I
produce them in the face of the open Court, that we may see what they have to
accuse me of; And I am ready here to answer for my self, and to make my just
defense. With this he was silent, But sat down in a fury having o^ more to say.
and said not one word more to me: and then they asked my fellow Soldier old
Mr. Wharton, whether he would take the Oath, which he refused, and began to
tell them of the Bishops cruelty toward him; and that they had had him in O
cruel persecutors
five several prisons within this two years, for refusing the Oath. And then
there was silence, after which was read a long piece of business how the Court
had proceeded against some that had harbored Jesuits and Seminary-Priests
(those Traitors) who refused to be examined upon Oath, and in regard that we
refused likewise to be examined upon Oath, it was fit they said, that we should
be proceeded against, as they were, so they were the president by which we were
censured, though their cause and ours be much unlike, in regard theirs were
little better than Treason; but our crime was so far from Treason, that it
was neither against the glory of God, the honor of the King, the Laws of the
Land, nor the good of the Commonwealth: but rather for the maintaining of the
honor of them all, as all those that read the books without partial
affections, and prejudicate hearts, can witness and declare, and if the books
had had any Treason, or any thing against the Law of the Land in them, yet we
were but subposedly guilty, for the things were never fully proved against us;
indeed there was two Oaths read in court, which they said was sworn against
us by one man but he was never brought face to face, and in both his Oaths he
has forsworn himself, as in many particulars thereof we both are able to
make good. In the conclusion, my Lord Keeper stood up, and said, My Lords, I
hold it fit, that they should be both for their contempt committed close
prisoners till Tuesday next; and if they do not conform themselves betwixt
this and then to take the Oath, and yield to be examined before Mr. Goad, then
that they shall be brought hither again, and censured, and made an Example; O
brave Justice.
Unto which they all agreed; and so we were committed close prisoners, and no
friends admitted to come unto us.

And upon Monday after we were had to Grayes Inn, and I being the first there,
Mr. Goad said to me, according to the Lords Order upon Friday last, I have sent
for you to tender the Oath unto you. Sir, I beseech you, let me hear the Lords
Order. So he caused it to be read unto me, and then tendered me the Book.
Well Sir, said I, I am of the same mind I was, and withal I understand, that
this Oath is one and the same with the High Commission Oath, which Oath I know
to be both against the Law of God, and the Law of the Land; and therefore in
brief I dare not take the Oath, though I suffer death for the refusal of it.
Well, said he, I did not send for you to dispute with you about the lawfulness
of it, but only according to my place to tender it unto you. Sir I dare not
take it, though I loose my life for the refusal of it. So he said, he had no
more to say to me; and I took my leave of him and came away. And after that
came the old Man, and it was tendered unto him, which he refused to take: (and
as he has told me) he declared unto him how the Bishops had him eight times in
prison for the refusal of it, and he had suffered the Bishops merciless
cruelty for many years together, and he would nownever take it as long as he
lived; and withal told him, that if there were a Cart ready at the door to
carry him to Tiburne, he would be hanged, before ever he would take it. And
this was that days business.

Upon the next morning about seven a clock, we were had to the
Star-Chamber-bar again to receive our Censure; and stood at the Bar about two
boures before Sir John Bancks came; but at the last he began his accusation
against us, that we did still continue in our former stubbornenesse: and also
there was another Affidavit of the foresaid Edmond Chillingtons read against
us; the sum of which was, that I had confessed to him, that I had printed Dr.
Bastwickes Answer to Sir John Bancks his Information, and his Letany; and an
other book, called, An Answer unto certain Objections; and another book of
his, called the Vanity and Impiety of the old Letany; and that I had diverse
other books of Dr. Bastwickes a Printing; and that Mr. John Wharton had been
at the charges of Printing a book called A breviate of the Bishops late
proceedings; and an other book, called Sixteen new Quertes, and diverse other
factious books; and that one James Ouldam, a Turner in Westminster Hall, had
dispersed diverse of these books. So it came to me to speak; and I said after
this manner: Most Noble Lords, I beseech your Honors, that you would be
pleased to give me leave to speak for my self, and to make my just defense;
and I shall labor so to Order my speeches, as that I shall not give your
Honors any just distaste; and withal shall do it with as much brevitie as I
can. So having obtained my desire, I began, and said, My Lords, it seems there
was diverse books sent out of Holland, which came to the hands of one Edmond
Chillinton, which made this affidavit against us: and as I understand, he
delivered diverse of these books unto one John Chilliburne, servant to this old
Man Mr. Wharton (I, said he, my Lords, and I had given him a strict charge,
that he should not meddle with any,) and his Master being in Prison, he
dispersed diverse of them for the foresaid Chillingtons use, whereupon the
books were taken in his Custody, and he being found dispersing of them, gos to
one Smith, a Tailor in Bridewell (as I am informed) and desires him to get his
peace made with the Bishops, whereupon he covenants with some of the Bishops
Creatures, to betray me into their hands, being newly come out of Holland,
which (as he said) did send over these books. So my Lords, he having purchased
his own liberty, lays the plot for betraying me, and I was taken by a
Purfevant and four others of his assistance, walking in the streets with the
foresaid John Chilliburne, who had laid and contrived the plot before (as I am
able to make good) and the next morning I was committed by Sir John Lamb to the
Gate House, (now my Lords, I do protest before your Honors in the word of a
Christian that I did not send over thief books, neither did J know the Ship
that brought them, nor any that belongs to the ship, nor to my knowledge did
never see with my eyes, either the ship, or any that belongs unto it.

(But before I proceed with my Speech, I desire to digress a little, in
regard that John Chilliburne does yet stiffly maintain, that he did not betray
me, nor laid the plot, and therefore I do him wrong for accusing him, he
says. To which I answer, and say, in this, he is worfe than Judas himself;
for after he had betrayed Christ, he came and confessed his sin, and said; I
have sinned in betraying the innocent blood; and this man has betrayed Christ
in betraying me his member, for what is done to his servant, he takes it as
done to himself: but he is not so good as Judas, who confessed his fault, but
he hides and justifies his sin, and therefore I will declare my Grounds and
Demonstrations, whereupon I am sure he was the Judas: The first is thus, He and
I appointed to meet one day upon the Exchange at] two a clock, unto which
place I came, and staid long for his coming, but he came not: and I verily
think, he sent two or three in his place, two of them being Arminians, living
in Cornehill, which J my self knew, who passed again and again by me, vewing
very narrowly my apparel, visage and countenance, as J think for that end
that they might know me again: and when J sat down, they would pass by, and
go a little from me, and sit down and fix their eyes upon me, insomuch that J
was afraid that J should there have been taken* which forced me to depart. And
at our next meeting J told him of it, and how that (unless J had known him
well) J should have believed he had betrayed me. Unto which he gave me no
satisfactory answer, but put it off, and said his liberty was as precious as
mine; and if he should betray me, he must betray himself, and therefore J
needed not to doubt any such thing: the Lord having blinded my eyes; J could
not see into his treacherous heart, but took this for a current answer, J
knowing that he had had a deep hand in the dispersing of books, and therefore
J gave credit to that which he had said, as being a real Truth, the Lord
having a secret hand of providence in it, (J hope at the last for his glory
and my good) did so Order it, that I should not take notice, or perceive his
perfidiousnesse, though I had an incling given me of it before by some friends,
yet J could not believe it, till the event manifested it, for that day J was
taken, he hearing (by what means I do not know) that I was to meet one at
the Temple, and understanding that I had a desire to see his Master at his own
house (being newly let out of prison) we came toward the Temple, and met me in
Fleet-streete, and so we went back toward the Temple, and had some discourse
there, in which he put me forward to go see and speak with his Master, unto
whom I declared, how fearful I was to go thither (in regard I heard they
laid wait for me) least I should be taken; but he made all things clear, and
contrived a way, by means of which he said, I might without any fear go
speak with him. So we parted, and appointed to meet at the stairs that goes
from Bridewell to Blackfriars. I came to the Stairs, and stood a great while,
but he came not, till I was a coming away; and I expecting him to come out of
Bridewell, I having sent him in thither, to speak with one, unto whom I think
he did not go, but yet he told me, he was with him; but rather he went to
Flamsted the Pursevant to get him in a readiness, for he came to me from
Flamsteds-houseward, down from Blackfriars, being a clean contrary way to
that I sent him. So we went toward his Masters house, and parted again, and
appointed to meet at Tantlins-Church; and when I came there, I saw one walking
with him, which I verily believe was one of the five that took me; and when I
came to him, I declared unto him that coming down Soper-lane, I saw a fellow
stand in a corner, very suspiciously, who looked very wishfully at me, and I at
him; and therefore I desired him to go, and see who it was, and whether I
might go safely to his Masters or no. So he went, and came back, and told me
his Master was come to the door, and I might go without any danger, and as we
went, I declared unto him my fearfulness, to go to his Masters; and I told
him, I would half draw my sword, that I might be in a readiness; and he went
before toward his Masters; and I do verily think acquainted them how it was
with me; and I going after him in the narrow Lane, I passed by two great
fellows, suspecting nothing; and by and by they seized upon my back and
shoulders, and cried out in the Kings Name for help, they had taken the Rogues
Whartons men, and John was the third man that seized upon me, laying fast hold
of my left shoulder, and they three pulled my cloak cross, over my arms,
that so, though I had my sword half drawn, yet by no means could I get it
out; which if I had, and got my back against the wall, I do not doubt but I
should have made them be willing to let me alone; for though they had fast hold
of me, they quaked and trembled for fear; and though they were five or six,
yet they cried out for more help to assist them. I being but one, and when
they all seized on me, then they called me by my name, and though we were in
the dark, yet they knew my habit, that I was in as well as my self, and
showed me their warrant with my name in it. I have been forced of necessity to
recite these things in regard of his daily speeches against me, and his writing
to me in justification of his innocence though as yet, for all I have sent for
him, he would never come face to face: Tart Letters likewise I have received
from Smith and Chillington, for speaking that which I have said in public of
them: and as for Smith, take notice what I said of him; and I here give my
reasons for that I said, it is known that at the last time the books were
taken at Mr. Whartons, part of them was not taken; which John can not deny, but
he carried them unto Smith; and what passed betwixt them, they themselves best
know: but this is sure, John was never troubled for the books, though he was
taken dispersing of them; and I am sure, his liberty was obtained by Smiths
and Sam, Bakers the Prelate of Londons Chaplains means. Also Smith is not
ignorant, but does very well know that promise that John made to Mr. Baker
about twelve months ago, to do him special service about such things, which
promise I do verily believe he has faithfully kept; for he has confessed to
his Master since the beginning of my trouble, that he has used to carry to
Baker all new books he could get, as soon as they came out, and how for the
which he gave him money, but how much he best knows.

Also, what free and samiliar access John has had to him, and he and John to
Baker, and for those secrets which John from time to time has revealed to him
and Baker, what they are I name not, but appeal to their own consciences: for
it is too manifest that he is a darling both to Smith and Baker, in regard
they stand so stoutly for him as they do; for Mr. Wharton, being not long
since with Baker, he told him he heard he was about to put away his Man John.
Yea (said he) what should I do with him else? Well (said he) if you do it, and
put him away, the Chamberlain will make you take him again. Will he so (said
he) he can not do it, for he is a Judas, and a Thief, for he has stolen
money from me, and I can prove it said the Old Man; and therefore he can not
make me take him again. Baker could not well tell what to say to it; but yet
did persuade him to keep him.

This the Old man told me himself, it seems they have kept him at his
Masters, as a private and secret servant for their own turns above this
fourteen Months and they would still, if they could keep him there. But what
secret mischief he has done by his so frequent resorting to Baker and Smith,
is not yet fully known, but I hope it will come out by degrees: Therefore, let
all that hears of it take notice of it, and let some of those that were in the
information with the three Worthies, cast back their eyes and see if they can
find and spy out who was their Original Accuser and Betrayer. These things
may be worth the making known, though I may incur hatred and spite from them
for it, yet I weigh not that, for I have not declared these things out of any
revenge, for I commit that unto God.

And for that wrong they have done unto me, I freely forgive them; and if any
of them belong to God, I pray him to call them home unto him. But these things
I have set down, being forced thereunto for vindicating my good name from
their bitter reproaches and calumniations, and all you that read this, judge
and censure what I have said. But now after my Digression I will return again
to our former matter.

And being at the Gatehouse I was removed by (six of your Honors) to the
Fleet, at which time the said Chillington was removed from Bridewell to
Newgate, and being kept And almost starved.
close there: then he by their threats and persuasions and the procuring of his
own liberty, goes and accuses me for printing ten or twelve thousand Books in
Holland. And at my Examination before Sir John Banks I cleared my self of
that, and upon Friday last he made an Affidavit against me, in which he has
most falsely forsworn himself, and to day he has made another, which is also
a most false untruth: And withal my Lords, he is known to be a notorious
lying fellow, and has accused me for the purchasing of his own liberty,
which he has got. And therefore, I beseech your Honors, to take into your
serious consideration, and see whether I am to be censured upon such a fellows
Affidavits or no. Then said the Lord Keeper, thou art a mad fellow, seeing
things are thus, that thou will not take thine Oath, and answer truly. My
Honorable Lord I have declared unto you the real Truth, but for the Oath, it
is an Oath of Inquiry, and of the same nature of the High-Commission-Oath;
Which Oath I know to be unlawful; and withal, I find no warrant in the Word
of God, for an Oath of Inquiry, and it ought to be the director of me in all
things that I do, and therefore my Lords at no hand, I dare not take the Oath
(when I named the Word of God, the Court began to laugh, as though they had had
nothing to do with it) my Lords (said Mr. Goad) he told me yesterday, he durst
not take the Oath, though he suffered death for the refusal of it. And with
that my Lord Privy Seal spoke: Will you (said he) take your Oath, that that
which you have said is true? My Lord (said I) I am but a young Man, and do not
well know what belongs to the nature of an Oath (but that which I have, said is
a real truth) but thus much by Gods appointment, I know an Oath ought to be
the end of all controversy and strife, Heb. 6. 16. And if it might be so in
this my present cause, I would safely take my Oath, that what I have said is
true. So they spoke to the Old man my fellow partner, and asked him whether he
would take the Oath. So he desired them to give him leave to speak; and he
begun to thunder it out against the Bishops, and told them they required three
Oaths of the Kings Subjects; namely, the Oath of Churchwardenship, and the
Oath of Canonical Obedience, and the Oath Ex Officio; Which (said he) are all
against the Law of the Land, and by which they deceive and perjure thousands of
the Kings Subjects in a year. And withal, my Lords, (said he) there is a
Maxim in Divinity, that we should prefer the glory of God, the good of our
King and Country, before our own lives: but the Lords wondering to hear the
Old Man begin to talk after this manner, commanded him to hold his peace, and
to answer them, whether he would take the Oath or no? To which he replied, and
desired them to let him talk a little, and he would tell them by and by. At
which all the Court burst out of a laughing; but they would not let him go on,
but commanded silence, which if they would have let him proceed, he would so
have peppered the Bishops as they were never in their lives in an open Court of
Judicature. So they asked us again, whether we would take the Oath? which we
both again refused; and withal I told them, that for the reasons before I
durst not take it. Then they said, they would proceed to Censure. I bid them
do as they pleased, for I knew my self innocent of the thing for which I was
imprisoned and accused; but yet notwithstanding did submit my body to their
Honors pleasure. So they censured us 500. pound a piece; and then stood up
Judge Ioans, and said: It was fit, that I being a young man for example sake,
should have some-corporall So my youth was the cause of my whipping by Judge
^ones his Law.
punishment inflicted upon me. So my Censure was to be whipped, but neither time
nor place allotted. And for the Old Man, in regard of his age, being 85. years
old, they would spare his corporal punishment, though (said they) he deserves
it as well as the other (meaning me) yet he should stand upon the Pillory; but
I could not understand or perceive by Censure, that I was to stand upon the
Pillory. So we took our leaves of them. And when I came from the Bar, I spoke
in an audible voice, and said: My Lords, J beseech God to bless your Honors,
and to discover and make known unto you the wickedness and cruelty of the
Prelates.

So here is an end of my public proceedings, as yet, which I have had since I
came into my troubles, the Lord sanctify them unto me, and make me the better
by them, and put an end to them in his due time, and make way for my
deliverance, as I hope he will.

After our Censure we had the liberty of the prison for a few days; but the
Old Man, my fellow partner, went to the Warden of the Fleet; and told him the
sum of that which he intended in the Star Chamber, to have spoken against the
Bishops, if the Lords would have let him; So he told the Warden, how the
Bishops were the greatest Tyrants that ever were since Adams Creation; and that
they were more crueller than the Cannibals, those Men-eaters, for (said he)
they presently devouted men, and put an end to their pain, but the Bishops do
it by degrees, and are many years in exercising their cruelty and tyranny upon
those that stand out against them; and therefore are worse than the very
Canibals; (and in this he says very true, for the Holy Ghost says: They that
be slain with the Sword, are better than they that be slain with Hunger; and
he gives the reason of it: For those pine away, stricken through, for want of
the fruits of the field, Lamen. 4. 9 Whereas those that are slain outright,
are soon out of their pain;) and said he, they have persecuted me about
forty years, and cast me into eight several Prisons; and all to undo me,
and waste my estate, that so I might not be worth a penny to buy me meat, but
starve in prison, for want of food, and yet were never able to lay any thing to
my charge, that I had done either against Gods Law, or the Law of the land; and
(said he) they are the wickedest men that are in the Kingdom; and I can prove
them (says he) to be enemies of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of the
King and Commonwealth; Or else I will be willing to loose my life; and also
told him that they did thrust the Lord Jesus Christ, out of his Priestly,
Prophetical and Kingly Offices, and has set up a will worship of their own
invention, contrary to the Holy Scriptures; and that they led by their wicked
practices the greater half of the Kingdom to Hell with them; and that they
rob the King of a million of money in a year, and the subjects of as much by
their powling, sinful wicked Courts; and that their living by which they lived
was got by Very satable to their constant practice.
lying and cozning of poor ignorant Children; for (said he) the Pope and the
Priest did promise the Children of deceased Parents, if they would give so much
to the Church, they would pray their Parents out of Purgatory, and so cozened
them of their estates; and (said he) by such dissemblings and cozening ways
and means, as this, were their livings at the first raised, Yea, but Sir,
(says the Warden) what is that to them, that was in time of Popery? Yea, but
Sir, (said he) their livings has continued ever since, and they live still to
this day upon the sweetness and fatness of them.

This and much more he then told the Warden, as Mr. Wharton himself since then
has told me. And there being a Papist with four or five more in the room,
the Warden said; Papist come hither, and hear what the Old Man says. So it
came to the Lords of the Counsels ears, whereupon we were the next Monday
after brought both together and locked upclose prisoners in one Chamber,
without any Order or Warrant at all, but only Warden INGRAMS bare Command and
Pleasure. But the Old Man, about three weeks after, made a Petition to the
Lords of the Counsel, that he might have some liberty, and being very weak,
more likely to dye than to live, he had his liberty granted till the Term;
but I do still remain close Prisoner; but for my own part, I am as
cheerful and merry, and as well contented with my present condition (in
regard I see the overruling hand of my good God in it) as ever I was with any
condition in my life, I bless his holy name for it; for in all my troubles I
have had such sweet and comfortable refreshings from my God, that though my
imprisonment, and those straights that I have been in, might seem to the
World, to be a great and heavy burden, yet to me it has been a happy
condition, and a cause of exceeding joy and rejoicing.

From the Fleet, the place of my joy and rejoicing the 12. of March 1637. By
me JOHN LILBVRNE. Being close Imprisoned by James Ingram the Warden of the
Fleet, who locked me up within few days after my Sentence, until the day of
my suffering, and would never suffer me to walk in the Prison yard with a
Keeper, though I often sent to him, and desired it of him, but told me all was
little enough, because I was so refractory.

A WORK OF THE BEAST. OR, A Relation of a most unchristian Censure, executed
upon JOHN LILBVRNE, (Now Prisoner in the Fleet) the 18. of April, 1638. with
the Heavenly Speech uttered by Him at the time of his Suffering.
Upon Wednesday the said 18. of April, Having no certain notice of the
execution of my Censure, till this present morning, I prepared my self by
prayer unto God, that he would make good his promise, to be with me* and enable
me to undergo my affliction with joyfulnesse and courage: and that he would
be a mouth and utterance unto me to enable me to speak that which might make
for his greatest honor. And in my Meditations my soul did principally pitch
upon these three places of Scripture.

First, That in Esaias 41. 10. 11. 12. 13. Fear thou not, for I am with thee, be
not dismayed, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee,
yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. Behold all
they that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed and confounded, they
shall be as nothing, and they that strive with thee shall perish, Thou shall
seek them, and shall not find them, even them that contended with thee, they
that war against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of naught. For the
Lord thy God will hold thee by thy right hand* saying unto thee, fear not, I
will help thee, Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel, I will
help thee, says the Lord, and thy redeemer the Holy one of Israel, etc.

Secondly, that place in Esaias 43. 1. 2. Where God speaks thus to his Elect.
Fear not, for I have redeemed thee* I have called thee by thy name, thou art
mine. When thou passest through the w^ters, I will be with thee, and through
the rivers they shall not overflow thee, when thou walk through the fire
thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

Thirdly, that in Heb. 13. 5. 6. In these words, For he has said I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee, So that we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper,
I will not fear wh^t man can do unto me.

With the consideration of these and other gracious promises, made to his
people. I being one of his chosen ones, did claim my share and interest in
them, and the Lord of his infinite goodness enabled me to cast my self upon,
and rest in them, knowing and steadfastly believing that he is a God of
faithfulness and power, who is able and willing to make good these his
promises to the utmost, and (to his praise be it spoken, I desire to speak it)
my soul was that morning exceedingly lifted up with spiritual consolation:
and I felt within me such a divine supportation, that the baseness of my
punishment. I was to undergo did seem as a matter of nothing to me. And I
went to my suffering with as willing and joyful a heart as if I had been go^^g
to solemnize the day of my marriage with one of the choicest creatures this
world could afford.

The Warden of the Fleet having sent his men for my old fellow soldier Mr.
John Wharton, and my self being both in one Chamber, we made our selves ready
to go to the place of Execution. I took the Old Man by the hand and led him
down three pair of stairs, and ^o along the yard till we came to the gate.
And when we came there, George Harrington the Porter told me I must stay a
little, and after our partin^ (commending one another to the protection of our
alsufficient God) I was bid go to the Porters Lodge, no sooner was I gone in,
but came John Hawes. the other Porter to me using these words.

Mr. Lilbourne, I am very sorry for your punishment, you are now to undergo,
you must strip you, and be whipped from hence to West-minster.

I replied, The will of my God be done, for I know he will carry me through it
with an undanted Spirit; but* I must confess it seemed at the first a little
strange to me, in regard I had no more notice given me for my preparation for
so sore a punishment. For I thought I should not have been whipped through the
street, but only at the Pillory. And so passing a long the Lane, being
attended with many Staves and Halberts, as Christ was when he was apprehended
by his enemies, and led to the High Priests Hall, M^t. 26. we came to
Fleete-bridge, where was a Cart standing ready for me; and I being commanded to
strip me* I did it with all willingness and cheerfulness, whereupon the
Executioner took out a cord and tied my hands to the Carts-Arse, which caused
me to utter these words, Welcome be the Cross of Christ.

With that there drew near a young man of my acquaintance, and bid me put on a
courageous resolution to suffer cheerfully, and not to dishonor my cause, for
you suffer (said he* for a good cause I gave him thanks for his Christian
encouragement, I replying I know the cause is good * for it is Gods cause, and
for mine own part, I am cheerful and merry in the Lord, and am as well
contented with this my present portion as if I were to receive my present
liberty: For I know my God that has gone along with me hitherto, will carry me
through to the end. And for the affliction it self, though it be the
punishment inflicted upon Rogues, yet* I esteem it not the least disgrace, but
the greatest honor that can be done unto me, that the Lord counts me worthy
to suffer any thing for his great Name.

And you my brethren that do now here behold my present condition this day* be
not discouraged, be not discouraged at the ways of godliness, by reason of
the Cross that accompanies it, for it is the lot and portion of all which will
live godly in Christ Jesus, to suffer persecution.

The Cart being ready to go forward, I spoke to the Executioner (when I saw
him pull out his Corded whip out of his pocket) after this manner; Well, my
friend, do thy office; to which he replied, I have whipped many a Rogue, but now
I shall whip an honest man, but be not discouraged (said he) it will be soon
over.

To which I replied, I know my God has not only enabled me to believe in his
Name, but also to suffer for his sake. So the Carman drove forward his Cart,
and I labored with my God for strength to submit my back with cheerfulness
unto the smiter, and he heard my desire, and granted my request; for when the
first stripe was given, I felt not the least pain, but said, Blessed be thy
Name, O Lord my God, that have counted me worthy to suffer thy glorious Names
sake; and at the giving of the second, I cried out with a loud voice,
Hallelujah, Hallelujah, Glory, Honor and Praise be given to thee, O Lord, for
ever, and to the Lamb that sits upon the Throne. So we went up to
Fleetstreet, the Lord enabling me to endure the stripes with such patience and
cheerfulness, that I did not in the least manner show the least discontent at
them, for my God hardened my back and steeled my reins, and took away the
smart and pain of the stripes from me.

But I must confess, if I had had no more but mine own natural strength, I
had sunk under the burden of my punishment; for to the flesh the pain was
very grievous and heavy, but my God in whom I did trust, was higher and
stronger than my self* who strengthened and enabled me not only to undergo
the punishment with cheerfulness but made me triumph, and with a holy
disdain, to insult over my torments.

And as we went along the Strand, many friends spoke to me and asked how I
did, and bid me be cheerful, to whom I replied I was merry and cheerful, and
was upheld with a divine and heavenly supportation, comforted with the sweet
consolations of Gods Spirit. And about the middle of the Strand, there came a
friend, and bid me speak with boldness; to whom I replied, when the time
comes so I will; for then if I should have spoken and spent my strength, it
would have been but as water spilt on the ground, in regard of the noise and
press of people: And also at that time I was not in a sit temper to speak;
because the dust much troubled me, and the Sun shined very hot upon me; and
the tipstaffe-man at the first would not let me have my hat to keep the
vehement heat of the Sun from my head: Also he many times spoke to the
Cart-man to drive softly, so that the heat of the Sun exceedingly pierced my
head, and made me somewhat faint. But yet my God upheld me with courage, and
made me undergo it with a joyful heart: And when I came to Chearing Cross,
some Christian friends spoke to me, and bid me be of good cheer; so I am (said
I) for I rest not in mine own strength, but I fight under the Banner of my
great and mighty Captain, The Lord Jesus Christ, who has conquered all his
Enemies, and I doubt not but through his strength I shall conquer and overcome
all my sufferings for his power upholds me, his strength enables me, his
presence cheeres me, and his Spirit comforts me, and I look for an immortal
crown, which never shall fade nor decay; the assured hope and expectation
whereof makes me to contemn my sufferings, and count them as nothing; for my
momentany affliction will work for me a far more exceeding crown and weight
of glory. And as I went by the Kings Palace, a great multitude of people came
to look upon me; and passing through the gate unto Westminster, many demanded
what was the matter.

To whom I replied, My brethren, against the Law of God, against the Law of the
Land, against the King or State have I not committed the least offense that
deserves this punishment, but only I suffer as an object of the Prelates
cruelty and malice; and hereupon one of the Warden of the Fleets-officers,
began to interrupt inee, and tols me my sufferings were just, and therefore* I
should hold my tongue; whom I bid meddle with his own business, for I would
speak* come what would, for my cause is good for which I suffered, and here I
was ready to shed my dearest blood for it.

And as we went through Kings-street, many encouraged me, and bid me be
cheerful; others* whose faces (to my knowledge) I never saw before, and who, I
verily think, knew not the cause of my suffering, but seeing my cheerfulness
under it, beseeched the Lord to bless me and strengthen me.

At the last we came to the Pillorie, where I was unloosed from the Cart, and
having put on some of my clothes, we went to the Tavern, where I staid a
pretty while waiting for my Surgeon, which was not yet come to dress me,
where were many of my friends, who exceedingly rejoiced to see my courage, that
the Lord had enabled me to undergo my punishment so willingly, who asked me
how I did. I told them, as well as ever I was in my life, I bless my God for
it; for I felt such inward joy and comfort, cheering up my soul, that I
lightly esteemed my sufferings.

And this I counted my wedding day, in which I was married to the Lord Jesus
Christ; for now I know he loves me, in that he has bestowed so rich apparel
this day upon me, and counted me worthy to suffer for his sake.

I having a desire to retire into a private room from the multitude of people
that were about me, which made me like to feign; I had not been there long,
but Mr. Lightborne, the Tipstaffe of the Star Chamber, came unto me, saying,
the Lords sent him to me to know if I would acknowledge my self to be in a
fault, and then he knew what to say unto me. To whom I replied, Have their
Honors caused me to be whipped from the Fleet to Westminster, and do they now
send to know if I will acknowledge a fault? they should have done this before I
had been whipped; for now, seeing I have undergone the greatest part of my
punishment, I hope the Lord will assist me to go through it all: and besides,
if I would have done this at the first I needed not to have come to this; But
as I told the Lords when I was before them at the Bar, so I desire you to
tell them again, that I am not conscious to my self of doing any thing that
deserves a submission, but yet I do willingly submit to their Lordships
pleasures in my censure. He told me, if I would confess a fault, it would
save me a standing in the Pillorie, otherwise. I must undergo the burden of
it.

Well (said I) I regard not a little outward disgrace for the cause of my God,
I have found already that sweetness in him in whom I have believed, that
through his strength, I am able to undergo any thing that shall be inflicted
on me; But me thinks that I had very hard measure, that I should be condemned
and thus punished upon two Oaths, in which the party has most falsely
forsworn himself; and because I would not take an Oath to betray mine own
innocence. Why Paul found more mercy from the Heathen Roman Governors for
they would not put him to an Oath to accuse himself, but suffered him to make
the best defense he could for himself, neither would they condemn him, before
his accusers and he were brought face to face to justify, and fully to prove
their accusation; but the Lords have not dealt so with me, for my accusers and
I were never brought face to face to justify their accusation against me: it
is true two false Oaths were sworn against me, and I was thereupon condemned;
and because I would not accuse my self. It is true (said he) it was so with
Paul, but the Laws of this Land is otherwise than their Laws were in those
days. Then said I, they are worse and more cruel, than the Laws of the
Pagans and Heathen Romans were, who would condemn no man without witnesses,
and they should be brought face to face, to justify their accusation, and so
he went away, and I prepared my self for the Pillory, to which I went with a
joyful courage; and when I was upon it I made obeisance to the Lords, some of
them (as I suppose) looking out at the Star Chamber window toward me, And so I
put my neck into the hole, which being a great deal too low for me, it was
very painful to me, in regard of continuance of the time that I stood on the
pillorie, which was about two hours, my back also being very sore, and the
Sun shining so exceeding hot, and the Tipstaffe-man not suffering me to
keep on my hat to defend my head from the heat of the Sun, so that I stood
there in great pain; yet through the strength of my God I underwent it with
courage* to the very last minute; and lifting up my heart and spirit unto my
God.

While I was thus standing on the pillorie; I craved his powerful assistance,
with the Spirit of wisdom and courage, that I might open my mouth with
boldness, and speak those things that might make for his greatest glory, and
the goood of his people; and so casting mine eyes on the multitude, I began to
speak after this manner:

My Christian Brethren, to all you that love the Lord Jesus Christ, and desire
that he should reign and rule in your hearts and lives, to you especially, and
to as many as hear me this day, I direct my speech.

I stand here in the place of ignominy and shame; yet to me it is not so, but I
own and embrace it, as the Welcome Cross of Christ, and as a badge of my
Christian Profession: I have been already whipped from the Fleet to this place,
by virtue of a censure, from the Honorable Lords of the Star Chamber hereunto,
the Cause of my censure I shall declare unto you as briefly as I can.

The Lord by his special hand of providence, so ordered it, that not long ago
I was in Holland, where I was like to have settled my self in a course of
trading that might have brought me in a pretty large portion of earthly things,
(after which my heart did too much run) but the Lord having a better portion
in store for me, and more durable riches to bestow upon my soul, by the same
hand of providence, brought me back again, and cast me into easy
affliction, that thereby I might be weaned from the world, and see the vanity
and emptiness of all things therein. And he has now pitched my soul upon
such an object of beauty, amiablenesse and excellency, as is as permanent and
endurable, as Eternity it self, namely, the personal excellency of the Lord
Jesus Christ, the sweetness of whose presence, no affliction can ever be able
to wrest out of my soul.

Now, while I was in Holland, it seems there were diverse Books, of that noble
and renowned Doctor John Bastwicke sent into England, which came to the hands
of one Edmond Chillington, for the sending over of which I was taken and
apprehended, the plot being before laid, by one John Chilliburne (whom I
supposed, and took to be my friend) servant to my old fellow soldier, Master
John Wharton, living in Bowlane, after this manner.

I walking in the street with the said John Chilliburne, was taken by the
Pursevant and his men; the said John, as I verily believe, having given
direction to them where to stand, and he himself was the third man that laid
hands on me to hold me.

Now at my censure before the Lords, I there declared upon the word of a
Christian, that I sent not over those Books neither did I know the Ship that
brought them, nor my of the men that belonged to the Ship, nor to my knowledge
did I ever see, either Ship, or any appertaining to it in all my days.

Besides this, I was accused at my examination before the Kings Attorney at his
Chamber, by the said (...) Chillington,) Button-seller, living in Canon-street,
near Alchurch Lane, and late prisoner in Bridewell and Newgate, for printing
ten or welve thousand Books in Holland, and that I would have printed the
Unmasking the mystery of Iniquity; if I could have gotten a true copy of it,
and that I had a Chamber in Mastor John Foots house at Delfe, where he thinks
the Books were kept.

Now, here I declare before you all, upon the word of a suffering Christian,
that he might as well have accused me of printing a hundred thousand hooks,
and the one been as true as the other; and for the printing the Unmasking the
Mystery of Iniquity* upon the word of an honest man, I never saw, nor to my
knowledge heard of the Book; till I came back again into England: and for my
having a Chamber in Master John Foots house at Delfe, where he thinks the
Books were kept; I was so far from having a Chamber there, as I never lay in
his house but twice or thrice at the most: and upon the last Friday of the last
Term, I was brought to the Star Chamber Bar, where before me was read the
said It has been an ordinary thing in the Star Chamber and high Commission,
either to forge Affidavits, or to make addition unto them.
Edmond Chillingtons Affidavit, upon Oath, against Mr. John Wharton and my
self; the sum of which oath, was, That he and I had printed (at Rotterdam
in Holland) Doctor Bastwicks Answer, and his Letany, withdivers other
scandalous Books.

Now, here again, I speak it in the presence of God, and all you that hear
me, that Master Wharton and I never joined together in printing either these,
or any other Books whatsoever, neither did I receive any money from him toward
the printing any.

Withal, in his first Oath, he peremptorily swore; that we had printed them
at Rotterdam, unto which I likewise say, That he has in this particular
forsworn himself; for mine own part, I never in all my days either printed,
or caused to be printed, either for my self, or for Master Wharton any Books
at Rotterdam; neither did I come into any Printing House there, all the time I
was in the City.

And then upon the Tuesday after, he swore against both of us again. The sum
of which Oaths was, that I had confessed to him (which is most false) that I
had printed Doctor Bastwicke^ Answer to Sir John Bancks his Information, and
his Letany; and another Book, called, Certain Answers to Certain Objections:
and another Book, called, The Vanity and Impiety of the old Letany; and that I
had diverse other Books of the said Doctor Bastwicks in printing, and that
Master Wharton had been at the charges of printing a Book called A Breviate of
the Bishops late proceedings; and another Book called sixteen new Queries,
and in this his Oath has sworn they were printed at Rotterdam, or somewhere
else in Holland; and that one James Oldam, a Turner, keeping Shop at
Westminster-hall-gate, dispersed diverse of these Books. Now, in this Oath he
has again forsworn himself in a high degree; for whereas he took his Oath
that I had printed the Book called The Vanity and Impiety of the old Letany; I
here speak it before you all, that I never in all my days did see one of them
in print, but I must confess, I have seen and read it in written hand, before
the Doctor was censured, and as for other Books, of which he says, I have
diverse in printing. To that I answer, that for mine own particular. I never
read nor saw any of the Doctors Books; but the forenamed four in English, and
one little thing more of about two sheets of paper, which is annexed to the
Vanity of the old Letany and as for his Latin Books, I never saw any but two.
Namely, his Flagellum, for which he was first censured in the High Commission
Court, and his Apologeticus, which were both in print long before I knew the
Doctor. But it is true, there is a second edition of his Flagellum, but that
was at the press above two years ago: namely, Anno 1634. and some of this
impression was in England before I came out of Holland.

And these are the maine things for which I was censured and condemned, being
two oaths in which the said Chillington has palpably forsworn himself; and
if he had not forsworn himself, yet by the Law (as I am given to understand)
I might have excepted against him, being a guilty person himself, and a
prisoner, and did that which he did against me for purchasing his own
liberty, which he has by such Judasly means got and obtained; who is also
known to be a lying fellow, as I told the Lords I was able to prove and make
good.

But besides all this, there was an inquisition-oath tendered unto me (which I
refused to take) on four several days; the sum of which Oath is thus much:
You shall swear that you shall make true answer to all things that shall be
asked of you: So help you God. Now this Oath I refused as a sinful and
unlawful Oath: it being the High Commission Oath, with which the Prelates ever
have, and still do, so butcherly torment, afflict and undo, the dear Saints
and Servants of God. It is an oath against the Law of the Land (as Master
Nicholas Fuller in his Argument does prove: And also it is expressly against
the Petition of Right an Act of Parliament Enacted in the second year of our
King. Again, it is absolutely against the Law of God; for that Law requires no
man to accuse himself, but if any thing be laid to his charge, there must come
two or three witnesses at the least to prove it: It is also against the
practice of Christ himself, who in all his examinations before the High
Priest, would not accuse himself, but upon their demands, returned this
answer: Why ask you me? go to them that heard me.

Withal, this Oath is against the very law of Nature; for nature is always a
preserver of it self, and not a destroyer: But if a man takes this wicked
oath, he destroys and undoes himself, as daily experience does witness. Nay,
it is worse than the Law of the Heathen Romans, as we may read, Acts 25. 16.
For, when Paul stood before the Pagan Governors, and the Jews required
judgment against him, the Governor replied, it is not the manner of the
Romans to condemn any man, before he and his accusers be brought face to face
to justify their accusation. But for mine own part, if I had been proceeded
against by a Bill, I would have answered and justified all that they could have
proved against me, and by the strength of my God, would have sealed whatsoever
I have done with my blood, for I am privy to mine own actions, and my
conscience bears me witness, that I have labored ever since the Lord in
mercy made the riches of his grace known to my soul, to keep a good
conscience, and to walk inoffensively both toward God and man. But as for
that oath that was put upon me, I did refuse to take it, as a sinful and
unlawful oath, and by the strength of my God inabling me, I will never take
it, though I be pulled in pieces with wild horses, as the ancient Christians
were by the bloody Tyrants, in the Primitive Church, neither shall I think
that man a faithful Subject of Christ's Kingdom, that shall at any time
hereafter take it, seeing the wickedness of it has been so apparently laid
open by so many, for the refusal whereof many do suffer cruel persecution to
this day.

Thus have I as briefly as I could, declared unto you, the whole cause of my
standing here this day, I being upon these grounds censured by the Lords at the
Star Chamber on the last Court day of the last Term, to pay 500. pounds to the
King, and to receive the punishment which with rejoicing I have undergone, unto
whose censure I do with willingness and cheerfulness submit my self.

But seeing I now stand here at this present, I intend, the Lord assisting me
with his power, and guiding me by his Spirit, to declare my mind unto you.

I have nothing to say to any man's person, and therefore will not meddle with
that, only the things that I have to say in the first place, are concerning
the Bishops and their calling: They challenge their callings to be Iure Divino,
and for the oppugning of which, those there renowned living martyrs of the
Lord, Doctor Bastwicke, Master Burton and Master Prin, did suffer in this
place, and they have sufficiently proved, that their calling is not from God,
which men I love and honor, and do persuade my self that their souls are
dear and precious in the sight of God, though they were so cruelly and
butcherly dealt with by the Prelates; and as for Master Burton and Master Prin,
they are worthy and learned men, but yet did not in many things write so fully
as the Doctor did, who has sufficiently and plentifully set forth the
wickedness, both of the Prelates themselves and of their callings (as you may
read in his Books) that they are not Jure Divino, which noble and reverend
Doctor I love with my soul; and as he is a man that stands for the truth and
glory of God, my very life and heart-blood I will lay down for his honor, and
the maintaining of his cause for which he suffered, it being Gods cause. As
for the Bishops, they used in former times to challenge their jurisdiction,
callings and power from the King; but they have now openly in the High
Commission Court renounced that, as was heard by many, at the censure of that
Noble Doctor. And as you may fully read in his Apologettcus; and in his Answer
to Sir John Bancks his Information. Now I will here maintain it before them
all, that their callings is so far from being, Jure Divino, (as they say they
are) that they are rather jure Diabolico, which if I be not able to prove, let
me be hanged up at the Hall gate. But my brethren, for your better
satisfaction, read the 9. and 13. Chapters of the Revelation, and there you
shall see, that there came Locusts out of the Bottomless Pit, part of whom
they are, and they are there lively described. Also you shall there find, that
the Beast (which is the Pope, or Roman State and government) has given to him
by the Dragon (the Devil) his power and seat, and great authority, So that
the Popes authority comes from the devil, and the Prelates, and their
Creatures in their printed Books, do challenge their authority, jurisdiction
and power, (that they exercise over all sorts of people) is from Rome.

And for proving of the Church of England, to be a true Church, their best and
strongest argument is, that the Bishops are lineally destended from his
Holiness (or Impiousnesse) of Rome, as you may read in Pocklingtons Book,
called Sunday no Sabbath. So that by their own confession they stand by that
same power and authority that they have received from the Pope. So that their
calling is not from God, but from the Devil. For the Pope cannot give a better
authority or calling to them then he himself has; but his authority and
calling is from the Devil, therefore the Prelates calling and authority is
from the Devil also, Revel. 9. 3. And there came out of the smoke, Locusts
upon the earth, and unto them was given power, as the Scorpions of the earth
have power to hurt and undo men, as the Prelates daily do: and also, Revel.
13. 2. And the Beast which I saw (says Saint John) was like unto a Leopard,
and his feet were as the feet of a Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a
Lion, and the Dragon (that is to say, the Devil) gave him his power, his seat
and great authority; and verse 15. 16, 17. And whether the Prelates as well as
the Pope, do not daily the same things, let every man that has but common
reason judge.

For, do not their daily practices and cruel burdens imposed on all sorts of
people, high and low, rich and poor, witness that their descent is from the
Beast, part of his state and kingdom: So also Revel. 16. 13, 14. all which
places do declare, that their power and authority being from the Pope, (as
they themselves confess) therefore it must needs originally come from the
Devil; for their power and callings must of necessity proceed either from
God, or else from the Devil; but it proceeds not from God, as the Scriptures
sufficiently declare, therefore their calling and power proceeds from the
Devil, as both Scripture and their own daily practices do demonstrate and
prove, and as for that last place cited, Rev. 16. 13. 14. If you please to
read the second and third parts of Doctor Bastwicks Letany, you shall find,
he there proves, that the Prelates practices do every way suit with, and make
good that portion of Scripture to the utmost. For in their Sermons that they
preach before his Majesty, how do they incense the King and Nobles against
the people of God, laboring to make them odious in his sight, and stirring him
up to execute vengeance upon them, though they be the most harmless
generation of all others.

And as for all these officers that are under them, and made by them, for mine
own particular, I cannot see, but that their callings are as unlawful as the
Bishops themselves; and in particular, for the callings of the Ministers, I do
not, nor will not speak against their persons, for I know some of them to be
very able men, and men of excellent gifts and qualifications, and I persuade my
self, their souls are very dear and precious in the sight of God.

Yet notwithstanding, this proves not their callings to be ever the better, as
it is in civil government: If the King (whom God has made a lawful
Magistrate) make a wicked man an officer, he is as true an officer, and as
well to be obeyed, coming in the Kings name, as the best man in the world
coming with the same authority; for in such a case, he that is a wicked man,
has his calling from as good authority as the godliest man has; and
therefore his calling is as good as the others.

But on the other side, if he that has no authority make officers, though the
men themselves be never so good and holy, yet their holiness makes their
calling never a whit the truer, but still is a false calling, in regard his
authority was not good not lawful that made them: and even so the Ministers be
they never so holy men, yet they have one and the same calling with the
wickedest that is amongst them, their holiness proves not their callings to be
ever the truer, seeing their authority that made them Ministers is false, and
therefore they have more to answer for than any of the rest, by how much the
more God has bestowed greater gifts upon them than upon others, and yet they
detain the truth in unrighteousness from Gods people, and do not make known
to them as they ought, the whole Will and Counsel, of God.

And again, the greater is their sin, if their callings be unlawful (as I
verily believe they are) in that they still hold them and do not willingly lay
down and renounce them, or they do but deceive the people, and highly dishonor
God, and sin against their own souls, while they preach unto the people by
virtue of an Antichristian and unlawful calling; and the more godly and able
the Minister is that still preaches by virtue of this calling, the more hurt he
does; for the people that have such a Minister will not be persuaded of the
truth of things, though one speak and inform them in the name of the Lord,
but will be ready to reply, Our Minister that preaches still by virtue of this
Calling, is so holy a man, that were not his calling right and good, I do
assure my self he would no longer preach by virtue thereof. And thus the
holiness of the Minister is a cloak to cover the unlawfulness of his
calling, and make the people continue rebels against Christ his Scepter and
Kingdom, which is an aggravation of his sin: for by this means the people
are kept off from receiving the whole truth into their souls, and rest in
being but almost Christians, or but Christians in part. But, Oh my brethren, it
behooves all you that fear God, and tender the salvation of your own souls,
to look about you, and to shake off that long security and formality in
Religion, that you have lain in: For God of all things cannot endure
Lukewarmnesse, Rev. 3. 16. and search out diligently the truth of things, and
try them in the Balance of the Sanctuary. I beseech you take things no more
upon trust, as hitherto you have done, but take pains to search and find out
those spiritual and hidden truths that God has enwrapped in his sacred Book,
and find out a bottom for your own souls: for if you will have the comforts
of them, you must bestow some labor for the getting of them, and you must
search diligently before you find them, Prove. 2. Labor also to withdraw your
necks from under that spiritual and Antichristian bondage (unto which you have
for a long time subjected your souls) lest the Lord cause his plagues, and the
fierceness of his wrath to seize both upon your bodies and souls; seeing you
are now warned of the danger of these things.

For he himself has said, Rev. 14. 9. 10, 11. That if any man worship the
Beast and his Image and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand; the
same shall drink of the wine of his wrath, which is powered out without
mixture, into the cup of his indignation, and he shall he tormented with fire
and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the
Lamb, and the smooke of their torment ascended up for ever and ever, and they
have no rest, day nor night, who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever
receives the mark of his name. Therefore, as you love your own souls, and
look for that immortal Crown of happiness in the world to come, look that
you withdraw your selves from that Antichristian power and slavery that you are
now under, even as God himself has commanded and enjoined you in Rev. 18. 4.
saying, Come out of her my people, that you be not partakers of her sins, and
that you receive not of her plagues, for her sins have reached unto heaven,
and God has remembered her iniquities. Here is the voice of God himself
commanding all his chosen ones, though they have lived under this Antichristian
slavish power and estate along time, yet at last, to withdraw their obedience
and subjection from it. My brethren, we are all at this present, in a very
dangerous and fearful condition, under the Idolatrous and spiritual bondage
of the Prelates, in regard we have turned traitors unto our God, in seeing his
Almighty great name, and his heavenly truth trodden under foot, and so highly
dishonored by them, and yet we not only let them alone in holding our peace,
but most slavishly and wickedly subject our selves unto them, fearing the face
of a piece of dirt, more than the Almighty great, God of Heaven and Earth, who
is able to cast both body and soul into everlasting damnation.

Oh repent, I beseech you therefore repent, for that great dishonor you have
suffered to be done unto God by your fearfulness and cowardlinesse, and for
the time to come, put on courageous resolutions like valiant soldiers of Jesus
Christ, and fight manfully in this his spiritual battle, in which battle
some of his soldiers have already lost part of their blood, and withal, study
this Book of the Revelation, and there you shall find the mystery of
iniquity fully unfolded and explained; and also you shall see what great
spiritual battles have been fought betwixt the Lamb and his Servant, and the
Dragon (the Devil) and his vassals, and some are to fight.

Therefore, gird on your spiritual armor, spoken of, Ephesians. 6. that you may
quit your selves like good and faithful soldiers, and fear no colors, the
victory and conquest is ours already; for we are sure to have it (I do not
speak of any bodily and temporal battle, but only of a spiritual one) and
be not discouraged and knocked off from the study of it, because of the
obscurity and darkness of it, fore Lord has promised his enlightening Spirit
unto all his people that are laborious and studious to know him aright, and
also he has promised a blessing, and pronounced a blessedness unto all that
read and labor to keep the things contained in this book, Rev. 1. 3. My
Christian brethren, in the bowels of Jesus Christ, I beseech you do not
contemn the things that are delivered to you, in regard of the meannesse and
weakness of me the instrument, being but one of the meanest and unworthiest
of the servants of Jesus Christ, for the Lord many times does great things by
weak means, that his power may be more seen; for we are too ready to cast
our eye upon the means and instrument, not looking up unto that Almighty power
that is in God, who is able to do the greatest things by the weakest means,
and therefore out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings he has ordained
strength, Psalm. 8. 2. And he has chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the world to
confound the things which are mighty, and base things of the world, and things
which are despised has God chosen, yea, things which are not, to bring to
naught things that are, 1 Cor. 1. 27. 28. And he gives the reason wherefore he
is pleased so to do. That no flesh should glory in his presence.

So you see God is not tied to any instrument and means to effect his own
glory, but he by the least instrument is able to bring to pass the greatest
things.

It is true, I am a young man, and no Scholar, according to that which the
world counts Schollership, yet I have obtained mercy of the Lord to be
faithful, and be by a divine providence, has brought me hither this day;
and I speak to you in the name of the Lord being assisted with the spirit and
power of the God of heaven and earth, and I speak not the words of rashness
or inconsiderateness, but the words of soberness, and mature deliberation;
for I did consult with my God, before I came hither, and desired him that he
would direct and enable me to speak that which might be for his glory, and the
good of his people. And as I am a soldier, fighting under the banner of the
great and mighty Captain, the Lord Jesus Christ, and as I look for that crown
of immortality, which one day I know shall be set upon my temples being in the
condition that I am in, I dare not hold my peace, but speak unto you with
boldness in the might and strength of my God, the things which the Lord in
mercy has made known unto my soul, come life come death.

When I was here about, there came a fat Lawyer, I do not know his name and
commanded me to hold my peace, and leave my preaching. To whom I replied and
said, Sir, I will not hold my peace, but speak my mind freely, though I be
hanged at Tiburne for my pains. It seems he himself was galled and touched as
the Lawyers were in Christ's time, when he spoke against the Scribes and
Pharisees, which made them say, Master, in saying thus, thou revilest us also.
So he went his way, and (I think) complained to the Lords, but I went on with
my speech and said:

My brethren, be not discouraged at the ways of God for the affliction and
cross that does accompany them, for it is sweet and comfortable drawing in the
yoke of Christ for all that* and I have found it so by experience; for my
soul is filled so full of spiritual and heavenly joy, that with my tongue I am
not able to express it, neither are any capable (I think) to partake of so
great a degree of consolation, but only those upon whom the Lords gracious
afflicting hand is. And for mine own part, I stand this day in the place of an
evil doer, but my conscience witnesses that I am not so. And hereabout I put
my hand into my pocket, and pulled out three of worthy Dr. Bastwicks Books, and
threw them among the people, and said, There is part of the Books for which I
suffer, take them among you, and read them, and see if you find any thing in
them against the Law of God, the Law of the Land, the glory of God, the honor
of the King or State.

I am the son of a Gentle man, and my friends are of rank and quality in
the Country where they live, which is 200. miles from this place, and I am in
my present condition deserted of them all, for I know, not one of them dare
meddle with me in my present estate, being I am stung by the Scorpions (the
Prelates) and for any thing that I know, it may be, I shall never have a
favorable countenance from any of them again, and withal, I am a young man,
and likely to have lived well, and in plenty, according to the fashion of the
world; yet notwithstanding, for the cause of Christ, and to do him service, I
have, and do bid adue to father, friends, riches, pleasures, ease, contented
life and blood, and lay all down at the footstool of Jesus Christ, being
willing to part with all, rather then I will dishonor him, or in the least
measure part with the peace of a good conscience, and that sweetness and joy
which I have found in him, for in naked Christ is the quintessence of
sweetness, and I am so far from thinking my affliction and punishment which
this day I have endured, and still do endure and groan under (a disgrace) that
I receive it as the welcome Cross of Christ, and do think my self this day
more honored by my sufferings, then if a crown of gold had been set upon my
head; for I have in some part been made conformable to my Lord and Master, and
have in some measure drunk of the same Cup which he himself drank of, while
he was in this sinful world; for he shed his most precious blood for the
salvation of my poor soul, that so I might be reconciled to his father,
therefore am I willing to undergo any thing for his sake, and that inward joy
and consolation within me that carries me high above all my pains and torments
and you ( my brethren) if you be willing to have Christ, you must own him, and
take him upon his own terms, and know that Christ and the cross is
inseparable; for he that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
persecution and affliction, it is the lot and portion of all his chosen ones,
through many afflictions and trialls we must enter into glory; and the Apostle
says, that if we be without afflictions, whereof all are partakers, then are
ye Bastards, and not Sons. And therefore, if you will have Christ, sit down
and reckon before ever you make profession of him, what he will cost you, lest
when you come to the trial, you dishonor him, and if you be not willing and
contented with all, and let all go for his sake, you are not worthy of him.

If Parents, Husband, Wife or children, lands or livings, riches or honors,
pleasure or case, life or blood, stand in the way, you must be willing to part
with all these, and to entertain Christ naked and alone, though you have
nothing but the Cross, or else you are not worthy of him, Matthew. 10. 37. 38.

Oh, my brethren, there is such sweetness and contentedness in enjoying the
Lord Jesus alone, that it is able, where it is felt, to make a man go through
all difficulties, and endure all hardships that may possibly come upon him.
Therefore, if he call you to it, do not deny him, nor his truth in the least
manner; for he has said, He that denies him before men, him will he deny
before his Father which is in Heaven. And now is the time that we must show
our selves good soldiers of Jesus Christ, for his truth, his cause and glory
lies at stake in a high degree, therefore put on courageous resolutions, and
withdraw your necks and souls from all false power and worship, and fight with
courage and boldness in this spiritual battle, in which battle, the Lord
before your eyes has raised up some valiant Champions that fought up to the
ears in blood, therefore be courageous soldiers and fight it out bravely,
that your God may be glorified by you, and let him only have the service, both
of your inward and outward man, and stand to his cause, and love your own
souls, and fear not the face of any mort^ll man; for God has promised to be
with you, and uphold you, that they shall not prevail against you, Esaias 41. 10,
11. But alas, how few are there that date show any courage for God and his
cause, though his glory lies at the stake, but think themselves happy and
well, and count themselves wise men, if they can sleep in a whole skin, when
Christ has said, He that will save his life shall lose it, and he that will
lose his life for his sake, shall find it. What shall it profit a man, if he
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?

Therefore it is better for a man to be willing and contented to let all go
for the enjoying of Christ, and doing him service, then to sit down and sleep
in a whole skin, though in so doing he gain all the world, and see him
dishonored, his glory and truth trodden under foot, and the blood of his
servants shed and spilt?

Yes without doubt it is: but many are in these times, so far from suffering
valiantly for Christ, that they rather dissuade men from it, and count it a
point of singularity and pride, and selfe-ends for a man, to put himself
forward to do God service; asking, what calling and warrant any private man
has there unto seeing it belongs to the Ministers to speak of these things.
Yes, so it does, but alas, they are so cowardly and fearful that they dare not
speak.

And therefore it belongs also to thee, or me, or any other man, if thou be
a soldier of Jesus Christ, whatsoever by place or calling thy rank or degree
be, be it higher or lower, yet if he call for thy service, thou art bound,
though others stand still, to maintain his power and glory to the utmost of
thy power and strength, yea, to the shedding the last drop of thy blood, for
he has not loved his life unto the death for thy sake, but shed his precious
blood for the redemption of thy soul: has he done this for thee; and dare
thou see him dishonored, and his glory lie at the stake, and not speak on his
behalf, or do him the best service thou can?

If one of a base and cowardly spirit thus thou do, let me tell thee here,
and that truly to thy face, thou have a Dalila in thine heart, which thou
love more than God, and that thou shall one day certainly find by woeful
experience. Alas, if men should hold their peace in such times as these, the
Lord would cause the very stones to speak to convince man of his cowardly
baseness.

Having proceeded in a manner thus far by the strength of my God, with
boldness and courage in my speech, The Warden of the Fleet came with the sat
Lawyer and commanded me to hold my peace. To whom I replied, I would speak and
declare my cause and mind, though I were to be hanged at the gate for my
speaking. And he caused proclamation to be made upon the pillory, for bringing
to him the books: so then he commanded me to be gagged, and if I spoke any
more, that then I should be whipped again upon the Pillory.

So I remained about an hour and a half gagged, being intercepted of much
matter, which by Gods assistance I intended to have spoken; but yet with their
cruelty I was nothing at all daunted, for I was full of comfort and courage,
being mightily strengthened with the power of the Almighty, which made me with
cherfulness triumph over all my sufferings, not showing one sad countenance
or discontented heart.

And when I was to come down, having taken out my head out of the Pillory, I
looked about me upon the people, and said, I am more then a conqueror through
him that has loved me, Vivat Rex, Let the King live for ever, and so I came
down and was had back again to the Tavern, where I, together with Mr.
Wharton, staid a while, till one went to the Warden to know what should be done
with me, who gave order we should be carried back again to the Fleet, and
as I went by land through the streets, great store of people stood all along,
to behold me, and many of them blessed God for enabling me to undergo my
sufferings with such cheerfulness and courage as I did, for I was mightily
filled with the sweet presence of Gods Spirit, which caused me notwithstanding
the pains of my sufferings to go alone the streets with a joyful countenance
not showing the least discontentednesse* as if I had been going to take
possession of so ne great treasures.

After I came back to the prison, none were suffered to come at me but the
Surgeon to dress me, and I feeling my self somewhat feverish, I went to bed
and my Surgeon doubting the same also gave me a Glister, and appointed to come
the next morning and let me blood, but when he came* he could not be permitted
to come at me, nor any else, for the Porter kep^ the key and locked me up very
close, saying, the Warden gave him straight command so to do. Whereupon I
desired the Surgeon to go to Westminster to the Warden and certify him how it
was with me, (being very ill) and that he might have liberty to come at me to
let me blood and dress me which could not be obtained, till the Warden
himself came home. About one of the clock John Hawes the Porter came to me, to
know what I had to say to the Warden, to whom I said, Master Hawes this is very
cruel and harsh dealing, that after so sore whipping, my Surgeon shall not be
admitted to come and dress me, nor any other be suffered to administer to my
necessities, having not eaten all this day, nor the last evening but a little
Caudle, I hope the Lords will be more merciful, than after the undergoing the
extremity of my censure to take my life from me by letting me perish for want
of looking to, therefore I pray speak to Mr. Warden, that he would be pleased
to give leave to my Surgeon to come to dress and let me blood, otherwise I
was in danger of a Fever, which might take away my life; So he wished me to
hay written to the Warden; I told him, if he would help me to Pen, Ink and
Paper so I would. No (said he) I dare not do that. Then I desired him to
deliver my mind to the Warden by word of mouth, who then went away, and after I
was in my bed, he came to me again, and said thus unto me: Mr. Lilburne, I
have one suite to you. What is that, said I? It is this, said he, that you
would help me to one of those books that you threw abroad at the Pillory, that
I might read it, for I never read any of them; I speak not for it to do you
any hurt, only I have a great desire to read one of them. Sir, I think you
do not (said I) but I cannot satisfy your desire for if I had had more of
them, they should yesterday have all gone. I verily believe you, said he, and
so we parted.

And in a very little while after, came the Warden himself with the Porter,
and I being in my bed, he asked me how I did? Said I, I am well, I bless my
God for it, and am very merry and cheerful. Well said he, you have undone
your self with speaking what you did yesterday. Sir, said I, I am not sorry
for what I have said, but am heartily glad that the Lord gave me strength and
courage to speak what I did, and were I to speak again, I would speak twice
as much as I did, if I could have liberty, though I were immediately to lose my
life after it. Would thou so, said he? Ey indeed Sir would I, with the Lords
assistance, said I, for I fear not the face of Man.

And concerning what I yesterday spoke, I did not in the least manner speak
against any of the Lords* but did openly declare, that I did willingly with all
contentedness submit my self to their censure; and as for the Bishops, I said
nothing against any of their persons, but only against their Callings. Ey,
said the Warden, and thou said their Calling was from the Devil. Yes Sir, so
I did, said I, and I will prove it, and make it good, or else I will be willing
to lose my dearest blood; For if you please to read the 9. and 13. Chapters of
the Revelations, you shall there find, that the Beast which ascended out of
the bottomless pit (which is the Pope and Roman State, has his power and
authority given him by the Dragon, (the Devil.) So that all the power which
the Pope has, and does exercise, originally comes from the Devil: If you
read also some Books lately set out by the Prelates themselves, and their
Creatures, you shall there find, that they claim their jurisdiction, standing
and power from the Pope: Now, if their power and calling be from the Pope (as
they themselves say it is) then it must needs be from the Devil also; For the
Popes power and calling is from the Devil; And he cannot give a better power
and calling to them than he himself has; And I pray Sir, if the Bishop of
Canterbury be offended at that which I spoke yesterday, tell him, I will seal
it with my blood; And if he please to send for me, I will justify it to his
face, and if I be not able to make it good before any Noble man in the
Kingdom, let me lose my life. Ey, but it had been a great deal better, said
he, for thine own particular good to have been more sparing of thy speech at
that time. No Sir, said I, nothing at all; for my life and blood is not dear
and precious to me, so I may glorify God, and do him any service therewith.
I assure thee, said he, I was exceedingly chid about thee; and also there were
old businesses rubbed up aginst me concerning Doctor Laiton and Master Burton,
for that liberty that they had. Wherefore were you chid for me said I? About
the Books, said he, that you threw abroad, in regard you were close prisoner,
and yet had those books about you; I would ask you one question: Did you
bring those books to the Fleet with you, or were they since brought to you by
any other? I beseech you Sir* pardon me for revealing that said I. Then he
would have known who they were that most resorted to me. I desired I might be
excused in that also. Ey, but you must give me an answer, said he, for I must
certify the Lords thereof. Then said I, I pray you tell their Honors, I am
unwilling to tell you. What were those books, said he, that you threw abroad,
were they all of one sort? Those that have them, said I, can certify you of
that I my self have one of them, said he, and have read it, and can find no
wit in it* there is nothing but railing in it. Sir, said I, I conceive you are
mistaken, for the book is all full of wit; it is true, this book which which
you lighted on, is not so full of solidity as other of his books are; but you
must understand, that at that time when the Doctor made that book he was full
of heaviness and in danger of a great punishment for the Prelates had breathed
out more cruelty against him for writing his Apology; and at that time also
he was compassed about on every side with the Pestilence; therefore he made
that book to make himself merry. But, said he, he does not write any thing
in it to the purpose against the Bishops callings. Sir, said I, I must
confess, you lighted on the worst of the three. And it is true, there is not
much soliditie and force of argument in it, but only mirth; but the other two
are as full of soliditie as this is of mirth. What, were they of three sorts,
said he? Yes Sir, that they were, said I. What were the other two called, said
he? The one said I, was his Answer to Sir John Banks his information, The other
is an Answer to some Objections that are made against that books which you
have; but if ever you read his Latin books, you shall there find solidity
enough, and the wickedness and unlawfulness of the Bishops callings and
practices set forth to the full. What Latin books be they, said he? His
Flagellum, for which he was first censured, said I. What, has he been twice
censured, said he? Yes, said I, he was censured in the High Commission Court,
for writing his Flagellum; and after that he wrote his Apology; and that
little book which you have, which were the cause of his censure in the
Star Chamber. But have thou any more of those books, said he? Sir, said I, if
I had had twenty of them* more, they should all have gone yesterday. But have
thou any more of them now, said he? Sir, said I, I verily think that if I
should tell you I had not, you would not believe me, and therefore, if you
please, you may search my Chamber. So I must (said he) for the Lords have
commanded me so to do, therefore open your Trunk. Sir, said I, it is open
already. Search it John Hawes, said he. So he searched it, and found nothing
there. Open the Cubbard, said he. So I gave the Porter the key of my Cubbard to
search it and he found nothing there but my victuals. Search his pocket, said
the Warden. Indeed, Sir said I, there is none in them; yet he searched them and
found as I said. Then he searched all my Chamber over, but found nothing at
all. Well Sir, said I, now you can certify the Lords how you find things with
me; but I pray Sir, must I still be kept close prisoner? I hope now the Lords
have inflicted their censure on me, they will not still keep me close. No,
said he, within a little time you will be eased of it; so we took our leaves
each of other, and he went away.

And the next day, being Friday, and a Star-Chamber-day, I hoped I should have
had the liberty of the Prison; but in stead thereof, news was brought me at
evening, that I must be removed to the Comon-G^al, or a worse place, and that I
must be put in yrons. Well for all this my God enabled me to keep my hold
still; and not to let my confidence go; for, (blessed be his name for it) this
news did not in the least manner trouble me.

And upon Saturday morning, John Hawes the Porter came with the woman that
looked to me, to my Chamber, to stand by her, that none might speak with me
till she had made my bed, and done other things for me, and he told me, he
was sorry to hear such news as he did concerning me. What is it, said I? I
hear said he* that the Lords have ordered that you must be put into the Wards,
and kept close prisoner there, and lie in yrons, and none must be suffered to
come at you to bring you any thing; but you must live upon the Poor Man's Box
Sir, that is very hard, said I, but the will of my God be done; For mine own
part it nothing at all troubles me; for I know in whom I have believed, and I
know, not one hair of my head shall fall to the ground without his providence;
and I have cast up my account already, what it will cost me; therefore, I weigh
not any thing that can be inflicted on me; for I know, that God made Paul and
Silas to sing in the Stocks at midnight, will also make me rejoice in my
chains; but it is very much that they will let none come to me, to bring me
any thing; it seems, they will be more cruel to me than the very Heathens and
Pagan Romans were to Paul, who when he was in Prison, did never refuse to let
any come to him to administer to his necessities; but I weigh it not, for I
know my God is and will be with me, to make me go through all my afflictions
with cheerfulness, for I feel his power within me so mightily supporting and
upholding me, that no condition in this world can make me miserable; and for
mine own part I do no more set by my life and blood in this cause, then I do a
piece of bread when I have newly dyned.

Afterward the woman telling me she hoped I should not have so sore a
punishment laid on me but that I might have things brought me from my friends,
I told her, I did not much care how it went with me, for Ieremyes Dungeon, or
Daniels Den, or the three Childrens Furnace, is as pleasant and welcome to me
as a Palace; for wheresoever I am, I shall find God there, and if I have him,
that is enough to me; and for victuals, I told her, I did not doubt, but that
God that fed the Prophet Esiah by a Raven, would preserve me, and fill me to
the full by the way of his providence; and if no meat should be brought me, I
knew, if they take away my meat, God will take away my stomach; therefore I
weighed not their cruelty, and thereupon uttered to her these four verses: I
do not fear nor dread the face of any mortal man,
Let him against me bend his power, and do the worst be can,
For my whole trust, strength, confidence, My hope, and all my aid,
Is in the Lord IEHOVAS fence, which Heaven and earth has made.


The rest that I intended by the strength of my God to have spoken (if I had
not been prevented by the Gag) I now forbear to set down, in regard I hear
I am to come into the field again to fight a second battle, unto which time I
reserve it, if the Lord so order it that I may have liberty to speak, I doubt
not but by the might and power of my God, in whom I rest and trust, valiantly
to display the weapons of a good soldier of Jesus Christ; Come life, come
death; and in the mean time, to what I have here said and written, I set to my
name by me JOHN LILBVRN, being wiritten with part of mine own blood; The rest
of which, by the Lords assistance I will willingly shed, if he call for it, in
the maintaining of his Truth and Glory, and that which I have here said and
written: by me,

JOHN LILBVRNE.

At the Inner Star Chamber the 18th. of April, Anno Dom. 1638.
Present:
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. Lord Privy Seal.
Earl Marshall. Earl of Salisbury. Lord Cottington. Lord Newburch. M.
Secretary Cook. M. Secretary Windebanck.
WHereas John Lilburne, Prisoner in the Fleet, by sentence in Starchamber, did
this day suffer condign punishment for his several offenses, by whipping at a
Cart, and standing in the Pillory, and as their Lordships were this day
informed, during the time that his body was under the said execution,
audaciously and wickedly, did not only utter sundry scandalous speeches, but
likewise scattered diverse copies of seditious books among the people that
beheld the said execution, for which very thing, among other offenses of like
nature, he has been censured in the said Court by the aforesaid sentence: It
is therefore, by their Lordships ordered, that the said John Lilburne should be
laid alone, with yrons on his hands and legs in the Wards of the Fleet, where
the basest and meanest sort of prisoners are used to be put; and that the
Warden of the Fleet take especial care to hinder the resort of any persons
whatsoever unto him. And particularly, that he be not supplied with money from
any friend, and th^^ he take especial notice of all letters, writings and
books brought unto him, and seize and deliver the same unto their Lordships;
and take notice from time to time who they be that resort unto the said prison
to visit the said Lilburne, or to speak with him, and inform the Board
thereof. And it was lastly ordered, that all persons that shall be hereafter
produced to receive corporal punishment according to sentence of that Court,
or by order of the Board, shall have their garments searched before they be
brought forth, and neither writing nor other thing suffered to be about them;
and their hands likewise to be bound, during the time they are under
punishment. Whereof, together with the other premises, the said Warden of the
Fleet is hereby required to take notice, and to have especial care, that this
their Lordships order be accordingly observed.

Examined per DVDLY CARLETON.

FINIS.

