THE HARMONY, CHRONICLE AND ORDER OF THE New Testament.

The Text of the Four EVANGELISTS Methodized. Story of the ACTS of the APOSTLES
Analyzed. Order of the EPISTLES Manifested. Times of the REVELATION Observed.
All Illustrated, With variety of Observations upon the Chiefest Difficulties
TEXTUALL and TALMUDICALL: For clearing of their Sense and Language. With an
Additionall DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Fall of JERUSALEM AND THE Condition of the
Jews in that Land afterward. By JOHN LIGHTFOOT D.D.

LONDON, Printed by A.M. for Simon Miller at the Star in St Paul's
Churchyard. M.DC.LV.

Dr Lightfoots Harmony on the N. Testament.

THE HARMONY, CHRONICLE AND ORDER OF THE New Testament.

The Text of the Four EVANGELISTS Methodized. Story of the ACTS of the APOSTLES
Analyzed. Order of the EPISTLES Manifested. Times of the REVELATION Observed.
All Illustrated, With variety of Observations upon the Chiefest Difficulties
TEXTUALL and TALMUDICALL: For clearing of their Sense and Language. With an
Additionall DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Fall of JERUSALEM AND THE Condition of the
Jews in that Land afterward. By JOHN LIGHTFOOT D.D.

LONDON, Printed by A.M. for Simon Miller at the Star in St Paul's
Churchyard. M.DC.LV.

SERENISSIMO OLIVERO Reipub. Angl. Scot. and Hybern. etc. Domino PROTECTORI.
J. L. Devotissimus Cliens Munusculum hoc Literarium In se quidem Nihilum, At
Summi Officii, omnimodaeque Observantiae Sincerum Pignus ac Indicium, Humillime
meritoque Dicat Dedicatque.

TO HIS HIGHNESS Honorable COUNCIL.
IT is not presumption that has induced me to this address, but sense of duty,
and of that obligation that lies upon me. For besides that homage which I owe,
in common with the whole Nation, to his Highness (whom the Lord has placed
over us, and raised up a Healer and Deliverer in the needful time) a peculiar
and redoubled bond of fealty obliges me, as living in a Rectory that belongs
to his Patronage and Donation. Which tenancy and dependence, as I cannot but
own, in all submissiveness, thankfulness and duty; so in acknowledgement
thereof and of my hearty Loyalty to his Highness, I have assumed the humble
boldness to present this poor Tribute and Oblation to Him, having no better
thing to offer. His Clemency and Goodness will not despise the Offering of a
willing mind, though it be but mean, especially one of this nature: I dare not
call the Subject that I have handled, Mean, because it is the sum of the New
Testament, but the failings and meannesse of the handling of it, as it is the
more excusable, because aiming at so worthy a Subject (and who is sufficient
for these things?) so may I hope that it will find the more easy pardon, and
some acceptance, for the Subjects sake.

With this most humble address to his Highness, I was desirous to leave an
humble memorial also with your Honors who stand so near Him, not only of
profession of that service and observance that with all the Nation I owe to
your Lordships, but also of special thankfulness and acknowledgement of
goodness and favor received from your Honorable Table, in a matter of mine
own particular concernment. I can add no more, but my prayers to the Father of
mercies, for his gracious Protection of his Highness and your H.H. and that he
will guide you in all your Councels and in all your ways.

Devoted to Your H. H. in all Service, I. L.

TO THE READER.
I Shall not trouble the Reader with any long discourse to show how the
Scripture abounds with transposition of stories; how the holy Ghost does
eminently hereby show, the Majesty of his style and Divine wisdom; how this is
equally used in both Testaments; what need the student of Scripture has,
carefully to observe those dislocations; and what profit he may reap, by
reducing them to their proper time and order. I shall only in brief give
account of what I have done in the ensuing Treatise, which refers to that way
of study of the New Testament.

Some years ago I published The Harmony, Chronicle and Order of the Old
Testament, observing what transpositions may be observed there, the reason of
their dislocating, and where, in Chronicall account, is their proper time and
place: and accordingly manifesting the genuine Order of the Books, Chapters,
Stories and Prophesies through the whole Book. The New Testament being Written
and Composed after the very same manner of texture, requires the like
observation, and having made the Assay upon the one, I could not but do the
like by the other. I have therefore first observed the proper Time and Order of
the Texts of the Evangelists, and how all the four may be reduced into the
current of one Story, and thereby evidences taken out of them themselves. I
could willingly have published the Text it self in that Order, for so I have
transcribed it from end to end, and so I offered it to the Press, but found its
passage difficult: So that I have been forced to give directions for the so
reading of it only by naming Chapters and verses. It would have been both more
easy and more pleasant to the Reader, had the Text of the four been laid
before him in several Columes, but his examining and ordering it in his own
Bible by the intimations given, will cost more labor indeed, but will better
confirm memory and understanding.

The Acts of the Apostles, do not much scruple the Reader with dislocations,
but the taking up of the times of the Stories, is not of little difficulty, and
yet in some particulars, of some necessity: These are observed where most
material, according to what light and evidence may be had for them, either in
the Text it self there, or elsewhere. Especially I have endeavored to observe
the times of the writing of The Epistles, both those that fall in, in those
times that the Story of The Acts of the Apostles handles, and those that were
written afterward. For the fixing of some there is so plain ground from the
Text that the time is determined certainly; for others, we are put to
probability and conjecture, yet such ground to build conjecture on, that I hope
there has not been much roving from the mark. I must stand at the Readers
censure.

I was unwilling to have meddled with The Revelation, partly because I have no
mind to be bold in things of that nature [I see too much daring with that Book
already] and partly, because I could not go along with the common stating of
the times, and matters there: yet being necessitated by the nature of the task,
that I had undertaken, I could not but deal with the Times and Order of things
spoken of in that Book: and that could not be done neither, without some
speaking to the things themselves: which I have conjectured at [referring all
to better Judgements] by the best propriety of the Language and Dialect used, I
could observe: where literally, and where allusively to be understood.

Now because it would have been but a tedious task for the Reader, only to
study upon the mere dislocations, and the ordering of them, or only to be
pondering how to lay all in their right current, I have not only gone the way
before him, but have showed his way all along with variety of observations; as
not obvious [for such would have but added one tediousness to another] so I
hope not unprofitable, nor without his delight.

I have not set my self to Comment, but in a tra^sient way to hint the clearing
of some of the most conspicuous difficulties, and that partly from the Text it
self, and partly from Talmudicall collections. Of which later I have alleged
very many, and the most of them I hope not impertinently, but for useful
illustration. For though it is true indeed that there are no greater enemies to
Christ, nor greater deniers of the Doctrine of the Gospel, then the Hebrew
Writers; yet as Cerah's Censers, and the spoils of David's enemies, were
dedicated to the Sanctuary service, so may the Records, to be met with in these
men, be of most excellent use and improvement to the explication of a world of
passages in the New Testament: Nay multitudes of passages not possibly to be
explained, but from these Records. For since the scene of the most actings in
it, was among the Jews, the speeches of Christ and his Apostles were to the
Jews, and they Jews by birth and education that wrote the Gospels and Epistles,
it is no wonder if it speak the Jews Dialect throughout, and glanceth at their
Traditions, Opinions and Customs at every step. What Author in the world but he
is best to be understood from the Writers and Dialect of his own Nation? What
one Roman Writer can a man understandingly read, unless he be well acquainted
with their History, Customs, Propriety of phrases and common speech? So does
the New Testament, loquitur cum vulgo: Though it be penned in Greek, it speaks
in the phrase of the Jewish Nation among whom it was penned all along, and
there are multitudes of expressions in it which are not to be found but there
and in the Jews Writings in all the world. They are very much deceived that
think the New Testament so very easy to be understood, because of the familiar
doctrine it contains, Faith and Repentance. It is true indeed, it is plainer
as to the matter it handles, then the Old, because it is an unfolding of the
Old: but for the attaining of the understanding of the expressions that it
uses in these explications, you must go two steps further then you do about
the Old, namely to observe where and how it uses the Septuagints Greek, as it
does very commonly, and when it uses the Jews Idiome, or reference thereunto,
which indeed it does continually: A Student well versed in their Language and
Writings would find it no great difficulty to translate the New Testament into
Talmudick language, almost from verse to verse, so close does it speak all
along to their common speech. The allegations that I have produced of this
nature in this present Tract, I have done but cursorily, as not writing a
Comment, but a running Survey of the Times, Order and History of the whole New
Testament: So that it may be many of them may not speak to every Reader that
full intent for which they are produced, and which, would I have spent time to
have been their Interpreter [but I was willing to avoid prolixity] I could have
made them to have spoken plainly. What I might have done in this kind I shall
show but by one instance [which let not the Reader think tedious here, since I
have avoided tediousness in this kind all along hereafter] and this is by a
Comment in the way we have been speaking of but upon one verse, and that is the
22d verse of the 5th Chapter of Matthew, which I have picked out the rather, to
make an exercitation upon, because it is generally held by all Expositors, that
in it there is a plain reference to something in the Jewish Customs, which is
the thing we have been mentioning.

Whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of
Judgment, etc. The sense which is ordinarily given of this verse in the
construction of many Expositors, is made to refer unto the three sorts of
Judicatories among the Jews: the lowest consisting of three Judges, the middle
of twenty three, and the supreme of seventy one. With which allusion and
explication I cannot close, upon these three Reasons: 1. Because the lowest
Judicatory to which they apply the word The Judgment, had nothing to do in
capital matters: and so the conclusion of the verse before cannot be
understood in this verse, The murderer shall be in danger of being judged by
the Iudicatory of three, for they judged no such thing; and answerably the
first clause in this verse, where the same word The Judgment is reserved,
cannot have the same application. 2. The word (...) is used only in the second
clause, and it will be hard to give a reason why the middle Sanhedrin should
only be so called [as that interpretation makes it to be] when all the three,
and most eminently the highest, did bear that name. 3. To apply Gehenna ignis
to penalty inflicted by the highest Sanhedrins, as diverse do, does cause so
hard straining [as may be observed in the several allusions that are framed of
it] that it is very far from an easily digested and current sense. I deny not
indeed that Christ in the verse alluded to something of the Jews practices, in
some point of Judicature, but unto what, I shall defer to conjecture, till its
course come, in the method, in which it seems most genuine to take the
unfolding of the verse up, and that is 1. To consider of three words in it;
which also are to be met in other places, and so carry a more general
concernment with them, then to be confined unto this verse, and those are,
Brother, and (...), and Gehenna. 2. To consider of the three degrees of
offenses that are spoken of, namely causeless anger, saying Raka, and calling
Thou fool. And 3. to consider of the three penalties denounced upon these
offenses, viz. Judgment, The Council, and Hell fire.

1. The word Brother, which does so constantly wrap up all professors of the
Name of Christ, in the signification of it, in the New Testament, may not
unfitly be looked upon, by reflection upon the sense of the word Neighbor in
the Old Testament, as that was commonly interpreted and understood by the Jews:
By using the word Neighbor [saith Rabbi Nathan] he excludes all the Heathen,
Aruch. in (...). And let this passage of Maymony be well weighed: It is all one
[saith he] to slay an Israelite and to slay a Canaanite servant: he that does
either must be put to death for it: An Israelite that slays a stranger
sojourner is not put to death by the Sanhedrin for it, because it is said, If a
man come presumptuously upon his neighbor [Exod. 21.14.] and it is needless to
say, he is not to be put to death for a Heathen. And it is all one for a man to
kill another man's servant, or to kill his own servant, for he must die for
either, because a servant has taken upon him the Commandments, and is added to
the possession of the Lord. In Rotseahh, etc. per. 2. By which it is apparent
that they accounted all of their own Religion, and them only, to come under the
title Neighbor; to which opinion how our Savior speaks you may observe in
Luke 10.29, 30. etc. So that in the Jewish Church there were those that went
under the notion of Brethren, that is, Israelites, who were all of one blood;
and those that went under the name of Neighbors, and those were they that came
in from other Nations to their Religion: They shall no more teach every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, Jer. 31.34, etc. Now under the Gospel,
where there is no distinction of Tribes and kinreds, the word Brother is
ordinarily used to signify in the same latitude that Neighbor had done:
namely all that come into the profession of the Gospel, and it is so taken
also, as that had been, in contradistinction to a Heathen: Any man that is
called a Brother, 1 Cor. 5.11. If thy brother offend thee, etc. Let him be as a
Heathen, Mat. 18.15, 17.

2. (...), which our English rendereth, Is in danger of, translates the word
(...) and (...), which are as ordinarily used among the Jewish Writers, as any
words whatsoever: as (...) Guilty of death. (...) Guilty of cutting off, etc.
Every page almost in either Talmud will give you examples of this nature.

3. Gehenna: It is well known that this expression is taken from (...) The
valley of Hinnom, of which, and of the filthiness and abominableness of which
place, there is so much spoken in Scripture. There was the horrid Idol Molech
to which they burnt their children in the fire: And thither, as D. Kimchi
says, was cast out all the filth and unburied carcases, and there was a
continual fire to burn the filth and the bones. In Psalm. 27.

From hence the Jews borrowed the word, and used it in their ordinary language,
to betoken Hell: And the Text from which they especially translated the
construction, seems to have been the last verse of the Prophecy of Isaiah,
which by some of them is glossed thus, And they shall go forth out of Jerusalem
into the valley of Hinnom, and there they shall see the carcases of those that
rebelled against me, etc. Vid. Kimch. and Ab. Ezr. in loc.

It were endless to show the frequency of the word in their Writers: let these
few examples suffice. Chald. Paraph. in Isa. 26.15. Lord thou will drive all
the wicked to Gehinnom. And on Isa. 33.14. The wicked shall be judged and
delivered to Gehinnom the everlasting burning. And on ver. 17. Thou shall see
those that go down to the Land of Gehinnom. R. Sol. on Isa. 24.22. They shall
be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut
up in prison (...), They that guilty of Ge^innom into Gehinnom. Targ. in Ruth
1.12. Be thou delivered from the Judgment of Gehinnom. Midras Mishle fol. 69.
Do you think to be delivered from the Judgment of Gehinnom? Baal Tur. in Genesis
1.1. Because of the Law, they are delivered from the Judgment of Gehennah,
etc. See the phrase, Matthew. 23.33.

And now we have done with words, let us come to sentences, and consider the
offenses that are prohibited, which are easily acknowledged to be graduall, or
one above another. About the first, viz. Causeless anger, there needs no
explanation, the words and matter are plain enough.

The second is, Whosoever shall say to his brother Racha. A nickname or
scornful title usual which they disdainfully put one upon another, and very
commonly: and therefore our Savior has specified in this word, the rather
because it was of so common use among them, and they made no bones at it. Take
these few examples, A certain man sought to betake himself to repentance [and
restitution.] His wife said to him Rekah if thou make restitution, even thy
girdle about thee is not thine own, etc. Tanchum fol. 5. Rabbi Iochanan was
teaching concerning the building of Jerusalem with Saphires and Diamonds, etc.
One of his scholars laughed him to scorn. But afterward being convinced of the
truth of the thing, he says to him, Rabbi, Do thou expound, for it is fit for
thee to expound: as thou saidest so have I seen it: He says to him Rekah,
Had thou not seen thou would not have believed, etc. Midras Tillin. fol.
38. col. 4. To what is the thing like? To a King of flesh and blood who took to
wife a Kings daughter: he says to her, Wait and fill me a cup, but she would
not: whereupon he was angry and put her away: She went and was married to a
sordid fellow: and he says to her, Wait and fill me a cup: She said unto him,
Rekah, I am a Kings daughter, etc. Idem in Psalm. 137. A Gentile says to an
Israelite, I have a dainty dish, for thee to eat of. He says What is it? He
answers Swines flesh. He says to him, Rekah, even what you kill of clean
beasts is forbidden us, much more this. Tanch. fol. 18. col. 4.

The third offense is to say to a brother, Thou fool, which how to distinguish
from Racha, which signifies an empty fellow, were some difficulty, but that
Solomon is a good Dictionary here for us, who takes the term continually for a
wicked wretch and reprobate, and in opposition to spiritual wisdom: So that in
the first clause is condemned causeless anger; in the second, scornful
taunting and reproaching of a brother: and in the last, calling him a reprobate
and wicked, or uncharitably censuring his spiritual and eternal estate. And
this last does more especially hit the Scribes and Pharisees, who arrogated to
themselves only to be called (...) Wisemen, but of all others had this
scornful and uncharitable opinion, This people that knows not the Law is
cursed, Ioh. 7.49.

And now for the penalties denounced upon these offenses, let us look upon
them, taking notice of these two traditions of the Jews, which our Savior
seems to face and to contradict. 1. That they accounted the command Thou
shall not kill, to aim only at actual murder. So in their collecting of the
613 precepts out of the Law, they understand that command to mean but this,
That one should not kill an Israelite: Vid. trip. Targ. ibid. Sepher Chinnuch
ibid. Maym. in Rotseah: per. 1. And accordingly they allotted this only
violation of it to judgment. Against this wild gloss and practice he
speaks in the first clause: Ye have heard it said, Thou shall not kill, and
he that kills or commits actual murder, is liable to judgment, and ye
extend the violation of that Command no further; but I say to you, that
causeless anger against thy brother is a violation of that Command, and even
that makes a man liable to judgment. 2. They allotted only that murder to be
judged by the Council or Sanhedrin, that was committed by a man in propria
persona. Let them speak their own sense: A murderer is he that kills his
neighbor with a stone, or with Iron: or that thrusts him into water or fire
out of which it is not possible to get out again, if the man die he is guilty,
(...) [(...).] But if he thrust him into fire or water, out of which it is
possible to get out again, though he die, yet he is quit. He sets on him a dog
or a serpent, he is quit: He intended to kill a stranger and kills an Israelite;
To kill a little one, and kills one of stature: To hit him on the loins, and
such a blow on the loins could not kill him, but it misses the loins and hits
him on the heart and kills him: he is quit. He intended to hit him on the heart,
and such a blow on the heart was enough to kill him, but it lights on the
loins, and such a blow on the loins was not enough to kill him, yet he dies: he
is quit. He intended to strike one of stature, and the blow was not enough to
have killed one of stature, but it lights on a little one, and there was enough
in the blow to have killed a little one, and he dies, yet he is quit, He
intended to hit a little one, and there was enough in the blow to kill a little
one, but it lights on one of stature, and there was not enough in the blow to
kill one of stature, yet he dies: he is quit. R. Simeon says, Though he
intended to kill one, and kills another, he is quit, etc. Talm. in Sanhedr. per.
9.

Any one that kills his neighbor with his hand, as if he strike him with a
sword, or with a stone that kills him, or strangles him till he die, or burns
him in the fire, seeing that he kills him any how in his own person, lo such a
one must be put to death by the Sanhedrin: But he that hires another to kill
his neighbor, or that sends his servants and they kill him, or that violently
thrusts him before a Lion, or the like, and the beast kills him: Any one of
these is a shedder of blood, and the guilt of shedding of blood is upon him,
and he is liable to death by the hand of heaven, but he is not to be put to
death by the Sanhedrin. And whence is the proof that it must be thus? Because
it is said, He that sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. This is
he that slays a man himself, and not by the hand of another. Your blood of your
lives will I require: This is he that slays himself. At the hand of every beast
will I require it: This is he that delivers up his neighbor before a beast to
be rent in pieces. At the hand of man, even at the hand of every man's brother
will I require the life of man: This is he that hires others to kill his
neighbor: In this interpretation requiring is spoken of all the three, behold
their judgment is delivered over to heaven [or God.] And all these manslayers
and the like, who are not liable to death by the Sanhedrin; if the King of
Israel will slay them by the Judgment of the Kingdom and the Law of Nations,
he may, etc. Maym. ubi supr. per. 2.

You may observe in these wretched traditions a twofold killing, and a twofold
judgment: a man's killing another in his own person and with his own hand, and
such a one liable to the judgment of the Sanhedrin, to be put to death by them
as a murderer: And a man that killed another by proxy; not with his own hand,
but hiring another to kill him, or turning a beast or serpent upon him to kill
him. This man not to be judged and executed by the Sanhedrin, but referred and
reserved only to the judgment of God. So that from hence we see plainly, in
what sense the word Judgment is used in the later end of the preceding verse,
and the first clause of this, namely not for the Judgment of any of the
Sanhedrins, as it is commonly understood, but for the Judgment of God. In the
former verse Christ speaks their sense, and in the first clause of this, his
own, in application to it. Ye have heard it said, that any man that kills is
liable to the Judgment of God; But I say in you that he that is but angry with
his brother without a cause, is liable to the Judgment of God. You have heard
it said, That he only that commits murder with his own hand, is to be judged by
the Council or Sanhedrin as a murderer; But I say to you, that he that but
calls his brother Racha, as common a word as ye make it, and a thing of nothing,
he is liable to be judged by the Sanhedrin.

Lastly, He that says to his brother, Thou fool, wicked one, or castaway,
shall be in danger of hell fire. (...). There are two observable things in the
words. The first is the change of case from what was before: there it was said,
(...), but here (...). And hereupon S. Petit in his variae Lectiones lib. 1.
cap. 1. professes that he cannot wonder enough, that Expositors should not
observe this variation: and what he himself makes of the observation of it I
shall not insist upon, but refer the Reader to his own words. Surely he
little minds the Greek Text that sees not this in it, and there needs not any
far fetched Exposition to satisfy about it: It is but an Emphaticall raising
of the sense, to make it the more feeling and to speak home: He that says to
his brother Raka shall be in danger of the Council, but he that says Thou
fool, he shall be in danger of a penalty even to hell fire. And thus our
Savior does equal the sin and penalty in a very just parallel. Injust anger,
with Gods just anger and judgment: Public reproach; with public correction
by the Council: And censuring for a child of hell, to the fire of hell. 2. It
is no said (...), To the fire of hell, but (...), To a hell of fire: in which
expression he does still set the Emphasis higher: And besides the reference to
the valley of Hinnom, he seems to refer to that penalty used by the
Sanhedrin, of burning: the most bitter death that they used to put men unto:
the manner of which was thus: They set the malefactor in a dunghill up to the
knees: and they put a towell about his neck, and one pulled one way, and another
another, till by thus strangling him they forced him to open his mouth. Then
did they pour scalding lead into his mouth, which went down into his belly and
so burnt his bowels. Talm. in Sanhed. per. 7. Now having spoken in the clause
before of being judged by the Sanhedrin, whose terriblest penalty was this
burning, he does in this clause raise the penalty higher, namely of burning,
but in hell: not a little scalding lead, but even with a Hell of fire, etc.

The greatest part of the New Testament might be observed to speak in such
reference to something or other commonly known, or used or spoken among the
Jews, and even the difficultest passages in it might be brought to far more
facility then they be, if these references were well observed. There ^re diverse
places where Commentators, not able to clear the sense for want of this, have
been bold to say the Text is corrupt, and to frame a Text of their own heads;
whereas the matter skilfully handled in this way, might have been made plain:
As we have given experiment in this kind in some as we have gone along, and
diverse others might have been instanced, but our work was not now to write a
Comment.

August 28th 1654. I. L,

THE HARMONY, CHRONICLE AND ORDER OF THE New Testament.
The First Part. viz. The HARMONY and ORDER OF THE FOUR EVANGELISTS.
SECTION I. LUKE Chap. I. Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. LUKES Preface. His warrant to write
his Gospel.
IN compiling the four Evangelists into one continued current and story, this
Preface that Luke prefixeth to his Gospel, may very fitly be set before them
all, as a general Proem to the whole.

If he wrote his Gospel, near about that time, when he wrote his Acts of the
Apostles, it was not till Paul had now worn out his two years imprisonment in
Rome, or thereabout, Acts 28.30. which was twenty seven years after Christ's
ascension: by which time the Gospel had been carried by the Apostles who were
eyewitnesses of Christ's actions, and by the Disciples, who were Ministers of
the word, through the most parts of the world.

From these men's Sermons and relations, many undertook to write Gospels, partly
for their own use, and partly for the benefit of others: which thing, though
they did lawfully and with a good intent, yet because they did it not by
inspiration, nor by divine warrant; albeit, what they had written were
according to truth, yet was the authority of their writings but humane, and not
to be admitted into the divine Canon. But Luke had his intelligence and
instructions from above, (...), ver. 3.

SECTION II. JOHN Chap. I. from the beginning to Ver. 15. CHRIST'S Divinity
showed: and the fitness of him, the Word, to be incarnate.
AFter the Preface, this portion does justly challenge to be ranked first: for
it not only treats of Christ's Divinity, which is first to be looked after in
his story, but it also shows, how proper it was for him the second person in
the Trinity to be incarnate, rather then either of the other persons: 1. He
being the Word by whom the world was created, and therefore fittest by whom it
should be redeemed. 2. The Word in whom the promise of life was given, ver. 4.
and so most fit by whom life should be brought. 3. The substance of that word
of promise, that shone as a light throughout all the old Testament, in the
darkness of the types, figures, prophesies and mysteries there, and the
darkness of those obscure dispensations comprehended it not, but that it gave
light and shone in that obscurity: and they could not comprehend it, it being a
light to break out in a far greater luster th^n they affoarded.

SECTION III. LUKE Chap. I. from Ver. 5. to Ver. 57. The birth of John the
Baptist, and the birth of our Savior foretold by the Angel Gabriel.
Christ's forerunner, Ioh. 1.6. and this begins to tell his story to the full.

HEROD the Great, by descent an Edomite, and placed by the Romans King of
Judea, [compare Genesis 27.40.] among diverse other plagues, in his uneven, and
rugged reign, had slain the Sanhedrin, Joseph. Ant. l. 14. c. 17. and to
plaster the business again, by the counsel of Bava ben Bara repaired the
Temple, and made it incomparably more sumptuous then it was before, Iucas. fol.
19. He began this work in the 18th year of his reign, and it cost him eight
years to finish it, Ios. Ant. lib. 15. c. 14. So that this new fabric was but
eight or nine years old at this year that we are upon.

In this Temple, Zacharias a Priest of the course of Abia, was offering incense
in the holy place, as was used daily; and has tidings brought him of a son,
that should be forerunner to the Messiah. Although Zacharias be said to have
been of the course of Abia, yet can it hardly be thought that he was of his
seed and posterity: for we find mention but of four of the courses that
returned out of Babylon, and Abias was none of them, Ezra 2.36, 37, 38, 39. But
the whole number of those Priests that did return of those four courses, being
about 4290, were cast by lot into 24 courses, according to the Primitive
institution, and Zacharias was of the eight, as Abias course had been before
the captivity, and which yet bare his name, as the other did their names, who
had denominated the courses from their first original. Of this ordering of the
courses after the captivity, both Talmuds speak largely, in the Treatise
Taanith cap. 4.

Whether Zacharias were of the seed of Abia or no, it is apparent by his
serving in Abias course, that he was not High Priest, but one of the ordinary
Priests, that served by course as their turn came, and that had their
particular employment in the service, by lot. The manner of their lottery for
this purpose, is mentioned at large in Tamid cap. 3. in Ioma cap. 2.

The Angel Gabriel who about 456 years ago, had given account to Daniel of the
time of Messiah his sufferings, does now when that time is drawing near, first
bring tidings of his forerunners birth, and then of his own.

The Jerusalem Gemara in Ioma fol. 42. col. 3. relates a story very parallel to
this of Zachary, both of his seeing an Angel in the Temple, and of his stay
there longer then was used at offering Incense. Simeon the just, say they,
served Israel in the High Priesthood forty years: And on the last year he
says unto them, This year I must die. They say to him, How know thou that?
He answered. Every year hitherto, when I went into the most holy place [on the
day of expiation] one like an old man clothed in white, and veiled in white,
went in with me, and came out with me. Now this year he went in with me, but
came not out with me. And instantly after, The High Priest might not stay
praying in the most holy place long, lest he should put the people into a fear.
One once staid long, and they were about to go in after him. Some say it was
Simeon the Just. They said to him, Why did thou stay so long? He answered, I
was praying for the Sanctuary of your God, that it should not be destroyed.
They say to him, Though thou did so, yet should thou not have stayed so
long.

If this relation carry any truth with it, it might be looked upon, as the
expiring of Vision [as Prophecy had also ceased not long before that time:]
for Simeon the Just, is said to be (...) of the remnant of the men of Ezraes
great Synagogue. Aboth R. Nathan cap. 4. and upon the death of Zachary and
Malacy, who were of that Synagogue, the spirit of Prophecy departed: And here
Vision and Prophecy is dawning again.

Zacharias for not believing the words of the Angel is struck (...) Deaf and
Dumb: and does foresignifie the silencing of the Leviticall Priesthood ere long
to be. In the Jews Canons (...) is one of the five sorts of persons that they
commonly exclude from all employments and matters of honor, trust, or import;
and it means (...) one that can neither hear nor speak, Jerur in chegigah. fol.
75. col. 4.

His wife Elizabeth conceiving with child, retires as a recluse for five
months space, that she might keep her self from all defilement, she carrying
as choice a Nazarite in her womb as she did, ver. 15.

Five months were not the whole time of her retiring for that, that urged her
to keep close so long, had the same tie upon her all the time she went with
child; but five months are only named, by way of introduction to the story,
and occurrence in the sixth month mentioned instantly after.

In the sixth month the same Angel appears to the Virgin Mary, and tells
her of the birth of the Messiah, to be of her: which she believing, though by
the course of nature so impossible, she presently goes to her Cosen Elizabeth
into the hill-countrey of Judea [to Hebron, see Josh. 21.11.] not only to visit
her and to rejoice with her, nor only to see the proof of those things that the
Angel had told of her, but very probably, acted by the holy Ghost, that she
might conceive the Messiah in Hebron, where so many choice and eminent types of
him, and references to him had been in ancient time.

These tidings come to the Virgin at the very latter end of the year that we
are upon, or the beginning of the next, and her journey to Hebron is in the
middle of winter.

SECTION IV. MATTHEW Chap. I. All the Chapter. CHRIST'S Genealogy by the Line of
Solomon, and by his supposed Father Joseph. His Mother in danger to be divorced
upon false suspicion of Adultery.
WHether it were that Mary conceived with child at the instant of the Angels
telling her of her conception, as has been held most generally, or at the
instant that she came to her Cosen Elizabeth in Hebron, by the time, that she
had stayed with her three months, she might easily be discovered to be with
child, as Tamar was after the same space of time, Genesis 38.24. Whose case and
danger of death in that story, compare with the Virgins case and danger of
divorce in this. The Talmudish Decretals do allot three months for such a
discovery. Every woman [say they] that is divorced or become a widow, behold
she may not be married, nor espoused, till she have stayed 90 days, that it
may be known whether she be with child or no; and that there may be
distinguishing betwixt the seed of the first husband, and the seed of the
second. Likewise a stranger and his wife which are proselytes, they keep them
asunder 90 days, that there may be a discerning between the seed sown in
holiness, [that is when they are come into the true Religion out of
Heathenisme. Compare 1 Cor. 7.14.] and the seed not sown in holiness. Talm. in
Jehameth cap. 4. and in Chetubeth cap. 5. Maym. in Gerushin cap. 11.

This space of time considered, in the present story, it shows how fitly the
last verse of the preceding Section, viz. Luke 1.56. and the 18th verse of
this, do join together. The Genealogy interposed does not interrupt, but
illustrate the story intended: And it is not only properly, but even
necessarily, set in the front of the Evangelicall history, that satisfaction
might be given by it, in that main point concerning Christ, which the
Scriptures do so often inculcate, and which the Jews would first of all look
after, namely to prove Jesus of Nazaret, how ever so meanly born, yet to be The
son of David. There were two remarkable Maxims among the Jewish Nation. 1. That
there was to be no King for Israel, but of the house of David and line of
Solomon. Talm. in Sanhedr. cap. 10. And consequently they looked for King
Messiah from that Line. 2. That the family of the Mother is not called a
family. Juchasin. fol. 55. Hereupon has Matthew most pertinently brought this
pedigree through the house of Solomon, and ended it in Joseph a male, whom the
Jews looked upon as the Father of Jesus.

The last verse of this Chapter, as it refers to the demeanor of Joseph and
Mary in their mutual society till the birth of Christ, lies properly in the
Harmonizing of the Evangelists, in the place where it does: But as it refers
to the birth of Christ, it is coincident with Luke ^.7. The Reader in his
thoughts will place it as he sees cause in these several relations.

SECTION V. LUKE Chap. I. from Ver. 57. to the end. John Baptist born.
WHen Mary's three months stay with her Cosen Elizabeth was expired, it is
easily guessed, that if Elizabeth by that time, were not delivered of her
child, yet she was very near it: and that consideration does clear the
subsequence of this Section to the preceding.

John Baptist born in Hebron, the place of the residence of Abraham, and of the
first Royalty of David. Here Circumcision was first ordained, and here is he
born, that was to bring in Baptism instead of Circumcision. The Priests at the
Temple, as they looked for break of day, used often to say, The face of all the
sky is bright even unto Hebron. Talm. in Joma. cap. 3. and in Tamid cap. 3.
Compare the dawning of the Gospel now rising there, in the birth of the
Baptist* and compare the words of Zacharias a Priest, ver. 78,

The time of the Baptists birth, will be found [by setting that clock from our
Saviour] to have been in the Spring much about the time of the Passover, about
which time of the year Isaac was born.

SECTION VI. LUKE Chap. II. from Ver. 1. to Ver. 40. CHRIST Born.
Baptist and the birth of Christ: and indeed there is nothing to be found in
any of the Evangelists that can interpose.

The four Monarchies which Daniel had told should be, and should expire, before
the coming of Christ, have now run their course, and a fifth is risen far more
potent and fully as cruel as all the four put together, and therefore it is
pictured with the badges of all the four, Rev. 13.2. compared with Dan. 7.4, 5,
etc.

A Decree of Augustus given out at Rome, becomes an occasion of accomplishing a
Decree of the Lords, namely of the birth of the Messiah at Bethlehem. He is
born under a Roman taxation, and now that Prophecy of Chittim or Italy
afflicting Heber, Numb. 24.24. begins livelily to take place.

The time of his birth was in the month Tisri [which answers to part of our
September] and about the Feast of Tabernacles, as may be concluded upon by
observing that he lived just two and thirty years old and an half, and died at
Easter. That month was remarkable for very many things. In it the World was
created, the Tabernacle begun, and the Temple consecrated: and as the Jerusalem
Gomarists well observe, In it were the Fathers [before the flood] born: In Resh
hashavah fol. 56. cap. col. 4.

His birth was in the night, and attended with a Song of the whole quire of
Angels [as Heb. 1.6. and compare Job 38.7.] and with a glorious light about
Bethlehem Shepherds, to whom this great Shepherd is first revealed.

At eight days old he is Circumcised, and made a member of the Church of
Israel: At forty days old, he is presented in the Temple in the east gate of
the Court of Israel, called the gate of Nicanor; and Maeries poverty is showed
by her Offering [compare ver. 24. with Lev. 12.6, 8,] yet her Child is owned
as the consolation and expectation of Israel.

The first year of his age and infancy Christ spent at Bethlehem: for whereas
the Lord by the Prophet had appointed his birth there, Mich, 5.2. his parents
had no warrant for his education in any place but there, till the Lord should
give them an express for it, which he did by an Angel, Mat. 2.22. Therefore
how the words of Luke in chap. 2. ver. 39. are to be understood we shall
observe upon the next Section.

SECTION VII. MATTHEW. Chap. II. All the Chapter. CHRIST homaged by the wise men,
Persecuted by Herod, flees into Egypt.
ver. 7. and ver. 16. by which it appears that Christ was two years old when
the wise men came to him: For Herod had enquired diligently of them the time
when the Star appeared, and according to the time that they had told him, he
slew the male children from two years old and under. From two years old,
because they had told him it was so long since the Star appeared; And under
two years old, because he would make sure work, as to that scruple that might
arise, namely, whether the Star were a forerunner, or a concomitant of the
Birth of that King of the Jews that they spoke of.

Now that the Star appeared at the instant of his birth, cannot but be
concluded upon this consideration, if there were no more, That otherwise it
left the wise man so uncertain of the time when he should be born, as that they
could not tell whether he were born or no, no not when they were come to
Jerusalem.

The appearance of the Star therefore was on the night when he was born, and
they having told Herod how long it was since it appeared, he accordingly
slays all the children of two years old; for so old according to their
information did he account the child to be for whom he sought, and yet withal
he slew all the children under that age, that he might be sure to hit and not
fail of his design. This considered, it shows that Christ was in his second
year at the wise men's coming, and withal it proves the order of this Section
to be proper, and that this Story is to be laid after the story of Mary's
Purification and not before, as many have laid it.

It may be objected indeed, that Luke having given the Story of his presenting
in the Temple, concludes, When they had performed all things according to the
Law, they returned into Galilee: Now if they returned into Galilee when Christ
was 40 days old, how was he found at Bethlehem at two years old? Answ. Luke is
to be understood in that passage according to the current of his own Story. He
had nothing to say about this matter of the wise men, nor of Christ's journey
into Egypt [because Matthew had handled that to the full before] and the next
thing that he has to relate, is his coming out of Galilee to Jerusalem, to one
of the Festivals: having nothing therefore to insert between his presenting in
the Temple at forty days old, and his coming again to the Temple at twelve
years old, he makes this brief transition between when they had performed all
things according to the Law they returned into Galilee, that he might thereby
bring Christ to Galilee, from whence he came when he showed his wisdom at
twelve years old.

(...) in Scripture is always taken in the worst sense for men practicing
Magical and unlawful Arts; and if it be to be understood so in this place, it
magnifieth the power and grace of Christ the more, when men that had been of
such a profession become the first Professors of Christ, of any among the
Gentiles: They seeing a new and uncouth Star in the Heavens [it may be the
light that shone about Bethlehem-Shepherds seemed to them at distance a new
strange Star hanging over Iudaea] are informed by God two years after what it
signified; and are wrought upon by his Spirit to come and homage Christ whom it
pointed out.

Herod at the report of the King of the Jews born, and that with the attendance
of such a glorious Star, looks upon him as the Messiah, yet endeavors to
murder him. He is sent by the direction of an Angel with his mother into Egypt,
where there was at this time an infinite number of the Jewish Nation. Succah
cap. 5. At Alexandria there was a great Cathedral, double cloistered, and
sometime there were there double the number of Israel, that came out of Egypt,
and there were 71 golden chairs, according to the 71 Elders of the great
Sanhedrin* And there was a Pulpit of wood in the middle, where the Minister of
the Congregation stood, etc. The Babylon Talmud says, Alexander the Great slew
these multitudes, but the Jerusalem says Trajanus did. And the Author of
Iuchasin will show you a truth in both. For, In the days of Simeon the Just
(says he) Alexandria which was Amen Min Ne, was full of Israelites, double the
number of those that came out of Egypt, etc. But they were all slain by
Alexander. But after this it was re-peopled again from the time of Onias, who
built there a great Temple, and an Altar, and all the men of Egypt went
thither, etc. And there was a great Congregation there, double to the number of
those that came out of Egypt. Fol. 14. Of this Temple built by Onias in Egypt,
Josephus makes mention, Antiq. lib. 13. cap. 6. And the Talmud in Menacheth,
cap. 13. So that Christ being sent into Egypt was sent among his own Nation,
who had filled that Country.

The time that he was in Egypt was not above three or four months, so soon the
Lord smote Herod for his butchery of the innocent children, and murtherous
intent against the Lord of Life. Joseph and Mary being called out of Egypt
after Herod's death, intend for Iudaea again, thinking to go to Bethlehem, but
the fear of Archelaus, and the warning of an Angel directs them into Galilee;
They knew not but that Christ was to be educated in Bethlehem as he was to be
born there; therefore they kept him there till he was two years old, and durst
not take him thence, till fear and the warrant of an Angel dismisseth them into
Egypt; And when they come again from thence, they can think of no other place
but Bethlehem again, till the like fear and warrant send them into Galilee.

Christ, from the time of his return out of Egypt, till he come to be twelve
years old, which was for the space of these years; For the better understanding
of which times let us take up some few passages in Josephus.

Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 10. Herod (says he) reigned 34 years, from the time that
Antigonus was taken away, and 37 years from the time that he was first decl^red
King by the Romans.

And again in the same Book cap. 15. In the tenth year of the reign of
Archelaus, the people not enduring his cruelty and tyranny, they accused
Archelaus to Caesar, and he banished him to Vienna: And a little after Cyrenius
was sent by Caesar to tax Syria, and to confiscate Archelaus his goods.

And lib. 18. cap. 1. Coponius was also sent with Cyrenius to be governor of
Judea.

And ibid. cap. 5. Coponius returning to Rome, Marcus Ambibuchus becomes his
Successor in that government. And after him succeeded Annius Rufus, in whose
time died Caesar Augustus the second Emperor of the Romans.

Now when Augustus died Christ was fourteen years old, as appears from this,
that he was 29. years old complete, and beginning to be thirty, in the
fifteenth year of Tiberius the Emperor next succeeding, Luke 3.1, 2. Reckon
then these times that Josephus has mentioned between the death of Herod and
the death of Augustus, namely, the ten years of Archelaus, and after them the
government of Coponius, and after him Ambibuchus, and after him Rufus, and it
will necessarily follow that when Herod slew Bethlehem children, Christ being
then two years old, it was the very last year of his reign.

SECTION VIII. LUKE Chap. II. from Ver. 40. to the end of the Chapter. CHRIST
at twelve years old shows his wisdom among the Doctors: At the same age had
Solomon showed his wisdom in deciding the controversy between the two
harlots. Ionic. Martyr. in Epist. ad Mignos.
Christ from his infancy till he began to be thirty years old, but only this
Story of his showing his wisdom at twelve years old among the Doctors of some
of the three Sanhedrins that sat at the Temple; for there sat one of 23.
Judges in the Eastgate of the Mountain of the house called the gate Shushan;
Another of 23. in the gate of Nicanor, or the Eastgate of the Court of Israel.
And the great Sanhedrin of 71. Judges, that sat in the Room Gazith, not far
from the Altar.

Though Herod had slain the Sanhedrin, as is related by Josephus and diverse
others, yet was not that Court, nor the judiciary thereof utterly extinguished,
but revived again, and continued till many years after the destruction of the
City.

His Story about this matter is briefly thus given by the Babylon Talmud, in
Bava Bathra fol. 3. facic. 2. Herod was a servant of the Armenian Family; He
set his eyes upon a girl of it. One day the man heard a voice from Heaven [Bath
Kol] which said, Any servant that rebelleth this year shall prosper. He rises
up, and slays all his Musters: but left that girl, etc. And whereas it is
said, Thou shall set a King over thee from among thy brethren [which as the
gloss there tells us, their Rabbis understood, of the chiefest of thy
brethren] he rose up and slew all the great ones, only he left Baba ben Bora to
take counsel of him. The gloss upon this again tells us: That he slew not
utterly all the great ones, for he left Hillel and the sons of Betirah
remaining: and Josephus relates also, that he spared Shammai: to which Abraham
Zaccuth adds, that Menahim and 80 gallant men of the chief of the Nation were
gone over to his service and to attend upon him. So that these of themselves,
and by ordination of others, did soon repair that breach that his sword had
made in the Sanhedrin, he not resisting its erection again, when he had now
taken away the men of his displeasure.

Hillel was president, and sat so forty years, and died [by the Jews
computation applied to the Christian account] much about this twelfth year of
Christ. For they say that he lived an hundred and twenty years, the last forty
of which he spent in the Presidency of the Sanhedrin, entering upon that dignity
an hundred years before the destruction of the City.

Menahem was at first Vicepresident with him, but upon his going away to Herod's
service, Shammai came in his room: and now two as eminent and Learned men sat
in those two chairs, as ever had done since the first birth of traditions.
Hillel himself was so deserving a man, that whereas in the vacancy of the
Presidentship, by the death of Shemaiah and Abtalion, R. Judah and R. Ieshua
the sons of Betirah might have taken the chairs, they preferred Hillel as the
worthier person, Talm. Ierus. in Pissachin. fol. 33. col. 1. He bred many
eminent scholars, to the number of fourscore, the most renowned of which by
name were, Jonathan ben Vzziel the Chaldee Paraphrast, and Rabban Iocanan ben
Zaccai: both probably alive at this year of Christ, and a good while after. The
latter was undoubtedly so, for he lived to see the destruction of the City and
Temple, and sat President in the Sanhedrin at Iabneh afterward. And till that
time also lived the sons of Betirah mentioned before.

Shammai was little inferior to Hillel in learning or in breeding learned men:
and their equal learning and schools, bred differences between them in point
of learning, and determination about some things in their traditions. The two
Masters controverting about a few Articles, but their Scholars about very
many, and their differences very high.

This contention of the Scholars grew so very high even in the Masters time,
that it is recorded that the Scholars of Shammai affronted and bandied against
Hillel himself, in the Temple court. Ierus. in Iom. Tobh. fol. 61. col. 3. And
the quarrellings of these Schools were so bitter, that as the same Talmud
relates, it came to effusion of blood and murdering one another, Shabb. fol.
3. col. 3. These are some of the Traditions that were made or settled in the
Chamber of Hananiah the son of Ezekia, the son of Baron. The persons were
numbered, and the Scholars of Shammai were more then the Scholars of Hillel.
That day was a grievous day to Israel as was the day of the making of the
golden Calfe. The Scholars of Shammai stood below and slew the Scholars of
Hillel. Nor did these animosities cease, but they were ever crossing and
jarring, till at the last the Schools of Hillel carried it, by the
determination of a divine voice from Heaven, as was pretended [for to such
fictions they glad to betake themselves.]

Till the divine voice [Bath Kol] came forth, it was lawful for any one to
practice according the weighty or light things of the School of Shammai, or
according to the weighty or light things of the School of Hillel. There came
forth a divine voice at Jabneh and said, The words of the one and of the other
are the words of the living God, but the certain determination of the thing is
according to the School of Hillel. And whosever transgresses against the words
of the School of Hillel, deserves death. Ibid. in Beracoth fol. 3. col. 2.

At these times then that we are upon, their School-Learning was come to the
very height, Hillel and Shammai having promoted it to a pitch incomparably
transcendent above what it had been before; and accordingly now began the
Titles of Rabban and Rabbi; Rabban Simeon the Son of Hillel being the first
President of the Sanhedrin that bare a Title, for till these times their great
and Learned men, had been called only by their bare proper names. So that now
in a double seasonablenesse does Christ the divine wisdom of God appear and
set in among them, at twelve years old beginning, and all the time of his
Ministry after, going on to show them wisdom fully, and his own Word and
Doctrine the divine oracles of wisdom. In a double seasonablenesse I say, when
their Learning was now come to the height, and when their Traditions had to the
utmost made the word of God of no effect.

This twelfth year of Christ, was the last year of the reign of Archelaus the
Son of Herod, of whom is mention, Matthew. 2.22. He is accused to Augustus for
maladministration, and thereupon banished by him to Vienna, as was mentioned
before. And Coponius comes Governor of Iudaea in his stead.

Caesar dies this fourteenth year of Christ, on the nineteenth day of August:
duobus Sextis, Pompeio and Apuleio. Coss. Suet. in Augusto. cap. 10. He was 75
years, 10 months and 26 days old, having been Monarch since his victory at
Actium 44 years, wanting 13 days. Dion Cass. lib. 56. TIBERIUS Caesar reigns
in his stead.

Gabriel had done, in his foretelling of the time of his appearing. Dan. 9.24,
25, etc. where speaking of the years that should pass, from his own time unto
Messiah the Prince, he begins the story of Messiah, from the time of his
Ministry only, or from the latter half of the last seven years there
mentioned, the time when he should confirm the Covenant with the many, etc.

These years he spent with his Parents at Nazaret, Luke 2.51. following his
Fathers trade of Carpentry, Matthew. 13.55. with Mark. 6.3. And these two things
were they especially, that did so mainly cloud him from the eyes of the Jews,
that they could not own him for the Messiah, namely because he was of so poor
condition and education, and they looked for the Messiah in a pompous garb, and
because his first appearing in his Ministry was not from Nazaret: his birth at
Bethlehem so many years ago, either having been out at all taken notice of when
it was, or if it were, by this time worn out of notice and remembrance.

SECTION IX. LUKE Chap. III. from the beginning to Ver. 18. MATTHEW. Chap. III.
from the beginning to Ver. 13. MARK Chap. I. from the beginning to Ver. 9. The
Gospel began in JOHN'S Ministry and Baptism.
Mark has made this the beginning of his Gospel, because the preceding
occurrences of Christ's birth and Minoitry, were committed by the holy Ghost who
held his pen, to the pens of others: He calls the Ministry and Baptism of
John, the beginning of the Gospel, and that deservedly, both in regard of John's
preaching and proclaiming Christ's appearing to be so near, as also in regard of
the great change that his Ministry introduced, both in doctrine and practice:
He preaching and administering the baptism of repentance for the remission of
sins, whereas baptism till that time had been used and taken up as an
obligation to the performance of the Law: And he baptizing Jews into another
religion then their own, whereas till then, baptizing had been used, to admit
Heathens into the religion of the Jews.

Here is the standard of time that the holy Ghost has set up in the new
Testament: unto which as unto the fulness of tim^, he has drawn up a
chronicall chain from the Creation: and from which as from a standing mark, we
are to measure all the times of the new Testament if we would fix them to a
certain date.

There are two main stories that Luke lays down in his third Chapter: the one
is John's baptizing, and the other is, Christ baptized by him, and he has dated
the former in the fifteenth year of Tiberius Caesar, and how to date the latter
we are taught and helped by these collections. 1. He intimates to us that
Christ when he was baptized by John, was but entering on his thirtee^th year, as
the wonders that he has used do plainly evidence. (...), He was beginning to
be about thirty years of age, or after a manner, and in such a way of
reckoning, as the Scripture ordinarily uses, accounting the very first day of
a year, as that year. (...): One day of the year is reputed that year. Tal.
Bab. Resh hashavah fol. 2. 2. John baptized half a year before Jesus came to be
baptized of him, for he was half a year younger then John, Luke 1.26. and as
Christ was baptized and entered his Ministry, just when he was beginning to
enter upon his thirtieth year, so John had begun his Ministry at the same age,
and both according to the Law, Numb. 4. 3. Christ was baptized in September, at
what time of the year he had been born: For the phrase of Luke mentioned
before, does plainly confirm, that his baptism was close to that time of the
year, that had been the time of his birth. 4. For the synchronizing therefore
of the year of Christ with the year of Tiberius, we must lay Tiberius his
fifteenth collateral in Annal, accounting with Christ's nine and twentieth;
whether you reckon Tiberius his year from the very time of the year that he
began to reign, which was the 20th of August, [and then in September when
Christ was baptized, his sixteenth year was begun, and Christ's thirtieth] or
whether you reckon according to the common accounting of the Roman Fasti, from
Iunuary to January, and then though Christ indeed spent three months of his
thirtieth year in Tiberius his fifteenth so accounted, yet he spent three times
three months of it in his sixteenth.

The fifteenth year of Tiberius then and the nine and twentieth of our Savior,
was the great year of the beginning of the Gospel, in the preaching and
baptizing of John, who began this work about Passover time, or in the month
Abib, otherwise called Nisan. The time of the year that Abraham had received
the Promise, Isaac was born, Israel was redeemed out of Egypt, and the
Tabernacle was erected in the wilderness. The Jews speak more then they are
aware of, when they say, that As in Nisan there had been redemption, so in
Nisan there should be redemption. Tal. Bab. ubi supr. fol. 11. The Gospel
began, and Christ died in that month.

Now whereas it may seem strange, that upon John's beginning to baptize, he
introducing so strange a practice and doctrine among them, yet the people
should flock to him in so great multitudes, as the Evangelists show they did,
and receive his baptism with so much readiness: [besides that general
satisfaction that may be given to this, from the consideration of Gods special
hand and work, providing entertainment for his Gospel, now setting forth,]
these four things also may be pertinently observed.

1. This was the time that the Nation expected that the Messia should appear:
See Luke 19.11. Gabriels seventy in Dan. 9. had so plainly and exactly pointed
to this very time, that not only the pious and the studious among the Nation,
could not but observe it, but it had even raised an expectation through a great
part of the world, of some great Potencie to arise among the Jewish Nation
about these times, which should subdue and be Ruler of all the world.
Percrebuerat orient toto vetus and constans opinio, esse in fatis ut eo
tempore Iudaea profecti rerum potirentur. Sueton. in Vesp. cap. 4. An old and a
constant opinion had grown through the whole East, that some coming out of the
East should be Master of all.

Nay so evident was the time and truth in Daniel, that the Jerusalem Gomarists
that could be well content to deny that Messiah was already come, as the rest
of their Nation do, yet they cannot but confess it in Beracoth. fol. 1. col.
1. in this story. Our Doctors say, the Name of King Messiah is David: R. Joshua
ben Levi says, His Name is The branch* [Zech. 3.8.] R. Judah the son of R.
Ibhu says, his Name is Menahem, [the Comforter.] And this helps to prove that
which R. Judah says, namely this example of a certain Jew: who as he was
polwing, his Ox lowed: A certain Arabian passing by and observing his Ox low,
said, O Jew, O Jew, loose thine Oxen, and lay by this plow, for behold your
Sanctuary is destroyed. The Ox lowed a second time. He says to him again, O
Jew, O Jew, yoke thine Oxen, and tie on thy plow, for behold King Messiah is
born. He says to him, What is his Name? the other answered Menahem [the
Comforter:] And what is his Fathers Name? He answered, Hezekiah [the strong
God.] He says to him, Whence is he? He answered, From the royal Palace of
Bethlehem Judah. He went and sold his Oxen, and sold his plow and gears, and
went about from City to City selling swaddling clothes for babes. When he came
to that City, all the women bought of him, but the Mother of Menahem bought
not. He heard the voice of the women saying, O Mother of Menaham, thou Mother
of Menahem, Bring some things sold here to thy child. She answered, Now I
pray, that all Isreal's enemies may be hanged, for on the day that he was born
the house of the Sanctuary was destroyed. He says to her, We hope as it is
destroyed at his feet, so it will be built at his feet. She says to him, I
have no money. And why, says he, does he suffer for that? If thou have no
money now, I will come again after two days and receive it. After the days he
came to the City and says to her, How does the Child? She answered him, Since
the time that thou saw me, there came winds and storms and took him out of
my hands. A clear confession of Christ's being already come, and of the poverty
of his Mother.

2. They expected a great change of things when Messiah should come: That
Promise in the Prophet of new Heavens and a new earth, to be created, raised
this expectation. Hence have they this saying, (...) The holy blessed God will
renew the world for a thousand years. Aruch in (...). [ John speaks their own
language, when he speaks of reigning with Christ a thousand years, Rev. 20.4.
which is no more to be understood of the time yet to come, then Messiah is yet
to be expected as not come.] Hereupon they call the days of the Messiah (...)
A new Creation, as 2 Cor. 5.17. In Midris Tillin. fol. 4. col. 3. R. Houne
speaks of three ages, and the last that he mentions is (...) the age of the
Messiah: And when that comes, says he, the holy blessed God says, Now it lies
upon me to Create a new Creation. They likewise call at that time (...) the
world to come, because of the change of things that they expected then, as if a
new world were created. Tanchum. fol. 77. col. 3. In the world to come I will
send my messenger speedily, and he shall prepare the way before me. Paul takes
the world to come in this sense, Heb. 2.5.

3. Baptism had been in long and common use among them many generations before
John Baptist came, they using this for admission of Proselytes into the Church,
and baptizing, men, women and children for that end.

Talm. in Jobamoth cap. 4. and Moym. in ^ssure biah, cap. 13. A person is not a
proselyte till he be both circumcised and baptized.

Id. in Chittubeth cap. 1. (...). A little one they baptize, by the appointment
of the Consistory. And Maym. in Avadim. cap. 8. An Israelite that takes a
little Heathen child, or that finds an Heathen infant, and baptizeth him for
a proselyte, behold he is a proselyte.

Hence a ready reason may be given, why there is so little mention of baptizing
Infants in the new Testament, that there is neither plain precept nor example
for it, as some ordinarily plead: The reason is, because there needed no such
mention, baptizing of Infants having been as ordinarily used in the Church of
the Jews as ever it has been in the Christian Church: It was enough to mention
that Christ established baptism for an Ordinance under the Gospel; and then, who
should be baptized, was well enough known, by the use of this Ordinance of old.
Therefore it is good plea, Because there is no clear forbidding of the
baptizing of Infants in the Gospel, ergo they are to be baptized: for that
having been in common use among the Jews, that Infants should be baptized as
well as men and women, our Savior would have given some special prohibition
if he intended that they should have been excluded: so that silence in this
case does necessarily conclude approbation to have the practice continued which
had been used of old before.

John's baptism differed from that before, only in this; that whereas that
admitted proselytes to the Jewish religion, this admitted and translated Jews
into the Gospel religion: that was a baptism binding them over to the
performance of the Law, as their Circumcision did, but this was a baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins, as was observed before.

4. Though some of the Nation expected that the Messiah would come and redeem
them, though they were impenitent, as some of the Gentiles plead in Talm. Bab.
Sanhedr. cap. 10. and R. Samuel in articulis fidei Iudaicae: yet was it more
generally held and with good reason, that the Messiah would look for a
repenting generation: and thereupon others of the Gomarists in the place
alleged say: If Israel repent but one day, presently the Messiah comes.

Upon the consideration of these things, it will appear the less strange, that
the people flowed in to John's baptism in so great a conflux, this being the
time about which the Nation expected the appearing of Messiah, baptism being a
thing most commonly known and used among them, and this baptism of repentance
administered preparatively toward the entertainment of Christ now ready to come,
being suitable to their own apprehensions of the necessity of repentance,
against his coming.

Baptism was [besides other tendencies of it] as a badge whereby those that
received it and stuck to it, were marked out for safety and preservation
against that destruction that was to come upon the Nation for unbelief.
Therefore John construes their coming to be baptized, their fleeing from the
wrath to come: and Peter in the same sense, does say, that baptism does now
save, 1 Pet. 3.21. as the Ark had done in the destruction of the old world, so
this from the destruction now coming. And Acts 2.40. to his admonition to
Repent and be baptized, he adds, Save your selves from this untoward
genenation.

MATTHEW. Chap. III. from Ver. 13. to the end. MARK Chap. I. Ver. 9, 10, 11. LUKE
Chap. III. Ver. 21, 22.

Joseph's age at his appearing before Pharaoh, Genesis 41.46. The Priests, at their
entrance into their office, Numb. 4. and David's when he began to reign, 2 Samuel
5.4.

He has now three years and an half to live, and to be a public Minister of
the Gospel, as the Angel Gabriel had told, Dan. 9.27. that in half of the last
seven of the years there named, he should confirm the Covenant: R. Iochavan
says, Three years and an half the divine glory stood upon the mount of Olives
and cried, Seek the Lord while he may be found. Midr. Till. fol. 10. col. 4.

This space of time had been renowned before, by Elias his shutting up Heaven,
Luke 4.25. James 5.17. and now Heaven is opened: by the persecution of
Antiochus when all religion was destroyed, Dan. 12.7, 11. and now redemption
and restoring is come.

Christ therefore living three years and an half and dying at Easter, it
follows that he was baptized in Tizri, about the Feast of Tabernacles, at
which time of the year he had been born: and was now, when he was baptized,
nine and twenty years old complete, and just entering upon his thirtieth: to
which add his three years and an half after his baptism, and it resulteth,
that he died, being two and thirty years old and an half: the exact time of
David's reign in Jerusalem, 1 King. 2.11. The days that David reigned over
Israel, were forty years; seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and
three years reigned be in Jerusalem: that is, in Hebron seven years and an
half, 2 Samuel 5.5. and in Jerusalem two and thirty years and an half: so the
Ierus. Talm. counts well, in Rosh hashavah, fol. 1. col. 2.

As Christ by Circumcision was admitted a member of the Church of the Jews, so
is he by baptism of the Church of the Gospel: being withal installed into his
Ministerial function by baptism, and unction of the holy Ghost, as the
Priests were into theirs, by washing and anointing.

SECTION X. LUKE Chap. III. from Ver. 23. to the end of the Chapter. CHRIST'S
Genealogy by his Mothers side.
MATTHEWS Genealogy, and this, as they run by a different line, so they are
brought in upon different ends. Matthew intends to show, that Jesus Christ was
the Son promised to David. Luke shows him the seed of the woman promised to
Adam, Genesis 3.15. who in the next following Section begins to break the head of
the Serpent. Therefore when that promise to Adam begins to take place in
Christ's entering upon his Ministry, and in his being sealed for the Messiah by
the holy Ghost, this Genealogy is divinely woven in.

Matthew derives his line by the pedigree of Joseph his supposed Father, and
draws it from Solomon: Luke by the pedigree of Mary his Mother, and draws it
from Nathan: For as the Jews looked on him as the Son of David, they would
regard the masculine line and the line Royal, therefore Matthew gives it at
his birth. But looked on, as the seed promised to Adam, the seed of the woman,
he was to be looked after, by the line of his Mother. And whereas this seed of
the woman was to destroy the power of Satan by the word of truth, as Satan had
destroyed men by words of falsehood, Luke does properly draw up his line to
Adam, now when he is to begin to preach the word.

The line on this side the captivity, for which there is no record elsewhere in
Scripture, Matthew and L^^k took from some known records then extant among the
Nation. R. Levi says, there was found a book of genealogies at Jerusalem, in
which it was written, Hillel was of the family of David. Ben Jat^aph of the
family of Asap, etc. Tal. Ierus. in Taanith, fol. 68. col. 1. They kept the
records of pedigrees and of all other, they would be sure to keep those of the
family of David, because of the expectation of the Messiah from it.

SECTION XI. MATTHEW. Chap. IV. from the beginning to Ver. 12. MARK Chap. I. Ver.
12, 13. LUKE Chap. IV. from the beginning to Ver. 14. The seed of the woman and
the Serpent combating.
MARK and LUKE by these words, immediately the spirit drives him, and Jesus,
returned from Jordan, do make the order necessary: so that as for the
subsequence of this to what preceded there can be no scruple. Only there is
some difference twixt Matthew and Luke in relating the order of the
temptations: which Matthew having laid down in their proper rank [as appears
by these particles then, ver. 15. and again, ver. 8.] Luke in the rehearsing of
them, is not so much observant of the order [that being fixed by Matthew
before,] as he is careful to give the full story, and so to give it, as might
redound to the fullest information.

As our mother Eve was tempted by Satan to the lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eyes, and the pride of life, as 1 John 2.16. [for she saw it was good for
food, that it was pleasant to the eyes, and to be desired to make one wise,
Genesis 3.6.] so by these, had it been possible, would the same tempter have
overthrown the seed of the woman: For he tempted him to turn stones into bread,
as to satisfy the longing of the flesh; to fall down and worship him upon the
sight of a bewitching object to his eyes, and to fly in the air in pride, and
to get glory among men. Luke for our better observing of this parallel, has
laid the order of these temptations answerable to the order of those.

Jesus being baptized about the feast of Tabernacles, toward the latter end of
our September, is presently carried into the wilderness of Judea, by the
acting of the holy Spirit, to enter that combat with the Serpent which was
designed, Genesis 3.15. Forty days and forty nights [He being all the while, in
watching, fasting and solitude, and among the wild beasts, but safe as Adam
among them in innocency] the Devil tempts him invisibly as he does other
men, namely striving to inject sinful suggestions into him, but he could find
nothing in him to work upon, as Ioh. 14.30. therefore at forty days end he
takes another course, and appears to him visibly in the shape of an Angel of
light [and so had Eve been deceived by him, mistaking him for a good Angel] and
tries him by persuasion, by Scripture and by power, but in all is foiled,
mastered and banished by sword.

SECTION XII. JOHN Chap. I. from Ver. 15. to the end of the Chapter. CHRIST is
pointed out by John and followed by some Disciples.
COnceive the continuance of the story thus: Christ newly baptized, goes
immediately into the wilderness, and leaves John at Jordan on Judea side: In
the time of the forty days temptation, John having now gathered his harvest of
Disciples on that side the River, goes over into the country beyond Jordan,
and baptizeth in Bethabara. Thither came some Pharisees by commission of the
Sanhedrin, to question him about the authority whereby he baptized, making no
strangeness at baptizing, which had been so long in use among them, but
questioning his authority to baptize in that tenor that he did.

The next day after their questioning of him, Christ comes into sight, is
pointed out by John, and followed by some of his Disciples.

For half a year John had baptized in the Name of Christ and knew him not, ver.
31, 33. Only as all the Nation expected the Messiah to come in time, and John
had it revealed to him that he was now ready to appear, so John baptized and
the people came to him upon this account: He professed to all that came to him
to be baptized, and so he did to the Jews Commissioners now, that he baptized
only in the Name of him that was to come after him, whose shoos latchet he was
not worthy to unloose, ver. 27. Let a passage in Tosaphtoth, comment upon these
words: (...). What is the token of a servant? He ties his Masters shoos, or
looses his shoos, and bears his things after him to the bath, In Kiddushin cap.
1. And the like says Maymony in Mekerah cap. 2. A Canaanite servant is like
land as to buying: and he is bought by money, or by script, or by service in
way of earnest: And what is the earnest in buying servants? Namely that a man
use them as they use servants before a Master. As, to loose his shoe, or to
tie his shoe, or to carry his things after him to the bath, etc.

So that those that were baptized in this time, of whom there was a very great
number, knew not of Jesus of Nazareth his being the Christ, nor knew they more
of Christ then they had known before, but only that he was ready to come: only
they were baptized into faith in him, and to repentance.

But when Christ himself came to be baptized, John had discovery of him, and so
is able now upon the sight of him to point him out to his Disciples: whereupon
Peter [and probably Iohn] and Andrew, and Philip, and Nathanael follow him.

SECTION XIII. JOHN Chap. II. All the Chapter. Water turned into wine. CHRIST'S
first Passover after his Baptism.
THe words, The third day in ver. 1. mean they, either the third day from
Christ's coming into Galilee, Joh. 1.43. or the third day from his conference
with Nathanael, or the third day from the Disciples first following him, they
give demonstration enough of the series, and connection of this Chapter to the
former.

It was about the middle of our November when Christ came out of the
wilderness to John at Bethabara, and then there were about four months to the
Passover, which time he spent in going up and down Galilee, and at last comes
to his own home at Capernaum. Those two passages being laid together, The day
following Jesus would go forth into Galilee, Joh. 1.43. And After this he went
down to Capernaum, and continued there not many days, and the Jews Passover
was at hand, Joh. 2.12. do make it evident that Jesus had now a perambulation
of Galilee, which took up a good space of time. So that this first miracle of
turning water into wine, was about the middle of our November, or little
further.

The Jews marriages were fixed to certain days of the week: For a virgin was
to be married on the fourth day of the week, and a widow on the fifth, Talm. in
chetub. cap. 1. [The reason why, is not pertinent to produce here.] Now if this
marriage at Cana, were of a virgin, and on the fourth day of the week, or our
wednesday, then Christ's first showing himself to John and his Disciples at
Jordan, was on the first day of the week, afterward the Christian Sabbath.

These marriage feasts they held to be commanded, and thereupon they have this
maxim, It is not fit for the Scholars of the wise to eat at feasts, but only
at the feasts commanded, as those of espousals and of marriages, Maym. in Deah.
cap. 5.

At the Passover, it is half a year since Christ was baptized: and
thenceforward he has three years to live, which John reckons by three
Passeovers more, viz. Ioh. 5.1. and 6.4. and 18.28. In this first half year he
had gone through his forty days temptation, had gathered some Disciples, and
had perambulated Galilee.

At Jerusalem at the Passover, in the face of all the people, he acted in the
evidence of the great Prophet, and purges his own Temple, as Mal. 3.1, 3. does
many miracles, knows the false hearts of many, and trusts not himself with
them.

He found in the Temple, those that sold Oxen and Sheep, ver. 14. For some
illustration to this passage, take a story in Tal. Ierus. in Iom. tobh. fol.
61. col. 3. One day Baba ben Bota came into the Temple Court and found it
solitary or destitute [that is, not having any beasts there for sacrifice.] He
says, Desolate be their houses who have desolated the house of our God. What
did he? He sent and fetched in three thousand sheep of the sheep of Kedar, and
searched them whether they were without blemish, and brought them into the
mountain of the house [or the utmost court, the place where Christ found sheep
and Oxen at this time] and says, My brethren, the house of Israel, whosoever
will bring a burnt-offering let him bring it, whosoever will bring a
peace offering let him bring it.

Among other things that Jesus did for the purging of his Temple, it is said,
He powered out the changers money and overthrew the Tables. (...), and so again,
Matthew. 21.12. Maym. in Shekalim. cap. 1. It is an affirmative precept of the
Law, that every Israelite pay yearly half a shekel: yea even the poor, that
lives on alms, is bound to this, either begging so much money that he may give
it, or selling his coat to get so much.

Talm. in Shekalim. cap. 1, etc. On the first day of the month Adar,
proclamation was made about this half shekel, that they should get it ready. On
the fifteenth day of that month, the Collectors sat in every City for the
receiving of it; and as yet they forced none to pay. But on the five and
twentieth day they began to sit in the Temple [this was some eighteen or
nineteen days before the Passeover] and then they forced men to pay, and if
any refused they distrained. They sat with two Chests before them, into the
one of which they put the money of the present year, and into the other the
money that should have been paid the year before. Every one must have half a
shekel to pay for himself. Therefore when he brought a shekel to change for two
half shekels, he was to pay (...), some profit to the changer. And when a
shekel was brought for two, there was a double profit to be paid for the change.

SECTION XIV. JOHN Chap. III. All the Chapter. Nicodemus. The Disciples baptize
in the Name of Jesus.
BEfore our Saviors departure from Jerusalem, Nicodemus one of the Judges of
the great Sanhedrin comes to him, and becomes his Disciple: for we cannot so
properly look for a member of that great Council in any place as at Jerusalem.
He had observed in his miracles, the dawning of the days of Messiah, or the
Kingdom of Heaven, but having but gross and erroneous apprehensions concerning
the Kingdom of Heaven, or of the state of those days [as was the general
mistake of the Nation,] he is rectified about that matter, and is taught the
great doctrines of regeneration and believing in Christ: Christ teaching
regeneration by the spirit and Water, exalts baptism, and closely calls to
Nicodemus to be baptized. The Talmudish records make mention of a Nicodemus in
these times, who had to do about waters, to provide sufficient for the people
to drink at the festivals.

He is taught [against the great misprision of the Nation] that Messiah should
be a redeemer of the Gentiles as well as the Jews. The Jews in their common
language, did title the Gentiles (...), The Nations of the world. The earth
they divided into (...), The land of Israel, and out of the Land: and the
people they parted into (...) and (...) Israel and the Nations of the world:
The new Testament which follows their common language exceeding much, uses
both these expressions very often, whereby to signify the Gentiles: sometimes
calling them those that are without, and sometimes the world. Nicodemus very
readily understood the word in this common sense, when Christ says, God so
loved the world, that he gave his Son. And he very well perceived that Christ
contradicted in these his words, their common and uncharitable error, which
held, that the Messiah should be a redeemer only to Israel [and those Gentiles
only, that should be proselyted to their Judaisme,] but as for the rest of the
Heathen he should confound and destroy them: Examples of this their proud
uncharitableness might be produced by multitudes: let these two or three
suffice. The Jerus. Talm. in Taanith fol. 64. col. 1. speaking of the coming of
Messiah says, and produces these words, Isa. 21.12. The morning comes and
also the night, It shall be the morning to Israel, but night to the Nations of
the world. Midr. Till. on Psalm. 2. The threshing is come, the straw they cast
into the fire, the chaff into the wind, but preserve the wheat in the floor;
and every one that sees it, takes it and kisses it: (...) So the Nations of the
world say, the world was made for our sakes, but Israel say to them, Is it not
written, But the people shall be as the burning of the lime kilne, But Israel
in the time to come [(...) an expression whereby they commonly mean the times
of the Messias] shall be left only, as it is said, The Lord shall lead him
alone, and there shall be with him no strange god. Baal turim on Numb. 24.8. on
those words, He shall eat up the Nations his enemies, and shall break their
bones, observes the letter (...) in one of the words to have a special mark
upon it, signifying, says he, that he should root out the seven Nations [of
the Canaanites] and in time to come [(...)] the other sixty three Nations, that
is all the seventy Nations of the world. No, says our Savior, God loved the
world or the Gentiles, and God sent not his Son Messiah to condemn the world
or the Gentiles, but that the world through him should be saved.

After this transaction with Nicodemus, Jesus departs from Jerusalem into
Judea, and there he sets his Disciples to baptize in his Name: that whereas
John had only baptized in the Name of Christ, and his baptized ones did not
know who Christ was, now the Disciples baptize in the Name of Jesus of
Nazareth, to evidence him to be the Christ into whose Name John had baptized.

John himself was baptizing still in Aenon in Galilee, having traversed Judea
upon the coasts of Jordan; and Peraea or beyond Jordan, and now come thither
where presently his sun is to set.

This Chapter contains the story of half a year and somewhat more, namely from
the Passover [if the conference with Nicodemus were at that time] till after
the feast of Tabernacles: at which time it was a whole year since Christ was
baptized, and a year and an half since John began to baptize.

SECTION XV. LUKE Chap. III. Ver. 18, 19, 20. JOHN Imprisoned.
FRom the last verse of the preceding Section and forward, we hear no more of
John in any of the four Evangelists, till you find him in prison. Therefore
this portion in Luke, which gives the story of his imprisonment, is very fitly
and properly to be subjoyned to what precedeth: observe how aptly the first
verse of this and the last of that do join together. Luke indeed has used an
anticipation here, laying down the story of John's imprisonment, before the
story of Christ's being baptized, because he would show the effects of John's
doctrine altogether. With Pharisees, Sadduces, Publicans, Soldiers, and the
rest of the people, he found entertainment of his doctrine when he told them
their faults, and taught them their duty; but when he reproved Herod, he would
not be so compliant, but imprisoned him. The time of his commitment may be
guessed, by what time it was that Christ slipped aside for his own safety upon
the hearing how the case went with John, which will appear to be about the
middle of our November, and John had begun to preach and baptize at spring was
twelve month before, about some eighteen or nineteen months ago.

SECTION XVI. JOHN Chap. IV. All the Chapter. MATTHEW. Chap. IV. Ver. 12. CHRIST
at Jacobs well: Converteth Samaritans: Heals a sick person, etc.
Judea when John was apprehended by Herod in Galilee. His pretended quarrel
was the multitude of John's disciples, as dangerous for innovation: but the very
true cause indeed was, his and Herodias spleen for John's plainness with them
about their incest. The Pharisees at Jerusalem would soon hear what was become
of John their eyesore, and what Herod laid to his charge, namely the
dangerousnesse of his gathering so many disciples. Now our Savior
understanding that they looked upon him, as one that had more Disciples then
John, and so was in equal danger from them upon that account, he gets out
of Judea out of their reach and goes to Galilee. But was not Galilee within
their reach too?

From ver. 35. may be computed the time of this journey into Galilee, namely
when it was now four months to harvest; that is, to the Passover, for from
the second day in the Passover week their Harvest began, Lev. 23.11, etc. And
from this, there may be some reasonable conjecture concerning the time when
John was cast into prison. Christ was in Sychar field about the latter end of
our November, when it was now four months to the Passover, and he took that
journey as soon as he understood of John's imprisonment, Mat. 4.12. He was now
entered upon his one and thirtieth year of age.

When he comes up into Galilee, he avoideth his own City Nazareth, ver. 44.
because he knew he should find no respect there in regard of the mean
education that he had among them: but he goes to Cana where he had done his
first miracle; and from thence with a word of his mouth he heals one sick at
Capernaum. It was the son (...), of one of the Kings party, namely of old
Herod's, to whom diverse of the eminent and learned of the Jews had gone to be
his servants, to the distaste of others, and probably in a reluctance to their
own principles, but overcome with court-interests, Iuchasin fol. 19.

SECTION XVII. LUKE Chap. IV. from Ver. 14. to Ver. 31. MARK Chap. I. Ver. 14.
CHRIST Preaching in Nazaret Synagogue is in danger of his life.
THus is CHRIST come up to Galilee again from Jerusalem, and out of Judea where
he had staid a good space. The Reader may observe here what a chasma [if I may
so call it] there is in the story of Luke, who has stepped from the story of
Christ's temptation in the wilderness, to this his coming to Galilee, and has
laid nothing between, whereas there was a whole years history intercurrent; and
so we observed such another Chap. 2.39.

At his first coming up into Galilee in this voyage, he avoideth his own Town
Nazareth, because he knew a Prophet has no honor in his own Country, but now
having gone up and down the country some space, and a renown being gone of him
all over those parts, he comes at last to see what entertainment he can find
in his own Town. There he is admitted [as a member of that Synagogue] to be
Maphtir, or public reader of the second Lesson in the Prophets for that day.
But preaching upon what he had read, and hinting the calling of the Gentiles,
from the dealing of Elias and Elisha with some Heathens, and withal pinching
close upon the wickedness of Nazaret by that comparison, he is in danger of
his life, but delivers himself in some miraculous manner.

He preaches thus in the Synagogues, in the authority and demonstration of a
Prophet, and as he evidenced that authority elsewhere by his miracles, so does
he here in Nazaret, by reading of the Lesson in the Prophet, which being to be
read in the original Hebrew, which Language was now lost among them and only
attained to by study, he shows his Prophetical spirit in this skill in the
language, having had no education to such a purpose. The reader in the Law and
Prophets both, had an Interpreter, that rendered what was read out of the Hebrew
text into the vulgar language, and the Interpreter sometime took liberty to
paraphrase upon the Text [as the Chaldee Paraphrast had done, especially upon
the Prophets,] and kept not always verbatim to it. The Jerusalem Gomarists
give an instance of such a thing, in Sanhedr. fol. 20. col. 3. Joseph the
Maonite interpreted in the Synagogue in Tiberias these words, Hear ye this all
ye people, Why do not ye labor in the Law? have not I given the Sanhedrin to
you for a gift? And hearken O house of Israel, Why do you not give the
Sanhedrin the gift I appointed you at Sinai? And hearken O house of the King,
for the judgment is to you; I speak it to you, but the judgment is to the
Priests: I will come and sit with them in judgment, and end and destroy them
out of this world. So Christ in reading the Lesson out of the Prophet, becomes
his own Interpreter and Paraphrast both.

SECTION XVIII. MATTHEW. Chap. IV. Ver. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. MARK Chap. I. Ver.
14, 15. CHRIST at Capernaum in the coasts of Zebulon and Nepthali, etc.
WHereas Matthew in the beginning of this Section, tells that Christ left
Nazareth, Luke in the end of the preceding, shows the reason why, namely
because he was in hazard of his life there, and so the connection is made plain.

In the coasts of Zebulon and Nepthali captivity had first begun, 2 King.
15.29. and there Christ first begins, more publicly and evidently to preach
the near approach of the Kingdom of Heaven and redemption. In the first
plantation of the Land after the captivity, Galilee escaped from being
Samaritan, and was reserved for this happy privilege, of being the first scene
of Christ's preaching the Gospel. And as that country was inhabited by a good
part of the ten Tribes before their captity, so upon the return out of Babel in
the times of Zorobabel and Ezra, it may well be held to have been planted with
some of the ten Tribes again. For 1. Observe in Ezra 1. that there is a
Proclamation from Cyrus, that any of the blood of the Jews wheresoever within
his dominions, should have liberty to go up to Jerusalem, ver. 3, 4, 5. Now
undoudtedly the ten Tribes were then residing within his dominions, and it is
harsh to conceive that they had all so far utterly forgot God and their
country, as none of them to desire to go to their own Land again when
permitted. 2. There is a summa totalis in Ezra 2. of forty two thousand, three
hundred and threescore, ver. 64. that returned out of captivity upon that
Proclamation, and there are the number of several families reckoned, as making
up that sum: whereas if the total of these particulars be summed up, it
reaches not, by sixteen thousond or thereabout, to that number of forty two
thousand, three hundred and threescore. Where then must we find those sixteen
thousand, since they arise not in the number of the families there named? The
families there named are of Judah and Benjamin, and then certainly those sixteen
thousand can hardly be imagined any other then o^ the ten Tribes. And 3.
Whereas it is apparent that the returned of Judah and Benjamin planted Iudaea,
whom can we imagine, but some of the ten Tribes to have planted Galilee? And
hence their difference in language from the Jews of Iudaea, and in several
customs. And hence the reducing of some after the captivity, to the line of
some of the ten Tribes: as Hannah to the Tribe of Asher, Luke 2.36. Ben Cobisin
of the line of Ahab. Talm. Jerus. in Taanith fol. 68. col. 1.

And here is the first returning of the ten Tribes, to be supposed, and it
carries fair probability, that the most of the twelve Apostles, and many of
the rest of the Disciples that were of Christ's most constant retinue, were of
the progeny of some of the ten Tribes returned.

SECTION XIX. LUKE Chap. V. from the beginning to Ver. 12. MATTHEW. Chap. IV.
Ver. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. MARK Chap. I. Ver. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Peter and
Andrew, etc. called to be fishers of men.
THe method and series is confirmed by the transition of Matthew and Mark: but
in the order of Luke there is some difficulty. 1. He relates the calling of
these Disciples differently from the relation given by the other: for they say
Christ called Peter and Andrew as he walked by the sea side, but he storieth
their call when Christ was with them in the ship: they say he called James and
John at some distance beyond Peter and Andrew, but he carries it as if he
called them all together. But this is not contrariety, but for the more
illustration; they all speak the same truth, but one helps to explain another.
The story at full in them all is thus: As Jesus walked by the sea of
Genezareth, he saw two ships standing there, the one whereof belonged to Peter
and Andrew, and the other to James and John. All these men, being partners, had
been fishing all night, but had caught nothing, and were now stepped down out
of their ships to wash their nets. Christ pressed with multitude on the shore,
enters into Peter's ship and thence teaches the people. And thence putting off
a little into the main, he helps Peter to a miraculous draught of fishes,
which was so unwieldy that he was glad to becken up James and John from the
shore to come and help them. The draught of fishes was got up and boated, and
then James and John return to the shore again, and fall to mending their net
which was rent with helping at so great a draught. Peter seeing what was done,
adoreth Christ, and he and Andrew being yet at sea, are called by him for
fishers of men, and bringing their ship to shore, they leave all and follow
him. Christ and they coasting a little further along the shore, came to James
and John, and he calls them. And thus lies the story at the full.

2. A second scruple in the order of Luke is this, that he has laid the two
miracles of casting out a Devil in Capernaum Synagogue, and the healing of
Petrs mother in law, before the calling of these Disciples, which apparently by
this Evangelist were after. But the reason hereof may be conceived to be,
especially this. In Chap. 4. ver. 30, 31. he had related that Jesus escaping
from Nazaret, came down to Capernaum, and being now in the mention of his being
there, he records these two miracles that he did there [though not at that
very time that he has brought them in] having an eye in that his relation,
rather to the place then to the time. And so we shall observe elsewhere, that
the very mention of a place, does sometimes occasion these holy penmen, to
produce stories out of their proper time, to affix them to that their proper
place.

These Disciples hitherto, were only as private men, following Christ, and here
is the first time that they are but mentioned to the Ministerial function, to
be fishers of men: How then did they baptize before? Ioh. 3.22. with Ioh. 4.2.
And the starting of this question, calls to remembrance that saying of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.17. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel:
Is baptism administrable by private men, and is there any inconsistency
betwixt baptizing and preaching? Answ. As baptism was in use among the Jews
for admission of proselytes under the Law, these two things were required to
it, 1. (...) He that was baptized must be baptized before three: 2. (...) The
thing required a consessus, or to be done by the allowing of some eldership.
And because it required this [saith Maymony, whose words the former are also]
therefore they baptized not on the Sabbath, nor on the holy days, nor in the
night. A man that baptized himself, and proselyted himself, although it were
before two witnesses; or that came and said, I was proselyted in such a man's
consessus and they baptized me, he is not permitted to come into the
Congregation, till he bring witness. Maym. in Issure. biah. par. 13. The
reason of this strictness was, because of their strict niceness about
conversing or matching with a Heathen, till they were sure he was fully
Israelited.

Christ and the Apostles in the administration of baptism, followed or forsook
their custom as they saw cause. In the case alleged, he follows it, he
preaches and calls in Disciples, and they are baptized by these Disciples,
but Christ chief in the action: and therefore one text tells us that he
baptized, though we are taught by another text, that he baptized not. Now the
Disciples are not to be looked upon as private men, since they were men of such
privacy with the Messiah, and not only converted by him, but called to be with
him, and intended by him to be solemnly inducted into the ministerial function
when he should see time.

And answerably in that saying of the Apostle, I came not to baptize, but to
preach, he sets not an inconsistency between these two, which were joined by
Christ in Paul's and all Ministers Commission, Matthew. 28.19. but he speaks
according to this custom that we have mentioned, which the Apostles followed
when disciples came in to be baptized, by multitudes, they themselves preaching
and bringing in disciples to be baptized, and others baptizing them, and they
not private men neither, but fellow laborers with them in the Gospel, and
Ministers of it.

Fishers of men] Maym. in Talm. Torah. par. 7. speaks of (...) Fishers of the
Law.

SECTION XX. MARK Chap. I. from Ver. 21. to Ver. 40. LUKE Chap. IV. from Ver.
31. to the end of Chapter. MATTHEW. Chap. VIII. Ver. 14, 15, 16, 17. A Devil
cast out in Capernaum Synagoge. Peter's wives Mother and diverse more healed.
IF the transition of Mark from the preceding story to this, be observed, it
cleereth the order: For having declared there how Christ had called his
Disciples; And they, says he, that is Christ and his new called Disciples went
into Capernaum; his own City.

There on the Sabbath day he casts out a devil in the Synagogue, who by
confessing Christ for the Messiah, would have terrified the people with the
dread of him, that they might not dare to entertain him. From the Synagogue
they go to dinner to Peter's house, and there he raises his wives Mother in law
from a Fever: And after Sunset when the Sabbath was done, many more are
brought to him and are healed. They began their Sabbath from Sunset, and at
the same time of the day they ended it. Talm. Hierosolm. in Sheviith. fol. 33.
col. 1. And their manner of observing it, briefly was thus: for the
consideration of such a thing may be of some use, in some places of the Gospel
as we go along, since there is so frequent mention there about their Sabbath.

The Eve of the Sabbath, or the day before, was called the day of the
preparation for the Sabbath, Luke 23.54. and from the time of the evening
sacrifice and forward, they began to fit themselves for the Sabbath, and to
cease from their works, so as not to go to the barbor, not to sit in Judgment,
etc. nay not to eat thenceforward till the Sabbath came in. Nay thenceforward
they would not set things on working, which being set awork would complete
their business of themselves, unless it would be completed before the Sabbath
came. As, they would not put Galls and Coperas to steep to make Ink, unless
they would be steeped while it was yet day, before the evening of the Sabbath
was entered. Nor put wool to dying, unless it would take color whilst it was
yet day: Nor put Flax into the oven, unless it would be dried whilst it was
yet day, etc. Talm. in Sab. par. 1.

They washed their face, and hands, and feet in warm water, to make them neat
against they met the Sabbath; and the ancient wise men used to gather their
scholars together and to say, Come let us go meet King Sabbath, Maym. in Sab.
par. 36.

Toward Sunsetting, when the Sabbath was now approaching, they lighted up
their Sabbath candle. Men and women were bound to have a candle lighted up in
their houses on the Sabbath, though they were never so poor, nay though they
were forced to go a begging for Oil for this purpose: and the lighting up of
this candle was a part of making the Sabbath a delight: and women were
especially commanded to look to this business, etc. Ibid.

They accounted it a matter of special import and command, to hallow the
Sabbath with some words, because it is said, Remember the Sabbath day to hallow
it: and accordingly they used a twofold action to this purpose, namely a
solemn form of words in the way of hallowing it at its coming it, and this they
called (...) Kiddush, and another solemn form of words in way of parting with
it at its going forth, and this they called (...) Habdalah.

The solemnity accompanying the hallowing of it at its coming in was thus. They
spread and furnished the table with provision, and had the Sabbath candle
burning by; and the master of the house took a cup of wine, and first rehearsed
that portion of Scripture in Genesis 2. ver. 1, 2, 3. and then blessed over the
wine, and then pronounced the hallowing blessing of the Sabbath, and so drank
off the wine, and the rest of the company drank after him, and so they washed
their hands and fell to eat. This helps to understand those verses of Persius
in Satyr. 5.

-- At cum
Haeredis venere dies, unct aque fenestris
Dispositae pinguem nebulam vomuere lucernae
Portantes violas, rubrumque amplexa catinum
Cauda natat thyuni, tumet alba fidelia vino:
Labra moves tacitus recutitaque Sabbata palles.
They used to eat their meals on the Sabbath, and thought they were bound to it
in honor of the day, the first of which was this that they ate at the very
entrance of it over night. Yea the poor that lived of alms were to eat three
meals that day: and those that were of ability were to get choice provision,
and always better, at the least not the same that they used on the week days.

The morning being come, and up, they went to morning prayer in the Synagogue,
and when they had done there, they went home and ate their second meal: and
when they had done that, they went to some Beth Midrash, or Divinity Lecture,
and there spent the time till the afternoon was well come on; and then went
home and ate their third meal, and so continued eating and drinking till the
Sabbath went out.

At the going out of the Sabbath, which was about Sunsetting, the master of
the family again gave thanks over a cup of wine; then over his candle [for he
set up a parting candle too,] and then over some spices which they used for the
refreshing or reviving of any person that should faint for sorrow to part with
the Sabbath [this is the reason they give themselves;] And then he pronounced
the (...) separation blessing, by way of separating between the Sabbath that
was now going out, and the working day that was coming in. And so he and the
company drank off a cup of wine and fell to their victuals again.

But to return again to our Evangelists. The retrograde course of Lukes method
at this place, appears more conspicuous then before. For in the beginning of
the fifth Chapter he gives the relation of the Disciples calling, and in the
latter end of the fourth, this story of casting out the Devil in Capernaum
Synagogue, which was after their calling. Which he has so placed, the rather
[besides what was said upon this matter before] because in the last verse of
that fourth Chapter, he speaks of Christ's preaching all about in their
Synagogues, and therefore begins the fifth Chapter with the story of the
calling of the Disciples, that he might show how Christ went attended with them
in that perambulation. And in the same manner Matthew has laid their call and
that voyage close together for the very same intimation. Matthew. 4.22, 23.
although other occurrences came between which he has laid a great way off: As
the story of Peter's wives mother, which is brought in in this Section. He had
said Mat. 4.23. That (...) went about all the Synagogues of Galilee, teaching
in their Synagogues and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing all
manner of sickness. He therefore begins first with his Doctrine, and lays
down the Sermon in the Mount, and then begins to speak of his Miracles at
Chap. 8. and first gives the story of healing a Leper, which was the first
Miracle he wrought in that perambulation: and then the healing of the
Centurions servant, which was the first Miracle he wrought after the Sermon in
the Mount: and there being come into mention of one Miracle done in Capernaum,
he also brings in another [though not done at the same time, but before] that
he might dispatch the works done in that place together. And thus the scope of
his method is plain: and here again we see an example of what was said before,
namely that the mention of a place does oftentimes occasion these holy penmen,
to speak of stories out of their proper time, because they would take up the
whole story of that place all at once or together.

SECTION XXI. MAT. Chap. IV. Ver. 23, 24, 25. A third perambulation of Galilee.
THe beginning of this Section, and the conclusion of the preceding, being laid
together, the order appears plain and direct.

CHRIST had perambulated Galilee twice before, since he was baptized, but
either altogether without, or else with very little retinue, but now attended
with his Disciples and with great multitudes: and his fame is now spread
throughout all Syria. Syria was exceeding numerously inhabited by Jews, and in
diverse things it is set in equal privilegiall pace and equipage with the Land
of Canaan. Insomuch that there is a controversy amongst our wise men [saith R.
Menahem on Deuteronomy. 11.] whether Syria which was subdued by David were of the Land
of Israel or no*

In three things, say they, Syria was equal with the Land of Israel, and in
three things it was equal with heathen countries: The dust defiles, as heathen
Countries dust does, and he that brings a Bill of Divorce out of Syria, is as
if he brought it out of a heathen Land; and he that sells his servant into
Syria, is as he that sold him into a heathen country: In three things it is
equal to the Land of Israel: for he that buys Land in Syria, is as if he
bought it in the suburbs of Jerusalem, and it is liable to Tithes, to the year
of release, and if he can go to it in cleanness, it is clean. Tosaphta in
Kelim par. 1.

SECTION XXII. MARK Chap. I. from Ver. 40. to the end of the Chapter. LUKE
Chap. V. Ver. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. MATTHEW. Chap. VIII. Ver. 2, 3, 4. A Leper
healed.
MARK and Luke do assure the order: the reason why Matthew has placed this
story, as he has done, has been observed instantly before: which some not
having taken notice of, have supposed the story in Matthew, and in the other
two Evangelists not to have been the same* but conceive they speak of two
several Lepers healed at two several times: whereas the words of the Leper,
and the words and action of Christ in all the three, do assert it plainly for
one story; and had the reason of Matthews dislocation of it been observed, it
would never have been apprehended otherwise.

Lepers in Israel might not come into the Cities, till the Priests had
pronounced them clean, and so restored them again to the Congregation: for the
Priests could not heal, but only judge of the malady: and whom they pronounced
clean, were not healed wholly of the disease, but were enlarged only from their
separation: The leprosy continued still, though they were absolved from their
uncleanness by the Priest [a very pregnant emblem of original sin,] but the
danger of infection was over, and so they were restored again to humane
society. If this Leper had not yet been under the Priests absolution, his
faith, or his earnest desire of his recovery, or both, enforces him to break
those bounds that were set him, and he straineth courtesy to come to Christ in
a City, Luke 5.12. If he were absolved by the Priests already from his
uncleanness, yet seeks he to Christ to make him clean from his disease,
which the Priests could only pronounce him clean from: the Priests could only
pronounce him clean to the Congregation; Christ makes him clean to himself.

SECTION XXIII. MARK Chap. II. from the beginning to Ver. 15. LUKE Chap. V.
from Ver. 17, to Ver. 29. MATTHEW. Chap. IX. from Ver. 2. to Ver. 10. CHRIST
heals a palsy man: forgiveth sins: calls MATTHEW.
MARK and Luke do again confirm the order: but Matthews dislocation of the same
story, does breed some scruple. For the clearing of which, let us first begin
at the very conclusion of this Section, and make good the order there in the
end, and that will illustrate the propriety of it here in the beginning: We
have parted the story of the calling of Levi, from the story of the feast that
he made for Christ after his call, although all the Evangelists that handle his
story have laid them close together: The warrant upon which we have parted
them, although they be so nearly joined in the text, is from these two things:
1. From undoubted evidence, by the current of the history, and the progress of
the Evangelists hitherto, which makes it plain, that Levies calling was at that
time that we are now upon, or as it is laid in the end of this Section. 2. From
this evidence, that his feast was not of a good while after his call, in that
Matthew says, while he was speaking, namely about fasting, and putting new
cloth into an old garment, etc. [which speech both the other Evangelists place
at Levies feast or presently upon it:] Iairus came unto him. See Matthew. 9.18.
Mark 2.15, 18, 19. Luke 5.29, 33, etc. Now it is plain by the process of the
history of Mark and Luke, that very many things, and a good space of time
intercurred between the calling of Matthew or Levi, and the coming of Iairus:
for Levies call is in Matthew. 2.14. and Luke 5.27. and the story of Iairus his
coming is not till Matthew. 5.22. and Luke 8.41. Now in that these words that
Christ was in speaking when Iairus came to him, Matthew. 9.18. were spoken at
Levies feast, Luke 5.29, 33. it is apparent that his feast was a good space of
time after his call: and hence have we warrant for the putting of those stories
in the harmonizing of the Evangelists. The three indeed that speak of these
stories do handle them together, because they would dispatch Levies story at
once: and Mark and Luke do mention what occurred at his feet, but when they
have done that, they return to the story and time, that properly followed in
order after his calling.

Here therefore is the reason of Matthews so far dislocating the story of the
palsy man that is before us as he has done: namely because in that ninth
Chapter he pitcheth upon the time of Levies feast, and from that time goes on
forward with the story succeeding it: And so having pitched upon the time of
his feast, he also brings in the story of his call, because he would take up
his whole story in one place, as the other Evangelists have also done: and with
the story of his call, he has likewise brought in the story of the palsy man
because it occurred at the same time.

Matthew is not ashamed to proclaim the baseness of his own profession before
he was called, that that grace might be magnified that had called him. He was a
Publican [and as it seemeth] at the Custom-house of Capernaum, to gather custom
and tribute of those that passed over the water, or that had to deal on that
sea of Galilee The Ierus. Talm. has this Canon. Demai. fol. 23 col. 1. (...):
A Pharisee [or one of the religion] that turns Publican, they turn him out of
his order, but does he leave his Publicanisme? they restore him to his order
again: so unconsistent did they repute this profession and religion. Maym. in
Gezelah. par. 5. Men of whom it may be presumed that they are robbers, and of
whom it may be presumed that all their wealth is gotten of rapine, because
their trade is a trade of robbers, as Publicans and thieves, it is unlawful to
use their wealth, etc. He becomes an Apostle and a penman of the Gospel: He
wrote his Gospel first of all the four; and wrote it in Greek, though he wrote
it more particularly for Hebrews: for the Hebrew tongue was so lost, that it
was not ordinarily to be understood; and the Greek Bible was the readiest in
the hands of the unlearned, to examine the quotations from the old Testament,
that he or any other of the divine Penmen should allege: The Prophets had been
but very lately before Matthews time turned into the Chaldee tongue by Jonathan
ben Vzziel, and the Law by Onkeles a little after; and the Jerusalem Talmud
tells of a Targum or tradition of Job, which Gamaliel Paul's Master had. Shabb.
fol. 15. col. 3. and all this because the original Hebrew was not commonly
understood. And in the reading of the Law and Prophets in the Synagogues, they
had Interpreters that rendered it into the Syriack as was said a little before,
because they understood not the Original; therefore it were unreasonable that
Matthew should write in Hebrew, a Language then to the most unknown.

SECTION XIV. JOHN Chap. V. All the Chapter. CHRIST'S second Passover after his
Baptism.
An infirm man healed at Bethesda.
FOr the justifying and clearing of the order in this place, these things are
to be taken into consideration. 1. That the first thing that the two
Evangelists Mark and Luke, who are most exact for order, have placed after the
calling of Levi, is, the Disciples plucking the ears of Corn. They have indeed
interserted Levies first, and John's disciples questioning about fasting, but
that was more for the dispatching of Levies story altogether, then for the
propriety of their subsequence each to other, as has been showed already. 2.
In that the story of the Disciples plucking the ears of Corn, is joined by them
next, we are to look for a Passover between, for till the Passover was over,
and the first fruits sheaf offered the second day after, it was not lawful to
meddle with any Corn, to use, or to eat it, Lev. 23.14. 3. Christ had said in
the field of Sichem, that it was then four months to harvest, Joh. 4.35. that
is, to the Passover, at what time their Barley harvest began, Lev. 23.11, etc.
Now, casting up the time from that place and speech, taken up in the current of
the story from thence hither, we cannot but conclude the four months to be now
up, and this to be the Passover, then thought upon in those words. And we may
conceive that the Evangel^st has the rather omitted to call it by its proper
name, or to speak it expressly, that this feast was the Passover, because in
that speech he had given fair intimation, how to understand the next feast of
the Jews that he should speak of. He mentions indeed a Passover in Chap.
6.4. but we shall find by the progress of the story in the other Evangelists,
that that was yet so far yet to come, that it cannot in the least wise be
supposed to be that which was to come within four months after Christ's being
in the field of Sichem. The feast of the Jews therefore that he speaks of in
the first verse of this Chapter, must needs be that Passover referred to Ioh.
4.35. and this considered does clear the order.

At this Passover a man is healed at Bethesda, who had been diseased from
seven years before Christ was born. This was a pool first laid up by Solomon,
as may be conjectured from Josephus de Bell. lib. 5. cap. 13. compared with
Nehem. 3. and at first called Solomon's Pool, but now Bethesda, or the place of
mercy from its beneficial virtue. It was supplied with water from the fountain
Sileam, which represented David's and Christ's Kingdom, Isa. 8 6.

The five porches about it, and the man, when healed, carrying his bed out of
one of them, calls to mind the (...) Mevuo^h or Entries that are so much
spoken of in the treatise Erubhin, the carrying of any thing out of which into
the street on the Sabbath day, was to carry (...) out of a private place into a
public, and was prohibited.

He is hereupon convented before the Sanhedrin, and there he does most openly
confess and prove himself to be the Messiah: And he asserteth that all Power
and Judgment is put into his hand, and that he has the same authority for the
dispensing of the affairs of the new Testament, that the Father had for the
old. And this he does so plainly, that he leaves their unbelief henceforward
without excuse.

The Jews speak of diverse ominous things that occurred forty years before the
destruction of the City; As, It is a tradition that forty years before the
Sanctuary was destroyed the western Lamp went out, and the scarlet list kept
its redness, and the Lords lot came up on the left hand. And they locked up
the Temple doors at even, yet when they rose in the morning they found them
open. Jerus. in Joma. fol. 43. col. 3. And, Sanhedr. fol. 18. col. 1. Forty
years before the Temple was destroyed, power of judgeng in capital matters was
taken away from Israel: Now there are some that reckon but thirty eight years
between the death of Christ and the destruction of the City; and if that be so,
then these ominous presages occurred this year that we are upon. It being just
forty years, by that account, from this Passover at which Christ heals the
diseased man at Bethesda, to the time of Titus his pitching his Camp and siege
about Jerusalem, which was at a Passover. But of this let the Reader judge.

SECTION XXV. LUKE Chap. VI. from the beginning to Ver. 12. MARK Chap. II. from
Ver. 23, to the end: and Chap. III. from the beginning to Ver. 7. MARK Chap.
XII. from the beginning to Ver. 15. The Disciples plucking ears of Corn. A
withered hand healed on the Sabbath.
THe words (...) which Luke has used ver. 1. being rightly understood, will
help to clear the order of this Section, and to confirm the order of the
preceding.

The Law enjoined that the next morrow after the eating of the Passover,
should be kept holy like a Sabbath, Exodus 12.16. and accordingly it is called a
Sabbath, Lev. 23.7, 11. And there the Law also enjoins, that the next day after
that Sabbaticall day, they shall offer the sheaf of first fruits to the Lord:
and from that day they should count seven Sabbaths to Pentecost, which was
their solemn festival, and thanksgiving for that half harvest, viz. Barley
harvest which they had then inned, Lev. 23.15, 16, 17. That day therefore that
they offered their first Barley sheaf, and from which they were to count the
seven Sabbaths or weeks forward, being the second day in the Passover week,
the Sabbaths that followed, did carry a memorial of that day in their name
till the seven were run out: as the first was called (...), the first
second-day Sabbath; The next (...), the second second-day Sabbath: the next
(...), the third second-day Sabbath, and so the rest all the seven through.
Now let it be observed, 1. That no Corn, no not ears of Corn might be eaten
till the first fruits sheaf was offered and waved before the Lord, Lev. 23.14.
2. That it was waved the second day of the Passover week. 3. That this was the
first Sabbath after that second day, when the Disciples plucked the ears of
Corn, and it will plainly evince that we must look for a Passover before this
story, and so it will show the warranty and justness of taking in the fifth of
John next before it.

But the order of Matthew may breed some scruple, and that the rather, because
that though he has placed this story after diverse occurrences that are yet to
come, yet he has prefaced it with this circumstance, At that time: Now this
expression does not always center stories in the same point of time, but
sometimes it has made a transition betwixt two stories, whose times were at a
good distance asunder: as Genesis 38.1. Deuteronomy. 10.8. and so likewise the phrase, In
these days, Mat. 3.1.

The latter story about healing the man with the withered hand, is so
unanimously ordered by all the three, after the other, that there is no doubt
of the method of it.

It was a special part of religion which the Jews used on the Sabbath, to eat
good meat, and better then they did on the week days: yea they thought
themselves bound to eat three meals on that day [as was said before,] and for
this they allege, Isa. 58.13. Nid. Kimch. ibid. and Tamh. fol. 1. Talm. and
Maym. in Shab, etc. compare Phil. 3.19.

Observe how far the Disciples are from such an observance, and from such
provision, when a few ears of Barley [for that was the Corn plucked] must make
a dinner.

The plucking of ears of Corn on the Sabbath was forbidden by their Canons
verbatim. Talm. in Shab. par. 7. and Maymon. Shab. par. 7, and 8. He that
reapeth Corn on the Sabbath, to the quantity of a fig, is guilty. And plucking
Corn is as reaping: And whosoever plucketh up any thing from it growing, is
guilty, under the notion of reaping.

Christ before his healing the withered hand, is questioned by them; Is it
lawful to heal on the Sabbath day? Their decretals allowed it in some cases.
Tanch. fol. 9. col. 2. our Doctors teach the danger of life dispenses with the
Sabbath. And so does Circumcision and the healing of that. But this is rule
says Rabbi Akibah, that that which may be done on the eve of the Sabbath,
dispenses not with the Sabbath. Talm. in Shabb. par. 19. Such was this case.
Compare Luke 13.14. They accounted that this might have been done any other day.

SECTION XXVI. MARK Chap. III. from Ver. 7, to Ver. 13. MATTHEW. Chap XII. from
Ver. 15, to Ver. 22. Great multitudes follow Christ: who heals all that come
to him.
THe connection that both these Evangelists have at this story, does abundantly
assert the order. The Pharisees took counsel to destroy him, but when Jesus
knew it, he departed, etc. The Herodians join with them in their plotting,
which seem to have been these learned and great men of the Nation who had gone
into the service of Herod the Great, and now of his son mentioned before.

SECTION XXVII. LUKE Chap. VI. from Ver. 12, to Ver. 20. MARK Chap. III. from
Ver. 13. to the middle of Ver. 19. MATTHEW. Chap. V. Ver. 1. The twelve Apostles
chosen.
LUKE and Mark do methodize and fix the time of the Sermon in the Mount; which
Matthew has laid very early in his Gospel, because he would first treat of
Christ's Doctrine, and then of his Miracles.

In a mount near Capernaum, he ordains a Ministry for the Church of the
Gospel, and delivers the doctrine of the Gospel, as Moses at Sinai had done
the like for the Law. The number of the present Ministers appointed, whom he
calls Apostles, was twelve, agreeable to the twelve Tribes of Israel: that as
they were the beginning of the Church of the Jews, so are these of the
Gentiles: and to both these numbers of twelve joined together, the number of
the four and twenty Elders, the representative of the whole Church, Rev. 4. and
5, etc. has relation, Rev. 21.12, 14.

The text allotteth these ends of their appointment: 1. That they might be with
Christ, to see his glory, Ioh. 1.14. and to be witnesses of all things that he
did, Acts 10.39, 41. Luke 24.48. 2. That he might send them forth to preach. 3.
To heal diseases and cast out Devils.

Before they were completed in all their divine endowments, they grew on by
degrees; They were auditors a good while, and learning the doctrine of the
Gospel, that they were to preach, before they set upon that work: for though
Christ chose them now, yet it is well toward a twelve month, before he send
them abroad a preaching, as will appear in the process of the story. So that
besides the time that they had spent before this their choosing, they also
spent that in hearing and learning from the mouth of their Master, what they
were to teach when he should employ them: So that even the Apostles themselves
at the first setting forth into the Ministry, did not preach by the Spirit, but
what they had learned and gotten by hearing, study, conference and meditation.

As the Lord under the Law, and from the first founding of that Church, did set
apart a peculiar order and function of men for the service of the Sanctuary, so
did he under the Gospel, a peculiar order and function for the Ministry of the
Gospel; and this no more to be usurped upon, then that: Now as under the Law
there were several sorts of men within that function, as Highpriests,
Chief-Priests, ordinary Priests and Levites, but all paled in with that
peculiarity that no other might meddle with their function: so likewise at the
first rising of the Gospel, there were Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets,
Pastors, Teachers, according to the necessity of those present times, but all
hedged in with a distinctive ministerial calling, that none other might nor
may break in upon. All the Titles and Names that Ministers are called by
throughout the new Testament, are such as denote peculiarity and
distinctivenesse of order; as, Wise men and Scribes, Mat. 23.34. Now the Jews
knew not, nor ever had heard of Wise men and Scribes, (...), but the learned of
their Nation distinguished for others, by peculiarity of order and ordination:
And if they understood not Christ in such a sense, namely men of a distinct
order, they understood these Titles Wise men and Scribes, in a sense that they
had never known nor heard of before: Ministers in the new Testament are called
Elders, Bishops, Angels of the Churches, Pastors, Teachers: now all these were
Synagogue terms, and every one of them denoted peculiarity of order, as might
be showed abundantly from their Synagogue antiquities: The Jews knew no Elders
but men by their order and function distinguished from other men. A Bishop
translates the word (...) Chazan, An Angel of the Congregation translates the
title (...) Sheliach tsibbor, A Pastor translates the word (...) Parnas, And a
Teacher translates (...) the Divinity Reader: Now these terms had never been
known by any to signify otherwise then men of a peculiar function and
distinct order.

SECTION XXVIII. MATTHEW. Chap. V, and VI, and VII. LUKE Chap. VI. from Ver. 20,
to the end of the Chapter. The Sermon in the Mount.
THe proof of the order does not need to be insisted upon; Luke does manifes^ly
assert it. It had been foretold by the Prophet, All thy children shall be
taught of God, Isa. 54.13. which if applied to the Gentiles, they had been
taught by the Devil, his Oracles and Idols: If applied to the Jews, they
indeed had been taught by the Lord in his Prophets, but these were but men like
themselves, but this Prophecy foretells the preaching of Christ who was God
himself, he teaching and conversing amongst them, he then the great teacher of
the world, Isa. 2.2. and 51.4. does from the mount Capernaum, deliver his
Evangelicall Law, not for the abolishing of the Law and Prophets, but for their
clearing and fulfilling.

He first begins with pronouncing blessings, as the most proper and
comfortable tenor of the Gospel: and hereby he calls us to remember Gerizim
and Ebal, Deuteronomy. 27. For though Israel be enjoined there to pronounce both
blessings and curses upon those mountains, yet are the curses only specified by
name and number, for the curse came by the Law, but he that was to bless was
to come: which thing takes place very comfortably and harmoniously here. Luke
adds that he also denounced woes; as, Blessed be the poor: Blessed are ye
that hunger now, etc. But woe unto you that are rich: Woe unto you that are
fu^^, etc. according to which form the Jews conceive, the blessings and curses
were pronounced by Israel from those two mountains mentioned, Talm. in Sotah.
per. 7. and Tosapht. i^i. per. 8. How did Israel pronounce the blessings and
the curses? Six Tribes went up to the ^op of mount Gerizim, and six to the top
of mount Ebal: the Priests, and the Levites, and the A^k stood below in the
midst between; They turned their faces toward mount Gerizim, and began with
blessing; Blessed is the man that makes not any graven or molten Image an
abomination to the Lord, etc. And both parties answered and said Amen. Then
turned they their faces toward mount Ebal, and began with cursing; Cursed be
the man that makes any graven or molten image an abomination to the Lord, etc.
and both parties answered Amen: And so of the rest.

2. He proceeds laying out the latitude of the Law, according to its full
extent and intention, and shows the wretchedness of their traditionall
glosses, that had made the Law of no effect. They understood the Law, Thou
shall not kill, only of actual murder, and that, committed by a man's own hand;
for if he hired another to kill him, or turned a wild beast upon him, which
slew him, this they accounted not murder for which to be questioned by the
Sanhedrin, though it deserved the judgment of God, Talm. in Sanhedr. per. 9.
Maym. in Rets^a per. 2. but shows that the command extends to the prohibiting
of causlesse anger, and that that deserves the judgment of God, that the
uncharitable scornings of a brother, under their usual word Raka, deserved the
judgment of the Sanhedrin, and especially the calling him fool [in Solomon's
sense,] or censuring rashly his spiritual estate, deserved hell fire. They
construed the command, Thou shall not commit adultery, barely of the act of
adultery, and that with another man's wife. Trip. targ. in marg. ad Exodus 20.
but he tells, that it prohibits, lustful thoughts and looks, and that looking
upon a woman to lust after her, is adultery in heart. Rabban Simeon delighted
to look upon fair women, that he might take occasion by the sight of their
beauty, to bless God. [A fair excuse.] Tal. Ierus. in Baracoth. fol. 12. col.
3.

The Law had permitted divorces, only in case of fornication, Deuteronomy. 24.1. but
they had extended it to any cause, and to so loose an extent, that R. Ahibah
said, A man may put away his wife, if he see another woman that pleases him
better then she. Gittin par. 9. The Law had forbidden forswearing, or swearing
falsely, thereupon they had made bold to take liberty of vain swearing at
pleasure, so that, what they swore were not false; as see Tal. and Maym. in
Shevnoth.

These cursed constructions of theirs by which they had made the Law of no
effect, he divinely damneth, and stateth the proper and true intent of the Law
in these cases.

3. He prescribes Christian duties, and especially rules of piety, charity and
sincerity, and condemns the hypocritical vainglory of the Pharisees about
these things. They used when they gave alms in the Synagogue, to have it
openly proclaimed and published what they gave, as if a Trumpet had been
sounded for every one to take notice of their charity, Ierus. in Demai, fol.
23. col. 2. And they had an open proclaiming in the streets, for the calling of
the poor to gather the corner of the field that they had left them, Id. Peah.
per. 4, etc. They loved to be seen praying in the streets, especially in their
Phylactery prayers morning and evening, besides other occasional Oraisons, Id.
Beracoth. per. 1, and 2. They used to pray those prayers often, and often other
prayers, in the Synagogue, apart and distinct from the prayers or service that
the Synagogue was then upon, and so their particular devotion was the more
subject to be observed, Ib. fol. 8. col. 3, etc. They used on their fasting
days to use such a carriage and demeanor in face and garb, that all might
observe that it was fasting day with them, Piske. Tosaph. in Taanith. per. 1,
etc. And in all their devotions and demeanor they hunted after the praise of
men; which he condemns, and urges for sincerity and care to approve the
heart to God.

Throughout all this Sermon, this great oracle of divine truth, does not only
show and hold out the sacred doctrines of faith, manners, duty and eternal
life, but he evidenceth throughout, that he was thoroughly acquainted with all
the learning, doctrines and traditions of those times. And to the explication
of this divine Sermon, is required quick and ready versednesse in the Jews
Records, for Christ has an eyed and reference to their language, doctrines,
customs, traditions an opinions almost in every line.

SECTION XXIX. LUKE Chap. VII. from the beginning to Ver. 11. MATTHEW. Chap.
VIII. Ver. 1. and then Ver. 5, to Ver. 14. A Centurions servant healed.
LUKES transition, When he had ended all his sayings, does prove the order. The
four verses that speak about the Leper in Matthew, were taken up before, and
their order spoken to then.

A proselyte Captain that had so far affected the Jews religion that he had
built a Synagogue in Capernaum, having seen and heard the works and words of
Christ, believes him for the Messiah, and beggeth of him the healing of his
servant. Which that Christ could do, he concludes from a comparison of the
power of his own word and command among his soldiers: for since they were
ready to come, and go, or run at his command, much more does he conclude, was
the word of Christ of power to command away the disease of his servant if he
pleased. Christ had often in his sermon on the Mount, asserted the authority of
his own word, against and above the words of their traditionaries, and
equalized it with that word that gave the Law. And here is a very high and
seasonable confession of the authority of that word, made by this Centurion,
and an evidence of the power of it by the healing of his servant at distance.
The man's faith is justly extolled though he were a Gentile, and the casting off
the Jews is clearly foretold, which Christ had not so plainly spoken out
hitherto.

SECTION XXX. LUKE Chap. VII. Ver. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. The Widows Son
of Naim raised.
AS Christ yesterday recovered a young man from the point of death, so does he
another to day from death it self. The words (...) ver. 11. do confirm the
order. The day after. etc.

Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 5. speaks of the Village Nais, as being upon the
edge of Samaria, in the way as the Galileans passed to Jerusalem. And it is not
improbable that Christ was going thitherward at this time to one of the
Festivals; most like to Pentecost.

As he comes to Naim he meets with a dead man carried out [(...) in Talmudish
Language] for they might not bury within their cities, no nor at the Levites
Cities, within the compass of that ground without the City that was allotted
for its suburbs, Maym. in Shemittah veiobel per. 13. [If Jerusalem went
parallel with the Levites Cities in this, as it did in other things, Christ's
Sepulcher will not prove so near the City as it has been commonly reputed.] He
raises this dead man openly, and in the sight of all the company there
present, which was very great, and yet when afterward he raises Iairu^
daughter, he charge that those that had seen him do the miracle which were
but five persons, that they should tell no man what was done, Luke 8.56. which
prohibition was given rather in regard of the place where it was done, then in
any other respect, it being in Capernaum against which City he had denounced a
curse before.

SECTION XXXI. LUKE Chap. VII. from ver. 18. to ver. 36. MATTHEW. Chap. II. from
ver. 2. to ver. 20. JOHN'S Message to Christ: Christ's testimony of John.
THE Transition of Luke from the Stories before, about the raising of the dead
men and healing the Centurions Servant, And the Disciples of John showed him of
all these things, does confirm the order.

JOHN from Machaerus Castle where he lay Prisoner, sends two of his Disciples
to Christ to enquire of him, Whether he were he that should come; Not that John
was ignorant who he was, having had so many demonstrations of him as he had
had, and having given so ample testimony of him as he had done, Ioh. 1.34, 36.
and 3.29, 30. No^ that John's Disciples were so wilfully ignorant of him as not
to be persuaded by their Ma^ter that he was he, but his message to him seems to
this purpose; John and his Disciples had heard of the great and many miracles
that Christ had done, healing the sick, and raising the dead, etc. and it may
be, they thought it strange that Christ amongst all his miraculous workings,
would not work John's liberty out of thraldom, who lay a prisoner for him, and
for the Gospel he preached before him: And this, may be, was ^he bottom of
their question, Art thou he that shall come, or look we for another? as
expecting somewhat more from the Messiah, then they had yet obtained. They
received a full answer to their question by the miracles they saw wrought,
which abundantly proved that he was he that was to come. But as to their
expectation of his miraculous enlargement of John, his answer was, that his
work was to preach the Gospel, and that it was a blessed thing not to take any
offense at him, but to yield and submit to his wise dispensations. And
accordingly when the messengers of John were returned, he gives a glorious
testimony concerning him to the people, but yet shows how far one truly and
fully acquainted and stated in the Kingdom of Heaven, went beyond him in
judging of it, who looked for temporal redemption by it.

The Method of Matthew is somewhat difficult here, but he seems purposely to
have joined the mission of Christ's Disciples and John's disciples together. I
suppose Christ was at Jerusalem when John's messengers came to him: and if it
were at the feast of Pentecost, John had then been seven or eight months in
prison.

SECTION XXXII. MAT. Chap. XI. from Ver. 20, to the end of the Chapter.
Chorazin and Bethsaida upbraided.
BEsides Matthews continuing this portion to that that went before, the
upbraiding of these Cities is so answerable to the matter contained in the end
of the former Section, that it easily shows it to be spoken at the same time:
See Ver. 17, 18, 19, of this Chapter.

When Christ says, that if the things done in these Cities, had been done in
Tire and Sidon, and Sodom, and Gomorrh^, they would have repented, and would
have remained till now; he understands not saving grace and saving repentance
in them, but such an external humiliation as would have preserved them from
ruin: As the case was with Nineveh, they repented and were delivered from the
threatened destruction: their repentance was not to salvation of the persons,
but to the preservation of their City: as Ahabs humbling prevented the present
judgment, and not his final condemnation.

SECTION XXXIII. LUKE Chap. VII. from Ver. 36, to the end of the Chapter. Mary
Magdalen weepeth at Christ's feet, and washes them with tears, etc.
THe continuation of this portion in Luke to that in Sect. 31. will plead for
its order: and the reader will easily observe, that the interposition of the
preceding Section in Matthew, is so far from interrupting the story, that it
is necessarily to be taken in there, and is an illustration of it. The actings
of the two several parties in this Section, the Pharisee that invited Christ
to eat with him, and the woman sinner that comes and weeps at his feet for
mercy, may seem to have had some rise from, or some occasional reference to
the speech of Christ in the two Sections next preceding. In the former he had
said, The son of man came eating and drinking, and this possibly might induce
the Pharisee to his invitation: and in the latter he had said, Come unto me ye
that are weary and heavy laden, and that might invite the woman to her address.

This woman was Mary the sister of Lazarus, who was also called Mary Magdalen;
of whom there is mention in the very beginning of the next Chapter. That she
was Mary the sister of Lazarus, John gives us ground to assert, Ioh. 11.2. as
we shall show when we come there: where we shall evidence, that these words, It
was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with
her hair, can properly be referred to no story but this before us: And that
Mary the sister of Lazarus was called Mary Magdalen, we shall prove in the next
Section: Christ in the story in Sect. 31. when John's disciples came to him we
supposed to be at Jerusalem, and answerably it may be conceived that this
passage occurred at Bethany, where Simon the Pharisee may not improbably be
held to be the same with Simon the Leper, Matthew. 26.6. where this very woman
again anointed him.

SECTION XXXIV. LUKE Chap. VIII. Ver. 1, 2, 3. Certain women that followed
Christ.
LUKE again is the warrant for the order. In the former story he had spoken of
one woman that had found healing and mercy with Christ, and he speaks here of
diverse, and among them Mary Magdalen. Now that she was Mary the sister of
Lazarus, let but these two arguments be weighed, not to insist upon more. The
first is this: If Mary Magdalen were not Mary the sister of Lazarus, then Mary
the sister of Lazarus gave no attendance at Christ's death, nor had any thing to
do about his burial [or at least is not mentioned as an agent at either] which
is a thing so incredible to conceive, that it needs not much discourse to set
forth the incredibility of it. There is mention of Mary Magdalen, and Mary the
mother of James and Salom, Mark. 15.40. and Ioanna, Luke 24.10. but not a word
of Mary the sister of Lazarus. She had twice anointed Christ in the compass
of that very week, she had ever been as near and as zealous a woman disciple as
any that followed him, and her residence was at Bethany hard by Jerusalem, and
what is now become of her in these two great occasions of attending upon
Christ's death and imbalming? Had she left Christ, and neglected her attendance
on him, at this time above all others? or have the Evangelists, whilst they
mention the other that attended, left her out? It is so unreasonable to believe
either of these, that even necessity inforceth us to conclude, that when they
name Mary Magdalen, they mean Mary the sister of Lazarus. And Secondly take
this argument of Baronius, which has more weight in it then at first sight it
does seem to have, who in his Annals ad Annum Christi 32, goes about to prove
this thing that we assert, and he shows how it also was the opinion of the
Fathers, and those in former times. His words are these: We say upon the
testimony of John the Evangelist, nay of Christ himself, that it plainly
appears, that Mary the sister of Lazarus, and Mary Magdalen was but one and the
same person. For when in Bethany the same sister of Lazarus anointed the feet
of Jesus, and Judas did thereupon take offense, Jesus himself checking the
boldness of the furious Disciple, said, Let her alone, that she may keep it
against the day of my burial: Now that she that brought the ointment to the
sepulcher for the anointing of the body of Jesus, was Mary Magdalen, is
affirmed by Mark, and that she with Mary the mother of James and Salome did
that office. When therefore neither in him, nor in any other of the Evangelists
there is any mention of Mary the sister of Lazarus, who was foretold by our
Savior that she should do that office, it may easily be known that both these
Mary's were but one and the same. At Ioh. 12.7. we shall show that that speech
must be construed to such a sense, as he has put on it, save only that
following the vulgar Latin, he reads sine ut servet, which indeed makes his
sense the fuller, but though not so read, yet will that sense be full enough.

It is to be objected indeed, that Mary was called Magdalen, from the place
Magdala, of which there is mention Matthew. 15.29. and in Tal. Ierus. in
Maazaroth. fol. 50. col. 3. in this passage, R. Iochanan in the name of R.
Simeon ^en Iochai: He had two enclosures, one in Magdala, the other in
Tiberisa, etc. And in Beracoth fol. 13. col. 1. there is mention of one (...)
R. Judah of Magdala: now Magdala being in Galilee [as some seat it] or over
against Galilee beyond Jordan [as others,] it was so very far distant from
Bethany, that Mary the sister of Lazarus, whose Town was Bethany, could not
possibly be called Magdalen from Magdala. To which we may first give Baronius
his answer, who also mentions this objection; That though she were of Bethany
by original, and the native seat of her fathers house, yet might she also be
of Magdala by marriage, or some occasional residence otherwise. And in the
second place, we may adduce what the Talmudish speak of one (...) Mary
Magdalen, or Megaddala, for the word is of doubtful pointing, whom they
character for a notorious strumpet in those times that Jesus of Nazareth lived.
Alphez. in Gittin. fol. 605. Some man finds a fly in his cup, and takes her
out and will not drink, and this was the temper of Papus the son of Judah,
who locked the door upon his wife whenever he went out. The glossaries R.
Solamon and Nissim, upon this passage comment thus: Papus the son of Judah,
was husband (...) to Mary Magdala, and whenever he went forth he locked the
door upon his wife, lest she should speak with any man, which was a usage
unfitting, and hereupon there arose discord between them, and she played the
whore against him. Now they construe the latter word (...) as signifying one
that broided or plaited her hair, which (...) Peter blames in women, 1 Pet.
3.3. Tal. Babyl. Venet. in Sanhedr. par. 7. is speaking of one that enticed to
Idolatry, and how he was brought to the Sanhedrin and stoned. And thus, say
they, they did to Ben Sarda in Lydda, and hanged him on the Passover eve. Ben
Sarda was the son of Pandira. [They call our Savior blasphemously by this
name Ben Sarda.] And a little after. His mother was Sarda. His mother was Mary
Magdalen, Mary the platter of women's hair. vid. etiam Schab. fol. 104. And in
Chagigah fol. 4. The Angel of death said to his messenger, Go fetch me (...)
Mary the broider of women's hair; He went and fetched Mary Magdala, or Mary the
broider of hair for young men. Now whether the word (...) be read Magdela or
Magdila, a Participle in Hiphil, which is most proper, and so warranted by
Aruch in (...) and Kelim par. 15.] or Megaddela in Piel: either of them in a
Greek dress, especially the former, come so near the sound of the word in
hand, that we may very well construe Mary Magdalen in this Talmudish
construction for a woman of common infamy, and that has this nickname of
Magdila from her lascivious dress and carriage. Observe Lukes expression,
(...), Mary which was called Magdalen: which manner of phrase is rarely used
when persons are named after their Country.

SECTION XXXV. MATTHEW. Chap. XII. from Ver. 22, to Ver. 46. MARK Chap. III. from
the last clause of Ver. 19. And they went into an house: to Ver. 31. A Devil
cast out: Christ called Beelzebub: Blasphemy against the holy Ghost.
THe series and consequence of this Section will require some clearing. 1. The
reader here sees that Mark has nor mentioned any thing from the ordaining of
the twelve Apostles unto this place: for the holy Ghost that held all their
pens, did so dispose them, that sometimes one should speak the story, sometimes
another, and sometimes more or all of them together. Now though the first
clause of this Section in Mark, And they went into an house, be joined so close
to the Apostles ordaining, as if that were the next thing done; yet the current
of the story in the rest of the Evangelists, does show that it is not to be
taken in, at that instant: and indeed the progress of the story even in Mark
himself, does show that this is the proper place of it, as will appear to him
that shall precisely observe it. 2. Matthew has laid this story of casting out
a Devil, etc. next after two stories that occurred before the Sermon in the
Mount, as has appeared in its place: the reason of which may be supposed to
be, because he would take up the exceptions of the Scribes and Pharisees
together: That this story in Matthew lies in juncture to these next succeeding
will readily appear in them. 3. There is a story in Luke 11. so like this, that
one would think it were the very same; for there is mention of the same
miracle, casting out a Devil, and the same cavil of the Pharisees, and the
same answer to Christ: and yet the progress of the history of Luke thither,
and especially the coming off from that story, do persuade that it was another
story. For Luke chaineth such following passages to it, that cannot possibly be
brought in concurrent with the current of these Evangelists now before us. And
we shall observe hereafter, that Christ in his latter time did repeat over
again very many of those things that he had spoken a good while before: as
Moses his Deuteronomy was but a rehearsal of things that had been acted and
spoken in his former time. The same devilishnesse was in the Scribes and
Pharisees in all places, and it was accordingly to be met withal by Christ in
more places then one: They had taken up a consent to beat down the dignity and
authority of his miracles, by asserting that whatsoever he did, he did by the
power of Magic, and this corrupt blood ran up in their veins every where
wheresoever he met them, and therefore it is no wonder if the same words be in
their mouths here and there, when the same rotten principle was every where in
their hearts. Observe how scornfully they require a sign from Heaven, when they
had but newly seen a most heavenly sign.

The word Beelzebul was taken up for the more detestation, as importing, The
god of a dunghill, and the sacrificing to Idols they called dunging to an
Idol, R. Jose, ben R. Ben says, (...) He that sees them dunging to an Idol,
must say, He that sacrifices to other gods must be destroyed. Talm. Jerus.
Baracoth, fol. 12. col. 2.

What Christ speaks about the unpardonablenesse of blasphemy against the holy
Ghost, is in direct facing of their Tenet; which held, that blasphemy was
attoned for by death though by nothing else. He [say they] by whom the name of
Heaven is blasphemed, repentance has no power to save him from punishment, nor
the day of expiation to atone for him, nor chastisements of the Judges to
acquit him. But repentance and the day of expiation atone for a third part,
and chastisements a third part, and death a third part. And of such it is said,
If this iniquity be purged till you die: Behold we learn that death acquitteth.
Talm. Jerus. Sanhed. fol. 27. col. 3.

The Jews defamed the miracles done by Christ as done by Magic, as appears
not only by this and other places in the Gospel, but even in Talm. Bab. Schabb.
fol. 104. col. 2. R. Eliezer said to the wise men, Did not Ben Sarda [this is a
blasphemous name they give to Jesus of Nazareth, as was said a little before]
bring enchantments out of Egypt in incisions in his flesh?

But when they saw they were not able to contradict and decry the credit of the
great miracles that he did, and they saw that this would not serve their turn,
to say he did them by the power of the Devil; the Devil taught them to betake
themselves to another shift clean contrary, and that was, to say and maintain,
that when Messiah came, he should do no miracles at all: which they assert in
Sanhedr. per Helek. and Maym. in Melachim. per. ult.

SECTION XXXVI. MATTHEW. Chap. XII. from Ver. 46, to the end. MARK Chap. III.
from Ver. 31. to the end. LUKE Chap. VIII. Ver. 19, 20, 21. CHRIST'S Mother and
Brethren seek him, etc.
THe Order is cleared by the transition of Matthew, While he yet talked, etc.
Luke has set the coming of Christ's mother and brethren, after the Parable of
the Sower [whereas the other two Evangelists have set it before and that in its
proper place] thereby intimating the end and prosecution of the errand they
came upon, which was to take him up from preaching* with which intention and
importunity they follow him from place to place. Here is an evidence of the
Virgin Mary's sinfullnesse, as well as other women's, if going about to stop
Christ's Ministry were a sin, as certainly it was, proceed that intention from
what pretense soever. Mark 3.21. His friends went to lay hold on him, for they
said (...): signify that word what it will, whether he is beside himself, or
he is faint, or he is in a rapture, etc. their errand and intention was to take
him off from the course he was in: which he knew well enough, and therefore he
gives so smart an answer, Who is my Mother, etc? Compare Deuteronomy. 33.9.

SECTION XXXVII. MATTHEW. Chap. XIII. from the beginning to Ver. 54. MARK Chap.
IV. from the beginning to Ver. 35. LUKE Chap. VIII. from Ver. 4, to Ver. 19.
The Parable of the Sower: and diverse other Parables.
MATTHEWS transition does again clear the order here. The same day went Jesus,
etc. The same day that his Mother and brethren came to him, as is apparent in
the twelfth Chapter. So that this consideration helps to methodize the order
of Luke: for whereas the other two have set the coming of Christ's mother and
brethren before his uttering of the Parable of the Sower, etc. he has set it
after; and that without contrariety though with diversity. For both the
occurrences were on the same day: and he has by this order showed how the
mother and friends of Christ having once found him, went along with him,
whether to prosecute the intention they came upon, or better convinced to
attend him and his doctrine.

CHRIST'S speaking of Parables, which he does so exceeding much through the
Gospel, was according to the style and manner of that Nation, which were
exceedingly accustomed to this manner of Rhetoric. The Talmuds are abundantly
full of this kind of oratory, and so are generally all their ancient writers:
and they commonly enter upon their Parables with this preface (...): A Parable:
To what is the thing like? which style he also uses not seldom. And sometime
they enter upon it more abruptly with such an entrance as this (...) or (...)
To a man, or To a King of flesh and blood, etc. meaning, It is like to a man or
like to a King, etc. I believe there are very many in the world, that have not
been further acquainted with the writings of the Jews then what they have seen
quoted by other writers, and yet are ready to censure them of lies and
falsehoods [which indeed they are not free from] merely upon want of
acquaintance with their style of Parables and hyperboles.

Very good use may be made of the Talmudish treatises, Peah, Demai and Kilaim,
which treats intentionally concerning sowing and seeds, for illustration of
these Parables. In Kilaim, they dispute of sowing (...) upon rocks and upon
stones, and of mingling (...), wheat and tares, etc. cap. 1. In Peah in Tal.
Ierus. fol. 20. they speak of a tree of mustardseed, that one might climb into
like other trees, etc. And in diverse other passages in these Parables, some
light may be fetched from those tracts: seeing Christ all along speaks of
things usual and most particularly usual among that Nation.

SECTION XXXVIII. MATTHEW. Chap. VIII. Ver. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. MARK. Chap. IV.
Ver. 35 LUKE Chap. IX. Ver. 57, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62. A Scribe will follow
CHRIST, etc.
THe story of CHRIST'S preparing to go over the water, is evidenced by Mark, to
come in here in its proper place; for he says, The same day at even, etc.
Matthews laying it where he has done, may seem to be because of its neernesse
to Matthews or Levies feast, as will appear in the following current of the
story; which feast he has laid at Matthews call, and so has accordingly
brought here diverse stories together, though far distinct in time; as some
being near the time of his call, some near the time of his feast. But a greater
scruple arises, namely, Whether this story in Matthew, of two that would
follow Christ, and that in Luke 9.57, etc. of three that would do so, be one
and the same story, or two occurrences at several times? It is well the matter
is of no more chronologicall import, for it is hard to resolve which way to
take it. The words of the persons to Christ, and his answer to them, are so
much the same, that it is hard to think two several stories should run so
parallel in all circumstances: And yet Lukes laying it so far out of its place,
might persuade that it is not the same story. It would be more tiresome then
profitable to dispute the matter at large; therefore to make sure and quick
work, both the stories may be taken in at both places. I should rather hold
them to be two stories: In both of them where it is said, by those that should
follow Christ, Let me first go and bury my father, It argues not that their
father was dead or very sick; but that they thought themselves bound not to
leave their father whilst he was living.

SECTION XXXIX. MATTHEW. Chap. VIII. from Ver. 23, to the end. And Chap. IX. Ver.
1. MARK Chap. IV. from Ver. 36, to the end. And Chapter V. from beg. to V. 22. LUKE
Chap. VIII. from Ver. 22, to Ver. 41. CHRIST calmeth the sea: casts out a
Legion of Devils, etc.
THe order needs no clearing, it is so plainly asserted by all the three:
only among them in relating the story thus ordered, there seems to be some
difference: 1. Mark says, They took him in the ship as he was, namely as he
was now in it, having gone into it to preach to the people, as ver. 1. The
other two speak of his entering into the ship now, as if he had not been in it
before, because they continue not this story, to the story of his speaking of
the Parables out of the ship as Mark does, but speak of this after other
stories. 2. Matthews calling of the Country beyond Jordan whither he went, the
Country of the Gergasens, whereas the other two call it the Country of the
Gadarens, is no great scruple, since it bare two names, ancient and modern. But
3. the main doubt lies in this; that whereas Mark and Luke speak but of one
possessed, Matthew speaks of two. So I observe that Matthew speaks of two blind
men begging at Jericho, Matthew. 20.30. whereas Mark speaks but of one, Mark
10.46. And so likewise Matthew speaks of both the thieves mocking Christ,
Matthew. 27.44. whereas Luke speaks but of one of them so doing, Luke 23.39, etc.

It might be answered, as to this story, that it may be that these two that
Matthew speaks of were not alike furious, but that the impetuousnesse of the
one was more then the other: and that Mark and Luke speak of him only that was
in the worse case. Or for ought that Matthews Greek prohibiteth, the two might
be understood for man and wife, whom the two other Evangelists treat of as one
person. But by the other examples adduced, where Matthew speaking of two, Mark
and Luke speak but of one, it is plain and satisfactory, that these two latter,
writing after Matthew, and he having given the story before them, numbering the
persons concerned in it, they have not been curious so much to specify the
number of persons on whom the miracles were wrought, which he had done before,
as careful to record the miracle done, that none of Christ's workings might be
left unrecorded, as to the nature of the thing done.

The Evangelists describe the condition of these poor possessed ones, much in
the same colors that the Jews do him that they call (...), who is one of the
five sorts of persons whom they seclude from all actings of import or trust.
(...) say they [or a distract person] is he that goes out in the night and
lodges among the graves, and tears his clothes to pieces, and spoils
whatsoever men give him. Jerus. in Trumeth fol. 4. col. 2.

It is of some scrupulousness to cast, how so many swine should be in those
parts, since swines flesh was such an abomination among the Jews, and those
that kept and bred swine little less abominated. Their wise men said, Cursed
be he that brings up dogs and swine, Maymon. in Niz. Mammon per. 5. And there
is a story of a woman reviling one of their Rabbis, in these words, One of
these three things is in thee, either thou art a drinker of wine, or a usurer,
or one that breeds swine. Jerus. Shekalim fol. 47. col. 3. But even Pliny may
help us to an Answer and resolution in this doubt, who tells us how rare
dainties swines flesh is accounted of by the Romans, Neque alio ex animali
numerosior materia ganiae,: quinquaginta prope sapores, cum caeteris singuli.
Of one creature, says he, is there made more numerous matter for luxury:
Almost fifty several tastes in it, whereas in other creatures there is but
one. And hence those pages of the Censors Laws; Interdictaque caenis abdomina,
glandia, testiculi, vulvae, sincipita verina, [A Roman Cook were fittest to
english this. And a little after he tells, that Solidum aprum Romanorum primus
in epulis apposuit P. Servilius Rullus: Publius Servilius Rullus first of the
Romans, served in a whole Swine to the table, the father of that Rullus that
promulgated the Lex Agraria in Tullies Consulship. Tam propinqua origo nunc
quotidianae rei est: A thing now in daily use, had its beginning no longer ago.
Observe that it was of ordinary use among the Romans, to serve in solidum aprum
at their feasts. Vid. Plin. not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 51. Now were it granted
that the Gadarens were Jews, which for the generality they were not [and to
find Swine feeding among the Heathen was no strange thing] yet when there
might be such trading in Swine as the Roman cookery and luxury caused to be,
the covetousness of a Jew would strain him far for his profit, especially it
being not directly against the Law to deal with these cattle alive, though so
strictly forbidden to eat them dead.

SECTION XL. LUKE Chap. V. from Ver. 29. to the end of the Chapt. MARK Chap.
II. from Ver. 15. to Ver. 23. MATTHEW. Chap. XII. from Ver. 10. to Ver. 18.
Levies Feast: Concerning Fasting, etc.
MUch needs not to be spoken concerning the order here. Why Levies, or
Matthews Call and Feast are set together by all the Evangelists that speak of
them, we have observed before, namely because they would dispatch the whole
story of that man at once or altogether: And that his call was at the place
where we have laid it, the current of the story thither confirms past
denial. Likewise that his Feast must come in here, Matthews words, ver. 18. do
make it plain: for he says, that while Jesus was speaking those things
concerning fasting, etc. Iairus came to him: whose coming the other two
Evangelists have clearly pitched in this place.

In Matthew the late Publicans house, when Christ is invited to dinner, many
Publicans and sinners sit down at meat with him, a thing as far contrary to the
Pharisaicall discipline as what was most contrary, for which the Pharisees
callenge him and his Disciples. They looked upon Christ and his Disciples, as
(...) men of religion and devotion, and therefore that ought to separate
themselves from the vulgar sort of people; especially from such as these were
of an infamous stamp and character: A Scholar of the wise, by their Canons,
might not eat with one of the vulgar, much less with Publicans and sinners,
the worst sort of all the vulgar that were.

SECTION XLI. MARK Chap. V. from Ver. 22, to the end. LUKE Chap. VIII. from
Ver. 41, to the end. MATTHEW. Chap. IX. from Ver. 18, to Ver. 27. A bloody issue
healed: Jairus daughter raised.
MATTHEW assures the order, for he says, While Jesus was speaking: those
things that are recorded in the preceding Section, concerning Fasting, and not
putting new wine into old bottles, etc. Iairus came to him to beg the recovery
of his now dying daughter.

Iairus was one of the Rulers of Capernaum Synagogue, and had seen so many
miracles done by Christ there, that if he were not a Disciple already, yet he
believes that Christ can easily recover her, though when he came away from her
she was giving up the ghost. As Jesus goes with him in Capernaum streets, a
woman with a bloody issue of twelve years continuance comes behind him and
touches him: Her disease and Iairus daughter, were born in one and the same
year, for they were both twelve years old, Luke 8. ver. 42, 43.

The malady of this woman was not only of a sad languishing, but it was also of
a great uncleanness, according to the uncleanness mentioned in the Law. The
Talmudich treatise Zavim, and Maymony in Issurei biah, cap. 4.5, 6. would read
a doleful Lecture upon her disease, as to this point of uncleanness. And this
it may be was one main cause that made the woman to come trembling and fearing
to Christ when she saw she could not be hid, Mat. 5.33. because she had been so
bold as to touch Christ in her uncleanness.

The story of the Pictures of Christ and this woman touching him, both made in
brass of which the Papists have made no small ado toward their worshipping of
Images] has spoken exceeding wide and far from hitting upon the right place
where this woman and Christ met. The story as it is related by Eusebius,
Baronius, and others, is this. That in Caesaria Philippi called otherwise
Paneas, the house of this woman was to be seen: and before the door of the
house, a brazen Image of a woman kneeling, and before her the brazen statue of
a man, in a garment down to the feet, and stretching out his hand to the woman:
And that there grew there a certain strange herb, which when it grew up to
touch the brazen hemme of his garment, it had the medicinal virtue of healing
any disease.

But why all this at Caesaria Philippi? whereas this occurrence of the woman's
healing by the touch of the hemme of his garment was in Capernaum: for Matthew
tells, that when Jesus came back out of the Country of the Gadarens, he came
into his own City, Matthew. 9.1. which was Capernaum: and there was Matthews
house, in which he was when Iairus came to him. See Sect. 23.

Before he comes to Iairus his house, his daughter is dead, and there he finds
minstrels and piping in a mournful tone, for the bewailing of her. This was
the custom of the Jews in such cases, as is to be seen in Talm. Ierus. in
Beracoth. fol. 5. col. 4. Maymony in (...) cap. 14, etc. vid. etiam Ierus. Meed
Katon. fol. 83. col. 4.

A good while ago he had denounced a sad doom against Capernaum, Matthew. 11.23.
at Sect. 32. O thou Capernaum which art exalted unto heaven, shall be brought
down to hell, etc. which was spoken as to the generality of the City, who for
the things they had heard and seen, as that being Christ's own City, or the
place of his habitation, yet they believed not. And this may be some reason,
why when he had raised this dead girl, he bids her parents keep the matter
close: for that City had justly forfeited all such revelations of him: Yet for
all the denouncing of that sad fate against her, he often resorteth thither, and
forsakes not his habitation there; partly because he had some there, who for
all the unbelief of the generality, belonged to him, and believed in him; and
partly because he had no reason to remove his habitation for their unbelief,
nor to pass off his dwelling for other men's wickedness; for where could he go
to reside, but he should reside among some of the same temper?

SECTION XLII. MATTHEW. Chap. IX. from Ver. 27, to Ver. 35. Two blind men, and a
possessed dumb man healed.
THe order is clear from these two passages of connection: When Jesus departed
thence, ver. 27. And As they went out, ver. 32.

Jesus from Iairus his house returned to his own home, ver. 28. and there two
blind men come to him, whose eyes he touches, and says, According to your
faith be it to you: urging this upon them the rather, because of the general
untowardnesse and unbelief of the place where he now was, Capernaum: and
because of the Pharisees that were now present, ver. 34. that he might magnify
faith.

As these blind men went out, they brought in a man possessed with a dumb
devil, and he also was healed, which the Pharisees still ascribe to magic, etc.

SECTION XLIII. MARK Chap. VI. Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. MATTHEW. Chap. XIII. Ver.
54, 55, 56, 57, 58. CHRIST at Nazaret, and offense taken at him.
IT is said by Matthew, that when Jesus returned back out of the Land of the
Gadarens, he came into his own City, Matthew. 9.1. that is, to Capernaum, where
he himself dwelt, and Matthew, and Iairus; and the three last Sections relate
stories done in their three houses: Now Mark says, that from thence he went
out and came into his own Country, that is to Nazareth: which title is used of
that City again, Ioh. 4.44.

In that Synagogue he had been abused a good while ago, and his life
endangered, Luke 4.29. and thither he is come now to try them again, and finds
not much better entertainment then before, but only not so full of danger:
therefore he did not many great works there because of their unbelief, which
Mark utters, He could do no mighty works there, ver. 5. which means not any
want of power, but it relates to his will, and to the rule by which he went in
doing his works: such another phrase see Genesis 19.22.

When it is said by the same Evangelist, He marvelled at their unbelief: it
means not, that he marvelled because they had not saving says, but he
marvelled because they believed no more then they did.

SECTION XLIV. MATTHEW. Chap. IX. Ver. 35, 36, 37, 38. Another perambulation of
Galilee.
MATTHEW himself joins this portion to the stories in Sect. 42. and the last
words of Mark in the Section preceding, he went round about the villages
teaching, are concurrent with the first words in this, and so do assert the
connection.

CHRIST at his former rejection at Nazaret, begins to go abroad preaching
through their Synagogues as in Sect. 18. and so he does now: and so great
multitudes resort unto him, that he now resolves upon sending forth his
Disciples to Preach abroad also.

SECTION XLV. MATTHEW. Chap. X. all the Chap. And V. 1. of Chap. IX. MARK Chap.
VI. V. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. LUKE Chap. IX. Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. The twelve
Apostles sent out to preach.
THe order in Matthew and Mark shows and cleers it self.

The twelve had been ordained for Apostles a great while since, and all that
while, had been with Christ as probationers, to see his works and to learn his
Doctrine: and since their pointing out to be Apostles it is observable, how
much Christ has applied himself to Doctrine, that they might learn the Gospel
of the Kingdom, and be stored with what to preach, when he should send them
forth. Hitherto they had been learners, and as for the gifts of the Spirit they
as yet differed nothing from the rest that followed him, but now he gives them
power of healing and casting out devils, [and now is the power of miracles
restored.] So that they cured diseases by the Spirit, but they preached not by
the Spirit, but taught that only which they had learned from the mouth of
Christ.

He sends them out by two and two, and so it is like the twelve spies divided
themselves when they went to search the Land. It may be the Apostles went in
these couples that Matthew had reckoned them in.

What Christ forbids them to take with them for their journey, was 1. to
inure them to depend upon his protection and not upon their own carfulness:
And 2. He hereby intimates that they should find such good entertainment in
their Ministry, that they should find safety and maintenance wheresoever they
came. Therefore when in Luke 22.6. Now take purse and scrip, etc. he thereby
would not signify that his care of them was any whit abated of what it was
now, but that they should meet with worse times and worse entertainment then
they had had now.

Whereas in Matthew and Luke they are forbidden to take staves, in Mark it is
said, they should take nothing for their journey save a staff only: not staves
for weapons or for their defense, but a staff for their resting on for their
ease in the journey: as Genesis 32.10.

They are confined to preach to Israel only, [though many Gentiles dwelt
intermixedly with them in their Cities] because the Lord would own the
peculiarity of the Nation in the first preaching of the Gospel, as he had done
all along in the Economy of the Law: when they had forfeited their privilege
of being a peculiar people, by crucifying him that sent the Gospel amongst
them, then is the Apostles commission enlarged to go to the Gentiles, Matthew. 28.

SECTION XLVI. MARK Chap. VI. from Ver. 14. to Ver. 30. MATTHEW. Chap. XIV. from
the begin. to Ver. 13. LUKE Chap. IX. Ver. 7, 8, 9. JOHN beheaded: His
Disciples come in to Christ.
MARK and Luke do justify the order, for both of them have laid this story
next to the story of Christ's sending forth his Disciples. Matthew when he says
At that time, he uses the word in its latitude, as it is often used in
Scripture, not precisely or determinately for the very day or season when a
thing was done, but in the current of time then in being. And yet in this
expression he seems also to have respect to the story that he had related
next before, though that were some reasonable space of time before this: For
there he had told that Christ coming into his own Country, was slighted and
undervalued, and they were offended in him, yet Herod was amazed at the wonders
that he heard of him.

Here are two times regardable in this Section, namely the time of John
Baptists death, and the time of Herod's hearing of the fame of Jesus: And the
juncture of the stories is very close. As the Disciples were preaching up and
down according to Christ's mission, Herod beheaded the Baptist: and by their
preaching in the name of Jesus, the fame of Jesus comes to Herod's hearing; and
the Disciples again hearing of the murder of John, get in to their master. So
that the story of John's death, is related here in the proper place and time
when it did occur. And from one passage of John the Evangelist in the next
following Section, there is the ground of a fair conjecture of the time of his
beheading: For we shall see in the beginning of the next Section, that all the
^our do speak of Christ departing privately into a desert place: Matthew
particularly gives the reason, namely because he had newly heard, by John's
Disciples, of the death of their Master. Now John the Evangelist in giving that
story of Christ's retiring, has inserted this passage, And the Jews Passover
was nigh, whereby we may conclude that the Baptists death was a little before
the time of the Passover. And from hence we may take up the whole space of his
Ministry and imprisonment. He began to Preach and Baptize in the year of Christ
29, at the spring of that year or about Easter. Half a year after Jesus is
baptized by him, about the Feast of Tabernacles. Till after the Feast of
Tabernacles come twelve month, viz. in the Year of Christ 30, he is still
abroad baptizing in Bethabara and Aenon: About October in that Year he is
imprisoned, and so lies in restraint till almost Easter twelve month, which
was in the Year of Christ 32. And so his story is of three years space, the
better half of which he preached at liberty, and the other half he lay in
prison.

Herod upon the hearing of the fame of Jesus, is struck with horror of
conscience upon thought of the murder of John: and if the leaven of Herod was
Sadduceism, his horror makes him deny his Sadducaicall principles, and to
think that John was Risen from the dead.

SECTION XLVII. MATTHEW. Chap. XIV. from Ver. 13. to the end of the Chapter. JOHN
Chap. VI. from beginning of Chap. to Ver. 22. MARK Chap. VI. from V. 30. to the
end of the Chap. LUKE IX. from V. 10. to V. 18. Five thousand fed miraculously:
Christ walks on the Sea.
ALl the four speak the same story of Christ's miraculous feeding many thousands
in a Desert: Mark and Matthew do plainly link this story to the preceding, as
is conspicuous to the eye of whosoever shall view in them the last verse of the
foregoing Section, and the first of this.

John's Disciples with the tidings of their Masters death, and Jesus Disciples
from their Preaching abroad, came in to Jesus much about the same time: and it
may be John's Disciples cleave to him and depart no more from him. Upon the
tidings Jesus withdraws into a desert place, over the sea of Galilee, Joh. 6.1.
not over to the other side beyond Jordan, but he coasted by Sea from one place
to another on the same shore; namely from Capernaum to the Desert of Bethsaida:
for it is said, the people followed him afoot and came up to him: and when his
Disciples return by Sea again, they are said to go over to Bethsaida, Mark
6.45. and from thence over to Capernaum, John 6.17. coasting still upon the
same side.

John in this story has made mention of the Passover near at hand, verse. 4.
because he only of all the four has undertaken to give account of all the
Passeovers, betwixt Christ's Baptism and his death, The third PASSOVER since
Christ's Baptism.
for the better reckoning of the time of his public Ministry. It may be the
coming on of the Passover had brought all the Apostles in, to attend their
Master thither. They fail him at Capernaum his own City whither it is like he
had appointed them to come in at such a time.

When Christ intends to feed the multitude, he propounds to Philip among all
the Disciples, Where shall we buy bread? for this was in the Desert of
Bethsaida, which was Philips City, John 1.44.

SECTION XLVIII. JOHN Chap. VI. from Ver. 22. to the end of the Chapter. Jesus
teaches in Capernaum Synagogue, concerning eating his flesh, etc.
THe first words in the Section, The day following, asserts the order.

Diverse of those that had been fed by Christ miraculously in the Desert of
Bethsaida, remained upon that ground all night, expecting Jesus to come again
among them, who was departed away from them, but, as they saw, not with his
Disciples; therefore they the next morning follow him to Capernaum, and there
find him. It was Synagogue day there, namely either the second or fifth day of
the week, and in the Synagogue Christ speaks of eating his flesh and drinking
his blood, which seems a Doctrine so monstrous to many, that diverse that had
followed him, do now depart from him.

What would these people have? They had been fed miraculously yesterday, and
yet to day they say to him, What sign show thou that we may see and believe?
ver. 30. Our fathers did eat manna in the desert, etc. ver. 31. They looked for
a continued miraculous feeding as Moses fed Israel with Manna in the
wilderness: and to that the words of Christ refer, ver. 26. Ye seek me, not
because ye saw the miracles, but because ye ate of the loaves.

It is said, When they had seen the miracle that Jesus did, they said, This is
of a truth the Prophet that should come into the world, and they went about to
make him King, ver. 14, 15. They thought they saw in this miracle the sign of
the Messiah they looked for, who should feed his people miraculously as Moses
had done, and therefore when they now require a sign to be still showed in that
nature, Christ tells them they must expect no other food to be provided for them
by him, then his own flesh and blood: which sounds so coldly in some of their
ears, that they will follow him no more.

SECTION XLIX. JOHN Chap. VII. Ver. 1. After these things Jesus walked in
Galilee, for he would not walk in Jury, because the Jews sought to kill him.
BEtween the time of this Section and that preceding, we are to imagine the
Passover to have passed, of which there is mention, John 6.4. So that after
this passage in Capernaum Synagogue, Christ goes up to the Passover at
Jerusalem, and there the Jews, that is the Sanhedrin sought to kill him. At the
Passover the last year they convented him before them, to answer for his
violation of the Sabbath in healing the man at Bethesda, Joh. 5. and he plainly
affirms and proves himself to be the Messiah, and he comes off with safety, but
after what manner is not expressed.

But now the increase of his Disciples, the spreading of his fame and Doctrine
by the preaching of the twelve, and it may be the example of the murdering of
the Baptist, had so stirred them up to seek his life, that he perceiving it,
gets away from Jerusalem into Galilee, and will not yet come into Judea again.

SECTION L. MARK Chap. VII. all the Chapter. And Chap. VIII. from begin. to
Ver. 22. MATTHEW. Chap. XV. all the Chap. And Chapter XVI. from the begin. to V. 13.
Scribes and Pharisees impious traditions: The Woman of Canaans Daughter healed.
A man Dumb and Deaf healed. Four thousand fed miraculously. Pharisees require a
sign, etc. Leaven of Pharisees, etc.
THese two Evangelists join this portion to the end of Sect. 47. Now what we
have laid between in Sect. 48. and 49. is of so plain subsequence and order,
that no more needs to be said of this or them.

Certain Scribes and Pharisees that were sent purposely from Jerusalem, [as may
be conjectured, because the Sanhedrin there fought to destroy Iesus] seeking to
entrap and oppose him, and to make a party against him, quarrel his Disciples
for not washing before meat. Their preciseness about this matter may be seen in
Talmudich Treatise Iadaim, and in Maymony in his Tract Mikvaoth, and
occursorily almost in every place in the Jewish Writers, where they have
occasion to speak of their meals and of their manner of eating.

1. Washing of the hands or dipping of them, is of the institution of the
Scribes: they are the words of Maymony in Mik^aoth, per. 11.

2. Hi^^el and Sha^ma^ ^^creed about washing the hands: But R. Iose the son
of R. Ben says, The tradition about it had come to their hands, but they had
forgot it. These therefore decreed but according to the mind of those that had
gone before them. Talm. Jerus. in Schabb. fol. 3. col. 4.

3. (...) The eating of their common meat in cleanness, is very much spoken of
in their Writings and most highly extolled: Insomuch that the Gloss upon
Chagigah per. 2. does define a man or Religion by this, that He eats his common
meals in cleanness: and the Gomarists in the place of the Jerusalem Talmud
last cited have this saying, Whosoever has his dwelling in the Land of Israel,
and eats his common meals in cleanness, and speaks the holy tongue, and says
over his Phylacteries morning and evening, that men may be confident that he
shall obtain the life of the world to come.

And again in Chal^ah fol. 58. col. 3. R. Iesi in the name of R. Shabeai and R.
Chajash in the name of Simeon Ben Lachish say thus, A man should walk four
miles to the washing of his hands. It is a tradition, that washing before meat
is arbitrary, but after meat it is duty. Only that at his washing before, he
says over some prayer, but after, not. R. Jacob bar. R. Isaac, hereupon
retorted, Do thou say he washes and says over a prayer, and yet do thou
say that washing is arbitrary? It is said he should go four miles to the
washing of his hands, and yet do thou say it is arbitrary?

How they prized this and other traditions of the Elders above the Word of God,
and so by and for them made that of no weight, may be read too numerously in
them, in such like blasphemous passages as these: The words of the Scribes are
more lovely then the words of the Law, and more weighty then the words of the
Prophets.

And, He that says there are no Phylacteries, and in so saying transgresses
against the words of the Law, he is not guilty: but he that says there is five
Phylacteries, and in so saying, adds to the words of the Scribes, he is
guilty. Je^us. Baracoth fol. 3. col. 2.

The written Law is narrow, but the traditionall is longer then the earth and
broader then the sea. Tanchum. fol. 4. col. 4.

Our Savior damning these cursed Traditions, does instance only in that
unnatural tenet of theirs, that extinguisheth all filial assistance to needy
Parents: as if a son said to his father or mother, It is Corban, etc. Their
Canons set down the duty of a son to his father, as, to give him meat and drink
if he stood in need, and to cloth him, to wash his hands, feet and face, and
if he needed, to lead him in and out. Tosapht. in Kiddushin per. 1. And yet
with this superinduced Tradition, they destroyed all such duty. About the word
Corban, in the sense in which it is used here, the Talmudich Treatises, Nedarim
and Nazir and the Tosaphtoth upon them, are good explications, where it is
often used.

His resolving the case about meats not defiling the man, overthrew a great
part of Pharisaism: for this washing before meat was merely out of their
Traditions, and it was a great part of their sanctimony. Moses indeed had
forbidden diverse things as unclean to be touched, and by the touching of which
the person was legally defiled, but that with this reference, that he was
unclean as to Gods service, or to the Congregation, but this pretenced
uncleanness of theirs, for which they appointed washing before meat, had
respect simply neither to the one nor the other.

Christ to a Heathen woman that begged the dispossessing of her daughter, calls
the Heathens Dogs, and she readily understands his meaning, as that being a
common title that the Jews put upon them, Midr. Titt. fol. 6. col. 3. (...) The
Nations of the world are compared to Dogs.

No sign given to the Pharisees when they demand one, but the sign of Jonah the
Prophet: whereby Christ does not only intimate his own burial and
resurrection, but he chiefly intends to hint the calling of the Gentiles
after his resurrection, as the Ninivites were after Ionahs, which was a thing
the Jews could not endure to hear of.

SECTION LI. MARK Chap. VIII. Ver. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. A blind man restored to
sight at Bethsaida.
MARKS authority warrants the connection here: especially it being considered
that in the preceding Section Christ and his Disciples are crossing over the
Sea, and here they are arrived at Bethsaida. A journey by Sea thither they had,
when Jesus fed the five thousand in Sect. 47. and now being come up to that
place where that miracle was wrought, it was a strange construction the
Disciples made of the words of their master, Beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, when they thought he blamed them for not bringing bread: the very
place where they were, might have confuted that misprision.

Christ opens the eyes of a blind man, but will not do it in Bethsaida, but
leads the man out of the Town, nor will he suffer him to go into the Town when
he is cured, nor to tell it there. He had a good while ago, as has been said,
denounced woe against Bethsaida, Matthew. 11.21. and for her perverseness he will
no more strive with her for her good: He had gathered out of her those that
belonged to himself.

SECTION LII. MATTHEW. Chap. XVI. from Ver. 13. to the end of the Chapter. MARK
Chap. VIII. from Ver. 27. to the end of the Chapter. And Chap. IX. Ver. 1. LUKE
Chap. IX. from Ver. 18. to Ve. 28. The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven given to
Peter, etc.
MATTHEW and Mark establish the order.

Upon Peter's confession that Jesus was The Christ the Son of the living God:
1. He promises to build his Church upon the Rock of that Truth, and the Rock
confessed in it, from Isa. 28.16. Psalm. 118.22, etc. 2. He promises the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven to Peter only, of all the Apostles: meaning thereby,
that he should be the man that should first unlock the door of faith, and of
the Gospel unto the Gentiles, which was accomplished in Act. 10. And 3. he
gives him power of binding and loosing, and this power the other Disciples had
common with him, Matthew. 18.18.

Binding and loosing in the language and style most familiarly known to the
Jewish Nation [and it can little be doubted that Christ speaks according to
common and most familiar sense of the language] did refer more properly to
things then to persons: Therefore he says, (...), and not (...). And in Matthew.
18.18. (...), not (...).

The phrase (...) To bind and to loose in their vulgar speech, meant, to
prohibit and to permit, or to teach what is prohibited or permitted, what
lawful, what unlawful, as may appear by these instances; a few produced*
whereas thousands might be alleged out of their Writings.

Talm. in Pesachim per. 4. halac. 5. Our wise men say that in Judah they did
w^rk on the Passover eve till noon, but in Galilee not at all: And as for the
night (...) The School of Shammai bound it* that is, forbad to work on it, or
taught that it was unlawful: (...) but the School of Hillel loosed it till sun
rising, or taught that it was lawful to work till sunrise.

Ierus. in Shabb. fol. 6. col. 1. They are speaking about washing in the Bathes
of Tiberias on the Sabbath: And they determine how far this was lawful, in
these words, (...) They bound washing to them, but they loosed sweating:
meaning, they taught that it was lawful to go into the Bath to sweat, but not
to bathe for pleasure.

Ibid. fol. 4. col. 1. They send not letters by the hand of a Gentile on the
eve of the Sabbath, nor on the fifth day of the week: Nay on the fourth day of
the week (...) The School of Shammai bound it (...) but the School of Hillel
loosed it.

Ibid. fol. 7. col. 4. Women may not look in a Looking glass on the Sabbath:
But if it were fastened upon a wall (...) Rabbi loosed the looking into it, but
the wise men bound it.

Id. in Jam. tobh. fol. 60. col. 1. R. Iochanan went from Tsipporis to
Tiberias, he says, Why brought ye to me this Elder (...) For what I loose he
binds, and what I bind he loses.

Maym. in Hhamets umatsah. per. 4. (...) The Scribes have bound leaven, that
is, they have prohibited it.

Tanchum. fol. 1. col. 3. (...) They have upon necessity loosed salvation on
the Sabbath: that is, they have permitted it, or taught that it was lawful.

Thousands of instances of this nature might be produced, by all which it is
clear that the Jews use of the phrase was of their Doctors or learned men's
teaching what was lawful and permitted, and what unlawful and prohibited.
Hence is that definition of such men's office and work, in Tosaphta ad Iebamoth
per. 4. (...) A wise man that Judges Judgment, makes unclean and makes
clean, binds and loses: that is, teaches what is clean and unclean, what
is permitted and prohibited. And Maymony in Sanhedr. per. 4. giving the
relation of their ordaining of Elders, and to what several employments they
were ordained, says thus, A wise man that is fit to teach all the Law, the
Consistory had power to ordain him, To Judge, but not to teach Bound and loose,
or power to teach Bound and loose, but not to judge in pecuniary matters: or
power to both these, but not to judge in matters of mulct, etc. So that the
Ordination of one to that Function which was more properly Ministerial, or to
teach the people their duty, as what was lawful, what not, what they were to
do, and what not to do, was to such a purpose, or in such a tenor as this,
Take thou power to bind and loose, or to teach what is bound and loose, for
they use both the expressions (...) and (...)

By this vulgar and only sense of this phrase in the nation, the meaning of
Christ using it thus to his Disciples, is easily understood; namely that he
first does instate them in a Ministerial capacity to teach, what bound and
loose, what to be done and what not, and this as Ministers, and thus all
Ministers successively to the end of the world. But as they were Apostles of
that singular and unparalleled order, as the like never in the Church again, he
gives them power to bind and loose in a degree above all Ministers that were
to follow: namely, that whereas some part of Moses Law was now to stand in
practice, and some to be laid aside, some things under the Law prohibited, were
now to be permitted, and some things then permitted, to be now prohibited, he
promises the Apostles such assistance of his Spirit, and gives them such
power, that what they allowed to stand in practice should stand, and what to
fall should fall: what they bound in earth should be bound in heaven, etc.

SECTION LIII. MATTHEW. Chap. XVII. from the beginning to Ver. 24. MARK Chap. IX.
from Ver. 2. to Ver. 33. LUKE IX. from V. 28. to Ver. 46. CHRIST transfigured.
A devil cast out of a child.
MATTHEW and Mark link this story to the preceding with this link, After six
days, etc. which Luke has uttered, About an eight days after, which is but
the same in sense: Six days complete came between the day that Christ had
spoken the words before and the day of his Transfiguration: So that the day of
his Transfiguration was the eight day from the day when Christ said, There are
some standing here that shall not taste of death till they have seen the
Kingdom of God come with power.

This story o^ Christ's Transfigu^acion relates to that prediction concerning
the great Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.18. I will raise them up a Prophet from among their
brethren like unto thee, etc. And it shall come to pass that whosoever will
not hearken to my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of
him. A Prophet, that is, a succession of Prophets till the great Prophet should
come who should seal Vision and Prophecy.

Christ had been sealed for the great Priest at his Baptism, when entering into
his Ministry at the same age that the Priests entered into their Office, he is
attested from heaven, This is my wellbeloved Son in whom I am well pleased. He
is sealed for the great Prophet here, by the like attestation from heaven, with
the same words, This is my wellbeloved Son in whom I am well pleased, but
withal it is added Hear him, answerable to those words, Whosoever will not
hearken, etc. Deuteronomy. 18.19.

Moses the first Prophet had all his Oracles out of a Cloud: and the Cloud of
Glory that lead Israel in the Wilderness, departed at his death: think of that
when you see a cloud here overshadowing and a Divine Oracle given out of it, at
the sealing of the Prophet greater then he.

Moses was the first Prophet of the Jews, and Elias the first Prophet of the
Gentiles, and they both now appear to attend their Master. Christ and the three
Disciples were in this mount of his Transfiguration all night: for Luke says,
It came to pass the next day when they were come down, etc. ver. 37. Compare
Christ transfigured and his face shining with the shining of Moses his face,
and so compare that first Prophet and this great Prophet again together.

The Disciples that had authority and power given them over all devils, Luke
9.1. are not able here to cast one out: and their Master shows a double
reason why, namely, because of their unbelief, and because that kind went not
out but by Fasting and Prayer: Now, that their unbelief should be any more then
it had been before [for they had cast out devils before this, Matthew. 6.13.] it
might seem strange, but that here were some concurrents toward that, more then
they had met with before now: and that we may observe especially in these two
things: 1. There were diverse diseases, which in their own nature, were but
natural diseases, which yet the Jews did commonly repute as seizure and
possessing by the devil, especially those that distempered the mind, or did in
more special manner convulse the body: and according to this common language
and conception of the Nation, the language of the Gospel does speak exceeding
frequently: Examples of this kind of Dialect among the Jews we might produce
diverse: as that in Maym. in Gerushin. per. 2. A man which is troubled with an
evil spirit, and says when the sickness [(...)] begins upon him, Write a bill
of Divorcement to my wife, he says as good as nothing, because he is not
compos sui: And so likewise, a drunken man, when he comes near the drunkenness
of Lot, etc. He calls this evil spirit [(...) or] a sickness, and by it he
means Lunacy or Distractednesse that had its lucida intervalla.

So the Jews speak of a man (...) that is possessed by Cordicus: which they
interpret to be a spirit that seizes on him that drinks too much wine out of
the winepresse. Talm in Gittin. per. 7. Vid. R. Sol. and Nissim ibi. And to
spare more, because the story in hand is of a child, take but this example of
an evil spirit which they conceived did seize upon children: (...) Shibta, say
they, is an evil spirit that seizes upon children by the neck, even upon the
sinews behind the neck, and dries them up from their use and strength till it
kill him. And the time of it is from the childs being two months old, and the
danger of it is till the child be seven years old. Aruch. in (...) Which
seems to mean nothing else but Convulsion fits or shrinking of sinews, or
some such like thing, a natural malady.

Now in this child there were not only these fits of Convulsions or the
Falling sickness and the like, but he was really possessed with the devil
indeed. So that though the Disciples had healed several persons of maladies,
which the Jews in their language and conceptions called possessings with evil
spirits, and the Evangelists speak their language, yet this is a subject to
work upon of a further difficulty by far, the devil being bodily in this child
indeed. 2. Granting [for we dare not deny] that they had cast out devils indeed
before, yet this case carried some extraordinary matter in it above other
times. They were then preaching up and down, and their Commission gave them
power to cast out devils to confirm their Doctrine, but now they were not in
that employment. They were also now set upon by the Scribes and Pharisees, with
a possessed person of an extraordinary example, as being possessed from an
Infant, purposely that they might puzzle them, and that in the fairer
opportunity, when their Master and three of the chief of their company, Peter
and James and John were absent. Therefore if by all these concurrents of
disadvantage, their faith were somewhat shaken, it is to be the less wondered
at, by how much the more the case was more strange and unusual to them, and
they had not been put to such a trial before.

SECTION LIVE. MATTHEW. Chap. XVII. Ver. 24, 25, 26, 27. CHRIST pays money
miraculously gotten.
MARKS words in the beginning of the next Section, laid to the first verse of
this, will be evidence sufficient for the order of both.

Christ is demanded the half shekel that every Israelite was bound by the Law
annually to pay for the redemption of his life, Exodus 30.13. The word (...)
speaks that. Now the proper time of collecting that began a little before the
Passover, as we have observed before out of the Treatise Shekalim. And though
it were now almost half a year past the Passover, yet is this the first time
that Jesus had been at his own house in Capernaum, since the time of gathering
that money had come in. This hal^ shekel that every Israelite paid yearly, went
to the repair of the Temple, and to the buying of things needful for the
service there; Christ paies his Church Duties, therefore here, though, as his
own words argue, he being the Son of the great King for whom that Tribute was
demanded, might have pleaded immunity: for Kings take Tribute of strangers, not
of their own children. His paying it by a miraculous compassing of it out of a
fishes mouth, shows at once his Divine power that could make all things serve
his ends, and his great care to discharge his due paiments and to avoid
offense; and withal, his poverty, when he is put to a Miracle for such a
little sum of money, for he would not work Miracles where there was not need.
His paying for Peter with him, was because he was of the same Town, and so was
under the same demand of payment, and he knew that he was in the same want of
money. The other Disciples were to pay in the places of their several houses.
When Jerusalem was destroyed by the Romans, (...). The Jews were commanded to
pay this half shekell yearly to Jupiter Capitolinus, Xiphilin. apud Dion. lib.
66. Joseph. de Bell. lib. 7. cap. 27.

SECTION LV. MARK Chap. IX. from V. 33. to the end of Chapt. MATTHEW. Chap.
XVIII. all the Chapter. LUKE Chap. IX. from V. 46. to Ver. 51. A dispute who
greatest: One casting out Devils, and yet not following Christ: Dic Ecclesiae,
etc.
THe order needs no demonstration: The seeming difference between Matthew and
Mark in the beginning of the Section needs animadversion rather: Mark says
their dispute who should be greatest, was as they went in the way toward
Capernaum, and when Christ asked them at Aapernaum what their discourse had
been, they held their peace. But Matthew says, At the same time, namely while
Christ was at Capernaum, the Disciples came to him and asked him, Who is the
greatest, etc. in which relation he briefly coucheth the two stories that Mark
speaks of into one, namely, their talking by the way who should be greatest,
and this question coming before Christ.

It may be Christ's so lately taking Peter and James and John into the mount
apart from the rest, gave occasion to this debate, which he determines by
setting a child in the midst, etc. They that have held this child to have
been Ignatius in his infancy, who was afterward the Martyr, [as see Nicoph.
lib. 2. c. 3. Baron. ad Annum Christi 71. Marg. de la Bign. in Ignat. in
Biblioth. Patr. tom. 1.] sure did not well observe his own words, if they be
his own, in his Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, (...). And I do not only know
that Christ is come in the flesh, by his being born and being crucified, but I
saw him in the flesh after his resurrection. For so the Latin renders it, Vidi
cum in carne: or be it, I knew him in the flesh after his resurrection, it may
seem very strange, that he that was so very a child as Christ to take him in
his arms this year almost at the feast of Tabernacles, and the next year at
Easter, which was but within half a years space, to become so intelligent as to
take notice of his being risen.

Upon Christ's speaking of receiving those that come in his name, John propounds
a dubious case, of one that they had met with that went about indeed in his
Name, and in his Name cast out devils, and yet would not own himself his
Disciple, nor follow him: which raises to us a further scruple, How this man
came to this miraculous power? for that it was so, and not Magical exorcizing
in the Name of Jesus, as diverse enemies of the Gospel used afterward, may be
gathered by Christ's answer, who calls it doing a Miracle in his Name, and speaks
of this man as not being against him but for him. Whether he did these Miracles
in the Name of Messiah or of Jesus we will not question: the original of this
power to him, we may resolve much into the same principle from whence Caiaphas
prophesied, Ioh. 11.51. This he spoke, not of himself, but being Highpriest
that year he prophesied: There is an emphasis in That year: For now was the
fullness of time, the year of expectation, and accomplishment of Vision and
Prophecy, and the time of the pouring out of the Spirit as never before: and
if in that full meal of this provision that Christ had made for his own, some
crumbs fell besides the table that others gathered up, or were partakers of, it
does the more magnify the diffusion, and does so much the more point out and
give notice to observe the time. For Christ did so little leave himself without
witness, and did give so clear evidence that this was the great and signal
time spoken of by the Prophets in all generations, that Miracles wrought not
only by himself and his Disciples, but even by the Jews own children, as Matthew.
12.27. give abundant testimony to it.

Matthews text in this Section runs parallel with the other to ver. 10. and so
far the Reader may take them up together: then goes he on with Christ's
speech and the story alone.

The number of a hundred divided into ninety nine and one, ver. 12. is
according to the usual and ordinary manner of the Jews speech, with whom this
very division is very common.

Talm. in Peah. per. 4. halac. 1. and 2. When a man is dividing nuts among the
poor, though ninety nine call on him to divide them, and one call on him to
scatter them, to him they must hearken* With grapes and dates it is not so,
though ninety nine call on him to scatter them, and one to divide them, to him
they must hearken, etc.

Jerus. in Shab. fol. 14. col. 3. Rabh, and R. Chaiish Rabbah, both of them
said, If ninety nine dye by an evil eye, and one by the hand of heaven. R.
Chaninah and Samuel both of them said, If ninety nine die by cold and one by
the hand of heaven, etc.

The rules that Christ gives about dealing with an offending brother, were
very well known in the Nation, and such as were practiced, at least prescribed
in their own Discipline.

1. Admonition privately betwixt the party offended and the party offending. Of
such Maymony speaks in his Treatise Deah. per. 6.

2. Admonition, two witnesses being present. Jerus. in Joma fol. 45. col. 3. He
that sins against his fellow, it is necessary that he say unto him, I have
offended against thee. If he receive him, well: If not, he must bring two men
and appease him before them, etc. Only Christ raises his lesson to a higher
charity, namely for the offended party to try the amendment of the offending.
So the jealous husband admonisht his wife before two. Setah. per. 1. and the
Sanhedrin by two Scholars of the wife admonished an Israelitish City that fell
to Idolatry, before they made war upon it. Maym. in Avedah Zarah. per. 4.

3. If he will not hear them, tell the Church. They used the open proclaiming
of an incorrigible person in the Synagogue, A woman that is rebellious against
her husband, that she may vex him, and says, Behold I will thus vex him
because he did so and so to me: they send to her from the Iudicatory or Bench,
and say to her, Know thou that if thou persist in thy rebelliousnesse, though
thy Ioynture be a hundred pound, thou have forfeited it; and afterward they
make Proclamation concerning her in the Synagogues and in the Schools every
day for four Sabbaths together, saying, Such a woman rebels against her
husband, etc. Maymony in (...) per. 14. And likewise Ibid. cap. 12. If a man
will not provide for his children, they rebuke him, and shame him, and are
urgent with him; and if yet he will not, they proclaim him in the Synagogue
saying, Such a one is cruel and will not nourish his children, etc. Here was
telling the Church, by open Proclamation.

SECTION LVI. JOHN Chap. VII. from Ver. 2. to Ver. 10. The Feast of Tabernacles.
that when Jesus had ended these sayings, which are contained in the preceding
Section, he departed from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judea beyond
Jordan, Matthew. 19.1. Mark 10.1. which is not to be understood as if he departed
thither presently, but they say no more of his actions till his departure
thither: and so pass over almost half a years story in silence, which Luke and
John do make up. These bring Jesus out of Galilee beyond Jordan, and presently
back to Jerusalem to his passion: but these as we shall see, bring him twice to
Jerusalem, before his last coming up, namely this to the feast of Tabernacles,
and another to the Feast of Dedication.

The Brethren, that is, the kinsmen of Jesus urge him to go up to the feast of
Tabernacles, that his Disciples in Judea might see his works, ver. 3. remember
here Ioh. 3.22. and 4.1. His brethren themselves believed not on him, ver. 5.
and that the rather, because they thought his privacy that he desired to keep
in, was not answerable to the port and state of the Messiah: therefore they
desire that he would appear in the power of his miracles in Judea the center of
the Nation, that if he were the Messiah, he might carry it out there, as they
expected the Messiah should do.

SECTION LVII. LUKE Chap. IX. from Ver. 51. to the end of the Chapter. JOHN
Chap. VII. Ver. 10. CHRIST going toward the Feast of Tabernacles.
THat this journey of Christ toward Jerusalem that Luke speaks of in this
Section, is the same with this in John, namely his going up to the Feast of
Tabernacles, is plain by this, that Luke mentions two journeys of his to
Jerusalem more; namely in Chap. 13.22. which was to the Feast of Dedication,
and Chap. 17.11. which was to the Passover and his Passion.

The words of Luke then, When the time was come that he should be received up,
he steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, mean, that now being come
within half a year of the time of his death, he resolved to be more constant at
Jerusalem then he had been; having avoided the place and country, once and
again, because the Jews sought to kill him.

The stories of several men in this Section, that take upon them to follow
Christ, but they had something else to do first, have been spoken to before, at
Sect. 38.

SECTION LVIII. LUKE Chap. X. from the beginning to Ver. 17. The seventy
Disciples sent forth.
AS to the order of this story, First, It is to be observed, that Luke says,
It was after these things mentioned in the former Section; that is, after
Christ was set out from Galilee toward the feast of Tabernacles. Secondly,
that it is said Ioh. 7.10. That Jesus went up to that Feast, not openly, but as
it were in secret, whereupon it may be concluded, that he had dispatched the
seventy Disciples away before he came there. He gives them the same
instructions that he had given the twelve, and the same power to heal the sick:
only whereas the twelve went at large to any of the Cities of Israel, these
were to go to those places where Christ himself should come, to make way for
him, and to prepare the places for the receiving of him against he came: so
that now Christ disposes for the full revealing of himself for the Messiah,
the Seventy beforehand proclaiming him and preaching in his Name, and he
afterward coming and showing himself to be he of whom they preached. The
numbers 12, and 70, cannot but recall to mind the twelve Tribes and the
seventy Elders of Israel. These Seventy were but a little while abroad [for
thirty five couples would soon dispatch a great deal of work:] and they return
again to their Master before he departs from Jerusalem, Luke 10.17, 38.

He again accuses Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, which he had done before
at Sect. 32. for having at any time occasion to speak of contempt of the
Gospel, they may justly be introduced as having the most tender of it, and yet
despised it.

SECTION LIX. JOHN Chap. VII. from Ver. II, to the end of the Chapter. CHRIST,
at the Feast of Tabernacles.
THe pregnancy of the order here, speaks it self: In the two preceding
Sections, Jesus was in the way up to the Feast, and now he is come there.

Now is the year of the World 3960, and the year of Christ* 33 begun: both
entering in this very month in which the Feast of Tabernacles was. The great
year of the world, the fulness of time, the year of redemption and pouring
down of the Spirit. It was indeed the year of Jubilee, however the Jews would
jumble their account [as see Maymon. in Shemittah veiobel. per. 10.] whether
ignorantly or wilfully let them look to it. For count from the 7th year of the
rule of Joshua, when the wars of Canaan ended, and Jubilees began, and you
have 1400 years to this present year that we are upon, just eight and twenty
Jubilees: this year the last that Israel must ever see. It is the confession of
Zohar in Lev. 25. that the Divine glory should be freedom and redemption in a
year of Iubilee. Compare the sending out of the seventy Disciples near upon the
very instant when this Jubilee began, with the sounding of the Trumpet for the
proclaiming of the Jubilee, Lev. 25.9. and there is a fair equity and
unanswerablenesse to that type, in that very thing.

From this Feast of Tabernacles to the Passover at which time Christ suffered,
was that last half year, of the last half seven mentioned Dan. 9. which compare
with the last half year of Isreal's being in Egypt, in which time Moses did his
miracles, and which ended also at the Passover.

Among the many varieties of solemnity and festivity used at the Feast of
Tabernacles, of which we have given account at large in another volume, there
was the pouring out of water fetched out of the fountain Siloam, with the wine
of the drink offering, and at night their most transportant joyfulnesse,
expressed by their singing, dancing and the like jocund gestures, for that
pouring out of water: which by some, in Ierus. succah, fol. 55. col. 1. is
interpreted to signify the pouring out of the holy Ghost: The consideration of
this illustrates ver. 37, 38. where it is said, that on the last and great day
of the Feast, Jesus cried, If any thirst, etc. He that believes on me, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of water, etc. Upon which words many believed him,
because they had seen already so fair evidence of the gifts of the Spirit, in
the powerful works of himself and his Disciples: and yet the text says here,
The holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified: a far
greater gift of that being yet behind.

The Sanhedrin would fain have been meddling with him to have tried him for a
false Prophet, as may be gathered from their words ver. 52. but his hour was
not yet come.

JOHN Chap. VIII. A woman taken in Adultery, etc.
IT is said in the conclusion of the former Chapter, that every one [of the
Sanhedrin] went home, and here, Jesus went into the mount of Olives: which
joins the story plain enough. Not that he lodged in mount Olivet in the open
fields, but that he went to Bethany, and lodged in the house of Lazarus, of
which we shall find confirmation in the next Section.

In the morning he comes to the Temple, and in the treasury, or the Court of
the women, he sits down, and teaches the people: For it was the custom for
the Teachers of the people to sit when they taught, and those that were taught
to stand about them. As he thus sits teaching, the Scribes and Pharisees bring
a woman to him taken in the act of Adultery, etc.

The Syriack wants this story: and Beza doubts it [a man always ready to
suspect the text] because of the strangeness of Christ's action, writing with
his finger on the ground. Mihi ut ingenue loquar [saith he] vel ob hunc ipsum
locum suspecta est haec historia. Whereas it speaks the style of John
thoroughout, and the demeanor of the Scribes and Pharisees, and of Christ most
consonantly to their carriage all along the Gospel. The snare that they laid
for him in this matter, was various. That he should condemn the adulteress,
but where was the adulterer? why brought they not him too? If he condemned her,
he seemed to assume Judicial power: if he condemned her not, he seemed a
contemer of the Law. But he in his divine wisdom used such a mean, as condemned
their baseness, and confounded their machination against him. His writing with
his finger upon the ground, may rather be construed from allusion to Numb.
5.23. or from Ier. 17.13. or from a passage in Tal. Ierus. in Megillah. fol.
74. col. 2. or from several other illustrations, then for that action toughly
and rudely to deny the authenticknesse of the story. The censuring and judging
of this woman, belonged to a Judicial bench at the least of twenty three
Judges, and it would have carried a fair accusation against him, had he gone
about to judge in such a matter. The woman was espoused and not yet married, as
see Deuteronomy. 22.24. for their Judicials punished him that lay with an espoused
maid, with stoning, Sanhedr. per. 7 halac. 4. but him that lay with a married
wife, with strangling, Ibid. per. 11. halac. 1.

Christ's words at ver. 25. I am even the same that I said to you from the
beginning, refer to his open and manifest asserting himself for the Messia a
year and a half ago before the Sanhedrin, Joh. 5.

Their words to him, ver. 57. Thou art not yet fifty years old, mean, Thou art
not yet come within the compass of old age, no not to the first skirts of it,
for fifty years was the beginning of superannuation to the Levites at the
Temple, Numb. 4. and the Jews had a common opinion, that whosoever died before
fifty, or at least fifty two, died untimely, and as it were by cutting off.

SECTION LX. LUKE Chapter X. from Ver. 17. to the end of the Chapter. And Chap. XI,
and XII, and XIII, to Ver. 17.
THe observing of the beginning and end of this Section, will clear the
subsequence of this to the preceding, and the order of all the stories
comprehended in it. It begins with the seventy Disciples returning from the
employment upon which their Master had sent them. Now that they returned to him
at Jerusalem whither he was gone to the Feast of Tabernacles, appears by this,
that after they are come up to him, he is in Bethany in the house of Mary and
Martha, Luke 10.38, 39.

The Section ends with this relation, And he went through the Cities and
villages teaching and journeying toward Jerusalem, Luke 13.22. So that in
Chap. 10.17. he is at Jerusalem, having come thither to the Feast of
Tabernacles, And in Chap. 13.22. He has been abroad and is now traveling up
to Jerusalem again to the Feast of Dedication. Therefore this whole Section is
the story of his actions from the one Feast to the other.

Chap. X. Upon the Disciples relating that the Devils were subject to them in
his Name, he answers, I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightening. Which
refers partly to his death shortly to be, by which Satan was overthrown, and
partly [if Heaven mean the Church of the Jews, and the state of Religion there
as it means not seldome] to the power of the Gospel this very year and forward,
among them, casting him out. With these words of Christ, and the consideration
of the time they refer to, we may fitly compare several places which give and
receive light mutually with it: As Matthew. 12.45. where Satan cast out of this
nation returns again, 1 Cor. 6.3. Rev. 12.9. and Rev. 20.1, 2, etc.

Unto a Lawyer Christ defines who is a Neighbor, by the Parable of the
wounded man and the good Samaritan, vastly differing from the doctrine of the
Pharisees in that case. Take these two or three assertions of their own Schools
for some illustration of this Parable.

1. They accounted none under the term Brother, but an Israelite by blood, and
none under the term Neighbor, but those that were come in to their Religion.
Aruch in voce (...). By using the word Neighbor are excluded all the Heathen.
Maym. in Retseah per. 2. An Israelite that slays a stranger sojourning among
them, is not to be put to death by the Sanhedrin for it, because it is said, If
a man come presumptuously upon his Neighbor: By which it is apparent they
accounted not such a one a Neighbor.

2. They have this bloody and desperate tenet: Heretics, that is, Israelites
that follow Idolatry, or such as commit provoking transgressions, as to eat a
carcass, or to wear linsey-woolsey for provocation, this is an Heretic. And
Epicureans, which are such Israelites as deny the Law and Prophets, it is
commanded that a man kill them if he have power in his hand to kill them; and
he may boldly kill them with the sword: but if he cannot, he shall subtly
come about them till he can compass their death. As if he see one of them
fallen into a well, and there was a ladder in the well before, let him take it
up and say, I must needs use it to fetch my son from the top of the house,
and then I will bring it thee again. But Heathens betwixt whom and us there is
not war, as also the feeders of small cattle of Israel, and such like, we
may not compass their death; but it is forbidden to deliver them, if they be
in danger of death. [Observe this] As if one see one of them fall into the Sea,
he shall not fetch him up, for it is said, Thou shall not stand up against the
blood of thy Neighbor. But such a one is not thy Neighbor.

3. Of all other people of the world they abhorred Samaritans, as appears by
Ioh. 4.9 and 8.43. and by exceeding many expressions to that purpose in their
own writings: and therefore our Savior urging for clear and free charity in
this Parable, exemplifieth in a Samaritan the unlikeliest man in the world to
do any charitable office for a Jew: and he a neighbor, though so remo^e in
blood, religion and converse.

Christ is at Bethany, ver. 30. in the house of Mary and Martha. Martha was an
usual woman's name in the nation Joshua the son of Gamla married Martha the
daughter of Baithus, Iuchas. fol. 57. Abba the son of Martha. Id. fol. 72.
and Aruch in (...). Isaac bar Shemuel, bar Martha. Jerus. in Shab. fol. 3. col.
4, etc. And now let the Reader cast his eye back from hence, and calculate,
when or how it was, that Christ came so acquainted with this family, and he
will find no time or occasion so likely, as when the woman-sinner washed his
feet, Luke 7. which we proved there was Mary, the sister of Lazarus, who was
also called Magdalen.

Chap. XI. ver. 2. The Lords prayer rehearsed: Christ had taught it, almost a
year and a half ago, in his Sermon in the mount, and now being desired to teach
them to pray, he gives the same again. They that deny this for a form of prayer
to be used, either know not, or consider not, what kind of prayers the eminent
men among the Jews taught them: John had taught his to pray, after the same
manner and use of the nation; and Christ being desired to teach his Disciples
as John had taught his, rehearses this form which he had given before. They
that again deny this Prayer is to be used by any but real Saints, because, as
they say, none but such can call God Our father; either know not or consider
not, how usual this compellation was among the nation in their devotions, and
Christ speaks constantly according to the common and most usual language of
the country.

At ver. 14. and forward, there is a story of casting out a Devil, so like that
in Sect. 35. the Jews cavil, and our Saviors words about it are the very
same: and yet the current of the history evinceth them for two several
stories: for as the Jews always carried the same malicious construction of his
miracles, so does he justly always return them the same answer, as has been
observed already.

At ver. 27. there is a link that chains the time and stories, As he spoke
these things: and another at ver. 29. if compared with ver. 16. and again at
ver. 37. where his denouncing woe against the Pharisees, although it be much the
same for sense with that in Matthew. 23. yet that they were uttered at two
several times and upon two several occasions, will appear by that time that
we come to that Chapter.

In Chap. XII. He rehearses many things that he had spoken before: the same
doctrine being needful to be inculcated over and over, though to the same
audience: much more when new auditors were still coming in. Therefore Christ
toward his latter end, did like Moses, making his Deuteronomium rehearse the
doctrine that he had taught before.

Chap. XIII. The first verse bears this link of connection, and continuance of
story; There were present at that season, etc. Pilates bloody act in mingling
some Galileans blood with their sacrifices, cannot be looked for so properly in
any place, as at the Temple. Josephus his story in Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 5. is
far from it. Siloam was in the midst of the City, Ierus. in Chagigah* fol.
76. col. 1. a place of great concourse, where the fall of the Tower slew
eigteen men.

SECTION LXI. JOHN Chap. IX, and Chap. X. all the Chapters. A blind man from
his birth healed. Christ the good shepherd: The Feast of Dedication.
THat this healing of the blind man was at Jerusalem, appears by this, that
Christ sends him to the pool of Siloam to wash, ver. 7. which lay upon the
western part of the City. For Christ was now come up to the Feast of
Dedication, Chap. 10.22. so that this cleers the order and time.

He cures blind eyes on the Sabbath, by putting clay upon them made of his
spittle, a ready way one would have thought to have put seeing eyes out. Maym.
in Shabb. per. 21. Fasting spittle is forbidden to be put so much as upon the
eye on the Sabbath.

Maladies of children that were extraordinary, the Jews did very much ascribe
to some sin of the parents: and the traditionaries used this conceit as a
means to awe men to the observance of their traditions. So they conceit of this
man. Chap. 9.2, 34. Thou wast altogether born in sins. We alleged before,
their fancy about Shibta an evil spirit that seized upon children by the neck
and shrunk up their sinews: And whence, say they comes this? And they give this
answer. If the mother come from the house of office and give the child suck
presently, etc. A fetch merely to awe women to wash after such occasions, and
to put the more repute upon their traditions about washings.

The man upon whom the miracle is wrought takes Jesus to be a Prophet upon it,
but as yet does not know him for Messiah. ver. 17. And when he says to the
Jews, Will ye also be his Disciples? ver. 27. he speaks it seriously and from
a good heart, urging them to own him for a Prophet as he did: And when he was
vehement with them in this pious asserting, they cast him out of the Synagogue.
For they had agreed already, that if any man did confess that he was the
Messiah, he should be cast out of the Synagogue, ver. 22. A passage very well
worth observing, both toward some discovery of the nature of their
excommunication, and for illustration of several matters in this divine
history.

Chap. X. CHRIST from Ezekiel. 34. and Zech. 11. asserteth himself the great
Shepherd, and condemns the evil shepherds that undid the flock: especially
the three that his soul loathed, Zech. 11.8. The Pharisees, Sadduces and
Esseans: He feeding his flock with two shepherds s^aves, called Beauty and
Bands; at the last breaks them: His staff Beauty, dissolving the Covenant of
peculiarity, once made with Israel, by which they alone were his people, but
that peculiarity now gone, and the Gentiles taken in. And his staff Bands,
dissolving the brotherhood twixt Israel and Judah, that now there is a
difference betwixt a true Israel^te and a Jew; and Israelites owning Christ,
and they that own him not are no more brethren.

It was at Jerusalem the feast of the Dedication, ver. 22. Under the second
Temple when the Grecian Kings decreed decrees against Israel, and abolished
their Law, and suffered them not to practice the Law and Commandments, and laid
their hands upon their goods and upon their daughters, and went into the Temple
and made breaches in it, and defiled the pure things, and Israel was in
exceeding great straits because of them, and they afflicted them with great
affliction, until the Lord God of their fathers had pity on them, and
delivered them out of their hand: and the Asmenian high Priests prevailed
against them, and slew them, and delivered Israel out of their hands: and set
up a King of the Priests, and the Kingdom returned to Israel more then two
hundred years, even to the second destruction: And when Israel prevailed
against their enemies and slew them, it was the five and twentieth day of the
month Cisleu: and they went into the Temple, and found not of pure oil in the
Sanctuary but only one bottle, and there was not in it so much as to light
above one day: yet they lighted the lamps with it for eight days, until they
had beaten their Olives and got pure oil. And because of this, the wise men
that were in that generation, ordained that those eight days, beginning from
the 25th of Cisleu, should be days of rejoicing and thankesgiving: and they
light up candles on them in the evening at the doors of their houses, every
night of the eight, for the declaring and setting forth of that miracle: and
those days are called The Dedication, etc. Maym. in Chanuchah. per. 1. See 1
Maccab. 4.59. These eight days of Cisleu fell about the middle of our
December. And so by this intimation John has kept the clock of time going,
that we may tell how the story goes. Since Christ's being at the Feast of
Tabernacles hitherto, was about two months and somewhat more.

The three last verses of this tenth Chapter, which mention Christ's going
beyond Jordan, speak the same thing with Matthew. 19.1. and Mark. 10.1. and might
very properly be set collateral with those texts, but since it was somewhat
long after Christ's departure from Jerusalem to his arrival beyond Jordan,
these may be taken in here, and understood, as spoken of his setting forth from
Jerusalem, and showing whither he intended to go.

SECTION LXII. LUKE Chap. XIII. Ver. 23. to the end of the Chapter. And Chap.
XIV, XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII, to Ver. 15.
THe order here is somewhat obscure, and that especially from these two things.
1. Because of the first verse of all the Section, which may seem to be linked
to the time of the verse preceding it in Luke. He went through the Cities and
villages teaching and journeying toward Jerusalem. Then said one to him, etc.
2. Because of that passage in Chap. 17.11. And it came to pass as he went to
Jerusalem, he passed through the mids of Samaria and Galilee, which might seem
to be the same journey with that Chap. 13.22. and that all the occurrences in
these Chapters were in that journey.

But for the proof and clearing of the order, to be as we have laid it, these
things are to be observed. 1. That this story wherewithal this Section
begins, One said to him Lord, Are few to be saved? etc. was on the same day
that he cries out, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. ver. 31, 34. Now that this was
when Christ was no more to come up to Jerusalem till his last coming up
thither, is evident from his words, ver. 35. Ye shall no more see me till the
time when ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord: So
that this was after his coming up to the Feast of Dedication. And those words
were spoken, whilst he was yet at Jerusalem, before he went away thence from
that Feast to go beyond Jordan: The word Then therefore wherewith this Section
begins in our English tran^lation, does not enforce the necessary
conjunction of the times, for in the Original it is not (...) but (...). 2.
Whereas it is said, in Chap. 17.11. That as he went to Jerusalem, he passed
through Samaria and Galilee, it is to be understood of his last journey
thither: and the manner of expression does help to confirm our order, as we
shall see there. Herod was now at Jerusalem, as compare ver. 31, and 34. and it
may be, he being Ruler of Galilee, had helped forward the death of these
Galileans whom Pilate had slain as they were sacrificing: and an intimation of
such like danger from him is given Jesus: And this may be conceived one cause
that sets him out of the City, and to go beyond Jordan, which is recorded in
the last verses of the preceding Section, Ioh. 10.40. and how the order of
story is to be cast in the readers thoughts it is easy to see. Christ being at
the Feast of Dedication at Jerusalem, one comes and asks him, Lord, are few to
be saved? Luke 13.23. And the same day, ver. 31. some Pharisees tell him of
danger from Herod. He answers, that it was true indeed that he was to die at
Jerusalem, for a Prophet could not be tried but by the great Council there [
Talm. in Sanhedr. per. 11.] but he had yet some time to walk and work miracles
before, and so he goes away from Jerusalem.

Chap. XIV. He heals the Dropsy on the Sabbath, and pleads the
lawfullnesse of the action, from their own pity to their beasts, to pull them
out of a pit on the Sabbath. of which Maym. in Schabb. Per. 25.

R. Abuhabh in praesat. ad Ner. 7. has a Parable somewhat like that passage at
ver. 8. and forward. Three men, says he, were bidden to a feast, A Prince, a
wise man, and an humble man: The Prince sat highest, next him the wise man,
and the humble man lowest. The King observed it, and asked the Prince, why
sit thou highest? He said, Because I am a Prince. To the wise man, Why
sit thou next? He said, Because I am a wise man. And to the humble man, Why
sit thou lowest? Because I am humble. The King seated the humble man
highest, and the wise man still in his place, and the Prince lowest.

Chap XV. By three eminent and feeling Parables, is set forth Gods readiness
to receive sinners, etc. in the last of which is a clear intimation of the
calling of the Gentiles.

Chap. XVI. The Parable of the unjust steward, of the rich man and Lazarus,
from Psalm. 49. Lazer is used constantly in the Jerus. Talm. for Eleazer. The
word signifies God help me, or God is my help, a fit name under which to
personate a beggar. Ahrahams bosom, a phrase used by the Jews. That day that
Rabbi died, R. Ada ben Ahava said, This day he sits in Abraham's bosom,
Juchasin fol. 77. col. 4. That the tongue of the damned in hell thirsts for
water, as ver. 24. is also their conception. Talm. Ierus. in Chagigah. fol. 77.
col. 4. is relating a story of a good man and a bad man that died: And the good
man (...), had no burial rites, but the bad man had. Afterward one in a vision
saw the good man walking in gardens, and among pleasant fountains of waters:
but the bad near a river, and his tongue reach after water, but could not reach
it.

Chap. XVII. At ver. 11. it is said, As he went through Jerusalem, he passed
through Samaria and Galilee. This means his last journey thither; but the
expression is somewhat strange: Had it been as he went to Jerusalem he passed
through Galilee and Samaria, this had set his face toward Jerusalem: but
uttered as it is, it seems to set his back upon it: But by this passage the
Evangelist helps to explain what John and the other Evangelists speak of his
journey from Jerusalem beyond Jordan,namely that he went not to Jericho, and so
the next way to the next place beyond Jordan, but that he went through Samaria
up into Galilee, and there crossed over Jordan to Bethabara, which was over
against Galilee.

From ver. 20. and forward, there is a speech of Christ much like that in
Matthew. 24. which still gives us occasion to observe how Christ rehearsed
things over and over.

Chap. XVIII. By two Parables he shows the needfullnesse and efficacy of
fervency, constancy and humility in prayer. In the Pharisees prayer ver. 11. we
may observe what kind of faith in God the Judaich faith was. He waited for
good from God, but grounded this in himself, because of his own righteousness.
But in the Gospel the righteousness of God is revealed, and that from faith to
faith. In the Publicans posture in his prayer, two of their Canonical gestures
in prayer are exhibited; standing and looking downward. Maym. in Deah per. 7.
(...) A scholar of the wise must look downward when he stands praying. The
Pharisees fasting twice a week, may be explained from Ierus. Taanith fol. 64.3.
and Maym. Taanith per. 1.

SECTION LXIII. MATTHEW. Chap. XIX. from the beginning to Ver. 13. MARK Chap. X.
from the beginning to Ver. 13. CHRIST beyond Jordan. Concerning Divorce.
MATTHEW says, When Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed from
Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judea beyond Jordan. Which sayings that he
speaks of, were finished a long while ago, at Sect. 55. but because he
sets down nothing betwixt that time and this journey over Jordan, therefore
he thus joyneth their stories together: The time and actions that he has
omitted, we have seen how Luke and John have supplied.

Were there any Coasts of Judea beyond Jordan? Either the conjunction And is to
be understood, He came into the coasts of Judea and beyond Jordan, as it is
understood Psalm. 133.3. Acts 7.16, etc. or by Fines Iudaeae trans Iordanem, is
meant Fines Iudaeorum, because the Syrians also dwelt in the coasts beyond
Jordan.

Moses at the very same instant of time gave a Law to put an adulterous wife to
death, Deuteronomy. 22.22. and a Law to divorce her, Deuteronomy. 24.1. in the former showing
the desert of the fact, in the latter permitting to mitigate of the rigor of
that Law, and as our Savior here interprets it, to prevent those cruel effects
that their hardness of heart might have produced, had there been no
mitigation. They brag of that Law of divorce as if favored them as a peculiar
privilege. Ierus. kiddushen fol. 58.3. R. Chaijah Rabbah said, Divorces are
not granted to the nations of the world, meaning not to the Gentiles as they
were to the Jews: whereas truth here informs us, that it was permitted only
because of the hardness of their hearts and to avoid greater mischief. When
permission of divorce was given, after a Law to punish adultery with death, for
a mitigation of it, it requires most serious weighing, whether a Law to punish
adultery with death should be undispensable now, after the Law of divorce
given, and continued by our Savior in case of fornication.

SECTION LXIV. MATTHEW. Chap. XIX. from Ver. 13. to the end of the Chapt. MARK
Chap. X. from Ver. 13. to Ver. 32. LUKE Chap. XVIII. from Ver. 15. to Ver. 31.
INFANTS brought to Christ. A rich man departs sorrowful.
MATTHEW and Mark do evidence the order, and as Luke had helped out their
briefnesse before, so do they now also again help us out about his order.

Whose children were these that were brought to Christ? Not unbeleevers
doubtless, but the children of some that professed Christ: Why did they bring
them? Not to be healed of any disease doubtless, for then the Disciples would
not have been angry at their coming: for why at theirs, more then at all
others, that had come for that end? Their bringing therefore must needs be
concluded to be in the name of Disciples, and that Christ would so receive them
and bless them: And so he does, and asserteth them for Disciples, and to whom
the Kingdom of heaven belonged; taking the Kingdom of heaven in the common
acceptance of the Gospel.

Observe Mark 10.19, etc. that mention being made by Christ of the
Commandments, as if he spoke of the whole Law, yet he instanceth only in the
second table. And see the like again, Romans 13.8, etc. James 2.8, 9, 10, etc.
The demeanor of men toward the second table is a sure trial how they stand to
the first.

It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle. An expression
common in the Nation. Talm. Bava meria fol. 38. facie 2. It may be thou art of
Pumbeditha where they can bring an Elephant through the eye of a needle.

SECTION LXV. MATTHEW. Chap. XX. from the beginning to Ver. 17. Laborers in the
Vineyard, etc.
THe first word For makes plain the order and connection, joining this speech to
that before.

The Ierus. Talm. in Beracoth has a Parable somewhat like to this, but wildly
applied to a far different purpose: A King hired many workmen, and there was
one of them hired for his work, for more then what was enough: What did the
King? He took him and walked with him up and down. At the time of the evening
the workmen came to receive their wages, and he also gave him his full wages
with them. The workmen repined and said, We have labored all the day and this
man labored but two hours, and thou have given him full wages with us: The
King said to them, This man has labored more in two hours then you have done
all day. So R. Bon labored more in the Law in twenty nine years, then another
in a hundred, etc. fol. 5.

SECTION LXVI. JOHN Chap. XI. from the beginning to Ver. 17. Tidings come to
Christ of Lazarus sickness.
AT Sect. 63. Christ goes beyond Jordan: the occasion of his coming back, was
the message of Mary and Martha to him, to desire his help to their sick
brother: The story of this therefore is necessary to be related before the
story of his coming thence, which is the next thing that the other three
Evangelists fall upon, after they have done with what is set down in the
preceding Sections.

The words of the second verse, It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with
ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, are most generally construed as
pointing to that story in the next Chapter, Ioh. 12.3. Then took Mary a pound
of ointment of Spikenard very costly, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped
his feet with her hair* Which seems very improper and unconsonant upon these
reasons. 1. To what purpose should John use such an anticipation? It was
neither material to the story that he was entering on, Chap. 11. to tell that
Mary anointed Christ's feet a good while after he had raised her brother: nor
was it any other then needless to bring in the mention of it here, since he
was to give the full story of it in the next Chapter. 2. The word (...) is of
such a tense as does properly denote an action past, and is so to be rendered,
if it be rendered in its just propriety, It was Mary which had anointed. 3.
Whereas no reason can be given why John should anticipate it here, if he meant
it of an anointing that was yet to come, a plain and satisfactory reason may be
given, why he speaks of it here, as referring to an anointing past, namely
because he would show what acquaintance and interest Mary had with Christ,
which did imbolden her to send to him about her sick brother, for she had
washed and anointed his feet heretofore. The words of John therefore point at
an action past, and indeed they point at that story of the woman-sinner washing
the feet of Christ with ^ears, and anointing them with ointment, and wiping
them with her hairs, Luke 7. It is true indeed that John who uses these words
that we are upon, had not spoken of any such anointing before, whereunto to
refer you in his own Gospel, but the passage was so well and renownedly known
and recorded by Luke before, that he relates to it as to a thing of most
famous notice and memorial.

SECTION LXVII. LUKE Chap. XVIII. Ver. 31, 32, 33, 34. MARK Chap. X. Ver. 32,
33, 34. MATTHEW. Chap. XX. Ver. 17, 18, 19. CHRIST foretells his suffering.
THe message from Mary and Martha, about their sick brother, inviteth Christ
from beyond Jordan into Judea again. He stays two days after he had received
the message in the same place where the messenger found him, and in the story
of this Section he is set forward. And being now upon his last journey to
Jerusalem he foretells to his Disciples what should become of him there: They
followed him with fear and amazement before, foreseeing that he went upon his
own danger, and yet when he had spoken the thing out to them at the full they
understood him not.

SECTION LXVIII. MATTHEW. Chap. XX. from Ver. 20. to Ver. 29. MARK Chap. X. from
Ver. 35. to Ver. 46. The request of Zebedees sons. They are told of their
Martyrdom.
THe order is plain of it self: and yet the connection is somewhat strange: for
in the last words before, Christ had foretold of his death, yet the sons of
Zebedee here desire to sit on his right hand and left in his Kingdom. Galatius
resolves it thus, Discipuli in errore aliquando fuerunt, credentes Christum
illico post resurrectionem terreni regni sceptro potiturum: unde and quidam
eorum, super caeteros primatum ambientes, etc. The Disciples sometimes were
mistaken, conceiving that Christ presently after his resurrection should obtain
the scepter of an earthly Kingdom, whereupon some of them ambitious of priority
above the rest, desired to sit on his right hand and left, etc. lib. 4. cap. 1.
It is true indeed that the Jewish Nation, and the Disciples with them erred in
judging about Messiah his Kingdom, Act. 1. but they erred as far also about
Messiah his resurrection, till experience had informed them better. Therefore
it cannot well be imagined, that the wife and sons of Zebedee thought of
Christ's resurrection in this their request, but conceived of his temporal
Kingdom according to the notions of the rest of the Nation about it: What
therefore our Savior had spoken instantly before of his being scourged,
crucified, killed, and Rising again, they understood in some figurative sense
or other; but the Evangelists plainly tell us, they understood it not in the
sense that he spoke it. It may be his naming these two The sons of thunder,
gave them some blind encouragement to such a request. Christ foretells his own
death and their suffering Martyrdom under the title of Baptism, in which sense
the Apostle also uses the word 1 Cor. 15.29. The Jewish baptizings or dippings
in their purifications, was a very sharp piece of Religion, when in frost and
snow and wind and weather they must over head ears in cold water, from which,
the phrase was used to signify death and the bitterest sufferings. The
Jerusalem Gomarists do tell us, that the women of Galilee grew barren, by
reason of the cold in their purifyings. R. Aba in the name of Tanchum bar R.
Chaia says, In the days of R. Joshua ben Levi, they sought to abolish this
dipping, because of the women of Galilee which were made barren by reason of
the cold. R. Joshua ben Levi says, Do ye seek to abolish a thing that fenceth
Israel from transgression? etc. Beracoth fol. 6. col. 3.

SECTION LXIX. LUKE Chap. XVIII. from Ver. 35. to the end. MATTHEW. Chap. XX.
from Ver. 29. to the end. MARK Chap. X. from Ver. 46. to the end. Blind healed.
CHRIST in his journey from beyond Jordan to Bethany for the raising of
Lazarus, passes through Jericho: and he heals one blind man as he enters
into Jericho, of which Luke speaks, and another as he goes out, of which the
other two. Matthew indeed speaks of two healed as he came out of Jericho;
comprehending it may be, the story of him that was healed on the other side of
the Town, and this together in one story, for briefnesse sake: Or if there were
two healed on this side the Town, Mark only mentions one because he rather
aims at showing of the manner or kind of the miracle, then at the number: as
we have observed the like before, at Sect. 39.

SECTION LXX. LUKE Chap. XIX. from the beginning to Ver. 29. Zaccheus a
Publican converted.
THe order lies plain in ver. 1. Christ was passed through Jericho before he
met with Zaccheus, etc. Rabban Iochanan ben Zaccai, has made the name Zaccai
or Zaccheus renowned in Jewish Writings: His father Zaccai might very well be
now alive, and for any difference of the times might well enough be the
Zaccheus before us, but that some other circumstances do contradict it.
Whosoever this man was, it is observable, that though his name Zaccheus speak
him a Jew, yet Christ reputes him not a child of Abraham till he believe, ver.
19.

Ver. 11. They thought that the Kingdom of heaven should immediately appear.
Observe this: this they had learned from Dan. 9. where the time is so
punctually determined, that they that looked for the consolation of Israel
could not but observe it, and they that observed, could not but see it now
accomplished.

SECTION LXXI. JOHN Chap. XI. from Ver. 17. to the end of the Chapter. Lazarus
raised. Caiaphas Prophecieth.
NOw is Christ come up to Bethany. Whether (...) mentioned by Talm. Bab.
Pesachin fol. 53. facie 1. [where they speak of the figs of Bethhene, and the
dates of Tubni] be the same with this Bethany, we shall not dispute here: Both
a Town, and some space of ground about it was called by this name Bethany.

As he had stayed in the place where he was when heard of Lazarus sickness,
purposely that he might die before he came to him, that God might be the more
glorified by his raising, ver. 15. so did he make sure to stay long enough
after he was dead before he came, that the glory might be the more. He had been
four days dead, ver. 39. Compare with this these sayings of the Jews. Maym. in
Gerushin. per. ult. If one look upon a dead man within three days after his
death he may know him, but after three days his visage is changed.

Jerus. in Moed Katon fol. 82. col. 2. Three days the soul flies about the
body as if thinking to return to it: but after it sees the visage of the
countenance changed, it leaves it* and gets it gone.

Upon the miracle wrought, the Jews seek to kill Jesus and Lazarus both:
whereupon Jesus goes to a City called Ephraim, ver. 54. Talm. Bab. in
Menachath fol. 85. fac. 1. Iuchn^ and Mamr^ [Iannes and Iambres] said to Moses,
Do thou bring straw to Ephraim? Gloss. Ibi* Iuch^e and Mamre were the chief
Sorcerers of Egypt: they when Moses began to do miracles thought he had done
them by magic: they said, Do thou bring straw to Ephraim? Ephraim was a
place that exceedingly abounds with corn, and dare thou bring corn thither?
meaning, Do thou bring Sorceries into Egypt that abounds so with Sorceries?

Aru^h in (...) Ephraim was a City in the ^^nd of Israel where there was
abundance of corn. Where is the chiefest provision for Offering^* The chiefest
for fine slower are Micmash and Zanoah, and next to them Ephraim in the Vale.

JOHN Chap. XII. from begin. to Ver. 12. A Supper at Bethany: Jesus his feet
anointed.
THe connection of this story to the preceding Chapter, is plainly made by the
Evangelist himself: Compare ver. 55. of Chap. 11. and ver. 1. of this.

Though there were a Proclamation out against Jesus for his life, Chap. 11.57.
yet comes he for Jerusalem, and Lazarus at Bethany is not afraid to entertain
him He may well venture his life for him who had received it from him. It was
their Sabbath day at night when he had this Supper, a time that they used to
have extraordinary cheer. Mary who had anointed his feet before, Luke 7.38.
does the like again.

There is a groundless and a strange opinion of some, that the Supper in
Matthew. 26.6, 7. and Mark 14.3. was the same with this Supper in Ioh. 12. An
imagination, that I cannot enough admire at, seeing there are so many things
plainly to gainsay it: but the discussion of it shall be deferred till we come
to those Chapters. Only one particular here may not be omitted without
observation, and which will make something at present toward the confutation of
that opinion, and that is our Saviors answer in the vindication of Mary's act,
Let her alone, against the day of my burial has she kept this: or rather, She
has kept it: Not that he means that this anointing of his feet, was her
anointing him against his burial, but that she had kept some of this ointment
yet for that purpose hereafter. Judas repined at the expense of the ointment
that she used for the anointing of his feet, and pleaded that it had been
better bestowed upon charitable uses on the poor: Why? says Christ, she has
kept it yet and not spent all, that she may bestow it upon a charitable use,
the anointing of my body to its burial. For 1. neither the text does any whit
assert that she spent the whole pound that she brought, nor indeed in reason
was so great a quantity needful. 2. It was not so proper to apply it to his
burial now, when as he was to ride in triumph to Jerusalem to morrow, as it
was two days before the Passover [when the other Supper and anointing was]
which was the very night when Judas compacted for his betraying. 3. Then Christ
says she poured it upon his body, Mat. 26.12. which cannot be of the same
sense with pouring it upon his feet only. She therefore six days before the
Passover anointed his feet, which was an ordinary use among the Jews to have
their feet anointed, and the Talmudists give some rules about it in Talm.
Ierus. Sanhedr. fol. 21. col. 1. and this she does in dear love and affection
to him: But two days before the Passover, she does not so much anoint his
head, as pour the ointment upon his head that it might run all over his body,
and this she did toward his burial, not only in his construction, but in her
own intention: she being the first we read of that believed his death, as she
was the first that law him after his resurrection. Her faith and fact he
foresaw, and therefore says now at the anointing of his feet, that she yet
kept it for the anointing of his body, which when she did, he extols the fact
with this encomion, that wheresoever the Gospel should be preached, that action
of her, the example of the first faith in his death, should be published in
memorial of her. Thus did this Mary, [who as has been showed was Mary
Magdalen] anoint Christ three several times, his feet at her first conversion,
and his feet again at this time, six days before the Passover, and his head
and body two days before the Passover, even that night that Judas first went
about to make his bargain for betraying him.

SECTION LXXII. MATTHEW. XXI. from the beginning to Ver. 17. MARK XI. from the
begin. to the middle of Ver. 11. LUKE XIX. from Ver. 29. to the end. JOHN XII.
from Ver. 12. to Ver. 20. CHRIST rides upon an Ass into Jerusalem.
JOHN makes the connection plain, when he says, On the next day* etc. And
shows that as Christ went up at this time, in the evidence and accomplishment
of that Prophecy, Zech. 9.9. so he also went up in the equity and answering of
that Type, of taking up the Paschall Lamb on the tenth day, Exodus 12.3. for
this was on that very day: and the Lamb of God does now go in, as giving up
himself for the great Paschal.

John tells us that he lay at Bethany the night before this, and yet the
other Evangelists have related it, that when he came to Bethpage and Bethany,
he sent two of his Disciples for the Ass, etc. The Jews Chorography will here
help us out: They tell us

1. (...) Two thousand cubits was the Suburbs of a City. Maym. in Schabh. per.
27.

2. (...) Two thousand cubits were the bounds of a Sabbath, or a Sabbath days
journey. Talm. in Setah. per. 5.

3. Bethpage was of this nature: it was not a Town upon mount Olivet as it has
been very generally supposed, and accordingly placed in the most Maps, but it
was some buildings and that space of ground that lay from Jerusalem wall
forward toward mount Olivet, and up mount Olivet to the extent of two thousand
cubits from the wall, or thereabout; and hereupon it was reputed by the Jews of
the same qualification with Jerusalem, as a part of it, in diverse respects.

Talm. Bab. Pesachin fol. 63. fac. 2. He that slayes a Thanksgiving Sacrifice
within, while the bread belonging to it is without the wall, the bread is not
holy. What means without the wall? R. Iochanan says, Without the wall of
Bethpage. The Gloss there says, Bethpage was an outer place of Jerusalem. And
the same Gloss uses the very same words again upon the same Tract, fol. 91.
fac. 1. And again in the same Treatise, fol. 95. fac. 2. the Mishnah says
thus, The two loaves and the shewbread are allowable in the Temple Court, and
they are allowable in Bethpage. Nay the Gloss in Sanhedr. fol. 14. fac. 1.
says, Bethpage was a place which was accounted as Jerusalem for all things. So
that the place so called, began from Jerusalem and went onwards to and upon
mount Olivet, for the space of a Sabbath days journey or thereabout, and then
began the coast that was called Bethany. And hence it is that Luke says that
Christ when he ascended into heaven, led forth his Disciples as far as
Bethany, Luke 24.50. which elsewhere he shows was the space of a Sabbath
days journey, Acts 1.12. which cannot be understood of the Town Bethany, for
that was fifteen furlongs, or very near two Sabbath days journey from
Jerusalem, but that he led them over that space of ground which was called
Bethpage, to that part of Olivet where it began to be called Bethany, and at
that place it was where Christ began his triumphant riding into the City at
this time.

It is very observable that he is entertained with the solemnity of the Feast
of Tabernacles: for carrying of Palm branches and crying Hosanna was never used
but only at that Feast, but now translated to this occasion: which may help
somewhat to the explaining of Zech. 14.16.

Count from hence the days to the Passover, as the Evangelists have reckoned
them, and you will find that this was the first day of the week [the Lords day
afterward] and this day seven night he rose from the dead.

In the midst of his triumph he weepeth over the City, though he knew that
within five days she would be his death.

SECTION LXXIII. JOHN Chap. XII. from Ver. 20, to the end of the Chapter.
Greeks would see Jesus. A voice from heaven.
THe order is plain in the Text of John, and needs no illustration.

Christ was thrice attested from heaven, according to his threefold Office,
King, Priest and Prophet. At his Baptism, for the great Highpriest, when he was
anointed and entered into his Ministry. At his Transfiguration for the great
Prophet to whom all must hear. And now for the great King, when he had newly
fulfilled that Prophecy, Rejoice O Sion, behold thy King comes, etc.

The Bath Kol or heavenly voice that the Jews commonly speak of, is in the
most, if not all the instances that they give of it, but a fiction of their own
brain, to bring their Doctors and their Doctrines into credit.

SECTION LXXIV. MARK Chap. XI. from the middle of Ver. 11. to Ver. 27. MATTHEW.
Chap. XXI. from Ver. 17. to Ver. 23. The fruitless Figtree cursed.
THe order is clear in Mark v.11.12.

Christ after his riding into Jerusalem, having spent all the day there, goes
at even to lodge at Bethany: and in the morning going for Jerusalem again and
hungring sees a figtree, and finding no figs on it curses it, and yet the
Evangelist tells that the time of figs was not yet.

Why then should Christ look for figs, when he knew the time of the year was
not yet for them?

Answ. He looked not for any figs that he thought could be grown ripe and fit
to eat, that spring, it being now at the furthest but about our April, but he
looked for those that grew the last summer, and had hung on the trees all
winter. It is true indeed that some trees had shot forth their fruit by
Passover time, for so Maymony tells us in Kiadush Hhodesh per. 4. but neither
to ripeness; nor was the figtree any of them. For to those words of our
Savior, Matthew. 24.32. When the figtree puts forth her leaves ye know summer
is nigh, lay these of Ierus. in Sheviith fol. 35. col. 4. Rabban Simeon ben
Gamaliel says, From the putting forth of the figtree leaf to the green figs
appearing are fifty days: and from the first appearing of the fig to the fall
of the blossom fifty days, and from thence to the ripe figs fifty days more:
five months in all.

There were several kinds of figtrees in that Land, as the Jews tell us in the
Treatises Demai and Sheviith, where they have special occasion to treat of
that matter, [besides those figtrees that were in their Orchards and
Vineyards.] As 1. (...) which they say were figs of the wilderness. 2. (...)
which were baser figs likewise. 3. (...) figtrees that brought their fruit to
ripeness but once in two years. And 4. (...) which they say, grew in the
fields and bare white figs (...) from three years to three years. The Gomarists
dispute, What? Do they bear their fruit every year, or only once in three
years? They bear their fruit every year, but it is not ripe till three years
end. How does a man know its time, or what year it is with it? R. Jonah says,
by binding a list about it. It is a tradition of Samuel, that he hung some
pendants upon it. The meaning of the matter is this: There was a figtree
growing in the fields of this nature, that the figs that it shot forth one
summer, it was two summers more before they came to ripeness, so that they
hung upon the tree [unless hands or wind hindered] three summers and two
winters before their maturity: Now because the strange nature of this tree,
different from others, caused that the seventh year, or year of release could
not so easily be remembered and observed concerning it as concerning other
trees, therefore they tied some coards or lists about it, or hung something
upon it, that might give notice, and keep in remembrance what year it was with
it, and whether the fruit, if any, were of the first, second or third years
growth. So likewise the figtrees mentioned before, called (...) were two
summers in ripening their fruit. So that of such a tree as one of these Christ
might well look for figs of the last years growth, old figs under new leaves,
if so be the leaves were new. Yet could not this properly be called (...) [as
there are that would change the reading of the original, and instead of (...),
for the time of figs was not yet, would have it read (but I question whether
with the consent of any one copy in the world) (...), For where he was, was the
time of figs.] For that phrase, The time of figs, means the common time that
generally figs were ripe, which was ordinary and commonly known, and which was
not of well near five months after Passover time.

Christ comes to the Temple and casts out buyers and sellers as he had done
three years before: this was four days before the Passover. At Even he goes
and lodges in Bethany.

In the morning he comes again to Jerusalem. This was three days before the
Passover. As they came, the Disciples observe the figtree withered, whereupon
he says, Have faith in God, for verily I say unto you, that whosoever shall
say to this mountain, Be thou removed and he cast into the sea, and shall not
doubt in his heart but believe that those things which he says shall come to
pass, he shall have whatsoever he says. In which words he neither warranteth
nor encourages any to look for a faith that should remove mountains; but 1. He
speaks Hyperbolically for the magnifying of the power and excellency of
faith, as Mark 9.23. Hyperboles, with which the Scripture abounds, are not to
be taken according to the letter, but the thing intended is to be taken at the
higher pitch. As to instance but in one example, and that about this very
mountain that Christ pointed at, Zech. 14.4. which means not literally
Olivets cleaving indeed or removing, but great concussions to the people, and
open way made for the enemy. 2. Christ in this expression speaks the Jews own
language, and by the very phrase that they ordinarily used to magnify their
own abilities by, he magnifieth faith. When they would speak of the high parts
and qualities of their great ones, they used to say, He is a remover of
mountains, Tal. Bab. Beracoth. fol. 64. fac. 1. Sinai and the Remover of
mountains, whether of them sent first, etc. Now Rabh Joseph was Sinai, and
Rabbah was The remover of mountains. Why so named? The Gloss upon the place
resolves us thus, They called Rabh Joseph Sinai, because he was most expert in
deep explications. And they called Rabbah bar Nachmani A remover of mountains,
because he was most acutely learned, etc. The same Talmud also in Erubhin fol.
29. says thus, Rabba says, Behold I am like ben Azzai in the streets of
Tiberias. The Gloss thereupon says thus, Ben Azzai taught profoundly in the
streets of Tiberias, and there was no man in his days that was a remover of
mountains like him. By removing of mountains meaning how able men they were,
and how they could overcome the greatest difficulties in Divinity. Which common
phrase Christ uses to face that wretched boasting of theirs of their own parts
and worth, and to set up faith in its proper dignity, as that that is only able
for all things.

SECTION LXXV. MATTHEW. Chap. XXI. from Ver. 23. to the end of the Chapt. MARK
Chap. XI. from Ver. 27. to the end: And Chap. XII. from the beginning to Ver.
13. LUKE Chap. XX. from the begin. to Ver. 20. CHRIST in the Temple posing them
about John's Baptism. The parable of the Vineyard, etc.
THe continuation of the order is apparent.

CHRIST comes again from Bethany into the Temple, and there being questioned
by what authority he did what he did, he stops their mouth by proposing a
question again, What they thought of John's authority by which he made that
great change in Religion that he did, and intraps them in such a dilemma as
they are not able to get out of.

He proposes the Parable of the Vineyard and Husbandmen, and by it shows the
privileges, and yet the perverseness of the Jewish Nation, and their
destruction, from Isa. 5. etc. See R. Tanchum. fol. 54. col. 4.

SECTION LXXVI. MATTHEW. Chap. XXII. from the beginning of the Chapter to Ver.
15. The Parable of the Wedding Supper.
THe order is plain of it self. The Parable sets forth the Jews despising of
the means of grace and evil usage of those that were sent unto them, ver. 5, 6.
and for this, their destruction and ruin of their City, and the calling of the
Gentiles, etc.

SECTION LXXVII. MATTHEW. Chap. XXII. from Ver. 15. to the end. And Chap. XXIII.
all the Chapter. MARK Chap. XII. from Ver. 13. to Ver. 41. LUKE Chap. XX. from
Ver. 26. to the end of the Chapt. Tribute to Caesar. The resurrection asserted
in the Law. The great Commandment. Christ how David's son. Woe against the
Scribes and Pharisees.
THe Evangelists are so clear in their order, both here and a good way forward,
that there can be no scrupling in it.

The question proposed, Whether it were lawful to give tribute to Caesar,
proceeded from that old maxim among them, upon mistake of Deuteronomy. 17.15. that
they ought not to be subject to any power or potentate, which was not of their
own blood or Religion: the holding to which maxim, cost them the ruin of
their City and Nation.

His answer from the Image of Caesar upon their coin, was according to their own
concessions. The Jerusalem Talmud does personate David and Abigail talking
thus. Abigail said, What evil have I done or my children, or my cattle? David
says to her, Because thy husband vilified to Kingdom of David. She says, Art
thou a King then? He says to her, Did not Samuel anoint me King? She says to
him, (...) The Coin of our Lord Saul is yet current: In Sanhedr. fol. 20. col.
2. Maym. in Gezelah per. 5. A King that cuts down the trees of any owner, and
makes a bridge of them, it is lawful to go over it, etc. How is this to be
understood? Of a King whose Coin is current in these Countries, for the men of
the Country do thereby evidence, that they acknowledge him for their Lord and
themselves his servants: But if his Coin be not current, then he is a robber,
etc.

The topic from whence he argues the resurrection against the Sadduces, is
also acknowledged by the Writers of that Nation: Tanchum. fol. 13. col. 3. The
holy blessed God does not join his Name to the Saints while they are alive, but
when they are dead: as it is said, To the Saints which are in the earth, etc.
But behold we find that he joins his Name to Isaac [meaning, he calls himself
the God of Isaac] while he was alive, etc. Jerus. in Beracoth fol. 5. col. 4.
Whence is there proof that the righteous are called living when they are dead,
etc.

He poseth the Pharisees in their very Catechism: they used it as a common name
for the Messiah to call him the son of David, and yet when they are put to it
to observe that David calls him Lord, they are so far nonplust, that they have
not only not what to answer, for the present, but this silenceth them from
future disputes. Now therefore he falls upon them with their deserved character
and doom, and as in Matthew. 5. he had pronounced beatitudes, so here in Matthew.
23. he denounces woes, and curses these men from Isa. 65.15, etc.

This Chapter as it is a speech to and of the Scribes and Pharisees, and
treats of their doctrines and demeanours, so from their own Pandects and
Authors may it be explained from point to point: those speaking out their
doctrines and practices to the full.

Their sitting in Moses chair, ver. 1. means them as Magistrates, to whom
Christ injoyneth all lawful obedience. Vid. Sanhedr. per. 1. halac. 6.

Their heavy burdens ver. 4. translates their (...) of which they speak so much
and so highly.

Their Tephillin are called Phylacteries, ver. 5. which means not only
Observatives, because they were memorials of their duty and devotions [being
four portions of the Law written in two parchments, and the one worn upon their
forehead and the other upon their left arm] but Preservatives, as being reputed
by them a fence against evil spirits, Ierus. Beracoth fol. 2. A man has need
to say over his Phylacteries every evening in his house, to fright away evil
spirits.

They loved to be called Rabbi Rabbi, ver. 7. R. Ahibah said to Eliezer, Rabbi
Rabbi, Jerus. Meed. Ka^on fol. 81.1. And yet they had this rule against it,
Love the work, but hate the Rabbiship, Maym. in Talm. Torah. per. 3.

Call no one father, ver. 9. in that sense as they owned their Doctors by the
title (...) relying upon the authority of humane doctrines.

Their permitting and practicing to swear by the Temple, ver. 16. came into a
common custom, Juchas. fol. 50. col. 1. Baba ben Bota swear by the Temple, and
so did Rabban Simeon ben Gamaliel, and this was a custom in Israel.

Their tithing mint, annise and cummin, ver. 23. explained in the Talmudish
treatises Demai, whited sepulchers, ver. 27. Shekalim per. 1. halac. 1. In the
month Adar they whited the sepulchers. And the reason is given by the
Gomarists, that people hereby might have the better discovery of them, the
better to avoid defilement by them: which well observed, sets on Christ's
invective against these wretches the more. Gomar. utriusque Talm. in loc. and
Ierus. in Maasar Sheni. fol. 55.3.

Their decking of Sepulchers in honor of those that lay in them, ver. 29.
handled in Ierus. in Moed Katon fol. 80. col. 3, and 4.

He concludes his speech with the intimation of what shame and guilt lay upon
them for the blood of the former Prophets slain by their fathers, filled up by
their own wickedness in persecuting those that he did or should send to them.
He calls them Serpents from Genesis 3.15. and teaches us to look upon them as
the seed of the Serpent in an eminent degree, if any degree of that nature may
be called eminent. He doomes all the Prophets to be required of that
generation, because they by their transcendent abuse of those whom God sent,
even of Messiah himself, did justify and exceed all the evil their fathers had
done against the Prophets: Yea all the blood shed before the blood of
Zacharias, and his, though they held that to have been satisfied for, by the
destruction, slaughter and captivity by the Babylonians, Ierus. in Taanith fol.
69. col. 2. His changes the name of his father, and so does Targ. in Lament.
cap. 2. ver. 20. And concludes with a sad denunciation of destruction, and that
they should no more see him till they should say, Blessed be he that comes in
the name of the Lord: which very words he had uttered also a great while before
this, Luke 13.34, 35. and the multitude had said, Blessed be he that comes,
etc. when he rode into Jerusalem upon an Ass. But the same words now uttered
by him, are of somewhat doubtful interpretation, whether they mean, their no
more seeing of him till the night and time of the Passover, [for at the
Paschal meal every company rehearsed this saying, Blessed be he that comes,
etc. in their great Hallel as they called it] or that they should no more see
him at all, because they had not learned to entertain him, as coming from God.
See Joh. 5.43.

SECTION LXXVIII. MARK Chap. XII. Ver. 41, 42, 43, 44. LUKE Chap. XXI. Ver. 1,
2, 3, 4. The poor widows mites.
THe Jews before their prayers in the Temple, or their Synagogues, used to give
something by way of alms or offering, that Charity and piety might go together.
Maym. in Mattanath Anijim. per. 6. Now in the Court of the women at the Temple
[as we have observed elsewhere in the description of that place] there were
several chests, which the Jews call Shoper^th, into which the people put the
money they offered, some to buy one thing for the service of the Temple, some
another, etc.

SECTION LXXIX. MATTHEW. Chap. XXIV. all the Chapter. MARK Chap. XIII. all the
Chapter. LUKE Chap. XXI. from Ver. 5. to the end of the Chapter. And after
these MATTHEW. Chap. XXV. all the Chapter. CHRIST foretells the destruction of
Jerusalem, the signs and miseries preceding and accompanying it.
THe Talmud tells us that there was a place upon mount Olivet, just in the face
of the Temple, where the Priest slew and burnt the red Cow into the ashes of
purification, and as he sprinkled the blood, he looked directly upon the Temple
door. Middeth Per. 1, etc. This was the last Sermon that Christ made upon mount
Olivet, and he makes it as he sits upon that mount, just facing the Temple,
Matthew. 13.3. And that text that he had taken in tears but two or three days
ago, weeping over the City and foretelling the destruction of it, Luke 19.44.
he now preaches upon at large, declaring the misery and foreshewing the
forerunners of that destruction.

The aim of his speech, or, to what time and purpose it refers, may be
discerned by the question of the Disciples, to which it is an answer. When
shall these things be, viz. that one stone stone of the Temple shall not be
left upon another? Mark. 13.4. Luke 21.7. and so it relates plainly to the
destruction of the Temple and City. But Matthew has added; And what shall be
the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world? from whence it is
conceived by some, that the speech does aim at the end of the world, and
Christ's last coming unto judgment. It is true indeed that the close of his
speech in Matthew. 25. does speak plainly of the last judgment, and that many of
those terrible things mentioned, Matthew. 24. may very well typifie the terrors
of the last day, but the prime and proper scope of the speech in that 24th
Chapter, is to set forth the destruction of Jerusalem, and the rejection and
misery of the Jewish nation; as may be observed by these particulers.

1. Because in Matthew. 24.15, 16. He points directly to time and place, when and
where these things shall be, viz. when the Temple shall be profaned, then these
things come, etc.

2. Especial consider ver. 34. Verily I say unto you; This generation shall
not pass till all these things be fulfilled. This generation, not meaning
Generatio Evangelica, as some do harshly interpret it, but as it means in
Matthew. 23.36. Luke 11.31, 32. and abundance of other places in the new
Testament, the generation then in being.

3. The destruction of Jerusalem, is phrased in Scripture as the destruction of
the whole world, Ier. 4.23. Isa. 65.17. and Christ's coming to her in judgment,
as his coming to the last judgment, Matthew. 17.28. Ioh. 21.22. Matthew. 19.28.
Rev. 1.7, etc.

Therefore those dreadful things spoken of in ver. 29.30, 31. are but borrowed
expressions to set forth the terrors of that judgment the more. Ver. 29. The
Sun shall be darkened, etc. shows the decay of all glory, excellency and
prosperity in that nation, and the coming in of all sadness, misery and
confusion: as Isa. 13.10. Joel 2.10. Ver. 30. Then shall they see the sign of
the Son of man, etc. Not any visible appearance of Christ, or of the cross
in the clouds [as some have imagined,] but whereas the Jews would not own
Christ before for the Son of man, or for the Messiah, then by the vengeance
that he should execute upon them, they and all the world should see an evident
sign, that he was so. This therefore is called his coming, and his coming in
his kingdom, Matthew. 17.28. because this did first declare his power, glory and
victory on that nation that had despised him. Ver. 31. He shall send his Angels
with a great sound of a Trumpet, etc. that is, his Ministers with the Trumpet
of the Gospel, to fetch in his elect from among the Gentiles when the Jews were
now destroyed and cast off. And the false Christ's, and false Prophets that
should arise, ver. 5.24. arose in that nation in those last days of it, as is
abundantly evident both in the new Testament, and in Josephus: And those wars
and rumors of wars, and nation rising against nation, etc. ver. 6, 7. were
accomplished not only in the horrid civil wars among the Jews, but also in
the great concussions in the Roman Empire, in the wars betwixt Otho and
Vitellius, and betwixt Vitellius and Vespasian, [of which the Roman
Historians, especially Tacitus is very large] the like to which, there had not
been before, even to the sacking of Rome it self, and the burning of the
Capitol.

SECTION LXXX. MATTHEW. Chap. XXVI. from the beginning to Ver. 14. MARK Chap.
XIV. from the beginning to Ver. 10. LUKE Chap. XXII. Ver. 1, 2. And after these
portions read JOHN Chap. XIII. from the beginning to Ver. 27. CHRIST'S head
anointed at a supper at Bethany two nights before the Passover: At the same
supper he washes his Disciples feet: gives Judas the sop and the Devil
enters into him.
THe proof of the proper order here will require some dispute, not so much in
regard of any obscurity or difficulty of the order it self, but in regard of
needless and groundless difficulties that are put upon it. There are two
strange opinions we meet with here: The one is, that holds that this supper
mentioned by Matthew and Mark, was the same supper which is mentioned in Ioh.
12. which was six days before the Passover. And the other is, that holds,
that this supper in Ioh. 13. was the supper on the Passover night: so that for
the showing and asserting of the order as we have laid it, these three things
are to be done.

First, It is to be proved, that the supper in Ioh. 12. and the supper in
Matthew. 26. and Mark 14. were not one and the same supper, but two suppers at
some days distance. Secondly, That the supper in Ioh. 13. was not on the
Passover night, but before the Passover night. And thirdly, That the supper
in Ioh. 13. was the same supper with that in Matthew. 26.6. and Mark. 14.3. two
days before the Passover.

First, That the supper in Ioh. 12. and the supper in Matthew. 26. and Mark 14.
were two different suppers [to which something has been said before,] appears
by these observations. 1. The supper in Ioh. 12. was in the house of Lazarus
[unlesse we will unwarrantably strain the construction of the story,] but the
supper in Matthew. 26. and Mar. 14. was in the house of Simon the Leper. 2. At
the supper in Ioh. 12. Christ's feet were anointed, but his head was anointed
at the supper in Matthew. 26. and Mark 14.3. The supper in Ion. 12. was six days
before the Passover, but the supper in Matthew. 26. and Mark 14. was but two
days before: For observe Mark 14.1. After two days was the feast of the
Passover: and then ver. 3. And Jesus being at Bethany, etc. Here they that
hold the opinion that we are confuting, will not acknowledge the order of the
Evangelists direct, but say there is a dislocation, so that though two days be
mentioned before, yet the story following was six days before the Passover.
But the method of Matthew and Mark has been so direct hither through the story
of Christ's actions, since his last coming to Jerusalem, that no reason possible
can be given why they should invert the order here. They had punctually
mentioned his actions, five, four, three days before the Passover, and now
they come to speak of two days before, and under that account bring in this
supper, and what sense or reason can there be to surmise that it was six days
before? They had showed you Christ five days before the Passover, at Bethany,
Joh. 12.1, 12. Mark 11.1, 11. And four days before the Passover, at Bethany,
Mark 11.12, 15, 19, 20. And three days before the Passover, at Bethany, Mark
11.20, 27. and 13.3. And then they come and speak of two days before the
Passover, and they speak also of Christ's being at Bethany, and yet would the
opinion under confutation apply the reckoning of the two days only to point at
the Highpriests assembling: and Christ's being at Bethany, to be jumped
backward over all the story before, even to beyond Matthew. 21. Mark. 11. An
opinion that by its improbability is confutation enough to it self.

A second think to be cleared is, that the supper in Ioh. 13. was not on the
Passover night but before: which may be evidenced by these arguments instead
of more. 1. Because John says expressly ver. 1. that it was (...), before the
festival of the Passover, for so the word (...) constantly signifies, not the
meal of the Paschal, as some would construe it here, but the whole festival.
2. The Disciples when Jesus said to Judas, What thou do, do quickly, thought
he spoke about buying something against the feast, ver. 29. by which it appears
that the feast was not yet come.

Thirdly, Luke shows, that the entering of Satan into Judas [which was at the
supper, Ioh. 13.] was before the Passover day came: for observe his order,
Luke 22.3. Then entered Satan into Judas, and he went and communed with the
chief Priests, etc. and then ver. 7. Then came the day of unleavened bread:
Upon all which considerations, it is apparent, that this supper in Ioh. 13. at
which Satan entered into Judas [whereupon he went and compacted for his Masters
betraying] was not on the Passover night, but some space before the Passover
day came. There is indeed a passage in Ioh. 13.38. which may seem to bring that
supper to the Passover night, which is, when Christ says at the supper to
Peter, The Cock shall not crow till thou have denied me thrice, which seems
to carry it, as if this supper were on that very night when Peter denied him.
For answer to which, let it be observed: 1. That Peter denied Christ but once
before the Cock crew. Mark 14.68, 69, 70. and it will teach us to expound the
words of Christ, Ioh. 13.38. and Matthew. 26.24. not as meaning that he should
deny him three times over before any Cock crew, but that he should deny him
thrice in the time of Cocks crowing, which time was a fourth part of the night,
Mark 13.34. And that it means in such a sense is yet more apparent by Mark
14.30. where he utters it, The Cock shall not crow twice. 2. Let it be
observed, that in Ioh. 13.38. it is only said, The Cock shall not crow, but in
Matthew. 26. Mark. 14. when the speech refers to the very night when his denial
was, it is said, This night, before the Cock crow; And, This day, even this
night before the Cock crow, etc. And so it is to be understood that Christ used
that speech to Peter twice over, and in it he does twice refute his presuming
upon his own strength which Peter twice showed: First at the supper in Ioh. 13.
which was two days before the Passover, and there the emphasis of the speech
lies especially in the word Thrice; as if he had said to him, Art thou so
confident of thy strength and standing for me? I tell thee the time will be,
when thou shall deny me thrice in the time of Cocks crowing. The second was at
the Passover supper, and then Christ puts the emphasis upon the word This
night: Art thou so confident? I tell thee this night thou shall deny me, etc.

Thus having showed that that supper in Ioh. 13. was not on the Passover
night, but before; a third thing is to show, that it was two days before the
Passover, and the same with that supper mentioned by Matthew and Mark in
Bethany: And for the proof of this we need go no further then this observation:
That both the Evangelists Matthew and Mark, do begin the treason of Judas from
that supper in Bethany, Matthew. 26.13, 14. Mark 14.9, 10. for as soon as they
have related the story of that supper, they presently tell, Then one of the
twelve called Judas went to the chief Prists, etc. Now it is apparent that he
began the acting of his treason from the time of Satan's entering into him with
the sop which was at that supper Ioh. 13. and so it concludes that to be the
same supper with that in Matthew. 26.6.

The texture of the story then lies thus: Six days before the Passover
Christ suppeth and lodges in Bethany: five days before the Passover he
rides in triumph to Jerusalem, and at even comes and lodges in Bethany
again, four days before the Passover he goes to Jerusalem again, and at
night comes to Bethany again to lodge. The third day before the Passover he
goes again into the City; and at even comes to Bethany again: And that night
he suppeth in the house of Simon the Leper, it being now two days to the
Passover: As he sits at supper, Mary the sister of Lazarus, called also Mary
Magdalen, annoints his head, etc. And he before the table was taken away,
arises from the table and washes the Disciples feet, and after sits down and
gives Judas the sop.

SECTION LXXXI. JOHN Chap. XIII. Ver. 27, 28, 29, 39. MATTHEW. Chap. XXVI. Ver.
14, 15, 16. MARK Chap. XIV. Ver. 10, 11. LUKE Chap. XXII. Ver. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Satan enters into Judas: he compacts for the betraying of his Master.
THe continuation of the story in John clears the connection. He dipped the
sop and gave it to Judas, And after the sop Satan entered into him. This was at
a supper in Bethany two days before the Passover, as has been showed: From
thence, though it were night, Judas trudgeth to Jerusalem, acted entirely by
Satan, and agrees with the Sanhedrin for his Masters betraying. They had met
purposely to contrive the apprehension and death of Christ, but had resolved,
that it must not be at the feast, for fear of tumult: but Judas coming in,
undertakes to deliver him up, though at the feast, yet quietly enough in the
absence of the people: And they bargain to give him thirty pieces of silver;
the price of a servant, Exodus 31.22. Maym. in Nizkei Mamon per. 11. The price
of servants whether great or little, whether male or female, is thirty Selas of
good silver; be he a servant worth a hundred pound, or be he a servant but
worth a penny. Now the same author in Shekalim per. 1. rateth Sela at 384 barley
corns weight in silver.

SECTION LXXXII. JOHN Chap. XIII. from Ver. 31, to the end. and Chap. XIV. all
the Chapters. CHRIST'S speech to comfort his Disciples, etc.
THe first words, Therefore when he was gone out, continue the story: When
Judas was gone out about his cursed work, and the hour was now come when
Christ's passion was beginning, [for we may justly take his being sold, for a
part of his sufferings] he gives his Disciples diverse lessons, some of
admonition, some of instruction, some of comfort. For the better judging of the
time of this speech [besides the connection which joins it to Judas his going
forth upon the devils entering into him with the sop] these two things are
observable. 1. That the last words of the 14th Chapter are, Arise, let us go
hence, by which it is plain, that the speech contained in this present Section,
and the speech in Ioh. 15, and 16, and 17. were spoken at two several times
and in two several places. That, at the Passover supper, for John tells,
Chap. 18.1. that when Jesus had finished that speech, he went over the brook
Kidron: but this, before, and in another place, because upon the ending of it
it is plain Jesus removed to another place, by his saying, Arise let us go
hence. 2. That Christ says, Yet a little time I am with you, Chap. 13. ver.
33. Yet a little while and the world sees me no more, Chap. 14. ver. 19.
Hereafter I shall not talk much with you, ver. 30. which intimate some space of
time yet to come, and not so sudden a parting, as the space was betwixt his
rising from his last supper, and his apprehension. This speech therefore was
spoken at Bethany after Judas his going out: and the Section contains the sum
of Christ's discourse with his Disciples, while he staid there, which was the
night that Judas received the sop, and the next day and night, and till toward
the evening of the day after: And the last words, Arise, let us go hence,
intimate his removal from Bethany to Jerusalem on the Passover day. Judas
either that night that he had received the sop, or the next day, lays the
plot with the Highpriests for the delivering up of his Master at the feast,
and having so done, he returns to his Master to Bethany again. And the next
day which was the Passover day, Christ sends Peter and John from thence to
prepare the Passover for him, and when he saw time, he calls, Arise, let us go
hence, and so he sets for Jerusalem with the rest of the Disciples and Judas
in the company.

SECTION LXXXIII. MATTHEW. Chap. XXVI. from Ver. 17. to Ver. 30. MARK Chap. XIV.
from Ver. 12. to Ver. 26. LUKE Chap. XXII. from Ver. 7. to Ver. 24. CHRIST
eats the Passover: ordains the Lords Supper, etc.
PETER and John who were sent to prepare the Passover, had this work to do.
They were to get a room fitting; to that their Master directs them by a sign.
They were to get a Lamb, and to bring him into the Temple, and there to have
him killed and his blood sprinkled, under the name of a Paschall for thirteen
persons. For no Lamb could be eaten for a Paschall, whose blood was not first
sprinkled at the Altar, and that (...) in the name of a Paschall, and (...) by
count for such a number of persons as had agreed to be at the eating of him.
Talm. in Pesachin. per. 5. [as Christ died but for a certain number.] Which
shows [had not the Evangelists done it otherwise] that Christ ate his Passover
on the same day that the Jews did theirs [which some, upon misunderstanding of
Ioh. 18.28. have denied] nay that it was not possible otherwise, for how
impossible was it to get the Priests to kill a Paschall for any, upon a wrong
day?

Having got the Lamb thus slain at the Temple, they were to bring him home to
the house where he was to be eaten, to get him roasted, and to get bread and
wine ready, and what other provision was usual and requisite for that meal.

At Even Jesus comes and sits down with the twelve: and as he ate, he gave
intimation of the Traitor, who was now at the table and eating with him. Which
might seem to make this story the same with that in Ioh. 13.21, 22. and so
might argue, that this and that were but one and the same Supper. But herein is
an apparent difference in the stories. 1. At the Supper in Ioh. 13. Christ
gives only a private signification of the Traitor by a token given secretly
to John, but here he points him out openly. 2. There he gives him a sop, here
he only speaks of dipping with him in the dish. Only there is some diversity in
the Evangelists, in relating this story: Matthew and Mark have laid this
taxation and discovery of the Traitor before the administration of the Lords
Supper, but Luke after.

And there is the like variety in their relating the time of these words of
Christ, I will no more drink of the fruit of the vine, etc. for Luke has
brought them in as spoken before the Sacrament, but the other two after. In
both which, first the main intent of the relation is to be looked after, and
then may we better state the time. The intent in the former, is to show Judas
at the Table, and at the Table all the time both of the Paschall and the Lords
Supper, those symboles of love and communion, yet he such a wretch as to
communicate in both, and yet a Traitor. The two, Matthew and Mark would show
that he was at the Table, and so the mention of that they bring in upon Christ's
first sitting down and beginning to eat: And Luke makes the story full, and
shows that he was at the Table all the time, both at Passover and Sacrament,
and the words of Christ upon the delivering of the Cup, But behold the hand of
him that betrays me, etc. cannot possibly be mitigated from such a
construction. As to the later, the meaning of Christ in the words, I will no
more drink of the fruit of the vine, etc. is, that the Kingdom of God was now
so near, that this was the last meat and drink, or the last meal that he was to
have, before that came. By the Kingdom of God, meaning his resurrection and
forward, when God by him had conquered death, Satan and hell. And whereas he
says, Till I drink it n^w with you in the Kingdom of God, he did so, eating
and drinking with them after his resurrection. This therefore being the aim of
his speech, it was seasonable to say so, any time of the meal, This is the last
meal I must eat with you till I be risen again from the dead. And hereupon the
Evangelists have left the time of his uttering of it at that indifferency, that
they have done. And indeed these two passages had such reference one to
another, that the one might bring on the other, and both of them might very
well be spoken by Christ twice: The observing of the direct order of Christ's
actions at this meal, which the Evangelists have related, will help to clear
this matter.

When he was set down with them, he first says, I have desired to eat this
Passover with you before I suffer, for this is the last I must eat with you
before the Kingdom of God be come. And thereupon he takes the first cup of
wine that was to be drunk at that meal, and drinks of it and gives it them, and
bids, Divide it among your selves, for I shall not drink of the fruit of the
vine, etc. meaning, this is the last time I shall eat and drink with you, etc.
And this speech properly brought in the other, One of you shall betray me: as
paraphrased, speaking thus, I shall no more eat with you, for there is one now
at the table with me, has compassed my death. Hereupon they question who it
should be, etc. After this passage they eat the Paschall Lamb after its rite,
and after it, he ordains the Lords Supper: Bread to be his Body henceforward,
in the same sense that the Paschall Lamb had been his Body hitherto, and the
Cup to be the New Testament in his Blood now under the Gospel, as the blood of
Bullocks had been the Old Testament in his Blood, Exodus 24. And after the
administering of the Cup, he tells them again, that that was the last that he
must drink, for the hand of him that betrayed him was at the Table.

SECTION LXXXIV. LUKE Chap. XXII. from Ver. 24. to Ver. 39. A contest among the
Disciples about priority.
LUKE himself is a clear warrant for the order. And withal, the joint
consideration of the story before will help to confirm it. The question among
themselves about the traitor, helps to draw on this other question about
priority: An unseasonable and a very unreasonable quarrel: To which their
Master gives closely this twofold answer, besides proposing his own example of
humility. 1. That let not them stand upon priority, for he would equally honor
them in his Kingdom, etc. 2. That this was not a time to stand upon such
business as seeking to be preferred one before another, for this was a time of
sifting, and a time when all the care they could take for their safety should
be little enough: therefore they had now something else to do then to look
after precedence.

SECTION LXXXV. JOHN Chap. XV, XVI, XVII. CHRIST'S last words to his Disciples
and a Prayer for them.
JOHN in Chap. 18.1. informs us that when Jesus had spoken the words contained
in these Chapters, he went over the brook Kidron: by which it appears that
they were spoken at his last Supper instantly before he rose and went to the
garden where he was apprehended. At their Passover Suppers they used large
discourses seasonable and agreeable to the occasion: and especially in
commemorating what God had done for that people. Whatsoever Christ had spoken
upon that subject, is not recorded, but this which was more needful for the
Disciples present condition, were agreeable to the great occasion now at hand,
and most beneficial for the Church in time to come.

SECTION LXXXVI. MAT. Chapter XXVI. from V. 30. to the end, and Chapter XXVII. all.
MAR. Chapter XIV. from Ver. 26. to the end, and Chapter XV. all. LUKE Chapter XXII. from V.
39. to the end, and Chapter XXIII. all. JOHN Chapter XVIII. and Chapter XIX. all the
Chapters. CHRIST'S Apprehension, Arraignment, Death and Burial.
THere is no difficulty in the connection of the beginning of this Section to
the preceding, but only this, that the rest of the Evangelists make mention of
Christ's singing of an hymn, as the last thing he did, before his setting out
for the mount of Olives; but John makes his speech and prayer to be last, and
speaks not of his singing of a hymn at all. Which indeed is neither
contrariety nor diversity of story, but only variety of relation for the
holding out of the story more complete. The three former Evangelists have
recorded how Christ did celebrate the Passover and ordain the Sacrament at the
end of it, and therefore they properly speak of his singing an hymn, for that
was ever an unseparable piece of service at the Passover Supper, and
constantly used at the conclusion of that meal: But John had made no mention of
the Passover Supper or Sacrament at all, and therefore it was not only not
needful, but also not proper, that he should mention the singing of any hymn
at all: But he relates the last speech and prayer of Christ, which the other
had omitted. And whether this speech recorded by him, or the hymn mentioned by
them, were last done by Christ, is not much material to the order of the
story. I suppose the speech was later. The hymn that they sung was Psalm. 115.
and 116. and 117. and 118. which was the later part of the great Hallel as they
called it, which was constantly sung at the Passover and their other great
Solemnities, and with this later part was this Solemnity concluded.

His Prayer in the Garden.
CHRIST rising from Supper, goes forth of the City over the brook Kidron to
the mount of Olives. [Compare David's case and journey, 2 Samuel 15.23.] Judas
when they rose from the table, slips away into the City, and there has his
cutthroats laid ready by the chief Priests, for the cursed design that they
had compacted about. As Christ goes along he tells the eleven that were with
him, of their trouble that night by his apprehension, and their scattering from
him: but he would be in Galilee before them, and there they should meet again.
And so he directs them which way to betake themselves after the Feast, and
what to do when their Master should be taken from them by death. He foretells
Peter again of his denial of him that night: which Peter now armed with a
sword cannot hear of, but promises great matters.

He comes to Gethsemany, A place of Oil presses, at the foot of Olivet, into a
Garden. The Talmudists speak of the Gardens here, and tell how the Gardiners
used to fatten their grounds with the scouring of the sink that carried the
blood and filth of the Temple Court into that valley. Leaving eight Disciples
behind, he takes Peter and James and John with him, and imparteth to them the
fears and sorrows that now seized upon him, and leaving them also about a
stones cast behind, charging them to watch and pray: He prays thrice for the
removal of this Cup if possible, etc. and in an Agony he sweats drops like
blood. [Remember Adams fall in a Garden, and the first doom, In the sweat of
thy brows, etc.] Now was the power of darkness, Luke 22.23. all the power of
hell being let loose against Christ, as it never was against person upon earth
before or since, and that from the pitching of this field of old, Genesis 3.15.
Thou shall bruise his heel. So that it was not so much for any p^^gs of hell
that Christ felt within him, as for the assaults of hell, that he saw enlarged
against him, that he was so full of sorrow and anguish. His desiring the
removal of the Cup was purae humanitatis, but his submitting to the will of
God purae sanctitatis: As when a gangrened member is to be cut off, pura natura
relucts against it, but right reason yields to it. He prayed thrice, and after
every time came to his three Disciples, and still found them sleeping.

His Apprehension.
He had scarce awakened them at the third time, when the Traitor and his
Assasines are upon him to apprehend him. At their first approach Judas
according to the sign given, that his fellow-villains might know Jesus from the
rest, steppeth to him and kisseth him. And thereupon the rest draw up near him.
Jesus steppeth forward to meet them, and asks, Whom seek ye? They say, Jesus
of Nazareth: he says I am he: and thereupon they went backward and fell to the
ground: And his thus confounding them with a word, showed, that none could take
his life from him, unless he laid it down of himself. While they lie on the
ground, and he has them thus under him, he indents for the dismission of his
Disciples, and having agreed for their safety and discharge, he yields himself.
So up they got, and lay hold upon him: and Peter to show some of his promised
stoutness cuts off Malchus ear, but Christ heals the wound. With this wretched
crew that apprehended him, there were some of their Masters that set them on,
Luke 22.52. To all together he tells, that it was plain it was now their hour
and the power of darkness, for that they had him so often among them in the
Temple, that they were never able to lay hands on him till now: Upon these
words the Disciples think it time to shift for themselves: And one flees away
naked.

His appearance before Annas.
Besides the ill account that these men could give of this nights Passover [no
sooner eaten, but their hands in blood] and besides the horrid offense they
committed against the Lord and against his Christ in this fact that they were
upon, they doubly transgressed against their own Canons: namely in arraigning
and condemning a person upon a holiday, for such a day was now come in: and
arraigning and judging a person by night, both which are directly forbidden by
their Law. Tal. in Iom tobh per. 5. halac. 2.

They first bring Christ to Annas, And why? For he was neither chief
Magistrate, but Gamaliel; nor he Highpriest, but Caiaphas: He was indeed Sagan,
and father in Law to Caiaphas, but by neither of these relations had he
Judicial power as a single man. But as the chief Priests had a special hand
in this business, and Annas was chief among them by his place and relation to
Caiaphas, and so had had no doubt a singular stroke in contriving this
business that was now transacting: so upon his apprehension he is first
brought thither, to show that they had the man sure whom he so much desired to
be secured, and to take his grave advice what further to do with him. He was
brought bound to him, and so bound he sends him to Caiaphas.

His Arraignment before the Sanhedrin.
At Caiaphas his house was the Sanhedrin now assembled: Whether we take this
for his lodgings in the Temple, or his house in the City it is not much
material. Peter follows thither, and by another Disciple that was acquainted
there, he is helped into the Hall, and sits with the servants by the fire. The
chief Priests and Elders were busy to find out witnesses that might accuse
him, and though many false witnesses [(...) in Talmudich language] come in, yet
all will not do: for it was not possible to touch him of any offense. He all
this while standing silent [ Isa. 53.7.] Caiaphas adjures him to tell whether
he were the Christ or no, he confesses it, and withal tells them that the time
should come that they should find the truth of this by experience, when he
should show his power and vengeance in his judgment against them, and their
City, coming in clouds, etc. This confession and words they account blasphemy:
and that they might have the surer impression of so construing them, Caiaphas
rents his garments, and by that action would, as it were, force them to agree
with him that it was so, when his garments had paid so dear, for the confirming
of it. Their custom and reason of renting their clothes upon the hearing of
blasphemy, is handled in Ierus. in Sanhedr. fol. 25. col. 1. and 2. and in
Maym. in Avodah Zarah. per. 2. where those two Canons being observed, Every one
that hears Gods name blasphemed, is bound to rent his garments: And The Judges
hearing blasphemy must stand up upon their feet, and must rent their clothes
and may not sew them up again. It will cause us to observe something in it,
that the Highpriest only rent his clothes, and not the rest of the Bench with
him. Which though they did not, yet they vote with him, that it was blasphemy,
and therefore he was guilty of death: which had it been executed, must have
been by stoning. Sanhedr. per. 7. halac. 4. And now they begin to spit on him,
to buffet him and abuse him.

Peter's denial.
Here Peter first denies him: for being challenged as he sat by the fire, by
the damsel porter, for one of his company, he denies it, and shrinks away into
the porch, and then the first Cock crew. Luke says that the maid came to him
as he sat by the fire: Matthew and Mark, that he was now beneath in the
Palace, and without in the Palace, meaning, beneath or without from that place
or room where the Bench sat. Betwixt this first denial and the second, there
was but a little while, Luke 22.55. In the space between, the Highpriest is
questioning Jesus of his Disciples and Doctrine, and because he answers, Ask
them that have heard me, etc. an officious Officer smites him, as if he had not
answered with reverence enough. Peter this while was in the porch, where he was
when the Cock crew after his first denial: and there another maid sees him and
brings him to the company that stood by the fire, and challenges him for one of
his Disciples, and now he denies with an oath. And about an hour after, Luke
22.59. [which space of time the Bench took up in examining Christ about his
Disciples and Doctrine] a kinsman of Malchus challenges him, and tells the
company he saw him with Jesus in the Garden, and he pleading the contrary, is
discovered to all the company to be a Galilean by his Dialect, but he denies
with execrations: and presently the second Cock crew: And Jesus looking back
upon him, he remembers what he had done and goes out and weeps bitterly. And so
presently after the second Cock the Bench rises and leaves Jesus in the hands
of their Officers, by whom he is taunted, stricken and shamefully used.

His being delivered up to the Roman power.
In the morning the Sanhedrin met formally in their own Council chamber, and
again question Jesus [brought there before them, and they resolved to put him
to death] Whether he were the Messiah or no? he gives the same answer as
before, that though they would not believe him if he told them he was, which
was the truth, yet the time was coming when they should find it true: They
question him again, Art thou the Son of God? which he not denying, they judge
him a blasphemer again and deserving to die, and so deliver him up to the
secular power. It is observable in both these questionings of him upon this
point, both in the night, and now in the morning, how convertible terms the Son
of God, and the Son of man are made. In the night they question him, Art thou
the Son of God? He answers, Ye shall see the Son of man, etc. Mat. 26.63, 64.
And now in the morning again he says, Ye shall see the Son of man sitting on
the right hand of power: and they reply, Art thou then the Son of God? Luke
22.69, 70.

Judas his Recantation and Ruin.
Judas unquiet in mind for what he had done in betraying, attends the trials,
and waits the issue: and when he now saw that he was condemned by the Bench to
be delivered up to the Heathen power, he steps in, and offers his money again,
and confesses he had betrayed innocent blood, and this probably as Christ
stood by. Having received a surly answer again from them, he flings down his
money in the Temple where they sat [ Gazith or Hhavoth, it is not seasonable to
question here] and departing, is snatched by the devil who was bodily in him,
into the air, and there strangled, and flung down headlong to the earth, and
all his bowels burst out. With the thirty pieces of silver, his wages of
iniquity, the Priests consult to buy the Potters field. And here a quotation of
Matthew has troubled Expositors so far, that diverse have denied the purity
of the Text. His words are these, Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by
Jeremy the Prophet, And they took the thirty pieces of silver, etc. Matthew.
27.9. Whereas those words are not to be found in Jeremy at all, but in Zechary
they are found, Zech. 11.13.

Now Matthew speaks according to an ordinary manner of speaking used among the
Jews, and by them would easily and without cavil be understood, though he cited
a text o^ Zechary under the name of Jeremy: For the illustration of which
matter we must first produce a record of their own. The Babylon Talmud in Bava
Bathra, fol. 14. facie 2. is discoursing concerning the order in which the
Books of the old Testament were ordered and ranked of old. And first they show
that there was this general division of it, into (...) The Law, the Prophets,
and the Hagiographa. By the last, meaning The Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
Canticles, Job, Ruth, Esther, etc. Then do they tell, that the Books were
particularly thus ranked: The five Books of Moses, Joshua, Judges, Samuel,
Kings: and then the Prophets, among whom Jeremy was set first, and then
Ezekiel, and after him Esaias, and then the twelve. But they object, was not Esaias
long before Jeremy and Ezekiel in time? Why should he then be set after them in
order? And they give this answer, The last Book of Kings ends with destruction,
and Jeremy is all destruction. Ezekiel begins with destruction and ends with
comfort, and Esaias is all comfort. (...) Therefore they joined destruction and
destruction together, and comfort and comfort together. And thus in their
Bibles of old, Jeremy came next after the Book of Kings, and stood first in the
volume of the Prophets. So that Matthews alleging of a Text of Zechary, under
the name of Jeremy, does but allege a Text out of the volume of the Prophets,
under his name that stood first in that volume: And such a manner of speech is
that of Christ, Luke 24.44. All things must be fulfilled which are written of
me in the Law, and the Prophets and the Psalms: in which he follows the
general division that we have mentioned, only he calls the whole third part,
or Hagiographa, by the title the Psalms, because the Book of Psalms stood
first of all the Books of that part. In that saying Matthew. 16.14. Others say
Jeremy, or one of the Prophets, there is the same reason why Jeremy alone is
named by name, viz. because his name stood first in the volume of the Prophets;
and so came first in their way when they were speaking of the Prophets.

CHRIST'S Arraignment before Pilate.
The chief Priests and Elders bring Jesus to Pilate, but would not go into his
house [the house of a Heathen] lest they should be defiled, but that they might
eat the Passover, Ioh. 18.28. Why? They had eaten the Passover over night, at
the same time that Jesus ate his [and well they had spent the night after it.]
But this day that was now come in, was (...) their day of presenting themselves
in the Temple, and offering their sacrifices and peace offerings, of which they
were to keep a solemn feasting, and this John calls the Passover: In which
sense Passover bullocks are spoken of, Deuteronomy. 16.2. 2 Chronicles. 30.24. and 35.8,
9. The School of Shammai says, their appearing was with two pieces of silver,
and their chagigah with a Meah of silver. But the School of Hillel says, their
appearing was with a Meah of silver, and their chagigah with two pieces of
silver. Their burnt offerings at this solemnity were taken from among common
cattle, but their peace offerings from their tithes. He that keeps not the
chagigah on the first day of the feast, must keep it all the feast, etc.
Chagigah per. 1.

Pilate conceives him brought to him as a common malefactor, and therefore he
bids them take him back and Judge him by their own Bench and Law: and in these
words he meant really and according as the truth was, that it was in their
power to judge and execute him, and needed not to trouble him with him. And
when they answer, We may not put any man to death, Joh. 18.31. They speak truly
also, and as the thing was indeed, but the words of Pilate and theirs were not
ad idem: (...) It is a tradition that forty years before the Temple was
destroyed capital Judgments were taken away from them. Jerus. in Sanhedr. fol.
18 col. 1. But how? Not by the Romans, for they permitted them the use of their
Religion, Laws, Magistracy, capital and penal executions and judgments in
almost all cases, as freely as ever they had: and that both in their Sanhedrins
within the Land, and in their Synagogues without, as far as the power of the
Synagogues could reach at any time: as might be proved abundantly, if it were
to be insisted on here.

The words then of these men to Pilate are true indeed, That they could put no
man to death, but this was not, as if the Romans had deprived the Sanhedrin of
its power, but because thieves, murderers and malefactors of their own Nation
were grown so numerous, strong and heady that they had overpowred the
Sanhedrins power, that it could not, it durst not execute capital penalties
upon offenders as it should have done. And this their own Writings witness.
Juchasin fol. 21. The Sanhedrin flitted forty years before the destruction of
the Temple, namely from that time that the Temple doors opened of their own
accord, and Rabban Iochanan ben Zaccai rebuked them and said, O Temple, Temple,
Zechary of old prophesied of thee saying, Open thy doors O Lebanon that the
fire may enter, etc. And also because that murderers increased, and they were
unwilling to judge Capital matters, they flitted from place to place, even to
Iabneh, etc. which also is asserted in Shabb. fol. 51. Avodah Zarah. fol. 8.

When they perceive that Pilate no more received the impression of their
accusation of him as a malefactor like others, they then accuse him of Treason,
as forbidding to pay Tribute to Caesar, and as saying that he himself was a
King: and this they thought would do the business. Pilate hereupon takes him
in into his Judgment Hall [for hitherto the Jews conference and his had been
at his gate] and questions him upon this point, and Jesus plainly confesses
that he was a King, but his Kingdom not of this world [and therefore he needed
not from him to fear any prejudice to the Roman power] and so well satisfies
Pilate, that he brings him out to the gate again, where the Jews stood, and
professes that he found no fault in him at all. Then the Jews lay in fresh
accusations against him, to which he answers not a word.

Brought before Herod.
Pilate by a word that dropped from them, understanding that he was of Galilee,
Herod's Jurisdiction, sent him to Herod, who was now at Jerusalem: partly
because he would be content to have shut his hands of him, and partly because
he would court Herod, toward the reconciling of old heart-burnings between
them. And now Jesus sees the monster that had murdered his forerunner. Herod
was glad to see him, and had desired it a long time, and now hoped to have got
some miracles from him, but he got not so much as one word: though he
questioned him much, and the Jews who had followed him thither did vehemently
accuse him. The old Fox had sought and threatened his death before, Luke 13.31,
32. and yet now has him in his hands, and lets him go [only abused and mocked
and gorgeously arraied] and so sends him back to Pilate, that so he might court
him again, more then for any content he had that he should escape his hands.
See Acts 4.27.

Before Pilate again.
Pilate at his gate again talks with the Jews, and motions the release of the
Prisoner, and whether him or Barabbas: and leaves it to their thoughts and
goes to his Judgment seat again. By this time is his Lady stirring, and
understanding what business was in hand, she sends to him about her dream. He
goes to the gate again, inquires what is their vote about the Prisoners
release: they are all for Barabbas. He puts it to the vote again, and they are
the same still: he urges a third time, and pleads the innocence of Jesus,
but they still urge for his crucifying. Then calls he for water, and washes his
hands, but instantly imbrues them in his blood.

By this time it was the third hour of the day, or about nine a clock, the time
of the beginning of the morning Sacrifice. Hence Mark begins to count, Mark
15.25. namely, from the time that Pilate delivered him up. He is whipped by
Pilate, led into the Praetorium by the soldiers, Crowned with thorns [remember
the earths first curse, Genesis 3.18.] arraied in scarlet, and a reed put into his
hand for a Scepter. and in this garb Pilate brings him forth to the gate to
them again, and publishes again that he found no fault in him. They urge that
he ought to die because he said he was the Son of God. This startles Pilate,
and in he takes him again and re-examines him, but he would give him no answer,
but only, Thou could have no power over me, unless it were given thee from
above, etc. Hereupon he goes out to the gate again, and urges for his release
more then ever. They answer, Then he is no friend of Caesar, and this knocks the
business dead. In therefore he goes again and brings out Jesus and sits down
upon another Tribunal in public, and Jesus standing before him in his scarlet
Robes and thorny Crown, he tells the Jews, Here is your King: Our King? say
they, Away with him, crucify him. What? says he, Shall I crucify your King?
They answer, We have no King but Caesar. Compare Zech. 11.6. where their
destruction is threatened to be by their King Caesar: as it was by Vespasian.

Then he delivers him up to be crucified: and it was the Preparation of the
Passover, and about the sixth hour, Joh 19.14. John seems the rather to have
added this circumstance, not only to state the time [which indeed was of
weighty concernment] but also to brand these Jews impiety, and neglect of their
Religion for the satisfying of their malice. This day was a very high day, of
their appearance in Temple and their Chagigah [as we touched before] and in the
morning they durst not go into Pilates Palace for fear of defiling, and lest
they should be prevented of these great devotions, and yet the day is thus
far spent, and nothing done but only they have purchased the shedding of so
innocent blood.

But John in this passage lays two visible scruples before us: Quest. 1. How
is it possible to reconcile him and Mark together, when Mark says, It was the
third hour and they crucified him, Mark 15.25. whereas he tells us, It was the
sixth hour when Pilate delivered him up? Answ. 1. If we cast up in our thoughts
how many things were done this day before his nailing to his Cross, it cannot
be imaginable that they were all done before the third hour of the day. The
Sanhedrin meet, sit in Counsel, examine the Prisoner and vote him guilty;
Bring him to Pilates Palace, there have manifold canvasses with Pilate pro and
contra about him; Bring him to Herod, where he is questioned about many things:
his garments changed and gorgeous Robes put upon him, and sent back to Pilate
again. Then a fresh canvasse about him or Barabbas to be released, and Pilate
puts them to a three-times deliberation upon it. Then overcome with their
importunity, washes his hands, scourges him, and delivers him up to them to
be abused. The soldiers lead him into the Hall, make a Crown of thorns, divest
and vest him anew, and make sport with him at pleasure. Pilate again brings him
forth, and anew seeks and labors his release: brings him in again and enters a
new serious examination of him, hearing mention of his being the Son of God:
Goes out again and labors all he can for his deliverance, but being taxed that
then he could not be Cesars friend, he goes to the Bench and formally passes
sentence upon him, writes the title of his Cross, the Jews in the mean while
abusing him. Then i^ he lead forth out of the City bearing his Cross, and
brought to the place of execution, which was a good way off, stripped, has wine
mingled with myrrh given him to drink, which he refuses, is nailed to the
Cross, his garments parted, and then Mark brings this in, And it was the third
hour, and they crucified him. Now this great multitude of various passages can
hardly be conceived possible to have been gone through by the third hour of the
day or nine of the clock in the morning, no not though the Jews had bent
themselves to dispatch before that time, which was far from their thoughts.
2. Mark therefore in that calculation of the time, takes his date from the
first time that Pilate gave him up to their abusings: and his phrase may be
taken of so comprehensive an intimation, as to speak both the time of his first
giving up, at the third hour of the day, and the time of his nailing to his
Cross, the third hour from that. And much after the same manner of account
that our Saviors six hours sufferings, from Pilates first giving him up, to
his dying, are reckoned: So the 430 years of sojourning of the children of
Israel in Egypt, Exodus 12. are computed, namely, the one half before they came
into Egypt, and the other half after. Quest. 2. But it may justly move a second
quaere, How Christ could be on his Cross and darkness begun from the sixth
hour, as the other Evangelists record it, when John says that it was but about
the sixth hour when Pilate delivered him up? Which words of John as they raise
the scruple, so they may give the answer: For it might very properly be said,
and that according to the usual speech of the Nation, that it was about the
sixth hour, when the sixth hour was but now beginning, and by the time that it
was completed all that might be dispatched, that passed betwixt his sentencing
and his being raised upon the Cross.

Crucified.
Sentence of death was passed upon him as he stood in his scarlet Robes and
thorny Crown: and when the Jews have now their desire, they mock him, suddenly
strip him, and put on his own clothes. Then taking him away to the place of
execution, they lay his Cross upon him [such engines of death doubtless lay
always ready about the Judgment Hall] and so as Isaac in the figure, he first
bare the wood, that afterward must bear him, Genesis 22.6, 9. The place of
execution was without the City, (...) as the Talmudists do determine in Talm.
Bab. Sanhedr. fol. 42.2. [See how the Apostle applies this to his suffering for
the Gentiles, Heb. 13.12.]

By the time he was come out of the City gates, they observe that he is
overburdened with his Cross, and thereupon they force Simon a Cyrenian [some
noted Disciple belike] to bear the end of it after him.

They come to the place of execution commonly called Golgotha [not the place of
graves, but] the place of souls: where though there were indeed some burial of
the executed, yet was it in such a manner that the place deserved this name
rather then the other: For they buried not an executed person in the grave of
his fathers, but there were two places of burial for such: one for them that
were slain with the sword and strangled, and the other for them that were burnt
and stoned: and when the flesh was wasted, the bones were gathered and buried
in the graves of their fathers: Talm. ubi supr. fol. 46.1. The proper writing
and pronunciation of the word had been Golgolta, but use had now brought it to
be uttered Golgotha, which very pronunciation the Samaritan Version uses in
Number. 1.

They first strip him, and then offer him intoxicating wine, which when he
tasted he refused to drink. (...) When any person was brought forth to be put
to death, they gave him to drink some frankincense in a cup of wine, that it
might stupifie him: as it is said, Give strong drink to him that is ready to
perish, and wine to those that be of heavy hearts. And there is a tradition,
that the Gentlewomen of Jerusalem afforded this of their good will, etc* Tal.
Bab. ibid. fol. 43.1. And let it not be impertinent to add that which
immediately follows in the same page: A crier went before him that was to be
executed, which proclaimed, N. the son of N. is going to execution because he
has committed such a fact, and N. and N. are witnesses against him, if there
be any that can clear him, let them speak. And instantly after: There is a
tradition that they hanged Jesus on the eve of the Passover, and a Crier went
before him forty days, Such a one goes to be put to death, because he has
bewitched, deceived, and perverted Israel: if any one can say any thing for his
clearing, let him come and speak: but they found no clearing of him, therefore
they hanged him upon the eve of the Passover, etc.

He is nailed to his Cross hands and feet, and so the Jews themselves confess
Abel [his figure] to have been wounded by Cain, Tanch. fol. 3. col. 4. and
Isaac to have been bound on the Altar: Idem fol. 12. col. 2. And with him are
crucified two malefactors, [compare Joseph betwixt two offenders, Genesis 40.]
(...), in Josephus his construction, will help us to understand the sense of
the word here. Four soldiers part his garments and cast lots for his coat and
sit down to watch him.

Over his head was his cause written, in the expression of which the variety of
the Evangelists shows their style, and how where one speaks short another
inlargeth, and what need of taking all together to make up the full story. Mark
has it, The King of the Jews. Luke, This is the King of the Jews. Matthew,
This is Jesus the King of the Jews. John, Jesus of Nazareth the King of the
Jews: Where the main thing regarded is, that he was condemned for taking on him
to be King of the Jews as they pretended, which was also pretended to be
Treason against Caesar: and to this point all the Evangelists speak alike, and
their variety is only in wording this for the readers understanding: and he
that spoke shortest spoke enough to express the matter of his accusation: and
the rest that speak larger are but a comment upon the same thing. The three
tongues in which this was written, Hebrew, Greek and Latin, are thus spoken of
in Midras Tillin fol. 25. col. 4. R. Iochanan says, There are three tongues.
The Latin tongue for war, The Greek tongue for speech, and the Hebrew for
prayer.

All sorts of people had followed him to the execution: Some openly wept for
him and bewailed him, which was not a thing usual in such cases. In the
Talmudich Tract last cited fol. 46.2. there is this strange doctrine, (...)
They bewailed not him that went to be executed, but only mourned inwardly for
him. And what think you was the reason? The Gloss tells you thus, They bewailed
him not, because his disgrace might be his expiation: meaning, that whereas
they accounted, that the more shame and punishment a condemned person suffered,
the more these tended to his expiation, they therefore would not openly bewail
him, for that would have been some honor to him, and so would have abated of
his expiation; but none lamenting for him, it was the greater disgrace, and the
greater the disgrace the better was his sin [as they thought] expiated, and
atoned for. This strange custom and opinion, does set forth this public
bewailing of Christ the more remarkably.

Others, when he was now raised upon his Cross reviled him, among whom were
the chief Priests, Scribes, and Elders: who had so little to do, or rather
their malice so much as to attend the execution. They were at first in some
hesitancy whether he would not deliver himself by miracle: but when they saw he
did not, then they triumph and insult at no measure. Nay, the thieves that were
crucified with him spared him not, for so Matthew and Mark tell us, but at last
one of them becomes a convert and receives assurance of being that day with him
in Paradise. [(...) a phrase very usual with them.] Compare the case of
Joseph's fellow prisoners, Genesis 40. the one desiring him to remember him and
escaping, and the other not.

It may be, the darkness now begun, in an extraordinary and dreadful manner,
was some means of working upon this thief for his conviction that Jesus was the
Messiah: For instantly upon his raising upon his Cross, it was now the sixth
hour or high Noon complete; and the darkness began, and continued till three a
clock afternoon: the very space of time of the day that Adam lay in darkness
without the promise, from the time of his Fall till God came and revealed
Christ to him.

By the Cross stood the mother of Jesus now a widow, and as it seems,
destitute of maintenance, therefore he commends her to the care and charge of
his beloved Disciple John. (...) A widow was to be maintained out of the estate
of her husbands heirs until she received her dowry. Maym. in (...) per. 18.
But the poverty of Joseph and Mary afforded neither heritage, nor dower, nor
had they any children but Jesus who was now dying. If those that are called the
brethren of Jesus were the sons of Joseph by another wife, as some have thought
them, they had been fittest to have been charged with the maintenance of the
widow.

About the ninth hour Jesus cries out, Eli, Eli lama sabachthani, that is, My
God, my God, why have thou left me? Not forsaken him, as to the feeling of any
spiritual desertion, but why left to such hands and to such cruel usage? Some
said hereupon he called Elias: but was this said in mockery? or indeed did they
think his words Eli, Eli meant Elias? Two things might make them really think
so: the unusualnesse of the word Eli or Elohi in their Syriack tongue, the word
Mari being it by which they commonly expressed the sense of that. And 2. the
common opinion and legends that they had of Elias his coming to comfort and
resolve men in distress and perplexity, of which their Talmuds give not a few
examples.

Complaining of thirst he had vinegar given him, which having tasted, and
feeling the pangs of death come upon him, he says, It is finished, and giving
up a great cry, and committing his spirit to God, he dies [at the time of the
evening sacrifice.] At which instant there was an earthquake which rent the
rocks: and the vail of the Temple was then also rent in the middle: The Priest
that offered incense that evening sacrifice time, could bring an amazed
testimony of this, when he came forth. The renting of the rocks light in such a
place as where were the graves of many Saints hewn out, which now were opened
[and showed the conquest over the grave] and at another earthquake at which
Christ's grave was opened on the morning of his resurrection, the mouldred
bodies of these graves revived, and after his rising they came out of the
graves also and came into the holy City. Observe that Matthew calls Jerusalem
The holy City, when it has now murdered Christ, chap. 27.53. How great a
matter must it be that must unchurch a Nation?

The Centurion and the company present, at the sight of what strange things had
occurred, return much affected and full of thoughts about what was done: As the
evening grew on, the Jews desire and obtain that the legs of them might be
broken so to hasten their end, that they might not hang on the Cross all
night. This dispatcheth the penitent thief [howsoever it did the other] as we
may conclude from the words of Christ that told him of being that day in
Paradise: But Christ being dead already they brake no bone of him, but one with
a spear pierces him, and out of his side comes water and blood distinct and
discernable the one from the other.

At Even Joseph of Aramathaea [Samuels Town, 1 Samuel 1.1.] a Priest or a Levite,
one of the (...) Council Chamger of the Temple, begs the body of Jesus, which
otherwise should have been buried in the common graves of malefactors, and
intombs it in his own Tomb, Nicodemus joining with him, and the women observing
where he was laid, go and prepare spices for his further imbalming when the
Sabbath was over: all showing their love to him, but in this very action
showing their little expecting his Resurrection.

SECTION LXXXVII. MATTHEW. Chap. XXVIII. from the beginning to Ver. 16. MARK
Chap. XVI. from the begin. to Ver. 12. LUKE Chap. XXIV. from the begin, to Ver.
13. JOHN Chap. XX. from the beg. to Ver. 19. CHRIST'S Resurrection, his first
appearing, viz. to Mary Magdalen.
AS for the subsequence of this Section to the preceding, there can be no
scruple, but it requires some heedfulnesse, to lay the story in it, in its
proper currency, because of some seeming diversities in the four in their
relating the story of it.

The Lord of life was under death about 36 hours: and so long was that day
wherein the Sun stood still in the time of Joshua: as Kimchi says, it is the
acknowledgement of the Jews: on Josh. 10.

Christ himself calls this space three days and three nights, Matthew. 12.40.
whereas it was but two nights and one whole day, and two small parts of two
more. And yet herein he speaks warrantably even by the known and allowed
Dialect of the Nation. Both the Talmuds in the Treatise Shabbah per. 9. do
dispute about the three days that Israel separated from their wives before the
giving of the Law, Exodus 19.15. and among other things they have these
passages: R. Akibah made the day a (...) and the night a (...) And so did R.
Ismael. But this is a tradition, R. Eliezer ben Azariah says, (...) A day and
a night make a (...), and a part of a (...) is accounted as the whole. Observe
these last words to the purpose that we are upon: Three natural days by this
rule were three (...), and any part of any of these, was accounted as the whole
of it.

The Evangelists seem to differ somewhat in the mention of the time of the
women's coming to the sepulcher. John says Mary Magdalen came while it was yet
dark. Matthew, when it began to dawn: whereas Mark says, she and the other
women came thither at Sunrising: All which together speak the story to the full
to this tenor. That at the dawning, and while it was yet dark, the women as
soon as they could see [at the least Mary Magdalen] set out to go to the
Sepulcher: and that was at the very instant of Christ's rising, when there was a
great earthquake and an Angel came and rolled away the stone. Mary Magdalen
came from Bethany, from her brother Lazarus his house [if she came from her own
home] and the other women were at their several lodgings, and to get them all
together [for they were to go about this work all together] would spend some
time: so that though Mary were so early stirring, yet before they were all got
together to the Sepulcher it was Sunrising. These women little knew of the
watch that was set over the grave, and the sealing of the stone [which was done
on the morning of the Sabbath] for all their care is how to get the stone
rolled away. When they come there, they find that done already [and the watch
was fled] and the Angel that had rolled it away sitting on it on the right hand
of the entering in, and when they were entered in they saw another Angel, which
both told them of his being risen. And thus Matthew and Mark that mention but
one Angel, are to be reconciled to Luke who speaks of two.

The women return and tell the Disciples what they had seen, but their words
seemed to them as idle tales: yea Mary her self yet believed not that he was
risen: It is worth studying upon the faith of the Disciples: it was a saving
faith in Christ, and yet they believed not that he should die till he was dead,
nor believed that he should rise again, no not when he was now risen.

Peter and John run to the Sepulcher, and Mary Magdalen follows them: They
see the body gone and the clothes lying there [and John proves the first that
believes his resurrection] and they return home, but Mary stays there weeping
still: And looking in, she sees two Angels, the one at the head and the other
at the feet where the body had lain [like the two Cherubins at either end of
the Ark:] And looking behind her she sees Jesus, and thought it had been the
Gardener, but presently knew him, and comes away to bring the Disciples word.
Here Matthew speaks short: for he mentions but one journey of the women to
the grave and back, and says that as they came back Jesus met them. Whereas
Mary had two journeys, and it was she alone that met him, and that in her
second return. As she returned now the watchmen are come into the City, and
bribed to deny that he was risen, and so the chief Priests and Elders give
money to hire the Nation into unbelief.

SECTION LXXXVIII. LUKE Chap. XXIV. from Ver. 13. to Ver. 36. MARK Chap. XVI.
Ver. 12, 13. His second appearing: viz. to Peter and Alpheus going to Emmaus.
THe same day in the afternoon two of them went to Emmaus a Town sixty
furlongs, or seven miles and a half from Jerusalem. Josephus places it at the
very same distance De Bello lib. 7. cap. 27. calling it there Ammaus, and
relating how Vespasian after the destruction of Jerusalem, gave it for the
habitation of some of the Roman soldiery left there. But in Antiq. lib. 17.
cap. 12. he calls it Emmaus, and relates how it was fired by Varus, etc. It lay
in the way toward some part of Galilee, and it may be these two men were now
returning home thither, and intended to lodge at Emmaus the first night: but
now they stop their journey and return thence the same night to Jerusalem. The
two were Peter, and Alpheus the father of three Apostles, who also was called
Cleopas. See ver. 18, and 34. of this appearance to Peter, Paul speaks, 1 Cor*
15.5.

And that Alpheus and Cleopas were but one and the same person, may not only be
conjectured from the nearness of the sound, and from their being written in
Hebrew with the same letters, (...) but it is made plain in Ioh. 19.25. Where
she is called Mary the wife of Cleopas, who in the other Evangelists is clearly
evidenced to be Mary the wife of Alpheus, the mother of James and Ioses, etc.
Mat. 27.56. Mar. 15.40.

SECTION LXXXIX. LUKE Chap. XXIV. from Ver. 36. to Ver. 49. JOHN Chap. XX. from
Ver. 19. to Ver. 26. MARK Chap. XVI. Ver. 14. His third appearing: viz. to the
eleven.
THe connection is plain in John and Luke: for the former says, The same day at
evening being the first day of the week, etc. And the other, that as they were
speaking of his appearing to the two at Emmaus, he came in among them. The
first day of the week is an ordinary Judaich phrase (...); and so they reckon
the days forward (...) The second day of the week. (...) The third day of the
week, etc. They that are now so very punctual to have the days so named and
no otherwise, mistake that for a phrase purely Evangelicall, which indeed is a
phrase purely Judaicall.

As they sat at Supper Jesus comes in among them: shows them his hands and
side: eats with them: opens the Scriptures and their understandings:
breaths upon them, and says, Receive ye the holy Ghost, etc. Whosoever
sins ye remit, etc. This was to interest them in a power and privilege
peculiar and distinct from any they had received yet, and distinct from that
they were to receive on Pentecost day, viz. this invested them in power of life
and death, to inflict death, or corporal plagues miraculously upon the enemies
or disgracers of the Gospel, or to spare them as they should be directed by the
holy Ghost, which they here received. The death of Ananias and Saphira was a
fruit of this power, as is observed at that story.

Thomas was not present at this time, and yet Mark says, He appeared unto the
eleven as they sat at meat: and so Luke 24.33. Peter and Cleopas found the
eleven gathered together, etc. Nay 1 Cor. 15.5. He was seen of the twelve: The
title of the whole Chorus being used, though all were not present.

SECTION XC. JOHN Chap. XX. from Ver. 26. to the end. His fourth appearing:
Thomas now present.
JOHN says this was After eight days, which [reckoning the days current] was
that day seven night, or the first day of the week again: a second
establishment of that day for the Christian Sabbath. Thomas upon seeing,
believes, but blessed are they that have not seen yet have believed. See 1 Pet.
1.8.

Tanchum. fol. 8. col. 1. R. Simeon ben Lachish says, A Proselyte is more
lovely in the sight of God then all that company that stood at mount Sinai:
Why? Because all they if they had not seen the thunders and lightnings and
fire, and the mountains trembling, and the sound of the Trumpet, they would not
have received the Law: but a proselyte though he see none of these things, yet
he comes and gives up himself to God, and takes upon him the Kingdom of heaven.

SECTION XCI. JOHN Chap. XXI. all the Chapter. MATTHEW. Chap. XXVIII. Ver. 16.
Then the eleven Disciples went away into Galilee. A fifth appearing: To seven
of the Apostles at the sea of Tiberias, etc.
CHRIST before his death had told them of his meeting with them in Galilee
after his resurrection: and when he was risen, he appoints them to a mountain
there. They are now come up into the Country, and while they wait the time of
his appointment, Peter and six other of the Apostles go a fishing: not as their
trade now, for they never had been all of them fishers before, but either for a
present supply of provision for themselves, or for present employment till
their Master should dispose of them. He had at first revealed himself to three
of these seven [nay four, if Andrew were here] by a miraculous draught of
fishes, and so he does to them all now: and who can tell whether they had not
some thoughts of that, and some expectation of the like appearing now, which
did the rather urge them to this work?

At sea he helps them to a marvailous draught of 153 great fishes [so many
thousands were the proselytes that wrought for the Temple, only 600 over, 2 Chronicles. 2.17.] and at land he had provided them a dinner against they came
ashore, and dines with them. And this, says John, was the third time that he
showed himself to his Disciples: which asserts the order of this Section, and
shows that this was before his appearing to the whole number at the mountain
where he had appointed them: The two times that he had appeared to them before
this, this Evangelist gives account of before, namely one time when Thomas was
not present, and another time when he was.

After dinner he puts Peter to a threefold confession, answerable to his
threefold denial, and foretells his Martyrdom, but tells that John should
live till he should come: meaning in that sense, as his coming and coming in
glory is often used in the Gospel, namely his coming to take vengeance of the
unbelieving Jewish Nation: Peter should be Martyred by them, but John should
live to see them receive their deserts.

SECTION XCII. MATTHEW. Chap. XXVIII. from Ver. 16. to the end. MARK Chap. XVI.
Ver. 15, 16, 17, 18. LUKE Chap. XXIV. Ver. 49. A sixth appearing: at the
mountain in Galilee to all the eleven: and 500 more.
HIs appointing them into Galilee to such a mount [it is like to that mount
near Capernaum where he had chosen the Apostles and made his Sermon, Matthew. 5.]
was not barely to appear to the eleven, for that had he done before, and that
could he have done at Jerusalem, but it was an intended meeting, not only with
the eleven, but with the whole multitude of his Galilean and other Disciples,
and therefore he published this appointment so often, before and after his
Resurrection: and we cannot so properly understand his being seen of above five
hundred brethren at once, of which the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 15.6. of any
other time and place as of this: He had appointed the place, and the concourse
argues that he had appointed the time too, or at least this concourse waited
at the place till his time should come. And here may we conceive that he kept
the Lords day or the first day of the week for the Christian Sabbath with this
multitude of his Disciples; revealing himself clearly to them, and preaching to
them of the things that concerned the Kingdom of God.

Particularly he gives command and commission to go and disciple all Nations:
For whereas hitherto he had confined them to preach only to Israel, now must
they preach to every creature, Mark 16.15. (...) [See Colos. 1.23.]. (...) is
the Jews ordinary language, that is, to all men. (...) Solomon in his Proverbs
makes known Theory and Practice to the creatures, Kafvenaki in Prove. 1. (...)
He causes the holy Ghost to dwell upon the creatures, Mid^. Til. in Psalm. 135.
Nimrod made Idols (...) and caused the creatures to err, Tanch. fol. 8.4. The
Lord requires that (...) the creatures should pray before him, Id. fol. 16.4.
In which and an hundred other instances that might be given, the word Creatures
signifies only Men: and their charge and commission to preach the Gospel to
every creature, means to all men, the Gentiles as well as the Jews.

Warrant then and charge is given for the fetching of them in [the great
mystery, Ephesians. 3.4, 6.] who had lain subject to vanity of Idolatry, and under
the bondage of all manner of corruption ever since their casting off at Babel
2203 years ago. They had been taught of the devil, his oracles and delusions,
etc. but now they must all be taught of God, Isa. 54.13. by the preaching of
the Gospel. They had in some few numbers in this space been taught by Israel to
know the Lord and proselyted into their Religion, but now such proselyting
should not need, for all must come to the knowledge of God, Heb. 8.11. the
Gospel carrying the knowledge of him, and it being carried through all Nations.
Those of them that had come into the Church of Israel and the true Religion,
had been inducted and sealed into it, by being baptized. Talm. in Iebam. per.
4. etc. And so that proselyte Sacrament [as I may so call i^*] must be carried
and continued among all Nations, as a badge of homage and subjection to Christ
to whom all power is given in heaven and earth; and of the profession of the
true God, The Father, Son and holy Ghost, against all false Gods and false
worship. Infants born of Christian parents are to bear this badge, though when
they undertake it, they understand not what they do, because none in Christian
families should continue without the note of homage to Christ's sovereignty, and
this distinctive mark against Heathenism that worshippeth false Gods, as no
male among Israel after eight days old must be without the badge of
Circumcision.

Discipling was not of persons already taught, but to that end that they should
be taught, and if the Disciples understood this word in Christ's command after
any other sense, it was different from the sense of the word, which the Nation
had ever used and only used: For in their Schools a person was made (...) a
Scholar or Disciple, when he gave in himself to such a Master to be taught and
trained up by him: and in the Discipling of Proselytes to the Jews Religion, it
was of the very like tenor. That sense therefore that many put upon these
words, viz. that none are to be baptized but those that are thoroughly taught,
is such a one as the Apostles and all the Jewish Nation had never known or
heard of before.

That wretched and horrid opinion that denies the Godhead of Christ, and the
Godhead of the holy Ghost, little observes, or at least will not see why the
administration of Baptism among the Gentiles must be in the Name of the Father,
Son and holy Ghost, whereas among the Jews it was only in the Name of Jesus,
Act. 2.38. namely for this reason, that as by that among the Jews, Jesus was to
be professed for the true Messiah against all other, so by this among the
Gentiles who had worshipped false Gods, The Father, Son and holy Ghost should
be professed the only true God. And it would be but a wild, as well as an
irreligious Paraphrase that that opinion would make of this passage, Go preach
the Gospel to every creature, and Baptize them in the Name of the Son a
creature, and the holy Ghost a creature.

He promises the miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost to them that should
believe: [not to all, but to some for the confirmation of the Doctrine:] and
charge the Disciples to return to Jerusalem and there to stay till he should
pour down the holy Ghost upon them, to enable them for this Ministry among all
Nations, to which he had designed them. Mark and Luke do briefly add the story
of his ascension, because they will dispatch his whole story, but that is
related more amply, Act. 1.

A seventh appearing: To James.
After the appearing to above five hundred Brethren at once, which we suppose
and not without ground to have been that last mentioned, the Apostle relates
that he was seen of James, 1 Cor. 15.7. and then of all the Apostles: which
does plainly rank this appearance to James between that to the five hundred
Brethren on the mountain in Galilee, and his coming to all the Apostles when
they were come again to Jerusalem. Which James this was, Paul is silent of, as
all the Evangelists are, of any such particular appearance. It is most like he
means James the less, of whom he speaks often elsewhere, and so does the story
of the Acts of the Apostles as one of specialler note in the time of Paul's
preaching among the Gentiles. We read often in the Gospels, of Peter and James
and John three Disciples of singular eminency in regard of the privacy that
Christ vouchsafed to them at some special times, more then to the other
Apostles, and in that he badged them with a peculiar mark of changing their
names, and did not so by any of the other. But that James was the son of
Zebedee: Now when he was Martyred, Act. 12. you find that James the son of
Alpheus called James the less, came to be ranked in the like dignity with
Peter and John, and was Minister of the Circumcision, in special manner with
them, Gal. 2.9. they to the Jews scattered abroad, and he residentiary in
Judea. See Act. 15.13. and 21.18. Gal. 2.13. If we question how he of all the
rest of the Apostles came in, to make up that triumvirate when the other James
was gone, we cannot tell where so pregnantly to give an answer as from hence;
in that Christ vouchsafed thus particularly to appear to him, which was not
only an argument, but might carry the virtue of a command, to bring him into
that rank, Office and Employment, when the other James had run his course.

THE CHRONICLE AND ORDER OF The Acts of the Apostles: THE EPISTLES, AND THE
REVELATION. The Second Part.
ACTS CHAP. I.
Galilee where Christ had last appeared to his Disciples, he remandeth them
back to Jerusalem, and there comes again to them. Where among other
conference, they question him, Whether he would at that time restore the
Kingdom to Israel? His summoning them again to that place, the Metropolis, it
may be gave them occasion to move that question; they as yet, with the rest of
the Nation conceiting the Messiah a temporal Deliverer; and possibly not fully
understanding what he meant by the promise of the Father. His answer, It is not
for you to know the times and seasons, intimates not that ever there should be
such a restoration, but it smartly checketh their curiosity, as erroneous and
needless; and sets them to look off earthly longings, to mind the business
they had to do, viz. to preach him through the world. He leads them out as
far on mount Olivet, as where it began to be called Bethany, and there, about
the place where he had begun his triumphant riding upon an Ass into Jerusalem,
he now rides triumphantly into heaven in a cloud.

The Disciples having seen his Ascension, and two Angels, that told them of his
coming again in like manner as he went, return to Jerusalem, and there go up
into an upper room, and their number is summed up an hundred and twenty. (...)
An upper room was ordinarily chosen by the Learned of the Jews for their
meeting place to discuss and determine matters of Learning and Religion.
Schab. per. 1. halac. 4. These are the articles that the Schools of Shammai
and Hillel discussed (...) in the chamber, or upper room of Chananiah ben
Hezekiah, etc. Jerus. Pesachin. fol. 30. col. 2. (...) The upper room of Beth
Arum in Lydda, etc.

An hundred and twenty were not all the present professors in Jerusalem, but
these spoken of were they that were of Christ's constant retinue, and companied
with him all the time that he went in and out among them, ver. 21. and who
being constant witnesses of his actions, and auditors of his doctrine, were
appo^^^ed by him for the Ministry. These are they that the story means all
along in these passages: Chap. 2.1. They were all together. Chap. 4.21. They
went to their company. Chap. 6.3. Look ye out among your selves. Chap. 8. They
were all scattered abroad except the Apostles. Chap. 11.19. They which were
scattered abroad, preached, etc. The Jews say, Ezras great Synagogue, was of a
hundred and twenty men. Avoth R. Nathan per. 4. Juchasin fol. 13. And their
Canons allow not the setting up of a Sanhedrin of three and twenty Judges, in
any City; but where there were an hundred and twenty men fit, some for one
Office and employment, some for another. Talm. in Sanhedr. per. 1. and Maymony
in his Treatise of the same name, per. 1.

The activity of Peter in the work of the Gospel, mentioned more along this
story, then of any of the others, was not only enjoined, but also inlivened, by
that saying of his Master, When thou art converted strengthen thy brethren: and
he that had fallen so foul, as he had done, had need of all industry to
evidence his recovery, and to get ground again.

The Phrase in ver. 25. Judas is gone to his own place, may properly be
compared with the opinion of the nation, about a traitor, He that betrayeth an
Israelite, either body or goods, into the hands of the Heathen, has no portion
in the world to come, Maym. in chobel Umazzik per. 8. And with the Gloss of
Baal Turim upon these words in Number. 24.25. Balaam went to his own place, They
mean, says he, that he went to hell.

ACTS CHAP. II.
THe expectation of the Nation grounded from Dan. 9. that the Messiah should
appear about this time, Luke 19.11. had brought multitudes of Jews out of all
Nations to see the issue: And Pentecost having brought up also all the Country
of Judea to celebrate that Feast; in this double conflux of people, the holy
Ghost is given and comes down upon the hundred and twenty Disciples, in the
likeness of fiery tongues: At which very time of the year, and in fire, the
Law had been given 1447 years ago. The Ierus. Gomarists in Taanith. fol. 65.
col. 3. have a saying, That as Jerusalem was destroyed by fire, so should it be
rebuilt by fire. And in Iom tobh fol. 61. col. 3. and Chagigah fol. 78. col. 1.
they say that David died at the Feast of Pentecost. Both passages regardable at
this place.

As the confusion of tongues at Babel had caused the casting off of the
Gentiles, by severing them from the participation of the true Religion [which
was only professed and known in the Hebrew tongue] so was the gift of tongues,
to be a needful means, to bring them in to Religion again; when every one may
hear of the things of God in his own language. The Disciples were doubly
endowed by this gift, as to the matter of language; for they were hereby
enabled to speak to every Nation in their own tongue; and not that only, but
they were enabled to understand the Originals of Scripture, which they
understood not before. Their birth and breeding had not allowed them so much
learning as to understand any Bible that was then extant, either Hebrew or
Greek, but here is the first operation of this gift of the Spirit upon them,
that they are first made able to understand the Originals of Scripture, and
then able to unlock them to any one in their own tongue. And here should they
begin that take on them to expound the Scriptures by the Spirit, namely to
unlock the difficulties of the Original languages, [for therein the mainest
difficulty of the Scripture lodgeth] according as was the method of the Spirits
operation in the Apostles.

Pentecost was a time of rejoicing, and at all such festivities the Jews had
ever good store of wine stirring: so that these men conclude that they had
drunk too much and spoke as men distract: which Peter confutes by telling them
it was not yet the third hour of the day, or nine a clock. For upon their
Sabbaths and holidaies they used not to eat or drink till their Synagogue
service was done. Maym. in Schab. per. 30. which was not of a good while after
nine a clock.

His alleging of Joel, In the last days I will pour out my Spirit, etc.
teaches us how to construe the phrase, The last days, in exceeding many
places both of the Old Testament and the New, as Isa. 2.1. 1 Timothy 4.1. and 2 Timothy 3.1. 1 Pet. 4.7. 1 Ioh. 2.19, etc. namely for the last days of Jerusalem
and the Jewish State. For to take his words in any other sense [as some do for
the last days of the world] is to make his allegation utterly impertinent and
monstrous.

Three thousand converted, are Baptized In the Name of the Lord Jesus, ver. 38.
which no whit disagreeth from the command, Baptize in the Name of the Father
and of the Son, etc. Matthew. 28.19. For the form of Baptism in those first days
of the Gospel, of which the New Testament gives the story, may be considered
under a threefold condition. 1. John the Baptist baptized in the Name of
Messiah, or Christ that was then ready to come, but that Jesus of Nazareth was
he, he himself knew not till he had run a good part of his course, Ioh. 1.31.
as was observed before. 2. The Disciples baptizing the Jews, baptized them in
the Name of Jesus: upon this reason, because the great point of controversy
then in the Nation about Messiah was, Whether Jesus of Nazareth were he or no.
All the Nation acknowledged a Messiah, but the most of them abominated that
Jesus of Nazareth should be thought to be he: therefore those that by the
preaching of the Gospel came to acknowledge him to be Messiah, were baptized
into his Name, as the critical badge of their embracing the true Messiah. But
3. among the Gentiles where that question was not afoot, they baptized in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. And so that
baptizing in the Name of Jesus, was for a season for the settling of the
evidence of his being Messiah, and when that was thoroughly established, then it
was used no more, but Baptism was in the Name of the Father, and Son, etc. Of
the same cognizance were those extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, evidences of
Jesus his being the Messiah, and means of conveying the Gospel through the
world, and when both these were well established, then those gifts ceased for
ever.

All that believed were together and had all things common, ver. 46. The
children of those that believed, must come under the title of Believers too, or
they must famish. For this community of goods being for the relief of the poor,
as we shall show at the fourth Chapter, the children, babes and infants of
believing parents that were poor, must be taken in under this expression, All
that believed, etc. or how did they for support? If the community of goods
reached them as well as their parents, the title must reach them too: When a
Master of a family was baptized, his children were they never so young were
baptized with him, and hence the mention of baptizing whole households, Act.
16.15.33. They that pleading against Infants Baptism, do cavil, that it may
be, there were no Infants in those families that are mentioned, bewray that
they little understand the manner of administering Baptism in its first use. For
the stress of the business lies not in this; whether it can be proved that
there were Infants in those families, where it is recorded, that whole
households were baptized, but the case is this, that in all families whatsoever,
were there never so many Infants, they were all baptized, when their parents
were baptized. Thus was the constant custom among the Jews for admission of
Proselytes, and thence this Canon, That a woman proselyted and baptized when
she was great with child, her child needed not then to be baptized when it was
born. Maym. in Issure biah per. 13. For if he had been born before she was
baptized, he must have been baptized with her. And the New Testament gives so
little evidence of the altering this custom, at those first baptizings under
the Gospel, that it plainly on the contrary shows the continuance of it, when
it speaks of the Apostles baptizing whole households.

ACTS CHAP. III, IV.
PEntecost Feast lasted eight days, as well as their other Feasts, Passover,
Tabernacles, and Dedication did. Ierus. in Moed Katon, and Chagigah at large.
The occurrences of the very day of Pentecost it self, are related already: Now
whether the healing of the Creeple, and the consequences upon that, contained
in the third Chapter, befell upon the same day in the afternoon, or on the next
day after, which was the day when all the males appeared before the Lord in the
Temple, or further in the Feast, is not certain, but that they were within the
compass of the Feast, is more then probable, by the great multitude that was
converted at one Sermon.

Peter and John go into the Temple at the ninth hour, the hour of prayer. Talm.
in Pesachin. per. 5. The daily sacrifice of the evening was killed at the eight
hour and a half, and offered at the ninth hour and an half. Joseph. Antiq. lib.
14. cap. 8. (...), etc. Twice a day, nvmely in the morning and about the ninth
hour, they offered on the Altar. There, as they go in, at the Eastgate, that
led into the Court of the women, they find and heal a Creeple, which had been
so from his birth. The Jews looked upon this miracle, as wrought by their own
holiness, as appears by the Apostles answer to them, ver. 12. For such a
conceit walked among the Nation, that extraordinary holiness might attain to
miraculous workings. R. Phinehas ben Iair says, Industry brings to purity,
Purity to cleanness, Cleanness to holiness, Holiness to humbleness,
Humbleness to fear of sin, Fear of sin to partaking of the holy Ghost. Jerus.
Schab. fol. 3. col. 3.

Yet are they imprisoned that night, and the next morning convented before the
Council. Among others which are named of the Council, which were Priests,
Alexander and John, mentioned ver. 6. seem to be Alexander Alabarcha, or his
son, and Rabban Iochanan ben Zaccai, the later, Vice President at this time
under Rabban Gamaliel.

They dismissed, come to their own company, and related what had occurred, and
upon joint prayer the place is shaken, and they are again filled with the holy
Ghost. Why? What could be added to them they having been so filled with the
holy Ghost before? In their prayer they petitioned these two things, That God
would give them boldness to speak his Word, and that Healings and Signs and
Wonders might be done in the Name of Jesus: And the power of both these falls
now upon them: and especially, it may be conceived that Wonder of Wonders, upon
the twelve, power to bestow the holy Ghost.

The community of goods, with the mention of which the second and the fourth
Chapters conclude, may be considered under these two animadversions: 1. That
although persecution as yet for the Gospel, had brought none to poverty, yet it
is manifest that there were poor amongst them. And some come to the more
poverty for the Gospel sake too. For if they were poor before they received the
Gospel, then the Synagogue of which they were provided for them: but now they
were destitute of that provision, they having forsaken the Synagogue; or at the
least the Synagogue them, because of their forsaking of their Judaism. For the
Evangelicall Church therefore, that was now begun, to provide for her poor, it
had not only the Synagogue for an example, but would have had it for a
reproach, if they had neglected so needful a duty, which that took care for so
constantly and tenderly. 2. This having of all things common therefore, was not
an extinction of propriety and of meum and tuum, as if one rich man should have
as good interest in another rich man's estate as himself, but it was intended
mainly for the relief of the poor: Not to bring any that had estates to
voluntary poverty, nor to level estates, but to releeve those which stood in
need. Chap. 2.45. and 4.35. Distribution was made to every man as he had need:
To them that preached the word for their maintenance, and to the poor for their
relief.

ACTS CHAP. V.
ANanias and Sapphira set up as everlasting monuments to all generations of
Gods just indignation against the despisers of the Spirit of Christ. (...) The
Spirit of Messiah was in honorable mention and esteem in the Nation, in their
common speech, though they would not know him when he was revealed. Now the
sin of this couple was first coveteousnesse, but especially presuming to play
false, and yet thinking to go undiscovered of that Spirit which wrought so
powerfully in the Apostles. That cursed opinion that denies the Godhead of the
holy Ghost, runs parallel with this sin of Ananias and Sapphira to a hair.

Peter's warrant for this execution we may read in that passage, John 20.22,
23. He breathed on them and said, Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose sins ye
remit they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain they are retained. How? To
forgive sins absolutely? this belongs only to God. Was it to forgive them
declaratively? This seems too low a construction, and too restrained: It
seems therefore the most proper meaning of this donation, that he now endued
them with power, to avenge what sins the holy Ghost [now received] should
direct them, to avenge, with bodily plagues, giving up to Satan, or with death:
and again to remit such penalties as they should be directed to remit, and they
should be remitted. The holy Ghost whom they had received then with so peculiar
a power, Ananias and Saphira do here plainly vilify, and affront directly;
therefore an execution of such power upon them was as proper and direct. But be
it whether it will, that Peter took his warrant originally from thence, or had
it instantly by some immediate revelation, as the judgment was fearful, so
his executing of it was remarkable, showing at once his assurance of the pardon
of his own lying against his Master, when he can and dare thus avenge a lie
against the holy Ghost: and also his just zeal and activity for the honor of
his Master whom he had denied.

It is said in ver. 12. They were all in Solomon's porch, which was the East
cloister of the mount of the Temple, and in part of it did the Sanhedrin now
sit, and the Apostles not afraid to act so near them: But at last they are
apprehended and imprisoned, but miraculously enlarged, and preaching in the
Temple again: and thereupon convented before the Council. Gamaliel, Paul's
master was now President, and continued in this dignity till within eighteen
years of the destruction of the City. He pleads here for the Apostles, not
out of any love to their persons or doctrine, for he lived and died a down
right Pharisee: but partly because he saw the Sadduces at present the chief
agents against them, and chiefly because the miracles they wrought were so
plain and convincing, that he could move no less then what he did. And yet for
all the fairness of this man at this time, yet did he afterward ordain and
publish that prayer called (...) The prayer against Heretics, meaning
Christians; framed indeed by Samuel Katon, but approved and authorized by this
man, President of the Sanhedrin [then at Iabuch] and commanded to be used
constantly in their Synagogues, in which they prayed against the Gospel and the
professors of it* Taanith. fol. 65.3. Maym. in Tephil. per. 2.

ACTS CHAP. VI, VII.
THe seven Deacons [as they are commonly called] chosen by occasion of the
Hellenists murmuring against the Hebrews about neglect of their widows. The
Hebrews were Jews the inhabitants of Judea, and the Hellenists those Jews that
lived in other Countries dispersedly among the Greeks: Not only in Greece, but
almost in all other Countries, which the conquests of Alexander, and the
continuance of the Syrogrecian Monarchy after him had filled with Greeks, as
all Countries also were filled with Jews.

In all the Jews Synagogues there were (...) Parnasin, Deacons, or such as had
care of the poor, whose work it was to gather alms for them from the
Congregation, and to distribute it to them. (...) There were two that gathered
alms for them and one more added to distribute it to them. Maym. in Sanhedr.
per. 1. R. Chelbe in the name of R. Ba bar Zabda says, They appoint not less
then three Parnasin. For if judgment about pecuniary matters were judged by
three, much more this matter which concerns life is to be managed by three.
Jerus. in Peah fol. 21. col. 1. That needful office is here translated into
the Christian Church: and the seven are chosen to this work out of the number
of the hundred and twenty that are mentioned, chap. 1.15. and that company only
was the choosers of them, and not all the Believers in Jerusalem. The reason
why the Hebrews neglected the widows of the Hellenists may be supposed, either
because they would stick to their old rule, mentioned once before, That a widow
was to be maintained by her husbands children. Talm. in che^^b. per. 11. Maym.
in (...) per. 18. [compare 1 Timothy 5.4.] or because the Hebrews of Judea had
brought in more into the common stock for the poor, by sale of their Goods and
Lands, then those that had come from foreign Countries had done, they not
having Goods and Lands so ready to sell. All that had been brought in hitherto,
had been put into the Apostles hands, and they had been burdened with the care
and trouble of the disposal of it: but now they transfer that work and
office to the seven, solemnly ordaining them by Imposition of hands into it,
and here only, the Imposition of the Apostles hands confers not the holy Ghost,
for these men were full of the holy Ghost before.

Stephen an eminent man among them, is quarrelled by certain of the Libertines,
and the Hellenists Synagogue. Libertini (...) are exceeding frequently spoken
of in the Jews Writings. And the Alexandrian Synagogue [one of the Hellenists]
is mentioned in Jerus. in Megillah. fol. 73. col. 4. and Juchas. fol. 26. who
tell, that R. Eliezer bar Zadoc took the Synagogue of the Alexandrians that was
at Jerusalem, and employed it to his own use.

When they are notable to overpower him by argument and disputation, they take
a ready way to do it, by false accusation, and conventing him before the
Sanhedrin: where being accused of vilifying Moses, and speaking of the
destruction of that place, he is vindicated, even miraculously, before he
pleads his own cause, by his face shining like the face of Moses, and bearing
an Angelical aspect and Majesty; for indeed he spoke but what was spoken by
the Angel Gabriel, Dan. 9.26, 27.

In his Apology, he speaks to the heads of his accusation, but somewhat
abstrusely; yet so as to them to whom he spoke to be well understood, his
discourse being according to their own Rhetoric and Logic: To what was laid
to his charge, for vilifying Moses, and saying, his customs should be changed,
he rehearses in brief the whole history of Moses, and shows he was Orthodox to
him; but yet he drives all to this, that as the times before Moses were still
moving and growing on to settlement in Moses, so when Moses himself had settled
all he had to do, yet he pointed them to a Prophet yet to come, to whom they
should hearken as the ultimate Oracle, which was this Jesus that he preached to
them. And whereas he was accused for speaking of the destruction of the Temple,
he first shows, that fixednesse to this or that place, is not so much to be
stood upon, as appears by the flitting condition of the Patriachs [whose
flittings he gives the story of at large] and by the moving condition of the
Tabernacle before the Temple was built: And when the Temple was built, it was
not because God would confine himself to one place, for the most High dwells
not in Temples made with hands, ver. 48. etc.

He inserteth two or three sharp and true accusations of them, whereas theirs
of him had been but false and causeless. As, that their fathers had persecuted
those that foretold of Christ, as they did him for now preaching him, and they
followed their fathers steps; nay went further, for they had murdered Christ,
whereas their fathers had but murdered his Prophets. And whereas they were so
punctual, about the Ceremonious rites given by Moses, they neglected the
moral Law, which was given by the disposition of Angels.

This cuts them to the heart, that they pass a rancourous and furious sentence
of death upon him: but he has a sight of the high bench of heaven, God and
Christ at his right hand, their judge and his: A most fit prospect for the
first Martyr.

They cast him out of the City and stone him for blasphemy. For these were to
be stoned, He that went in to his mother, or to his fathers wife, or to his
daughter in Law, or to a male, or to a beast: and he that blasphemed, or that
committed Idolatry, etc. And the place of stoning was out from the place of
Judgment, [nay out of the City, as the Gomarists resolve it] because it is
said, Bring him that cursed, out of the Camp. And A crier went before him, that
was to die, proclaiming his fault. Sanhedr. per. 6. and 7.

When he was come within four cubits of the place of stoning, they stripped him
naked: only covered his nakedness before. Ibid.

And being come to the very place, first the witnesses laid their hands upon
him, Maym. in Avodah Zarah per. 2. and then stripping off their coats that they
might be more expedite for their present work, first one of them dasheth his
loins violently against a stone that lay for that purpose: if that killed him
not, then the other dasheth a great stone upon his heart, as he lay on his
back* and if that dispatched him not, then all the people fell upon him with
stones. Talm. ubi sup.

Steven in the midst of all this their fury, and his own anguish, gets on his
knees and prays for them: and having so done he fell asleep. The Jews do
ordinarily use the word (...) to signify Dying, which properly signifies
sleeping, especially when they speak of a fair and comfortable death: which
word Luke translates here. (...) All that were stoned were also hanged up upon
a tree. Talm. ubi supr. Whether Steven were so used is uncertain, but it is
evident that he had a fair burial, and not the burial of a malefactor.

ACTS CHAP. VIII.
Steven: in which Saul was a chief agent, scholar of Gamaliel [President of the
Sanhedrin] and it may be the busier for that. In Talm. Bab. Sanhedr. fol. 43.
col. 1. they say, Jesus had five Disciples, Mathai, Nakai, Netser, Boni and
Thodah, and they are urging reasons there, why they should all be put to death,
etc.

All the hundred and twenty Ministers mentioned, Chap. 1.15. are scattered
abroad [only the twelve stay at Jerusalem as in the furnace to comfort and
cherish the Church there in so sad a time] and they preach all along as they
go, and so Satan breaks his own head by his own design, for by persecution by
which he had contrived to smother* the Gospel, it spreads the more.

The first plantation of it mentioned, is in Samaria, and that according to
Christ's own direction, and foretelling, Act. 1.8. Ye shall be witnesses to me,
both in Jerusalem and in all Judea, and in Samaria, etc. He had forbidden them
before, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the
Samaritans do not enter, Matthew. 10.5. but now that partition wall that had been
between, is to be broken down. Of all Nations and people under heaven the
Samaritans were the most odious to the Jews, and a main reason was, because
they were Jews Apostates. For though the first peopling of that place, after
the Captivity of the ten Tribes, was by Heathens, 2 King. 17. yet upon the
building of the Temple on mount Gerizim, such multitudes of Jews continually
flocked thither, that generally Samaritanism was but a mongrell Judaism. They
called Jacob their father, expected Messiah, had their Temple, Priesthood,
Service, Penteteuch, etc. And to spare more, take but this one passage in Talm.
Jerus. Pesachin fol. 27.2. The Cuthaeans all the time that they celebrate their
unleavened bread feast with Israel, they are to be believed concerning their
putting away of leaven: If they do not keep their unleavened bread feast with
Israel, they are not to be believed concerning their putting away of leaven.
Rabban Gamaliel says, All the Ordinances that the Cuthaeans use, they are more
punctual in them then Israel is. It is an unhappy obscurity that the Hebrew
Writers have put upon the word Cuthaeans, for though it most properly signify
Samaritans, yet have they so commonly given this name to Christians, as the
most odious name they could invent to give them, that in the most places that
you meet with it, you cannot tell whether they mean the one or the other. In
the place cited, it seems indeed most likely that it means the Samaritans,
because it speaks of their keeping the feast of unleavened bread, and using the
Ordinances of Israel: unless it speak of those Jews that had received the
Gospel and become Christians, and were fallen to their Judaism again, and
joined that with their Christianity, which very many did, as we shall have
occasion to observe hereafter.

Simon Magus takes upon him to believe and is baptized: The naming of him calls
to mind the mention of one Simon a Magician that Josephus speaks of, Antiq.
lib. 20. cap. 5. who was a means to entice Drusilla from her former husband to
go and marry Felix the Governor of Judea, this might very well be that man.
And it minds of a passage in Tal. Ierus. in Iebamoth fol. 13. col. 1. (...) I
cannot but render it, The Simonians came to Rabbi, and said to him We pray thee
give us a man to be our Expositor, Judge, Minister, Scribe, Traditionary, and
to do for us all we need. I know what (...) is in Tal. Bab. in Cholin. fol. 15.
But certainly (...) means some people, but whence so named, there is no
disputing here.

Philip baptized Samaria, and did great wonders among them, but could not
bestow the holy Ghost upon them: that power belonged only to the Apostles;
therefore Peter and John are sent thither for that purpose. They laid their
hands upon them and they received the holy Ghost: Not upon all, for what needed
that? or what reason was there for it? The gifts of the holy Ghost that were
received, were these miraculous ones, of Tongues, Prophecy, etc. Acts 10.46.
and 19.6. Now of these there were but these two ends, 1. For the confirmation
of the doctrine of the Gospel, such miraculous gifts attending it. And 2. for
instruction of others: for Tongues were given indeed for a sign, 1 Cor. 14.22.
but not only for a sign, but for edification and instruction, as the Apostle
also shows at large in the same Chapter. Now both these ends were attained,
though they that received the holy Ghost were not all, but only a few and set
number: nay the later not conceivable of all, for if all were enabled
miraculously to be Teachers, who were to be taught? The Imposition therefore of
the Apostles hands, mentioned here and elsewhere, and those passages, These
signs shall follow those that believe, they shall cast out devils, they shall
speak with Tongues, etc. Mark 16.17. Repent and be baptized every one of you,
and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost, Act. 2.38, etc. were not upon
all that believed the Gospel, and were baptized: but upon some certain number,
whom they were directed by the holy Ghost to lay their hands upon, as those men
that God had appointed and determined for Preachers and Ministers to the
people, and who by the Imposition of the Apostles hands, receiving the holy
Ghost, were by those gifts enabled to understand the language and sense of
Scripture, and to be instructers of the people, and to; build them up.

Candaces Eunuch, having been at Jerusalem to worship, and returning back is
converted by Philip. [Of Candace Queen of Meroe in Aethiopia, see Strabo lib.
17.] He met with him in the way that lead from Jerusalem to Gaza the desert. Of
this place Strabo again lib. 16. speaks thus, Then is the haven of the
Gazaeans: above which, some seven furlongs, is the City, once glorious, but
ruined by Alexander (...) and it remains desert. Diodorus Siculus calls it
(...) The old Gaza, lib. 19. for another was built at the haven by the sea
side, called sometimes Maiuma. Gozom. Eccles. hist. lib. 5. cap. 3. and
afterward Constantia, named so by Constantine after the name of his sister: as
says Eusebius. de Vit. Constant. lib. 4. cap. 28. or as Sozomon, of his son
Constantius.

Whether this Eunuch were a Jew or a Proselyte is scarce worth inquiring: his
devotion is far more worth spending thoughts upon, which brought him so long
a journey, and employed him so well in his travail, as in reading the
Scripture. He is baptized in the name of Jesus, ver. 37. and [as it may well be
conceived] takes ship at Gaza, and is the first, that we find, that carried
the profession of Jesus into Africa. The mention of which, may justly call our
thoughts to consider of the Temple built in Egypt by Onias, and the vast
numbers of Jews that were in that and the Countries thereabouts, and yet how
little intimation there is, in the New Testament Story, by whom or how the
Gospel was conveyed into those parts.

Philip is rapt by the Spirit from Gaza to Azotus, which were 270 furlongs, or
34 miles asunder, as Diodor. Sicul. ubi supra, measures.

ACTS CHAP. IX. from the beginning to Ver. 23.
THe conversion of Paul: A monument of mercy, 1 Timothy 1.14.16. A Pharisee, a
persecutor, a murderer, yet become a Christian, a Preacher, an Apostle.

He consented to Stevens death: and after that he gets a Commission from the
chief Priests, and makes desperate havoc in Jerusalem, Act. 8.2. and 22.4. and
26.10.

We find all along this Book, that the chief Priests are not only the busiest
men in persecuting of the Gospel, but in many places it is related so, as if
they were the only men and had entire power in their own hands, as a peculiar
Court, to give Commissions, to judge, condemn and execute: as it has been and
is the opinion of some, that there was an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin distinct
from the Civil.

It is true indeed that there was in the Temple a Consistory only of Priests,
which sat in the room called Parhedrin, and Liscath Bulente, The Chamber of the
Council: but these sat not there, as Magistrates over the people, but only as
a Consistory, to take care of the service and affairs of the Temple, that
nothing should be wanting, nor nothing slacked that was required about it, or
that conduced to the promoting of the service of it, and their power extended
not beyond that virge. Any other Concessus or Consistory of Priests alone, then
this, I believe cannot be showed in any records of that Nation, and this is far
from the power and constitution of a Sanhedrin. The Talmud indeed in Chetuhboth
per. 1. Halac. 5. speaks of a Beth din, or Consistory of the Priests which
required 400 zuzims in dower or jointure for a virgin: Which seems to assert
this as a peculiar Court, invested with distinct power from the other. But the
Gomarists, especially the Babylonian do make it plain, that no such thing can
be inferred from this action: for they tell us that the Priests determined this
business of 400 zuzims dower to their own daughters, only for the honor of
their Tribe and blood: So that this was not any act of judicial power binding
others, but an act of consent among themselves to keep up the credit of their
Function and Families. But here is not time and place to discuss this point [a
matter of no small Controversie] further then what may give illustration to the
subject before us.

How to understand therefore this judicial activity of the chief Priests
throughout this book, the Evangelist has given us a rule betime in the story,
Chap. 4. ver. 5. Where he shows that the whole Sanhedrin is to be understood,
of which the Priests were a great, if not the greatest part, and were in this
cause the busiest men. In case of necessity, there might be a Sanhedrin, though
never a Priest or Levite was of it, for so is their own Canon, namely if fit
men of either rank were not to be found; but in common carriage, and experience
they were the greatest and most potent number, as whose profession and Function
bespake studiousnesse and pleaded honor. In all the New Testament we meet but
with these men by name, of all the Sanhedrin. Anna^, and Caiaphas and John, and
Alexander, Gamaliel, Nicodemus, and Joseph of Arimathea. And how many of these
were not Priests? Gamaliel indeed was of the Tribe of (...), and of the Progeny
of David, being grandchilde of Hill^l* But as for all the rest, some of them
were undoubtedly of the Priesthood, and the others more probably so (...) then
of any other Tribe* Of Annas and Caiaphas there is no question* And if John,
Acts 4.6. be the eminente^^ John that was then among them, it means Rabban
Iochanan ben Zaccai* who was now Vicepresident of the Council, and he was a
Priest as Iuchusi^ tells us. And if Nicodemus be the same with the eminentest
Nicodemus of those time of whom Avoth R Mathan per. 6* and Talm. bab. in
Cetubbeth fol. 66. make [as we have no cause to think otherwise] then was he by
their plain description a Priest likewise. And so was Joseph of Arimathea, if
his style and title (...) be to be understood according to the common speech of
the Nation, as there can be no reason why it should not be so understood. And
as for Alexander, of whom is least evidence, it is not worth spending so much
time upon as to discuss, since these already mentioned may be witness enough.

In all the busy stirring therefore of the Priests in this story of the Acts
of Apostles, as chap. 7.1. and 23.2. and about this Commission of Saul, we are
not to take them as a distinct and separate power from the Sanhedrin, but as a
part of it, and such as whose Function and interest, as they thought, did most
of all the other urge them to look to the prevention of this growing evil of
the Gospel, as they did, as heartily, as erroniously repute it: and therefore
the story does more especially pitch upon them as the most stirring men. And so
Paul himself does help to interpret Lukes relation* For wher^^s chap. 9.1, 2.
it is said, Saul went to the high Priest and desired of him letters to Damascus
(...) who best could tell how this should be understood, explains it thus,
chap. 22.5. Of the High Priest, and of all the estate of the Elders I received
letters to the brethren, etc. The words of all the estate of the Elders
determine the point we have in hand, and the other words to the brethren, call
us to the consideration of another: and that is, how far the Sanhedrins
decrees and injunctions had power and command over the Jews in foreign Lands.
By producing the words of one of their Acts we shall better judge of this
matter and understand the words to the brethren, both at once.

In Talm. Ierus. Sanhedr. fol. 18. col. 4. they say thus, For the three
Countries they intercalated the year for Judea, and beyond Jordan and Galilee.
For two of them together they did it, for one alone they did it not. There is a
story of Rabban Gamaliel and the Elders, that they sat at the going up to the
Temple, and Iochanan the Scribe sat before them: Rabban Gamaliel says to him,
Write (...) To our Brethren that dwell in the upper South Country (...) And to
our Brethren that dwell in the lower South Country, Peace be multiplied to you.
We give you to understand that the time of setting forth your tithes is come,
etc. (...) And to our Brethren of Galilee the upper, and Galilee the lower,
Peace be multiplied unto you. We give you to understand that the time of
setting forth your tithes is come, etc. (...) And to our Brethren of the
captivity of Babel, of Media, of Greece, and the whole captivity of Israel,
Peace be multiplied unto you: We give you to understand, that since the Lambs
are yet little, and young Pigeons small, and the time of the first ripe ears is
not yet come, that it seems good to me and to my fellows to add thirty days
unto this year. And the very same is related again in Maasar shein fol. 56.
col. 3. By which we see that when Luke says, that Saul had the Sanhedrins
letters to the brethren, he speaks but the very language that such letters used
to speak in: and by this we see also, that their letters missive to their
brethren in foreign Lands, were rather Declarations then Commands: For it was
not so much the awe of the Sanhedrins power reaching to those remote places,
that kept the whole Nation to obedience of their decrees, as it was their
innate and inured ambition to be held and kept a peculiar and distinct and
conform people, and their devotednesse to their Law and Worship, the great
Oracle of which they held the Sanhedrin to be, in all ages. Such letters may we
conceive were these to the Synagogues at Damascus, not imperious, but
declarative and persuasive: which before Saul had delivered [who was now (...)
Apostolus Synhedrii magni] he is converted and designed for an Apostle of Jesus
Christ.

He saw Christ, ver. 17. 1 Cor. 9.1. though he saw him not: for as Israel at
Sinai saw the Lord, not in any representation, but only his glory, so did he
Christ in his glory, and a voice. And so they that traveled with him heard the
voice, ver. 7. in its terrible sound, but they heard it not, Acts. 22.9. in its
articulate utterance, so as to understand it, [the like to that in Ioh. 12.29.]

At three days end he receives his sight, and Baptism, and was filled with
the Holy Ghost, ver. 17, 18. but how he received the last is somewhat obscure:
whether before his Baptism or upon it, by immediate infusion as they did chap.
10.45. on by imposition of Ananias his hands; which if he did, as it was
extraordinary for any besides an Apostle to confer the Holy Ghost, so could
not Ananias do, or think of doing this, without an extraordinary warrant*
Whether way it was, he is now so completely furnished with all accomplishments
for his Ministry, that he confers not with flesh and blood, that is, not with
any men, nor goes he up to Jerusalem* no not to confer with the Apostles, Gal.
1.16, 17. but has the full knowledge of the Gospel, and full assurance of his
knowledge that it was right: And so he begins to preach in Damascus.

Paul spends in Damascus and Arabia, and Damascus again* Gal. 1.17.

ACTS CHAP. IX. from Ver. 23. to Ver. 32.
Jerusalem, being driven from Damascus by a machination of the Jews, who had
wrought with the Governor to apprehend him, but he is let over the wall in a
basket, 2 Cor. 11.32, 33.

He goes up (...) Jerusalem to see Peter, Gal. 1.18. but at his first coming
thither, the Disciples are afraid of him, all Barnabas makes way for his
intertainment, Act. 9.27. His going to see Peter is to confer with the Minister
of the Circumcision, himself being appointed Minister to the Uncircumcised: And
how Barnabas who was to be his fellow should come to be acquainted with him
before any of the rest, we can hardly find out any other way to resolve, then
by conceiving he had some intimation from God of his own Apostleship among the
Gentiles, and Paul's with him.

He staieth at Jerusalem but fifteen days and sees none of the Apostles, but
Peter and James the less, Gal. 1.18, 19. He preaches boldly there, and
disputes so vehemently with the Hellenists that they go about to kill him, Act.
9.29. But why him, rather then Peter, James, Barnabas, and others that were now
at Jerusalem? we may answer, Because he himself was a Hellenist, one once of
their own College, and the more zealous he was now against them, the more
incensed were they against him, for an Apostate, as they accounted him: and now
he that with them had contrived the death of Steven, is forced by them to fly
for his own life.

ACTS CHAP. IX. from Ver. 32. to the end. and CHAP. X. all and CHAP. XI. to
Ver. 19.
ver. 19. of Chap. 11. as they are of a doubtful date, because neither the
Historian here, nor any other part of Scripture has fixed the determinate time
of their occurring, so is not the limiting of them to their year or time so
very needful* if only it be secured, that they follow in time to those
preceding that we have spoken to; and that we may be assured of their order,
though we cannot be of their precise time. And this is easy to resolve upon,
without much debate. The last verse of the former Section, informs us of a
peace and rest come to all the Churches, and the beginning of this brings in
Peter [as in this calm] passing through all quarters preaching and confirming
them. And that this could not be but after the times of the stories mentioned
hitherto, appears by this, that though it is true indeed, that Peter was
abroad in Samaria upon the conversion of it, yet he was returned again to
Jerusalem, Chap. 8.25. and was there three years after, when Paul comes up
thither.

This therefore is a new voyage, in which he does three great things, heals
Aen^as of a Palsy at Lydda: raises Dorcas from the dead at Ioppa; and opens
the door of the Gospel to the Gentiles in Caesarea.

Aeneas is a name that we find in the Jewish Writers. (...) R. Samuel the
son of R. Aeneas, is mentioned in Ierus. Iebamoth fol. 6.2. And Lod or Lydda
they speak exceeding frequently of, and produce remarkable stories and
memorials of it. And indeed the quarters of Peter's present walk, compared with
the Hebrews records concerning these places, may well claim some observation.
For when he is at Ioppa he is in the middle, as it were, of those places which
in a little time after this [nay it may be at this very time] were two of their
greatest and eminentest Schools.

At Iabneh on the one hand of Ioppa did the great Sanhedrin sit long: both
before the destruction of Jerusalem and after: for when it began to be unsettled
and to flit up and down forty years before the destruction of the City, its
first removal from Jerusalem was hither: and here sat Gamaliel, Paul's Master,
with his Sanhedrin a good space of time, and for ought can be said to the
contrary, it might very well be there at this time when Peter was at Ioppa.

Now as the Jews called that place Iabneh so the Gentiles called it Iamnia, and
how near it was to Ioppa you may guess from these words of Strabo, lib. 16.
This place [speaking of Ioppa] was so populous that out of the neighbor Town
Iamnia, and other places thereabout, it was able to raise 40000 men.

At Lydda on the other hand of Ioppa, were most famous Schools, and eminent men
as well as at Iabneh. (...). It was a Town that wanted little of the bigness
of a City. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 5. It lay West of Jerusalem a days
journey off, as the Talmud seats it and measures, in Maasar Sheni per. 5. hal.
2. It was in Judea: And thereupon four and twenty of the School of Rabbi came
thither to intercalate the year, but an evil eye came in upon them, and they
died all at one time. Jerus. Sanhedr. fol. 18. col. 3. For they might not
intercalate the year but in Judea, Maym. in Kiddush Hedesh per. 4. but upon
this mischance they removed that business into Galilee. Here it seems the
Sanhedrin sat also sometimes, or at least they had a great Bench of their own,
for there is mention of stoning ben Satda at Lydda on the eve of the Passover,
Ibid. fol. 25.4. To reckon the stories and eminent men belonging to this place
were endless, at the least it is needless here.

But the mention and gender of Saron which is also named with Lydda, Act. 9.35.
may plead excuse if we allege one or two Talmudich passages for the clearing
of it, Jerus. in Sheviith fol. 38.4. From Bethoron to Emmaus was hilly: from
Emmaus to Lydda plain, and from Lydda to the sea vale.

Idem in Sotah fol. 18.4. R. Iochanan and R. Eliezer went from Labneh to Lydda
and met with R. Joshua in (...) Bekiin.

Gittin per. 1. hal. 1. He that brings a bill of Divorce from a Heathen
Country must be able to say, In my presence it was written and sealed in my
presence: Rabban Gamaliel says, Yea he that brings one from Rekam and Chagra.
R. Eleazer says, Yea he that brings one from Caphar Lodim to Lod. Rabbi Nissim
upon the place says thus: Caphar Lodim was out of the Land, near to Lod, which
was within the Land, and it was so called because Lyddans were always found
there.

Jerus. in Beracoth fol. 3.1. They brought a chest full of bones from Caphar
Tobi and set it openly at the entering in to Lod. Tudrus the Physician came, and
all the Physicians with him, etc.

Besides observing, that Tobi is the name of a man [ Rabban Gamaliels servant.
Beracoth per. 2. hal. 7.] as Tabitha is the name of a woman in the story before
us; the word Saron being of the masculine gender, it plainly tells us that it is
not the name of a Town, but of the plain or flat where diverse Towns stood, and
among others it may be these mentioned.

ACTS CHAP. X. all the Chapter.
LIttle inferior to these places for Learned men, was Caesarea upon the Sea,
and beyond them for other eminencies. (...) The Doctors of Caesarea are of
exceeding frequent and exceeding renowned mention in both Talmuds: and by name
R. Heshaiah the great; R. Achavah, R. Zeira, R. Ada, R. Prigori, R. Vlla, R.
Tachalipha and several others. It was anciently called (...) Stratons tower,
but sumptuously built and beautified by Herod the great, in honor of Caesar,
it was called Caesarea^ It was mixedly inhabited by Jews and Gentiles, and much
of an equal number; and most commonly well fraught with Roman soldiers,
because the Governors residence was ordinarily here.

Of some of these Bands was Cornelius a Captain: a man come to an admirable
pitch of piety, and it is hard to imagine how he came by it: For that he was
not so much as a Proselyte, is apparent, in that they at Jerusalem cavil at
Peter for going to him, as to a Heathen. And whether he were (...) A sojourning
s^ranger as they called some, is not much material, since by their own
judgment (...) A sojourning stranger was as a Gentile to all purposes, Jerus.
Jebamoth fol. 8. col. 4. Whencesoever he learned faith in Christ, his full
knowledge of Christ he learned from Peter: he having a warrant by vision to
send for Peter, and he a warrant by vision to go to him.

Here the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven committed to Peter so long ago, Mat.
16. do their work: opening the door of faith first to the Gentiles, which never
was shut since, nor ever will be whilst there is a Church to be upon the
earth. Jonah at Ioppa, and Simon bar Iona there, both sent to the Gentiles,
compare together.

Upon Peter's preaching, the Holy Ghost falls upon those Gentiles that were
present, to the amazement of those of the Circumcision that had come with
Peter: for they had not only not seen the like before, but had been trained up,
while in their Judaism, under a maxim of a clean contrary tenor, which taught
them That the Holy Ghost would dwell neither upon any Heathen, nor upon any Jew
in a Heathen Country. Caesarea was [as the Jews reputed] (...) between the
borders: that is, a place disputable whether to account within the Land or
without, or indeed both, Iuchas fol. 74. And so were also other places upon
this Western border of the Land, the great sea shore: as A^on or Ptolemais,
Ierus. (...) ^ol. 60. col. 2. Ascalon, Idem Sheviith fol. 36.3. and diverse
others, but all things computed, no fitter place in the Land could have been
chosen for the beginning of this great work of bringing Jews and Gentiles
together into one bound, then this: not only because this City was both Jew and
Gentile, within the Land and without, but also, because here was the Roman
Court the chief of the Gentiles: and the mentioning of Cornelius his being of
the Italian Band, hinteth such an observation.

The Holy Ghost at this its first bestowing upon the Gentiles, is given in the
like manner as it was at its first bestowing upon the Jewish Nation, Act. 2.
namely by immediate infusion: at all other times you find mention of it, you
find mention of Imposition of hands used for it. But here it may be observed
withal, that whereas the fruit of this gift of the Holy Ghost was, that they
spoke with tongues, ver. 46. it confirms that which we spoke at Chap. 2. viz.
that the first fruit of this gift of tongues was, that they that had it, were
enabled to speak and understand the Originals of the Scripture: And here it
appears more plainly then there: And more plainly still in those twelve at
Ephesus, Acts 19.6. And those that spoke with Tongues in the Church of Corinth,
1 Cor. 14. For to what purpose was it for them to speak there with Tongues
where they all understood the same Language? It was not to gibber and talk in
strange Language that men might admire but not understand, but it was for
edification of others, yea and for edifying of himself that so spoke, 1 Cor.
14.4. He that speaks a tongue edifieth himself: How? what could he speak in
any strange Language to his own edification, which he might not as much edify
himself by, had he spoken it in his own native tongue? But only that this is
meant, his ability by the gift of tongues, to understand and speak the
Original language of the Scripture, was both for his own edification and the
edification of others. Suppose one in the Church of Corinth could speak
Persick, Arabic, Ethiopick, etc. and did chatter these Languages among them;
he could not possibly speak any thing in those Tongues [though interpreted]
that could edify the people any more, then if he spoke it in his mother
tongue: But if he spoke and understood and uttered the Original language of
Scripture, that if interpreted, would edify: and he could not speak in his
mother tongue, unless taken from thence, what he might speak thence.

Peter returning to Jerusalem is taken to task by some of the Circumcision for
going in to the Gentiles and eating with them: a thing of unspeakable
detestation to the Jews: Hence those allusions: Let him be to thee as a
Heathen, Matthew. 18. With such a one no not to e^t, 1 Cor. 5. We find not any
such quarrel at Peter and John for going down to Samaria, though the
Samaritans were as odious to the Jewish Nation as people could be, but they
were neither uncircumcised, nor Idolaters: both which, especially the later,
bred their detestation of the Heathen.

ACTS CHAP. XI. from Ver. 19. to the end of the Chapter.
Caesarea the seat of the Roman Governor of Judea, first sees the door of
faith opened to the Gentiles, so Antioch the feat of the Roman Governor of
Syria, first hears the name Christian. These of the hundred and twenty
Ministers [mentioned, Acts 1.^5.] that had sled upon the persecution raised
against Steven, went preaching up and down first as far as the bounds of
Judea extended: then some of them stepped our, as far as into Phaenice,
Cyprus and Syria, but all this while dealing with the Jews only. At last some
of them at Antioch (...) spoke to the Hellenists, ver. 20. Here the word
Hellenists is of doubtful interpretation: only this is doubtless in it, that
it means not Jews, as the word does, Acts 6.1. for it is set in opposition to
them, ver. 19. Does it mean Proselytes then? That it cannot neither, for they
were reputed as Jews to all purposes. Means it Heathens? Yes, that is undoubted
it does, both by the scope of the story here, and by the quarrel urging these
believers at Antioch to be Circumcised, Chap. 15. But why then should they be
called Hellenistae rather then Hellenes? Some conceive, because they were
become (...) Proselyte sojournours, meaning that they had forsaken their
Idolatry: as Cornelius had done his, though he were not (...) a Proselyte
circumcised: But what if these were native Syrians by pedigree and language,
could they then for that be called Hellenists or Greeks? The word therefore
must mean, that they were such as were Syrogrecians; Antioch it self indeed
having been once the head of the Syrogrecian Empire: Hellenes or purely Greeks
they could not be called [though it will not be denied they spoke that
Language] because they were not only no inhabitans of that Country, but not
altogether of that blood: but such as were of a mixture of Syrian and Greek;
the progeny of the old plantations and infranchisments of the Syrogrecian
Monarchy. Whatsoever their title Hellenists includes, they being undoubtedly
Heathens, it shows that these Ministers preached to them, understood of the
liberty given to preach to the Gentiles, and the passage betwixt Peter and
Cornelius, or they durst not have been bold to have gone beyond the partition
wall without their warrant: And the readiness of the Church at Jerusalem to
send Barnabas to them, shows that they also were satisfied in this matter, and
so this evidenceth that this story was after that about Cornelius.

Their sending Barnabas, and his fetching Saul to the same work with him,
gives some confirmation of that which was touched before, namely that it is
very probable that Barnabas knew of his own being designed for a Minister to
the uncircumcision, and of Paul's being joined with him in that work, a great
while before they were sent away from Antioch upon it: They now spend a whole
year in the Church there, and there the Name Christian is first taken up, and
that in a Gentile Church. Antioch of old had been called Hamath, but now it
bare the name of one that had been as bloody a persecutor of the Church and
truth, as the Church of Israel had ever seen, Antiochus. The very name of the
place may raise a meditation.

ACTS CHAP. XII, XIII.
HEre we meet with some scruple in Chronology, and about the precedence of the
story in these two Chapters: for though the actions in Chap. 12. be laid first,
and that very properly, that the story of Peter may be taken up together, and
concluded before the story of Paul come in, which is to be followed to the end
of the Book, yet there may be just question whether, the sending of Paul and
Barnabas from Antioch to preach among the Gentiles, which is handled in the
beginning of Chap. 13. were not before some, if not all those things related in
Chap. 12. And the question arises from these two scruples. 1. Because it is
doubtful, in what year of Claudius the famine was, that is spoken of Chap.
12.28. And 2. because it is obscure, how long Paul and Barnabas staid at
Antioch after their return from Jerusalem, Chap. 12.25. before they were sent
away among the Gentiles. But about this we need not much to trouble our selves:
since as to the understanding of the stories themselves, there can be little
illustration taken from their time: save only as to this, that the public Fast
in the Church of Antioch, may seem to have some relation to some of the sad
stories mentioned before, as coincident with them, or near to them; namely,
either the famine through the world, Chap. 11.28. or the Persecution in the
Church, Chap. 12. We shall not therefore offer to dislocate the order of the
stories, from that wherein they he, the Holy Ghost by the intertexture of them
rather teaching us, that some of them were contemporary; then any way
encouraging us to invert their order. Only these things cannot pass
unmentioned, toward the stating of their time and place, partly of coincidency,
and partly of their succeeding one the other, and which may help us better to
understand both.

1. That whereas Dion the Roman Historian lib. 60. has placed a sore famine
[at least at Rome] in the time of Claudius, in his second year: Josephus
carries it, Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 2. as if the bitterness of it at Jerusalem,
were in his fourth, which Eusebius. in Chron. determines positively; both may be
true; for, for famines to last several years together is no strange thing in
History, Divine or Humane, nor in experience in our own age.

2. That Herod Agrippa's murdering of James, and imprisoning of Peter could not
be before the third year of Claudius: for Josephus a witness impartial enough
in this case, informs us, that Claudius in his second Consulship, which was
indeed the second year of his reign, made an Edict in behalf of the Jews, and
sent it through the world, and after that sent Agrippa away into his own
Kingdom: Now his Consulship beginning the first of January, it was so next
impossible that those things should be done at Rome, and Agrippa provide for
his journey and travel it, and come to Jerusalem, and murder James and
apprehend Peter, and all before the Passeove, unless he hasted as it had been
for a wager, that he that can believe Peter to have been imprisoned in Claudius
his second year of Consulship and reign, must exceedingly straiten the time of
these occurrences, to make room for his belief.

3. In the third year of Claudius, therefore, are those stories in Chap. 12. to
be reputed; only the last, about Herod's death, in the beginning of his fourth,
for a Passover in his fourth Herod lived not to see.

4. It may be observed that Luke has placed the going up of Paul and Barnabas
with the alms of the Church of Antioch to the poor of Judea, before the murder
of James, Chap. 11.30. but their return thence, not till after that, and Herod's
death, Chap. 12.25. not that thereupon we are necessarily to think that they
staid there so long, as while all those things in Chap. 12. were acting, but
that by that relation the story of Paul and Barnabas is begun again, and we may
very well conceive, for all that postscript of Luke after the story of James
his Martyrdom, Peter's imprisonment, and Agrippa's death, their return to
Antioch, and going from thence among the Gentiles, Chap. 13. to have been at
that time while some of the things in Chap. 12. occurred.

Nero, it may not be amiss to affix their Years also, as they went along
concurrent with the Years of our Savior.

The famine begun: the Church of Antioch send relief into Judea.

ACTS CHAP. XII. from the beginning to Ver. 20. CLAUDIUS. III.

Herod, for so does the Jews Pandect help us to understand these words, He slew
James with the sword. (...) Sanhedr. per. 7. hal. 3. They that were slain by
the sword were beheaded, which also was the custom of the Kingdom; that is, of
the Romans.

The ceremonious zeal of Agrippa in the Jewish way, bending it self against the
Church, may be construed as a Jewish act, wicked, as upon the score of that
Nations wickedness and guilt.

The underling condition in which they had lain all the time of Caius [he
having no good affection to that people] being now got loose and aloft knows no
bounds: and being somewhat countenanced by the Edict of Claudius, they cannot
be content with their own immunities, unless they seek also the suppression of
the Christian Church. Though Claudius his Proclamation had this special clause
and caveat, (...), that they should not go about to infringe the liberty of
other men's Religion. This unbounded incroaching of theirs did within a little
time cause the Emperor, who had now made a Decree for them, to make another
against them.

Peter designed by the murderer for the like butchery, escapes by miracle: and
the Tyrant before that time twelve month, comes to a miraculous fearful end.

ACTS CHAP. XIII. from beginning to Ver. 14.
THe Divine Historian having hitherto followed the Story of the Church and
Gospel as both of them were dilated among the Jews, and therein pitched more
especially upon the Acts of Peter and John the singular Ministers of the
Circumcision, more peculiarly Peter's: he does now turn his Pen, to follow the
planting and progress of the Gospel among the Gentiles, and here he insisteth
more especially upon the Story of Paul and Barnabas the singular Ministers of
the uncircumcision, more peculiarly Paul's.

There were now in the Church of Antioch five men which were both Prophets and
Teachers, or which did not only instruct the people and expound the Scriptures,
but had also the Prophetic spirit and were partakers of Revelations: For
though Prophets and Teachers were indeed of a distinct notion, 1 Cor. 12.28.
Ephesians. 4.11. and their abilities to teach were accordingly of a distinct
original, namely the former by revelation, and the latter by study, yet (...),
[which phrase may not pass without observation] according to the state of the
Church then being, they not only had prophetic Teachers, but there was a kind
of necessity they should have such, till time and study had enabled others to
be Teachers, which as yet they could not have attained unto, the Gospel having
been so lately brought among them.

Among these five, the names of Barnabas and Saul are no strangers to the
Reader, but the other three are more unknown.

1. Simeon who was called Niger: If the word Niger were Latin, it might then
fairly be conjectured, that this was Simon of Cyrene, the Moorish complexion of
his Country justly giving him the title of Simeon the black; but since the
Patrionymick, Cyrenean, is applied only in the singular number to the next man
Lucius, and since the word (...) was then used among the Jews in several
significations, as may be seen in Aruch, we shall rather conceive this man a
Cypriot from Chap. 11.20. and as Barnabas also was, Chap. 4.36. and his surname
Niger whatsoever it signified, used to distinguish him from Simon Peter, and
Simon the Canani^e.

2. Lucius of Cyrene: Held by some and that not without some ground to be Luke
the Evangelist: which it is like has been the reason, why antiquity has so
generally held Luke to be an Antiochian: true, in regard of this his first
appearing there under this name Lucius though originally a Cyrenian, and
educated as it may be supposed in the Cyrenian College or Synagogue in
Jerusalem, Chap. 6.9. and there first receiving the Gospel. In Romans 16.21. Paul
salutes the Roman Church in the name of Lucius, whereas there was none then in
Paul's retinue whose name sounded that way but only Luke: as we shall observe
there.

3. Manaen, who had been brought up with Herod the Tetrach. Iuchasin fol. 19.
mentions one Menahem who was once Vicepresident of the Sanhedrin under
Hillel, but departed to the service of Herod the great, with fourscore other
eminent men with him: of whom we gave some touch before: It may be this was his
son, and was called Manaen or Menahem after the father, and as the father was
a great favorite of Herod the great the father, so this brought up at Court
with Herod the Tetrach the son.

As these holy men were at the public ministration with fasting and prayer,
the Holy Ghost gives them advertisement of the separating of Paul and Barnabas,
for the Ministry among the Gentiles. A mission that might not be granted, but
by such a divine warrant; considering how the Gentiles had always lain behind
a partition wall to the Jews: For although Peter in the case of Cornelius had
opened the door of the Gospel to the Heathen, yet was this a far greater
breaking down of the partition wall, when the Gospel was to be brought into
their own Lands and to their own doors: When God says, Separate them to the
work whereunto I have called them, it further confirms that it was and had
been known before that they should be Ministers of the uncircumcision.

The Romish glossaries would fain strain the Mass out of the word (...), and
the Rhemists think they have done us a courtesy, that they have not translated
it to that sense: whereas, besides that the word naturally signifies any
public ministration, the Holy Ghost by the use of it seems to have a
special aim, namely to intimate to us, that this was a public fast, as well
as another public ministration. Public fasts were not ordinary services, and
they were not taken up but upon extraordinary occasions, and what the present
occasion might be, had been a great deal better worth studying upon, then how
to make the Greek word speak the Mass which it never meant.

How public fastings and days of humiliation were used by the Jews, and upon
what occasions, there is a special Treatise in the Talmud upon that subject,
called Taanith, and the like in Maymony, that bears witness: and it was no
whit unsuitable to the Gospel, upon the like exigencies to use the like kind of
service and devotion: And the present famine that was upon all Countries might
very well minister occasion to this Church at Antioch at this present for such
a work, for we cannot but suppose that the famine was now in being.

Whatsoever the occasion was, the Lord, in the midst of their humiliation,
points out Paul and Barnabas, for an employment of his own, who were but a
while ago returned from an employment of the Churches: And so the other three
Simeon, Lucius, and Menaen, understanding what the Lord meant, and having used
another solemn day in fasting in prayer, lay their hands upon them and set them
apart by Ordination. According as the ordaining of Elders among the Jews was by
a Triumvirate, or by three Elders. Sanhedr. per. 1. halac. 3.

This is the second Imposition of hands since the Gospel began, which did not
confer the Holy Ghost with it [for these two were full of the Holy Ghost
before:] and this is the first Ordination of Elders since the Gospel, that was
used out of the Land of Israel. Which rite the Jewish Canons would confine only
to that Land. Maym. Sanhedr. per. 4. Which circumstances well considered, with
the employment that these two were to go about, and this manner of their
sending forth, no better reason I suppose can be given of this present action,
then that the Lord hereby did set down a platform of ordaining Ministers in the
Church of the Gentiles to future times.

Paul and Barnabas thus designed by the Lord and ordained and sent forth by
this Triumvirate and guided by the Holy Ghost, they first go to Seleucia: most
likely Seleucia Pieriae, of which Strabo says, that it is the first City of
Syria from Cilicia, Geogr. lib. 14. to which Pliny assenteth, when he measures
the breadth of Syria, from Seleucia Pieriae to Zeugma upon Euphrates, Not.
hist. lib. 5. cap. 12. The reason of their going thither may be judged to be,
that they might take ship for Cyprus, whither they intended, for that this was
a Port, appears by what follows in Strabo, when he says, That from Seleucia
to Soli is about a thousand furlongs sail: and so it is plain in Lukes text
when he says, they departed unto Seleucin, and from thence they sailed to
Cyprus: where let us now follow them.

Cyprus was a Country so exceeding full of Jews, that it comes in for one in
that strange story that Dion Cassius relates in the life of Trajan. The Jews
[saith he] that dwelt about Cyrene, choosing one Andrew for their Captain, slew
the Greeks and Romans, and ate their flesh, and devoured their inwards, and
besmeared themselves with their blood, and wore their ^kins. Many they sawed
asunder from the head downward: others they cast to wild beasts: many they
made to slay one another, so that there were two hundred and twenty thousand
destroyed in this manner. There was the like slaughter made in Egypt and
Cyprus, where there also perished two hundred and forty thousand. From whence
it is that a Jew may not since come into Cyprus: and if any by storms at sea be
driven in thither they are slain. But the Jews were subdued by others, but
especially by Lucius whom Trajan sent thither. This was the native Country of
Barnabas, Act. 4.36.

Although these two Apostles were sent to the Gentiles, yet was it so far from
excluding their preaching to the Jews, that they constantly began with them
first in all places where they came.

They begin at Salamis, the place next their landing, and there they preached
in the Synagogues of the Jews, having John Mark for their Minister.

From thence they travailed preaching up and down in the Island, till they come
to Paphos which was at the very further part of it, toward the Southwest Angle.
There they meet with a Magical Jew called Barjesus, and commonly titled
Elymas, which is the same in sense with Magus: Such Jewish deceivers as this
went up and down the Countries to oppose the Gospel, and to show Magical
tricks and wonders, for the stronger confirming of their opposition. Such were
the vagabond Jews exorcists, Act. 19.13. and of such our Savior spoke, Matthew.
24.24. and o^ some such we may give examples out of their own Talmudicall
Writers. And here we may take notice of a threefold practice of opposition that
the Jews used in these times and forward against the Gospel and the spreading
of it, besides open persecution unto blood.

1. Much about these times was made the prayer that has been mentioned which
was called (...) The prayer against Heretics, which became by injunction one
of their daily prayers. Maymony speaks the matter and intent of it in his
Treatise Tephillah, in these words: In the days of Rabban Gamaliel, Heretics
increased in Israel [by Heretics he means those that turned from Judaism to
Christianity] and they troubled Israel, and persuaded them to turn from their
Religion. He seeing this to be a matter of exceeding great consequence, more
then any thing else, stood up, he and his Sanhedrin, and appointed a prayer, in
which there was a petition to God to destroy those Heretics: and this he se^
among the common prayers, and appointed it to be in every man's mouth, and so
their daily prayers became nineteen in number. Pereh 2. So that they daily
prayed against Christians and Christianity.

2. The Jews had their emissaries every where abroad, that to the utmost in
them cried down the Gospel, preached against it, went about to consute it, and
blasphemed it and Christ that gave it: Of this there is testimony abundant in
the New Testament: and in the Jews own Writings.

And 3. they were exceeding many of them skilled in Magic, and by that did
many strange things, by such false miracles seeking to outface and vilify the
Divine miracles done by Christ and his Apostles: and striving to confirm their
own doctrines which opposed the Gospel, by backing them with such strange and
wondrous actings. Iuchasin speaks of Abba Chelchiah, and Chamin, and Chamina
Ben Dusa, (...) men skilled in miracles, fol. 20. And the Ierus. Talmud speaks
of their inchantings, and magical tricks in Shabb. fol. 8. col. 2. and 3.
Sanhedr. fol. 25. col. 4. nay even of their charming in the Name of Jesus.
Shabb. fol. 14. col. 4.

Paul miraculously strikes Elymas blind, and inlightens Sergius Paulus with the
light of the Gospel. This was at Paphos where old superstition dreamed of the
blind God Cupid. Doting Elymas grope for thy fellow. The first miracle wrought
among the Gentiles is striking a perverse Jew blind, which thing may very well
become an Allegory.

From Paphos they go to Perga in Pamphylia, and there John departs from them
and returns to Jerusalem: but what was the occasion is hard to conjecture.
Whether it were that he heard of Peter's trouble and danger that he had been in
at Jerusalem, and desired to see him, for that he had some special interest
and familiarity with Peter, may be collected from 1 Pet 5.14. and in that Peter
was so well acquainted at his mothers house, Act. 12.12, etc. Or whether in
regard of this his relation to Peter the Minister of the Circumcision, he made
it nice to go among the Gentiles into the thickest of which he saw they were
coming every day more then other. For at Paphos where they had last been, was a
Temple of Venus, and at Perga, where they now are, was a Temple of Diana.
Strab. lib. 14. Pomp. Mela. lib. 1. cap. 14. Or whatsoever the matter was, his
departure was so unwarrantable, that it made a breach betwixt him and Paul for
the present, nay it occasioned a breach betwixt Paul and Barnabas afterward.
And so we leave him in his journey to Jerusalem, whither when he came, he
stayed there till Paul and Barnabas came thither again.

ACTS CHAP. XII. from Ver. 20. to Ver. 24.
Claudius or near unto it, according as Josephus helps us to compute, who
testifies that the third year of his reign was completed a little before his
death. Vid. Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 7. He left behind him a son of seventeen
years old, in regard of whose minority, and thereby unfitness to reign,
Claudius sent Cuspius Fadus to Govern his Kingdom. His daughters were Berenice
sixteen years old, married to Herod King of Chalcis her fathers brother: And
Mariam ten years old, and Drusilla, six, who afterward married Felix.

ACTS CHAP. XIII. from Ver. 14. to the end of the Chapter. And CHAP. XIV.
viz. in what year the Council at Jerusalem, as it is commonly called, did
occur, which certainty we have not of the times of the occurrences
henceforward thitherto: so that since we cannot determinately point any passage
to its proper year, we must cast them in gross under this gross sum of
years, and distribute them to their proper seasons by the best conjecture we
can.

From Perga in Pamphilia, Paul and Barnabas come to Antioch in Pisidia, and on
the Sabbath day going into the Synagogue, are invited by the Rulers of the
Synagogue, after the reading of the Law and Prophets to speak a word of
exhortation to the people: But how could the Rulers know that they were men fit
to teach? It may be answered, By former converse with them in the City, and it
is very like that the Rulers themselves had drunk in some affection to the
Gospel by converse with them, which made them so ready to urge them to preach:
For it is not imaginable that this was the first time that they had seen them:
nor that they came to Town that very day, but that they had had some converse
before.

Paul preaches: and the Synagogue broke up, and the Jews gone out, the
Gentiles desired that the same words might be preached to them in the week
between, (...): namely on the second and fifth days of the week following,
which were Synagogue days, on which they met in the Synagogues as on the
Sabbath day: And which days, their traditions said, were appointed for that
purpose by Ezra. Talm. in Bava Kamah. per. 7. R. Sol. and Nissim in Chetubboth
per. 1. in Alphes. Their preaching on those days had so wrought, that on the
next Sabbath almost all the City was gathered together to hear the word: and
many of the Gentiles receive it, but the Jews stirred up some female
unbelieving proselytes against them, and some of the chief of the City, so that
they drove them out of those coasts, and they shaking off the dust of their
feet against them go to Iconium. This Ceremony enjoined them by their Master,
Matthew. 10.14. was not so much for any great business put in the thing it self,
as that even from a tenet of their own, they might show how they were to be
reputed of. It was their own Maxim, That the dust of a Heathen Country or City
did defile or make a person unclean. Tosaphta ad Kelim per. 1. has this
saying, In three things Syria was like unto any Heathen Land: The dust of it
made a person unclean, as the dust of any other Heathen Country did, etc. So
that their shaking off the dust of their feet against them, was to show that
they reputed them and their City as Heathenish.

ACTS CHAP. XIV.
AT Iconium they continue long, and with good effect, but at last they are in
danger of stoning, and thereupon they slip away to Lystra and Derbe Cities of
Lycaonia, and to the region that lies round about: That region Strabo
describes lib. 12. where among other particulars he tells that Derbe lay
coasting upon Isauria, and in his time was under the dominion of Amyntas. At
Lystra or Derbe Paul converteth Lois and Eunice, and Timothy, and as some will
tell you, here, or at Iconium he converteth Tecla. For healing a Creeple they
are first accounted Gods, but presently by persuasion of some Jews, Paul is
stoned, but being reputed dead, recovereth miraculously. From thence they go to
Derbe, and return to Lystra, Iconium and Antioch, and ordain Elders in those
Churches. (...), ver. 24. is unproperly rendered here Per suffragia creantes
Presbyteros: for so they could not do; there not being a man in all these
Churches fit to be chosen a Minister, or qualified with abilities for that
Function, unless the Apostles by Imposition of hands bestow the holy Ghost
upon them, which might enable them: For the Churches being but newly planted,
and the people but lately converted, it would be hard to find any among them
so thoroughly completed in the knowledge of the Gospel as to be a Minister: but
by the Apostles hands they receive the Holy Ghost, and so are enabled. It is
true indeed, the Greek word in the first sense denotes suffrages, but that is
not the only sense. And so does the word (...) in the proper sense signify
laying on of hands, yet there was (...) ordination that was without it. Maym.
in Sanhedr. 4. (...) How is ordination to be for perpetuity? Not that they lay
their hands on the head of the Elder, but call him Rabbi, and say, Behold thou
art ordained, etc.

ACTS CHAP. XV.
Jerusalem. The occasion of which was the busy stirring of some, who would
have brought the yoke of Mosaic observances upon the neck of the converted
Gentiles. Multitudes of the Jews that believed, yet were zealous of the Law,
Act. 21.20. and it was hard to get them off from those Rites, in which they had
been ever trained up, and which had been as it were an inheritance to them from
their fathers: This bred this disturbance at the present, and in time an
Apostasy from the Gospel of exceeding many. Antiquity has held that Cerinthus
was the chief stickler in this business; but whosoever it was that kindled it,
it was a spark enough to have fired all had it not been timely prevented.

Paul and Barnabas who had chiefly to deal in the ministration to the Gentiles,
are sent from Antioch to Jerusalem to consult the Apostles about this matter.
This is the same journey and occasion that is spoken of Gal. 2. Then fourteen
years after I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas and took Titus with me.
And I went up by revelation, etc. Not but that he was sent by the Church as
Luke has asserted here, ver. 2. but that the Church was directed by revelation
to take this course for the settling of the question, namely to send up to the
Apostles at Jerusalem. And hence we may fix the time of this business, if it be
resolved from whence the beginning of these fourteen years is to be dated,
namely whether he mean fourteen years after his first conversion, or fourteen
after his former journey to Jerusalem, mentioned Gal. 1.18. which he took three
years after his conversion. The later is the more undoubted, upon these two
observations. 1. It were exceeding obscure, and is exceeding unagreeable to
Scripture accounting, to reckon the later sum of fourteen years from the time
of his conversion, and not from the number or time that went next before, which
was his being at Jerusalem three years after he was converted. 2. His scope in
that his discourse is, not to show barely what journeys he took to Jerusalem
after his conversion, but to show how long he preached among the Gentiles and
abroad out of Judea time after time, and yet when he came to the Apostles to
Jerusalem, they found no fault with him, nor with the course he took in his
Ministry. After I was converted I went not to Jerusalem to consult the
Apostles, but went into Arabia, and back again to Damascus, and so preached up
and down, one utterly unknown by face to the Apostles; yet when after three
years thus doing I came up to Peter the Minister of the Circumcision, he was so
far from contrarying the course that I had gone, that he gave me fifteen
days entertainment. And after that time I went through Syria and Cilicia, and
abroad among the Gentiles, yet after fourteen years employment in this kind,
when I went up to Jerusalem again, I found fair respect with the Apostles and
they gave me the right hand of fellowship. This drift of the Apostle being
observed in that place, which cannot be denied, if his main purpose through the
whole Epistle be observed, it evidently stateth the time of this journey to
Jerusalem to be seventeen years after his conversion.

When Paul and Barnabas came to Jerusalem, they applied themselves (...).
singularly to Peter, James and John the Ministers of the Circumcision, and
imparted to them the doctrine, and manner of dealing that they had used among
the Gentiles, Gal. 2.2. And this they did that they might clear themselves of
all false rumors, that might be laid to their charge [as if they crossed the
doctrine and mind of the Apostles] and that they might have their judgment
and concurrence along with them. With Paul there was Titus, who hitherto had
been uncircumcised, all along in his attending and accompanying Paul: and even
now at Jerusalem, though he were before the Apostles of the Circumcision, yet
was he not forced to be circumcised there neither; because there were some
false brethren who lay upon the catch to observe and scandal the liberty of
the Gospel that the Apostles used, and they were unwilling to give way to them
in any such condescension, least they should have wronged the Gospel. For
though Paul allowed the Circumcision of Timothy, and though even these Apostles
persuaded Paul to use some of the Mosaic ceremonies* Act. 21.24. for avoiding
offense to the weak, and for the more winning of those that were well
satisfied, yet would they not yield an inch in any such thing to these
catchpoles that lay upon the lurch, to spy out something if it might have been
whereby they might have disgraced the Gospel.

Well: the result of the Apostles conference is, that the three of the
Circumsion, neither detracted from what the two of the uncircumsion had done
already, nor added any more things to be done by them hereafter: But they agree
that Paul and Barnabas should go to the Heathen, and they themselves to the
Circumcision: desiring only that though they went among the Gentiles, yet they
would remember the poor of the Circumcision, which they consented to, and all
was well concluded betwixt them.

But they that urged for the imposition of Moses his yoke would not be so
satisfied, but the matter must come to a public canvasse, and so the Elders
also met together with those Apostles to consider of it.

Peter would have none of Moses burdens laid upon the Gentiles, because he
himself had seen them to have been partakers of the holy Ghost, in as free and
full a measure, as they had been that had been most Mosaicall. Paul and
Barnabas affirmed that they had seen the like, and therefore what needed the
Gentiles to be troubled with these observances, seeing they were so eminent in
gifts of the Spirit as well as they of the Circumcision and what could these
add to them. But James finds out a temper betwixt those that would have all
these yokes imposed, and those that would have none, that so the Jews might
have the less offense, and the Gentiles no burden neither. And that was, that
the Gentiles might be required to refrain from eating things offered to Idols,
and strangled, and blood, and fornication. The three first were now become
things indifferent [however strictly they had been imposed by the Law before]
Christ having by his death done down the partition wall, and laid these things
aside as useless when there was to be no distinction of meats or Nations any
more: yet because the Jews were so glewed to these things that the tearing of
them away suddenly, would in a manner have fetched up skin and flesh and all,
therefore the whole Council upon the motion of James think it fit that the
Gentiles should thus far Judaize, till time and fuller acquaintance with the
Gospel might make both Jews and Gentiles to lay these now needless niceties
aside.

The Jews about these things had these Canons among many others.

Avodah Zarah. per. 2. These things of Idolatry are forbidden, and their
prohibition means the prohibition of their use. Wine and vinegar used in
Idolatry which at first was wine, etc. And flesh that was brought in for
Idolatry is permitted to be used [viz. before it was offered] but what is
brought out is prohibited.

And bottles and cans used in Idolatry, and an Israelites wine put in them are
prohibited to be used.

Maymon. in Avoda Zarah per. 7. A beast offered to an Idol is forbidden for any
use: yea even his dung, bones, horns, hooss, skin: yea though there were only a
hole cut in the beast to take out the heart, and that alone offered. Diverse
other things used in Idolatry are mentioned and prohibited.

The observing of all which helps to clear the distinction of the words used
in the text, namely (...) and (...), for these properly were not one and the
same thing, for every (...) was not (...), but e contra, every (...) was (...).
For diverse things were used at an Idolatrous offering, which themselves were
not offered, as knives, dishes and the like, which cannot be called (...), and
yet by these traditions were profane and unclean, and prohibited to be used.

About not eating of blood, they expounded the prohibition of the Law in that
point, unto this purpose, He that eats blood to the quantity of an olive, if
presumptuously, he is to be cut off, and if ignorantly, he is to bring a sin
offering. Talm. in Cherithut^ per. 1. and 5. Maym. in Maacaloth Asuroth per. 6.

By things strangled their Canons understood any thing that died of it self, or
that was not killed as it ought to be. And he that ate to the quantity of an
olive, of the flesh of any cattle that died of it self, or of any beast, or
any fowl that died of it self, was to be whipped, as it is said, Ye shall eat no
carcaise: and whatsoever was not slain as was fitting, is reputed as if dying
of it self. Talm. in Zevachin per. 7. Maym. ubi supr. per. 1. Therefore they
had their rules about killing any beast that they were to eat, of which the
Talmudick Treatise Cholin discusseth at large.

Now as concerning fornication, it is controverted, first whether it mean
bodily or spiritual: and secondly, how it comes to be ranked among things
indifferent [as the other named were] it self being of no such indifferency,
whethersoever is meant, the one or the other. The former certainly is not
meant, for the words (...) reaches that the full, and more needed not to be
spoken to that point: The later therefore is meant: but why named here with
things indifferent? Not because it was indifferent as well as they: Nor because
it was so very offensive to the Jews as were the other: for they made but
little of fornication themselves, according to the common taking of the word
fornication: but fornication here seems to translate their word (...) that
means with them marriage in degrees prohibited: which the Gentiles made no
matter about: and so the Apostles would bring the convert Gentiles under
obedience of the Law, Levit. 18.

Before we part from this Council, as it is commonly called, we may thus far
take notice of the nature of it as to observe, that it was not a convention
premeditated, and solemnly summoned, but only occasional and emergent, and
that it was only of those Apostles and Elders that were at Jerusalem, at the
instant when the matter from Antioch was brought thither, and the other
Apostles that were abroad were not fetched in, nor indeed needed any such
thing: for the message from Antioch required not so much the number of voices,
as the resolves of those Apostles that had especially to deal with the
Circumcision: and whom the Antiochian Church doubted not to find ready at
Jerusalem.

The matter being determined, Letters are dispatched, with the Decrees, unto
the Churches by Paul and Barnabas, and Judas and Silas: they come to Antioch
and there abide a while: and at last go their several ways, Judas to
Jerusalem, and Paul, Barnabas and Silas away among the Gentiles.

It was the agreement between Paul and Barnabas on the one party, and Peter,
James and John on the other, that those two should go among the Gentiles, and
these three among the Circumcision, Gal. 2.9. James abode at Jerusalem as the
residentiary Apostle of that Country, Gal. 2.13. Act. 21.18. and there at last
he suffered Martyrdom. Peter and John went abroad among the Jews dispersed in
foreign parts, so that at last you have Peter at Babylon in the East, and John
at Patmos in the West, and by this we may guess how they parted their
employment between them.

When Paul and Barnabas are to set forth, they disagree about Marks going with
them. Barnabas being his uncle, would have had his company, but Paul denied it,
because of his departure from them before. Mark it seems was at Antioch at
this time [and it may be a quaere whether Peter were not there also, Gal.
2.11.] and when the contest twixt Paul and Barnabas was so sharp that they part
asunder, Barnabas takes Mark and Paul Silas, and go their several ways, and
it is questionable whether they ever saw one another faces any more. Only
Paul and Mark were reconciled again and came into very near society, as we
shall observe afterward.

ACTS CHAP. XVI.
Silas having traveled through Syria and Cilicia, come to Derbe and Lystra:
there he Circumciseth Timothy, whom he intended to take along with him and to
breed him for his successor in the Ministry after his death. Timothy was a
young man of very choice education, parts and hopes, and some remarkable
Prophesies and predictions had been given concerning him, what an instrument he
should prove in the Gospel, which made Paul to fix upon him, as one designed
for him from heaven.

They set forth and travel Phrygia and Galatia, and when they would have gone
into Asia and Bithynia the Spirit forbad them, because the Lord would hasten
them into Macedonia unto a new work, and such a one as they had not meddled
withal till now, and that was to preach to a Roman plantation, for so the text
does intimate that Philippi was, ver. 12. and ver. 21. and so says Pliny, lib.
4. cap. 11. He had indeed been always in the Roman dominions, but still among
other Nations, as Jews, Greeks, Syrians and the like, but we read not that he
was in any City of Romans till here. And his going to preach to that people is
so remarkable, that the text seems to have set two or three notable badges
upon it. For that Nation lies under so many sad brands in Scripture, and lay
under so great an abominating by the Jews, that the Gospels entering among them,
has these three singular circumstances to advertise of it. 1. That the Spirit
diverted Paul from Asia and Bithynia to hasten him thither. 2. That he was
called thither by a special vision, the like invitation to which he had not in
all his travels to any other place. 3. The Penman does not join himself in the
story till this very time. For hitherto having spoken in the third person, he
and they, as He came to Derbe, ver. 1. They went through the Cities, ver. 4.
etc. he comes now to join himself, and to use the word We and Us. After he had
seen the vision immediately we endeavored to go into Macedonia, assuredly
gathering that the Lord had called us, ver. 10.

Yet was this City mixed also of abundance of Jews living among them, as that
people was now dispersed and sowed in the most places of the Empire, from Rome
it self Eastward, however it was on this side: On the Sabbath, by a river side
where the women it seemed used their bathings for purification, and where was a
Synagogue, they preach and convert Lydia a proselytesse, and she is instantly
baptized and her household before she go home, for ought can be found otherwise
in the text: from whence we may observe what believing gave admission to
Baptism to whole households. In this Roman Colony it is observable that the
Synagogue is called Prossucha, and that it is out of the Town.

Paul casts out a spirit of divination, and is therereupon beaten and
imprisoned he and Silas, but enlarged by an earthquake, and the Jaylour is
converted: and he and his family instantly baptized. After a little while Paul
and Silas depart, having laid the foundation of a very eminent Church as it
proved afterward: from which Paul in his Epistle thither, acknowledges as many
tokens of love received, as from any Church that he had planted: and to which
he made as many visits afterward. When he departs he had ordained no
Ministers there for ought can be gathered from the text, and it may be, he did
not, till his return thither again, which was the course he had used in other
Churches, Acts 14.23. He speaks of diverse fellow laborers that he had there
in the Gospel, both men and women, Philip. 4.3. which cannot be understood of
preaching, but that these being converted, they used their best endeavor to
persuade others to embrace the same Religion, etc.

ACTS CHAP. XVII.
PAUL and Silas or Silvanus, and Timothy come to Thessalonica, where they make
many converts, but withal find very much opposition. In three weeks space, or
very little more, they convert some Jews, many Proselytes, and not a few of the
chief Gentiles: women of the City: which number, considered with the shortness
of the time in which so many were brought in, and the bitterness they endured
from the unbelieving, made their piety to be exceedingly renowned all abroad, 1
Thessal. 1.6, 7, 8.

Persecution drives the Apostles to Beraea another Town of Macedonia, Plin.
lib. 4. cap. 10. there they found persons better bred and better learned then
that rabble mentioned ver. 5. that they had met withal at Thessalonica. The
Jews called their learned men (...) filii nobilium: it may be Lukes (...), ver.
11. translates that: The rabble from Thessalonica brings the persecution hither
also, so that Paul is glad to depart to Athens, but Silas and Timothy abide at
Beraea still.

At Athens there was a Synagogue of Jews and Proselytes, ver. 17. so that it is
undoubted the scholars of the University had heard from them the report of the
true God; therefore Paul is not so much cried out upon, for telling them of the
true God in opposition to the false, as for preaching of Jesus crucified, risen
and glorified, which neither they nor even the Jews Synagogue there, had ever
heard of before: for this he is convented before their great Court of
Areopagus, where his discourse converts one of that Bench, Dionysius.

ACTS CHAP. XVIII.
FRom Athens, Paul comes to Corinth. Vrbs olim clara opibus, post clade
notior, nunc Romana colonia, says Pomp. M^la. lib. 2. cap. 3. A little view of
the City may not be useless. It stood in the Isthmus, or that neck of Land
that lay and gave passage betwixt Peloponesus and Attica: upon which Isthmus
the sea pointing in, on either hand made Corinth a famous and a wealthy Mart
Town, by two Havens that it had at a reasonable distance from it on either side
it, the one Iochaeum, at which they took shipping for Italy and those Western
parts: and the other Cenchraea, at which they took shipping for Asia:
Merchandise arriving at these ports, from those several parts of the world,
were brought to Corinth which lay much in the middle between them, and so this
City became the great Exchange for those parts. It lay at the foot of a high
promont called Acrocorinthus, or the Pike of Corinth. The compass of the City
was some forty furlongs or five miles about, being strongly walled. In it was
a Temple of Venus, so ample a foundation, that it had above a thousand Nuns
[such Nuns as Venus had] to attend upon it. The City was sacked by L. Mummius
the Roman General, as for some other offense that it had given to that state,
so more especially for some abuse showed to the Roman Ambassadors there. But it
was repaired again by the Romans and made a Colony. Vid. Strabo lib. 8. Plin.
lib. 4. cap. 4.

Paul coming hither finds Priscilla and Aquila lately come from Italy,
because of Claudius his Decree, which had expelled all the Jews from Rome: Of
this Decree Suetonius speaks, as he is generally understood, In Claudio cap.
25. Iudaeos impulsore Christo assidue tumultuantes Roma expulit. Claudius
expelled the Jews out of Rome, who continually tumultuated because of Christ.
In some copies it is written Christo, but so generally interpreted by
Christians in the sense mentioned, that we shall not at all dispute it. The
same quarrel was got to Rome with the Gospel, that did attend it in all parts
of the world where it came among the Jews, they still opposing it and
contesting against it, and so breeding tumultuousnesse.

The Apostle here, in a strange place, and out of moneys, betaketh himself to
work with his hands for his subsistence, as also he did in other places upon
the same exigent. His work was to make Tents of skins such as the Soldiery
used to lodge in when they were in the field: Hence the phrase, Esse sub
pellibus. This Trade he learned before he set to his studies. It was the custom
of the Jewish Nation to set their children to some trade* yea though they were
to be students. What is commanded a father toward his son? To circumcise him,
to redeem him, to teach him the Law, to teach him a Trade, and to take him a
wife. R. Judah says, He that teaches not his son a trade, does as if he
taught him to be a thief. Rabban Gamali^l says, He that has a trade in his
hand to what is he like? He is like to a Vineyard that is fenced. Tosapht. in
Kiddushin per. 1. So some of the great wise men of Israel had been cutters of
wood. Maym. in Talm. Torah. per. 1. And not to instance in any others, as might
be done in diverse, [ Rabban Iochanan ben Zaccai that was at this instant
Vicepresident of the Sanhedrin, was a Merchant 4 years, and then he fell to
study the Law. Iuchasin fol. 21.] Paul had power and warrant to challenge
maintenance for preaching, as he intimates many times over in his Epistles,
but there was not yet any Church at Corinth to maintain him, and when there
was, he would take nothing of the Gentiles for the greater honor and promotion
of the Gospel. See 1 Cor. 9.6, 11, 12.

He frequenteth the Synagogue every Sabbath, and there reasons and persuades
diverse both Jews and Greeks. But when Silas and Timotheus were come from
Macedonia, he was pressed in spirit and testified to the Jews that Jesus was
the Christ, they having brought him tidings of the great proficiency and piety
of Macedonian Churches, namely the Philippian and Thessalonian. See Act. 17.14.
1 Thessalonians. 1.8. and 3.6. upon whose example he was the more earnest to bring the
Jews of Corinth on; but they oppose and blaspheam: whereupon he and Silas and
Timothy set to work to build up the Gentiles there. The converts in this place
were Crispus and Gaius, and the household of Stephanas, 1 Cor. 1.14, etc. and
Epenetus, Romans 16.5. He is called the first fruits of Achaia, and so is the
household of Stephanas, 1 Cor. 16.15. converted at his first coming thither. He
now sets upon a new task having the Lords encouragement by a vision by night,
and so he staieth at Corinth a year and an half.

In the time of this his abode there, he writes

THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS,
which was the first Epistle that he wrote.

The postscript affixed to that Epistle does date it from Athens [as it
seemeth] because of that passage in Chap. 3.1. We thought it good to be left at
Athens alone: whereas 1. There was a Church in Achaia when Paul wrote this
Epistle, Chap. 1.7. now there was none there while Paul was at Athens, for from
thence he went to Achaia, and began to plant the Church at Corinth. 2. Timothy
and Silas were joint Writers with the Apostle of this Epistle, Chap. 1.1. now
if they were with him at Athens whilst he abode there, which it may be they
were, at the least one of them, 1 Thessalonians. 3.1. yet was not the Epistle then
written, for it is questionable whether Silas was there, and Timothy went a
messenger thither, and returned again before this was written, Chap. 3.6. The
time of its writing therefore was when Timothy and Silas with him returned from
Macedonia and came to Paul at Corinth, Act. 18.5. and Timothy who had been sent
thither purposely, gives a comfortable account of their faith and constancy. So
that this Epistle was written from Corinth, somewhat within the beginning of
the first year of Paul's abode there.

In it, among other things, he characterizeth the condition of the unbeleeving
Jews, Chap. 2.15, 16. for the Thessalonian Church from its first planting had
been exceedingly molested with them.

He says, The wrath is come upon them to the utmost: which whether it mean
passively, that the wrath of God lay so heavy upon them, or actively, that in
their vexation and anger against the Gentiles, that was come upon them, that
was foretold for a plague to them, Deuteronomy. 32.21. it shows that that Nation was
now become unrecoverable: and so he looks upon it as the Antichrist in the next
Epistle, as we shall observe there.

Paul abiding still at Corinth, a tumult is raised against him, and he is
brought before the tribunal of Gallio the Proconsull, who refusing to judge in
matters of that nature, [because the Jews themselves had power to judge such
matters in their own Synagogue] the people become their own carvers, and beat
Sosthenes even before the Tribunal. This Gallio was brother of Seneca the
famous Court Philosopher, N^ro's Tutor: and of him Seneca gives this high
Encomion in the Preface to his fourth Book of natural Questions. I used to
tell thee [saith he to his friend Lucius] that my brother Gallio, whom no man
loves not a little if he can love no more, is not acquainted with other vices,
but this of flattery he hates. Thou have tried him on all hands. Thou have
begun to praise his disposition -- He would go away. Thou have begun to praise
his frugality, He would presently cut thee off at the first words: Thou have
begun to admire his affability and unaffected sweetness -- For there is no
mortal man so dear to any, as he to all -- And here also he withstood thy
flatteries, insomuch that thou criedst out, that thou had found a man
impregnable, against those snares that every one takes into his bosom. And
again in Epist. 104. Gallio, says he, when he was in Achaia and began to have
a fever, he presently took ship, crying out, that it was not the disease of his
body but of the place. To him he Dedicates his Treatise de Beata Vita. See more
of this Gallio, Tacit. Annal. 15. Sect. 11.

From Corinth in the time of his present abode there [but whether before this
tumult before Gallio or after, is not much materiall] Paul writes

THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS,
whilst he and Sylvanus and Timotheus were there together, Chap. 1.1. as they
had been at the writing of the first.

The exceeding much trouble and persecution that this Church had suffered from
the unbelieving Jews from its first planting, Act. 17.5, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 1.6. and
2.14. and 2 Thessalonians. 1.4. gave the Apostle just occasion whilst he was present
with them to discourse with them, and to inform them, concerning the condition
and carriage and end of that Nation: that they might be settled and resolved to
bear all whatsoever they should suffer from that accursed people and
generation: and here he takes up the same discourse again for their further
establishment.

Besides outward molestation and affliction of their bodies, there were false
teachers that troubled their minds, and especially with these two puzzles. 1.
To make them to doubt what became of them that died in the faith and profession
of Jesus: for whereas the Apostle handles the matter of the resurrection in the
former Epistle, Chap. 4.14. I cannot suppose that he does it to them as to men
of the Sadducee opinion, denying the resurrection, or as to men that had never
heard of the resurrection before, for all the Jews, set the Sadduces aside, did
assuredly believe it: but because that the opposers of the Gospel had buzzed to
them their lost condition after death, for their revolting from the Jewish
Religion, and becoming Apostates [as they reputed it] to the Gospel. The tenth
Chapter of the Treatise Sanhedrin that names certain sorts of people that must
not inherit the world to come, gives us good cause to suppose that this was no
small terror that those envious opposers would perplex the minds of those
withal, who had forsaken the Jewish Religion, and betaken themselves to the
profession of Christ. The Talmudich place cited speaks thus, All Israel has
a share in the world to come, as it is said, Thy people shall all of them be
righteous: But these have no share in the world to come, He that says, The
resurrection is not taught in the Law, and that the Law is not from God, and
Epicurus. Now by Epicurus they mean not luxurious one, as the word Epicure is
commonly used by us, but as the Gemara explains it there (...) One that
despises their Doctors: and elsewhere they yoke it with (...) Apostates. (...)
Apostates and Epicures. Resh. hashanah per. 1. and so they brought all that
started from the vain doctrine of their traditionaries under this title, and
under that terror of having no share in the world to come. 2. They went about
to perplex the mind of these converts with urging how near the day of the Lord
was. The Scripture, and the Apostl^ had spoken of the day of the Lords coming,
when he should come to take vengeance of the Jewish Nation for their
wickedness and unbelief: and these would terrify this Church with inculcating
the nearness of it, pretending for this, partly revelation, and partly the
words or writing of the Apostle. The aim in this terror was to amaze the new
believers and to puzzle them about what to hold, and what to do in that sad
time, which they pretended was ready to fall upon their heads. The Apostle
resolves that there was some good space of time to be before, for there was to
be a falling away, and the man of sin to be revealed.

The phrase The man of sin and child of perdition, is plainly taken from that
place, Isa. 11.4. With the breath of his lips he shall slay the wicked one: and
the Apostle makes it clear that he refers to that place, by using the very
words of the Prophet, at ver. 8. Whom the Lord shall consume with the breath of
his mouth. The Jews put an Emphasis upon that word in the Prophet, The wicked
one, as it appears by the Chaldee Paraphrast, who has uttered it (...) He
shall destroy the wicked Roman: And so the Apostle puts an Emphasis upon it,
and translates it the Man of sin: And in that Christ is introduced in the
Prophet, as having a special quarrel and vengeance against him, he is called
the son of perdition, or he that is so certainly and remarkably to be
destroyed. It is true, this means the Roman, as the Chaldee, and our
Protestant Divines by the warrant of John in the Revelation do interpret it*
but in the first place and sense it means the Jewish Nation, which proved
Antichrist, as well as Rome ever did, and as far as Rome ever did, and before
Rome ever did, and as long and longer then Rome has yet done. As Jews and Rome
joined in the murder of Christ, so are they joined in this character of
Antichrist, but the Jews to be understood first: See ver. 7. the mystery of
iniquity was already working when the Apostle wrote this Epistle, which cannot
possibly be understood but of the Jewish Nation, and so it is explained again
and again, 1 John 2.18. and 4.3. and 2 Ioh. v. 7, etc.

The several characters that the Apostle gives of the Man of sin, agree most
thoroughly to that generation and Nation, and so the Scripture plainly applies
them to it.

1. There was a falling away in that Nation of multitudes that had embraced the
Gospel. See Matthew. 24.12. Christ foretelling it, and Paul from thence, 1 Timothy
4.1. by the later times that he there speaks of, meaning the last days of
Jerusalem and the Jewish state, as the phrase is used in that sense abundantly.
Such apostasy may be observed hinted in the Epistle to the Galatians, to the
Hebrews, Colossians, Rev. 2.4. 2 Timothy 1.15. and to spare more, observe the
conclusion of that Parable, Matthew. 12.43, 44, 45. So shall it be with this
wicked generation. The devil once cast out of it by the Gospel, but returned by
their Apostasy.

2. How this Nation was the (...), the great opposer of the Gospel, needs no
instance to any that has read the new Testament. And he that reads the Jewish
Records, shall find evidence enough of it, of which we have given some brief
account at Chap. 13.

3. (...). Which exalts himself against every thing that is called God or
worshipped: were it (...), Against God, it were most true, to the very letter,
their Scribes in the Temple of God it self, sitting and setting up their
traditions above the commands of God, Mat. 15.6. But how they exalted
themselves against every thing called God, or the Magistracy and those that
were set over them, we may observe in such passages as these, 2 Pet. 2.10. They
despise government, etc. Jude v.8. They despise dominion, and speak evil of
dignities, etc. and in their own stories to endless examples.

4. As for the fourth mark mentioned, ver. 9. namely his coming after the
working of Satan with all Magical power and delusion, our Savior had foretold
is of that generation, Matthew. 24.24. compared with ver. 34. of that Chapter:
and it is abundantly asserted by Scripture, by Josephus, and other of their own
Writers, as we have given some examples before.

Now what the Apostle means when he speaks of one that let [ver. 6. And
now ye know what withholdeth, and ver. 7. He who now lets will let] is of
some obscurity; we may without offense give this conjecture. As the term The
day of the Lord, is taken in Scripture especially in this double sense, for his
day of judging the Jewish Nation, and for his day of judging all the world; so
are we to understand a falling away, and a Man of sin of the Jewish Nation
before the former, and a falling away and Antichrist, betwixt the former and
the later. This last is readily concluded upon, to be the Papacy, and he that
let* to mean the Imperial power: but what was he that let in the former,
that the Antichrist among the Jews was not revealed sooner? I should divide
this stake betwixt Claudius the Emperor [who by his decree against the Jews in
Rome, Act. 18.2. give a check by the appearance of his displeasure, to all the
Jews elsewhere that they durst not tyrannize against the Gospel whilst he
lived as they had done.] And Paul himself who by his uncessant traveling in
the Gospel, and combatting by the truth every where against the Jews, did keep
down very much their delusions and Apostasy whilst he was at liberty and
abroad, but when he was once laid up, then all went to ruin, as see Act.
20.29. 2 Timothy 1.15, etc.

Paul when he departs from Corinth, leaves a Church fairly planted there, but
how soon and how miserably it grew degenerate, we shall meet with cause to
observe before it be long. He comes to Ephesus, and striving to get up to one
of the feasts at Jerusalem, he leaves Priscilla and Aquila there. Thither, ere
long, comes Apollos, an excellent Scripture-man, but one that knew only the
baptism of John, but they instruct him better. Not that these Tent-makers
turned Preachers, but that having had so much converse with Paul, they were
able in private conference to inform him better then yet he knew, from what
they had learned from Paul.

ACTS CHAP. XIX. from Ver. 1, to Ver. 19.
OThers at Ephesus there were, that were no further gone in Christianity
neither, then the knowledge of the Baptism of John: Paul asks them, Have ye
received the holy Ghost? they answer, We have not yet so much as heard whether
the holy Ghost be: In which words they refer to a common and a true tenet of
the Nation, which was, that after the death of Ezra, Haggai, Zachary and
Malachy, the holy Ghost departed from Israel and went up: Iuchas. fol. 15. and
they profess they had never yet heard of his restoring. And it is very
probable, that they had never heard of Jesus; whom when Paul had preached to
them, they embrace; and the text says, they were then baptized in the Name of
the Lord Jesus. Not that they were rebaptized, but that now coming to the
knowledge of the proper end of John's baptism, namely to believe in Jesus as
ver. 4. they own their baptism to such an end and construction. For 1. What
need had they to be rebaptized, when in that first baptism they had had taken,
they had come in to the profession of the Gospel and of Christ, as far as the
doctrine that had brought them in could teach them? It was the change of their
profession from Iudaisme to Evangelisme, that required their being baptized,
and not the degrees of their growth in the knowledge of the Gospel, into the
profession of which they had been baptized already. How many baptismes must the
Apostles have undergone, if every signal degree of their coming on to the
perfect knowledge of the mystery of Christ, might have required, nay might have
admitted a new baptizing? 2. If these men were rebaptized, then must the same
be concluded of all that had received the baptism of John, when they came to
the knowledge of Jesus: which as it is incredible, because there is not the
least tittle of mention of such a thing, so is it unimaginable in the case of
those of the Apostles that were baptized by John; for who should baptize them
again in the name of Jesus, since Jesus himself baptized none? Ioh. 4.3. 3.
These men had taken on them the baptism of repentance, and the profession of
Christ, in the baptism of John, that they had received: therefore unless we
will suppose a baptism of faith, different from the baptism of repentance,
and a baptism in the name of Jesus different from the baptism in the name of
Christ, it will be hard to find a reason, why these men should undergo a new
baptizing.

And if it should be granted [which is against reason to grant,] that these men
were really rebaptized, yet were not this a warrantable ground for
rebaptization now, in regard of these main differences betwixt the case then
and now. 1. That great controversy then on foot, about, Whether Jesus were the
true Messiah or no, which caused their rebaptization, if they were rebaptized.
2. The visible conferring of the holy Ghost upon them, upon their baptism if
they were rebaptized: as being a main induction of such a thing, if such a
thing were, that the name of Jesus might be so apparently glorified, upon their
being baptized in the name of Jesus: which indeed was equally glorified, when
they received those gifts upon their acknowledging of Jesus, and owning their
baptism that they had of old been baptized with, as a badge of that
acknowledgment, though not baptized again.

ACTS CHAP. XIX. from Ver. 9. to Ver. 21.
Ephesus: in which he first begins for the space of a quarter of a year to
dispute in the Synagogue: and then when diverse were hardened and believed not,
he separated the Disciples, and disputed daily in the School of Tyrannus:
Hitherto what converts there were to the Gospel, they resorted still to the
public service in the Synagogue, where Paul reasoned daily for the truth of
the Gospel: but finding dangerous opposition, he gets away the Disciples from
thence, and in the School of one Tyrannus they are a particular Congregation.

In these great Towns where there were many Jews, both in Judea and elsewhere,
they had a Synagogue and a Divinity-School: This Divinity-School they called
Beth Midrash, and thither they used to go every Sabbath day, after they had
been at the Synagogue: whereupon they had this for a common proverb, (...):
From the Synagogue to the Divinity-School. In the Synagogue they had prayers
and reading of the Law, and plain Sermons of Doctrine, exhortation and comfort:
In the Divinity-School were discussed and taught, dogmaticall and controversall
points concerning the difficulties of the Law, and other high matters. And
hence it be those different titles and administrations of Pastor and Teacher,
Ephesians. 4.11. and He that teaches, and he that exhorts, Romans 12.7, 8. took
their pattern: if Pastor mean one of the Ministerial function.

In the time of this stay of Paul at Ephesus, He fought with beasts there after
the manner of men, 1 Cor. 15.32. which seems to be understood, of a proper
(...) or fighting with wild beasts in the Theater, as was the barbarous and
bestiall custom of the R^mans and those times. For 1. Observe in the hubbub of
Demetrius, Paul's companions are haled presently into the Theater, ver. 29. as
if there the people had that that would take a course with them. 2. Observe
that the Asiarchae or Theater-Officers are Paul's friends, as having knowledge
and acquaintance of him and with him before. 3. Demetrius his uproar which was
the greatest danger that Luke has mentioned of him, was not till after he had
written his Epistle to Corinth, in which, he speaks of fighting with beasts,
and therefore that could not be meant. 4. The phrase (...) does seem clearly to
distinguish it from any combat in a borrowed sense. 5. The trouble that befell
him in Asia, by which he was pressed above measure, and even despaired of life,
2 Cor. 1.8, 9. cannot be understood so well of the tumult of Demetrius, for we
read not of any hand laid upon Paul in it, as of some other danger nearer
dearth.

In the latter year of these two above written, which was part of Paul's last
year at Ephesus, on the 13th day of October of that year, Claudius the Emperor
dies, and Nero succeeds him: a wretch whose memory is not worth looking
after, unless it be for detetestation: yet must we in our further progress of
viewing the actions of Paul, and ranking his Epistles, be beholden to the
Chronicall observation of his years.

Paul himself says to the Elders of Ephesus, By the space of three years I
ceased not to warn every one, Acts 20.31. And yet Luke in this Chapter
specifieth only two years and a quarter, ver. 8.10. The comparing of which two
sums together, does help us to measure the time of his abode there mentioned
from ver. 20. and forward. Namely that he spent three months in disputing in
the Jews Synagogue: and two years in the School of Tyrannus: and three quarters
of a year after, in going up and down Asia. The expiration of his three years
was about Pentecost in the first year of Nero.


After these things were ended, Paul purposed in spirit when he had passed
through Macedonia and Achaia to go to Jerusalem, saying, When I have been there,
I must also see Rome.

22. So he sent into Macedonia two of them that ministered to him, Timotheus and
Erastus, but he himself staid in Asia for a season.


Paul's thoughts of going to Rome, do argue the death of Claudius, who had
banished all the Jews from thence, Acts 18.2. and that by the coming in of
Nero, a new Emperor, that Decree was extinct, and freedom of access to Rome
opened to them again: For it can be little conceived that Paul should think of
going thither, when he could neither find any of his nation there, nor he
himself come thither without certain hazard of his life: as the case would
have been if Claudius and his Decree were yet alive. It is therefore agreeable
to all reason, that the death of Claudius, and the succession of Nero was now
divulged, and Paul thereupon knowing that it was now lawful again for a Jew to
go to Rome, intends to take a farewell journey and visit to Macedonia,
Achaiah and Jerusalem, and then to go and preach there.

Claudius died the 13th day of October, as was said before, and Nero instantly
succeeded him. A Prince of so much clemency and mansuetude in the beginning of
his reign, that Titus the Emperor afterward used to say, that the best Princes
exceeded not the first five years of Nero in goodness. And Seneca, if he
flatter not the Prince, or his own tutorage of him, gives him this among many
other Encomiums of him, Lib. de Clementia, which he dedicates to him: Potes hoc
Caesar praedicare audacter, omnium quae in fidem tutelamque tuam venerunt,
nihil per te, neque vi, neque clam, reipublicae ereptum. Rarissimam laudem, and
nulli adhuc principum concessam concupisti, innocentiam: Nemo unus homo uni
homini tam charus unquam fuit quam tu populo Romano, magnum longumque ejus
bonum.

It must be some space of time before Claudius death could come to be reported
at Ephesus: it is like, the new year after the Roman account, might be stepped
in. Whenever it was that Paul heard the news, and that a door of access to
Rome was opened for the Jews again, he sets down his determination to stay at
Ephesus till Pentecost, and then to set for Macedon, and back to Jerusalem, and
then to Rome. Upon this resolution he sends Timothy and Erastus into Macedon
before him: appoints them to call at Corinth in the way, and intends himself
to stay at Ephesus till they should come thither again to him, 1 Cor. 16.10, 11.

Between Ver. 22. and Ver. 23. of this XIX CHAP. of the ACTS, falls in the
time of Paul's writing

THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.
He being now at Ephesus, and having set down the time of his removing thence,
namely at Pentecost coming, 1 Cor. 16.8. He had now been at Ephesus well
toward three years, and had met with many difficulties; yet had so prevailed
by the power of the Gospel, that not only all along hitherto many people were
continually converted, but even now alate, many conjurers, and such as used
magical arts, devoted themselves to the Gospel and their books to the fire,
and became the renewed monuments of the power and prevalency of the divine
truth. This was that great and effectual door opened to him, of which he
speaks, 1 Cor. 16.9. and which occasioned his stay at Ephesus still, when he
had sent Timothy and Erastus into Macedonia, Acts 19.21. In the time of which
stay there, Stephanas, and Fortunatus and Achaicus, come from Corinth, 1 Cor.
16.17. with Letters from the Church to Paul, 1 Cor. 7.1. and he upon their
return, returns his answer in this Epistle sent by Titus and another, 2 Cor.
12.18. Some Postscripts have named Timothy for the bearer, antedating his
journey to Corinth, which was not in his going to Mecedon, but in his return
back, and when this Epistle had already given them notice of his coming that
way, 1 Cor. 16.10.

Apollos when Paul wrote this Epistle was with him at Ephesus, and was desired
by Paul to have gone along with the brethren to Corinth, but he would not, 1
Cor. 16.11. it may be because he would not countenance a faction there by his
presence, which was begun under his name. The Church was exceedingly broken
into divisions, which produced very doleful effects among them. These several
enormities raged in that Church, though so lately and so nobly planted, and all
originally derived from this first mischief of faction and schism.

1. A member of the Church had married his fathers wife, yea as it seems 2
Cor. 7.12. his father yet living: which crime by their own Law and Canons
deserved death: For he that went in to his fathers wife was doubly liable to be
stoned, both because she was his fathers wife, and because she was another man's
wife, whether he lay with her in his fathers life time, or after his death,
Talm. in Sanhed. per. 7. and Maym, in Issure biah. per 1. and 2. And yet they
in the height of the contestings they had among themselves, did not only, not
take away such a wreth from among them, nor mourn for the miscarriage, but he
had got a party that bolstered him up and abetted him: and so while they should
have mourned they were puffed up. His own party in triumph that they could bear
him out against the adverse, and the other in rejoicing that in the contrary
faction there was befallen such a scandal. Or both as taking this Libertinism
as a new liberty of the Gospel. The Apostle advises his giving up to Satan, by
a power of miracles which was then in being. So likewise did he give up
Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.20. The derivation of this power we conceived
at Act 5. [in the case of Ananias and Saphira] to be from that passage of
Christ to the Disciples, Ioh. 20.22. He breathed on them and said, whose sins
ye retain they are retained, etc. and so were the Apostles endued with a
miraculous power of a contrary effect or operation. They could heal diseases
and bestow the holy Ghost, and they could inflict death or diseases, and give
up to Satan. Now though it may be questioned, whether any in the Church of
Corinth had this power, yet when Paul's spirit with the power of the Lord Jesus
Christ went along in the action, as Chap. 5.4. there can be no doubt of the
effect.

2. Their animosities were so great, that they not only instigated them to
common suits at Law, but to suits before the tribunals of the Heathen, which as
it was contrary to the peace and honor of the doctrine of the Gospel, so was
it even contrary to their Judaick traditions: which required their subjection
and appeals, only to men of their own blood, or of their own Religion. The
Apostle to rectify this misdemeanour, first calls them to remember, that the
Saints should judge the world, and this he mentions as a thing known to them,
Chap. 6.2. and it was known to them from Dan. 7.18, 27. And the Kingdom and
Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom shall be given to the people of the
Saints of the most high. How miserably this is misconstrued by too many of a
fifth Monarchy, when Saints shall only Rule, is to be read in too many miseries
that have followed that opinion. The Apostles meaning is no more but this, Do
you not know that there shall be a Christian Magistracy? or that Christians
shall be Rulers and (...) the world, and therefore why should you be so
fearful or careless to judge in your ow^ matters? Observe in what sense he
had taken the word Saints in the former verse, name^ly for Christians in the
largest sense, as set in opposition to the Heathen. And he speaks in the tenor
of Daniel from whence his words are taken, that though the world and Church had
been ruled and judged and domineered over, by the four Monarchies which were
Heathen, yet under the Kingdom of Christ under the Gospel, they should be ruled
and judged by Christian Kings, Magistrates and Rulers. Secondly, he minds them,
Know ye not that we shall judge Angels? ver. 3. Observe that he says not as
before, Know ye not that the Saints shall judge Angels? but we. By Angels it is
uncontrovertedly granted that he means evil Angels the Devils: Now the
Saints, that is all Christians that professed the Gospel were not to judge
Devils, but we, says he, that is the Apostles and Preachers of the Gospel; who
by the power of their Ministry ruined his Oracles, Idols, delusions and
worship, etc. Therefore he argues, since there is to be a Gospel Magistracy to
rule and judge the world, and a Gospel Ministry that should judge and destroy
the Devils, they should not account themselves so utterly incapable of judging
in things of their civil converse, as upon every controversy to go to the
Bench of the Heathens to the great dishonor of the Gospel. And withal
advises them, to set them to judge who were less esteemed in the Church, ver.
4. Not that he denies subjection to the Heathen Magistrate which now was over
them, or incourageth them to the usurpation of his power: but that he asserteth
the profession of the Gospel, capable of judging in such things, and by
improving of that capacity, as far as fell within their line, he would have
them provide for their own peace, and the Gospels credit. We observed before,
that though the Jews were under the Roman power, yet they permitted them to
live in their own Religion, and by their own Laws to maintain their Religion:
and it may not be impertinent to take up and enlarge that matter a little here.
As the Jews under the Roman subjection had their great Sanhedrin, and their
less of three and twenty Judges, as appears both in Scripture, and in their
Records, so were not these bare names, or civil bodies without a foul, but they
were inlivened by their juridicall, executive power, in which they were
instated of old: So that though they were at the disposal of the Roman Power,
and Religion, and Laws, and all went to wrack when the Emperor was offended at
them, as it was in the time of Caligula, yet for the most part, from the time
of the Romans power first coming over them, to the time of their own last
Rebellion, which was their ruin, the authority of their Sanhedrins and
Judicatories was preserved in a good measure entire, and they had
administration of justice of their own Magistracy, as they enjoyed their own
Religion. And this both within the Land and without, yea even after Jerusalem
was destroyed, as we shall show in its due place. And as it was thus in the
free actings of their Sanhedrins, so also was it in the actings of their
Synagogues, both in matters of Religion and of civil interest: For in every
Synagogue as there were Rulers of the Synagogue in reference to matters of
Religion and Divine worship, so were there Rulers or Magistrates in reference
to Civil affairs, which judged in such matters. Every Synagogue had Beth din
shel sheleshah, a Consistory or Judicatory, or what you will call it, of three
Rulers or Magistrates, to whom belonged to judge between party and party in
matters of money, stealth, damage, restitution, penalties, and diverse other
things which are mentioned and handled in both Talmuds in the Treatise
Sanhedrin per. 1. Who had not power indeed of capital punishments, but they
had of corporal, namely of scourging to forty stripes save one. Hence it is
that Christ foretells his Disciples, In the Synagogues you shall be beaten, Mark
13.9. and hence had Paul his five scourgings, 2 Cor. 11.24. So that in every
Synagogue there were Elders that ruled in Civil affairs, and Elders that
labored in the Word and Doctrine. And all things well considered, it may not
be so monstrous, as it seems to some, to say it might very well be so in those
times in Christian Congregations. For since, as it might be showed, that Christ
and his Apostles in platforming of the model of Christian Churches in those
times, did keep very close to the platform of the Synagogues: and since the
Romans in those times made no difference betwixt Jews in Judaism, and Jews that
were turned Christians, nor betwixt those Religions: for as yet there was no
persecution raised against Christianity, why might not Christian Congregations
have and exercise that double Function of Ministry and Magistracy in them as
well as the Jewish Synagogues? And if that much controverted place, 1 Timothy
5.17. should be interpreted according to such a sense, it were neither
irrational, nor improbable. Nor to interpret Paul speaking to such a tenor
here. Only his appointing of (...), the less esteemed in the Church* to be
appointed for that work is of some scruple: what if it allude to (...) A
Committee of private men? of which there is frequent mention among the Hebrew
Doctors. See Maymon. in (...) fol. 253. col. 1.

3. It was the old Jewish garb, when they went to pray, to hide head and face,
with a vail, to betoken their ashamednesse and confusion of face wherewithal
they appeared before God: And hence is the conjunction of these two words so
common in their Writings (...) He veiled himself and prayed. And this for a
current rule, The wise men and their scholars may not pray, unless they be
veiled. Maymon. in Tephillah per. 5. To which let us add that of Sueton. in
Vitell. cap. 2. Lucius Vitellius, says he, had an excellent faculty in
flattering: he first set afoot the worshipping of Caius Caesar for a God: when
returning out of Syria, he durst not go to him but with his head veiled, and
then turning himself about, he fell prostrate.

Again it was the custom of the Jewish women, to go veiled, or their faces
covered, whenever they went into public. A woman, says Maymony, may not go
into public (...) if she have not a vail on. In (...) per. 24. And this the
Talmudists call this (...) The Jewish Law: and (...) The garb of modesty.
Chetubboth per. 7. and Alphes. ibid. Where they say that those women
transgress the Jewish Law that go forth unvailed, or that spin in the streets,
or that talk with every man.

Now in this Church of Corinth, the men retained the Jewish custom that they
prayed veiled, or with their head and face covered, but the women transgressed
their Jewish Law, for they went unvailed and bare faced into the public
Congregation, and their reason was, as it seems by the Apostles discourse,
because they, in regard of their beauty and comely feature, needed less to be
ashamed before God in his worship then the men. The Apostle reproves both, and
argues that if the man pray veiled, who is the Image and glory of God, then
much more should the woman, who is but the glory of the man. But he cries down
the man's praying veiled, as dishonouring his head; and exhorts that the woman
have power on her head, because of the Angels, cap. 11.10. The word (...) which
we observed instantly before, out of Maymony signified a woman's vail, does also
signify power or dominion: and accordingly the Apostle speaks, Let the woman
have power on her head: But what means he by, Because of the Angels? I should
answer, Because of the devils: for these he had called Angels also, a few
Chapters before, viz. Chap. 6.3. And his words may be construed to this sense,
that women should not expose their faces openly in the Congregation, lest the
devil make a bait of their beauty, and thereby entangle the eyes and hearts of
the men, who should be then better employed, then gazing and longing after
beauty. There are, that by Angels understand the Ministers, and interpret it,
that women should be veiled lest the Ministers eyes should be entangled by
their faces: which exposition if it be admitted, it may speak for the admission
of that also which we give, which provides for the eyes of the whole
Congregation as well as of the Ministers.

4. In the same eleventh Chapter he also blames their disorder in receiving
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in the height of their heats and
contestations. Wherein they did not only not discern the Lords Body, a Symbol
and tie of communion, but they even transgressed that rule now Christians,
which those of them that were Jews would not have done in their Judaism. It was
then a Canon current, and binding amongst them, that none should eat and drink
in their Synagogues, and none should sleep, Jerus. in Megilla fol. 74. col. 1.
Maym. in Tephillah per. 11. and Gloss. in Maym. in Shabb. 30. But now as they
ate and drank the Bread and the Cup in the Sacrament, in their Churches, and
that warrantably, so did they also presume unwarrantably to eat their own
common suppers there, and that only in defiance one of another, the rich to
outface the poor, and one party another with their good commons; some banketing
and feasting to the full, whilst others sat hungry by and looked on. [See how
(...), ver. 21. signifies in the LXX, Genesis 43.34. Cant. 5.1.] Thus did they eat
and drink judgment to themselves in the Sacrament, whilst they would receive
the symbol of communion and yet show such signs and evidences of disunion at
the very instant: And the Lord accordingly overtook some of them with evident
judgments, weakness, sickness and death, avenging at once upon them the
indignity done to his Sacrament, and the indignity done to their brethren. Much
like surfeting Nabals case and end.

5. And as the people were thus irregular in this part of worship in their
public assemblies, so were their Ministers faulty in others, namely about the
managing of spiritual gifts there. The pretense to the spirit [where indeed it
was not] has always been the great usherer in of all error and delusion: And
to this the very unbeleeving Jews pretended, and often backed their pretenses
with magical impostures: and of this the Apostle speaks, Chap. 12.3. No man
speaking by the Spirit of God, as these men took on them to do, can call Jesus
accursed, as they called him. And on the other hand, some that had spiritual
gifts indeed, failed in the using of them to the edification of the Church, but
put them forth sometime for their own vainglory: and such was their miscarriage
which he taxes, Chap. 14. They that from that Chapter would ground a preaching
by the Spirit now, sure do little observe what they do to build upon an example
which the Apostle reproves: and they infer from a place much mistaken.

There were indeed the extraordinary gifts of tongues and prophesying in the
Church of Corinth, but who had them, and what had they in having them, and how
used they them? 1. It was not every or indeed any private member of the
Congregation that had them, but the Ministers only, and by these very gifts and
imposition of the Apostles hands by which these gifts were conferred, they were
inducted into the Ministry and enabled to it. The learned Reader will observe
the difference that in ver. 16. is made betwixt him that spoke with the
tongues, and (...) A private man, that sat by. 2. It was not to gabble with any
tongue that is called speaking with a tongue [for to what edification possible
could it be for any Minister in Corinth to speak Persick, Coptick, Gallick or
any other strange language in that Congregation where all of them understood
one and the same language?] but it was to understand and speak the Originals of
Scriptures, as was touched before, and to be able to unfold them, and so to
prophecy or preach to the people. Observe these passages in the Chapter: He
that speaks with a strange tongue edifieth himself, ver. 4. And, I would you
all spoke with tongues: Now how could a man edify himself by speaking in some
strange remote language, when he might speak or understand the very same thing
in his own mother tongue? And what were they better, if they all so spoke,
unless it were, that thereby they were the fitter to look into all humane
learning? But he or all of them that were able to understand and speak the
original language of Scripture, might thereby edify themselves, and therein
speak and understand what they could not in their mother tongue. 3. It appears
by the Apostles discourse that these men used these gifts irregularly,
confusedly and for their own vainglory, which he rebukes and rectifies.

6. There were also in or crept into this Church, those that were either down
right Sadduces in denying the resurrection, or that though with the Pharisees
they acknowledged it, yet denied it of those that had forsaken their Judaisme,
and so would exclude all Christians from it: Upon this the fifteenth Chapter
discourses so fully and divinely that nothing can be more.

Those that this Church sent to visit Paul at Ephesus, brought with them a
Letter from the Church, in the which they desired to be resolved about some
doubts: as

1. About marriage, and a single life; what they should do in that case, since
their Judaick Laws had always laid marriage upon them as a binding command.
This they reckon the first command of the 613. Vid. marg. ad tripl. Targ. ad
Genesis 1. And this their Canons did so strictly bind on as a duty, that they say
that he that lives to such an age and marries not transgresses, a preceptive
Law. Maym. in (...) per. 1. In this case the Apostle says, Praeceptum non
habeo; that he accounted it no such command, but every one was left to his
liberty: according as he could contain, or not contain. And in his stating this
case, how he speaks the language of his Nation, and how far he comes toward
their opinions, or goes from them, the learned may observe, by comparing the
beginning of this Chapter, with Maymony in his Treatise (...) especially fol. [
apud me] 251. and 248. and 249.

2. About cohabitation of man and wife, when the one party was a Believer or a
Christian, and the other party an unbeliever or a Heathen. And here he
concludes that the children, if either parent were a Christian, were holy, ver.
14. that is, Christians, and not to be reputed as Heathen children. It is the
very phrase that his Nation used about the children of Proselytes, that were
born after they were proselyted; they were said to be born (...) in holiness,
that is within the Religion, not in Heathenisme.

3. About eating things sacrificed to Idols, and communicating in such things;
a dangerous stumbling block of old, and particularly forbidden by the Council
at Iorusalem: Of this he speaks at large, and from the nature of
Idol-sacrifices, and from the nature of the Sacraments he shows how far
they should be separate from such communion with Idolatry. He speaks of all
Isreal's being baptized unto Moses in the cloud and sea, and so separate from
all Egyptian and other Idolatry and prophannesse; and our baptism speaks the
like separation. The Jews say Moses was sanctified by the cloud, Jerus. in Joma
fol. 38. col. 2. and Paul speaks here the same of all Israel, Chap. 10.2.

4. About Ministers maintenance under the Gospel, Chap. 9. which he confirms,
and shows that Peter and the rest of the Apostles and their wives and
families were so maintained, Chap. 9.5, etc.

He concludes the Epistle with a sad execration upon Whosoever loves not the
Lord Jesus Christ, let such a one be Anathema Maran Atha, Chap. 16.22. that is,
let him be accursed or destroyed: Our Lord comes. In which that he in the
first aim and intention means the unbelieving Jews, may be observed upon
these four considerations. 1. Because the Jews of all men under heaven were and
are the greatest haters of Christ. Pagans indeed do not love the Lord Jesus,
because they know him not, but again because they know him not they hate him
not. The Turks love not Christ as Christians love him, but again they hate not
Christ as the Jews hate him. The word Jesus here carries the Emphasis to level
this execration at them: they pretended to love Messiah or a Christ, but openly
profess hatred of Jesus. 2. Because the Apostle here uses such Dialect, as
that he speaks in the very Jews language in the words Maran atha. He had
spoken in Greek all along the Epistle, and Greek all along his Epistles, and
that here alone he should use a Syriack phrase and not translate it, it does
evidently show, that his speech refers more especially to the Jewish Nation.
So Jeremy in Chap. 10. v. 11. threatening and cursing the Chaldean Idolatry,
does it in the Chaldean language; one clause of which he uses not throughout
his Prophecy beside. 3. The Jews of all men did chiefly or only call Jesus
Anathema, as Chap. 12*3. and as they are not ashamed openly to confess in
their Talmud; therefore against them of all men first and chiefly is this
Anathema aimed. 4. This is agreeable to what the Scripture speaks copiously in
other places: as Isa. 65.15. You shall leave your name for a curse to my
chosen, etc. Malac. 4.6. Lest I come and smite the Land with a curse, etc. The
most pious and charitable Apostle could wish himself to be Anathema for that
Nation, on condition that they might believe and be saved, Romans 9.3. but since
they will not believe, and do refuse salvation, and hate the Savior, he
forgets consanguinity for the love of Christ, and dooming and devoting all
whomsoever, that loved not the Lord Jesus Christ to destruction, he intends
them in the first place who were his chief haters.

The words Maran-atha are held by some to be of the form of the highest
excommunication; Sic signatur, say they, species extremi Anathematis, ac si
diceretur, Maledictus esto ad adventum and in adventu Domini: And withal that
Maran atha is the same in sense with Shammatha: but this utterly without the
warrant of any Jewish antiquity [whose language it is] at all. I believe it is
impossible to show Maran atha for a form of Excommunication or execration in
any of their Writings, nay very hard if not next impossible to show the words
Maran atha in their Writings at all in any sense.

The phrase in the Apostle refers first to Christ's coming in vengeance against
Jerusalem and the Jewish Nation, as the execration is first to be pitched upon
them: Maran atha, Our Lord comes. Many and dreadful things are spoken of this
his coming in the Scripture, of which we have spoken in several places as we
have come along. So that in this sentence he does both justly doom this
unbelieving and wretched Nation to their deserved curse, and does withal in
this phrase intimate that the doomed curse was near approaching, in the Lords
coming in vengeance against them. Now though we construe the words in such an
application to the Jews, it is not exclusively, but that their sense reaches
also to every one that loves not the Lord Jesus of what Nation soever, and the
Lord will come in time to make him an Anathema.

There is some obscurity in a passage in Chap. 5.9. both of sense and history:
I wrote unto you in an Epistle not to company with fornicators: 10. Yet not
altogether with the fornicators of this world, etc. Where first we have to
inquire what it is that the Apostle does here forbid them, and then, when it
was that he wrote this Epistle that he speaks of. There are two things that
are here prohibited; one, when he wrote that which he speaks of, namely, that
they should not company with fornicators; and the other now when he writes this
Epistle, viz. that they should not eat with such: the later he had permitted
till now, though he prohibited the former, which let them well observe that
understand by eating the receiving of the Sacrament.

Besides what communion was among the Jews in sacris, there was a twofold
companying or communicating among them in civil things; the one more common,
the other more near and peculiar: Their more common was, eating together at the
same common table: For even such eating they accounted of, as of a communion,
under a rule: and hence no eating with Gentiles for any Jew, Act. 11.3. nor
with Publicans and sinners for any that were of the stricter sort of Religions:
therefore Christ is cavilled at for it so often in the Gospel. The other was that
communion or associating, which they called (...) and (...) the former of which
comprehended their near joining in partnership, deputations and the like, of
the which the triple Talmudick, Tract Bava, and Maymonies of Shittuphin and
Shilluchin, do treat at large. The later comprehended their combining in joint
interest and association, in the use of any common Court or Cloister where many
dwelt together: of which the Treatise Erubhin is a large discourse and obscure
enough. Now the Apostle in the former prohibition (...), seems to forbid this
nearer communion: that if any that is called a brother or a Christian, be a
fornicator, etc. they should not associate with him in any such conjunction as
partnership, deputation, employment, cohabitation or common interest, etc. But
upon the hearing of this horrid fact and example of the incestuous person, he
heightens his prohibition, and now forbids, that they should not use so much as
that common society with them, as to eat with them at common tables: which was
to set them at the utmost distance, even at the same that the Jews did the very
Heathens, for with them they might not eat.

Now how to understand (...), is of some difficulty. Some conceive it means an
Epistle, which was sent before this, and which was lost. Which is an exposition
somewhat hard to digest. Certainly it is gentler and more warrantable, yea even
by the rules of grammar to render (...) to such a sense as this, I wrote, or
had written, or was writing in this Epistle that you should not company with
fornicators, etc. but now hearing and weighing this high offense of the
incestuous person, and the danger of such an example, I sharpen my style, and
now forbid not only your near associating with such, but even the common
fellowship of eating together at common tables, which was as much as that which
is spoken, Matthew. 18.17. Let him be to thee as an heathen man.

ACTS CHAP. XIX. from Ver. 23. to the end of the Chapter.
PAUL had determined to stay at Ephesus till Pentecost, because of a great and
effectual door that was opened to him, and he was earnest to embrace that
opportunity, 1 Cor. 16.9. but before his determined time of departure thence
came, and as it seems not long before, Demetrius, with the rest of the
Silversmiths raise a tumult against him as the great impairer of their profit,
by crying down the worship of Diana and other Idols. These men used to make
silver Temples of Diana, (...), or little models, as it seems, made after
that Temple fashion; which they that came to Ephesus to worship, bought, either
to consecrate to the Goddess, and to leave there in her Temple, or rather to
take away with them home in memorial of that Goddess. Tully in Verrem speaks
of Aedes Minervae posita in fano Apollinis. And Dion Cassius lib. 36. of (...),
etc. A little Temple of Juno set upon a table looking toward the East, did of
it self turn toward the North. And in lib. 40. (...) [(...), etc.] The Eagle
[saith he, meaning the Roman ensign] was a little Temple, and in it was set a
golden Eagle: such a one pitched in every one of the Roman Legions, and it
never stirred out of the winter quarters, till the whole Camp did remove: this
Eagle fixed on the top of a spear one man carried: the lower end of the spear
being sharp that it might be stuck into the ground. So that it seems the Roman
Eagles were not flying Colors like ours, but a golden Eagle meddall wise
enclosed in a little fabric like a Temple: Of such a kind were these silver
Temples of Diana of, namely a little silver shrine made after the fashion of
the Temple, and the Goddess in it.

The great Temple was reputed one of the seven wondrous fabrics of the world:
It was hundreds of years in building at the charge of all Asia, before it came
to its last excellency and perfection. And as hither had been the conflux of
the cost of all Asia toward the building of it, so when it was built, hither
was the conflux of all Asia's superstition. And as from hence it may be
gathered how great a work it was to plant the Gospel in this center of
Idolatry, so does Demetrius readily observe, how great a detriment is like to
accrue to him and his fellows by the Gospels destroying that Idolatry, as daily
it did. Hereupon they raise a tumult against Paul, which is not only promoted
by the Idolatrous Heathen, but by the Jews also, though upon another score. In
the hubbub there is mention of Alexander, whom they drew out of the multitude
the Jews putting him forward. And he beckened with the hand and would have made
his defense unto the people, but when they knew he was a Jew, they would not
hear him, ver. 33, 34. And Paul in his second Epistle to Timothy, who was at
Ephesus when he wrote to him, says, Alexander the Coppersmith did me much
evil, 2 Timothy 4.14. I think there is little question to be made but that
Alexander mentioned in both places is one and the same man: especially if we
consider that he that Paul speaks of was of Demetrius his Profession a
Coppersmith. Now whereas Luke says the Jews put him forward, and he would fain
have made a speech in his defense to the people: it is easy to guess what the
subject of this speech would have been: Namely that whereas the Heathens every
where looked upon the Jews as the great opposers and enemies of their Idolatry,
and the Jews and Alexander were very apprehensive, that the eyes of the
Ephesians was on that Nation as the enemy of their Diana, and so they feared
the tumult might have fallen upon them, they put forward Alexander to make
their Apology, who if he had had liberty to have spoken would have laid load
upon Paul and his company, and have excused the Jews: but thus it pleased God
to provide for the Apostles safety, that the tumultuous people would not hear
what Alexander would have said: which would have laid all the blame on Paul.

ACTS CHAP. XX.
Ver. 1. And after the uproar was ceased, Paul called unto him the Disciples,
and embraced them, and departed for to go into Macedonia.

2. And when he had gone over those parts, and had given them much exhortation,
he came into Greece,

3. And abode there three months: and when the Jews laid wait for him as he
was about to sail into Syria, he purposed to return through Macedonia.


IT was his resolution to have stayed at Ephesus till Pentecost, had he had no
disquieture or disturbance there, 1 Cor. 16.8. Now though it be not certain how
long it was before the time that he had fixed for his departure, that the
tumult there did pack him away; yet this is apparent, that when he came thence,
he had the whole summer before him, and in that summer he traveled these
journeys, and thus was his progress.

1. From Ephesus he sets for Macedonia, ver. 1. and 1 Cor. 16.5. from whence
though he had been driven some five years ago by persecution, Act. 16. as he is
now from Ephesus, yet had he received so many evidences of the Macedonians
faith toward God, and pledges of their tenderness and love toward himself,
Philip. 4.15, 16. that he is not only resolved to venture himself again amongst
them, but he holds himself engaged to revisit them, and to bestow his pains
again among them for their further proficiency in the Gospel. At his departure
from Ephesus he leaves Timothy there behind him, though in a dangerous place
and time, yet necessity by reason of false teachers that were ready to break
out, so requiring it, 1 Timothy 1.3, 4.

2. By the way as he goes he makes some stay at Troas: where though he had fair
success in his Ministry, yet not finding Titus whom he expected to have met
withal from Corinth, he makes not long stay there, but sets away again
speedily for Macedonia, 2 Cor. 2.12, 13.

3. It was in his thoughts whilst he was at Ephesus, to have touched at
Corinth in this his journey, and to have made some stay there, 2 Cor. 1.15, 16.
but thus missing of Titus at Troas, and neither from him, nor yet from any
other receiving intelligence how his Epistle that he had written thither took
with them, he thought it best to go by, and not to call there at this time,
because he doubted he should have a heavy and comfortless meeting with them, 2
Cor. 2.1, 2.

4. Being come into Macedonia he finds some troubles there: fightings without,
either from false brethren, or from open enemies: and fears and unquietness
within, lest all should continue at Corinth, as he had heard of it: but at the
last Titus comes and refreshes him with the desired and welcome tidings that
all was well there, and that his Epistle had had that happy issue and effect
among them that he longed for, 2 Cor. 7.5, 6.

5. Whilst he staieth in Macedonia and those parts, he preaches especially in
those places where he had been before, namely Thessalonica and Philippi; and
now was the time also that he dispersed the Gospel as far as to Illyricum, of
which he speaks in Romans 15.19.

6. At this time whilst he was employed in these Macedonian climates, he
writes

THE FIRST EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY;
as may be concluded upon these observations.

1. It is apparent from 1 Timothy 1.3. and 3.15. that that Epistle was written
after Paul's setting out from Ephesus for Macedonia, and yet when he was in some
thoughts of returning shortly for Ephesus again.

2. Now it cannot be conceived to have been written when he was going toward
Macedonia, for then was he but newly parted from Timothy, and it is not likely
he would so write to him when he was but newly come from him.

3. Nor can it be conceived to be written when he was coming back again from
Macedonia into Greece, for then he was going to Ephesus in his own
determination, and might have been his own messenger, and had needed no Epistle
sending at all. And besides he intimates in Chap. 3.16. that it might be, he
might stay a little long before he came to him: Therefore it cannot but be
concluded that this Epistle was written whilst he was in Macedonia or the
parts thereabouts, at this time that we are upon.

It is something strange that there should be so various and roving conjectures
about the time and place of the writing of this Epistle where there is so plain
a demonstration thereof in the Epistle it self, i^ studiously compared with
these times and voyages of Paul that are before us. The Arabic dateth it from
Athens: supposing it, belike, at the time of his perambulation of Greece, of
which there is mention in ver. 3. of this Chapter: the Syriack from Laodicea:
some Greek copies add from Laodicea Pacatiana: which mistake belike grew,
because there is mention of an Epistle from Laodicea, Coloss. 4.16. of which we
shall speak and show the mistake when we come to the time of that Epistle. The
Rhemists suppose this Epistle to Timothy was written at Paul's first
imprisonment in Rome, when he was dismissed and set at liberty, but how
erroniously, will appear when we come to observe the time of the second Epistle.

Paul had bestowed much pains and a long time with the Church of Ephesus being
present with it: and he takes much care of it now he is gone thence: partly
because of the eminency of the place, and partly because of the fickleness of
some, who were ready to warp from the sound truth and doctrine received, to
heresy and foolish opinions. For the keeping down of these therefore that they
should not overgrow the Church, he leaves Timothy there, when himself
departs; choosing him for that employment above all other his followers,
because [as was said before] some prophetic predictions had sealed him for a
singular and extraordinary instrument in the Gospel, 1 Timothy 2.14.

He had two works to do in that City: first to prevent rising Error^ and
Heterodoxies, and secondly to direct and order the Orthodox aright in Worship
and Discipline: not as any Diocesan Bishop [for he staid but a while there, and
what he did, he did but by the Apostles direction,] but as one that Paul had
found sound, bold, blameless, painful and faithful.

Among the Jewish Churches that received the Gospel, there grew in time a very
epidemicall and dangerous Apostasy, either totally from the Doctrine of the
Gospel, or partially from the purity of it, as we have frequent occasion to
observe upon several passages that we meet withal as we go along: And this
backsliding from the Doctrine and Profession of Christ once received, was the
topping up of the iniquity of that Nation, and was a forerunner and a hastener
of their destruction and casting off.

The first principles whereby their false teachers did poison them toward this
recidivation, were, puzzling them with idle fables, intricate genealogies, and
especially nice curiosities, and needless obligations of the Law: Their fables
that were likeliest to serve their turn for this purpose [as near as one may
guess upon view of the whole heap in their Talmudick records] may be supposed
to have been those strange legends that they related of the wondrous sanctity,
devotion and facts of some of their Pharisaicall and legal righteous ones, and
the wondrous gallantry and golden days that they conceited in a carnal
construction of the times of Messiah.

Their endless genealogies which the Apostle speaks of Tit. 3.9. and
mentions together with these fables, 1 Timothy 1.4. were not any of the
genealogies of Scripture, holy and divine, but their long and intricate
pedigrees that they stood upon, to prove themselves Jews, Levites, Priests and
the like, thereby to interest themselves in chain to all those brave things
that they persuaded themselves belonged to a Jew as a Jew, upon that very
account: And to these we may add the long genealogy and pedigree of their
traditions which they derived by a long line of succession through the hands of
I know not how many Doctors: of which the Talmudick Treatise Avoth, is as a
Herald. And if we will construe the word (...) Iuchasin, Genealogies, in the
(...) Aserah Iuchasin Ten linages, that they speak of that came out of Babel at
the return of the captivity, I am sure we may find endless questions
wherewithal they puzzled men's minds about them; as Vid. Talm. in Kiddushin
per. 4. Alphes. ibid, etc.

And as for their making their baits of the Law for the catching and
withdrawing of simple souls either totally from the acknowledging, or at least
from the simplicity of the Gospel, it is very obvious in the Epistles of Paul
and the other Epistles how they wrought, and how they prevailed: the witchery
of old customs and long use, and the gawdinesse of a Ceremonious Religion,
helping them to speed in their designs, and forwarding their deceivings.

Such canker began to break out in the Church of Ephesus: whose creeping and
infecting, it is the first and great work of Timothy to prevent, and to fill
the ears of his hearers with sound doctrine and admonitions, which might keep
such deceit and infection out. And answerably it must be his care to settle the
Church in such a salubrious constitution of Worship, Ministry and Government,
as that it should not be ready to sway and incline to such dangerous
seductions. Hereupon does the Apostle lay a divine Directory before him,
concerning their manner of praying, choosing and ordaining Ministers, approving
Deacons, admitting widows, and regulating the people, that nothing could be
wanting to the healthful temper of that Church if they receive and embrace
these applications: In the most of which prescriptions he uses exceeding much
of their Synagogue language, that he may be the better understood, and
reflecteth upon diverse of their own Laws and customs, that what he prescribes
may imprint upon them with the more conviction. He calls the Minister
Episcopus, from the common and known title The Chazan or Overseer in the
Synagogue: Aruch in (...). He prescribes rules and qualifications for his
choice, in most things suitable to their own cautions in choosing of an Elder:
Maym. in Sanhedr. per. 4. He speaks of Elders ruling only, and Elders ruling
and laboring in the Word and Doctrine: meaning in this distinction, that same
that he had spoken of in Chap. 3. Bishops and Deacons. Both these in the common
language then best known, were called Elders, and both owned as Rulers. Yea the
very title that they usually termed Deacons by [ Parnasin] was the common word
that was used to signify a Ruler. The Jerusalem Talmud in Peah. fol. 21.1.
speaking of the three Parnasin or Deacons that were in every Synagogue, has
these two passages, which may be some illustration to two passages in this
Epistle. They appoint not less then three Parnasin in the Congregation: for if
matters of money were judged by three, matters of life much more require three
to manage them. Observe that the Deacons Office was accounted as an Office that
concerned this life, namely in taking care for the subsistence of the poor.
According to this may that in Chap. 3.12. be understood. For they that have
used the Office of a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good degree. A good
degree toward being entrusted with souls, when they have been faithful in
discharge of their trust concerning the life of the body. The other passage is
this, R. Haggai whenever he appointed Parnasin [Deacons] he urged the Law
upon the people, saying, All rule that is given, is given from the Law, etc.
And here you may likewise observe, that Deaconship is called Rule.

We observed before, that it were not so monstrous as it might seem, if by
Elders that ruled only we should understand a Civil Magistracy or Bench in
every Congregation, as there was in every Synagogue; but since the Apostle
names only Bishops and D^^cons, his interpretation here is best taken from and
within himself; and to understand the ^lders that ruled only of the Deacons,
which were called both Elders and Rulers, as well as the Ministers: and in the
Jews Synagogues were professed Scholars: The Talmudick place now cited tell us
that R. Eliezer one of their greatest Rabbis was a Parnas, or Deacon in a
Synagogue. The Episcopi or Ministers are titled (...), that labored in the
Word and Doctrine: which most properly is to be understood distinctly thus,
which labored in the Word, and which labored in teaching: and the former to
denote their laboriousnesse in study to enable them to teach, and the later
their laboriousnesse in teaching. (...) is but the common phrase of the Jews
turned into Greek (...) [See the Syriack here] by which they mean a great
student in the Law. Among multitudes of instances that might be alleged, I
shall produce but this one out of Ierus. in Maasar sheni fol. 56. col. 2. R.
Jonah paid his tithes to R. Acha bar Vlla, not because he was a Priest (...)
but because he labored in the Law, that is, was a great student and an able
teacher. They that suppose that the tithes under the Law were paid only at the
Temple, and to maintain the Priests in the ceremonious worship there, and upon
this conceit look upon them only as Leviticall, are far deceived: for as some
were indeed paid at the Temple upon such an account, so others and that the
greatest part, we paid to the Priests and Levites in their 48 Universities,
Josh. 21. to maintain them whilst they were studying there, to enable them for
the Ministry, and to teach the people, for which they were designed, Deuteronomy.
33.10. Mal. 2.7. and when they were dispersed through the Land, into the
several Synagogues to be Ministers in them, tithes were also paid for their
maintenance there.

He speaks of provision to be made for poor widows, even much according to
the Jews own rules, that they went by in their Synagogues, which herein were
good. The Talmudick Treatise Ievamoth speaks of this matter at large, and see
Maym. in (...) per. 18. and 20. The widows he allows to be taken in, to be
maintained of the public stock, he would have not to be widows by divorce, nor
widows young; but of 60 years of age, and of grave and holy qualifications: Not
that these were to vow the vow of continency [as see what a miserable ado the
Rhemists make upon this place] but that they must be such as were likely to
bring no more charge then themselves upon the Church, nor bring any shame or
reproach by the lightness of their lives to it, and might be serviceable in
their places, to attend upon strangers, to wash their feet, etc. But as for
younger widows, their age and those times were dangerous, when the Nicolaitan
doctrine without [which taught communicating with things of Idolatry and
fornication, and mixing and marriage indifferently with heathen] meeting with
the heat of youth within, might make such to wax wanton against Christ, and
deny the faith and marry with Heathens: or at least to bring charge upon the
Church if they continued in it.

He injoyns prayers to be made for all sorts of men, whereas the Jewish custom
was, to curse the Heathen, and to pray for none but themselves and their own
Nation. He calls the Church the pillar and ground of truth, Chap. 3.15. the very
title by which the great Sanhedrin was ordinarily styled. Vid. Maym. in Mamrin.
per. 1. the observing of which may be of good use for the explanation of it
here.

After some stay in Macedonia, and preaching up and down in those parts, Paul
turns back again, and goes for Greece, Act. 20.2. and by the way visits
Creete and there leaves Titus, Tit. 1.5. thinking that he should presently
after a little stay in Greece, have set toward Jerusalem, and that Titus
should have stayed there till further time: For if what has been spoken lately
concerning Titus be considered, how Paul sent him with his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, and that after their parting at Ephesus upon that occasion, they
never met till Titus comes up to him, when he was come from Ephesus to
Macedonia, 2 Cor. 7.5, 6. it will readily resolve, that in that first journey
to Macedonia he left him not in Creet, for Titus and he were not yet met again
since their parting at Ephesus. And that he left him not there at his second
coming up to Macedonia [namely after his traveling in Greece, and when he was
prevented of his intended journey into Syria, Act. 20.2, 3.] it is apparent
also by this, that instantly upon his return from Greece and from his prevented
journey, he sends for Titus to come to him upon warning, Tit. 3.12. which two
particulars jointly observed do make it plain that he left Titus in Creet when
he came back from Macedonia in his journey into Greece, and when he intended
after his perambulation of Greece to have gone for Syria, but the lying in wait
of some Jews for his life, turned him again to Macedonia.

In his return thither, or upon his coming there, he writes

THE EPISTLE TO TITUS.
It is not much material to controvert whether he sent this Epistle in the way
as he went toward Macedonia, or when he was come up into Macedonia; it is
enough to know, that it was in this scantling of time, either in his journey
thither, or instantly upon his coming there. The postscript has dated it from
Nicopolis, because of his words in Chap. 3.12. Come unto me to Nicopolis, for
there I have determined to winter: from which words, as the affixer of the
postscript has gathered some ground to date it thence, so others have gathered
better ground, to hold that it was not dated thence, because he says not (...)
Here, but (...) There I have determined to winter: as if he were not yet come
thither.

Who first planted the Gospel in Creete may he an endless inquiry: certain it
is that some Cretans were present at the first pouring out of the holy Ghost in
the gift of tongues, Acts 2.8. but whether they embraced the Gospel and
returned with it into their own Country, is an inquiry as endless: Whether
Barnabas ever preached there we may question also, but when we have done all we
can never resolve. It is more then probable that Paul was there himself, from
that expression I left thee in Creete, but his stay there when he left Titus
could not be long, as is easily cleared from the time of his journeys lately
mentioned.

Whether he had been there some time before, or whether he had sent the Gospel
thither by some of his Ministers, or however it came there, there wanted
something to the constituting of the Church, which he leaves Titus to
accomplish: And his work is just the same that he left Timothy at Ephesus for,
as is easily seen by laying together the two Epistles, viz. to stop the mouth
of the Heterodox, and to direct and advise the Orthodox in Doctrine and
Discipline, and to ordain Elders or Ministers in the Churches.

This matter of ordaining Elders has made the postscripts of the Epistles to
these two men to entitle them Bishops, the one of Ephesus, and the other of
Creete, who how little they stayed or settled in either of these places, he
reads but dimly that sees not.

The Apostle in this Epistle urges him to dispatch the business that lay
before him, that upon notice from him, he might be ready to come up to him to
Nicopolis: a City that bare the name and badge of the victory that Augustus
obtained against Antony. Dion. Cass. page 426. and 443.

Titus according to his appointment came to him, and when winter began to draw
over, and Paul began now to think of journying ere it were very long, he sends
him upon an employment to another place: which because it was when winter was
going off, we must place it in another year.

WORLD.
Paul intending for Syria as soon as the Spring was a little up, he sends
Titus before hand to Corinth, to hasten their collections for the Saints in
Judea, that they might be ready against Paul should come thither. And with
Titus he sends two other brethren, and by them all he sends

THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.
The proof that it was written and sent at this time and in this manner, is
plain by these places and passages in it: Chap. 9.2, 3, 4. I know the
forwardness of your mind* for which I boast of you to them of Macedonia: Yet
have I sent the brethren, lest our boasting of you should be in vain; left
happily they of Macedonia come with me, etc. Chap. 12.14. Behold the third time I
am coming to you. Chap. 13.1. This is the third time I am coming to you. And
Chap. 8.16. But thanks be unto God who put the same earnest care into the heart
of Titus for you. 17. Being more forward of his own accord he went unto you.
18. And with him we have sent the brother whose praise is in the Gospel. 22.
And we have sent with them our brother, whom we have oftentimes proved diligent
in many things, etc.

Who these two namelesse persons should be, will require some inquiry. The
later I suppose was Erastus, both because his diligence had been approved
before, Acts 19.22, etc. and also because it is said Erastus abode at Corinth,
2 Timothy 4. yet he not named among Paul's retinue when he set out for Asia, Act.
20.4. because he was gone to Corinth before.

As for the other brother whose praise is said to be in the Gospel, that very
phrase and expression has caused many to conceive, that it was Luke, and that
the words mean, Who is famous in all the Churches for the Gospel he has
written: whereas [besides that groundless strictness that is put upon the
words, limiting them to the writing of a Gospel, which according to that most
usual manner of speech, are rather to be understood of his renown in preaching
the Gospel] it is apparent by the words of Luke himself, that he went not
either before Paul to Corinth, as this brother spoken of did, nor did he go
before Paul to Troas as the rest that are named by him did, but he went in
Paul's company: for observe his speech, These tarried for us at Troas: And we
sailed away from Philippi, etc. The words Us and We do plainly associate the
penman himself with Paul at his setting out, and show that he was none of those
that were sent before.

Others therefore do guess that this brother that went along with Titus, was
Silas, because it is said, Who also was chosen by the Churches to travel with
us, etc. Which very thing which they use for an argument to prove it Silas,
proves against it, for Silas was not chosen by the Churches to go with Paul,
any more then Timothy or Titus were; but he was chosen by Paul alone, as they
also were. See Act. 15.40.

That clause then, Who was also chosen of the Churches to travel with us, does
deal the matter betwixt Barnabas and Mark, for none other can be named, to whom
the words can be so properly applied as to one of them: and of the ^wo, most
properly to Mark; and he I doubt not, is the man that is here intended: For 1.
the words with us, join Paul and Barnabas together in their travel, and the
third man who was chosen to travel with them was none but Mark. For 2. he was
chosen by the Church at Jerusalem for that purpose, Act. 12.25. and by the
Church at Antioch, Act. 13 5. as these words he was chosen by the Churches do
well explain those verses. 3. It is true indeed that Paul had taken distaste at
Mark, and so bitter, that Barnabas and he had parted upon it, Act. 15.39. yet
in his second Epistle to Timothy he desires Timothy to bring Mark to him, for
that he is profitable to him for the Ministry, 2 Timothy 4. by which it appears
that he was not only reconciled to him, but also that he had made use of him
and found him useful* When it was that they knit into amity and employment
again, is not discoverable, but that they had done so, the passage newly
alleged, does make past denial; and if his employment of Mark were not now,
or before, he can no more employ him, before he himself become a prisoner. When
we come to the time and order of the second Epistle to Timothy, we shall have
occasion to speak to this matter again, and shall find something there to help
the confirmation of this assertion, nay to raise it higher then yet it has
spoken, namely, that Mark was not only sent by Paul to Corinth at this time,
but also that he was at Corinth when Paul sent for him to come to him to Rome.
And thus if these words, Whose praise is in the Gospel, were to be understood
of one that had written a Gospel, here is a subject to apply them to in that
sense, for this Mark wrote a Gospel as well as Luke.

The Apostle in this second Epistle to Corinth, does first excuse his not
coming to them according as he had promised in his first Epistle, 1 Cor. 16.5.
clearing himself from all lightness in making, and from all unfaithfulness in
breaking that promise, and pitching the main reason upon themselves and their
present condition: because he had not yet intelligence when he went first into
Macedonia, of any reformation among them of those enormities that he had
reproved in his first Epistle, therefore he was unwilling to come to them in
heaviness, and with a scourge. This his failing to come according to his
promise, had opened the mouths of diverse in his disgrace, and false teachers
took any other occasion to vilify him, which he copiously satisfies and
vindicates himself all along the Epistle.

His exceeding zealous plainness with them, and dealing so home and thoroughly
against their misdemeanors as he did, was one advantage that false teachers
and his ill-willers took to open their mouth against him, and to withdraw
hearts from him: and withal and mainly, because he was so urgent against the
works of the Law as to Justification, and those rites which the Jews, even the
most that were converted to the Gospel, too much doted on. About the former,
their taunt and scorn against him was, His Letters are weighty and powerful,
but his bodily presence is weak and speech contemptible, Chap. 10.10. A poor
contemptible fellow [say they] to be so sharp and supercilious in his Letters,
this is more then he durst speak if he were here! etc. But let such know, says
he, that what I am by Letters in absence, I will be by words and in deed in
presence. Concerning both this and the latter named, they passed Festus his
censure upon him, as Act. 26.24. that he was besides himself. This he mentions
and answers, Chap. 5.13. Whether we are besides our selves it is for God, or
whether we be sober it is for your cause. For the love of Christ constrains
us, because we thus judge: that if one died for all, then were all dead, etc.
Since Christ died for all, that is, for Jews and Gentiles both, he could not
but conclude that all were dead, the Jew as well as the Gentile; therefore he
could not but so urgently call upon the Jew to look off his own righteousness,
and the works of the Law, and to look for Justification by faith in Christ.
Another scandalous opinion and reproach they also took up of him, That he
walked after the flesh [a strange slander of Paul] Chap. 10.2. but this was but
an appendix to that before: because he was not Pharisaically precise about
their trivial rites of the Law [which too many of them mixed with the Gospel,]
but cried them down, therefore they cried him up for carnal. His answer to
this is, that his Ministry may witness the contrary for him, ver. 3.4, 5. the
end of which and the abundant effect of which was to beat down such carnal
affections and actions as were such indeed: His expression of the weapons of
his warfare being strong to pull down strong holds, expounds that Number. 24.17.
of Christ smiting the corners of Moab, and destroying all the sons of Seth. And
he gives this for a second answer, that if they would be but obedient, they
should see how his Apostolic power was ready to avenge disobedience.

Since he has such back friends and open enemies in this Church, it is no
wonder if he write so doubtingly of them how he should find them: and that he
staid no longer with them when he came to them, as his stay was very little.
His former Epistle, as it is apparent by several passages in this, had wrought
them into a reasonable good temper: but mischief now was crept on them again,
at least there were some that were tampering to bring it on. In regard
therefore of that vilifying that these false teachers, enemies of him and God,
did set him at, and sought to make him odious and contemptible in the eyes of
the Church, he is put to it to make his vindication, and that, as the matter
required with much largeness and earnestness. He therefore copiously
discourses, what God had done by him, what he had suffered for God, and what
he had done for the Churches; in any of which things let any of these that
reviled him, come near him if they could. In relating the passages of his life,
he mentions many things, of which there is no mention in his story in the
Acts of the Apostles: and frequenly in his discourse, he speaks of his folly
in boasting, as Chap. 11.1. Bear with me a little in my folly, and see ver. 16,
17. because indeed man's boasting of himself is folly, and they would be ready
to censure his so, therefore he styles his by that title, though it were not
folly in him, but a needful and an holy vindication of himself and of his
Ministry.

After he had sent away this Epistle, by Titus, Erastus and Mark, if our
conjecture fail not, and had given notice to the Corinthians of his speedy
coming to them, and warning to get their collections ready against he came, he
provideth for his journey into Syria, which he had intended so long: partly to
visit the Churches in these parts, and partly to bring up the collections that
he had got for the poor of Judea: which he had promised to the three Ministers
of the Circumision, Peter, James and John that he would be careful of, Gal.
2.10.

ACTS CHAP. XX.
Ver. 4. And there accompanied him into Asia Sopater of Berea: and of the
Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus: and Gaius of Derbe, and Timotheus: and
of Asia, Tychichus and Trophimus.

5. These going before tarried for us at Troas.

6. And we set from Philippi, after the days of unleavened bread.


January and forward, even till Easter, Paul spent in Macedonia, still
wintering there, viz. in Nicopolis, Philippi, etc. and after Easter he sets for
Jerusalem, ver. 6. Therefore we have superscribed it, The 2d of Nero, and of
Christ the 56th.

When we come to speak of the Epistle to the Romans, which we shall meet with
in our way very shortly, we shall say something of the names of these men [for
many of them will meet us there:] only we cannot miss Timotheus here without
some notice taken of him, and some quaere how he came here. The last year Paul
left him at Ephesus when himself came thence, and being come thence into
Macedonia he sends him an Epistle with his earnest desire in it, that he would
stay there still upon that needful employment upon which he was left, 1 Timothy
1. how then is Timothy now got to him into Macedonia, so that he is with him at
his setting away from Philippi? We have not indeed any intimation that Paul
sent for him away, as we have of his sending for Titus whom he left in Creete,
intendedly for a longer time: but it is very probable that Paul designing to
have sailed for Syria, came near to him: and there discovering the danger that
was laid in his way by the Jews, which might also have infolded Timothy, he
brought him away back again with him, and so both returned into Macedonia, and
now winter is over, they are setting for Asia again.

But when Paul and this his company are all going for Asia together, why should
they not set out together, but these go before and tarry at Troas, and Paul and
some other of his company come after? Nay they were all to meet at Troas as it
appears, ver. 6. why might they not then have gone all together to Troas?

The reason of this was, because Paul himself was to go by Corinth: and not
minding to stay there but very little, because he hastened to Jerusalem, he
would not take his whole train thither, but sends them away the next way they
could go to Troas, himself promising and resolving to be speedily with them
there. He had promised a long time to the Church of Corinth to come unto them,
and he had newly sent word in that Epistle that he had lately sent, that now
his coming would be speedy, 2 Cor. 12.14. Behold the third time I am ready to
come to you: and Chap. 13.1. This is the third time that I am coming to you:
Not that he had been there twice before, for since his first departing thence
[when he had stayed there a long time together, at his first planting of the
Gospel in that place] there is neither mention nor probability of his being
there again, but this was the third time that he was in coming, having promised
and intended a journey thither once before, but was prevented, 2 Cor. 1.15, 16,
17. But now he not only promises by the Epistle that he will come, but staketh
the three Brethren that he had sent thither, for witnesses and sureties of that
promise, 2 Cor. 13.1, 2. that in the mouth of those witnesses his promise might
be established and assured.

Now the time is come that he makes good his promise, and whilst the rest of
his company go directly the next cut to Troas, he himself and Luke, and whom
else he thought good to retain with him, go about by Corinth.

And now to look a little further into the reason of their thus parting
company, and of Paul's short stay at Corinth when he came there, we may take
into thoughts [besides how much he hastened to Ierusalem] the jealousy that he
had that he should not find all things at Corinth so comfortable to himself,
and so creditable to them, before those that should come with him, as he
desired. He has many passages in the second Epistle that he wrote to them,
that glance that way: For though as to the general there was Reformation
wrought among them upon the receiving of his first Epistle, and thereupon he
speaks very excellent things of them, yet were there not a few that thought
basely of him, 2 Cor. 10.1, 2. and traduced him and his Doctrine, Chap. 11. and
12. and gave him cause to suspect that his boasting of that Church to the
Churches of Macedonia might come off but indifferently, if the Macedonians
should come with him to see how all things were there, 2 Cor. 9.4. And
therefore it was but the good policy of just fear, grief, and prudence to send
them by another way, and he had very just cause to stay but a while when he
came there.

From Corinth in his short stay there, he writes

THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS,
as has been well supposed by some of the Ancients, is asserted by the
postscript, and may be concluded from these observations.

1. That he says, that he is now going to Jerusalem to bring to the Saints
that benevolence that they of Macedonia and Achaia had collected for them, Romans
15.26. The word Achaia tells us that he now was sure of the Corinthian
contribution, which he was not sure of, till he came there.

2. That he commends to the Romans, Phaebe a servant of the Church of
Cenchraea, Romans 16.1. which Cenchraea was a place belonging to Corinth, as was
observed before, though at some few miles distance.

3. That he calls Erastus, Chamberlain of the City, Romans 16.23. of whom it is
said Erastus abode at Corinth, 2 Timothy 4.

4. That he calls Gaius his host, or the man with whom he lodged, and the
host of the whole Church, or in whose house strangers had their intertainment,
Romans 16.23. who was a Corinthian, 1 Cor. 1.14. And hence it appears that
Gaius of Derbe, who was one of those that were gone before to Troas, was one
man, and Gaius of Corinth was another.

It is true indeed that the greetings of some men were sent in this Epistle
which were not with Paul at this present in Corinth, as Timothies, Romans 16.20.
who was gone to Troas: and Sosipaters, who was gone thither also [for he I
suppose is the same with Sopater of Berea, Act. 20.4.] and this might seem to
infringe the truth of this opinion that holds that this Epistle was written
from Corinth: But when it is considered how lately Paul and these men parted,
and that it is past doubt that he would acquaint them before their parting of
his intentions to send to Rome, it is no difficulty to conceive how their
salutations inserted into that Epistle.

There are indeed some that confess that it was written from Corinth, but not
at this time but at another, namely in that time when Paul traveled Greece, of
which journey there is mention Act. 20. in which time, among other places, they
conceive he came to Corinth and there wrote this Epistle. But 1. it may very
well be questioned whether he were at Corinth in these three months travels or
no. For whereas he had promised to call on them as he went to Jerusalem, 1 Cor.
16.7. [which he intended when he traveled those three months, but that he
discovered that the Jews lay in wait for him] he excuses himself for not
coming according to that promise, 2 Cor. 1.16, 17. And if it were granted that
he was at Corinth at that time, yet 2. he could not write this Epistle at that
time, because when he wrote it, he knew the contribution of the Corinthian
Church was then ready, Romans 15.26. which when he traveled Greece, either
indeed was not so, or at least he knew not that it was, as appears copiously
in his second Epistle to that Church.

The Apostle in this most sublime Epistle, clears fully and divinely, the two
great mysteries of the Gospel, Righteousness by faith, and the calling of the
Gentiles. And in the handling of these he handles the great points Original
sin, Election, and casting off of the Jews. He lays this position down
concerning the first, Chap. 1.17. That in the Gospel is revealed the
Righteousness of God [justifying, as in the Law was revealed his
righteousness or justice condemning] and that from faith [of immediate
innixion upon God as was Adams before his fall, and as was that which the Jews
owned in God] to faith, in the righteousness of another: namely Christ. This
way of justification he proves first by showing how far all men both by nature
and action are from possibility of being justified of or by themselves, which
he clears by the horrid sinfulness of the heathen, Chap. 1. [a large proof
of which might be read at Rome at that very instant:] and little less
sinfulness of the Jews though they had the Law, Chap. 2. and 3. and therefore
concludes, Chap. 3.30. that God justifies the circumcision by faith [and not
by works, as they stood upon it] and the uncircumcision through faith [for all
their works that had been so abominable, and that seemed so contrary to
justification.] In Chap. 4. he takes up the example of Abraham, whom the Jews
reputed most highly justified by his works, for they had this saying of him
(...) Abraham performed all the Law every whit: but he proves that he found
nothing by his own works, but by believing he found all. In Chap. 5. he proves
the imputation of Christ's righteousness for Justification, by the parallel of
the imputation of Adams sin for condemnation: Not at all intending to assert
that as many as were condemned by Adam, were freed from that condemnation by
the death of Christ, but purposely and only to prove the one imputation by the
other.

It was a strange doctrine in the ears of a Jew to hear of being justified by
the righteousness of another, therefore he proves it by the like, men's being
condemned for and by the unrighteousness of another. Two close couched
passages clear what he aims at: The first is in ver. 12. (...), etc.
Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, etc. The word (...) As,
properly requires a So to follow it, as you may observe it does, in ver. 15,
18, 19. but here there is no such thing expressed, therefore it is so to be
understood: and the Apostles words to be construed to this sense. Wherefore it
is, or the case is here as it was in Adam, as by one man sin entered into the
world, etc. there imputation, so here. The second is ver. 18. in the Original
verbatim thus. As by the transgression of one, upon all men to condemnation, so
by the righteousness of one, upon all men to justification of life. What, upon
all men? Our Translation has added some words to clear the sense, but the
shortness of the Apostles style does better clear his intent: namely to
intimate imputation: as speaking to this purpose, As by the transgression of
one there was that that redounded to all to condemnation, so by the
righteousness of one there is that that redoundeth to all to justification of
life: And to clear that he means not that all that were condemned by Adams
Fall were redeemed by Christ, he at once shows the descent of Original sin,
and the descent of it for all the death and righteousness of Christ, Quae
tamen profuerunt antequam fuerunt. Ver. 13. For till the Law sin was in the
world: but sin is not imputed where there is no Law. Nevertheless death
reigned from Adam to Moses. By what Law was sin sin and did death reign,
when the Law was not yet given? Namely by that Law that was given to Adam, and
he brake, the guilt of which violation descends to all.

Having to the end of the fifth Chapter stated and proved Justification by
faith, in Chap. 6, and 7, and 8. he speaks of the state of persons justified,
which though they be not without sin, yet their state compared with Adams,
even whilst he was sinnelesse, it is far better then his: He invested in a
created, finite, changeable humane righteousness; they in the righteousness
of God uncreate, infinite, unchangeable. He having the principles of his
holiness and righteousness in his own nature, they theirs conveyed from
Christ: He having neither Christ nor the Spirit, but left to himself and his
natural purity; they having both. See Chap. 8.1, 2, 9, 10, etc.

At the nineteenth verse of Chap. 8. he begins upon the second mystery that he
has to treat upon, the calling of the Gentiles, whom he calls (...) The whole
Creation, or Every creature: by which title they also are called, Mark 16.15.
Coloss. 1* 23. and he shows how they were subject to vanity of Idolatry and the
delusions of the devil, but must in time be delivered from this bondage, for
which deliverance they now groaned: and not they only, but they of the Jews
also, which had received the first fruits of the Spirit, longed for their
coming in, waiting for the adoption that is, the redemption of their whole
body: for the Church of the Jews was but the child-like body, and accordingly
their Ordinances were according to child-like age of the Church* but the
stature of the fullness of Christ's mystical Body, was in the bringing in of
the Gentiles. Being to handle this great point of the Calling of the Gentiles
and Rejection of the Jews, he begins at the bottom, at the great doctrine of
Predestination, which he handles from ver. 29. of Chap 8. to Chap. 9.24. and
then he falls upon the other. That Israel stumbled at Messiah and fell, se^king
indeed after righteousness, but not his, but their own: and that they are cast
away, but not all; A remnant to be saved, that belonged to the Election of
Grace: As it was in the time when the world was Heathen, some of them that
belonged to the Election, came in and were proselyted to the worship of the
true God; so some of these, while all the rest of their Nation lie in unbelief.
And in this unbelief must they lie till the fullness of the Gentiles be come
in, and then all Gods Israel is completed.

The most that he salutes in the last Chapter, appear to have been of the
Jewish Nation, and the most of them [though now at Rome] yet sometime to have
been of Paul's company and acquaintance in some other place. The expulsion of
the Jews out of Rome by Claudius Decree, might very well bring many of them
into his converse, as well as it did Priscilla and Aquila whom he names first
among them. Epenetus was one of his own converts of Achaia; Mary had bestowed
much labor on him, yet he hitherto had never been near Rome. He that would
dispute the point of the first planter of the Gospel at Rome, might do well to
make the first muster of his thoughts here: And whereas the Apostle speaks of
the says of the Roman Church as spoken of throughout the world, Chap. 1. ver.
8. it is very questionable whether he look to the times before the Decree of
Claudius, or those since Claudius death, when all the scattered were returned
again, and many of those that had come out unbeleeving Jews had returned
Christians thither; as I believe the case was of Aquila and Priscilla: and some
converted in other places had now taken up their residence there, as Epenetus,
Andronicus, and Iunia, etc.

Those whose salutations he sends thither, may be the better judged of, who
they were, by observing who were of his retinue at this time, which are named,
Act. 20.4. as 1. Timothy. 2. Lucius, who seems to be Luke, called now by a
Latin name, in an Epistle to the Latins. He was with Paul at Corinth at the
sending away of the Epistle: for having mentioned the others that were gone to
Troas, these says he stayed for us, joining himself in Paul's company going now
to Corinth. 3. Jason seems to be he that is called Secundus, Act. 20.4. the
one his Hebrew name, and the other the same in Latin, for Secundus is said to
be a Thessalonian, and so was Jason, Acts 17.7. 4. Sosipater here in all
probability, he that is called Sopater of Berea there. 5. Tertius that wrote
out the Epistle, it may be was Silas: an Hebrician will see a fair likelihood
of the one name in the other, it being written in Hebrew letters (...): and the
Hebrew names to the Romans are rendered in the Roman Idiome. 6. Gaius, the same
in Greek with the ordinary Latin name Cai^s: it appears that he was a
Corinthian, 1 Cor. 1.13. and in that Paul here calls him, Mine host, and the
host of the whole Church: to the understanding of which, the observing of a
custom of the Jews may give some illustration. Maymony in his Treatise
concerning the Sabbath, speaks about that rite that they used of hallowing
the Sabbath with a se^ form of words at his coming in, per. 30. has this
saying: This hallowing of the Sabbath may not be used, but only in the place
where they eat: as for example, he may not use the hallowing words in one
house, and eat in another. Why then do they use the hallowing words in the
Synagogue? Because of travelers that do eat and drink there. Where the Gloss
upon the place comments thus, It is evident that they did not eat in their
Synagogues at all, as it is apparent in the eleventh Chapter of Maymonies
Treatise of prayer, but in a house near the Synagogue: and there they sat at
the hearing of the hallowing of the Sabbath, etc. It may be observed from
hence, that strangers and travelers were entertained in a place near the
Synagogue [compare Act. 18.7.] which was as a public Xenodochion or receptacle
of strangers, at the charge of the Congregation: which laudable custom is
almost apparent was transplanted into the Christian Churches in those times: as
compare such passages as those, Heb. 13.2. Acts 15.4. And possibly those Agapae
or feasts of charity spoken of in the Epistles of the Apostles, are to be
understood of these loving and charitable intertainment of strangers. Jude v.
12. These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you,
feeding themselves without fear. False teachers traveling abroad undiscovered,
and being entertained in these public receptacles for strangers, and at the
public charge, would find there a fit opportunity for themselves to vent
their errors and deceptions. In this sense may Gaius very properly be
understood the Host of the whole Church, as being the officer or chief overseer
employed by the Corinthian Church for these intertainments: In which also it
was almost inevitable but some women should have their employment: according to
which custom we may best understand such places as these, Phaebe a servant of
the Church at Cene^rea, she has been a succourer of many. Ver. 6. Mary
bestowed much labor on us. And see 1 Timothy 5.9, 10, etc. He speaks also of
other women of whom he gives this testimony, that they labored much in the
Lord, as Tryphena and Tryphosa and Persis, ver. 12. which may either be
understood in the like sense: or if not so, of their great pains some other way
for the honor and promotion of the Gospel, and benefit of the Saints and
themselves: as by visiting and relieving the poor and sick, taking pains in
following the Ministers of the Gospel, and venturing themselves with them:
hiding and cherishing them in times of danger, and so venturing themselves for
them: and so he says Priscilla and Aquila for his life laid down their own
necks, etc. He salutes three of his own kinsmen Andronicus and Iunia and
Herodion: the two first were converted before him, and were of note among the
Apostles: either being of the number of the 70 Disciples, or eminent converts
and close followers of Christ, or of the Apostles in those first times. He calls
them his fellow prisoners: but if he had called them his prisoners, it had been
easier to have told when and how. For they were in Christ, whilst he was a
persecutor: but when they were imprisoned with him, after his conversion, is
hard to find out. Among all that he salutes so kindly, where is Peter? If he
were now at Rome how was he forgotten?

ACTS CHAP. XX. Ver. 6. And we came to them to Troas in five days: Where we
abode seven days. And so to Ver. 17. of CHAP. XXI.
FRom Philippi after Easter, he sets away for Corinth, where he stayed so
little, that he came to Troas within five days after the company was come
thither which had gone before: for so are the five days to be understood: not
that Paul in five days went from Philippi to Corinth and Troas, but that his
company which was set out with him, but set directly for Troas, had stayed but
five days at Troas, before he came up to them.

There he celebrates the Lords day and the Lords Supper, and preaches and
discourses all night [a thing not altogether strange in the Jewish customs,
Ierus. S^tah fol. 16.4. R. Meir was teaching profoundly all the night of the
Sabbaths in the Synagogue of Chamath.] So that Eutychus sleeps and sals and is
taken up dead, but recovered by miracle. The change and beginning and end of
the Christian Sabbath may be observed here.

When he goes now from thence, it is most likely it was the time when he left
his Cloak, Books and Parchments with Carpus, 2 Timothy 4.13. His Cloak: for he was
now going among his own Nation in Judea: and there he was to wear his Jewish
habit, and he left his Roman garb here, till he should come into those Roman
quarters again. It may be, the Parchments were the Originals of those Epistles
that he had already written: for that he sent transcripts, and reserved the
Original copies, may be collected from these passages, I Tertius who wrote out
this Epistle, Romans 16.22. The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand, 1 Cor.
16.21. Col. 4.18. which was the token in every Epistle, 2 Thessalonians. 3.17. for all
the Epistle beside was written with another hand.

From Troas by several journeys he comes to Miletum: and thither he sends for
the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, which City was near at hand: But who were
these? Not Timothy and Trophimus, for they were in his company already, and had
been with him in his journey hither, but these twelve men upon whom he had laid
his hands, and bestowed on them the holy Ghost, and so fitted them for the
Ministry, Act. 19.6. and whomsoever besides Timothy had ordained into the
Ministry whilst he was there.

Although the Ephesian and the rest of the Asian Churches, were but in an ill
case at this time in regard of false doctrines and much Apostasy that had
corrupted and cankered them, yet does the Apostle foresee that the case will be
worse and worse with them still, and that grievous Wolves should yet break in
upon them: And this he concludes, not only from the boldness that he was
assured false teachers would use and assume to themselves when he was gone, but
from those predictions of Christ that had foretold what sad Apostasy should
occur, and what false teachers should arise before the great day of Jerusalem
came, which was now coming on apace.

ACTS CHAP. XXI. Ver. 17. And when we were come to Jerusalem the Brethren
received us gladly, etc.
PAUL is now got to Jerusalem: And the first thing that we have to do about his
story there, is to calculate the time and consider what Year it was when he
came thither: and to prove, if we can, that it was the second Year of Nero,
according as we have superscribed that Year: for this is of import, as to the
fixing of those chronicall observations that we are to take up hereafter.

The common consent in all times, has fixed his coming to Jerusalem and
apprehension there to this Year, and yet amongst all that have so concluded
upon it, there is none that has given any one clear proof or evidence at all
for such an assertion. Eusebius, Ado, Cassiodore, Baronius, Lorinus, and diverse
others are of this mind, yet whereupon they grounded their opinion is hard to
find, nay it is hard to find among many of them, any that goes about to show
any groundwork for it at all. It would therefore save a great deal of labor to
take their consent without any more ado, and it might carry good credit with
it, to go along with so general a tenet upon the word of so many Learned men:
yet that we may not go altogether led blindfold by others, let these things
toward the proof of it be taken into consideration. And first let us draw a
Chronicle of Nero's time.

NERO.
I. II. III. IV. Poppaea becomes Nero's Paramour. V. Nero slaies his mother
Agrippina. VI. VII. VIII. Poppaea becomes Nero's Wife. Pallas dies. IX. X.
Albinus is Governor of Iudaea. XI. Florus comes in Governor instead of
Albinus. XII. The first beginning of the Wars of the Jews. XIII. XIV.
Although these things affixed to the several Years of Nero, may seem very
Heterogeneall to the thing we have in hand, yet we shall find them of good use
when we have first cleared their truth and certainty.

1. That Poppaea became Nero's Minion in his 4th Year is apparent by Tacitus
Annal. lib. 13. Sect. 12. where he places the beginning of their adulterous
acquaintance A.V.C. 811. under the Consulship of Nero III. and Valerius Masella.

2. That Nero slew his mother Agrippina in his fifth Year, the same Tacitus
also asserteth, lib. 14. Sect. 1. placing that fact A.V.C. 812. under the
Consulship of C. Vipsanius, and Fonteius Capito.

3. The marrying of Poppaea to Nero, as his Wife, he places in his eighth
Year. Annal. lib. 14. Sect. 9. viz. A. V. C. 815. under the Consulship of P.
Marius, and L. Asinius: and in the same Year he places the death of Pallas.

4. The beginning of the Wars of the Jews in Nero's 12th, and the entrance of
Gessius Florus into the Government, the Year before, is confirmed under this
testimony of Josephus, Antiq. lib. 20. cap. ult. (...). Out of which how
Baronius can bring the beginning of Florus his Government to be in the tenth of
Nero, as he does, I understand not: for if the twelfth Year of Nero were Florus
his second, then the eleventh was his first.

And now let us take in some things more, which we must apply to these times
mentioned, to help us in the inquest we are about.

1. Josephus says, that when Portius Festus came into Felix room in the
Government of Judea, the chief of the Jews of Caesarea went to Rome to accuse
Felix; and he had been certainly punished for his unjust dealing with the Jews,
had not Nero been very favorable to him, at the entreaty of his brother
Pallas, who was then very much in Caesar's esteem. Antiq. lib. 20 cap. 7.

2. The same Josephus also speaking of the Government of Festus in Judea, he
first mentions how he found the Country infested with rebels and robbers whom
he overthrew: then he relates how King Agrippa built his Palace so at
Jerusalem, as that it overtopt the Temple Courts: which the Jews disliking
built a counterwall to hinder the prospect, that it should not view their
service and actions in the Temple. At this Agrippa and Festus took distaste, and
Festus commanded that the wall should be pulled down: but the Jews desired they
might send Agents to Rome about this matter, which they did. And when Nero
heard the case, (...). He did not only pardon the thing done: but he also
consented to suffer the building so to stand: vouchsafing this at the entreaty
of his wife Poppaea, for she was devout, etc. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 8. Observe
the last words, At the entreaty of his wife Poppaea.

3. The same Josephus again relates a journey of his own to Rome in these
words: When I was six and twenty years old I went to Rome upon this occasion.
When Felix was Governor of Judea, he sent certain Priests my near
acquaintance, and very good men for a small cause to Rome to appear before
Caesar. For whose deliverance I desiring to find some means went to Rome, and
there by the means of a certain Jew, (...). I came to be known to Poppaea
Caesar's Wife.

Baronius does revile Josephus here as if he had forgot his own age: Videas in
his [saith he] quae suae aetatis sunt, suo ipsius testimonio convinci, annorum
sex turpiter errant^m. And wherein? Quia affirmat se agentem suum supra
vigesimum sextum sub Faelice Iudaeae praeside Romam venisse. But Josephus says
no such word. He says indeed that he went to Rome to labor the deliverance of
some men that Felix had sent thither in the time of his Government, but that
Felix was in his Government when he went thither he says not at all.

And now to take up what we have to observe upon these things that have been
spoken.

1. It is true indeed, as Tacitus witnesses, that Pallas the brother of Felix,
who had been Claudius his great favorite, and so Nero's also in Claudius time,
did wane and decrease somewhat in his favor in a very short time after his
entrance into his reign: but he was not utterly laid flat, and out at all, till
after Poppaea came into favor and amorousnesse, who forwarded the death of
Agrippina, and the bringing down of those that were of her party as Pallas was.
Therefore the power of Pallas with the Emperor seems to be expired in Nero's
fifth year, in which Agrippina was slain. And by this account we cannot extend
Felix his escape for his brother Pallas his sake, beyond Nero's fourth Year.
For considering Poppaeas prevalency with the Emperor, when once she became his
Paramour, and considering her detestation of Agrippina and her faction of which
Pallas was the chief, we cannot cast Felix his discharge for Pallas his sake,
beyond Nero's fourth.

2. Paul lay two years prisoner at Caesarea under Felix: Act. 24.27. After two
years Porti^s Festus come into Felix room. Many are the conjectures about these
two years. Baronius says, it was Expleto biennio Neronis. Magister Historiae
Scholasticae, says it was Biennium ab accusatione Felicis a Iudaeis. A Lapide
cares not to think that Biennium hoc inchoandum a praefectura Felicis in Judea,
nam ante illud praefuerat Trachonitidi Batanaeae and Gandanitidi, etc. But it
is most proper to hold, that these two years mean the time of Paul's being a
prisoner under Felix from the time of his apprehension under Lysias the chief
Captain, till Felix his going out of his Government: and so it is held by Beda,
Beza, Salmeron, Onuphrius and others. And this is so proper and suitable to the
intent and discourse of Luke, that it needs no illustration or proof of it:
and it is most agreeable to the Scriptures manner of accounting in all other
places.

These two things then being thus concluded on, it will follow that Paul's
apprehension was in Nero's second, and Felix went out of Office in Nero's
fourth, before Poppaea was yet got into her potency. And the accounting of
Paul's to years imprisonment under Felix to be thus. At Pentecost in Nero's
second he is apprehended, and at Pentecost in Nero's third he had been a year
prisoner: and at Peneecost in Nero's fourth his two years are up: and that
spring it was that Felix went out of Office, and went to Rome to make his
answer, and Pallas his brother not yet utterly out of favor makes his peace.
And now let us draw up the Chronology of Nero's time to the full, according to
these evidences, and as refers to our occasion.

CHRIST. NERO. 55. 1. 56. 2. 57. 3. 58. 4. 59. 5. 60. 6. 61. 7. 62. 8. 63. 9.
64. 10. 65. 11. 66. 12. 67. 13. 68. 14.

Paul at Ephesus: Goes to Macedonia, Creet, Greece, to Macedonia again, and
wintereth in Nicopolis.

Paul at Macedonia till Easter: then goes up to Jerusalem, and is apprehended
at Pentecost, and from that time till the year go out, is a prisoner.

Paul a prisoner all this year under Felix.

Felix removed. Festus comes in: Paul shipped toward Rome, but wintereth by
the way.

Poppaea in Nero's eye, and becomes his Minion.

Festus Governor of Judea. Paul after wintering in his journey, comes to
Rome, and this is the first year of his imprisonment there. Nero kills his
mother Agrippina.

Festus Governor of Judea. Paul's second year imprisonment at Rome.

Festus Governor of Judea.

Festus Governor of Judea. Nero marries Poppaea.

Festus Governor: It may be Albinus came in sometime this year: and then was
James the less slain this year.

Albinus Governor of Judea.

Florus Governor of Judea.

Florus Governor of Judea. The Wars begin.

Nero dies, having reigned 13 years and 8 months.

ACTS CHAP. XXI. from Ver. 17. to the end of the Chapter.
PAul comes to Jerusalem at the feast of Pentecost, when the City was now full
of conflux to that festival. He resorteth instantly to James the residentiary
Apostle of the Circumcision, for holding correspondency sake; and there he
shows him the manner and fruit of his Ministry among the Gentiles. Which both
by James and the Elders that were with him is well approved of, as to the thing
it self: but they certify him of what complaints they heard from the Jews
against him, for crying down of the rites of Moses, especially Circumcision,
That thou teach all the Jews which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses,
saying, that they ought not to circumcise their children, ver. 21. Now because
thousands of the Jews which believed were yet zealous of the Law, this gave
much offense. But did Paul teach thus or not? No doubt he did, and it behoved
him so to do: nor does, nor can James except against the doctrine: for though
it is true that he and Paul and the other Apostles permitted compliance with
some of the Jewish rites for peace sake for a while, as there is an example in
this very place, yea Paul himself circumcised Timothy upon that reason; yet the
use of Circumcision, as these that stood upon it, used it, was utterly
inconsistent with the Gospel. Hear this Apostles Doctrine, Behold I Paul say
unto you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For I
testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtour to the
whole Law, Gal. 5.2. A converted Jew would have his son circumcised: Paul
asks him a reason; what can he answer, but it looks after some justification by
it? as their own Authors speak their thoughts: He that is circumcised is
perfect. And, He that is circumcised shall not go to Gehinnom. And, I said unto
thee, in thy blood live, Ezekiel. 16.6. This is the blood of Circumcision, etc.
Tanchum. in Genesis 17. and 18, etc.

They looked indeed upon Circumcision notion as an admission into the Covenant:
and thereupon the father of the child at his Circumcision constantly used these
words, Blessed be thou O Lord our God who have sanctified us by his
Commandments, and commanded us to bring the child into the Covenant of our
father Abraham. And they that stood by said, As thou have brought him into the
Covenant, so bring him into the Law and into the Bridechamber. Jerus. in
Beracoth. fol. 13. col. 1. But withal they looked upon this Covenant as a
Covenant of works, for, as we observed before, they reputed Abraham himself so
justified. Good cause therefore had Paul to stand out against the convert Jews
circumcising their children, as whereby the Doctrine of Justification by faith
was utterly enervated and made of no effect. And here by the way let us
conceive we heard Paul and one of these parents disputing upon this point.
Circumcise not thy child, says Paul, for if thou do thou laiest an
obligation upon him to observe the whole Law: and this may note to us that the
Sacrament carried an obligation with it, and obliged an Infant, though he knew
not what Law or obligation meant: Baptism is for obligation as well as this,
and a child capable of the obligation though he understand not what it means.
I, but says the Parent, I will not look upon it, as in way to Justification, I
will only use it for the childs admission into the Covenant of grace. If
Infants Baptism were not now in use for such a purpose, let one that denies it,
tell me, what Paul had to answer.

James urges not Paul at all to any public recantation of his Doctrine, but
advises him, by purifying himself and Judaizing a little in the Temple, to
give some public testimony for their satisfaction, ^^at he was not such an
enemy to Moses as he was reported: which he agrees to. For the Temple rites
might have better plea, while the Temple stood, then Circumcision, which was
none of them. On the second or third day of his Purification, some Asian Jews
raise a tumult against him. It is not so properly rendered, And when the seven
days were almost ended, ver. 27. as rather, And as the seven days were to
have been accomplished, the computing of these twelve days mentioned chap.
24.11. enforce that they should be so interpreted.

They found him in the second Court of the Temple the Court of the women,
whither no Heathen came [though they might come into the outer Court, called
the mountain of the House] and thither they supposed and pretended that he had
brought a Gentile, Trophimus an Ephesian: For which he is fallen upon with that
they called (...) The rebels beaten, stripes without number, the people falling
pell mell upon him. Which was the way [as the Jews records inform us] that the
Priests were dealt withal, that came into the next court above this, when any
of them was deprehended there in their uncleanness: they never stood upon it,
to bring him to judicial trial, but his fellows fell upon him, with the faggot
sticks of the Altar, or what came to hand, and mawled him with blows without
measure even unto death: And so had Paul been served now had not the Roman
Commander come and been his rescue. Yet did he suppose him an offender, and
questions him whether he were not that Egyptian that not long before that time
had made an insurrection. Josephus gives his story, Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 6.
thus. At that time there comes one to Jerusalem out of Egypt, pretending
himself to be a Prophet: and he counseled the common people, that they should
go with him to Mount Olivet, and that there he would show them how at his
command the walls of Jerusalem would fall: But Felix understanding this, sent
some horse and foot against them, and slew 400 of them [our text here says
4000] and took two hundred prisoners.

ACTS CHAP. XXII.
PAUL Apologizeth to the people: tells his Education, Conversation and
Conversion: and relating how by a Divine Vision he was appointed to go to the
Gentiles, they begin a new commotion, which the chief Captain again pacifieth;
but yet thinks Paul some notable villain, or else that there would never have
been so terrible cries against him: He would now have scourged him, but that he
understood he was a Roman: therefore he turns to another course, and the next
day brings him before the Sanhedrin. The sitting of that Bench was little at
Jerusalem now: For as we have observed, they were unnested from Jerusalem
diverse years ago, and their most constant residence at present was at Iabneh:
only they were now come up to the Festival.

ACTS CHAP. XXIII. and XXIV. to Ver. 27.
RAbban Simeon the son of Rabban Gamaliel, Paul's Master, was President of the
great Council at this time, for Gamaliel was dead some two or t^ree years
ago. Of him the Jews have this saying in Sotah per. 9. From the time that old
Rabban Gamaliel died, the honor of the Law ceased; for till then they read and
learned the Law standing, but after his death sitting. Onkelos the Targumist of
the Law burn a great quantity of frankincense for him at his Obsequies.
Iuchasin fol. 53. Whether Rabban Simeon the President were present at this
Session or no, Ananias the Highpriest is as busy as if he had been chief
President himself: But Paul cares for him as little, as he busied himself much.
He calls him whited wall, or arrant painted hypocrite: And when he was checked
for reviling Gods Highpriest, I knew not brethren, says he, that he is
Highpriest: for if I took him for such a one, I would not ^o have spoken to
him, since it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of my people.
It is not possible that Paul should not know who and what Ananias was: but
(...) is very indifferent, whether we understand this, as not owning this man
for a lawful Highpriest, or not owning any lawful Highpriesthood now at all.
The man base and usurping; and the Function of the Highpriesthood disanulled by
the great Highpriest, who had accomplished all that it typified, and the place
of the Highpriesthood being become a common Merchandise, obtained by money and
favor and dis^^^ching one another.

By a holy policy he divides the Council, and professing himself by education
a Pharisee, and of that belief in the point of the Resurrection, he not only
sets Pharise^* and Sadduces to a hot contestation between themselves, but he
makes the Pharis^^s, so far as to that opinion, to take his part: It had been
possible to have set the Hil^elian and Shammaean party together by the ears, by
a bone handsomely cast (...) them, for the Council had these factions in it,
and their feud was as deadly; b^t Paul could own no article of their divisions,
that was worth his owning, they were so (...) and below his cognizance. It is
the confession of the Jerusalem Gomarists in I^ma fol 38. col. 3. That the
fault of their great ones under the second Temple was love of money, and hatred
one of another.

Paul in the hubbub is rescued again by the Soldiery, and that night by
revelation is warranted to appeal to Caesar, by being informed he must go to
Rome. A Conspiracy of a pack of cutthroats to murder him, is prevented, and he
is sent to Caesarea to Felix, where he lies prisoner two years. By such packing
and combining of murderers, it may easily be conjectured what temper the Nation
was now in. Josephus his character of it at these times is, That the affairs of
the Jews grew daily worse and worse, (...) that the Country was full of thieves
and sorcerers, but Felix was daily picking them up to penalty after their
desert; the greater thief, the less; for his character yields (...) no better.
Tacitus says enough of him, when he speaks but this, Antonius Felix, per omnem
saevitiam ac libidinem jus regium servili ingenio exercuit: Histor. lib. 5.
cap. 2. Upon which Josephus will give you a large comment of his intolerable
covetousness, polling, cruelty, sacrilege, murderings, and all manner of
wickedness. His injuriousnesse to Paul in the story before us, and the very
naming (...) wife Drusilla may be brand enough upon him: for her, by
inticements and magical (...), he allured to himself from her husband and
married her. And him he kept prisoner two years wrongfully because he would not
bribe him. In his pleading before him, he makes him tremble, but it is but a
qualm and away.

Caesarea under Felix. A great City of Jews and Greeks mixtly: the place where
the first spark of Jews Wars kindled afterward. A famous University of Jews
in time, if so be it was not so at this time.

ACTS CHAP. XXIV. Ver. 27.
Caesarea under Felix for the first part of this year: Then comes Festus into
the Government, and Felix packeth to Rome to answer for his misdemeanors.

ACTS CHAP. XXV. and XXVI.
PAUL answers for himself, first before Festus alone: then before Agrippa and
his sister Bernice: this Agrippa was his son whose death is related Acts 12.
he by the favor of Claudius the Emperor succeeded his brother in Law-Uncle
Herod [for such relations did that Incestuous family find out] in the Kingdom
of Chalcis. For Berenice his sister had married Herod King of Chalcis her Uncle
and his, who was now dead, and this Agrippa succeeded him in his Kingdom, being
also King of Judea. Of this Agrippa, as it is most probable, there is frequent
mention among the Hebrew Writers: as particularly this, that King Agrippa
reading the Law in the later end of the year of release, as it was enjoined,
and coming to those words, Deuteronomy. 17.15. Thou shall not set a stranger King over
thee which is not of thy brethren, the tears ran down his cheeks [for he was
not of the seed of Israel] which the Congregation observing, cried out, Be of
good comfort O King Agrippa, thou art our brother. He was of their Religion
though not of their blood, and well versed in all the Laws and customs as Paul
speaks, chap. 26.3.

Berenice his sister, now a widow, lived with him, and that in more familiarity
then was for their credit: afterward she fell into the like familiarity with
Titus the son of Vespasian, when he came up to the Jews Wars. There is
mention in Ierus. in Taanith. fol. 66. col. 1. and again in Megillah fol. 70.
col. 3. of the Scribes or learned Jews of Chalcis, against whom the people rose
and tumultuated. [In the one place it is written (...) in the other (...).] It
may be they were of this Agrippa's planting there.

As Paul pleads for himself, Festus takes him to be beside himself: but Agrippa
better acquainted with those kind of things that he spoke of, was much moved:
and concludes that had he not appealed to Caesar, he might have been quit. What
he did in this appeal was not a small thing, and it is very questionable
whether ever Jew had appealed from their own Sanhedrin, to the Heathen
Tribunal before. But for this he had a Divine warrant.

ACTS CHAP. XXVII.
PAUL shipped for Rome: and Luke with him, and Aristarchus a Thessalonian. Paul
calls him his fellow prisoner, Col^ss. 4.10. whether now or not till he came to
Rome is a question: Trophimus an Ephesian is also now with him, Acts 21.29.
whom he leaves sick at Miletum, as he passes by those coasts of Asia, Act.
27.2. 2 Timothy 4.20. and there likew^se he leaves Timothy. Who else of those that
went with him to Jerusalem, Act. 20 4. were now with him, is uncertain. It was
now far in the year, and winter entering, for the feast of expiation was over,
so that they meet with a tempestuous journey, and at last suffer shipwreck and
swim for their lives, and do all escape. The Reader by the time of the writing
of the second Epistle to the Corinthians, which he has passed, will easily see
that what he speaks there, A day and a night I have been in the deep, 2 Cor.
11.25. cannot be understood of his shipwreck now, but referres to some time a
good while ago.

ACTS CHAP. XXVIII. from the beginning to Ver. 30.
Malta: where he does some miracles. And when winter was now drawing over, they
put to sea again, in an Alexandrian bottom, whose badge was Castor and Pollux:
or the picture of two young men on white horses, with either of them a javelin
in his hand, and by him half an egg and a star: whom Heathenish folly and
superstition conceited to have been twins begotten by Jupiter, and Deities
favorable to those that sailed on the sea. And this seems to have been the
reason why Luke does mention this circumstance, because he would intimate the
men's superstition, as expecting better sailing under this badge then they had
had.

From Melita they sail to Syracuse in Sicilie, and there abide three days.
From thence to Rhegium in Italy, and from thence to Puteoli: there they find
Christians and stay with them seven days: and then set away for Rome. At Appii
Forum above 50 miles from the City, some of the Roman Christians hearing of
their coming, come ^o meet them: and at the Tres Tabernae, 33 from the City,
they meet with (...) and so they enjoy the society of one another some space
together as they tr^vell along, which was no small refreshing to Paul, who had
desired so much and so long to see them.

ACTS CHAP. XXVIII.
Ver. 30. And Paul dwelt two whole years in his hired house, and received all
that came to him.

31. Preaching the Kingdom of God and teaching those things which concern the
Lord Jesus Christ with all confidence, no man forbidding him.


JULIUS the Centurion that had brought him and the rest of the prisoners from
Judea, had been his friend and favourer, from their first setting out, Chap.
27.3. and so continued, even to the time of his settling in Rome: obtaining him
this liberty, that he might take lodgings of his own, and there he was kept
under a restraintlesse restraint: After three days he sends for the chief of
the Jews, and lays open his case before them, and upon a day appointed he
asserteth and expounds the truth and doctrine of the Gospel, whereupon some
believe, but others do the rather become his enemies.

His accusers that were come from Judea to lay in his charge against him [for
we can hardly suppose otherwise, but that some such were come] would be urgent
to get their business dispatched that they might be returning to their own
homes again; and so would bring him to trial as soon as they could: and that
his tr^all was reasonable early this year, it appears by his own words in his
second Epistle to Timothy, where he speaks of his Answer that he had been at,
and requires Timothy to come to him before winter, 2 Timothy 4.16, 21.

As he appealed to Nero himself, so Nero himself heard his cause, Philip. 1.13.
2 Timothy 4.16. [and here it was possible Paul and Seneca might see each other] at
which time all that had owned him before, withdrew themselves for fear, and
durst not stand by him, or appear with him in this danger.

Tacitus mentions a case much like his, which had been tried two years
before, namely of Pomponia Graecina a noble Lady of Rome, concerning a strange
Religion. Superstitionis externae rea, mariti judicio permissa. I^que prisco
instituto, propinquis coram, de capite famaque conjugis cognovit, and inson^em
nuntiavi^. This that he calls externa superstitio, cannot well be understood
of any Religion, but either Judaism or Christianity: for any Heathen
superstition did relish so well with them, that it could hardly have brought
her into danger. If her peril of l^fe then were because of Christianity, as
very well it might, it was a terrible example that lay before the Christians
there: and if it were not, then this trial of Paul being of a doubtful issue
and consequent and full of danger, it made poor Paul's friends to shrink aside
in this his extremity, and to be to seek when he had most need of them. At my
first answer, says he, none stood with me, but all forsook me. In which words
he does not so much refer to what or how many more Answers he was called to
[as the postscript of that Epistle seems to construe it] as he does intimate,
that even at the very first pinch and appearance of danger, all that should
have been his assistants started from him. It may be Demas his embracing of the
present world, 2 Timothy 4.10. signifies in this sense, that he forsook Paul, and
shifted for himself and sculked to avoid the danger: or if it be taken, that he
returned to his worldly employments again, or that he returned to his Judaism
again: mean it what it will, we shall see in the story of the next year, that
he returned to Paul and to his station again. So that his failing was but as
Peter's denial of his Master, repented of and recovered. It was a hard case and
a great trial with the Apostle, when in so signal an encounter, and so
imminent danger of his life, none of the Church that was at Rome, nor any of
those that were of his own retinue, durst own him, or stand by him in his
exigent: but the Lord was with him, and brought him off safe from the Lions
mouth: He being assured by this providence of God to him, and for him, in his
great danger, that he was reserved for the further benefit of the Church and
propagating of the Gospel, applies himself to that work the best way he can,
considering his condition o^ imprisonment; and whereas he cannot travel up and
down to the Churches to preach to them as he done, he visits diverse of them
by his Epistles: And first he writes

THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS,
and sends it by Crescens, as may be conceived from 2 Timothy 4.10. For though
Demas, and Crescens, and Titus their departure from Paul be reckoned altogether
in that verse, yet the reason of the^r departure cannot be judged to have been
alike: for however Demas started upon some carnal respect, yet Crescens and
Titus are not so branded, nor will the eminent piety of the later suffer us to
have any such opinion of him, and the judging of him does also help us to judge
of Crescens who is joined with him. The postscript of this Epistle both in the
Greek, Syriack, Arabic, and diverse other Translations, does generally date it
from Rome: Beza from Antioch: Erasmus from Ephesus, but all upon conjecture:
for there is no intimation in the Epistle it self of the time or place of its
writing: Beza upon these words in Chap. 1. ver. 2. And all the brethren which
are with me, says thus, Puto sic totum Antiochenae Ecclesiae Presbyterium
significari, and inde scriptam hanc Epistolam, etc. I think by this he means
the whole Presbytery of the Church of Antioch, and that this Epistle was
written from thence, at that time that passed between Paul and Barnabas their
return into Asia from their first journey forth, and the coming of those
troubles to Antioch, Acts 14.28. But that Apostasy in the Churches which the
Apostle cries out against in this Epistle and in others, was not then begun;
and moreover it may well be questioned whether the Churches of Galatia were
then planted. And the former answer, may likewise be given to the opinion that
this Epistle was written from Ephesus: namely that at the time of Paul's being
at Ephesus, the Apostasy which ere long did sorely and almost Epidemically
infest the Churches, was but then beginning. And this is one reason why I
suppose it written from Rome, at this time that we are upon, because that
gangrene in the Eastern Churches was now come to ripeness, as it appears by
the second Epistle to Timothy, which was written this same year: See 2 Timothy
1.15.

False teachers had brought back the Galatians from the simplicity of the
Gospel, to their old Ceremonious performances again, and to reliance upon the
works of the Law for Justification: which miscarriage the Apostle takes
sharply to task in this Epistle. And first he vindicates his Apostleship as no
whit inferior to Peter and James and John the Ministers of the Circumcision,
and those that chiefly seemed to be pillars, and he shows how these approved of
him and it: And then he most divinely states the nature of the Law, at which
was the great stumbling; and especially speaks to that point that they most
stood upon, their living in it.

The Lord had laid a stone in Sion, which the Jews could not step over, but
stumble at, even to this day: and that is that which is said in Levit. 18.5.
Ezekiel. 20.11. and in other places, which the Apostle also touches in this
Epistle, Chap. 3.12. from whence they concluded that no living, no
justification but by the works of the Law. The Apostle in the third Chapter of
this Epistle lays down two conclusions that determine the case, and resolves
all into faith. The first is in ver. 17. namely that the Law was not given to
cross the Covenant of grace, but to be subservient to it. The second in ver.
10. that the Law did plainly show of it self that no man could perform it, but
it left a man under the curse. Observe that he says not, As many as fail of
the works of the Law, but As many as are of the works of the Law: showing that
the Law did not only denounce a curse upon all that performed it not, but
plainly demonstrated that none could perform it, and so left all under a curse:
and these words, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, etc.
conclude both. So that the Law was not given for justification, but to be
subservient to the Covenant of Justification: not to cross the Covenant but to
serve it, not purposely to leave under the curse, but to show the curse, and to
drive men to get from under it. So that men might live in it, but not by it. It
was the way in which men were to go to seek for Justification, but it was not
the cause or means whereby they were justified. See Gal. 3.5. The Jews made the
Moral Law cross to the Covenant of grace, whilst they sought to be justified
by works: and they made the Ceremonial Law cross the Moral, whilst they
resolved all duty into Ceremony: and so the Law which in it self was holy and
pure and good, they turned to death unto themselves by their abuse. They might
have lived in the Moral Law [had they used it aright,] though not by it: for
the more a man sets himself to the exact performance of it, the more he sees he
cannot perform it, and therefore he is driven the more to Christ: But they
resolved all into Ceremonious performance, and so lost sincerity toward the
Moral, and hereupon the Ceremonial Law good in it self, became to them
Statutes not good, and Judgments wherein they could not live, Ezekiel. 20.25.

From Rome also, and reasonable early in this year, Paul wrote

THE SECOND EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY;
and in it urges Timothy to come to him before Winter.

Timothy was now at Ephesus when this Epistle was directed to him, as may be
observed out of the Epistle it self by these collections.

1. In that he wills him to salute the household of Onisephorus, Chap. 4.19.
who was an Ephesian, Chap. 1.16, 18.

2. In that he bids him take Troas in ^is way as he comes to him, Chap.
4.13. which had been the way that Paul himself had gone from Ephesus, 2 Cor.
2.22. and to Ephesus again, Act. 20.5.

3. In that he warns him of Alexander, Chap. 4.14. who was an Ephesian, 1 Timothy 1.20. Act. 19.33.

There is one passage in this Epistle, which has caused some to doubt about
the time of its writing [for about the place there is no doubt] and that is,
what he says, Chap. 4 6. I am now ready to be offered up, and the time of my
departure is at hand: which would make one think, that he was now ready to be
martyred, and taken away, and it has made some believe that this was the last
Epistle that ever he wrote: but when we compare his own words again in ver. 17,
18. and Philip. 1 25. and Philem. ver. 22. it makes it past controversy that
he speaks not of his sudden Martyrdom, but that he is to be understood in
some other sense. But what is that? Baroniu^ gives this gl^sse, The words of
Paul concerning his speedy death, seem not possib^y otherwise to be understood,
then that God had revealed to him, that he should s^ffer death under Nero. For
that time might very well seem near which was to be fulfilled under the same
Prince. I, but Nero for his age might have reigned 50 o^ ^0 years after the
Apostles writi^g of this Epistle, and so the last words of this gloss, are but
a very poor salving: And indeed the resolution of the difficulty lies open and
conspicuous in the text it self. Paul looked upon Timothy as the prime and
choice man that was to succeed him in the work of the Gospel, when he himself
should be dead and gone* as being a young man, not only of singular
qualifications for that work, but of whom there had been special Prophesies
and predictions to such a purpose, 1 Timothy 1.18. as was observed before. He
exhorts him therefore in this place, to improve all his pains and parts to the
utmost, to do the work of an Evangelist, and to make proof of his Ministry to
the full, for that he himself could not last long, being now grown old and worn
with travel, and besides all this, in bonds at present, and so in continual
danger: therefore must Timothy be sitting himself daily to take his work up
when he was gone.

With Timothy he desires that Mark may come along with him to Rome, whom we
observed to be at Corinth at Paul's last coming thither: and one clause in this
Epistle seems also to speak to that matter: Chap. 4.20. Erasius abode at
Corinth, but Trophimus I left at Miletum sick. Erasius abode at Corinth; Why?
that Timothy k^ew without any information, for he was with Paul all along that
journey when Erasius went to Corinth and staid there. And Trophimus I left at
Miletum s^ck: Why? Timothy could not but know that too, without Paul's telling
him so from Rome, Miletum and Ephesus were so very near together, nay it is
more then pr^bab^e that Timothy was left at Miletum too when Trophimus was left
there. But when was he le^t? Not when Paul went toward Jerusalem, and sent for
the Elders of Ephesus to Miletum, Acts 20. for Trophimus went, and was with him
at Jerusalem, Acts 21.19. But it was when Paul returned from Jerusalem in bonds
to Rome, ^s has been said, though it be not particularly mentioned that he
touched there. Some would have the word Miletum to be read Melita, among whom
is Beza, who is ever one of the forwardest to tax the Text for corrupt, when he
cannot clear it. Potius con^icio leg^ndum (...) [saith he] quod vocabulum
facile suit in (...) depravare. Luke says plainly, that at Paul's coming away
from Judea in his voyage to Rome, it was their resolution to sail by the coasts
of Asia, Acts 27 2. which had been a far fairer ground to have concluded
upon, that Paul was at Miletum in that voyage, since that was a part of those
Asian coasts, then to change Miletum into Melita upon no ground at all. And
certainly the very scope of the Apostle in that passage will not admit of that
change: for he is not telling Timothy of Erastus his abode at Corinth, or of
Trophimus his sick stay at Miletum, as things unknown to him, but as things
very well known, yet mentioned to him as making to the Apostles present
purpose: He had sent for Timothy and Mark to come away to him to Rome, and to
forward them to that journey, he does these two things. 1. He shows how all
his company was scattered from him, ver. 9, 10. and therefore he had need of
them in that destitution. 2. He tells how supply might be made in their
places though they came away, for though Mark should come from Corinth, yet
Erastus might be a supply, for Erastus abode there. And Timothy come away from
Ephesus, yet Trophimus is there ready to supply his place, for Trophimus I left
at Miletum sick.

By Tychicus who was the bearer of this Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 4.12. Paul
also sends

THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS:
for it is apparent that he was in bonds when he sent that Epistle, Chap. 3.1.
and that he sent it by Tychichus, Chap. 6.21. That ye may know mine affairs and
how I do, Tychicus a beloved brother, and faithful Minister in the Lord, shall
make known to you all things, whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose.

In this Epistle he addresseth himself more especially to the convert Gentiles
of the Ephesian Church, to establish and settle them in the truth, against that
warping and wavering that was now too common: and he sets himself to unfold
the mystery of the Gospel in its full luster, and discovery in a more special
manner, and that especially in the two first Chapters, as he himself professes
in the third. By revelation God made known unto me the mystery, as I wrote
before in few words, whereby when ye read ye may understand my knowledge in the
mystery of Christ, ver. 3, 4.

He speaks much of the mystery of the Gentiles calling, and calls the Jews
and Gentiles knit in the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son
of God, A perfect man, and the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, Chap. 4.13. In Chap. 5.26, 27. speaking of Christ's washing the Church,
that he might present it to himself without spot or wrinkle, etc. he seems to
allude to the Jews exceeding great curiousness in their washings for
purification. Maym. in Mikvaoth per. 1. There must be nothing to interpose
between the person that is washed and the water: for if there be any thing
interposing betwixt him and the water, as if any clay or dough stick to his
flesh, he is unclean as he was, and his washing profits him nothing. And a
little after: If there be upon the flesh of a man or upon a vessel, any of
those things that may interpose, as dough, pitch or the like, though it be no
more then a grain of mustardseed, and he take it to thought, his washing
profits him nothing.

Wh^t he says in ver. 29. So ought men to love their wives even as their own
bodies, is agreed (...) even by the Jews doctrine. Our Doctors teach, He that
loves his wife as his own body, and he that honors her more then his own body,
and he that makes his sons to walk in a right way, etc. of such a one the
Scripture says, Thou shall know that peace shall be in thy tabernacle, etc.
Alphes. in Gittin per. ult.

Paul's imprisonment: in which he had the changeable and different occurrences,
of loving visits and salutes from some Churches abroad, and cross dealing from
some ill-willed at home: some sadness of heart by the sickness of
Epaphroditus near unto death, but comfort and reviving again by his recovery.
The Church of Philippi had sent him to visit Paul in their name, and to bring
him some tokens of their love for his support and maintenance in his
imprisonment: and the good man fell sick in Rome very like to die: upon his
recovery and return home again, Paul sends by him

THE EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS;
written in his name, and in the name of Timothy, who according to his
appointment was now come to him. He shows in this Epistle, that as there were
some which preached the Gospel of sincerity, so were there others that preached
of envy and contention, and so added affliction to his bonds: He was yet in
bonds, but in some good hopes of deliverance, as he shows in Chap. 2.24. for
he says he hoped ere long to send Timothy to them, and himself to come with
him: but we shall observe ere long, that when Paul has got his liberty,
Timothy is got into prison, and so his journey for the present stopped.

He saluteth no Church in the platform of Bishops and Deacons, but only this:
not but that there were Bishops and Deacons in other Churches as well as here,
but it may be, he does it here the rather, because of the contribution that the
Bishops and Deacons had gathered for him and sent to him: or because he would
show the platform of office and order in this Church of Philippi, which was
purely Gentile, agreeable to that of the believing Jews Churches.

He gives warning to beware of the heretical and unbeleeving Jews, whom he
calls dogs and the concision: and now the name they used to give to the Gentiles
[ Dogs] is light upon themselves. The very Talmudists speak as evil of that
generation in which Messiah should come as the Scripture does, 2 Timothy 3.1, etc.
and among other things they say thus: When the son of David comes, the
Synagogues shall become stews: Galilee shall be destroyed: Gablan shall be
desolate [the Samaritan Version of the Pentateuch does constantly render Seir,
Gablah] and the men of the border of Israel shall go from City to City, and the
wisdom of the Scribes shall be abominated, and Religious persons shall be
scorned: And the faces of that generation shall be as dogs. Talm. Bab. in
Sanhedr. fol. 97. He calls them (...) The concision: The word signifies such
superstitious and vain and impious cuttings in the flesh as Heathens used: as 2
King. 18.28, etc. No more does he make of their Circumcision: the Greek word is
used by the LXX Levit. 21.5.

He speaks of one in Philippi whom he calls his true yokefellow: alluding
it may be either to the word (...) by which the Jews did ordinarily express
great professors of Religion: (...) a most ordinary phrase in the Jerusalem
Talmud: Or the word (...) yokes or couples whereby they expressed the President
and Vicepresident of the Sanhedrin, those famous couples Shemaiah and Abtalion,
Hillel and Shammai, etc. Of whom it is that he speaks, is undeterminable.
Barnabas or Silas might best bear the title. Whosoever it was, it seems it
was some worthy person who was at this time in that Church, whom he entreats to
compose some differences that were then afoot; and to be helpful in some
occasions and cases that he knew needful. It is not to be doubted but
Epaphroditus, had acquainted him particularly with the state of the Church, and
he applies his exhortations accordingly.

As the Church of Philippi had sent Epaphroditus to visit him, so did the
Church of Colossi send Epaphras one of their Ministers to do the like, Colos.
1.7, 8. whereupon, by Tychicus, who had been the last year at Ephesus to fetch
Timothy, and returned with him to Rome, Col. 4.7. and by Onesimus a Colossian,
Col. 4.9. Paul and Timothy send

THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS.
The naming of Mark now with him, Chap. 4.10. does state the time of writing
this Epistle, and fixes it to this year; or else it would be easier for
Tychicus his travel, to have supposed that he brought it the last year when he
came to Timothy to Ephesus, and Colosse was not far off: but the observing of
Marks being now at Rome, puts the matter out of doubt. And whereas it might be
thought more likely, that Epaphras that came with the visit from the Church,
should bring this return of Paul back again, it appears by Chap. 4.12. that
he staid still with Paul and was fellow-prisoner now with him, Philem. ver. 23.

The Colossians had never seen Paul's face, no more had the Laodiceans; for no
less can be gathered from his own words, Chap. 2.1. yet had he been a means by
some of his agents to plant these Churches, or at least to afford them
plentiful watering. The Apostles had subordinate Ministers under them that
they employed to this purpose. I know not how the word Helps, 1 Cor. 12.28. can
be better understood.

The Laodiceans had sent him an Epistle [as the Corinthians had also done, 1
Cor. 7.1.] and this is that Epistle that he speaks of, Chap. 4.16. See that
ye read likewise the Epistle from Laodicea. Not that he had written any
Epistle from thence which is now lost, as is conceived by some, for he was
never there, but it means that Epistle which the Laodiceans had sent to him:
Not that he would have it read, as of equal Divine authority with his own, but
as a good copy and example to the Colossians. If any be not satisfied with this
construction, we shall offer another when we come to the Epistles of John,
rather then conceive, that any Epistle of Paul is lost, that was once read in
the Churches.

Among those whose salutations he sends, he names Demas: who the last year was
departed from him, and embraced, as he thought, the present world, 2 Timothy 4.10.
but now is come in a good man again. The sparks of grace once kindled, can
never be quenched, yea though not discernable to the eye of a Paul: which
however raked up under the ashes by vehement temptation or corruption, yet
covered with an everlasting decree, of everlasting love, are unextinguishable.
The act of grace, it is true, may be in a swone, and seem dead to the eyes of a
Paul himself, whilst yet there is the habit in life: I mean that gracious
changednesse, which by regeneration is wrought in the soul, the stony heart
turned into flesh, which though it may congeal into ice again, yet can never
again congeal into the stone it was. Fides qua apprehendens, its hand may slip,
but fides qua apprehensa, his hand cannot slip that has laid hold upon it.

By these same bearers Tychicus and Onesimus, by whom he sends the Epistle to
the Colossians, he also sends

THE EPISTLE TO PHILEMON.
For he was a Colossian, as appears by this that Paul calls Onesimus his
servant one of the Colossians, Col. 4.9. and Archippus which was Minister at
Colosse, Col. 4.17. seems to have been Philemons son, or at least to have
sojourned in his house, Philem. ver. 2. In this Epistle he sends salutations
from the persons he did in the Epistle to the Colossians. Epaphras, Marcus,
Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas: only there is this difference about two of them,
that here he calls Epaphras his fellow-prisoner, which there he did not, and
there Aristarchus his fellow-prisoner which here he does not: This doing of the
Apostle needs to breed no scruple, but it may rather justly be inquired how
these men came prisoners. Aristarchus set out with Paul from Jerusalem, and he
only is named of all his company, Act. 27.2. either because he was a prisoner
then as Paul was, or because the rest with Paul were his attendants and
Ministers constantly with him, and therefore needed not to be named. Or if
Aristarchus were not committed to prison till now, the consideration of
Epaphras his case will include his: Epaphras came from Colosse but very lately,
Col. 1.7, 8. and how, and for what, is he now got into prison? For answer to
this we may properly take in something out of the Roman story* Suetonius in the
Life of Nero speaking of those times of his that carried some moderation, in
which he was not broke out to his extreme wickedness: and mentioning some
things that he did and enacted that looked somewhat like a Reformation, he
says thus: Mul^a sub eo and animadversa severe, and coercita, nec minus
instituta: Adhibitus sumptibus modus: Publicae caenae ad sportulas redactae:
Interdictum ne quid in popinis cocti, praeter legumina, aut olera veniret, cum
antea nullum non opsonii genus proponeretur. Afflicti suppliciis Christiani,
genus hominum superstitionis novae and maleficae. This last particular is it
that we have to deal with; The Christians were put to punishment, a sort of men
of a new Religion, etc. Suet. in Nerone cap. 16.

Tacitus in the Life of the same tyrant tells of a dreadful fire that befell
in Rome in the tenth year of his reign, [of which we shall speak when we come
there] which common report buzzed and rumored up and down that he had kindled.
Abolendo rumori Nero subdidit reos, and quaesitissimis paenis affecit, quos per
flagitia invisos, vulgus Christianos appellat. Nero to stop that report,
brought in as guilty those who were called Christians, and tortured them with
exquisite torments. The author of that name was Christ, who in the reign of
Tiberius was put to death by Pontius Pilate. Repressaque in praesens
exitiabilis superstitio, rursus erumpebat, non modo per Iudaeam, originem ejus
mali, sed per urbem etiam; quo cuncta undique arocia aut pudenda confluunt,
celebranturque. Igitur primo correpti qui fatebantur, etc. For the Englishing
of this, the words repressa in praesens will breed some dispute; as doubtful,
whether they mean that the Christian Religion was suppressed by Nero at that
time when he inflicted those tortures upon them, pretending them guilty for
firing the City, which was in his tenth year, but it brake out again after, for
all that suppression; or that they mean, that that Religion had been suppressed
in former time, but now by that tenth year of Nero was broken out again, and he
falls upon it anew. The words you may wind to whether construction you will,
construing them either, That dangerous superstition suppressed for the present
broke out again: or That dangerous superstition having been suppressed for a
time, was broke out again; or, that had been suppressed till the present: Now
though there be this dubiousnesse in that phrase, yet the observation of these
things may state it, that there was some such suppression of Christianity
before that open persecution that broke out in his tenth year. 1. Because
Sueton speaks of his afflicting the Christians, a^ done in his way of
Reformation of Religion, and that in his good times when he was not grown a
monster, and not by way of crimination of them, or for the salving of his own
credit as he did in his tenth year. 2. There is mention of Pomponia Graecina
tried for her life, about the beginning of Nero's reign, for matter of Religion
as we mentioned before. 3. This imprisonment of Epaphras, and it may be of
Aristarchus, at this time, and certainly of Timothy presently after, may also
confirm it: for what should these men be imprisoned for but for Religion? It is
very probable therefore that Nero had by some Act or Edict suppressed
Christianity, not only at Rome, but also in Iudaea, as it seems by that
clause in Tacitus, Rursus erumpebat non modo per Iudaeam, etc. and if so, that
might be a forwarder of that defection that was so general in the Churches of
the Jews that had received the Gospel; they falling to Moses again, or joining
the adhesion to the Law with the profession of the Gospel: for thus hiding
their Christianity, they might retain their liberty of their Christianity such
as it was, the Religion of the Jews not being at all suppressed by him:
However, if there were such a suppression at Rome, as it is very like there
was, Paul's deliverance from the Lions mouth, was the more remarkable, since he
was to answer not only to his accusers about his profession, but before a judge
that was prejudiced against it so deeply.

But since we have heard of no stirring at Rome of all this time to such a
time, nor any mention of any imprisoning but only of Paul, how comes the matter
to wax so hot now, since Nero's heat against Christianity seems to have been
some years, or at least a good while ago? Here we cannot but remember that
passage in the Epistle to the Philippians so lately written: Philip 1.15, 16.
Some preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some also of good will. The one
preach Christ of contention not sincerity, supposing to add affliction to my
bonds. By which it may be conjectured, that some enemies of Paul's and his
companies, taking opportunity of Nero's declaration against Christianity did
bussle and make ado in preaching the Gospel, aiming at nothing more then this,
that hereby the ringleaders in the Gospel Paul and his company [as no doubt
they were noted so to be] might be the more narrowly looked after: and this
might well be some occasion of the imprisonment of Epaphras and Timothy at this
time, and of Aristarchus, if so be he were not a prisoner before.

Timothy a prisoner, and Paul himself at liberty, for his two years
imprisonment expired the later end of the last year or the beginning of this.
You have intimation of this, Heb. 13.23. where he says, Know ye, that our
brother Timothy is set at liberty: with whom if he come shortly I will see you:
For I cannot interpret the word (...) otherwise then in reference to restraint;
and then we may out of this passage observe that Timothy had been a prisoner,
and that the Hebrews had known of his imprisonment, but now he was at liberty,
and Paul too, ready to come away with him when he should come. He had written
to the Philippians that he hoped shortly to send Timothy to them, Philip. 2.19.
and to Philemon to provide a lodging for him, for he hoped ere long to come
into those parts, Philem. ver. 22. By which we may conclude, that upon his
enlargement he intended not to have stayed long at Rome, or that Timothy at the
least should not have been long from them, but that his imprisonment, as it
proved, hindered them both. Therefore we may not cast his commitment beyound
this year; but how long he lay under restraint we cannot tell, only we may
conceive him at liberty the next, for in that year we suppose the writing of
the Epistle to the Hebrews which speaks of his enlargement.

In our thoughts about Nero's suppressing Christianity, and these men's bonds
thereabout, we may also look with admiration at the wondrous workings of God:
observe, that even at these times there was Christianity in Nero's household,
Philip. 4.22.

This year some occurrences befalling in this our own Country of England,
though they are besides the argument that we are upon, yet may they not unfitly
be taken into mention for Countries sake. Suetonius Paulinus was now General
for the Romans here. He assails to take the I Will of Man, Incolis validam and
receptaculum perfugarum, says Tacitus: Strong in the inhabitants and a refuge
for fugitives. He bringing on his men near the shore, finds an Army guarding
and ready to forbid his landing. Among the men, there were women running up and
down; In modum furiarum, vest ferali, crinibus dejectis faces praeferebant.
Like furies in a dreery garb, with their hair about their ears, and they
carried torches. The Roman soldiers for a while stood amazed at such a sight,
but at last falling on, they enter and destroy them, and possess and Garrison
the Island. Excisique luci saevis superstitionibus sacri; Nam cruore captivo
adolere aras, and fibris hominum consulere Deo fas habebant. And they cut down
the groves that were devoted to bloody superstition: For they used to sacrifice
captives at their Altars, and to look into their inwards by way of auguration.

It is a remarkable and true saying of Pliny concerning Italy or Rome, That it
was a Country Quae sparsa congregaret imperia, ritusque molliret, and tot
populorum discordes ferasque linguas sermonis commercio contraheret ad
colloquia, and humanitatem homini daret. Not. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 5. which in
short is this, that it civilized the world, and taught barbarous Nations
humanity. A strange assertion, if we consider the barbarous bloudinesse and
superstitions of the Romans themselves; yet if we look upon the thing it self,
it is very true, they being a people of Learning, Discipline and Education, and
planting these wheresoever they got footing. And this was one means in the
Lords providence, whose ways are past finding out, to harrow the worlds
ruggedness, and to fit it the better for the sowing of the Gospel. In what
temper our Land of Britain was, as to civility, before they came in, may be
guessed by this garb of the I Will of Man, so near relating to it, if we had no
more evidence.

Whilst Suetonius was thus busied here, he hears of a revolt and rebellion in
Britain, caused partly by the cruel exaction of Decimus Catus the Governor,
who revived some impositions that Claudius the Emperor had remitted, partly by
the grinding usury and exaction of Seneca, who having put them, even unwilling,
to take vast sums of money of his, to most unsufferable usury, he now called
it and the use in, with all extremity and mercilesnesse: And partly by an
unhappy obsequiousness of Prasutagus King of the Iceni, or at least by an
unhappy abusing of his obsequiousness: For he dying, and leaving Nero and his
own two daughters his heirs by Will, the Roman Centurions as in claim to Nero's
Legacy, ransack and catch all they can, and pull his Kingdom all to pieces, and
abuse his wife and two daughters barbarously and inhumanely: and spare not
either his friends, kindred or Nobles. This stirs all to commotion, which is
eagerly prosecuted by Bondicea or Bunduica the widow of the King deceased, in
so much that they destroy the Colony at Camalodunum, the Roman Garrison and
associates at London, and the like at Verulam: in all to the number of 70000
persons: Suetonius at last comes in, and fights them, they being near upon
230000 in arms under Bunduica, he routeth them, slayes upon 80000 of them:
Bunduica for vexation poisons her self: and the Roman destroys with fire and
sword all the Towns before him that were of the adverse party, or adhered to
it: Diverse prodegies are mentioned by the Historians, that relate these bloody
occurrences as presages of it: as the sea bloody, strange voices and howlings
heard, sights seen in the Thames, of houses under water, as a Colony
overturned, etc.

Colossians, Chap. 4.10. intimates that Mark, who was then with him at Rome,
was likely ere long to come to them into the East, and he wills them to
receive him as from him, though there had once been disagreement betwixt Mark
and him. Whether Timothy's imprisonment delayed Mark's journey, may be some
question: for Paul having sent for them two to come to him together, 2 Timothy
4.11. it is like he could ill part with the one, when the other was made
useless to him by restraint: and so we have some cause to suppose, that while
Timothy was in prison, Mark remained with Paul. However, whenever it was that
he went for the East, we have this reason to think that Paul wrote and sent by
him

THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS:
and that he having delivered it where Paul had appointed him, went away to
Peter to Babylon in Chaldaea, because Peter there, mentions Mark now with
him, 1 Pet. 3.15. And this Epistle, 2 Pet. 3.15.

It is observable that these two great Apostles Peter and Paul the several
Ministers of the Circumcision and Uncircumcision, had their interchanged
agents: Sylvanus or Silas, Paul's Minister, residen^ with Peter, and employed by
him to carry his first Epistle: 1 Pet. 5.12. And Mark, Peter's Minister,
resident with Paul, 2 Timothy 4.11. Col. 4.10. and, very probably, employed by him
to carry this Epistle to the Hebrews. And thus in the interchanged agencies of
their Ministers, the parties with whom they had to deal, might own the joint
agreement of both the Apostles.

Although we dare not punctually assert either the bearer of this Epistle, or
the exact time of its writing, yet that it was written and sent about these
times that we are upon, may be observed by these two boundaries that shut it up
within some reasonable compass of the time hereabout. First, A part ante, or
that it could not be written much sooner then this, may be concluded by this,
that Timothy had gone through his imprisonment and was now enlarged before its
writing, Heb. 13.23. And secondly, A part post, or that it could not be
written much after this time, may be observed from that passage Chap. 12.4. Ye
have not yet resisted unto blood. For presently after this bloody times came on.

That it was written by Paul, has not only the concurrent consent of all
Copies and Translations, but even this proof for it, That none can be named A
prisoner, Chap. 10.34. and in Italy, Chap. 13.24. and in so near converse with
Timothy, Chap. 13.25. [as the Author of this Epistle was] so likely as Paul.

His not affixing his name to this, as he had done to his other Epistles, does
no more deny it to be his, then the first Epistle of John's is denied to be
John's upon the same account: especially considering that the name of the
Apostle of the uncircumcision, would not sound so well before an Epistle to the
Circumcised: and yet the more still, because he sent it by Mark [for so we
cannot but suppose] who was a Minister of the Minister of the Circumcision, and
who could easily inform them of the Writer.

Unto what part of the Jewish Nation he sends the Epistle under the
indorsement To the Hebrews, and why that indorsement To the Hebrews rather then
To the Jews, may be a useful and a needful Quaere. It cannot be imagined but
that he sends it to be delivered at a certain place within some reasonable
compass, because it was impossible for the bearer, whosoever he was, to
deliver it to all the Jews dispersion, and because in Chap. 13.23. he says
that when Timothy came, he would come with him, and see them. Therefore the
title The Hebrews must determine the place, since there is nothing else to
determine it. A double reason may be given why he so styles them rather then
Jews: namely, either because the name Jew was now beginning to become odious;
or rather because he would point out the Jews that dwelt in Iudaea, or the Land
of Israel. And this sense does the holy Ghost put upon the title the Hebrews,
Act. 6.1. where it is said, There was a murmuring of the Hellenists against the
Hebrews: By The Hellenists meaning the Jews that dwelt in foreign Countries
among the Greeks, and by The Hebrews those that dwelt in Judea. And so it is
most proper to understand the inscription of this Epistle, namely that Paul
directs, and sends it to the believing Jews of Judea: a people that had been
much engaged to him for his care of their poor, getting collections for them
all along his travels, and Mark [whom we suppose the bearer of this Epistle]
had come in to his attendance, and to the attendance of his Uncle Barnabas,
when they had been in Judea to bring alms unto those Churches, Act. 11. and 12.

It is not to be doubted indeed that he intends the discourse and matter of
this Epistle to all the Jews throughout all their dispersion [and therefore
Peter writing to the Jews of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia and Asia, applies it
as written to them, 2 Pet. 3.15.] yet does he indorse it, and send it chiefly
to The Hebrews or the Jews of Iudaea, the principal seat of the Circumcision,
as the properest center whither to direct it, and from whence it might best
diffuse in time to the whole circumference of their dispersion.

He has to deal in it mainly with those things that the Jewish writers
commonly call (...) Ordinances affixed to the Land, or such Ceremonious part of
their Religion, as while it stood, was confined to the Land, as Temple,
Sacrifice, Priesthood, etc. Therefore it was most proper to direct his speech
in its first bent, to those that dwelt in the Land, and were most near to those
things, and who in those Apostatizing times that then were, had the nearest
occasion and temptation to draw them back from the purity of the Gospel to
those rites again.

Unto that doubtfulnesse that some have taken up about the Original tongue of
this Epistle, as thinking it very improper that he should write in the Greek
tongue to the Hebrews, especially to the Hebrews in Iudaea, we need no better
satisfaction then what the Hebrews themselves, yea the Hebrews of Iudaea may
give to us, I mean the Jerusalem Gomarists, from severall-passages that they
have about the Greek language.

In Megillah, fol. 71. col. 2. they say thus, There is a tradition from ben
Kaphra, God shall enlarge Iaphet, and he shall dwell in the tents of Sem: For
they shall speak the language of Iaphet in the tents of Sem. The Babylon Gomara
on the same Treatise fol. 9. col. 2. resolves us, what tongue of Iaphet is
meant; for having spoken all along before, of the excellency and dignity of the
Greek tongue it concludes (...) The very beauty of Iaphet shall be in the tents
of Sem.

Our men first named, say further thus: Rabbi Jonathan of Beth Gubrin says,
There are four Languages brave for the world to use, and they are these: The
Vulgar, the Roman, the Syrian, and the Hebrew, and some also add the Assyrian:
Now the question is, What Tongue he means by the Vulgar? Reason will name the
Greek as soon as any; and Midras Tillin, makes it plain that this is meant; for
fol. 25. col. 4. speaking of this very passage [but alleging it in somewhat
different termes] he names the Greek which is not here named. Observe then
that the Hebrews call the Greek the Vulgar tongue.

They proceed, ibid. col. 3. It is a tradition. Rabban Simeon ben Gamaliel
says, In books they permitted not, that they should write, but only in Greek.
They searched, and found. that the Law cannot be interpreted completely but
only in the Greek. One once expounded to them, in the Syriack, out of the Greek
R. Jeremiah in the name of R. Chaiith ben Ba says, Aquila the proselyte
interpreted the Law, before R. Eliezer and before R. Joshua. And they extolled
him and said, Thou art fairer then the children of men.

And the same Talmud in Sotah fol. 21. col. 2. has this record. Rabbi Levi
went to Caesarea, and heard them (...) rehearsing their Phylacteries
Hellenistice, or, in the Greek tongue. A passage very well worth observing: For
if in Caesarea were as learned Schools as any were in the Nation; And if their
Phylacteries [pickt sentences out of the Law] might above all things have
challenged their rehearsal in the Hebrew tongue, as their own writers show,
yet they say them over in Greek, Paul might very well write to the Hebrews in
Iudaea in the Greek tongue, when that tongue was in so common a use even in an
University of Iudaea it self.

To these testimonies for the Greek tongue, might be added, that which is
spoken in the Treatise Shekalin, per. 3. halac. 2. Upon the three Treasure
Chests of the Temple were written Aleph, Beth, Gimel. But Rabbi Ismael says,
It was written upon them in Greek, Alpha, Beta, Gamma: They that hold that this
Epistle, and the Gospel of Matthew were written in Hebrew, should consider how
that tongue was now a stranger to all but Scholars, and how God in his
providence had dispersed and planted the Greek tongue throughout all the world,
by the conquest of Alexander, and the Grecian Monarchy; and had brought the old
Testament into Greek by the Septuagint.

As this Apostle in all his Epistles uses exceeding much of the Jews Dialect,
Language, Learning, allusion and reference to their opinions, traditions and
customs; so does he more singularly in this, and he does moreover in a more
peculiar manner apply himself, to their manner of argumentation and discourse.
For his intent is, if he can, to argue them into establishment, against that
grievous Apostasy that was now afoot: so many revolting from the purity of the
Gospel, either to a total betaking themselves to Moses again, or at least
mixing the Ceremonious rites of the Law with the profession of the Gospel.
Comparing his style here, with his style of discourse and arguing in the
Talmuds, Zohar and Rabboth, and such like older writings of the Jews, you might
easily tell with whom he is dealing though the Epistle were not inscribed in
syllables, To the Hebrews: and the very style of it may argue a Scholar of
Gamaliel, but now better taught and better improving his learning then that
master could teach him,

He first begins to prove the Messiah to be God, and Jesus to be he: about the
former of which, the Jews mistook, and about the latter they blasphemed. In
proving the former, he among other places of Scripture, produces that of Psalm.
102.25. Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation of the earth, etc.
To which a Jew would be ready to answer, I but this is to be understood of God
the Father; and how could this objection be answered? Yes, even by their own
concessions, upon which he argues in this place. For they understood that in
Genesis 1.2. The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, of the Spirit of
Christ, and so do they interpret it (...) This is the Spirit of Messiah: as
their mind is spoken in that point by Zohar, Berishith Rabba, and diverse
others. If the Spirit of Christ then, was the great agent in the Creation, by
their own grant, they could not but grant this alligation to be proper.

He shows Christ therefore greater then Angels, as in other regards, so into
whose hands was put the world to come, chap. 2.5. and here the phrase is used
in the Jews dialect, for the Kingdom of Messiah, as we mentioned before.

He proves him a greater Lawgiver then Moses, a greater Priest then Aaron, and
a greater King and Priest then Melchizedek: He shows all the Leviticall
economy but a shadow, and Christ the substance, and the old Covenant to be
abolished, by the coming in o^ a better: By the old or first Covenant meaning
the Covenant of peculiarity, or the administration of the Covenant of Grace so,
as whereby Israel was made a peculiar and distinct people. This Covenant of
peculiarity they brake as soon almost as they had obtained it, by making the
golden Calf, and thereupon follows the breaking of the two Tables in sign of
it: for though the Law written in the two Tables was Moral, and so concerned
all the world, yet their writing in Tables of stones for Israel, and committing
them to their keeping, refers to their peculiarity. To his handling of the
fabric and utensils of the Tabernacle and contexts of the Ark, Chap. Talm.
Ierus. in Shekalim. fol. 49. col. 3, 4. and Sotah fol. 22. col. 3. may be
usefully applied, for illustration. He hinteth the Apostasy now afoot, which
was no small induction to him of the writing of this Epistle, and shows the
desperate danger of it, Chap. 6.4, 5, etc. and Chap. 10.26, 27, etc. In which
his touching of it, we may see how far some had gone in the Gospel, and yet
so miserably far fallen from it, as that some of them had had the extraordinary
gifts of the holy Ghost, and yet now sinned willingly and wilfully against it.
In describing their guilt, one of his passages that he uses, is but harshly
applied by some, Chap. 10.29. [ Has trodden under foot the Son of God, and
has counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy
thing:] when they say that this horrid Apostate wretch, that treads Christ
under foot, was once sanctified by the blood of Christ: whereas the words mean,
Christ's being sanctified by the blood of the Covenant, according to the same
sense that Christ is said to be brought again from the dead, by the blood of
the Covenant, in this same Epistle, Chap. 13.20. And the Apostle does set forth
the horrid impiety of accounting the blood of the Covenant a common thing, by
this, because even the Son of God himself was sanctified by it or set apart
as Mediator: And so should I understand the words, He has trodden under foot
that Son of God, and counted the blood of the Covenant by which he the Son
of God was sanctified, an unholy thing. He magnifieth faith, against those
works that they stood upon and sought to be justified by, and shows that this
was the all in all with all the holy men both before the Law and under it. When
he gives them caution, Lest there be any fornicatour or profane person as Esau,
etc. Chap. 12.16. he does not only speak according to the common tenet of the
Nation, that Esau was a fornicator, as see Targ. Ierus. in Genesis 25. but he
seems to have his eye upon the Nicolaitan doctrine that was now rife, that
taught fornication: to which he seems also to refer, in those words, Chap.
13.4. Marriage is honorable, etc.

And now henceforward you have no more story of this Apostle: what became of
him after the writing of this Epistle it is impossible to find out, by any
light that the Scripture holds out in this matter. The two last verses but
one of this Epistle, trace him as far forward as we can any way else see him,
and that is but a little way neither. Know ye that our brother Timothy is set
at liberty, with whom if he come shortly I will see you. By which words these
things may be conjectured. 1. That after his enlargement out of bonds, he left
Rome, and preached in Italy. He mentions in his Epistle to the Romans, his
desire and intent to go preach in Spain, Rom, 15.24. but that was so long ago,
that he had now found some just cause [so much time intervening] to steer his
course another way. For 2. It appears that when he wrote this Epistle to the
Hebrews, he intended very shortly to set for Iudaea, if so be he sent the
Epistle to the Jews of Iudaea as has been showed most probable he did. So that
trace him in his intentions and hopes, and you find him purposing to go to
Philippi, Phil. 2.23, 24. Nay yet further, to Colosse, Philem. ver. 22. Nay yet
further into Iudaea. It is like that the Apostasy and wavering that he heard of
in the Eastern Churches, showed him more need to hasten thither then to go
westward. 3. He waited a little to see whether Timothy now enlarged would come
to him in that place of Italy where he now was: which if he did, he intended to
bring him along with him: but whether they met and traveled together, or what
further became of either of them, we shall not go about to trace, lest seeking
after them we lose our selves.

Albinus came into the government of Judea in Festus room, in this ninth year
of Nero. And if so, then was James the Apostle who was called James the less
martyred this year; Josephus gives the story of this, Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 8.
Caesar, says he, understanding the death of Festus, sends Albinus governor
into Judea. And the King [Agrippa] put Joseph from the Highpriesthood, and
conferred it upon Ananus the son of Ananus. Now this Ananus junior was
extreme bold and daring, and he was of the sect of the Saduces, which in
judging are most cruel of any of the Jews. Ananus therefore being such a^one,
and thinking he had got a fit opportunity, because Festus was dead and Albinus
was not yet come; he gets together a Council, and bringing before it James the
brother of Jesus, who was called Christ, and some others, as transgressors, he
delivered them up to be stoned: But those in the City that were more moderate,
and best skilled in the Laws, took this ill, and sent to the King privately,
beseeching him to charge Ananus that he should do so no more. And some of them
met Albinus as he came from Alexandria, and showed him how it was not lawful
for Ananus to call a Council without his consent. Whereupon he writes a
threatening Letter to Ananus. And King Agrippa for this fact put him from the
Highpriesthood when he had held it but three months, and placed Jesus the
son of Damneas in his room.

THE EPISTLE OF JAMES.
Although therefore, the certain time of his writing this Epistle cannot be
discovered, yet since he died in the year that we are upon, we may, not
unproperly, look upon it as written not very long before his death. And that
the rather, because by an expression or two he intimates the vengeance of
Jerusalem drawing very near. Chap. 5.8, 9. The coming of the Lord draws nigh;
and, Behold the Judge stands before the door. He being the Apostle
residentiary of the Circumcision in Judea, could not but of all others be
chiefly in the eyes of those that maliced the Gospel there, and the Ministers
of it: So it could not but be in his eye, to observe those tokens growing on
apace that his Master had spoken of, as the forerunners and forwarders of that
destruction coming: False Prophets, Iniquity abounding, Love waxing cold,
betraying and undoing one another, that he could not but very surely conclude,
that the Judge and judgment was not far from the door.

Among other things that our Savior foretells should precede that
destruction, this was one. Matthew. 24.14. This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be
preached in all the world, for a witness unto all Nations, and then shall the
end come. And so did the Gospel reach all the twelve Tribes, as well as other
Nations, even the ten Tribes, as well as the other two. Therefore James a
Minister of the Circumcision, does properly direct this Epistle to all the
twelve Tribes scattered abroad.

The whole Nation was at this time, some at the very height of unbelief and
crossenesse against the Gospel, and others at the very depth of suffering for
it: therefore he comforts the one, Chap. 1. and denounces their just doom
against the other, Chap. 4, and 5. He striveth to beat down four things
especially, which were not only unbecoming the Christian profession, but even
enemies against it. The first was, estimating men according to their gorgeous
outside, and so the poor preachers and professors of the Gospel were contemned.
Secondly, Their having many masters or teachers, whereby errors and schisms
were easily scattered and planted among them, and much mischief done by
unbridled tongues. Thirdly, Their reliance upon their historical faith, they
thinking that enough, and neglecting to bring forth the fruits of a faith
saving and lively. And lastly, Their common and vain oaths, to which the Jewish
nation, and that by the lenity, and toleration of their own Canons, was
exceeding loose.

In the close of the Epistle, he speaks of the Elders anointing the sick with
oil, Chap. 5.14. which may receive some explication from these things observed
in their own writings.

1. That anointing with oil was an ordinary medicinal application to the sick.
Talm. Jerus. in Baracoth. fol. 3. col. 1. R. Simeon the son of Eleazar
permitted R. Meir to mingle wine and oil, and to anoint the sick on the
Sabbath. And he was once sick, and we sought to do so to him, but he suffered
us not.

Id. in Maasar Sheni. fol. 53. col. 3. A tradition. Anointing on the Sabbath is
permitted. If his headake, or if a scall come upon it, he anoints with oil.

Talm. Bab. in Joma fol. 77.2. If he be sick, or scall be upon his head, he
anoints according to his manner, etc.

Now if we take the Apostles counsel as referring to this medicinal practice,
we may construe it, that he would have this Physical administration to be
improved to the best advantage, namely that whereas Anointing with oil was
ordinarily used to the sick, by way of Physic, he advises that they should
send for the Elders of the Church to do it; not that the anointing was any more
in their hand then in another, as to the thing it self, for it was still but a
Physical application, but that they with the applying of this corporal
Physic, might also pray with and for the patient, and apply the spiritual
Physic of good admonition and comforts to him. Which is much the same, as if
in our Nation, where this physical anointing is not so in use, a sick person
should send for the Minister at taking of any Physic, that he might pray with
him and counsel and comfort him: Or

2. It was very common among the Jews to use charming and anointing together,
of persons that were sick of certain maladies: of this the Ierus. Talm.
speaks in Schab. fol. 14. col. 3. (...) A man that one charmeth, he puts
oil upon his head and charmeth. And a little after, is related what they
charmed for, as for an evil eye, serpents, scorpions, etc. And in col. 4. is
mentioned how one charmed over a sick person in the name of Jesus Pandira. Now
this being a common wretched custom to anoint some that were sick and to use
charming with the anointing, this Apostle [seeing anointing was an ordinary and
good Physic, and the good use of it not to be extinguished for that abuse]
directs them better, namely to get the Elders or Ministers of the Church to
come to the sick, and to add to the medicinal anointing of him, their godly
and fervent prayers for him, far more available and comfortable then all
charming and enchanting, as well a far more warrantable and Christian.

C. Lecanius and M. Licinius being Consuls] befell that sore fire in Rome, [of
which some touch was given before] the forest that ever had befallen the City,
and which made such desolation, That whereas the City was divided into fourteen
great Wards [they are the words of Tacitus] only four of the fourteen stood
sound: For three were clean burnt down to the ground: and as for the other
seven they were all tattered and half consumed, and but a few relics of
houses remained.

It was commonly thought and talked, that Nero himself had the chief hand in
kindling and carrying on of this mischief; instigated thereunto either by his
own inhumane and barbarous temper, which delighted in nothing more, then in
destroying; or by a tickling humor he had, to build the City anew, that it
might bear his name. He to stop the mouth of the clamor, and to salve his
credit, brought the Christians that were in the City, to examination and
execution, as if they had been the only, and the all, in the breeding of this
mishap. Igitur primo correpti qui fatebantur, deinde indicio eorum, haut
perinde in crimine incendii, quam odio humani generis, convicti sunt, etc.
Therefore they were first laid hold on, that confessed themselves Christians:
and then by their discovery a vast multitude was convicted, not so much for
real guilt of kindling that fire, as because of the general hate of men
against them. And moreover there were scorns added to their deaths, for they
were cast, wrapped in beasts skins to be devoured of dogs, or they were
crucified, or burnt, and served for lights by night, when the day was gone.
Whereupon they were pitied, seeing that they were thus destroyed, not for the
public benefit, but only for one man's cruelty. Thus Tacitus.

What havoc may we think this doleful persecution made? as among other
Christians at Rome, so particularly among those eminent ones, that Paul in his
Epistle thither, saluteth by name, Romans 16. of whom many, no doubt, were alive
till now, and now dispatched. He himself, and Timothy and Luke, with other of
his retinue, may well be supposed to have been got away before this storm came,
because in several places of his Epistles written a good while ago, as we have
observed, he speaks of his setting away with what speed possible and
convenient. How escaped Peter if he now sat Bishop at Rome, as Rome asserteth?

Whether this persecution were circumscribed within the bounds of Rome or
Italy, or whether it was carried by the command of the tyrant through all other
Countries [as Vid. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. c. 24. Oros. lib. 7. etc.] we
need not to be much solicitous to go about to decide* certainly, though it were
not enforced by any Edict or command, yet such a copy would be taken for a
warrant, especially by those that without either command or copy, had been
forward enough to do mischief to the professors of the Gospel already, and had
taken, nay had made any occasion to undo, or destroy them. The Jews at this
mastery were the busiest men of any, and that mystery of iniquity was ever
working, but could not strike their full stroke, because something hindered, 2 Thessalonians. 2.6, 7. If he that hindered were Claudius, who by his expulsion of the
Jews out of Rome, showed a frown upon the whole Nation, and suffered them not
to rage as they would have done, he was taken away about ten years ago; and
they felt their chain much slackned at the coming in of Nero: who in his best
years, though he broke not out to destroy all before him, as he did afterward,
yet was he destructive enough to Christianity, as we have observed, and loose
and careless of the administration of affairs, and regarded not how things
went, so that he might have his ease, luxury and pleasure, which his Tutors
Seneca and Burrhus made but unworthy advantage of. But now that he himself has
given so visible, bloody and cursed an example, the Jews that stood barking at
their chain-end all this while, finding themselves so far let loose as such an
example might loose them, which was too far, would fall on without mercy.
They had been mischievous enough always against the professors of the Gospel,
but from hence forward they exceeded, and the more they grew toward their
desolation, the more did the devil make them bestirre themselves, knowing the
shortness of his time there.

This tenth of Nero there was a blazing star, horrid lightnings and thunders,
and diverse monstrous births.

Nero, Silius Nerva and Atticus Vestinus, being Consuls] very many eminent and
gallant men of Rome were cut off by the Tyrant, as the last year he had cut off
many eminent and worthy Christians. The Christians he destroyed, by a plot laid
against them by himself; the Romans for a plot laid by them against him. The
names of those that perished, now best known among us, were Seneca the
Philosopher, Nero's Tutor, and his nephew the Poet Lucan. Both of them very
renowned for their Writings, but both of them very ignominious for a several
miscarriage. Seneca for unparalleled covetousness, usury and oppression
mentioned before: and Lucan for betraying his own mother. Let him bear Tacitus
his brand: Lucanus, Quinctianus, and Senecio diu abnuere. Post, promissa
impunitate corrupti, quo tarditatem excusarent, Lucanus Atillam matrem suam,
[observe that] Quinctianus Glicium Gallum, Senecio Annium Pollionem amicorum
praecipuos nominavere. Lucan, Quinctianus and Senecio, were long before they
would confess any thing: But at last, being corrupted by the promise of
impunity, that they might make amends for their slownesse, Lucan accused his
mother Atilla, etc. Hereupon Atilla was wracked one day; and would confess
nothing: and the next day being carried to the wrack again [for she was so
disjoynted that she could not go] she made a shift as she sat in the cart to
strangle her self: choosing so to dye rather then either to endure the wrack
again, or to impeach any. An indeleble blot to her son Lucan for ever. Nor did
his base shift serve his turn, for he suffered death too, by having his veins
cut and so bleeding to death; which was the end of his Uncle Seneca also.

The Wars of the Jews are now drawing on apace [for they began the next year]
and the horrid Civil Wars of the Romans are not far off. So that here we
may properly take notice of that prediction ready now to take place. Matthew.
24.7, 8, 9. Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, etc.
All these are the beginnings of sorrows. Then shall they deliver you up to be
afflicted, and then shall they kill you: which Luke has expressed, But before
all these, shall they lay their hands upon you, and persecute you, Luke 21.12.
which seems to carry some difference, as if the one Evangelist showed, that
the persecution of the Disciples to death, should be before these troubles; and
the other, as if they should not be till these troubles were begun: But they
may be well reconciled by observing that in the words that Christ is there
speaking in both Evangelists, there is the intertexture of two stories, namely
what miseries should befall the Jewish Nation before their ruin, and what
miseries should befall the Disciples in the midst of those miseries: and so
the word Then in Matthew, and Before in Luke, are but as a transition from the
one history to the other: and yet they are not unsignificant neither, as to the
pointing out of the time, the one speaking the beginning of that persecution
foretold, and the other the continuance.

A fitter period of time whence to begin the punctual taking place of that
prediction, we can hardly point out, then this very year that we are upon, a
center between two critical years: the year before beginning the persecution
of Christians at Rome, and the year following beginning the Wars of the Jews
in Iudaea.

Although therefore we cannot positively assert the very time of the writing of

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER,
yet observing the Chronicall hint of some passages in it, this year may as
fairly lay claim thereunto, as any other year that can be asserted. For, to
omit that clause Chap. 4.7. The end of all things is at hand [referring to the
desolating of the Jewish Commonwealth and Nation] the mention of the fiery
trial, ver. 12. and the time now come when Judgment must begin at the house
of God, ver. 17. is but as a comment and accomplishment of that prediction
before alleged, Then s^all they deliver up to be afflicted, etc. It is true
indeed, that the Church had never wanted persecution since the Gospel arose,
and some for its sake had suffered death, as Steven and some at that time, the
two Iameses, and some at the time of both their deaths; but in the Countries
out of Iudaea, where the stroke of their Sanhedrin could not reach so well, nor
light so heavy, there was tumultuousnesse indeed enough, and beating and
bitterness against it, but rare effusion of blood, till the cursed example set
last year by the Tyrant at Rome, and now forward in the confusions of the
Jewish Nation; when a madness was come upon them among themselves, and a
desperate fury against all that would not be as they were. And that noc only in
Judea the seat of the War, but even through the whole world as far as they
durst, and were able to stir. Those words of Dion are very remarkable, when
speaking of the siege of Jerusalem by Titus, he says, That the Jews that were
in foreign Countries, not only within the Roman Empire, but also without, did
send help to their brethren in Iudaea. lib. 66.

When Cyrus gave leave to the Jews after the 70 years captivity to return to
their own Country, multitudes of them found themselves so pleasingly seated,
and by continuance of time rooted in Babylonia, that they would not remove
the^r habitation, but fixed there. There, in time they grew to so great a
Nation, and distinct a people, that they had (...) A Prince of the Captivity or
their own blood over them, and three famous Universities, Nehardea, Pombeditha
and Soria, which yielded very many eminent Scholars in the Judaick Language.

In the division of the employment of the three Ministers of the Circumcision,
Peter, James and John, Peter's lot sell here, and from Babylon it self the very
Center of those parts he sends this Epistle. He directs it to the dispersed
Jews in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia, in which parts the
Apostasy from the faith had been exceeding prevalent, and accordingly the
trouble of those that stuck to the faith, the most bitter. And in his
inscribing it to the Elect, he seems to have his eye upon those words of his
Master about this Apostasy, Mat. 24.24. They shall deceive, if it were
possible, the very Elect.

Among the many divine lessons that he reads to them, he teaches them and us
who is the Rock upon which the Church is built, Chap. 2.4, etc. and how
accordingly to understand super hanc Petram, Mat. 16. He exhorts them with all
earnestness to yield obedience to superior powers, Chap. 2.13, 14. and that
the rather because of that spirit of the Zelotae, that walking among the Nation
in all parts, urged them not to submit to any Heathen power.

He magnifieth Baptism as a badge and pledge of preservation of those that had
received it, and stuck to it, from that vengeance that was coming upon that
wicked Nation, Chap. 3.21. It is something a strange recoyling that he makes,
leaping back from mention of the death of Christ, ver. 18. over all the story
of the Old Testament, and lights on the generation that was swept away by the
flood: and shows how Christ's spirit preached unto them. Why? had not the same
spirit preached in all the times between? Why are not those times named then as
well as these? Because the Apostle does purposely intend to compare that old
world then destroyed, with the destruction of the Jewish Nation shortly coming:
and to show that as Noah and his family were then saved by water, ver. 20. so,
(...), they that had received Baptism were the Antitype to that, and Baptism
was a pledge and means of their deliverance now, they sticking closely to it.
And this very thing John Baptist taught in that question, Who has forewarned
you to flee from the wrath to come? Therefore when he calls (...). An asking of
a good Conscience toward or after God, he makes not this its definition, as if
none but those so qualified were to be baptized, but he characters its
difference from Circumcision, which put away the filth of the flesh in one
sense; and Legal and Pharisaicall washings, which did it in another. His whole
comparison runs to this tenor: The old world was disobedient to the spirit
of Christ preaching in the mouth of Noah, and therefore they perished. The Jews
[whose state the Scripture also calls an old world] were disobedient to
Christ preaching by his Spirit in the mouth of his Apostles, and even visibly
and audibly in his own person, therefore they must needs perish: But Noah and
his family that hearkeneth after God [whilest others said to the Lord Depart
from us, Job 22.16, 17.] were preserved by water: Even so does Baptism now
preserve us, the Antitype of that figure. For Baptism was not barely a washing
of the body from filth, as the common Legal washings were, but it was an
owning and asking after God, conscienciously, out from a perverse and wicked
generation: and therefore not to be started or revolted from. This then being
one end of Baptism, and that end taught to them that assumed it, viz. to badge
and mark to safety from the approaching vengeance, it may very well raise an
argument for Infants Baptism [whereas this text is commonly produced against
it:] for if these parents that came in to be baptized, sought hereby to flee
from the wrath to come, they would be careful to bring their children under
the same badge of security.

When he judges those that perished in the waters of Noah to be now in prison,
ver. 19. he knew he had the consent of his Nation in it: for thus they say in
Sanhedr. per. 10. halac. 3. The generation of the flood have no portion in the
world to come: neither shall they stand up in Judgment; for it is said, My
spirit shall no more judge with man, Genesis 6.3. Peter teaches us that the
Spirit that strove with the old world, was the Spirit of Messiah.

He sends this Epistle by Sylvanus, Paul's old attendant, but now with Peter: He
styles him, A faithful brother to you, as I suppose: not as doubting but
assured. He was to bring this Epistle to the Circumcision, who himself had been
a Minister of the uncircumcision: therefore this attestation is the more
needful and material, (...), I repute him a faithful brother to you of the
Circumcision, and do you also so repute him.

His naming of Mark with him, calls our thoughts back to what has been
mentioned of Mark heretofore: his being with Paul at Rome, and his coming from
him into the East. To suppose two Marks, one with Peter and another with Paul,
is to breed confusion where there needs not, and to conceive that for which
the Scripture has not only no ground, but is plain enough to the contrary: It
is easily seen how John Mark came into familiarity both with Paul and Peter,
and other Mark we can find none in the New Testament, unless of our own
invention: His being in these later times with Peter and Paul, may turn our
thoughts to consider how his Uncle Barnabas and he parted, since Paul and
Barnabas parted about him. He it was that wrote the Gospel, it may be being
with Petor, as Luke did the like being with Paul. In his Gospel he is most
exact of all the four in observing the proper time and series of the stories
recorded.

The wars of the Jews began in the twelfth year of the reign of Nero, in the
month of May. Joseph. de Bell. lib. 2. cap. 25.

If we take a view of the Nation, as it was at the present, and as it had been
for thirty or forty years backward, we shall find that besides the ordinary
and common wickedness that was among them, they had these four additions of
iniquity monstrous and unparalleled, and in which they did, as it were, exceed
themselves. 1. In regard that the appearance of the Messiah was expected to be
about the time that Christ appeared indeed, very many taking advantage of the
time and of that expectation, took upon them, some to be Christ, others to be
Prophets attending, and relating to his coming, Matthew. 24.24. Upon which
Josephus and other Writers of that Nation will give us a very full commentary
of experiences. 2. There were multitudes of the Zelotae, and of the sect of
Judas the Galilean, which would not yield any homage or subjection to be due to
the Roman power which was now over them: and neither would they now themselves,
nor would they suffer others, as far as they could hinder, to submit unto
them. 3. The unbeleeving Jews were generally sworn enemies and persecutors of
those that believed. And 4. which we have observed before, multitudes of those
that had believed and embraced the Gospel fell away, and became either seduced
or the greatest seducers, and brought in horrid heresies and pollutions. So
that in these various and malignant distempers of men, there had been
continual confusions, tumults, firings, murderings and plunderings among them
for many years, and they had been the unquietest and most tumultuous Nation
that had been under heaven, and they had often provoked the Roman power against
themselves, yet till this year had they never so visibly and professedly taken
up Arms and open War against that power.

The first spark kindled in Caesarea upon the sea, about an incroachment that a
Gentile there made upon the way that went to the Jews Synagogue; and from
thence it grew into a flame so fast through the whole Country [ Florus the
Governor helping it on] that by the 16th day of May, his soldiers by his
Commission have plundered Jerusalem, slain 3600 persons: and even Berenice
sister to King Agrippa escaped very narrowly with her life.

The Jews and Romans have diverse skirmishes: Massada Castle taken and the Roman
Garrison put to the sword. The Temple and several parts of the Cities made
Garrisons for several parties, and suffer much by fire and battery. Twenty
thousand Jews slain in Caesarea on a Sabbath: whereupon all the Nation rise all
about to avenge this slaughter, and in Syria, Phaenicia, Samaria, Peraea and
all round about, destroy Towns, Cities and persons all before them. Cestius the
Governor of Syria rises with his forces, and destroys the Jews again, and
their Towns all before him, and on the 30th of October enters Jerusalem and
fires a good part of the City.

Yet do the Jews give him a brush upon his march away, and cut off above 4000
of his men: with which success they are so fleshed, that they resolve to fight
it out, and accordingly platform themselves into the model and posture of a
long War: and the Country is only full of Fire, Sword, War and destruction.

The abomination of desolation had now begun to stand in the holy place, Matthew.
24.15. when the Temple is made a Garrison, and filled with slaughter; Antonia,
the Castle of the Temple, besieged, taken, and the Roman Garrison put to the
sword. The (...) Tabernae, or part of the buildings at the East wall of the
mountain of the House [the place where the Sanhedrin had once sitten,] fired
and burnt down. Ierus. in Peah. fol. 16. col. 3. And in a word, the Temple from
this time forward, never but a Garrison, and full of slaughter and confusion
till it be raked up in ashes.

Now it was time for those that were in Iudaea, who believed Christ's
prediction, to get into the mountains, and to shift for themselves, for now
begins the tribulation beyond parallel, such as was not since the beginning of
the world, nor ever must again, Matthew. 24.21. It is commonly asserted that the
Christians fled to Pella a City beyond Jordan: Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3.
cap. 5. which how to reconcile with Josephus, who says Pella was one of the
Cities that the Jews destroyed in avengement of the slaughter of the 20000 in
Caesarea, De Bell. lib. 2. cap. 33. let the Learned find.

About these times therefore we may well conceive to have been the writing of

THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PETER:
And that the rather from what he speaks in Chap 1. v. 14. I know that I must
shortly put off this tabernacle, as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me. In
which words, his thoughts reflect upon what Christ had spoken to John and him
about their ends, John 21. where he not only gave intimation to Peter that he
should be Martyred, ver. 18. but that he should be so, before his coming in
Judgment against Jerusalem, which John must live to see, but he must not, ver.
22. He therefore in Babylon, understanding how affairs went in Iudaea and with
the Jewish Nation all thereabout, and reading therein, from the words of his
Master, Matthew. 24. that the desolation was drawing on apace, concludes that his
time was not long: and therefore improves the time he has remaining the best
he can, not only in teaching those amongst whom he was, but by writing this
Epistle instructs those that were remote and at distance from him; in which
he does more especially give them caution against false teachers: and
characters the terror of the judgment coming, and exhorts to vigilance and
holiness.

The first character that he gives of the false teachers is, that they bring in
damnable Heresies, denying the Lord that bought them, Chap. 2.1. which he
speaks from Deuteronomy. 32. from whence also he uses other expressions, ver. 6. Is
not he thy Father that has bought thee? not meaning that these wretches were
redeemed by Christ, yet became such wretches, as some would interpret it; but
by buying is meant his buying out of Egypt this people for a peculiar people:
which these wretches boasted and stood upon, yet by their introducing and
practicing the profane principles they did, of fornication and communicating
with Idols, they denied the true God which bought that people for his peculiar.
He calls them spots, ver. 13. from Deuteronomy. 32.5. and parallels them with the old
world, Sodom, Balaam, nay the very fallen Angels.

He sets forth the destruction of that cursed Nation and their City in those
terms that Christ had done, Matthew. 24. and that the Scripture does elsewhere,
Deuteronomy. 32.22, 23, 24. Ier. 4.23. namely as the destruction of the whole world,
The heavens passing away, the elements melting, and the earth burnt up, etc.
And accordingly he speaks of a new heaven and a new earth, from Isa. 65.17. a
new state of the Church under the Gospel among the Gentiles, when this old
world of the Jews state should be dissolved.

He cites Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews, and gives an honorable testimony to
that, and to the rest of his Epistles: but acknowledges that in some places
they are hard to be understood, and were misconstrued by some unlearned and
unstable ones to their own ruin; yet neither does he, nor Paul who was yet
alive, and well knew of this wresting of his Epistles, clear or amend those
difficulties, but let them alone as they were: for the holy Ghost has so
penned Scripture as to set men to study.

And here is the last that we hear in Scripture of this great Apostle Peter.
His Martyrdom he apprehends to be near, and it was to be before Jerusalem was
destroyed, which was not now full four years to come. We may well conceive him
to have been put to death by the Jews in Babylonia where he now was: a madness
having come upon that Nation in all parts: and a singular raging against the
Gospel, the devil bestirring himself in them, now he knew their time was so
short.

THE EPISTLE OF IVDE.
As the second Epistle of Peter and this of Jude are very near akin, in style,
matter and subject, so it is fairly conjecturable in them that they were not
far removed in time, speaking both of wicked ones and wickedness at the same
height and ripeness. They are one to another as the Prophecy of Obadiah, and
Ierem. 49.14, etc. speaking the same thing, using the same manner of arguing,
and oftentimes almost the same words. It may be Jude stands up in his brother
James his charge among the Circumcision of Iudaea, and directs his Epistle to
all those that were sanctified and preserved in those Apostatizing times, as
his brother had done to all the twelve Tribes in general.

In citing the story of Michael the Archangel contending with the devil about
the body of Moses, ver. 9. he does but the same that Paul does in naming Iannes
and Iambres, namely allege a story which was current and owned among the
Nation, though there were no such thing in Scripture; and so he argues with
them from their own Authors and concessions. It is harsh to strain Zech. 3.1,
2. to speak such a story; when neither the name Michael is mentioned, nor any
thing like the body of Moses or akin to it. But among the Talmudicks there
seems to be something like the relics of such a matter, viz. of Michael and
the Angel of death disputing or discoursing about fetching away the soul of
Moses.

His alleging the Prophecy of Enoch, is an arguing of the very like nature,
as citing and referring to some known and common tradition that they had among
them to this purpose. [The Book Sepher Iesher an Hebrew Writer speaks of
Enoch after such a tenor.] And in both these he uses their own testimonies
against themselves: as if he should thus have spoken at large: These men speak
evil of dignities, whereas they have and own a story for current, that even
Michael the Archangel did not speak evil of the devil, when he was striving
with him about the body of Moses, etc. And whereas they show and own a
Prophecy of Enoch, of God coming in judgment, etc. why these are the very men
to whom such a matter is to be applied, etc. It is no strange thing in the New
Testament, for Christ and the Apostles to deal and argue with the Jews upon
their own concessions.

THE THREE EPISTLES OF JOHN.
Among all the Apostolic Epistles there is none about whose time of writing we
are so far to seek as we are about these. And it is neither satisfactory to
remove their place, nor is it satisfactory to take their time according to
their place; or to conceive them to be written after the Epistles of Peter,
because they are placed after them. Any conjecture that is to be had of them
may best be taken from the third Epistle.

Gaius, to whom that Epistle is directed, by that encomiastick character that
John gives of him, seems to be Gaius the Corinthian, the host of the whole
Church, Romans 16.23. for since he is commended for entertainment and charity
both to the Church and strangers, particularly to those who had preached among
the Gentiles, taking nothing of them, we know not where to find any other
Gaius to whom to affix this character but only this, and we have no reason to
look after any other. And upon this probability we may observe these other.

I. That that third Epistle was written when those that preached to the
Gentiles and took nothing of them, were still abroad upon that employment, for
he urges him to bring them forward on their journey, ver. 6. Now under that
expression, of taking nothing of the Gentiles, we can understand none but Paul
and Barnabas and those that were of their several companies, for the Scripture
has named none other. And if it refer to Paul and his company [for we find
not that Barnabas had any thing to do with Gaius] then we must conclude that it
was written a good while before this time that we are upon: unless we will
suppose Paul after his freedom from imprisonment at Rome, was got traveling
and preaching in those parts again. But I should rather suppose that John sent
this third Epistle to Gaius to Corinth, by Timothy from Ephesus, who was
setting away thence for Rome, upon Paul's sending for him to come to him
thither, 2 Timothy 4.9, 11, 21. In which journey as we have showed before, he was
to call at Corinth, and to take Mark along with him, who was there. And of them
may John's advice to Gaius be well understood, Whom if thou bring forward on
their journey thou shall do well: For for his sake they went out taking nothing
of the Gentiles; Mark with Barnabas, and Timothy with Paul.

II. Before John wrote this Epistle to Gaius, he had written another Epistle,
to some Church, it may be that of Corinth, of which Gaius was. I wrote, says
he, unto the Church, but Diotrephes who loves to have the preminence,
receives us not. This must needs be understood of The first Epistle of John:
unless we will conceive, unwarrantably [that I may say no worse,] that any of
John's Writings are lost.

III. Upon and with the forementioned supposall that John sent his Epistle to
Gaius by Timothy from Ephesus; we cannot but also suppose that John spent some
time in the Asian Churches, to which afterward from Patmos he writes his
Epistles: And if any one be not satisfied with that interpretation that was
given before, about the Epistle written from Laodicea, Coloss. 4.16. let him
rather understand it of The first Epistle of John as written by him from
Laodicea, then think it was an Epistle written by Paul from Laodicea, and that
that Epistle is lost: In both his later Epistles he intimates his hopes and
purpose shortly to come to them: from which we may construe that his intention
was to travel from Asia the less where he now was, and from whence he wrote
all his three Epistles westward into Greece, and in this journey you have him
got into Patmos, Rev. 1. from whence he writes back to Asia again.

In all his Epistles he exhorts to love, and constancy in the truth, a lesson
most needful in those divided and Apostatizing times. He gives notice of many
Antichrists now abroad, and these he shows to have been such as had once
professed the truth, but were Apostatized from it: They went out from us, but
they were not of us, etc. And this Apostasy he calls The sin unto death. To
such he advises they should not so much as say God speed: (...) in their
vulgar language. Jerus. Taamith fol. 64. col. 2. The Rabbis saw a holy man of
Caphar Immi, and went to him and said (...) God speed, But he answered them
nothing. Id. in Sheviith fol. 35.^. and 36.1. R. Chinna bar Papa and R. Samuel
bar Nachman, went by a man that was plowing on the seventh year [the year of
release,] R. Samuel says to him (...) God speed. R. Chinna says, Our master
did not teach us thus: for it is forbidden to say God speed, to one that is
plowing on the s^venth year.

John styles himself an Elder, and so does Peter, 1 Pet. 5.1. not as laying
aside their Apostolical power, but as dealing with those to whom they write in
a Ministerial way: and by this very title that they assume to themselves, they
closely intimate that thenceforward the extraordinary Function and gifts
Apostolic must not be expected, but the Ministerial, in the ordinary way of
Elders or Ministers, as the title had been long and vulgarly known. And yet
when he speaks of Diotrephes and his abusivenesse, he then threatens to show
his Apostolic power, and himself A son of thunder against him.

THE REVELATION OF JOHN.
AS it will be easily admitted to place this Book last of all the New
Testament, because it stands so in all Bibles, so on the other hand it will be
cavilled at, that I have brought in the writing of it so soon, as before the
fall of Jerusalem, since it has been of old and commonly held, that it was
penned in the reign of Domitian, far after these times that we are upon: But
the reasons by which I have been induced thereunto, will appear out of some
passages in the Book it self as we go through it.

As God revealed to Daniel the man greatly beloved, the state of his people,
and the Monarchies that afflicted them, from his own time, till the coming of
Christ; so does Christ to John the beloved Disciple, the state of the Church,
and story in brief of her chief afflicters, from thence to the end of the
world. So that where Daniel ends the Revelation begins, and John has nothing
to do with any of the four Monarchies that he speaks of, but deals with a
fifth [the Roman] that rose as it were out of the ashes of those four, and
swallowed them all up.

The composure of the Book is much like Daniels in this, that it repeats one
story over and over again, in varied and enlarged expressions: and exceeding
like Ezekiel's in method and things spoken. The style is very Prophetical, as
to the things spoken; and very Hebraizing, as to the speaking of them.
Exceeding much of the old Prophets language and matter adduced to intimate new
stories* and exceeding much of the Jews language, and allusion to their customs
and opinions, thereby to speak the things more familiarly to be understood. And
as Ezekiel wrote concerning the ruin of Jerusalem, when the ruining of it was
now begun, so I suppose does John of the final destruction of it, when the
Wars and miseries were now begun, which bred its destruction.

REVEL. CHAP. I, II, III.
THe three first Chapters refer to that present time when John wrote: and
they contain the story of his obtaining this Revelation, and of the condition
of the seven Churches of Asia at that time: declared in the Epistles directed
to them.

John traveling in the Ministry of the Gospel up and down from Asia Westward,
comes into the I Will Patmos, in the Icarian sea [ Vid. Strab. lib. 10.] an Island
about thirty miles compass [ Plin. lib. 4. cap. 12.] and there on the Lords
day he has these visions, and an Angel interprets to him all he saw.

He sees Christ clothed like a Priest, (...), ver. 13. [See the LXX in Exodus
28.4.] and girded over the paps, as the Priests used to be, with the curious
girdle. His appearance full of Majesty and gloriousness, described in the
terms of Daniel, Chap. 7.9. and 10.5, 6. Amongst other his Divine title, he is
called Alpha and Omega, terms ordinarily used by the Jews [only uttered in
their Hebrew tongue] to to signify the beginning and the end, or the first and
the last. Midr. Tillin. fol. 47.2. Abraham and Sarah performed all the Law from
Aleph to Tau. Marg. tripl. targ in Deuteronomy. 18.13. He that walks in integrity is
as if he performed all the Law from Aleph to Tau.

He directs Epistles to be sent to the seven Churches of Asia: who are golden
Candlesticks though very full of corruptions [it is not a small thing that
unchurches a Church] and inscribed to the Angels of the Churches: This phrase
translates (...) Sheliahh Tsibbor, the title of the Minister in every
Synagogue, who took care for the public reading and expounding of the Law and
Prophets: And these Epistles are sent accordingly to the Ministers of the
several Churches, that they might be read openly in their Congregations.

There are seven several Epistles to the several Churches, dictated
immediately and sent by Christ, and another general one from John to them all,
in which he shows the warrant and way of writing those seven.

He terms the holy Ghost, the seven Spirits, according to the Jews common
speech, who from Isa. 11.2. speak much of the seven Spirits of Messiah: and
speaking of Christ's coming with clouds, Chap 1.7. from Dan. 7.13. and from the
words of Christ himself, Matthew. 24.30. He at once teaches that he takes at
Daniel, and speaks of Christ's coming and reigning, when the four Monarchies
were destroyed, and especially refers to the first most visible evidence of
his power and dominion, in coming to destroy his enemies the Jewish Nation, and
their City. And here is one reason that induces me to suppose this Book
written, before that City was destroyed.

Coming to read the present condition of these Asian Churches in the Epistles
written to them, we may pertinently think of that saying of Paul, 2 Timothy 1.15.
This thou know that all they that are in Asia are turned from me: A great
Apostasy: of which there is too much evidence in these Churches, as also
mention of some sad fruits of it, and means and instruments inducing to it. As
1. unbeleeving Jews which the holy Ghost all along calls A Synagogue of Satan:
with these the Church of Smyrna was pestered, and more especially Pergamus,
where their mischievousnesse is styled the very throne or seat of Satan: and
where they had murdered Antipas a faithful Martyr already. 2. False Apostles
and seducers: some that pretended Apostolic power and commission, and it may
be colored their pretenses with Magical wonders, that they might act more
Apostle-like. These the Church of Ephesus was troubled with, but had discovered
their delusions and found them liars. 3. Other seducers that, it may be, came
not in the demonstration of such devilish power, but answered that by their
horrid devilish doctrines, the doctrines of the Nicolaitans, which taught to
eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication. In Thyatira a woman
seducer, cried up this doctrine, a whore and witch, a Iezabel: wherefore she
and her children, that is, her Disciples, are threatened to be destroyed by the
plague: the vengeance upon the fornicators with Baal P^or.

REVEL. CHAP. IV, V.
NOw comes a second vision. That before was of things then being, see Chap.
1.19. but this and forward of things to come, Chap. 4.1. A door open in heaven,
and the voice of a trumpet talking with John out of it.

The scene of John's visions said to be in heaven, is according to the scheme of
the Temple and the Divine glory there. And hence you have mention of the Altar,
Candlesticks, Sea of glass [the brazen laver made of the women's looking
glasses] the Ark of the Covenant, and the like. And as at the opening of the
Temple doors, a Trumpet sounded, so is the allusion here. The door in Heaven
opened, and a Trumpet calls John to come in and see what there. And immediately
he was in the Spirit, ver. 2. Why? was he not in the Spirit before? Chap. 1.10.
and was he not in the Spirit, in seeing the door in heaven opened? etc. But we
may observe a double degree in rapture: as inspired men may be considered under
a double notion: viz. Those that were inspired with Prophecy or to be Prophets
and to preach, and those that were inspired to be Penmen of Divine Writ, which
was higher. John has both inspirations or revelations to both ends, both in
the Vision before, and this: then he was in the Spirit and saw the vision, and
was in the Spirit and inspired to pen what he saw, and what to be sent to the
Churches. And in the first verse of this Chapter he is in the Spirit or has a
revelation, and in ver. 2. he is in the Spirit, he is inspired so as to take
impression and remembrance of these things to write them also.

He sees Christ inthroned in the middle of his Church, in the same Prophetic
and visionary Emblem that Ezekiel had seen, Ezekiel. 1. and 10. and this is a
commentary and fulfilling of that scene that Daniel speaks of, Dan. 7.9, 10,
22. In Ezekiel, the Lord, when Jerusalem was now to be destroyed, and the glory
of the Lord that used to be there, and the people were to flit into another
Land, appears so inthroned, as sitting in Judgment and flitting away by
degrees to another place: as compare Ezekiel. 1. and 10. well together. So Christ
here; when the destruction of Jerusalem was now near at hand, and his glory and
presence to remove from that Nation, now given up to unbelief and obduration,
to reside among the Gentiles, he is seated upon his throne as Judge and King
with glorious attendance, to judge that Nation for their sins and unbelief,
and stating the affairs of his Church whither his glory was now removing.

The scheme is platformed according to the model of Isreal's Camp. 1. The
Tabernacle was in the middle there, so is the throne here. 2. There the four
squadrons of the Camp of Levi next the Tabernacle, so here the four living
creatures. 3. Then the whole Camp of Israel, so here twenty four Elders
Representatives of the whole Church, built from twelve Tribes and twelve
Apostles.

In the hand of him that sat on the Throne was a Book sealed which no creature
could open. This justly calls us back to Dan. 12. v. 4. where words are shut up
and a Book sealed unto the time of the end: and now that that is near drawing
on, the Book is here opened.

REVEL. CHAP. VI.
THe opening of the six Seals in this Chapter, speaks the ruin and rejection
of the Jewish Nation, and the desolation of their City; which is now very near
at hand.

The first Seal opened ver. 2. shows Christ setting forth in Battle array and
avengement against them, as Psalm. 45.4, 5. And this the New Testament speaks
very much and very highly of, one while calling it his coming in clouds,
another while his coming in his Kingdom, and sometime his coming in Power and
great Glory, and the like. Because his plagueing and destroying of the Nation
that crucified him, and that so much opposed and wrought mischief against the
Gospel, was the first evidence that he gave in sight of all the world of his
being Christ: for till then, he and his Gospel had been in humility, as I may
say, as to the eyes of men, he persecuted whilst he was on earth, and they
persecuted after him, and no course taken with them that so used both, but now
he awakes, shows himself, and makes himself known by the Judgment that he
executes.

The three next Seals opening, show the means by which he did destroy, namely
those three sad plagues that had been threatened so often and so sore by the
Prophets, Sword, Famine and Pestilence. For

The second Seal opened sends out one upon a red Horse to take Peace from the
earth, and that men should destroy one another; he carried a great Sword, ver.
4.

The third Seals opening speaks of Famine, when Corn for scarcity should be
weighed like spicery in a pair of balances, ver. 5, 6.

The fourth Seal sends out one on a pale Horse whose name was Death [the
Chaldee very often expresses the Plague or Pestilence by that word (...): and
so it' is to be taken Revel. 2.22.] and Hell or Hades comes after him, ver. 8.

The opening of the fifth Seal reveals a main cause of the vengeance, namely
the blood of the Saints which had been shed, crying, and which was to be
required of that generation, Matthew. 23.35, 36. These souls are said to cry from
under the Altar, either in allusion to the blood of creatures sacrificed,
poured at the foot of the Altar, or according to the Jews tenet, that all just
souls departed are under the Throne of Glory. Answer to their cry is given,
that the number of their Brethren that were to be slain was not yet fulfilled,
and they must rest till that should be, and then avengement in their behalf
should come. This speaks suitable to that which we observed lately, that now
times were begun of bitter persecution, an hour of temptation, Rev. 2.10. and
3.10. the Jews and devil raging, till the Lord should something cool that fury
by the ruin of that people.

The opening of the sixth Seal, ver. 12, 13. shows the destruction it self in
those borrowed terms that the Scripture uses to express it by, namely as if
it were the destruction of the whole world: as Matthew. 24.29, 30. The sun
darkened, the stars falling, the heaven departing and the earth dissolved:
and that conclusion ver. 16. They shall say to the rocks fall on us, etc. does
not only warrant, but even enforce us to understand and construe these things
in the sense that we do: for Christ applies these very words to the very same
thing, Luke 23.30. And here is another, and, to me, a very satisfactory reason,
why to place the showing of these visions to John, and his wring of this Book
before the desolation of Jerusalem.

REVEL. CHAP. VII.
IN the end of the former Chapter was contained the intimation of the
desolation of Jerusalem, and in the beginning of this, the ceasing of
Prophecy, under the similitude of the four winds restrained from blowing upon
the earth. Compare Cant. 4.16. Ezekiel. 37.9. only a remnant of Israel are sealed
unto salvation, and not to perish by that restraint, and with them innumerable
Gentiles. Ezekiel helps here to confirm the explication that we have given of
the Chapter before: for he has the very like passage, upon the first
destruction of the City, Ezekiel. 9. and 10. and 11. Compare the marking in the
foreheads here, with Exodus 28.38. Dan not mentioned among the Tribes in this
place: Idolatry first began in that Tribe, Judge. 18. 1 King. 12.

REVEL. CHAP. VIII.
THe opening of the seventh Seal lands us upon a new scene: as a new world
began when Jerusalem was destroyed and the Jews cast off. The six Seals in the
two former Chapters, have showed their ruin, and the appearing of the Church
of the Gentiles, and now the seven Trumpets under the seventh Seal give us a
prospect in general of the times thence forward to the end of all things. I
say in general, for from the beginning of the twelfth Chapter and forward to
the end of the nineteenth they are handled more particularly.

Silence in heaven for a while, and seven Angels with seven Trumpets may call
our thoughts to Joshua 6.4, 10. and intimate that the Prophetic story is now
entered upon a new Canaan, or a new stage of the Church, as that business at
Jericho was at Isreal's first entering on the old: Or it may very properly be
looked upon as referring and alluding to the carriage of things at the Temple,
since this Book does represent things so much according to the scheme and scene
of the Temple all along.

And in this very place there is mention of the Altar and Incense and Trumpets,
which were all Temple appurtenances. It was therefore the custom at the Temple
that when the Priest went in to the Holy place, the people drew downward from
the Porch of the Temple, and there was* a silence whilst he was there, [yea
though the people were then praying] incomparably beyond what there was at
other times of the service, for the Priests were blowing with Trumpets or the
Levites singing: The allusion then here is plain. When the sacrifice was laid
on the Altar, a Priest took coals from the Altar, went in to the Holy place,
and offered incense upon the Golden Altar that stood before vail, that was
before the Ark, and this being done, the Trumpets sounded over the sacrifice.
Here then is first intimation of Christ's being offered upon the Altar; then his
going into the Holy place as Mediator for his people: and then the Trumpets
sounding and declaring his disposals in the world. His taking fire off the
Altar and casting it upon the earth, ver. 5. is a thing not used at the Temple,
but spoken from Ezekiel. 10.2. which betokens the sending of judgment, which
the Trumpets speak out.

These seven Trumpets, and the seven Vials in Chap. 16. in many things run
very parallel, how far they Synchronize, will be best considered when we come
there.

The first Trumpet sounding, brings hail and fire and blood upon the earth, and
destroys grass and trees a third part of them. Fire and hail was the plague of
Egypt, Exodus 9.23. but fire and blood, with hail, is a new plague. By these
seems to be intimated what plagues should be brought upon the world, by fire,
sword, dreadful tempest, unnatural seasons and the like.

The second Trumpet sounds, and a great burning mountain is cast into the sea,
and the third part of it becomes blood. The sea in the Prophetic language,
does signify multitudes of people: as Ierem. 51.36.42. And Babylon that was
Monarch was a burning mountain in the same Chapter, ver. 35. So that the
Imperial power seems to be the mountain here; which made bloody and
mischievous work, not only by the persecution of Christians, but even among
their own people. As Nero at present, Vitellius instantly after, Domitian,
Commodus, and indeed generally all of them either bloodily destroy their own
people, or at least for their covetousness, ambition, revenge or humor, bring
disquietnesse, oppression, misery, Wars and blood, upon all the world, in one
place or other.

The third Trumpet, brings the star Wormwood upon the rivers and fountains of
waters: which seems to denote the grievous Heresies that should be in the
Church, which should corrupt and imbitter the pure springs of the Scripture and
fountains of Truth. A star in the language of this Book is a Churchman,
Chap. 1.20. [ Ben Cochab was such a Wormwood star among the Jews, called most
properly Ben cozba the lier.] And the phrase, A star falling from heaven,
alludes to Isa. 14.12. How art thou fallen from heaven O Lucifer! etc.

The fourth Trumpet shows the darkning of the Sun and Moon and Stars for a
third part.

By which seems to be understood the wane and decay, both in the glory of the
Church, by superstition, and of the Empire, by its divisions within, and
enemies from without, and this before the rising of the Papacy, which appears
under the next Trumpet: and these things were great advantages to its rising.
The darkning of the heavenly luminaries in the Prophets language signifies the
eclipsing of the glory and prosperity of a Kingdom or people, Isa. 13.9, 10.
Joel 2.10. How it was with the Church and Empire in these respects, before that
time that the Papacy appeared, he is a stranger to History, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, that remembers not upon this very hint.

The three Trumpets coming are the Trumpets of Woe, woe, woe: though these things
past were very woeful; but those much more that are to come.

REVEL. CHAP. IX.
A Description of the Papacy under the fifth Trumpet. Another star falling
from heaven, and that a notable one indeed, the He that has the Key of the
bottomless pit committed to him. A vast difference from the Keys given Peter,
The Keys of the Kingdom of heaven: The setting of these in their just distance
and opposition will illustrate the matter before us. When the world is to come
out of darkness and Heathenism to the knowledge of the Gospel, Christ gives
Peter the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, to open the door and let light come
in among them: for he first preached to the Gentiles, Act. 10. and 15.7. The
world under the Papacy returns, as it were, to Heathenism again [and not
undeservedly for its contempt of the Gospel and unproficiency under it] which
is very fitly described by hell opened, by the Keys of the bottomless pit, and
darkness coming and clouding all. The Claviger or Turnkey is The child of
perdition, Abaddon and Apollyon, a destroyer and one that is surely and sorely
to be destroyed. Chittim [Italy or Rome] afflicting and perishing for ever,
Number. 24.24. Antichrist of the second edition, much augmented and enlarged. The
Jews the first, as we observed at the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, and
this the second, Antichrist at his full stature. It is true indeed that Rome
Heathen is one part of him, but observe how little a part reputed in comparison
of Rome Papish, the star fallen from heaven. So that though that did woeful
things, yet you see the first woe is fixed here.

The way of his bringing woe upon the earth, is by filling the world with smoke
and darkness of ignorance and humane traditions and inventions: and out of
this smoke come his locusts, of his votary orders. The locusts described much
like those in Joel 1. for their terror and destroying: only their having the
faces of men speaks them men-caterpillers: and their Nazarite-like hair long as
the hair of women, speaks them votaries; or such as take on them vowed
Religion. Their trading is not with grass or the green things of the earth as
other locusts do, but with men, and they are locusts in name, but scorpions in
action, wounding with the sting of their tails [the teacher of lies is the
tail, Isa. 9.15.] but not killing: leaving men indeed in a Religion and a
profession of Christ, but no better then a venomed and dying one. The time of
their tormenting is five months, the time of locusts ravening ordinarily, from
the spring well shot forth, to harvest.

This is the first woe.

These locusts stings, mind me of a story or two in the Roman History: which
let me mention here, though I cannot apply them hither. Dion, in his story of
the life of Domitian says thus, About that time diverse began to prick many
whom they pleased, with poisoned needles, whereof many died, hardly feeling
what was done to them. And this was practiced not only at Rome, but almost
through all the world.

And again in the life of Commodus. About that time, says he, there was so
great a mortality, that often times there died two thousand in Rome in one day.
And many, not only in the City, but also through the whole Roman Empire, were
killed by mischievous men, who poisoning needles pricked others with them: as
also it had been in Domitians time, and so innumerable people died by this
means. But there was no greater plague then Commodus himself, etc.

The sounding of the sixth Trumpet begins another woe. Four Angels loosed, which
were bound in Euphrates, and come with a terrible Army, and horses breathing
fire and smoke and brimstone, and having stings in their tails, etc. The Turks
and Mahumetans coming as a plague upon the Eastern part of the world, as the
Papacy on the Western. These hurt with their tails [false doctrine] as well as
the other did in the former Trumpet: but these have also heads in their tails,
which the other had not, for these hold out another Head and Savior, Mahomet.

REVEL. CHAP. X.
A Little Book in the hand of Christ, speaks the restoring of Religion, and
Truth, after all the darkness and confusions mentioned before. The words in
ver. 6, 7. do help to state the intent of this Vision. He swear by him that
lives for ever, that there should be delay of time no longer, but in the days
of the seventh Trumpet the mystery of God should be fulfilled. The mystery of
God is his gathering in of his Elect, more especially of the Gentiles, Romans
16.25, 26. Ephesians. 3.5, 6. and hitherto there had been great hinderance by Rome
Heathen, by Heresies, Papacy, Turcism, but at last Christ swears, that there
should be no more delay: the word (...) must be taken so here: and not
unconsonant to the signification of the word, and very consonant to the
context, and to the place from whence this verse is taken: That is Dan. 12.7.
where the Angel is brought in swearing, as here, that the trouble of Antiochus
and his persecution and hindrance should be so long, and there should be no
delay further, but there should be a restoring. That place laid to this, and
Antiochus looked upon as a figure of Antichrist, the construction of this place
is easy. Only the great Angel would have the speech of the seven thunders,
which refer to these times, to be concealed. The Prophecy in general
intimates the restoring of the Gospel in these later times, which is handled in
the next Chapter, but very generally, and very briefly. John's eating of the
little Book, as Ezekiel. 2.8. and the words to him, Thou must Prophecy again
before many Peoples and Nations and Tongues and Kings, do not so much infer
John's going abroad after this to preach to many Nations himself, as it does the
progress of the truth that he preached, through Nations and People, which had
been suppressed so long: aiming at these times when the Gospel last broke out
from under Popery. The passage is parallel to the last words in the Book of
Daniel, Go thy way till the end be, for thou shall rest, and stand in the lot,
at the end of days. Not that Daniel should live till the end of those miseries
by Antiochus, but that his doctrine, and the truth should stand up and be
restored in those times. The phrase is such another as when Christ tells his
Disciples that they should sit on twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel, which is not meant of their personal sitting to judge, but that their
doctrine should judge and condemn that unbeleeving Nation.

REVEL. CHAP. XI.
THe Vision of this Chapter is in order to the accomplishing of the mystery of
God, which was spoken of Chap. 10.7. As Ezekiels measuring of a new Temple,
showed the restoring of Religion and of the Lords people, and foretold of the
new Jerusalem and calling of the Gentiles: To the same purpose is the measuring
of the Temple here. The Church was under the mystical Babylon, Chap. 9. as the
Jews were under the Eastern, when Ezekiel wrote those things; now as that
description of the measures of the Temple, was a prediction and pledge of their
coming forth, so this speaks to the same tenor. John is commanded to leave
the Court which is without the Temple, forth, and not to measure it, Because it
was given to the Gentiles, and they should tread the holy City forty and two
months. Not in an hostile way, but as the flock of the Lord tread his Courts,
there worshipping him: as see the phrase, Isa. 1.12. Psalm. 122.2. and the
meaning seems to be this; Measure not the Court of the Gentiles, for their
multitudes that come to attend upon the Lord shall be boundless and
numberless.

The two and forty months: and a thousand two hundred and sixty days, ver.
3. and Chap. 12.6. and a time and times and half a time, Chap. 12.14. are but
borrowed phrases from Daniel: who so expresses the three years and an half of
Antiochus his persecution, and treading down Religion, Dan. 7.25. and 12.7, 11.
and they mean times of trouble, and are used to express that, but not any
fixed time. The Jews themselves have learned to make the same construction of
it, when they say Advianus besieged Bitter three years and an half, Jerus.
Taanith fol. 68. col. 4. And this also [that comfort might stand up against
misery] was the time of our Saviors Ministry, when he restored decayed and
ruined Religion, in so happy a manner, Dan. 9.27. And this the Jews also have
observed in that saying we have mentioned before, The divine glory shall stand
upon mount Olivet three years and an half, and shall preach, etc. So that
according to this interpretation of the numbers, the things they are applied
unto are facil. The Gentiles shall tread the Lords Courts forty two months,
and the two Witnesses shall Prophecy a thousand two hundred and sixty days
clothed in sackcloth: Meaning that the Gentiles shall worship God and attend
upon him in a Gospel Ministry [and for that, allusion is made to the space of
time that Christ administered the Gospel] but this ministering and attending
shall not be without persecution and trouble [and for intimation of that,
allusion is made to the bitter times of Antiochus.]

Two Witnesses, is a phrase taken from the Law. [ In the mouth of two or of
three witnesses every word shall stand] and it means all that should bear
witness to the truth in the times spoken of. But more especially the Ministry,
which is charactered by the picture of Moses and Elias, the two great Reformers
in their several times: the former, the first Minister of the Jews, the later
of the Gentiles. These are two Olive trees [See Zech. 4.3. Romans 11.17, 24.] and
two Candlesticks [See Chap. 1.20.] gracious in themselves, and having light,
and holding it out to others. They must finish and accomplish their work that
they had to do, and then be overcome by Antichrist and slain.

Their case is clearly paralleled with Christ their Masters; by comparing it
with which, it is best understood: He preached three years and six months in
trouble and sorrow, so they in sackcloth: He having finished his Ministry was
slain, so they. He revived and ascended, so they likewise. Now this that
especially states the case, and the counting of the progress of procedings
intended here, is this: That as Christ laid the foundation of the Gospel, and
when he having finished his Ministry was slain, risen and ascended, the Gospel
was not extinct with him, but increased more and more by the Ministry that
followed after: So seems this that alludes thereunto to be understood: As, that
the two Witnesses should mean the first Ministry, and bearing witness to the
truth at the first breaking of it out of Popery, which was followed with horrid
persecutions and multitudes of Martyrdoms: but these first Witnesses having so
done their Testimony, and vast numbers of them having sealed it with their
blood, and being gone to heaven, yet the Gospel increased and shook down a part
of Rome even at these first beginnings.

Their dead bodies must be cast in the streets of the great City where our Lord
was crucified. The term The great City resolves that Rome is meant, if there
were no other evidence: which see explained, Chap. 17.18. And by her power and
sentence our Lord was crucified, and for a quarrel of hers, being accused and
condemned by Pilate as a traitor to the Roman power, for saying he was a King.
This is the rather mentioned, now there is speech of Romes last bloodinesse
against Christ's Witnesses: that it might be showed that it persevered the same,
to his, that it had been to him, and that to the last, and that these Witnesses
drunk but of the same cup that their Master had drunk before them.

She is called spiritually [(...) as the Jews speak] Sodom and Egypt: Sodom for
filthiness: and Egypt for Idolatry and mercilesnesse, Never did place under
heaven wallow in fleshly filthiness, and particularly in the Sodomitick
bestiality, as Rome did about those times that John wrote: and how little it
has been mended under the Papacy there are Records plain enough that speak to
her shame. He that reads Martial and Iuvenal [to name no more] may stand and
wonder that men should become such beasts: and it had been better that those
Books had been for ever smothered in obscurity then that they should have come
to light, were it not only for this, that they and others of the like stamp, do
give that place her due character, and help us the better to understand her
description. It is observable what Paul says, Romans 1.21, 22, 23, 24. that
because the Heathen had brutish conceptions concerning God, abasing him, he
gave them over to brutish abasing their own bodies by bestiality, or indeed by
what was above bestiall. And so he shows plainly, that Gods giving up men to
such filthiness, especially Sodomy, was a direct plague for their Idolatrous
conceptions of God, and their Idolatry. And to this purpose it may be observed
that when the Holy Ghost has given the story of the worlds becoming Heathenish
at Babel for and by Idolatry, Genesis 11. he is not long before he brings in
mention of this sin among the Heathen, and fearful vengeance upon it, Genesis 19.
Apply this matter to the case of Rome and it may be of good information.

The casting their dead bodies in the streets, speaks the higher spite and
detestation against them: and in this particular they are described different
from their Master. And as they had prophesied three years and an half, so they
lay unburied three days and an half: till there was no apparent possibility of
their recovery. But they revive and go to heaven: and a tenth part of the City
falls by an Earthquake, and seven thousand perish: but the rest of that part of
the City that fell, who perished not, gave glory to God. Nine parts of the City
left standing still: whose ruin is working still from henceforward, by the
Gospel that these Witnesses had set on foot: which brings in the Kingdoms to
become the Kingdoms of Christ, etc.

REVEL. CHAP. XII.
AS Daniel, Chap. 2. gives a general view of the times, from his own days,
to the coming of Christ, in the mention of the four Monarchies [in the four
parts of Nebuchadnezzers Visionary Image] which should run their date and
decay, and come to nothing, before his coming: and then in Chap. 7. handles the
very same thing again in another kind of scheme, and something plainer: And
then in Chap. 8. and 10. and 11. and 12. does explain at large, and more
particularly, some of the most material things that he had touched in those
generals: So does our Apocalyptick here, and forward. He has hitherto given a
general survey of the times from his own days to the end: and now he goes
over some of the chief heads again with explanation.

And first he begins with the birth of Christ, and the Christian Church: and
the machination of the devil to destroy both. The Church of the Jews brings
forth her chief child, and the devil seeks to destroy him. He is pictured 1.
A great red Dragon. Old Pharaoh who sought to devour new born Israel is much of
the like character, Isa. 27.7. Psalm. 74.13, etc. 2. With seven heads: So many
had the persecuting Monarchies, Dan. 7. the Lion one, the Bear one, the Leopard
four, and the fourth beast one. 3. And ten horns, Parallel to the Syrogrecian
persecutors, Dan. 7.7, etc. 4. With his tail he drew and cast down the third
part of the stars; As the Tyrant Antiochus had done, Dan. 8.10. So that by
these allusive descriptions, phrases of old stories fetched to express new, is
showed the acting of the devil now, by his mischievous and tyrannical
instruments, with as much bitterness and bloody-mindednesse as he had done in
those. The woman's fleeing into the wilderness, alludes to Isreal's getting away
into the wilderness from the Dragon Pharaoh, Exodus 14. etc. And her nourishing
there a thousand two hundred and sixty days, speaks Christ's preservation of
that Church in the bitterest danger and days, like the days of Antiochus.
This Vision aims at the great opposition and oppression the Church and Gospel
underwent from the first rising of it, to the ruin of Jerusalem: and their
preservation in all that extremity.

The battle betwixt Michael and the Dragon, is of the same aim and time with
the former; but it speaks thus much further, that the Church is not only
preserved, but the Dragon conquered and cast to the earth. Heaven all along in
this Book is the Church, the earth therefore may be properly understood of the
world, and here more especially of that part of worldly ones, the unbeleeving
Jews; and that the rather, because the Gentiles here are called the
wilderness, as they be also in several other places in Scripture. The devil
therefore is cast out of the Church by the power of Michael, the Lord Christ,
that he cannot nestle there, and he goes into the rest of the Nation that did
not believe: much like the tenor of that parable, Matthew. 12.43, 44, 45. The
Woman has Eagles wings [alluding to Exodus 19.4.] and gets into the
wilderness, the persecuted Church and Gospel gets among the Gentiles: The
devil casts venom as a flood after the Woman-Church, and the earth swallows it
up: the unbeleeving Jews do as it were drink up all the poison of the devil,
and together with raging against the Church they grow enraged one against
another, and against the Romans, till they become their own destroyers. And
indeed though it were a most bitter time with the Church while she was among
the combustions that that Nation had within it self, yet their raging one
against another the more is increased in their particular quarrels, the more it
avenged her quarrel, and turned their edge from off her, upon themselves. The
devil seeing this, betakes himself to fight against the Woman's seed, the Church
of the Gentiles: and the Treatise of that begins in the next Chapter.

REVEL. CHAP. XIII.
When Rome has slain Christ, and destroyed Jerusalem, Satan gives up his Power
and Throne to it; and that deservedly, as to one most like to be his chief and
most able agent to act his fury. She is described here, a Beast bearing the
shape of all the four bloody Monarchies, Dan. 7. in power and cruelty matching,
nay incomparably exceeding them all. There is but little reason to take Rome
for the fourth Monarchy in Daniel; and the so taking it, brings much
disjoynting and confusion, into the interpreting of that Book and this, and
into the stating of affairs and times spoken of in them. The Jews like such a
gloss well, as whereby they do conclude, that the Messiah is not yet come,
because the fourth Monarchy the Roman, say they, is not yet utterly destroyed.
And truly I see not how they can conclude less, upon such a concession. For it
is plain in Daniel, that the four Kingdoms there spoken of, must come to
nothing before the first appearing of Messiah; and that the Roman is not, is
most plain, since this Book makes Rome Heathen and Papal but as one.

The Holy Ghost by Daniel shows the four Monarchies, the afflicters of the
Church of the Jews* till Messiah his first coming, The Babylonian, The
Mede-Persian, The Grecian, and The Syrogrecian: and John now takes at him, and
shows a fifth Monarchy the afflicter of the Church of Jews and Gentiles till
his second coming. Daniel indeed gives a hint of the Roman, but he clearly
distinguishes him from the other four, when he calls him the Prince that was to
come, Dan 9.26. beyond and after those four that he had spoken of before. Him
John describes here, as carrying the character of all those four. A Beast with
ten horns, such a one had been the Syrogrecian, Dan. 7.7. like a Leopard, as
the Grecian was, ver. 6. his feet as a Bears, such the Persian, ver. 5. his
mouth like a Lion, such the Babylonian, ver. 4. This therefore could not be any
of those, when it was all: and by this description of it by characters of them
all, it shows the vast power and incomparable cruelty and oppression of it
equalling them all: nay it infinitely went beyond them put all together, in
extent of Dominions, Power, Continuance and Cruelty, both to the Church and to
the world: Balaam long before Rome was in being does set it out for the great
afflicter, Number. 24.24. Ships shall come from the coasts of Chittim, and shall
afflict Assure, and shall afflict Eber: That Chittim means Italy or Rome, is
granted even by some Romanists themselves, it is asserted by the Jews, and
confirmed by other places of Scripture, and even proved by the very sense and
truth of that place. It afflicts both the afflicted and the afflicter Eber and
Assure: and that has been the garb of it since its first being. How may this be
read in her own stories? in her bloody Conquests over all the world: in the
titles of honor [but which speak oppression] Britannicus, Germanicus,
Africanus, and the like? And to take up all in Epitome, and that you may
conjecture ex ungue Leonem, what whole Rome has done in all her time for
slaughter, oppression and destroying, take but the brief of one of her
Commanders Pompey the Great; of whom Pliny speaks to this purpose, Not. Hist.
lib. 7. cap. 26. He recovered Sicily, subdued Africa: subjected 876 Towns about
the Alps and coasts of Spain: routed and slew 2183000 men. Sunk and took 846
Ships: took in 1538 fortified places; and triumphed from his Conquest of Asia,
Pontus, Armenia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, Syria, Iudaea, Albania,
Iberia, Creet and Basterna. What has Rome done by all her agents in all her
time? And she is this year 1654, two thousand four hundred and eight years old.

She is described here, with seven heads and ten horns, as the Dragon whose
deputed she is, is pictured Chap. 12.3. the horns crowned with power, and the
heads with blasphemies.

One of his heads had been wounded to death, but his deadly wound was healed:
This seems to mean her Monarchical or Kingly power, which was extinguished
with the Tarquins, but revived in the Caesar's: and hereby is given intimation
from whence to account the beginning of this fifth Monarchy: namely from Romes
beginning again to be Monarchical: and we may well take a hint of this from
Luke 2. where at the birth of Christ all the world is taxed by Caesar Augustus.
Not that Monarchical Government is therefore the worse because thus abused by
Rome Heathen, no more then Religion is the worse for being abused by Rome
Papal.

Another Beast arises, like this for power and cruelty, but far beyond him
in consonage and delusion. Rome Heathen dealt always openly and in down right
terms of bloodinesse; professedly setting it self to destroy Religion: But
Rome Papal is a mystery of iniquity: it goes to work by deceiving, and
carrying fair pretenses: therefore it is said that it spoke as a Dragon, but
had horns like a Lamb. It revives the tyranny of Rome Heathen and Imperial,
and none must thrive before it that will not bear its badge: either some mark,
or its name, or the number of its name: which number was the number of a man,
and his number is 666. In Hebrew numerals, Sethur the name of a man in Number.
13.13. comes just to this number: and which being interpreted signifies Hidden
or Mystery: the very inscription of Rome it self, Chap. 17.5. In Greek (...)
fits it, which is the old name of the Roman. And in Genealogicall Arithmetic
the number of Adonikams family suits with it, Ezra 5.13. which man's name
signifies, A Lord rising up.

REVEL. CHAP. XIV.
THe warring twixt Michael and his Angels, and the Dragon and his Angels, and
the Dragons making war with seed of the Woman, Chap. 12. receives
illustration in the thirteenth Chapter, and in the beginning of this. For in
Chap. 13. he resignes his Power and Throne to the Beast Rome, and makes him
chief leader in his Wars; and his Angels are men that receive his mark. Here
the Lamb upon mount Zion is Michael, and his Angels and followers are marked
with his Fathers Name in their foreheads, as Chap. 7.

And now as in the eight, ninth, tenth and eleventh Chapters the relation is
concerning those things that should be against the Church, from henceforth the
Prophecy is more especially of things that make for the Church, and against
her enemies. As 1. The preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, ver. 6, 7. 2.
The proclaiming of the ruin of the mystical Babylon: proclaimed even from its
first rising up a persecutor: as Isaiah did Prophecy against the Eastern, even
before its tyrannical being. 3. The Ministry of the Word giving caution,
against joining with the Beast and his Image, and the danger and damnation that
should follow upon joining with him, and the torments described, ver. 9, 10,
11. Here the patience of the Saints tried, ver. 12. and John by a voice from
heaven commanded to write them blessed that die in the Lord from thenceforth,
ver. 13. at once showing the bitterness of the persecution caused by the
Beast, that even death should be desirable to deliver the Saints from that
trouble; and encouraging to stand out against the Beast and his Image even to
the death.

These bitter dealings against the Church, ripen the sins of the world ready
for cutting down: and thereupon Christ is described coming as against Egypt,
Isa. 19.1. riding upon a cloud, and with a sickle in his hand to reap the
earth. As Joel 3.13. betokening his vengeance against his enemies: So the earth
is reaped Harvest and Vintage and all: This is a general intimation of Gods
judgment and vengeance, which is more particularly handled in the pouring out
of the Vials, Chap. 16.

It is observable that the word for reaping of the earth comes out from the
Temple: yea though Christ have the sickle in his hand, yet an Angel out of the
Temple calls to him to reap: and another Angel comes out of the Temple with a
sickle, and a third out of the Temple calls to him to reap: As this may be
understood to Doctrinall information, that the cries and urgencies of the
Church to Christ stir him up to avenge them on their enemies, Luke 18.7. so
the expressions may be explained by allusive application. The putting in of the
first sickle, to reap the first corn in Iudaea, was by the word and warrant of
the Priests and Rulers sitting in the Temple, and they that were to reap, when
they were come to the corn, put not in the sickle, till the word was given,
Reap. The manner and managing of this business, viz. the reaping of the first
sheaf is recorded and related by the Talmud: Menachoth per. 10. and in
Tosaphta. ibid. These three men, say they, that were appointed by the Sanhedrin
to reap, went out into the valley of Kidron, with a great company following
them on the first day of the Passover week when now it grew toward evening,
with three sickles and three baskets. One when they came to the place said to
them, On this Sabbath, on this Sabbath, on this Sabbath, In this basket, in
this basket, in this basket, With this sickle, with this sickle, with this
sickle, Reap: to whom the three answer, Well, well, well, I will reap. The
other says, Reap then. Then they reap, etc. Thus phrases taken from known
customs, do speak the plainer.

And so is the expression taken from common speech and opinion, when it is said
in ver. 30. The wine press was trodden without the City, and blood came out of
the wine press even to the horse bridles. Here is treading a wine press of
blood, a^ Christ treads in Edom, Isa. 63.1, 3. [ Edom is the common name by
which the Hebrew Writers call the Romans.] The wine press was without the
City: alluding to the wine and oil presses which were without Jerusalem at the
foot of mount Olivet. Blood came up to the horse bridles: An hyperbole by which
they expressed great slaughter and effusion of blood. So Talm. Ierus. in
Taanith fol. 69. col. 1. describing the woeful slaughter that Hadrian made of
the Jews at the destruction of the City Bitter says (...) The horses waded in
blood up to the nostrils, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.
Of that space and extent does R. Menahem. on genesis fol. 60. reckon the
largeness of the Land of Israel.

REVEL. CHAP. XV.
WHat was spoken in general, in the conclusion of the preceding Chapter,
concerning the treading of the wine press of Gods wrath, is here more
particularly prosecuted in the story of the seven Vials. At the beginning of
which John again calls us to reflect upon the scheme of the Temple in heaven:
which all along speaks according to the platform of the Temple at Jerusalem.
Here is a sea of glass mingled with fire, and harpers harping by it, etc.
singing the song of Moses: which as it calls to mind Moses and the peoples
singing upon the red sea shore upon their delivery from Egypt, Exodus 15. so
does it plainly allude to the music at the Temple, by the laver or sea, and
which standing near the Altar was as a sea of glass mingled with fire.

Moses and Israel sing after the destruction of Egypt; for their deliverance
was by her destruction, but those here that have got victory over the Beast,
sing before he is destroyed, for they are delivered from him and prevail
against him though he stand in his strength, and his destruction be not yet
come. The Gospel grew, and Sanguis Martyrum was semen Ecclesiae, do Satan and
Antichrist what they can.

After this song The Temple of the Tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was
opened, ver. 5. All the whole building upon Mount Moriah was called the Temple,
the Courts and Cloisters and Chambers, etc. but the very house it self, The
Holy and Holy of Holies was only and properly The Temple of the Tabernacle of
Testimony: And the song mentioned before, ver. 2. is represented as being in
the Court, near the Altar and laver, but now the very House it self is opened:
Parallel to what is spoken Chap. 11.19. The Temple of God was opened in heaven,
and there was seen in his Temple, the Ark of his Covenant: The Lord in pouring
out vengeance upon Antichrist, will manifest his judgments, as ver. 4. and
open his Counsels and Covenant: for while the enemy raged, and raved, and
destroyed those that would not worship him, and when even all the world in a
manner did worship him, the Lords judgments were hid, and his Covenant with
his people, as it were out of sight, or as if no such thing had been, but when
this vengeance shall come, then all will be plain.

The seven Angels that pour out the seven Vials are charactered in the garb of
Priests, coming out of the Temple, in white linen, and girded over the breasts,
as the Priests were. One of the living creatures gives the Vials into their
hands: the very same sense and carriage with that Ezekiel. 10.7.

REVEL. CHAP. XVI.
WEre the Stage where the things of this Book were to be acted, and the time of
their acting of as little compass as was that of the things of Daniel, one
might with more probability allot the several things mentioned, to their
several times, as the things in him may be done: But since the scene here is
as large as all the world where the Gospel was to come, and the time as long as
time shall be; [1600 years past already, and how much behind none knoweth] to
undertake to apply every thing in this Book to its particular time, place and
occasion, is to run a hazardous undertaking. In some places indeed the things
are so plain, that they speak themselves, but in many so obscure that he that
will venture to bring them to particular application, does it more upon his own
venture, then upon any good textuall warrant: And amongst those obscurities,
these Vials are not the least. Take them in a general interpretation [as I
believe they are intended] and their meaning is easy to be understood, but to
come to allot them severally to this or that time or place, is but to do that,
that when ye have done all you can, will come to no surer bottom to rest upon,
then your own conceit and supposall.

The matter of them is expressed as to the most part, by allusion to the
plagues of Egypt, as boils, blood, darkness, and so it clears the thing
intended, namely in general to show how the mystical Egypt, Chap. 11.8. after
all her oppression and persecution of the Israel of God, should at last come to
receive her just reward, as old Egypt had done: and that God would follow her
with plagues till he had destroyed her. They are somewhat like the plagues of
the seven Trumpets, some of which, as we observed, did in general speak the
state of the world till the rising of Antichrist: and those Vials may be
understood as the general description of his plagues and ruin. We observed in
Chap. 6. and that upon good Scripture ground, that the six Seals did all but
speak one effect, namely the destruction of the Jewish Nation, but brought to
pass by several judgments; and the like interpretation may be made here.

The first Vial brings a noisome Boil upon the worshippers of the Beast: this
was the sixth plague of Egypt, but here the first: for that plague in Egypt
came home to Iannes and Iambers the Magicians, that they could not stand before
Moses, Exodus 9.11. And that both this and all the rest might be showed to reach
home, even to the veriest deceivers and ringleaders of mischief in
Antichristian Egypt, this is justly set in the first rank.

The second and third here, refer to the one plague of blood in Egypt, and
these exceed that: For there all the rivers and ponds were indeed turned into
blood, but the Egyptians dug for water about the river to drink, Exodus 7.24.
and found it and it was not turned into blood: The question and answer of Aben
Ezra is pertinent. It is said, there was blood throughout all the Land of
Egypt: And the Magicians did so with their enchantments. Now how could the
Magicians turn water into blood, when there was no water left, but all was
blood? And he answers, Aaron only turned the waters that were above ground into
blood, not those that were under ground: but here sea and rivers and fountains,
and all are become blood: still to show how thoroughly the plagues should come
home.

At these plagues there is mention of the Angel of the waters, ver. 5. which,
since all the Angels here are characted in the garb of Priests, as has been
said, may also be understood as alluding to that Priest whose office it was to
have care of the waters, and to look that there should be water enough and
fitting for the people to drink, that came up to the three Festivals: Among the
offices of the Priests at the Temple this was one. Maym. in Kele Mikdash per.
7. and Nicodemus whom the Talmud speaks of was of this office, Aboth R. Nathan
per. 6.

The fourth Vial poured into the sun brings scorching heat; this seems to
allude to Joshua's or Deborah's day, when the stars from heaven fought: the
sun standing still so long did not only give light to Israel, but probably
heat and faintness to the Canaanites, and Psalm. 121 6 seems to refer
thither, The sun shall not smite thee by day.

As in the fourth they are plagued by the sun, so in the fifth, by want of it.
The seat of the Beast darkened as Pharoahs Throne and Kingdom was: and this
darkness bringing horror and pains; as Egypts did through dreadful
apparitions in the dark.

The drying up of Euphrates for the Kings of the East, under the sixth Vial,
seems to speak much to the tenor of the sixth Trumpet, the loosing of the four
Angels which were bound at Euphrates. Those we conceived the Turks to plague
Christendom; these we may conceive enemies to plague Antichrist. The allusion
in the former seems to be to the four Kings from beyond Euphrates, that came to
scourge Canaan, Genesis 14. this to the draining of Euphrates for Cyrus and Darius
to take Babylon. For having to treat here of a Babylon, as ver. 19. the scene
is best represented, as being laid at the old Babylon. Now the Historians that
mention the taking of Babylon by Cyrus, tell us it was by draining the great
stream of Euphrates, by cutting it into many little channels.

The Egyptian plague of frogs is here translated into another tenor, and that
more dangerous; three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the
Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet: spirits of devils working miracles, etc. This
is named betwixt the sixth and seventh Vial [though the acting of the
delusions by miracles were all the time of the Beast and false Prophet] because
of the judgment now coming: for though all deluders and deluded received their
judgments in their several ages, yet being here speaking of the last
judgments of Antichrist, they are all summed together. He is here called the
false Prophet, as being the great deluder of all. The fruit of all these
delusions is to set men to fight against God: whose end is set forth by
allusion to the Army of Iabin King of Canaan, Judge. 5.19. broken at the waters
of Megiddo. The word Armageddon signifies a mountain of men cut in pieces. Here
that solemn caution is inserted, Behold I come as a thief: Blessed is he that
watches and keeps his garments: The Priest that walked the round of the
Temple guards by night, had torches born before him, and if he found any asleep
upon the guard he burnt his clothes with the torches, Middoth per. 1. halac. 2.

The seventh Vial concludes the Beasts destruction. The great City is said to
be divided into three parts: either as Jerusalem was, Ezekiel. 5.11, 12. a third
part to pestilence, a third part to the sword, and a third part to dispersion,
and destruction in it: or because there is mention of an Earthquake, this
speaks its ruining in general, as Zech. 14.4, 5. A tenth part of it fell
before, Chap. 11.13. and now the nine parts remaining fall in a tripartite
ruin.

REVEL. CHAP. XVII.
MYSTICAL Babylon pictured with the colors of the old Babylon, Rome so called,
as being the mother of Idolatry, as Babel was the beginning of Heathenism: and
the mother of persecution, Babylon destroyed Jerusalem, so did Rome, and made
havoc of the Church continually.

She is resembled to a woman dockt with gold, etc. as Isa. 14.4. sitting upon a
seven-headed and ten-horned Beast; as Chap. 13.1. Which Beast was and is not
and yet is, it shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and shall go to
perdition. Rome under the Papacy was not the same Rome it had been, and yet it
was: Not Rome Heathen and Imperial as it had been before, and yet for all
evil, Idolatry, persecution, etc. the same Rome to all purposes. It is plainly
described as sitting upon seven hills, upon which there is hardly a Roman Poet
or Historian, but makes a clear comment. The seven heads denoted also seven
Kings or kinds of Government that had passed in that City: Five are fallen,
ver. 10. Kings, Consuls, Tribunes, Dictators, Triumvirs: and one then was when
John wrote, namely Emperors: And one not yet come, Christian Emperors, which
continued but a short space before the Beast came which was and is not. He is
the eight and he of the seven: They that hold Rome to be the fourth Monarchy in
Daniel, cannot but also hold from this place, that that Monarchy is not yet
extinct. The ten horns upon the Beast in Dan. 7.24. are ten Kings arising and
succeeding one another in the same Kingdom: but here at ver. 12. they are ten
several Kingdoms, all subject to the Beasts both Imperial and Papal, but at
last shall rise up against the mystical Whore and destroy her. It is like
there must yet be conversion of some Kingdoms from the Papacy, before it fall.

REVEL. CHAP. XVIII, XIX. to Ver. 11.
AN Elegy and a Triumph upon the fall of Babylon: The former Chap. 18. almost
verbatim from Isa. 13. and 14. and 21. and 34. and Ier. 51. and Ezekiel. 27. The
later also, Chap. 19. the phrase taken from the old Testament almost every
word. The triumphant Song begins with Halleluja several times over. The word
is first used at the later end of Psalm. 104. where destruction of the wicked
being first prayed for, Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let
the wicked be no more, he concludes with, Bless thou the Lord O my soul.
Hallelujah.

The observation of the peoples saying over the great Hallel at the Temple [or
their great Song of praise] does illustrate this. The Hallel consisted of
several Psalms, viz. from the 113th to the end of the 118th, and at very many
passages in that Song, as the Priests said the verses of the Psalms, all the
people still answered Hallelujah: Only here is one thing of some difference
from their course there, for here is Amen Hallelujah, ver. 4. whereas It is a
tradition That they answered not Amen in the Temple at all: What said they
then? Blessed be the Name of the glory of his Kingdom for ever and ever. Jerus.
in Beracoth fol. 13. col. 3. But the promises of God which are Yea and Amen,
being now performed, this is justly inserted; as Christ for the same cause in
this Book is called Amen, Chap. 3.14.

The marriage of the Lamb is now come, and his Wife is ready, ver. 7. the
Church now completed.

REVEL. CHAP. XIX. from Ver. 11. to the end of the Chapter.
HEre begins a new Vision, as it appears by the first words, And I saw heaven
opened: and here John begins upon his whole subject again, to sum up in brief
what he had been upon before. Observe what is said in ver. 19. I saw the Beast,
and the Kings of the earth, and their Armies gathered together to make war
against him that sat on the horse, and against his Army: and observe withal,
that there is the story of the destruction of the Beast before Chap. 18. and of
the marriage, and marriage Supper of the Lamb before, Chap. 19.7, 8, 9.
therefore the things mentioned here cannot be thought to occur after those:
this therefore is a brief rehearsal of what he had spoken from the twelfth
Chapter hither, about the battle of Michael and his Angels with the Dragon and
his Angels.

REVEL. CHAP. XX.
THe preceding Section spoke what Christ did with the Beast and those that
carried his mark: he fought against them always, and when he saw his time,
destroyed them: here the holy Ghost tells us what he did with the devil that set
them on: You heard of Christ fighting with the Dragon, Chap. 12. and the Dragon
foiled and cast out, sets to prosecute the Woman's seed: but what course takes
he for that? He resignes his Throne, and Power, and Authority, to the Beast
Rome, and it must do, and it did his business for him, Chap. 13.3. and how
thoroughly it did its masters work, is showed all along from that place forward.
But what becomes of the old Dragon the master of mischief? He sits by, as it
were, and looks on while his game is played, and hisses on his Deputy Rome,
first Imperial, then Papal. They at the last receive their due wages for
their work, Imperial and Papal go to perdition. But what must become of the
Dragon that set them on? It would be very improper to tell so largely of the
fearful vengeance and destruction upon the agents, and to say nothing of the
principal and chief mover. That therefore is done here, and this Chapter takes
at Chap. 13.3. and tells you what became of the old Dragon after the resigning
of his Throne to the Beast: namely that he sat not at his own quiet as if
Michael had nothing to do with him, or let him alone, having so much to do with
his instruments, but that he curbed and destroyed both principal and agent, and
cast them both together into the bottomless pit.

The Devil had two ways of undoing men; the Church by persecution, the world
by delusion of Oracles, Idolatry, false miracles, and the like. His managing of
the former by his Deputies the former Chapters have related, and how they sped
in his service: and this comes to tell how he speeds about the other. The great
Angel Michael, the Lord Christ, who has the key of the bottomless pit in his
hand, as Chap. 1.18. chains him by the power of the Gospel, that he should no
more deceive the Nations for a thousand years: Weigh the phrase, Not deceive
the Nations: it is not not persecute, but not deceive; nor is it the Church,
but the Nations. His persecuting of the Church has been storied before: and
here is told how he is curbed for deceiving the Nations, and indeed when he
deputed Rome, and let that loose for the former, he was chained up as for the
later. It is easily construed how Satan deceived the Nations, by Idols which
are called a lie, Isa. 44.20. Romans 1.25. by his Oracles in which was no light,
Isa. 8.20. and by magical miracles, which were mere delusion. Hence the world
for the time of Heathenism, is said to be in his Kingdom of darkness, Act.
26.18. Colos. 1.13, etc. Now the spreading of the Gospel through the world
ruined all these before it, and dissolved those cursed spells and charms of
delusion, and did as it were chain up Satan that he could no more Deceive the
Nations (...) The Heathen as he had done, by these deceits: so that the words
speak the ending of Satan's power in Heathenism, and the bringing in of the
Gentiles to the knowledge of the truth, out of darkness and delusion.

The date of this his chaining up was a thousand years: Now the Jews counted
the days of the Messiah, a thousand years, as we touched before. The Babylon
Talmud in Sanhedrin in the Chapter Helek does show their full opinion about the
days of Messiah, and amongst other things they say thus: as Aruch speaks their
words in voce (...) It is a tradition of the house of Elijah, that the
righteous ones that the blessed God shall raise from the dead, they shall no
more return to their dust, but those thousand years that the holy blessed God
is to renew the world, he will give them wings as Eagles, and they shall flee
upon the waters. The place in the Talmud is in Sanhedrin fol. 92. where the
text indeed has not the word thousand, but the marginall gloss has it, and
shows how to understand the thousand years. And Aruch speaks it as a thing of
undeniable knowledge and intertainment. And so speaks R. Eliez^r in Midras
Tillin fol. 4. col. 2. The days of the Messiah are a thousand years.

As John all along this Book does intimate new stories by remembering old ones,
and uses not only the Old Testament phrase to express them by, but much
allusion to customs, language and opinions of the Jews, that he might speak, as
it were, closer to them and nearer their apprehensions, so does he here and
forward. This later end of his Book remembers the later end of the Book of
Ezekiel. There is a resurrection Ezekiel. 37. Gog and Magog, Ezekiel. 38. and 39. and
a new Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 40. and forward. So here a resurrection, ver. 5. Gog and
Magog, ver. 8. and a new Jerusalem, Chap. 21. and 22.

There a resurrection, not of bodies out of the grave, but of Israel out of a
low captived condition in Babel. There a Gog and Magog, the Syrogrecian
persecutors, Antiochus and his house: and then the description of the new
Jerusalem, which as to the place and situation was a promise of their restoring
to their own Land, and to have Jerusalem built again, as it was indeed in the
days of Ezra and Nehemiah: but by the glory and ^^rgenesse of it [as it is
described, more in compass then all the Land of Canaan,] they were taught to
look further, namely at the heavenly or spiritual Jerusalem, the Church through
all the world.

Now the Jews according to their allegorical vein, applied these things to the
days of Christ thus: that first there should be a resurrection caused by
Messiah of righteous ones, then he to conquer Gog and Magog, and then there
must come (...) The brave world to come that they dreamed of: Beside what they
speak to this tenor in the Talmudick Treatise last cited, there is this
passage in Ierus. Megillah fol. 73. col. 1. They are applying particular parts
of the great Hallel to particular times [what the great Hallel was, we showed a
little before.] And that part, say they, I love the Lord because he has heard
me, refers to the days of Messiah: that part, Tie the sacrifice with cords; to
the days of Gog and Magog. And that, Thou art my God and I will praise thee:
refers to the world to come.

Our Divine Apocalyptick follows Ezekiel with an Allegory too, and in some of
his expressions alludes to some of theirs, not as approving them, but as
speaking the plainer to them by them: Here is a resurrection too, but not of
bodies neither, for not a word of mention of them, but of souls. The souls of
those that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, lived and reigned, ver. 4.
and yet this is called The first resurrection, ver. 5.

The meaning of the whole let us take up in parts. There are two main things
here intended. First, to show the ruin of the Kingdom of Satan, and secondly,
the nature of the Kingdom of Christ. The Scripture speaks much of Christ's
Kingdom, and his conquering Satan, and his Saints reigning with him; that
common place is briefly handled here: That Kingdom was to be especially among
the Gentiles, they called in unto the Gospel. Now among the Gentiles had been
Satan's Kingdom most settled and potent, but here Christ binds him and casts him
into the bottomless pit that he should deceive no more [as a great cheater and
seducer cast into prison] and this done by the coming in of the Gospel among
them. Then as for Christ's Kingdom I saw Thrones, says John, and they sat upon
them, etc. ver. 4. here is Christ and his inthroned and reigning. But how do
they reign with him? Here John faceth the foolish opinion of the Jews of their
reigning with the Messiah in an earthly pomp; and shows that the matter is of a
far different tenor: that they that suffer with him shall reign with him,
they that stick to him, witness for him, dye for him, these shall sit
inthroned with him. And he names beheading only of all kinds of deaths, as
being the most common: used both by Jews and Romans alike, as we have observed
before at Acts 12. out of Sanhedr. per. 7. halac. 3. And the first witness for
Christ, John the Baptist, died this death. He says that such live and reign
with Christ the thousand years, not as if they were all raised from the dead at
the beginning of the 1000 years, and so reign all together with him those years
out, as is the conceit of some [as absolute Judaism as any is, for matter of
opinion] but that this must be expected to be the garb of Christ's Kingdom all
along, suffering and standing out against sin, and the mark of the Beast and
the like: whereas they held it to be a thousand years of earthly bravery and
pompousnesse.

But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were
finished: This is the first resurrection: Not that they lived again when the
thousand years were finished, but it means that they lived not in this time
which was the time of living, when Satan was bound, and truth and life came
into the world: The Gentiles, before the Gospel came among them, were dead, in
Scripture phrase, very copiously: Ephesians. 2.1, 2. and 4.18, etc. but that
revived them, Ioh 5.25. This is the first resurrection, in and to Christ's
Kingdom: the second is spoken of at the 12th verse of this Chapter that we are
upon. Paul uses the same expression to signify the same thing, namely a
raising from darkness and sin by the power of the Gospel, Romans 11.15. Now when
this quickening came among the Gentiles, Satan going down, and Christ's Kingdom
advanced, and the Gospel bringing in life and light, as Ioh. 1.4. those that
did not come and stick close to Christ and bear witness to him, but closed
with the mark of the Beast, sin and sinful men, these were dead still and
lived not again till the thousand years were finished, that is, while they
lasted, though that were a time of receiving life.

Blessed therefore and holy are they that have part in this first resurrection,
for on them the second death has no power, ver. 6. The second death is a
phrase used by the Jews. Onkelos renders Deuteronomy. 33.6. thus, Let Reuben live and
not die the second death. And Jonathan, Isa. 65.6. thus, Behold it is written
before me, I will not grant them long life, but I will pay them vengeance for
their sins, and deliver their carcases to the second death. And ver. 15. The
Lord will slay them with the second death.

Observe in the Prophet that these verses speak of the ruin and rejection of
the Jews, now a cursed people, and given up to the second death: and in Chapter
66. ver. 29, 30, 31. is told how the Lord would send and gather the Gentiles to
be his people, and would make them his Priests and Levites: And then see how
fitly this verse answers those. In stead of these cursed people, these are
blessed and holy, and might not see the second death, and Christ makes them
Priests to himself and his Father.

In this passage of John scorn is put again upon the Jews wild interpretation
of the resurrection in Ezekiel. They take it literally, think some dead were
really raised out of their graves, came into the Land of Israel, begat
children, and died a second time: Nay they stick not to tell who these men
were, and who were their children. Talm. Babyl. in Sanhedr. ubi supra.

After the thousand years are expired, Satan is let loose again, and falls to
his old trade of the deceiving the Nations again, ver. 8. Zohar. fol. 72. col.
286. has this saying: It is a tradition, that in the day when judgment is
upon the world, and the holy blessed God sits upon the Throne of judgment,
then it is found that Satan that deceives high and low, he is found destroying
the world, and taking away souls. When the Papacy began, then Heathenism came
over the world again, and Satan as loose and deceiving as ever: then Idolatry,
blindness, deluding oracularities and miracles as fresh and plenteous as
before: from the rising of the Gospel among the Gentiles these had been beating
down, and Satan fettered and imprisoned deeper and deeper every day: and though
his agent Rome bestird it self hard to hold up his Kingdom, by the horrid
persecutions it raised, yet still ^he Gospel prevailed and laid all flat. But
when the Papacy came, then he was loose again, and his cheatings prevailed and
the world became again no better then Heathen. And if you should take the
thousand years fixedly and literally, and begin to count either from the
beginning of the Gospel in the preaching of John, or of Peter to Cornelius the
first inlet to the Gentiles, or of Paul and Barnabas their being sent among
them, the expiring of them will be in the very depth of Popery; especially
begin them from the fall of Jerusalem, where the date of the Gentiles more
peculiarly begins, and they will end upon the times of Pope Hildebrand, when if
the devil were not let loose, when was he?

He calls the enemies of the Church, especially Antichrist, Gog and Magog: the
title of the Syrogrecian Monarchy, the great persecutor, Ezekiel. 38. and 39. [
Pliny mentions a place in Caelosyria that retained the name Magog, lib. 5. cap.
23.] So that John from old stories and copies of great troubles transcribeth
new, using known terms from Scripture, and from the Jews language and notions,
that he might the better be understood: So that this Chapter contains a brief
of all the times from the rising of the Gospel among the Gentiles to the end of
the world, under these two sums, first the beating down of Idolatry and
Heathenism in the earth till the world was become Christian, and then the
Papacy arising does Heathenize it again. The destruction of which is set down,
ver. 9. by fire from heaven, in allusion to Sodom, or to 2 King. 1.10, 12. and
it is set close to the end of the world: the Devil and the Beast [ Rome
imperiall] and the false Prophet [ Rome Papall] are cast into fire and
brimstone, ver. 10. where John speaks so, as to show his method, which we have
spoken of. The devil was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the
Beast and the false Prophet are: He had given the story of the beast and false
Prophet, the devils agents, and what became of them, Chap. 19. v. 20. And now
the story of the devil himself: for it was not possible to handle these two
stories but apart: and now he brings the confusion of all the three together,
and the confusion of all with them that bare their mark, and whose names were
not written in the Book of life.

REVEL. CHAP. XXI.
THe Jerusalem from above described. The phrase is used by Paul, Gal. 4.26. and
it is used often by the Jews: Zohar fol. 120. col. 478. Rabbi Aba says, Luz is
(...) Jerusalem which is above, which the holy blessed God gives for a
possession, where blessings are given by his hand in a pure Land: but to an
impure Land no blessings to be at all. Compare Rev. 21.27, and 22.15. Midras.
Till. in Psalm. 122. Jerusalem is built as a City that is compact together. R.
Iochanan says, The holy blessed God said, I will not go into Jerusalem that is
above, until I have gone into Jerusalem that is below, etc.

Ezekiels Jerusalem, as we observed, was of a double signification, namely as
promising the rebuilding of the City after the Captivity, and foretelling of
the spiritual Jerusalem, the Church under the Gospel, and that most
especially: At that John takes at here, and that is the Jerusalem that he
describes. And from Isa. 65.17, 18. joyneth the creating new heavens and a new
earth; and so stateth the time of building this new Jerusalem, namely at the
coming in of the Gospel, when all things are made new, 2 Cor. 5.17. A new
people, new Ordinances, new Economy, and the old world of Israel dissolved.
Though the description of this new City be placed last in the Book, yet the
building of it was contemporary with the first things mentioned in it about the
calling of the Gentiles. When God pitched his Tabernacle amongst them, as he
had done in the midst of Israel, Levit. 26.11, 12. That Tabernacle is pitched
in the fourth and fifth Chapters of this Book: And now all tears wiped away and
no more sorrow, death nor pain, ver. 4. which if taken literally could refer
to nothing but the happy estate in heaven [of which the glory of this Jerusalem
may indeed be a figure] but here, as the other things are, it is to be taken
mystically or spiritually, to mean the taking away the curse of the Law, and
the sting of death and sin, etc. No condemnation to be to those that are in
Christ Jesus.

The passages in describing the City are all in the Prophets phrase, Ezekiel
and Isaiah: as compare these, The Bride the Lambs wife, ver. 9. Sing O barren
[Heathen] that did not bear, etc. Thy Maker is thine Husband, thy Redeemer,
etc. Isa. 54.1, 5.

Ver. 10. He carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high mountain.
Compare Ezekiel. 40.2.

That great City holy Jerusalem, etc. This referres to great dimensions of
Ezekiels Jerusalem; as also to the squarenesse, the three gates of a side, etc.
The glory of it described from thence, and from Isa. 58.8. and 60.2, 3. and
54.11, 12, etc. The wall of it 12000 furlongs square, or 1500 miles upon every
quarter, East, West, North and South 3000 miles about: and 1500 miles high.
Wall of salvation, Isa. 26.1. and 60.14.

The foundations of the walls garnished with twelve precious stones [see Isa.
54.11.] as the stones in the Ephod or holy Breastplate: three upon every side,
as these were three and three in a row: The first foundation stone here is the
Iaspar, the stone of Benjamin, for Paul's sake the great agent about this
building of the Church of the Gentiles: The Ierus. Talmud. in Peah, fol. 15.
col. 3. says expressly that the Iaspar was Benjamins stone, for it says,
Benjamins Iaspar was once lost [out of the Ephod] and they said Who is there
that has another as good as it? Some said, Damah the son of Nethina has
one, etc.

And I saw no Temple therein, etc. ver. 22. here this Jerusalem differs from
Ezekiels: that had a Temple, this none: and it is observable there, that the
platform of the Temple is much of the measures and fashion that the second
Temple was of, but the City of a compass larger then all the Land: which
helps to clear what was said before of the double significancy of those
things, they promised them an earthly Temple, which was built by Zerobabel, but
foretold a heavenly Jerusalem which is described here.

REVEL. CHAP. XXII.
FRom Ezekiel Chap. 47. and from several passages of Scripture besides, John
does still magnify the glory, happiness and holiness of the new Jerusalem:
Lively waters of clear Doctrine teaching Christ and life by him flowing through
it continually, Ezekiel. 7.1, 9. Cant. 4.15. The Tree of Life lost to Adam, and
Paradise shut up against him, to keep him from it, here restored. Then a curse,
here There shall be curse no more, ver. 3. See Zech. 14.11. (...) Anathema non
erit amplius, etc. He concludes, These sayings are faithful and true, so he
had said before at the marriage of the Lamb, Chap. 19.9. and again at his
beginning of the story of the new Jerusalem, Chap. 21.5. referring to the
several Prophecies that had been of these things, and now all those sayings
and Prophecies were come home in truth and faithfulness. He is commanded not
to seal his Book, as Daniel was, Dan. 12.4. because the time of these things
was instantly beginning, and Christ's coming to reveal his glory in avengement
upon the Jewish Nation and casting them off, and to take in the Gentiles in
their stead was now at the door, within three and an half or thereabout to
come, if we have conjectured the writing of this Book to its proper year. There
are two years more of Nero, and one of confusion in the Roman Empire in the
Wars of Otho, Vitellius and Vespasian, and the next year after Jerusalem falls.

And thus if this Book of the Revelation were written last of the Books of the
new Testament, as by the consent of all it was, then may we say, Now was the
whole will of God revealed and committed to writing, and from henceforth must
Vision and Prophecy and Inspiration cease for ever. These had been used and
imparted all along for the drawing up of the mind of God into writing, as also
the appearing of Angels had been used, for the further and further still
revealing of his will, and when the full revelation of that was completed,
their appearing, and revelations to men must be no more. So that this
Revelation to John was the topping up and finishing of all revelations. The
Lord had promised that in the last days [of Ierusalem] he would pour down of
his Spirit upon all flesh, Act. 2.17. And Christ promised to his Apostles, that
he would lead them into all truth, Ioh. 16.12.13. To look for therefore the
giving of those extraordinary gifts of the Spirit beyond the fall of Jerusalem
there is no warrant; and there is no need, since when the inspired penmen had
written all that the holy Ghost directed to write, All truth was written.

It is not to be denied indeed, that those that had these extraordinary gifts
before the fall of Jerusalem, if they lived after, had them after, for the
promoting of these ends for which they were given, but there is neither ground
nor reason whereupon to believe, that they were restored to the next
generation, or were or are to be imparted to any generation for ever. For as it
was in Israel at the first settling of their Church, so was it in this case in
the first settling of the Gospel. The first fathers of the Sanhedrin in the
wilderness, were endued with Divine gifts, such as we are speaking of, Numb.
11.25. but when that generation was expired, those that were to succeed in that
Function and employment, were such as were qualified for it by education, study
and parts acquired. So was it with this first age of the Gospel and the ages
succeeding. At the first dispersing of the Gospel, it was absolutely needful
that the first planters should be furnished with such extraordinary gifts, or
else it was not possible it should be planted. As this may appear by a plain
instance. Paul comes to a place where the Gospel had never come: he stays a
month or two and begets a Church, and then he is to go his way and to leave
them: Who now in this Church is fit to be their Minister? they being all alike
but very children in the Gospel: but Paul is directed by the holy Ghost to lay
his hands upon such and such of them, and that bestows upon them the gift of
tongues and Prophesying, and now they are able to be Ministers and to teach the
Congregation. But after that generation, when the Gospel was settled in all the
world, and committed to writing, and written to be read and studied: then was
study of the Scriptures the way to enable men to unfold the Scriptures and fit
them to be Ministers to instruct others: and Revelations and Inspirations
neither needful nor safe to be looked after, nor hopeful to be attained unto.
And this was the reason why Paul coming but newly out of Ephesus and Crete,
when he could have ordained and qualified Ministers with abilities by the
imposition of his hands, would not do it, but left Timothy and Titus to Ordain,
though they could not bestow those gifts: because he knew the way that the Lord
had appointed Ministers thence forward to be enabled for the Ministry, not by
extraordinary infusions of the Spirit, but by serious study of the Scriptures,
not by a miraculous, but by an ordinary Ordination. And accordingly he gives
Timothy himself counsel to study, 1 Timothy 4.13. though he were plentifully
endued with these extraordinary indowments, 1 Timothy 4.14. And Paul himself had
his Books for study, or he had them to no purpose, 2 Timothy 4.13.

And indeed it has been the way of God, he has instructed his people by a
studious and learned Ministry, ever since he gave a written word to instruct
them in. 1. Who were the standing Ministry of Israel all the time from the
giving of the Law to the Captivity into Babel? Not Prophets, or those inspired
men [for they were but occasional Teachers, and there were often long spaces
of time wherein no Prophet appeared] but the Priests and Levites that became
Learned in the Law by study, Deuteronomy. 33.10. Hos. 4* 6. Mal. 2.7. And for this end
as has been touched, they were disposed into 48 Cities of their own, as so
many Universities, where they studied the Law together, and from thence were
sent out into the several Synagogues to teach the people: and had the Tithes
paid them for their maintenance whilst they studied in the Universities, and
for their preaching in the Synagogues. And it may be observed that even they
that had the prophetic spirit did not only study the Scriptures themselves,
Josh. 1.8. Dan. 9.1. but sent the people for instruction to the Priests who
were students and the standing Ministry, Hag. 2.11. Mal. 2.7. 2. If you
consider the times under the second Temple, then it was utterly impossible that
the people should be taught but by a studious and learned Ministry; for the
spirit of Prophecy was departed, and the Scriptures were then in an unknown
tongue, to all but Students. And hence they had an interpreter in every
Synagogue to render into the Vulgar, what was read in the Law and the Prophets
in the Original. So that the Spirit of God inspired certain persons whom he
pleased to be the revealers of his will till he had imparted and committed to
writing what he thought fit to reveal under the Old Testament, and when he had
completed that, the holy Ghost departed, and such inspirations ceased. And
when the Gospel was to come in, then the Spirit was restored again, and
bestowed upon several persons for the revealing further of the mind of God,
and completing the work he had to do, for the settling of the Gospel, and
penning of the New Testament, and that being done, these gifts and inspirations
cease, and may no more be expected then we may expect some other Gospel yet to
come.

PARERGON. Concerning the FALL of JERUSALEM, AND The Condition of the Jews in
that Land after.
BEing come so near to the time of the destruction of Jerusalem, as that it is
but three years and an half and a little more from the time we have concluded
with unto it, and having so frequent occasion to mention that destruction, and
vengeance upon that Nation, as we have had: It may not be amiss to drive so
far further as to take a view of such a spectacle; not that we go about to
write the History of their Wars and ruin, which were but to transcribe
Josephus, who is in every man's hand, but to take a brief account of the times
thit^er, and of the condition of the Nation in that Land afterward, the History
of which is not altogether so obvious as the other: by both which we may not
only see the performance of those threatenings of vengeance, that had been so
abundantly given: but may the better judge wherein that vengeance did chiefly
consist.

Nero therefore, Vespasian comes General into Judea, to undertake that War:
A second Nebuchadnezzar; an instrument of the Lord raised up to execute his
vengeance upon that Nation, now the Nation of his curse, and to destroy their
City and Temple as the other had done. And as several strange occurrences
befell that destroyer, recorded in the Book of Daniel, so did diverse strange
things also befall this, recorded by the Roman Historians with one consent. As
Nilus flowing a handful higher on that day that he came into Alexandria, then
ever it did in one day before. A Vision that he had in the Temple of Serapis,
of his servant Basilides, who was known to be at that instant fourscore miles
off sick. And especially his healing of a blind man's eyes by anointing them
with his spittle, and curing a lame man's hand, by treading upon it with his
foot: To which may be added those that were accounted the presages of his
reigning, as a cypress tree in his ground, clean rooted up by the winds over
night, grew strait up again, and well in the morning. An Ox came and laid him
down at his feet, and laid his neck under his feet, at one time as he sat at
meat; and a dog came and brought him a dead man's hand, at another. Now not to
dispute whether all these things were true or no, nor by what power they were
wrought: certainly they set the man in the eyes of men, as a man of rarity: and
as he was designed by God for a singular work, so did these things make him to
be a man looked upon as one of some singular omen and fortune.

His work in the Jewish Wars this year was more especially in Galilee: where
first coming to Ptolemais, the men of Sipphoris, the greatest City there, come
peaceably and yieldingly to him; and they had done so indeed before to Cestius
Gallus. Josephus who afterward wrote the History of these Wars, was now a
great party in them, having fortified many Cities and places in Galilee, and
being the chiefest that in those parts stood against the Romans. First he
finds them work at Iotepata, which indures a very sharp siege, and puts the
Romans to very sharp service before it be taken: At last after about fifty
days siege Vespasian enters it, July 1. There Josephus himself is taken, and
foretells Vespasian that he should be Emperor. Iopp^ taken presently after, and
Tiberias yielded, and Taricheae taken and 6500 slain there. Gamala gained
October. 23. and diverse other places brought in this year either by storm or
surrender, which Josephus records the story of de Bello lib. 3. through the
whole Book: and lib. 4. to the end of the ninth Chapter which he concludes,
(...), Thus was all Galilee subdued.

Galilee, he falls this year to work in Iudaea, and indeed there the Jews fall
to bitter work among themselves. For all the unquiet spirits whom the War had
prosecuted and hunted from other parts, or whose turbulency desired to be in
action, were flocked hither; so that Jerusalem and Iudaea were filled full of
men and trouble: and quickly full of famine, blood and all manner of misery.
The doleful story Josephus gives at large, as also what the Romans did among
them this year, de Bello lib. 4. whither the reader may have recourse.

This year Nero died by his own hand, to escape public and more shameful
execution. In him ended the Blood and Family of the Caesar's: And now that
mystery of State was discovered, That an Emperor could be made, though not of
that Blood, and elsewhere then at Rome: and the misery of the State accrewed by
that discovery, when the longest sword did make the Emperor, and the trying
which was the longest, undid the Empire. The soldiery in Spain proclaimed
Galba to succeed him: against whom rises up Otho, and cuts him off when he was
now reigning, but in his seventh month, having only brought the Royalty into
his family; and himself to misery and ruin by it. When he was slain a common
soldier cut off his head, and putting his finger into his mouth [for he was
bald, and therefore he could not bear it by the hair] he carried it to Otho,
who gave it to the scum and black guard of the Camp, and they fixing it upon a
pole, carried it up and down in derision.

Vitellius rises up against him: and the determination of this competition was
not so speedy and unsensible as was that betwixt Galba and Otho: For Otho slew
Galba without any noise, and when himself had but three and twenty associates
at his first conspiring against him: But the present quarrel shook a good part
of the Empire, with sidings and preparations; and came to a pitched battle
before it came to an end. Otho's men lost the field, and when tidings of his
defeat came to him, he resolved to strive no longer, but to render up his
Empire and life together, and so slew himself. He reigned, if it may be called
a reign, but 95 days.

Daemones coming down from thence. And Jupiters Temple opened of its own accord
with horrid noise. And let this be reckoned for a prodigy too, Maricus a man of
an ordinary extraction among the Boii, raised a considerable number of men, and
proclaimed himself a God. He was soon overthrown and thrown to the wild
beasts, whom when they rent not in pieces, it heightened the peoples opinion in
thoughts that he was a God indeed; but Vitellius found another way to put him
to death, and so his Godship was spoiled.

There were diverse petty mutinies of the Armies, and destroying of Towns in
Italy and other parts before Vespasian stird: but when he stood up, there were
concussions that made all the Empire to shake, as it had hardly ever done
before. He was then in the East about the Wars of the Jews, as we have
touched instantly before: And there the Armies in Egypt, Iudaea and Syria swear
fealty to him in the month of July. And in a short time all the Provinces even
to Achaia did the like. The Legions in Maesia, Illyricum, Pannonia fall to him,
and letters are sent into Britain and Spain to move them to the like, and they
prevail with them.

Vitellius this while, follows his riotous courses: and marches toward Rome
with 60000 men in Arms, but in no discipline: and a rabble of Ruffians that
were of his roaring humor, exceeding that number. And these numbers were made
numberless, by the conflux of all sorts of people, out of the City to meet
him. Corn was trod down, the soldiers quarrelled: the people was abused
wounded and slain, and they had the face of a War among themselves. In such a
confused march they come into the City, and there take up their quarters, but
in all looseness, luxury and security.

At last Vespasians party breaks into Italy, and gives them a through Alarm: in
a short time they come to a battle at Cremona, where that poor Town is ruined,
and left as a monument of those combustions: and another memorial not to be
omitted, A son on the one party, killed his father on the other, and
perceived and deplored what he had done, as soon as he had done it. And thus
these tumults grew on to that height, that in fine they fight it out in Rome it
self, fire the Capitol, plunder the City, slay Vitellius, subdue his party, and
Vespasian becomes conqueror and Emperor. Think here of Matthew. 24.7.

Egypt: at Alexandria he receives tidings of his parties success, and thither
is such conflux of Friends, Ambassadors, and Allies, to congratulate and homage
him, that that City, though the second in the Empire, was little enough to
intertain the company gathered thither. Vitellius his fall was in December, the
later end of the last year: and Vespasian did wait in the beginning of this,
but till he could settle affairs there where he was, and till he might have
good weather at sea, and then he sets for Italy: and Titus his son parting with
him at Alexandria, sets for Judea, to make some end of those Wars.

And here we cannot but take in two passages for Chronology sake, which help
well to measure the time that we are just now upon. The one is this of Dion
Cassius, in the life of Vespasian. From the death of Nero to the reign of
Vespasian, there intercurred but one year and two and twenty days. And I write
this, least any should misreckon; giving the whole time to every one that
reigned. For they did not succeed one another, but one reigned in the time of
another: So that their years are not to be counted, by their succeeding one
another, but according to the exact course of the time it self.

The other is out of Josephus, who once and again tells that the fall of
Jerusalem was in the second year of Vespasian. De Bell. lib. 6. cap. 47* etc.
And yet in recording the story and times of the sacking of it, he does plainly
place it in that year, that the Roman Annals write Vespasians first: as it will
be obvious to observe, to any that peruseth them and him. His computation
therefore must be cast by his own counters: for he accounts the beginning of
his reign from the time that the Armies in the East proclaimed him, and swore
fealty to him: which was in July: and in September twelvemoneth after Jerusalem
was taken; at which time Vespasian was entered indeed upon a second year from
the time of his proclaiming; and according to this calculation it is that
Josephus reckons: whereas Vitellius was alive and fought it out many months
after Vespasian was proclaimed: therefore the Roman Fasti do very properly
begin his first year from the beginning of January, this year that we are upon.

Titus coming into Iudaea, and there gathering all his forces together,
marches against Jerusalem, and pitcheth his siege against it, when now the
Passover festival had called all the people of the Country in thither: For as
the turbulencies and intestine commotions in the bowels of the Empire it self
the last year, had given the Jews some respite from the Roman Armies, so had
they given them some boldness and security, seeing Vespasian and his Forces
were now forced to turn their faces another way; and they hoped they would
hardly have turned toward them again. How much they were deceived, Titus
without, and Famine and all miseries within did soon show them. What were the
passages in this siege, and what Famine, Pestilence, Civil slaughters, and
various kinds of death the besieged suffered in it, are so largely described
by Josephus, that it were but a needless rehearsal to speak of them: The end
was, that the Temple and City were raked up in ashes: eleven hundred thousand
perished in the siege; almost an hundred thousand taken prisoners, and the
Nation ruined from what they had been. That this desolation is phrased in
Scripture as the desolating of the whole world, [as we have had occasion to
observe diverse times by several passages that we have met withal referring
thereunto] it will appear no wonder, if we consider that it was the destroying
of the old peculiar Covenanted people; of the Lords own habitation, Ordinances,
and place chosen by him above, nay alone of all the places of the world, to put
his Name there. A people once highest in his favor, now deepest in his
displeasure: once blessed with his greatest dignations, above any, nay above
all the people under heaven, and now fallen under his heaviest indignation. A
people of his curse, and who have left their name for a curse to his chosen.
And a new world [as it were] now created, a new people made the Church, a new
Economy, and Old things past, and all things become new, 2 Cor. 5.17.

We are now upon a very remarkable and eminent Period; where should I write an
Ecclesiastical History, I should begin, as at the beginning of a new world:
not but that the Calling of the Gentiles had begun before, for the Gospel was
now gone through all the world: and the Jews were also given up before as to
the generality of them, when the holy Ghost calls them dogs, and a Synagogue of
Satan: but their State and Economy was not till now rooted up, nor the Divine
Ordinances once planted among them till now extinguished: and their casting off
sealed by the ruin of their City, dispersion of their Nation, and their final
obduration.

. I. The Desolation of the Temple and City.
THe Temple was burnt down, as Josephus a spectator sets the time, (...), On
the tenth day of the month Lous: which he says was a fatal day to the
Temple, for it had been burnt down by the Babylonians before on that day, De
Bell. lib. 6. cap. 27. And yet his Countrymen that write in the Hebrew tongue,
fix both these fatalities to the ninth day of that month which they call the
month Ab; and they account that day fatal for three other sad occurrences
besides: On the ninth day of the month Ab, say they, the decree came out
against Israel in the wilderness that they should not enter into the Land: On
it was the destruction of the first Temple, and on it was the destruction of
the second. On it the great City Bitter was taken, where there were thousands
and ten thousands of Israel, who had a great King over them [Ben Cozba] whom
all Israel, even their greatest wise men thought to have been Messiah: But he
fell into the hands of the Heathen, and there was great affliction, as there
was at the destruction of the Sanctuary. And on that day, a day allotted for
vengeance, The wicked Turnus Rufus plowed up the place of the Temple, and the
places about it, to accomplish what is said, Sion shall become a plowed field.
Talm. in Taanith. per. 4. halac. 6. Maymon. in Taanith per. 5.

It is strange men of the same Nation, and in a thing so signal, and of which
both parties were spectators, should be at such a difference: and yet not a
difference neither, if we take Josephus his report of the whole story, and the
other Jews construction of the time. He records that the Cloister walks
commonly called The Porches of the Temple, were fired on the eight day, and
were burning on the ninth, but that day Titus called a Council of War, and
carried it by three voices, that the Temple should be spared: but a new busling
of the Jews caused it to be fired, though against his will, on the next day:
Joseph. ubi supr. cap. 22, 23, 24. Now their Calendar reckons, from the middle
day of the three that fire was at it as from a Center: and they state the time
thus: It was the time of the evening, when fire was put to the Temple, and it
burnt till the going down of the Sun of the next day. And behold what Rabban
Iochanan ben Zaccai says: If I had not been in that generation I should not
have pitched it upon any other day but the tenth, because the most of the
Temple was burnt that day. And in the Jerusalem Talmud it is related that
Rabbi, and Joshua ben Levi fasted for it the ninth and tenth days both. Gloss.
in Maym. in Taanith per. 5.

Such another discrepancy about the time of the firing of the first Temple by
Nebuchadnezzar, may be observed in 2 King. 25.8, 9. where it is said, that In
the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month, came Nebuzaradan Captain of
the guard, and burnt the House of the Lord. And yet in Ierem. 52.12. it is said
to have been In the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month. Which the
Gomarists in the Babylon Talmud reconcile thus: It cannot be said on the
seventh day, because it is said On the tenth: Nor can it be said, On the tenth
day, because it is said On the seventh. How is it then? On the seventh the
aliens came into the Temple, and ate there and defiled it, the seventh, eight
and ninth days, and that day toward night they set it on fire: and it burnt
all the tenth day, and was the case also with the second Temple. Taanith fol.
29.

The ninth and tenth days of the month Ab on which the Temple was burnt down,
was about the two and three and twentieth of our July: and the City was taken
and sacked the eight day of September following: Joseph. ubi supr. cap. 47.
That day being their Sabbath day, Dion fol. 748.

After eleven hundred thousand destroyed and perished in the siege and sacking,
and ninety seven thousand taken prisoners, Titus commanded City and Temple to
be razed to the ground, only three of the highest Towers left standing,
Phasaelus, Hippicus and Mariamme, and the Western Wall of the City: those, that
they might remain as monuments of the strength of the place, and thereby of the
renown of the Roman Conquest: and this, that it might be of some use to the
Roman Garrison that was left there, which was the tenth Legion. Their chief
Captain was Terentius Rufus, a man of exceeding frequent mention in the Hebrew
Writers, but his former name a little shortened, yet a little added which makes
it long enough, for they constantly call him (...) Turnus Rufus the wicked one.
There are endless disputes betwixt him and R. Akibah mentioned, about the Jews
Law and Religion, and when he died R. Akibah married his widow, now become a
Proselytesse.

Amongst those that perished in the fate of the City, the names most famous,
were Iochanan, Simeon and Eleazar, the three ringleaders of sedition, names
famous for faction. But the person of the best rank that perished, was Rabban
Simeon, the President of the Sanhedrin, a man educated with Paul at the foot of
Gamaliel his father. The Sanhedrin had sitten at Iab^eh a long while, but the
Feast of the Passover had now brought them up to Jerusalem, and there he is
caught. The Bab. Talmud in the place lately cited, relates, that he was once in
danger, but one of the Roman Commanders was a means of his delivery: But at
last he was caught and slain, and in the Jews Martyrology he is set the first
of (...) The ten slain by the Kingdom: meaning ten eminent ones that were put
to death by the Romans. All the ten are reckoned by Midras Tillin upon Psalm. 9.
fol. 10. col. 3. He forgets not, says he, the cry of the poor: that is, he
forgets not the blood of Israel to require it of the Nations: nor the blood
of those Righteous ones that were slain: viz. Rabban Simeon the son of
Gamaliel, Rabbi Ismael the son of Elisha, R. Ishbab the Scribe, R. Hotspith the
Interpreter, R. Iose, R. Judah b^n Baba, R. Judah Hannachtom, R. Simeon ben
Azzai, R Hananiah ben Teradion, and R. Akibah. But the Author of ^semach David
reckoning up these, next after Rabban Simeon names Ananias the Sagan, or the
second Priest, and says that he was slain at the destruction of the City when
Rabban Simeon was slain. Of this Ananias Sagan there is mention in the Talmud
text several times: we will take but one instance, Shekalim per. 6. halac. 1.
There were thirteen worshippings or bowings in the Temple, but the house of
Rabban Gamaliel, and the house of Ananias Sagan made fourteen. The Sagan was,
as it were, Vice-Highpriest, the next to him in Dignity and Office, and is
sometimes called the Highpriest, as Luke 3.2. And it may be this was the man,
and bare that title, Act. 23.2, 4. the enemy of Paul, and whose character and
doom he reads, that he was a whited wall, and God would smite him: accomplished
when he perished in the fall of the City.

We may not omit the calculation of the time that the Jews make further, of the
Temples burning: When the first Temple was destroyed, say they, it was the
evening on the ninth of Ab, it was the going out of the year of release, and it
was the going out of the Sabbath: And so was it with the second Temple. Tal.
Bab. ubi supr. Observe, by their confession the Temple was burnt down upon the
Lords day, or on the Christian Sabbath. Fire put to it upon their Sabbath, and
it burnt all ours: And so the City fell upon their Sabbath, as was mentioned
out of Dion even now.

. II. The face and state of the Country after the Cities ruin.
WE will first begin at Jerusalem it self. It was laid so desolate, (...), That
travelers by could see no sign that it had been ever inhabited: they are the
words of Josephus De Bell. lib. 7. cap. 1. The Friars there, and the Maps here
with us, that point out places so punctually, as to tell you Here was Pilates
Palace, here the Highpriests, here the dolorous way, etc. must receive more
courtesy from your belief, then they can give proof to their assertion.

It appears by the constant and copious testimony of the Jews, that the City
and Temple were not only laid flat by fire, ruin, and demolishment, but that
Turnus Rufus brought a plow over them to make good that Prophecy, Zion shall
be plowed as a field: The plowman would find but rugged work: They allot it,
as observed before, to have been on the same day of the year, and so a
twelvemoneth at the least must intercede.

What the beauty of the place had been, needs no Rhetoric to set it forth, nor
what the populousness; the Temple, if there had been no other goodly
structures, was enough to speak the one, and the multitude of their Synagogues
the other: their own records sum them up to four hundred and threescore. R.
Phinehas in the name of R. Hoshaiah says there were 460 Synagogues in
Jerusalem, and every one had a house for the Book of the Law for the public
reading of that, and a house for the public teaching and explaining the
traditions. Jerus. Chetub. fol. 35. col. 3. which in Megillah fol. 73. col. 4.
and in R. Solomon upon the first of Isaiah are reckoned up to four hundred and
fourscore. But now not one relick left, of Temple, Synagogue, Midrash, House,
or any thing else but rubbish and desolation. Her people used this custom while
she stood, that on all other days of the year the unclean walked in the middle
of the street, and the clean by the houses sides, and the unclean said unto
them, Keep off: But on the days of the festivals, the clean walked in the
middle of the street, and the unclean by the house sides, and then the clean
bid Keep off. Jerus. Shekalin fol. 51. col. 1. But now where is that company,
that niceness, nay where are the streets? Titus himself some time after the
desolation, coming that way, could not but bemoan the fall of so brave a City,
and cursed the Rebels that had occasioned so fatal a destruction: Joseph. De
Bell. lib. 7. cap. 15.

How the Country near about was wasted with so long and terrible a siege, and
indeed the whole Country with so dreadful a War, it is easier conceived then
expressed. Josephus tells particularly much of it, and this thing for one, That
all the timber twelve miles about the City was cut down, and brought in to make
forts and engines for the siege, lib. 6. cap. 40.

We may take a view of the whole Country as to the surface and situation of it
in this prospective of their own: The Land [say they] that Israel possessed
that came out of Babylon, was these three Countries, Iudaea, Galilee and Beyond
Jordan, and these were severally tripartite again. There was Galilee the upper,
and Galilee the nether, and the Vale. From Caphar Hananiah upward, all that
bears not Sycamores, is Galilee the upper, and from Caphar Hananiah downward
all that does bear Sycamores is Galilee the lower, and the border of Tiberias
is the Vale. And in Iudaea, there is the Mountanous, and the Plain, and the
Vale. And the plain of Lydda is as the plain of the South, and the mountanous
thereof as the mountain royal: From Bethoron to the sea is one Region:
Sheviith per. 9. halac. 2. The Jerusalem Gomarists do add thus, What is the
vale in Galilee? The vale of Genezareth and the adjoining. What is the
mountanous in Iudaea? This is the mountain royal; and the plain thereof is the
plain of the South, and the vale is from Engedi to Jericho. And what is the
mountanous beyond Jordan? R. Simeon ben Eleazar says, The hills of Macvar, and
Gedor: And the plain thereof Heshbon and all her Cities, Dibon, Bamoth Baal,
and Beth Baal Meon. And the vale is Beth Haran, and Beth Nimrah. Sheviith fol.
38. col. 4.

It were endless to trace the footsteps of the War particularly in all these
places, let Josephus be consu^ted for that: we may say in short, that hardly
any considerable plac^ escaped, but such as were peaceable, or such as were
unaccessible. Of the later sort the mountanous of Judah was the chiefest place,
Josh. 21.1. Luke 1.39. (...) The mountain royal, as the Hebrew Writers do
commonly call it [a place incredibly populous as they testify, Ierus. Taanith
fol. 69. col. 1.] Hither Christ gives his Disciples warning before hand to
flee, when these evils should come, Matthew. 24.16. Which warning we cannot judge
but they took, and so planted here as in a place of safety by his warrant.

Though therefore the Country were extremely wasted, with so long and so
furious a War, yet was it not utterly waste, nor the Nation destroyed from
being a people, though it were destroyed from being what it had been. Those
places and persons that had quietly submitted to the Roman power, if they had
escaped the fury of their own seditions ones, were permitted to live in quiet,
yea to enjoy their own Religion and Laws, they in the mean while demeaning
themselves as peaceable subjects, to that power that had brought them under.
And for one acknowledgement of that subjection, they were enjoined to pay that
Didrachma or half shekel that they usually paid to the Temple for their lives,
to Jupiter Capitolinus, Xiphil. apud Dionem. page 748.

Their Sanhedrin continued in the same luster and state, as it had done for
many years before the City fell: and their Synagogues in the same posture, and
their Religion in the same condition, save only those parts of it, which were
confined to Jerusalem, which was now in the dust. And generally the places and
people that had escaped the War, if they would live quiet, did enjoy their
quietness, as well as men could do in a Land in such a condition as into which
it was now brought.

. III. The Sanhedrin sitting at Iabneh: Rabban Iochanan ben Zaccai President.
ALthough Rabban Simeon the President of the Council, was caught in Jerusalem
as in a trap, and so lost his life, yet Rabban Iochanan ben Zaccai his Vice
President, and who was also then in the City with him, made a shift to escape.
He spoke and acted for Caesar as much and as long as he durst, and when he saw
he could no longer be in safety in the City, he caused his Scholars R. Joshua
and R. Eliezer to carry him forth upon a Bier as a dead corpse [for a dead corpse
might not rest in Jerusalem all night, and so he escaped and was brought to
Caesar.] Thus R. Nathan tells the story, Avoth per. 4. This Rabban Iochanan
forty years ago, when the Temple doors flew open of their own accord, foresaw
its ruin in that presage, and accordingly applied that saying of the Prophet
Zechary, Open thy doors O Lebanon that the fire may devour thy Cedars.
Therefore when he saw the enemy now so straightly besieging the City, and such
forerunners of ruin apparent, it is no wonder if he used all persuasion to the
people to yield and to save their City, as the same Author also tells us he did,
and if he went and gave himself up to him that he knew should be Conqueror.
Nor needed he any Prophetic spirit to foresee these things, but the very
sickly condition and distemper of the Nation might plainly enough tell him,
that her death could not be far off.

He finding favor with Caesar, petitioned of him, that the Sanhedrin might
repair to its old place Iabneh, and there settle, and he obtained it. Iabneh
was near unto Ioppa upon the sea coast: there is mention of it, 2 Chronicles. 26.6.
Here had the Sanhedrin sitten as we have mentioned, many years before the
Temple fell, a good part of Gamaliels time, and all Rabban Simeons his son.

He sat President here five years: and these are the men of note that sat
with him: Rabban Gamaliel, son to Rabban Simeon that was slain at the fall of
the City: R. Zadok, one who had spent his body with extreme fasting since the
Temple doors had opened of their own accord, taking that for an omen of its
ruin approaching: R. Eliezer his son: R. Judah and R. Joshua the sons of
Betirah: R. Eliezer ben Hyrcanus the Author of Pirke Eliezer: R. Ioshuah, R.
Eliezer ben Erech, R. Ismael, R. Iose, R. Simeon ben Nathaniel, R. Akibah, and
diverse others, who outlived Rabban Iochanan the most of them a long time. They
made many Decretals in his time, especially about those things that had had
immediate reference to the Temple, as see Rosh hashanah per. 4. Shekalim per.
1* etc.

. IV. The Sanhedrin still at Iabneh: Rabban Gamaliel President.
WHen Rabban Iochanan died, Rabban Gamaliel succeeded him in the Presidency
seven years. He is commonly called by the Hebrew Writers (...) Rabban Gamaliel
of Iabneh. But for the right stating of his Presidency there, two things are to
be observed. The first is mentioned in Babyl. in Rosh hashanah fol. 31.1, 2.
where all the flittings of the Sanhedrin are reckoned in the Gomara thus: From
the room Gazith it flitted to the Taberna [in the mountain of the Temple] from
the Taberna into Jerusalem, from Jerusalem to Iabneh, from Iabneh to Osha or
Vsha, from Osha to Shepharaam, from Shepharaam to Beth Shaaraim, from Beth
Shaaraim to Tsipporis, and from Tsipporis to Tiberias. Now the marginall Gloss
teaches us how to understand these removes. When the President was in any of
these places, says it, the Sanhedrin was with him, and when he or his son
w^nt to another place, it went after him. It was at Iabneh in the days of
Rabban Iochanan, at Vsha in the days of Rabban Gamaliel, but they returned
from Vsha to Iabneh again: but in the days of Rabban Simeon his son it went
back again [to Vsha.] So that the time that Rabban Gamaliel sat at Iabneh
instantly upon Rabban Iochanans death, was not long, but he went to Vsha, and
his time at Vsha was not long neither, but to Iabneh again. And as we are to
observe thus about his time and place, so there is a second thing to be taken
notice about him, and that is the mixture of his Presidency.

The Talmudists do speak often (...) Of placing R. Eliezer the son of Azariah
in the Presidency. Tsemach David speaks it out thus: R. Eliezer ben Azariah was
a Priest, and was exceeding rich: he was made President in the room of Rabban
Gamaliel, but afterward they were joined in the Presidency together: which is
still obscure enough; but the Jerusalem Gomarists give the full story in
Taanith fol. 67. col. 4. in these words: A certain scholar came and asked R.
Joshua, What is evening prayer? He answered, A thing arbitrary. The same
scholar came and asked Rabban Gamaliel, What is evening prayer? and he said, A
bounden duty. He says to him, But R. Joshua says it is a thing arbitrary. He
says to him, To morrow when I come into the Congregation, stand forth and ask
this question: So the scholar did ask Rabban Gamaliel, What is evening prayer?
He answered, A bounden duty. How then, says the scholar, does R. Joshua say it
is a thing arbitrary? Rabban Gamaliel says to R. Joshua, Art thou he that
says it is a thing arbitrary? He answered, No. He says to him, Stand upon thy
feet that they may bear witness against thee. R. Joshua stood upon his feet,
whilst Rabban sat and was expounding, so that all the Congregation repined at
him [for making him to stand so.] And they said to R. Hotspith the Interpreter,
Dismiss the people, and they said to R. Zinnun the Minister say Begin, and
they said all Begin, and stood upon their feet too. And they said to him
[Rabban Gamaliel] Against whom has not thy mischief passed continually? They
went presently and made R. Eliezer ben Azaria President, who was but sixteen
years old, but very grave. R. Akibah sat by and took it ill, and said, It is
not because he is better studied in the Law then I, that he is thus preferred,
but because he is nobler born then I. Happy is the man who has Ancestors to
priveledge him. Happy is the man that has a nail to hang upon. And what was
the nail that R. Eliezer ben Azaria had? He was the tenth from Ezra. How many
benches of scholars were there sitting there then? R. Jacob bar Susi says
Fourscore besides the people that stood behind them. R. Iosi ben R. Bon says
Three hundred. Rabban Gamaliel went presently to every one at his own home and
sought to pacify him, etc. So that by this it appears how and why Gamaliel was
outed out of his Presidency, namely for his pride and passion [of which we
might show you other examples also] but he was restored again to be partner in
the dignity with R. Eliezer whom they promoted now.

There is exceeding much mention of this Gamiliel in the Talmuds, and he is a
very busy man there: the Reader there meets with him as often as with any one
man whosoever. He had a servant named Tobi very often spoken of, whose eye he
struck out, and let him go free for it: when he died he much bemoaned and
commended him. Beracoth per. 2. halac. 6. Whilst he sat at Iabneh, in his
curiosity for the exquisite taking of the new Moons, he had scored upon his
wall several forms and appearances of it, and those that came to bear witness
that they had seen the new Moon he brought thither, and asked, How saw you it?
In this form, or this, or the other, etc. Rosh hashanah per. 1. hal. 8.

. V. The Sanhedrin still at Iabneh. R. Akibah President.
THe twelve years of Rabban Iochanan and Rabban Gamaliel, raught from the
second year of Vespasian, when the Sanhedrin was first settled at Iabneh, to the
second year of Domitian: there begins R. Akibah his Presidency, and sat forty
years, namely to the time of the sacking of the Town Bitter or Beth tar, which
the Jews generally fix fifty two years after the fall of the Temple, or at most
fifty five: So that he sat all the time of Domitian and Trajan, to the 5th or
at most the 8th year of Hadrianus.

His time was a troublesome time with the Jews. In Domitians days, Iudaicus
fiscus praeter caeteros acerbissime actus, Above all others the Jews were
plagued with taxes and confiscations. Sueton in Domit. cap. 12. where he adds,
I remember when I was a boy, I was present when a man of 90 years old was
searched before a great company whether he were Circumcised or no.

In Trajan's time was that horrid insurrection of the Jews, mentioned by Dion.
lib. 68. about Cyrene, where they murdered Romans and Greeks, to the number of
two hundred and twenty thousand; ate their flesh, devoured their intrails, and
dawbed themselves with their blood: And the like insurrection they made in
Egypt and Cyprus, and murdered to the number of two hundred and forty
thousand. Tsemach David makes Ben Coziba a chief leader in this business: who
if he were, received his just reward in the time of Hadrian. He took on him to
be Messiah; made himself a King, stamped Coin of his own: (...) Ierus. Maasa
Sheni fol. 52. col. 4. brought the Romans against him, who destroyed him and
the City Bitter, and multitudes of thousands of Jews with him. The Jews
commonly write it (...), but in Ierus. Taanith. fol. 68. col. 4. it is written
(...) Beth tar: which properly signifies the house of spies. And there a story
is told that makes it no better, of the great ones that had escaped at the
ruin of Jerusalem, and dwelt here, and intrapped any man that they saw go
toward Jerusalem. Eusebius Hist. lib. 4. cap. 6. calls it Betheka, and says it
was not far from Jerusalem: which Baronius boldly translates Bethlehem. The
Jews do character the doleful slaughter at this place as the saddest stroke
that ever they received, but the fall of Jerusalem. R. Akibah himself perished
in it, dotingly have become Armor bearer to Ben Coziba, as holding him to be
the Messiah. You may observe what kind of a Messiah they expect.

Dion tells that in this War Severus, whom Hadrian had sent to quell them,
took fifty of their strongest Garrisons, and destroyed nine hundred fourscore
and five fair Towns. And he also destroyed all the Olive trees in Iudaea.
Jerus. Peah. fol. 20. col. 1. How they themselves record the slaughter at Beth
tar, may be seen in the Jerusalem Talmud in Taanith, the place cited above, and
the Babylonian in Gittin fol. 57.2.

Whence their first tumultuating took its rise, is of some obscurity, only it
may be resolved into Gods just judgment upon them to stir to their own
ruin. Yet Spartianus speaking of their stirring in the time of Hadrian says,
it was because they were forbidden Circumcision. Moverunt ea tempestate and
Iudaei bellum quod vetabantur mutilare genitalia. In vit. Hadrian. Trajan put a
restraint upon Christianity and persecuted it. Plin. Epist. lib. 10. ep. 97. It
may be he did the like upon Judaism, and that might move them to an
insurrection. The horrid Massacres that they committed in Cyrene, Egypt and
Cyprus might be looked upon as a just judgment for his persecution of
Christianity, if multitudes of Christians did not also perish in those
slaughters, if Ben Coziba were ringleader in them: For Justin Martyr, Apol. 2.
says, that Barchochebas brought Christians only to torture, unless they would
deny Christ and blashheme him. And Eusebius. in Chron. Chochebas the ringleader of
the Jews, put to death with all exquisite torture those Christians that would
not assist him against the Romans. That is worth observing which is spoken by
Ierus. Ievamoth. fol. 9. col. 1. There were many that had retracted their
foreskin in the days of Bon Coziba, were Circumcised again: which R. Nissim
speaks out more at large: There were many Circumcised ones in the days of Ben
Coziba, who had retracted their foreskin perforce, in the Town of Bitter, but
the hand of Ben Coziba prevailed, and reigned over them two years and an half,
and they were Circumcised again in his days. In Alphes. in Iovam. fol 428.
their retracting their foreskin perforce speaks much like to that which was
mentioned before out of Spartianus.

In these times also [of Trajane I suppose] there was an Edict against the Jews
Ordination upon pain of death to him that did Ordain, and him that was
Ordained, and ruin of the place where any Ordination should be. Talm. Bab.
Avodah Zarah fol. 8.2.

And from the time of these tumults forward that began to take place which is
spoken in Ierus. Sanhed. fol. 24. col. 2. That in the days of R. Simeon ben
Iochai [who was now alive] the judging even in pecuniary matters was taken
away. In fol. 18. col. 1. This is said to have been in the days of Simeon ben
Shetah: but that is a mistake* which is corrected in the place cited.

Upon these wars and tumults Hadrian forbids the Jews to go to Jerusalem, or
so much as to look upon it from any hill where it might be seen. Eusebius. hist.
l. 4. c. 6.

Tryphon the Jew that has the long dispute with Justin Martyr, fled from these
Wars. Justin. Dial. cum Tryph. he might very well be R. Tarphon, a great
associate with R. Akibah, and one much mentioned in the Talmuds.

. VI. The Sanhedrin at Vsha and Sheparaam (...). Rabban Simeon President.
THus did the just vengeance of God follow the Nation, but far were they from
being rooted out, and as far from laying to heart any plague that light upon
them. Besides R. Akibah, we can hardly name you another of note that perished
in all those deadly combustions, though some of them were in the thickest of
the danger; but reserved as it seems as a further plague for the seduction of
their Nation. Some of their expressions about the sad slaughter at Bethtar or
Bitter are to this purpose: The horses waded in blood up to the nostrils: There
were slain 400000: And Adrian walled a Vineyard of 16 miles about with dead
bodies a man's height. And there were found the brains of 300 children upon one
stone, and three chests full of tattared Phylacteries containing three bushels
every chest. Rabban Simeon ben Gamaliel says there were 500 Schools, and to
the least there belonged 500 Scholars, and they said, If the enemy should come
against us we could prick out their eyes with our pens: But when it came to it,
they folded them all up in their books and burnt them, and there was not one of
them left but only I. Not that he reckons himself in the number of the
children, for he was now well in years, but that none of all that great
University was left but himself: And yet besides the eminent men that we have
named, there were R. Meir a great speaker in the Talmud, but most commonly
against the common vote. R. Simeon ben Iochai and Eleazar his son, the first
Authors of the book Zohar. R. Nathan the Author of Avoth. R. Iosi Galileus and
his son Eliezer. R. Iochanan ben Nuri. Ben Nanas. R. Joshua ben Korcha. R.
Eliezer ben Chasma: and why should we reckon more when Berishith Rabba makes
this Summa Totalis on Genesis 25. That R. Akibah had 24000 disciples. Of some
decretals made at Vsha, you may read Ierus. in Rosh hashan. fol. 58. col. 3.
Chetub. fol. 28. col. 3.

In these times of Hadrian which we are yet upon, Aquila the Proselyte was in
being and in repute. In Ierus. Chagig. fol. 77. col. 1. he is introduced
discoursing with Hadrian about the universe being supported by a Spirit. In
Megil. fol. 71. col. 3. It is said that Aquila the Proselyte interpreted the
Law before R. Eliezer and R. Joshua, and they highly commended him for it and
said, Thou art fairer then the children of men. By which it may be conjectured
what a translation this was, when these men so extolled it. The Jerusalem
Gemarists do cite his version, Megil. fol. 73. col. 2. Succah fol. 53. col. 4.
Ioma fol. 41. col. 1. and several other places.

Rabban Simeon now President, sat about thirty years, namely from about the
6th or 8th of Hadrian, to the 15th or 16th or thereabout of Antoninus Pius: the
honor and power of that Bench growing low and in the wane every day more then
other. This Rabban Simeon you have a great spokesman in the Talmud: his
grandfather of the same name that died with Jerusalem, is seldom introduced
speaking there: Once you have him swearing by the Temple, Cherithuth per. 1.
halac. 7.

. VII. The Sanhedrin at Bethshaaraim, Tsipporis and Tiberias. R. Judah
President.
UPon the death of Rabban Simeon, his son Rabbi Judah succeeded him: a man of
note equal with, if not above any named before him: he bare not the title of
Rabban as his Ancestors had done for five generations before him, yet had he
those appellations that dignified him equal with it: he was called sometimes
eminently Rabbi and no more: sometime R. Judah the holy: sometimes our holy
Rabbi: sometime R. Judah the Prince: and often in the Ierus. Talmud R. Iudan.
Vid. Ierus. Sanhedr. fol. 30. col. 1. where it speaks of all his Titles. There
are innumerable stories of him, we shall only pick up those that are most
pertinent to our present subject. Iuchasin. fol. 2. tells us that he was with
the 70 of the Sanhedrin in Bethshaaraim, Sipphoris and Tiberias, and Tiberias
was the tenth and last flitting that the Sanhedrin had. How long in
Bethshaaraim is uncertain, and little is mentioned of that place: but Sipphoris
(...) is famous: It was the greatest City of Galilee, Joseph. de Bell. lib. 3.
cap. 3. a place planted in a fruitful situation, for sixteen miles about it,
says Talm. Ierus. was a Land flowing with milk and honey. Biceurim fol. 64.
col. 2. Rabbi Judah sat here seventeen years, and he applied that to himself,
Jacob lived in the Land of Egypt seventeen years, and Judah lived in Tsipporis
seventeen years. There are these two memorable stories of this place: That a
Butcher cousened the Jews here with carcases and beasts torn, and made them eat
them, nay he made them eat dogs flesh. Ierus. Trumoth. fol. 45. col. 3. And
diverse of Tsipporis were glad to wear patches on their faces to disfigure them
that they might not be known when inquisition was made after them. Id. Ievamoth
fol. 15. col. 3. and Sotah fol. 23. col. 3. The numerous passages about the
Doctors and disputes and Scholastic actions in this place would be too tedious
to mention, though with the briefest touch we could.

From Tsipporis the Sanhedrin removed to Tiberias, upon the brink of the lake
of Genesaret. This was about eight or nine miles from Tsipporis. Id. Sanhed.
fol. 21. col. 1. the Jews hold it to be the same with Rakkath in Josh. 19.35.
Megil. fol. 70. col 1. And that Chammath there mentioned also, was a place that
joined to it. Erubbin fol. 23. col. 4. so called from the hot bathes there.
Bab. Megil. fol. 6.1. How long Rabbi sat here is uncertain.

Their Records do make him exceedingly in favor with Antoninus the Emperor,
but whether Pius or Philosophus they name not: it is generally held to be Pius:
whethersoever it was, there are abundance of discourses twixt R. Judah and him
dispersed in their Writings: and they stick not to tell you, that he became a
Proselyte, and when the Proselytes of righteousness shall come, in the world
to come, Antoninus shall come in the head of them. Jerus. Megil. fol. 74. col.
1. Antoninus Philosophus or Marcus Aurelius was the likelier to converse with
Scholars. R. Judah outlived them both, and Commodus also.

Two famous things, as that Nation reputed it, did this man in his time. First
he gathered up and compiled into one Volume all the traditionall Law that had
run from hand to hand to his time [the Mishnah that we have now in our hands]
which is the Jews great pandect according to which they live: He saw their
state wane daily more and more, and though they had now many Learned Schools,
yet their Cabbala or great stock of traditions, he thought might fail and be
lost, now the Sanhedrin failed, therefore he thought to make sure work, and
committed it to writing, that it might be preserved to the Nation, and so he
helped to rule them. And a second thing that he did, was, that he took care
that there should be (...) Scribes and Teachers of the Traditions in all the
Cities in the Land of Israel. Ierus. Chagigah fol. 76. col. 3. In the same
Tract, fol. 77. col. it is reported of him that at six portions of the
Scripture when he came to read them he wept. He compiled the Mishnah about the
year of Christ 190, in the later end of the reign of Commodus: or as some
compute in the year of Christ 220, an hundred and fifty years after the
destruction of Jerusalem.

. VIII. The Schools and Learned men after the death of Rabbi Judah.
BEsides the places where the Sanhedrin had sitten, which yet continued Schools
when it was removed, there were diverse other places that were great Schools and
copiously furnished with Learned men, both in Galilee and Iudaea: and hence
that distinction that the reader of the Jerusalem Talmud will meet with, of
(...) and (...) a Southern man and a Galilean. Chagig. fol. 79. col. 3. that
is, a Scholar of the one, or of the other. Hence there is mention of R. Jacob
(...) the Southern man. Erubh. fol. 24. col. 2. and the Elders of the South,
ibid. col. 3. R. Ioshuah of the South, Challah fol. 57. col. 2. Of all the
places in Iudaea, next Iabneh and Bitter, Lydda was most eminent, where R.
Akibah sat as President of a School, before he was of the Sanhedrin at Iabneh.
Rosh hashanah per. halac. 7. and this continued a School all along to these
times of Rabbi Judah: In Galilee there was Mugdala, Chammath, and Caesarea, if
you will reckon that in Galilee, besides others.

R. Judah left two sons behind him, Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Simeon: Rabban
Gamaliel was promoted in his fathers life time: but after R. Judah was dead R.
Chaninah sat chief, and that by R. Iudahs appointment, and with him were R.
Cha^ia, R. Hoshaiah Rabba, R. Joshua ben Levi, Kaphra, Bar Kaphra, Rabh and
Samuel, which two last went away to the University in Babylonia. This
generation is the first of the Gomarists, explaining the Mishnah, and producing
the opinions of the Ancients upon it.

After R. Chaninah, who sat ten years, R. Iochanan was President eighty years*
He compiled the Jerusalem Talmud, as is generally held, in the year of Christ
230 or thereabout, which was about the middle of the reign of Alexander
Mammaeae; yet there is that in the Talmud it self that would make you believe
that you meet with the name of the Emperor Dioclesian there. Beracoth fol. 6.
col. 1. (...) When King Docletinus [to speak it acording to the letters] came
hither, R. Chaiia, bar Abba was seen getting upon a grave to see him. Sheviith
fol. 38. col. 4. (...) Dicletianus afflicted the men of Paneas, etc. In Kilaim
fol. 38. col. 3. and Chetuboth fol. 35. col. 2. They say the Land of Israel was
encompassed with seven seas, and the last of them they name is (...) The sea of
Apamia. [The Samaritan version on Numb. 34.11, 10. renders Sepham, Apamia.] Now
this, they say, is the sea or lake Mahaz: (...) Dicletianus gathered the rivers
and made it. And it might very well be, that R. Iochanan that compiled the
Talmud might live beyond the times of Diocletian: but in Trumoth fol. 46. col.
3. this Dicletianus they speak of, is plainly asserted to be in the days of
Rabbi Judah haccadosh in this story: The sons of R. Judah princeps, beat Diclot
the swine-heard, who afterward was made a King. He comes to Paneas and sends
letters to the Rabbis, See ye be with me at the going forth of the Sabbath,
etc. When they come to him, he says to them, You despise the Kingdom: They
answer him, Diclot the swine-herd we despise, but Diocletianus the King we
despise not: which is far from meaning Dioclesian the Emperor. If this were
a place to dispute about the exact time of writing this Talmud, we might also
take into examination the meaning of (...) spoken of in Chagigah fol. 79. col.
4. whether it mean Denarius Gordiani or no, but we shall not insist upon that
here.

After the compiling of this Talmud there is little further mention of the
Schools or Scholars of Iudaea or Galilee [the Universities in Babylonia from
henceforward bearing all the renown] yet were they not utterly extinct: and out
of them at last arises the famous R. Hillel grandchild of R. Judah, who stated
the Jews Almanac into that posture in which it stands at this day: And Hierom
had for his help in the Hebrew tongue a learned man of Tiberias.

. IX. The posture and temper of the People.
HAving taken this brief account of their Scholastic and Magistratick History,
as also of some general occurrences that befell the Nation in these times, let
us a little observe the carriage and temper of the men, for the better
discerning of the Lords dispensing in reference to them, as a people of his
curse, rejection and abhorring. They themselves little thought it, but were yet
as proud and self-confident of their being the only people of God as ever; and
unless it were in their plague by Ben Coziba, a stander by, would hardly think
they lay under those curses that had been so often and so terribly denounced
against them: and it may yet appear the more strange, when we do consider the
settled way of their Religion, in which they walked with as much confidence and
security as ever. The Land full of Synagogues, these frequented every Sabbath,
and the second and fifth days of the week, their paying Tithes, observing
purifyings, clean and unclean meats and drinks, and in a word, all their Rites,
but what unseparably belonged to the Temple, in as settled a course as they had
done before the Temple fell. But in this very thing was their misery and the
vengeance upon them; and that which they accounted was their happiness, and
with which they sweetened their Captivity and desolation of their City, was that
very thing that was their unhappiness and undoing.

A double badge of reprobation they visibly carried, though themselves could
not see it, namely their doting upon their wretched Traditions, and their
rancour and enmity against the Gospel, besides what other brands of a curse may
be read upon them.

He that reads their Talmuds may observe this mark of perdition upon them in
every page, that the generations after the destruction of Jerusalem, were more
mad, if possible, after their foolish and wicked Rites and Traditions, that
made faith and the Word of God of no effect, then the generations before had
been. A man that reads there may stand amazed to see a people of a lost and
languishing condition, yet building up of those toies and trifles an airy
structure, as if they were building an everlasting Kingdom. It speaks a
palpable blindness upon them, that they took so little advertisement by the
fall of their City, of the fall of their carnal and beggarly Rites, that they
set them up more zealously then ever before. Let any man observe who they are
that make the greatest noise in the Talmuds, and they will see this plain: This
minds me of a fancy of the great women among them, a ridiculous way that they
used for the remembrance and mourning for Jerusalem, namely by wearing a golden
Crown upon their heads, wrought in the fashion of a City, they called it (...)
The golden City: It is spoken of in Ierus. Shabb. fol. 7. col. 4. where they
are disputing whether the women might go forth with this ornament upon their
heads on the Sabbath: And there they tell that R. Akibah made a golden City for
his wife, and when Rabban Gamaliels saw it, she was envious at it: A pretty way
of mourning by pride, and to carry Jerusalem in gold on their heads, when
Jerusalem lies in ashes under their feet: Much like did they by their
Ceremonies and Traditions, when at the ruin of the City they should by right
have been all buried in ashes with it, they inhanced them and made them more
high and gallant then ever before.

It is needless to instance their derision and detestation of Christ and
Christianity, their blasphemy against his blessed name, their hatred and
mischievousnesse against the professors of it: their Writings proclaim their
impiety, and when many of the ancient Fathers have been put to write against
the Jews, it argues they were busy and stirring as far as they might. They
had continual opposings among themselves, yet they all agreed like Simeon and
Levi, brethren in evil, to oppose, vilify and blaspheam the Gospel. Hardly one
of the Grandees that we have named, but he had (...) his opposite, one or other
that stood out in contestation of opinion with him: Nay they went sometimes to
it by the ears, as R. Eliezer and R. Iosi are so struggling together that they
rent the Book of the Law betwixt them. Ierus. Shekalim fol. 47. col. 1. and as
we observed before, the Shammaeans and Hillelians fought it to blood and death:
Rabban Gamaliel at Iabneh, deposed R. Akibah from his Rectorship at Lydda. Rosh
hashan. fol. 57. col. 1. And diverse such bickerings which still ended in an
unanimous consent to oppose Christianity as much as possible.

We spoke before of the commonnesse of Magic amongst them, one singular means
whereby they kept their own in delusion, and whereby they affronted ours. The
general expectation of the Nation of Messiah coming when he did, had this
double and contrary effect; That it forwarded those that belonged to God, to
believe and receive the Gospel: and those that did not, it gave encouragement
to some to take upon them they were Christ or some great Prophet, and to others
it gave some persuasion to be deluded by them. These deceivers dealt most of
them with Magic, and that cheat ended not when Jerusalem ended, though one
would have thought that had been a fair term of not further expecting Messiah,
but since the people were willing still to be deceived by such expectation,
there rose up deluders still that were willing to deceive them. The Jerusalem
Talmud will furnish us with variety of examples in this kind, and I cite it
the oftener because it was made among these men we are speaking of, the Jews in
Iudaea.

To begin with dreamers and interpreters of dreams, which was a degree of
delusion with them. In Maasar Sheni fol. 45. col. 2, 3. there is mention of
Rabbi Iosi ben Chalpatha, of this trade, and R. Ismael ben Rabbi Iosi, and R.
Lazar, and R. Akibah; and there are many dreams recorded that they interpreted:
and it seems by a passage in the place, that they taught their Scholars this
trick as a piece of their learning: And finding of R. Akibah in this catalogue,
we cannot but think how well Ben Coziba and he were met: for if the one were a
cheater in one kind, the other was a deceiver in another. If that of the
Apostle Jude in his Epistle, ver. 8. These filthy dreamers; should be construed
in this literal sense, it would find enough in those times to make it good.

In Shabb. fol. 3. col. 2. it speaks of an apparition to one of their religious
men that was studying the Law.

Ibid. fol. 8. col. 2, 3. and fol. 14.3. there is mention of several
charmings, as reading some verses over a wound, laying the Book of the Law or
Phylacteries upon a sick person, charming against serpents and an evil eye,
etc. And now we are speaking of an evil eye, or witchery, we may take in that
Sanhedr. fol. 18. col. 3. Four and twenty of the School of Rabbi Judah came to
Lydda to intercalate the year, and an evil eye came in among them and they all
died.

In Sotah fol. 16. col. 2. A story related of R. Meir and an Inchantresse, and
he proving hard enough for her.

In Sanhedr. fol. 25. col. 4. There are three stories of Magical feats done by
(...) Heretics, one at Tiberias and two at Tsipporis, but R. Joshua outvying
one of them, and a fourth at Rome, and he making his part good there too. What
may be meant by Heretics must be divided betwixt Samaritans, and some wretches
that had forsaken their Judaism, and professed Christianity, but were such as
the Apostle calls false Apostles.

And to conclude all, the many stories they have of Bath kol or a voice from
heaven [most commonly coming for the magnifying of some of their Doctors, as
see, Sotah fol. 24. col. 2.] are either forgeries, or if there were any such
seeming voices, they were forged upon the anvile of Magic: How can a Nation
but carry the visible mark of perdition, when vain traditions are their
standing Religion, and Magic and Enchantments a common practice?

To this kind of legerdemain, we may add another, not altogether indeed of so
deep a die, yet that which came from the same father, and that was, the loud
legends they invented of their great Rabbines, thereby to awe the people to the
reverence of their Persons, Memories and Doctrines: and of others devoutly
zealous in their doting Religion, of whom they tell strange wonders for the
magnifying of it. I shall name none for shame: these are they that do most
disgrace their Writings, and make them most ridiculous.

A last thing to be named that they did toward the intayling folly, unbelief
and obduration upon their Nation to all posterity, is their engaging them to
their Canons and Traditions, as they delivered them: especially to the Mishnah
when Rabbi Judah had published it, and to the two Talmuds when they came forth,
especially the Babylonian, which stands as a Standard to all the Nation for her
Rule and Religion to this day: they being generally Pharisaicall, and scarce a
Karaite that we hear of amongst them.

. X. How far these Jews in the first generation of Christianity might infect
or infest it.
WE need not speak of their crossing the Gospel, and persecuting and
mischieving the professors of it, when it lay in their power; that needs no
clearing: A twofold infection, more especially, they diffused into the
Christian Church, which tainted many, and where it caught proved pestilentiall
enough, even that which was the least dangerous: and these were, that out of
this sink rose the desperate heresies of the first ages of the Gospel, and from
these men came the Allegorizing of the Scriptures, which was but one degree
less profitable, if not less deadly then their traditions.

How damnable Heresies arose from among them in the Apostles times, we have
seen copiously as we have come along through the Epistles, some unbeleeving
Jews and some Apostates diffusing poison so deadly and so affluent, that it
undid multitudes by backsliding. The venom was of a contrary malignity, yet
both extremes met alike in this point, that they proved most deadly. The
unbeleeving Jews standing upon the strictness of the Law, perverted diverse to
turn from the Gospel, to the precise course of their Judaism to seek
Justification by works. And the Apostatizing, as far misjudging of the
liberty of the Gospel, introduced all manner of licentiousness and
heedlesnesse of their ways, as to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to
commit fornication. These were the most notorious, as striking directly at the
root of Justification by faith, and of holiness of life: but these were not
all, but other roots of gall and wormwood growing upon the same soil, as
denying of the resurrection altogether, as did the Sadduces, or denying the
Resurrection of those that started from Judaism, and worshipping of Angels, and
whatsoever else, the Apostles speak of this gangrean in their Epistles, which
though they grew and were at full ripeness before Jerusalem fell, yet did they
fade but little when she was down.

As the first wretched stock of Heretics that rose, Simon, Cerinthus,
Menander, Ebion, Basilides, etc. appeared either in Iudaea, or at least there
where there were multitudes of Jews, as Basilides at Alexandria, so the most of
those damnable opinions that they sowed, and which grew for a long while after,
had some root or other in Judaism, or received some cursed moisture from thence
to nourish them. By Judaism I here understand the body of the Jews Religions,
though differing within it self, yet all contrary to Christianity. Look upon
Palestine, and you have it thus stocked in the times that we are upon. 1. With
Pharisees of seven sorts, as they be reckoned up Beracoth. fol. 13. col. 2.
Sotah. fol. 20. col. 3. 2. With Sadduces, at the least of two sorts, if not
more. 3. With Samaritans. 4. With Esseans: Baithusaeans you may reckon with
Sadduces or Samaritans whether you will. Now the variety, nay contrariety of
opinions that was among this mixture, would afford nourishment to any evil weed
of doctrine that could be sowed; these being as Manasseh against Ephraim, and
Ephraim against Manasseh, but all against the Gospel. We have mention of the
Baithusaeans going about to put a gull upon the Sanhedrin about the great
business of stating the beginning of the year, Rosh has^^n. fol. 57. col. 4.
The Sadduces laughing the Pharisees to scorn about washing the Candlesticks of
the Temple, Chagig. fol. 79. col. 4. The Pharisees and Sadduces crossing one
another in disputes, Iudaim. per. 4. halac. 7. And the Samaritans perpetually
at enmity with the Jews in all stories. Now all these being alike enemies to
Christianity, what mischief might not they severally do in poisoning and
seducing those that were not found in it? We find the names of some arch
Heretics mentioned in the Talmuds, though we cannot say they were the same
men. As (...) Dositheus, Orlah per. 2. halac. 5. (...) Ebion, Ierus. Ioma. fol.
4. col. 3. (...) Symmachus, Iovam. fol. 11. col. 3. Chetub. fol. 25. col. 3.
And Papias also is a Talmud name, of which name there was one so zealous of
traditions, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 39.

We observed at the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, that the Jews, partly
the unbeleeving, and partly the Apostatized, were the first part of Antichrist,
the mystery of iniquity that was then working when the Apostle wrote: and now
we may observe how they continued bodied together, as a Corporation of
iniquity, in Iudaea, till the times of Constantine the great, the succession of
their Schools plainly to be read there: as we have showed in little. And when
they waned there, then did they flourish in their three Universities in
Babylonia: and the succession of the Schools and names of their Learned men
known there, not only till the signing of the Babylon Talmud which was about
the year of Christ 500, but even till the other part of the mystery of iniquity
the Papal Antichrist arose at Babylon in the West: And as these two parts make
one entire body of Antichrist, and as the later took at the first to do the
work that they had done, to deface the truth and oppose it, and that under the
color of Religion, so did it in great measure take his Pandect of Errors from
these his predecessors. Traditions, false Miracles, Legends, Ceremonies, Merit,
Purgatory, implicit faith, and diverse other things so derived from this source,
as if left by legacy from the one to the other.

A second taint we mentioned that these Primitive Jews set, not only upon their
own posterity, but too much also upon the Church of Christ, was the turning of
the Scriptures all into Allegory: which as it is well known how it was used by
diverse of the Fathers to their great loss of time, and little profiting of the
Church: so is it easily to be known from whence it comes, by any that reads
Philo Iudaeus, and the Jewish Derushim. The Talmuds indeed are for the most
part, upon disputes, but sometimes they bring in how such or such a Doctor did
Darash, [mystically expound] such or such a place of Scripture: and then you
have directly such stuff as this. Philo in his discourse concerning the
Therapeutae or Esseans, relates that they had used this mystical kind of
exposition of old. And how near the Christians of Iudaea that fled from the
ruin of Jerusalem, might be supposed thenceforward to be planted to the
Esseni, we might observe from Pliny and Mela that place the Esseni along the
vale that coasted upon the dead sea [the old habitation of the Kenites] and
from considering that the mountains to which Christ warns those that were in
Iudaea to flee, was, the mountanous of Judah, as was tou^hed before.

. XI. That the Jews for all their spite to Christianity, could not impose upon
us a corrupted Text.
HEre we cannot but clear them, as for matter of fact, of what some lay to
their charge [but they do it for their own ends] that they foisted a corrupt
Text of the old Testament upon Christians, and so befooled them in the very
foundation of their Religion: So did their ancestors by Ptolomy King of Egypt,
and so what these men would have done, if they could, it is easy to
conjecture, but they did not, they could not so impose.

1. It was their great care and solicitousnesse, as to themselves, and their
own use, to preserve the Text in all purity and uncorruptnesse; and what our
Savior says of not one Iota or one tittle of the Law perishing, they were of
the same mind, and endeavored to maintain and assert that for true with all
industry. It were too long here to speak of the work of the Masorites for this
purpose, who altered not, added not, invented not a tittle, but carefully took
account of every thing as they found it, and so recorded it to posterity that
nothing could be changed. We shall only bring in their own expositions which
will attest to this truth to both those words that our Savior has, (...): It
is little to be doubted that Christ speaking in their language, means the
letter Iod, which is far the least of all their letters. And about this letter
the Jerusalem Talmud has this passage: Sanhedr. fol. 20. col. 3. The book of
Mishneh Torah [Deuteronomy] came and prostrated it self before God, and said
unto him: O Lord everlasting, Thou have written thy Law in me. A Testament that
fails in part, fails in the whole. Behold Solomon seeks to root Iod out of me
[viz. in (...) He shall not multiply wives.] The holy blessed God says to it:
Solomon and a thousand such as he shall fail, but a word of thee shall not
fail. R. Honna in the name of R. Acha said: The Iod that the blessed God took
from the name of our mother Sarah, was given half of it to Sarah and half to
Abraham. There is a tradition of R. Hoshaiah: Iod came and prostrated it self
before God and said; Lord everlasting, Thou have rooted me out from the name of
a righteous woman. The holy blessed God says to it: Heretofore thou wast in
the name of a woman and in the end of it, Henceforward thou shall be in the
name of a man and in the beginning. This is that which is written, Moses called
the name of Hoshea, Iehoshua. (...): one Tittle: It most properly means those
little Apiculi that distinguish betwixt letters that are very like one to
another: You may have the explanation of this in this pretty descant of
Tanchuna fol. 1. It is written, says he, (...) You shall not profane my holy
Name. He that makes the Cheth (...) a He (...) destroys the world: for he
makes this sense, You shall not praise my holy Name. It is written (...) Let
every thing that has breath praise the Lord: He that makes the He (...) a
Cheth (...) destroys the world; for he brings it to this sense, Let every thing
that has breath profane the Lord. It is written (...) They lied to the Lord:
He that makes Beth (...) Caph (...) destroys the world: for he makes this
sense, They lied like the Lord. It is written (...) There is none holy like the
Lord. He that makes Caph (...) Beth (...) destroys the world: for he makes
this sense, There is no holiness in the Lord. It is written (...) The Lord our
God is one Lord. He that makes Daleth (...) Resh (...) destroys the world: for
he brings the sense to this, The Lord our God is a strange God, etc. In
Chagig. fol. 77. col. 3. they speak more of the letter Iod, and so does Midras
Tillin in Psalm. 114. In Deuteronomy. 32.18. this little letter is written less then
it self in the word (...), and yet preserved in that quantity and not altered,
and observed so by the Masorites.

2. Yet could they not for all their care but have some false Copies go up and
down amongst them, through heedlesnesse or error of transcribers. In Shabb.
fol. 15. col. 2. they are disputing how many faults may be in a part of the
Bible, and yet it lawful to read in. The books of Hagiographa, say they, If
there be two or three faults in every leaf (...) He may mend it, and read: The
Books of Hagiographa they read not in their Synagogues, as they did the Law and
the Prophets, therefore this is to be understood of a man's private reading, and
of his own Bible, which if faulty, there were true Copies whereby he might mend
it and so read. Nay in Taanith fol. 68. col. 1. there is mention of a faulty
Copy that was laid up in the public records. They found three books in the
Court of the Temple. The book (...) the book (...) and the book (...). In one
they found written (...) and in two it was written (...) [Deut. 33.27.] And
they approved the two, and refused the one. In one they found written (...) and
in two it was written (...) [Exod. 24.5.] They approved the two, and refused
the other. In one they found written (...) and in two it was written (...);
They approved of the two and refused the other. That alteration (...) which is
the second mentioned, the Babylonian Gomarists, and Massecheth Sopherim per. 1.
say was one of the thirteen alterations that the Septuagint made in the Law for
Ptolomy King of Egypt. Which seems to argue that as they translated the Bible
into Greek, in which they made thousands of alterations from the text, so that
they copied an Hebrew copy for him, and in that made these, and this that was
found in the Court of the Temple a transcript of that Copy.

3. In every Synagogue they had a true Copy: And it was their care every where
to have their Bible as purely authentic as possible, as may be seen by the
curious rules that are given to that purpose in Massecheth Sophorim newly
cited, and Megillah. For this they accounted their treasure and their glory:
And in the reading of the Law and the Prophets in the Synagogue, it was their
great care that not a tittle should be read amiss: and for this purpose the
Minister stood over those that read, and oversaw that they read aright: and
from this, as Aruch tells us, he was called Chazan, that is Episcopus or
Overseer: In Ierus. Sotah fol. 21. col. 3. the Samaritans are blamed by the
Jews for wilfully corrupting their own Penteteuch. R. Eliezer ben R. Simeon
said, I said to the Scribes of the Samaritans, You have falsified your Law, and
yet reap no advantage by it: for you have written in your Law, By the plain of
Moreh which is Sichem; And was it not manifest enough without that addition
that it was Sichem? But you construe not, a pari, as we do. It is said here,
The plain of Moreh, and it is said elsewhere, The plain of Moreh: there it is
no other but Sichem: no more must it be here. [The addition cavilled at, which
is Sichem, is so in the Samaritan Penteteuch now extant, at Deuteronomy. 11.30.] But
amongst all the wickedness that Christ and his Apostles laid to the charge of
the Jews, yet you never find them blamed in the least degree for this, that
they went about to corrupt the letter of the Text: The sense indeed they
spoiled with their glosses, and so made the Word of God of no effect, and this
they hear of thoroughly, but not a word of their spoiling the letter of the Text.

4. Had they been never so desirous to have imposed upon Christians, by
falsifying the Text, they could not possibly do it: for 1. Every Synagogue in
the world having the purest Copy that possibly was to be got, how impossible
was it such legerdemain should be, when there were so many thousand Copies to
discover it [unlesse they were all corrupt alike] and multitudes out of the
Synagogues, Rulers and people were converted to the Gospel. 2. As learned men
as any they had among them, and that as well understood what Text was pure,
what corrupt, Joseph of Arlmathea, Nicodemus, Paul, and multitudes of the
Priests embraced the Gospel: and so multitudes of pure Copies were in the hands
of Christians, upon the first rising of the Gospel, and multitudes that had
such Copies in their hands were converted daily.

5. To which may be added that the same power and care of God that preserves
the Church, would preserve the Scriptures pure to it: and he that did and could
preserve the whole, could preserve every part, so that not so much as a tittle
should perish.

. XII. Concerning the Calling of the Jews.
BY what has been spoken concerning the state of the Jews in their own Land
after the fall of their City, it may be observed wherein it is that the Lords
vengeance upon that Nation does especially consist, namely in his rejection of
them from being his people, and in their obduration. The unspeakable miseries
and slaughter that they endured in the siege and ruin of Jerusalem, speak as
dreadful punishment as ever fell upon a Nation, and yet this was but short and
small, in comparison of that fearful blindness and hardness that lies upon
them, and has done for this sixteen hundred years together. Seventy years in
bodily bondage in Babel, did finish the punishment of their forefathers, for
all the Idolatry, bloodshed and impiety that they had committed: But these
after above twenty times seventy years, under dispersion and obduration, have
now as little appearance of amendment of their hearts and of their condition,
as there was so many hundred years ago. The same blindness, the same doting
upon traditions, the same insisting upon their own works for salvation, the
same blind confidence that they are Gods only beloved people, the same
expectation of Messiah to come, the same hatred of Messiah already come, and
the same opposition against the Gospel is in them still, that was in that first
generation that crucified the Lord of life. That generation is plainly and
often asserted by the holy Ghost in the New Testament to be Antichrist, and the
very same Antichristian spirit has continued in all the generations of them,
ever since, even to this day.

Into the thoughts therefore concerning their Calling after so long and so
extreme crosness against the Gospel and the Lord of it, I cannot but take these
things into consideration. [For though I am unwilling to recede from that
charitable opinion of most Christians that there shall once be a Calling of
them home, yet see I not how that supposall of the universal Call of the whole
Nation, as of one man, which some entertain, can be digested without some allay
and mitigation.] 1. That all Israel, both Jews and they of the ten Tribes, have
had as full an offer of the Gospel as any of the Gentiles have had, both in the
time of the Apostles and since. Of the two Tribes there can be no scruple: and
of the ten, almost as little, if their sin that cast them off the place of
their seating when carried out of their own Land, and the carriage of the
Gospel through the whole world, be well considered: Now that their refusing of
the Gospel so offered to them, in that manner as they have done, should be
followed with so universal a Call and Conversion, is somewhat hard to believe:
especially when it is observed that the Gentiles despising the Gospel are
doomed to the everlasting deprivation of it, and to a worse condition then Tire
and Zidon. 2. It is true indeed that Gods Covenant with their fathers, is of
special weight and observation in this business, and the Apostle touches it
in this question, Romans 11.28. but how is this to be understood? God made a
twofold Covenant with their fathers, viz. the Covenant of grace, and the
Covenant of peculiarity; and the later was but a manner of the administration
of the former. The Covenant of grace was made with Adam, and belongs to all the
seed of Christ, before the Law, under it, and after it, Jews and Gentiles. Now
the Economy of Moses was such an administration of this Covenant of grace as
made Israel a peculiar people. This effect of the Covenant with their fathers,
namely that they still are and ever shall be Gods peculiar, is their conceit
all along, but little warrant for us to hold it, since under the Gospel there
is no distinction of Jew and Gentile: And as for the other, that many of them
yet belong to Election and the Covenant of grace made with their fathers, it is
not to be doubted, which yet does little make for so general a calling. 3. It
was a good sign of the general conversion of the Heathen once to be, in that
there were multitudes of them proselyted daily, before the general Call by the
Gospel came [an hundred three and fifty thousand in the days of Solomon, and
that when Religion was then in a very narrow compass:] But of these, how few,
in comparison have come in, in all this long time, though they have had
incomparably more means and opportunity then ever those had? Their sin that
cast them off, was more horrid then the sin that cast off the Heathen, and so
their blindness and obduration is beyond theirs. And which deserves
observation, The sin of the two Tribes was beyond the sin of the ten. 4. Since
the new Testament does ordinarily style that first generation Antichrist: and
since, as is apparent, the very same spirit is in the Nation to this day, I see
not how we can look upon the conversion of the Jews under a lower notion then
the conversion of a brood of Antichrist. Therefore can I no more look for the
general calling of them, then I look for the general call of the
Antichristian brood of Rome. We see indeed by happy experience that several
Nations have fallen off from the Roman Antichrist, as the Protestant Countries
that are at this day: but Antichrist is yet in being and strong, and his end
will be, not by conversion, but perdition. So can I not but conceive of the
Jewish Nation, That although numerous multitudes of them may at the last be
brought into the Gospel as the Protestant party has been, yet that to the end
numerous multitudes also shall common in the An^tichristian spirit of unbelief
and opposition and blaspheming: and both parts of Antichrist, the Roman and
this so to perish together. Nor does this opinion any whit cross any place of
Scripture that is produced about the calling of the Jews, but rather settle its
sense and explain it: That eminent place of the Apostle, Romans 11. carries such
a limitation throughout: and the very intent of his discourse speaks to such
a tenor all along: For his drift in that Chapter is not to determine whether
all the Jews should be once called, but whether all the Jews were wholly cast
off: and this he states that there is a remnant, ver. 5. that the election has
obtained, but the rest are blinded, v. 7. and that blindness in part is
happened to Israel, etc. v. 25. And this is the mystery that he there speaks
of, and not as some would wrest it, their universal conversion. A mystery
indeed that God should cast off his old Covenanted people, and that they that
had always had the light, and only seen of all the Nations of the world,
should now sit in darkness and be blind, and that the Gentiles by their
blindness should come to see. It is remarkable in this place and others of the
Apostles Epistles, that though the destruction of Jerusalem were the most
signal time, and evidence of Gods casting them off, yet that they were indeed
cast off long before: as, to spare more allegations, may be observed in the
first Epistle to the Thessalonians, Chapter 2. v. 15, 16. which was the first
Epistle that the Apostle wrote. Whence punctually to date their rejection,
whether from the death of Christ, or from the first sending the Gospel among
the Gentiles, is not much material to inquire after here: it is enough for our
present purpose, to observe, that they are given for cast off so early in the
dispersion of the Gospel: So that the Apostle does clearly include their
conversion even at that first spreading of the Gospel, as well as their
conversion in future times. He says, their casting off was the riches of the
Gentiles, and the reconciling of the world, and their fullness should much more
enrich the Gentiles, and be as life from the dead: By their fullness not meaning
the whole number of their Nation, but the full number of Gods Elect of them
when they should be brought in. The casting off of the Nation enriched the
Gentiles, in that they came in to be the Lords people in their stead, but much
more shall it be an enriching to them when the full number of them that belong
to God shall come in also and be joined to the Gentiles, and help to make their
body up. This is apparently the drift of the Apostle in those words, which that
opinion is exceedingly wide of, that holds that the calling of the Jews shall
not be till the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. It is true indeed that he
says, that blindness in part is happened to Israel till that time, v. 25. and
so our Savior says that Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles until
the time of the Gentile^ be fulfilled, Luke 21.24. but this means her final
desolation, and the final blindness of that part that is blinded; not that
Jerusalem should be built again when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in,
which the Jews conceit: nor that then the Jews should be unblindfolded and
become a Gospel Church, as the Gentiles had been: for what a strange world does
such a supposall imagine? and how often does the Gospel gainsay any such
distinctiveness and peculiarity? As we need not to go far for instance, that
very place of the Apostle that is under our hands, does hold out all along that
the Gentiles and the Jews that belong to the election of grace, do make up but
one Body. And that very passage that is chiefly pleaded for their universal
Call, And so all Israel shall be saved, means no other. Therefore though it may
be hoped that God has multitudes of them yet to be brought in, from under
their Antichristian darkness and opp^sition of the Gospel, yet that they shall
be generally called, and ^o Antichristian party left behind, and that not till
Antichrist of Rome be fallen and the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, as
some circumstantiate the thing, needs clearer ^vidence of Scripture to
evince, then yet has been produced.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 2. line 24. r. B^ta. page 3. l. 7. r. (...) l. 14. r. (...) l. 41. r.
Talmudick: and so continually after. l. 48. r. Iebam^th and chetuboth. p. 4. l.
24. r. Saviors. l. 44. r. Gemarists: and so continually after. l. 45. r. Rosh
hashanah, and so all along. p. 5. l. 16. r. wisemen. p. 6. l. ^. r. Amon Min
No. l. 6. r. Menachoth. l. 44. r. Ignat. Martyr ^n Epist. ad Magnes. p. 7. l.
1. r. facie. for Armenian r. Asmonean. l. 6. r. Bota. l. 9. r. Menahem. l. 27.
r. Pesachin. l. 40. r. Garon. p. 8. l. 1. r. their wisdom folly. l. 53. r.
words. p. 9. l. 4. r. Rosh hashanah. l. 48. r. plowing. p. 10. l. 6. r. call
that time. l. 8. r. Chetubboth. and (...). l. 10. r. (...). l. 14. r. Iebamoth.
and Maym. l. 48. r. Gemarists. p. 12. l. 34. r. by a word. p. 19. l. 25. r.
Herodis. l. 41. r. three meals. p. 21. l. 9. r. parting. l. 24. r. Mark 2. l.
31. r. feast. p. 22. l. 1. r. translation. l. 13. r. feast. p. 23. l. 52. r.
but this is a rule. p. 25. l. 16. r. mount near Capernaum. l. 42. r. but he
shows. p. 26. l. 23. r. an eye. l. 24. r. and opinions. p. 27. l. 15. r. MAT.
CHAP. XI. l. 18. r. dead man. p. 29. l. 13. r. Tiberias. l. 21. r. Talmudicks.
l. 33. r. Ben Sa^da, and so after. p. 30. l. 10. r. answer of Christ. p. 34. l.
4, 9. r. Caesarea. l. 21. after seen r. were exalted to heaven. p. 37. l. 8. r.
they fall in. p. 38. l. 22. r. (...) l. 27. r. that man. p. 40. l. 12. r. Iom.
tobh. l. 18. r. salutation. p. 42. l. 41. r. Capernaum. p. 43. l. 36. r. R.
Chaiiah. p. 45. l. 20. r. an answerablenesse. p. 48. l. 42. c. Asmonean. p. 50.
l. 17. r. Iudaick. l. 21. r. (...) l. 42. r. as if it favoure^ them. p. 51. l.
20. r. Bava m^zia. p. 52. l. 10. r. tears. p. 53. l. 38. r. when he heard. l.
49. r. Menachoth. p. 55. l. 17. r. Sotah. p. 58. l. 22. r. vilified the
Kingdom. p. 59. l. 4. r. Moed katon. l. 24. r. all the Prophets blood. p. 60.
l. 9. r. Middoth. p. 67. l. 51. r. Hhanoth. p. 68. l. 50. r. (...) and (...) p.
73. l. 16. r. Shabbath. p. 76. l. 41. r. (...). p. 83. l. 17. r. Iab^ch. p. 86.
l. 7. r. Sozom. p. 87. l. 10. after make r. mention. l. 45. r. Ma^sar Sheni. p.
89. l. 26. r. Hodesh. l. 44, 47. r. Tebi. p. 91. l. 21. r. (...). l. 28. r.
Ministers that preached. l. 52. r. Chap. 11. p. 99. l. 37. r. reaches that to
the full. p. 100. l. 47. r. Proseucha. p. 101. l. 49. r. Chresto. p. 102. l.
12. for 4. r. 40. p. 103. l. 1. r. Nero's. l. 3. r. Lucilius. p. 104. l. 27. r.
(...). l. 30. r. at Act. Chap. 13. l. 4. r. foretold it. p. 106. l. 1. r. hence
it may be. p. 107. l. 33. r. Macedon. p. 109. l. 33. dele this. p. 115. l. 28.
r. in claim. p. 116. l. 9. r. concerned life. l. 36. r. were paid. p. 118. l.
1. dele WORLD. p. 121. l. 43. r. salutations came inserted. p. 125. l. 27. r.
Valerius Messalla. p. 126. l. 36. r. annum. p. 127. l. 2. r. Gaulanitidi. l.
10. r. two years. p. 128. l. 10. dele notion. l. 42. r. rebels beating. p. 138.
l. 6. r. atrocia. l. 40. r. to such a tune. l. 42. r. Nero. p. 142. l. 16. r.
R. Chaiab. l. 44. r. with the style of discourse. p. 143. l. 18. r. contents.
p. 148. l. 23. r. learning. p. 154. l. 20. r. titles. p. 160. l. 22. r.
Adrian^^. p. 162. l. 35. r. it increased. p. 166. l. 14. r. these vials.


